626 


NATURE 


[August 13, 1914 


The entertainment and hospitality meted out to the 
Association by the Mayor and Corporation of Swansea 
and the leading citizens were of a most lavish and 
thoroughly enjoyable character, and the local arrange¬ 
ments were carried out by Mr. W. Grant Murray 
with a smoothness and precision which have never 
been surpassed. 

The Association, at its business meeting, elected a 
distinguished worker on the art side—Mr. E. Rim- 
bault Dibdin—to be president for 1914-15. 


THE HARDENING OF STEEL. 

T the May meeting' of the Iron and Steel 
Institute two papers were read and discussed 
dealing with the theory of the hardening of steel; 
they gave rise to one of the most interesting dis¬ 
cussions of the meeting. While it is, of course, 
obvious that the more “practical” members of the 
institute take no interest in these discussions, it must 
be borne in mind that the theories of to-day become 
the foundations of the practice of to-morrow, and that 
therefore the “practical” man cannot in the least 
afford to despise or ignore what he likes to dismiss 
as “ mere theory.” 

The two papers on hardening presented to the insti¬ 
tute both put forward fairly definite theories, and at 
first sight these differ entirely from one another and 
still more from the older purely “allotropic” theory 
of hardening. It was interesting to find, however, 
that during the discussion not a single advocate of the 
other older theory—that of the so-called “carbonists” 
—came forward. When the views put forward by 
Profs. Edwards and Carpenter and by Mr. McCance 
are carefully compared, however, it will be found that 
they do not really differ very vitally either from one 
another or from the older allotropic view'. All three 
theories agree in supposing that when carbon steel 
is cooled rapidly an essentially unstable transition 
product is formed which is itself intrinsically hard. 
The allotropic theory called this intermediate hard 
product “beta iron,” and identified it with the beta 
iron which has a limited range of stable existence in 
pure iron and in low-carbon steels; Messrs. Edwards 
and Carpenter and the writer now' identify it with the 
“hard amorphous phase” of Beilby, while Mr. 
McCance invents a new word and calls it “ inter- 
strained ” iron. The real difference of opinion seems 
to centre on the question how this intermediate sub¬ 
stance comes into existence. 

Profs. Edwards and Carpenter approach the subject 
from the point of view of an analogy between the 
hardening by quenching of steel and of alloys of 
copper containing from 10 to 13 per cent, of 
aluminium. These latter are somewhat hardened by 
quenching, and there is a corresponding similarity, on 
broad lines, between the respective constitutional dia¬ 
grams ; by quenching, both kinds of alloys are caused 
to pass rapidly through a transformation range. The 
resulting micro-structures also show' a certain simi¬ 
larity, the aluminium-copper alloys exhibiting an 
acicular structure having some resemblance to the 
coarser kinds of martensite seen in hardened steels. 
The authors then endeavour to show' that the struc¬ 
tures of both quenched aluminium-copper alloys and 
of quenched steel arise from an identical cause, viz., 
highly multiplied twinning, which they believe to 
occur during quenching as a result of the internal 
strains caused during rapid cooling. The evidence 
that the martensite of steel is really equivalent to 
highly twinned austenite is, how'ever, very weak, and 
it has yet to be proved or even shown to be likely 
that quenching can produce multiple twinning. In 

NO. 2337, VOL. 93] 


the discussion of this paper, the writer pointed out 
that to produce notable strain-hardening of a plastic 
metal by deformation needed the application of really 
large deformations, while, on the contrary, the 
amount of deformation (strain in contradistinction to 
internal stress ) which could be caused in steel by 
quenching must be very small. It is further a very 
open question whether strain really ever produces 
direct twinning in a metal. Finally, it has yet to be 
showrn that a twinned constituent is really materially 
harder than in the untwinned condition ; the softness 
and ductility of such materials as rolled and annealed 
copper or brass, w'hich are one mass of twinned 
crystals, points in the opposite direction. The idea 
put forward by Edwards and Carpenter that 
amorphous layers are formed on the twin boundaries 
in the process of twinning was well refuted by Mr. 
Humfrey in the discussion, as he showed by means of 
models that twinning could and did occur without dis¬ 
arrangement of the space-lattice at the boundary. As 
a result of the whole discussion it appeared that the 
authors had attached altogether too much weight to 
the process of twinning, but that the formation of 
amorphous metal during the quenching process might 
well be looked upon as the real cause of hardening— 
a view which the late F. Osmond had put forward 
quite clearly a year or so before his death. 

Mr. McCance’s paper began a thoughtful considera¬ 
tion of the whole subject by a review of existing 
theories. Both in regard to the existence or other¬ 
wise of beta iron as an independent allotropic modi¬ 
fication, and in regard to the amorphous theory, how¬ 
ever, the author made the mistake of considering 
that the objections which he raised can settle the 
point and dispose of these theories in half a dozen 
words. The question as to the extent and nature 
of the differences between alpha and beta iron is still 
being closely discussed, and even if Weiss’s magneton 
theory finds ultimate acceptance, it is still a question 
whether the magnetic transformations do not really 
constitute one type of allotropy, nor is it yet certain 
that they may not be associated with far-reaching 
changes in other properties. Again, as regards the 
amorphous theory, Mr. McCance’s objections are 
based on a simple misunderstanding, coupled with an 
assumption, based on the magneton theory, which has 
yet to be justified. This assumption amounts to the 
view that only crystalline solids can be ferro-magnetic, 
and that consequently amorphous iron would neces¬ 
sarily be non-magnetic. Facts are, however, against 
this view, for colloidal suspensions of iron are strongly 
ferro-magnetic, and so are a number of oxides and 
salts of iron, some of the latter even in a state of 
solution. 

Of much greater value are Mr. McCance’s experi¬ 
mental studies of hardening in carbon steel, which 
lead him, finally, to put forward a theory of the 
hardening of steel by “ interstrain,” which is prac¬ 
tically a translation of Osmond’s view ascribing the 
hardness of quenched steel to the presence in it of'“le 
fer alpha dcroui.’ It is only Mr. McCance’s account 
of the nature of “ interstrained ” iron which it is diffi¬ 
cult to accept. Declining to accept the views of 
Beilby and of Rosenhain as to the hardening of 
strained metals by the formation of layers of the 
amorphous phase, the author uses the word “ inter¬ 
strain ” to denote a condition in which the regular 
crystalline arrangement is broken up generally, leav¬ 
ing a mass of irregularly arranged crystal fragments. 
It may well be asked what it is fhat holds these irre¬ 
gular and ill-fitting fragments together, and why an 
aggregate of such fragments should be harder than 
the aggregate of the larger pieces of crystal which 
constitute the ordinary soft metal ? But beyond this 


© 1914 Nature Publishing Group 







August 13, 1914] 


NATURE 


627 


there is the experimental evidence; both strain- 
hardened metal and quenched steel on etching exhibit 
the well-defined, oriented lustre of a crystalline aggre¬ 
gate, thus clearly showing that the crystals are not 
disarranged into minute irregular fragments. It 
would seem, therefore, that Mr. McCance’s conclu¬ 
sions must be narrowed down to this, that the hard¬ 
ness of quenched steel is due to the same cause as 
the hardness of strain-hardened iron, and this—but 
for a difference as to mode of origin—is also the view 
of Edwards and Carpenter. In this narrowed con¬ 
clusion, however, there is a distinct step forward, since 
we have a definite “explanation ’’of the hardening 
of steel in the sense that this phenomenon is cor¬ 
related with the much larger class of phenomena 
which occur when any soft or ductile metal is hardened 
by plastic strain. If we accept the possible existence 
of the amorphous phase, it is easy to express both 
classes of facts in a single and simple formula, and 
this in itself constitutes another argument in support 
of the amorphous theory. Whatever view one may 
take of these admittedly hypothetical matters, it seems 
that a definite advance has at last been made in our 
knowledge of the hardening of metals. 

W. Roskxiiatn. 


SCHOOLS AND EMPLOYERS IN THE 
UNITED STATES . 1 

M ISS WINEFRID JEVONS gives in the report 
before us an interesting account of the history and 
present position of the relations between the schools 
and industrial employment in the United States. 

The most important lesson to be learnt from the 
report is, perhaps, that in the United States employers 
and trade unions have realised, to a much greater 
extent than in this country, the necessity for part-time 
day classes for persons engaged in industry and com¬ 
merce. Not only does the American Confederation of 
Labour take this view, but the National Association of 
Manufacturers also favours it. Indeed, the latter body 
went so far in 1912 as to recommend compulsory 
continuation classes, until the seventeenth or 
eighteenth year, one half-day a week, without loss of 
wages. 

In this country there are some firms (comparatively 
few in number) who have had the wisdom to see that 
it is not only in the interest of the people they 
employ but also in their own interest to liberate 
young persons a certain number of hours a week, in 
order that they may in the daytime receive proper 
part-time instruction directed to make them more 
efficient in their respective industries; but we are still 
far from so wide and generous a belief in the value 
of education as the resolutions of the National Asso¬ 
ciation of Manufacturers show to be prevalent in the 
United States. 

The existence of such a wholesome state of public 
opinion accounts for the large amount of voluntary 
and compulsory part-time instruction which is to be 
found throughout the States; many instances of this 
are given in the report.. In Massachusetts, a law has 
been enacted which enables local authorities to open 
day continuation classes for the education of children 
between fourteen and sixteen who are in regular 
employment, and to compel attendance at these classes 
in the daytime for not fewer than four hours a week; 
the time spent in the school is counted as a part of 
the number of hours that the child is permitted by¬ 
law to work. The State provides half of the cost of 
the maintenance of the classes. 

In the States of Ohio and Wisconsin, compulsory 

1 Board of Education. Special Reports on Educational Subjects, vol. 
xxviii. 

NO. 2337, VOL. 93] 


day continuation classes are in existence; in the latter 
State, apprentices may not be employed for more than 
55 hours a week, and the employer must liberate the 
apprentice five of these 55 hours a week in order that 
he may attend a day continuation school. 

J. W. 


SEISMOMETRY AND ENGINEERING . 1 

N the memoir before us we have a gratifying proof 
that practical engineers realise the importance of 
the application of the principles of instrumental seis- 
mometry to building construction. The immediate 
object in the present investigation is the vibration set 
up in a large masonry bounding wall of a reservoir in 
Queistal, Schleswig. This wall stretches between 
rocks across a narrow valley, and the overflow of 
water, estimated at too cubic metres a second, falls 
about 40 metres. Thus an enormous amount of vibra¬ 
tional energy is set up. 

The destructive action of vibration on a structure 
is probably determined by the maximum acceleration 
experienced, and thus short-period vibrations are often 
more serious than long-period vibrations of larger 
amplitude. Prof. Grunma'h first describes and dis¬ 
cusses an apparatus designed to give the maximum 
acceleration, and then goes on to describe the arrange¬ 
ments for investigating the period and amplitude. 
These are really seismographs for measuring the hori¬ 
zontal and vertical components of motion. They are 
based on precisely the principle of electromagnetic 
registration introduced by Prince Galitzin for earth¬ 
quake recording. The apparatus differs from Galit¬ 
zin’s in detail considerably', since the periods and 
amplitudes to be measured are very different from 
those experienced by the passage of earthquake u'aves. 
Continuous registration was made, and excellent dia¬ 
grams of the results are given. It appears that the 
periods ranged from about 0-03 sec. to 0-003 sec., 
and the amplitude from o-ooi mm. to 0-00005 mm. 

The theoretical discussion of electromagnetic regis¬ 
tration given appears somewhat inadequate. The 
author adopts what may be called an equilibrium 
theory instead of a dynamical one. It is possible that 
this may be accurate enough in the case considered, 
but one would like a demonstration that this is so. 

The memoir will no doubt be appreciated by- 
engineers and seismologists alike. G. W. W. 


RECENT BOTANICAL WORK IN 
DENMARK. 

the general meeting of the Danish Botanical 
Society in 1912 it was decided to publish in the 
future two distinct journals. One of these is the 
Botanisk Tidsskrift, the society’s old periodical, which 
has reached its thirty-third volume, and contains 
chiefly papers on the Danish flora, besides articles 
on subjects of more general botanical interest. This 
will continue on its former lines, being written mostly 
in Danish, though occasionally'—much too rarely, it 
may be said, for non-Danish readers—with abstracts 
in English, French, or German. The second journal 
is a new venture, the Dansk Botanisk Arkiv, pub¬ 
lished at indefinite periods, and containing mono¬ 
graphs and other special articles in either of the four 
languages mentioned. Both journals are sent post 
free to members of the society, membership being open 
to ail on payment of 10 kronen {ns.) a year; the 
subscription for the Botanisk Tidsskrift alone is 
6 kronen, and the numbers of the Arkiv may be pur- 

1 “ Experimentalunt^rsuchung zur Messung von Erderschiitterungen. 
By Prof. L. Grunmach. Pp. 102. (Berlin : Leonhard Simion Nf., 1913. 



© 1914 Nature Publishing Group 










