SOURCE_URL: https://www.justice.gov/atr/case-document/file/512176/dl

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK 
•X 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
Plaintiff, 
- v -
STEINHARDT MANAGEMENT COMPANY, 
INC.; and CAXTON CORPORATION, 
Defendants, 
- and-
$12,500,000 THAT IS THE PROPERTY 
OF STEINHARDT MANAGEMENT 
COMPANY, INC.; 
Steinhardt Management 
Company, Inc., 
Real Party in Interest 
- and-
$12,500,000 THAT TS THE PROPERTY 
OF CAXTON CORPORATION, 
Caxton Corporation, 
Real Party in Interest. 
94 Civ. 9044 
Filed: December 16, 1994 
COMPLAINT 
The United States of America, plaintiff, by its attorneys, 
acting under the direction of the Attorney General of the United 
States, brings this civil action to obtain equitable and other 
relief against the defendant entities and to obtain forfeiture of 
the defendant property and complains and alleges: 

I. JURISDICTION AND VENUE 
1. This action is brought under Sections 4 and 6 of the 
Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 4, 6, as amended, to restrain violation 
of Section 1 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1, as amended, and 
to obtain forfeiture of property owned pursuant to a contract, 
combination or conspiracy in violation of Section 1 of the 
Sherman Act. The Court has jurisdiction over this matter 
pursuant to Section 4 of the Sherman Act and 28 U.S.C. §§ 1345, 
1355. 
2. Venue is proper in this district under Section 12 of the 
Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. § 22, as amended, and under 28 U.S.C. 
§1391(c) because the defendant entities transact business and are 
found in the Southern District of New York. 
3. This is an In rem proceeding against the defendant 
property. That property is in the defendant entities' bank 
accounts in the Southern District of New York. 
II. DESCRIPTION OF THE CONSPIRACY 
4 . This action arises from an unlawful combination and 
conspiracy among the defendant entities, Steinhardt Management 
Company ("SMC") and Caxton Corporation ("Caxton"), and other 
persons, to restrain interstate trade and foreign commerce in the 
7.00% United States Treasury notes auctioned on April 24, 1991 
("April notes") by withholding the notes from the markets for 
such securities in order to profit from the artificial shortage, 
or "squeeze," resulting from the withholding of supply. 
2 

5. Beginning in mid-April 1991, Caxton and SMC each bought 
large, leveraged long positions in the April notes. As of mid-
May 1991, their combined position in the issue was almost 
$20 billion.. This combined position represented about 160% of 
the approximately $12 billion of April notes issued by the United 
States Treasury. Between early May 1991 and mid-September 1991, 
SMC and Caxton, in combination, owned ("held") from $12 billion 
to $19 billion April notes. 
6. The purchases of April notes by Caxton and SMC had the 
effect of concentrating ownership of the issue and, 
simultaneously, creating a substantial "short" position in it. 
Once created, this short position could be eliminated only if the 
defendant entities reduced the size of their positions in the 
April notes. 
7. Caxton and SMC effectively controlled the supply of 
April notes available to both the "cash market" (where purchases 
and sales occur) and the "financing market" (where persons with 
leveraged long positions, such as the defendant entities, borrow 
money in order to buy or to continue to hold an issue) . Short 
sellers in both markets were required, in effect, to buy or 
borrow April notes from Caxton or SMC. 
8. After accumulating their position in the April notes, 
the defendant entities and their coconspirators acted to restrict 
the supply of April notes to short sellers. The consequence of 
this action was to cause short sellers to bid up prices for April 
notes in the cash and financing markets. From the latter part of 

May 1991 through mid - September 1991, Caxton and SMC and their 
coconspirators withheld significant quantities of April notes 
from the cash and financing markets. Due to this constriction in 
supply, the price of April notes in the cash market was 
increased; likewise, interest rates charged to finance a position 
in the April notes were depressed. 
9. As a result of the actions taken by the defendant 
entities and their coconspirators, they and their coconspirators 
earned substantial profits from the low financing rates and high 
cash-prices of the April notes caused by their actions. 
III.. DEFENDANTS 
10. SMC is a New York corporation with its principal place 
of business in New York, New York. SMC manages several 
investment funds. As manager of those funds, SMC purchased and 
financed April notes. SMC is the-real party in interest related 
to the $12,500,000.00 of defendant property it owns and controls. 
11. Caxton is a Delaware corporation, with its principal 
place of business in New York, New York. Caxton manages several 
investment funds. As manager of those funds, Caxton purchased 
and financed April notes. Caxton is the'real party in interest 
related to the $12,500,000.00 of defendant property it owns and 
controls. 
12. The investment funds SMC and Caxton manage compete with 
numerous investors and traders in the sale, purchase, financing 
4 

and lending of specific issues of United States Treasury 
securities. 
13. Various persons not made defendants in this action have 
participated as co-conspirators in the violations alleged in this 
Complaint and have performed.acts and made statements in 
furtherance of the conspiracy. 
IV. THE MARKETS FOR APRIL NOTES 
14. When the owner of a specific Treasury security holds a 
position in that issue that exceeds the amount of the issue 
available for purchase by short sellers in the cash or financing 
markets, a "squeeze" can occur. A squeeze is especially likely 
to succeed if the size of the position held by the single owner, 
or the combined position of the coordinating holders, exceeds the 
amount of the issue available to cover short positions through 
repurchase or "repo" agreements in the financing market. When a 
squeeze occurs, short sellers are required to pay abnormally high 
prices or to incur abnormally high financing costs to buy or 
borrow the specific security they are short. 
15. Purchasers of Treasury securities that wish to leverage 
their investments, such as the defendant entities, usually 
finance their positions in the financing market. In a financing 
market transaction, the owner of a security sells the issue and 
simultaneously agrees to repurchase it on a specified dare for a 
specified price. The repurchase price is higher than the sale 
price, the difference between the two prices representing an 
5 

interest rate, called the "repo rate". A financing market 
transaction is the functional equivalent of a loan in which 
Treasury securities are used as collateral. 
16. Short sellers (traders who sell securities they do not 
own in the expectation that the price will fall) must purchase or 
borrow the specific security that they are obligated to deliver 
in order to fulfill their obligations. An investor who needs to 
borrow a specific Treasury security issue can do so in the 
financing market, through "special" repo transactions in which 
the investor (short seller), in effect, lends cash in exchange 
for collateral of a specific issue. 
17. There are separate product markets within the meaning 
of the antitrust laws for specific Treasury issues within both 
the cash and financing markets. Some traders speculate in the 
financing market for specific issues, lending cash and accepting 
securities as collateral, in the hope that they can re-lend the 
collateral to someone else at a profit. Interest rates for 
special repo transactions in the financing markets fluctuate 
widely because they reflect supply and demand for a particular 
security. If a security is in short supply, the repo rate for 
that issue will generally be low because owners will be able to 
negotiate lower repo rates from short sellers competing to borrow 
the scarce security. 
18. Prices in the cash and financing markets are related. 
When it is costly to borrow a specific security, demand for it in 
the cash market will increase if some traders buy, rather than 
6 

borrow, it. As a result, the issue may cost more than other 
securities of comparable maturity. Similarly, a high price in 
the cash market (compared to securities of like maturity) may 
cause short sellers to borrow a security through repurchase 
agreements rather than buy it. That increased demand may depress 
repo rates. The holder of a.specific issue can earn a premium 
when lending or selling that security when demand for it is great 
in either the cash or financing market. 
19. The owner of a large position in a specific issue, or 
two or more holders acting together, can limit the supply of that 
issue available to the specials market by financing all or part 
of their positions "off the street," that is, with parties who 
will not re-lend the securities. Such a restriction of supply 
can precipitate a squeeze when demand for the issue exceeds the 
supply made available. In that situation, investors who must 
borrow the issue must accept very low interest rates in the repo 
market (on the cash they lend to obtain the issue), enabling the 
owner or owners of the issue to earn a premium for making the 
security available. 
20. Sellers of Treasury securities transmit securities to 
buyers in interstate commerce through the Federal Reserve System. 
The business activities of the defendant entities and co­
conspirators that are the subject of this complaint were within 
the flow of, and substantially affected, interstate trade and 
commerce. 
7 

V, THE CONSPIRACY 
21. Beginning in or about April 1991, Caxton and SMC agreed 
to acquire control of the supply of April notes and to limit the 
supply of April notes to the cash and financing markets in order 
to cause a squeeze and to profit thereby. To achieve the 
objectives of the conspiracy, the defendant entities did the 
things they agreed to do, including: 
a. purchasing and holding extremely large long positions 
in the April notes; 
b. exchanging information about their positions in the 
April notes; 
c. discussing ways to finance their positions in the April 
notes in a manner that would restrict the supply of the 
notes available to the cash and financing markets; 
d. restricting the supply of April notes available for 
specials transactions, beginning on May 23, 1991; 
e. instructing a primary dealer at which SMC concentrated 
the financing of its April note position to make the 
notes available for specials transactions only if the 
repo rate was below a specified level (and giving other 
directions to constrict supply availability); ' 
f. placing a part of Caxton's position in the April notes 
with a primary dealer that Caxton understood would 
place the notes with investors who were not likely to 
lend them; 
8 

g. concentrating the financing.of their positions with a 
single dealer; and 
h. continuing to hold their positions in the April notes 
at times when they could have sold some or all of these 
positions at a substantial premium. 
22. As a result of the conspiracy, repo rates for the April 
notes in the financing market declined and cash market prices for 
the notes increased. Repo rates for April notes generally 
remained low and cash market prices high until September 1991, 
when the joint position of SMC and Caxton fell below the amount 
necessary to continue the squeeze. 
VI. ANTICOMPETITIVE EFFECTS OF THE CONSPIRACY 
23. The combination and conspiracy to restrain interstate 
trade and commerce in April notes had, among other things, the 
following effects: 
a. SMC and Caxton obtained market power over the 
April notes; 
b. Persons who sold April notes short were denied the 
benefits of free and open competition in the cash 
and financing markets for April notes, resulting 
in higher costs to finance and purchase April 
notes; 
c. Price competition for April notes was unreasonably 
res trained; 
9 

d. Liquidity in the markets for April notes was 
reduced; and 
e. The Treasury was denied the benefits of a free and 
competitive secondary market for April notes. 
24. The combination and conspiracy affected a- substantial 
amount of interstate commerce and is likely to recur unless it is 
enjoined by this Court. 
VII. PRAYER'FOR RELIEF 
WHEREFORE, PLAINTIFF PRAYS FOR RELIEF AS FOLLOWS: 
1. That the Court adjudge and decree that SMC and Caxton 
have combined and conspired in unreasonable restraint of 
interstate trade and commerce in April notes, in violation of 
Section 1 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1. 
2. That SMC and Caxton and all persons acting on behalf of 
either of them or under their direction or control be permanently 
enjoined from engaging in, carrying out, renewing, or attempting 
to engage in, carry out, or renew, any contracts, agreements, 
practices, or understandings in violation of the Sherman Act. 
3. That the defendant property be forfeited to the United 
States. 
4. That plaintiff have such other relief as the Court may 
consider necessary or appropriate. 
10 

5. That plaintiff recover the costs of this action. 
Dated: 
ANNE K. BINGAMAN 
Assistant Attorney General 
ROBERT LITAN 
Deputy Assistant Attorney 
General 
./ 
MARK C. SCHECHTER 
Deputy Director of Operations 
£9* IN F. GREANEY 
"Chief 
Computers and Fi e Section 
THAN M. RICH 
istant Chief 
inputers and Finance Section 
HAYS GOKEY, JR. 
HG1946 
KENNETH.W. GAUL ^ 
KG28 5 8 
Attorneys 
Antitrust Division 
United States Department of 
Justice 
555 4th St., N.W. 
Washington, DC 20001 
11
