fF 
V wi ce 
cy 


“4 TRANSACTIONS 


OF THE 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE 


OF 


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


JANUARY TO DECEMBER 1904 


VOL. XXIII. 


PUBLISHED BY 
Tue AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, 
95 LIBERTY STREET, 
NEW YORK, N. Y., U. S. A. 
1905. 


‘ ‘ioe sg Pinay 
Copyright 1904 

bythe} ae $i Con go 
American Instirute or Evecrricay ENGINEE 


a . 
woe a 
prey me 
At, 
‘ ; are sia, J 
p t . Rp os) 
e P 
’ i 
Fs i i e: = 
; 
4 P 
t i 
Zz ~ r 
Aj 
aq / 
» 
a 
= 
- 
| ‘ 
‘ 
, 
' 
" 
j 
: ‘ay 
. ay 
. 2 
i g 


» =! 


‘Press of McItroy & Emmer, 22 Thames 
a Pa oan 7 Ve, 


OFFICERS AND BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 


1903=1904. 


PRESIDENT. | 


BION J. ARNOLD. 
Term expires 1904. 


JUNIOR PAST-PRESIDENTS. 
CHARLES P. STEINMETZ. CHARLES F. SCOTT. 


VICE-PRESIDENTS. 


Terms expire 1904. Terms expire 1905. 
Cc. O. MAILLOUX. W. S. BARSTOW. 
SCHUYLER S. WHEELER. RALPH D. MERSHON. 
JOHN W. LIEB, Jr. CALVIN W. RICE. 
MANAGERS, 

Terms expire 1904. Terms expire 1905. Terms expire 1906. 
JOHN J. CARTY. CHARLES A. TERRY. SAMUEL SHELDON. 
Re DE! LOZIER. TOWNSEND WOLCOTT. GEORGE F. SEVER. 
W. E. GOLDSBOROUGH. GANO S. DUNN. * A. H. ARMSTRONG. 
SAMUEL REBER. E. H. MULLIN. Wir Cpa) GN: 

TREASURER. SECRETARY. 
Terms expire 1904. 
GEORGE A. HAMILTON, RALPH W. POPE, 


463 West Street, New York. 95 Liberty Street, New York. 


PAST-PRESIDENTS. 


NORVIN GREEN, 1884-5-6. FRANK J. SPRAGUE, 1892-3, 
FRANKLIN L. POPE, 1886-7. ‘EDWIN J. HOUSTON, 1893-4-5. 
T. COMMERFORD MARTIN, 1887-8. LOUIS DUNCAN, 1895-6-7. 
EDWARD WESTON, 1888-9. FRANCIS B. CROCKER, 1897-8. 
ELIHU THOMSON, 1889-90. A. E. KENNELLY, 1898-1900. 

W. A. ANTHONY, 1890-91. CARL HERING, 1900-1901. 
ALEX. GRAHAM BELL, 1891-2. CHARLES P. STEINMETZ, 1901-2. 


CHARLES F. SCOTT, 1902-3. 


STANDING COMMITTEES. 


ele CARTY. 


GANO S. DUNN, 


GEO. A. HAMILTON. 


Library Committee. 


WM. D. WEAVER, 


Executive Committee. 


BION J. ARNOLD, 
Chairm: 


rman 
. JOHN W. oe He 


RALPH W. 
CHARLES is TERRY. 


Board of Examiners. 
WM. MAVER, Jr., 


Chairman. 


GANO S. DUNN. 


WILLIAM J. JENKS. 
CHARLES E. KNOX. 
LEONARD WALDO. 


Editing Committee. 
CARY T. HUTCHINSON, 
Chairman. 
GEORGE F. SEVER. 
HENRY A. LARDNER. 


W. ROLLE 
HENRY By LARDNER. 


CECIL P. 


Committee on Papers. 


S. SHELDON, Chairman. 
A. H. ARMSTRONG. 

A. J. BOWIE, Jr. 

Pe JUNKERSFELD. 
JOHN F. KELLY. 


Chairman. 


OOLE. 
TOWNSEND WOLCOTT. 


Committee on Finance. 


JOHN J. CARTY, 
Chairman. 

W. S. BARSTOW. 

E. H. MULLIN. 


SPECIAL COMMITTEES. 


Transmission Committee. 


RALPH D. MERSHON, 
Chairman. 

F, O. BLACKWELL. 

C. CHESNEY. 


M. HUNT. 
P. M. LINCOLN. 
Affiliated Societies. 
OBERLIN SMITH, 


Chairman. 
GOLDSBOROUGH. 


Po 


B. OWENS. 


Committee on National 
Electric Code. 


A. E, KENNELLY, 
Chairman. 

L. A. FERGUSON. 

P. G. GOSSLER. 

F. A.C. PERRINE. 

H. A. SINCLAIR. 

ARTHUR WILLIAMS. 

Cc. J.H. WOODBURY. 


Committee on By-Laws. 
RALPH W. POPE, 


hairman. 
CARY T. HUTCHINSON. 
E. H. MULLIN. 
W. D. WEAVER. 
SAMUEL SHELDON. 
WM. MAVER, Jr. 


Comm. on Cadmium Cell. 


H S.CARHART, 
Chairman. 

G. A. HAMILTON. 

E. B. ROSA. 

C. H. SHARP. 

B. J. ARNOLD, Ex-Officio, 


Committee on Telegraphy 
and Telephony. 


A. E. KENNELLY, 


hairman. 
B. GHERARDI. 
.C. KELSEY. 
. B. MILLER. 
H. L. REBER. 


Standardization Committee. 
H. J. RYAN, Chairman. 
B.A. BEHREND. 

LOUIS BELL. 

CARL HERING. 

BB Ss. ea 


OSA. 
P. STEINMETZ. 


ua Fund Committee. 


CALVIN W. RICE, 
Chairman. 

T.C. MARTIN. 

J. G. WHITE. 


Committee on Engineering 


Data. 
H. W. eS Chairman. 
13 bs FOSTER. 
W. 1. SLICHTER. 
E. A. MERRILL, 


Reception Games 


CALVIN W. RICE, | 
Chairman. 
ARTHUR WILLIAMS. 


LIN 
CALVERT TOWNLEY. 
ig C, BATES. 

B. GHERARDI. 
W. J. HAMMER 


Conference Library 
Committee. 
W.D. WEAVER, Ch 
M. I, PUPIN, eae 
FRANCIS W. JONES. 


Local Organization Comm. 


CHARLES F. SCOTT, 
Chairman 
CALVIN W. RICE. 
D. C. JACKSON. 
W.C. L. EGLIN. 
. O. SQUIER. 


Committee on Increase of 
Membership. 


W.S. BARSTOW, 
Chairman 

J. F. GILCHRIST. 

W. E. GOLDSBOROUGH. 

SAMUEL REBER. 

GEO. D. SHEPARDSON. 


Advisory Committee on 
Building Fund. 


U.N. BETHELL,Chairman. 
N. F. BRADY. 

EUGENE GRIFFIN. 

J. H. McGRAW. 

C. W. PRICE 

SAMUEL REBER. 

F. J. SPRAGUE 

ELIHU THOMSON. 
SAMUEL INSULL. 


Representatives on Board 
of Award, John Fritz Medal. 


CARL HERING. 
CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 
CHARLES F. SCOTT. 
BION J. ARNOLD. 


Representatives on Joint 
Committee Union Engi= 
neering Building. 


CHARLES F. SCOTT. 


BION J. ARNOLD 
SCHUYLER S.WHEELER 


CONTENTS. 


Frontispiece—Portrait of Bion J. Arnold, President of the InstiturTE. 


ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTORS. 


MeetinG at New York, JANUARY 29, 1904. 


Speed-Torque Characteristics of the Single-Phase Repulsion Motor.— 
Pa elbe ig bao Micinibeis (eS tr ate.) aye ia eel seas ate ea eens 

The Alternating-Current Railway Motor.—By Charles P. Steinmetz 
(GHATS OE RO Met Sacre ga ch eee Pa Cea eae ie LCI ee SH ORE Ree 
Discussion on Alternating-Current Railway Motors by B. G. 
Lamme, A. S. McAllister, Bion J. Arnold, C. P: Steinmetz P. M. 
Lincoln, Walter I. Slichter, Ralph D. Mershon, A. H. Armstrong, 
Robert Lundell, O. S. Lyford, Jr.. H. A. Wagner, Chas. F. 
Scott, B. A. Behrend, W. S. Franklin, Comfort A. Adams, 
DiisalcdeC salacksonc ety cn. ons atone tlie hae Sea ES 
Discussion, at Pittsburg, February 2, 1904, on Alternating- 
Current Railway Motors by V. Karapetofi.. 0 5............. 

MEETING AT CINCINNATI, FEBRUARY 15, 1904. 


Single-Phase Railways.—By W. A. Blanck. (lllustrated.)........ 


HIGH PRESSURE LINES. 


MEETING at NEw York, FEBRUARY 26, 1904. 


The Conductivity of the Atmosphere at High Voltages.—By Harris 
Bl eenicypcutlemnd CLLLOUSEN CTE 2) chyohen cukarute eel earn icen cesta el AAR RM eCe he 
Discussion by C. F. Scott, Samuel Sheldon, Harold B. Smith, 

P. H. Thomas, Harris J. Ryan, P. M. Lincoln, G. T. Hanchett, 
Elihu Thomson, Ralph D. Mershon, 8S. M. Kintner.......... 


Discussion at Pittsburg, March 10, 1904, by H. W. Fisher. . ~ 


European Practice in the Construction and Operation of High Pres- 
sure Transmission Lines and Insulators.—By Guido Semenza. 
CLS UCOD ea Wb actin needa neon soe paOuas ome wen aD c 

Discussion by J. W. Lieb, Jr., W. N. Smith, Bion J. Arnold, 
lee dina lesan, WWE Sy ID be, (Cid Vsielolutcorii coors cae diols v ene. b ole 
Discussion at Pittsburg, March 10, 1904, by N. J. Neall.... 
Discussion at Chicago, April 26, 1904, on High Voltage Lines 
by W.-A. Blanck, C.-E. Freeittan.. 05:2... 2.2.2. ste ees ese ee 


HIGH PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. 


Meerine at New York, Marcu 25, 1904. 


‘The Relative Fire-Risk of Oil Transformers and Air-Blast Trans- 
LOLIMERS (=a Dy maW iy CO nn isi st-mietmenersiperciie de fe! as os iaict aioe has 
Discussion by F. A. C. Perrine, J. S. Peck, Calvert Townley, 

Ralph D. Mershon, C. E. Skinner, HG. Stott., PN] Nunn, 

P. M. Lincoln, C. L. de Muralt, O. S. Lyford, Jr., Howard 


Bayne, W. L. Waters, Irving A. Taylor, Norman T. Wilcox, A. C. 


Pratt, H. A. Lardner, H. F. Parshall, R. S. Kelsch, H. W. Tobey, 
Wm. J. Hazard, E. P. Roberts, W. S. Wi Roxorohas Se, cue cier otNls oor 


Vv 


171 


175 


vi 

The Use of Group-Switches in Large Power-Plants.—By L. B. 
Stillwell... ccs teeters wo sa: deed cA DL corals ER eee en eae ea 
Discussion by Alex Dow, Ralph D. Mershon, H. G. Stott, 
L. B. Stillwell, Wm. B. Jackson, Irving A. Taylor, Gilbert 
Wrght, John Budaylorw els Es dParsbal ls eerie enter 
Oil-Switches for High Pressures.—By E. M. Hewlett............. 
Discussion by C. C. Chesney, F. A. C. Perrine, Alex Dow, 
Ralph D. Mershon, C. F. Scott, P. N. Nunn, C. L. de Muralt, 

BB. Parshall ice ee cals eer aces eee aie ee 
Terminals and Bushings for High-Pressure Transformers.—By 
Walter. S. Moody. i143...) LR, ay ee eee eee eee 
Discussion by Ralph D. Mershon, C. E. Skinner, Irving A. 
Taylor, Ni Me snyder Ay Rrattec. crn te eee eee 
Discussion at Chicago, March 29, 1904, on High-Pressure 
Transmission by James Lyman, W. A. Blanck, P. Junkersfeld, 
G. N. Eastman, D. W. Roper, G. H. Lukes, W. G. Carlton, 
E. O. Sessions, I. E. Brooke, Mr. Thomas, R. F. Schuchardt, Ed. 
Schildhawer 36 20% 25.7. 80. Baedtepas eect te eee 
Discussion at Pittsburg, Aprel 7, 1904, on High-Pressure 
Transmission by J. W. Farley, N. J. Neajl, A. B. Bond, B. P. 
5X0) (Pa Ce ae Pee eS dcortins OA okra cdowdo oui Goo yo 
Discussion at Philadelphia, May 9, 1904, on High-Pressure 
Transmission by, Hi PF) Sanwlle; WiC. Debalina 


ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. 


MEETING AT NEw York, APRIL 22, 1904. 


The Mechanical Construction of Revolving-Field Alternators.— 
By David’ By Rushmore: sis iaed s\n: eee ee 

A Contribution to the Theory of the Regulation of, Alternators.— 
By oH. Me Hobart and; Pasbunca me //isiraico.) eee 
Discussion by C. A. Adams, Jr., B. A. Behrend, W. L. 
Waters, Gano S. Dunn, David B. Rushmore, F. A. C. Perrine, 
Bradley .T| McCormick es ipsa ne eee eet aren eee meee 
Discussion at Pittsburg, May 5, 1904, by V. Karapetoff.... 
Discussion by H. M. Hobart and Franklin Punga (by letter) 


MEETING AT SEATTLE, WASH., APRIL 14, 1904. 
Operation of Synchronous Converters.—By S. C. Lindsay......... 


ANNUAL MEETING. 
At New York, May 17-18, 1904. 

Notes on Fly-Wheels.—By H. H. Barnes, Jr. (J/lustrated.).......; 
Predetermination of Sparking in Direct-Current Machines.—By W. 
Le-Waters: Clilustr acted Na mane ene ee eee 
Effect of Self Induction on Railway Motor Commutation.—By E. H. 
Andersors)).(Lilusivated.\\ ae ec). s ee eee beeen a re ee 

On the Calculation of Line Batteries—By W. E. Winship. (//lus- 
AOL Pee CR RPE ee Pn, crea tints on oles aati Sic conn Ge 
Wave Form Variations of a Long-Distance Line.—By George H. 
Rowe. (Ulluistrated.) :% 2 aha eee eee ee ee 
Data and Tests on a 10 000 Cycle-per-Second Alternator.—By B. G. 
Waimea), (LU UStr ated.) 25 .ri utes ace cae eaten estes 
The Single-Phase Induction Motor.—By William S$. Franklin.  (J/- 
buStr.ated.) ioc eemeh het uk Soe tre Sewt shel Rela eee 
Discussion on papers presented at the Annual Meeting, by 

W. L. Waters, E. R. Douglas, R. B. Treat, E. H. Anderson, 
W.S. Franklin, Clarence P. Feldman, Bion J. Arnold, H. Ward 
Leonard, Thorbur Reid, F. J. White, Lamar Lyndon, W. E. 
Winship, F. D. Newbury, F. B.’ Crocker, H, H. Barnes, Jr., 

H. Y. Hall, Jr., A. S. McAllister ¥ 


199 


204 
215 


2N7 


vil 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 

MEETING aT CHICAGO, JUNE 21-22, 1904. 
Protection of Cables from Arcs Due to the Failure of Adjacent 
Cables by iWissGs Carltonian ote tee sre ele oem ete. 
Discussion by Ralph D. Mershon, W. F. Wells, H. C. Wirt, 
W. G. Carlton, H. B. Alverson, E. M. Lake, A. M. Hunt, 
eM Viaietr Skt Zarate ren ch Be, nee ce spete oN ye ba Re Ne Tet 
Synchronous Motors for Regulation of Power-Factor and Line 
Pressures ve bcaG. satire wre meget ye nate eee unr 
Discussion by F. O. Blackwell, W. L. Waters, H. B. Gear, 
W. B. Jackson, F. A. C. Perrine, Ralph D. Mershon, S. B. 
; Storer, Chas. F. Scott, J. S. Peck, H. W. Buck, T. J. Johnston 
Long oa for Transmission Lines.—By F. O. Blackwell. (Jdlus- 
UROLLLOD) Ree aN te LY BRAC EY ich SECON Te ep ec PAR Lites ae, ee Aa 
Discussion by Ralph D. Mershon, F. O. Blackwell, A. S. 
Hatch, Chas. F. Scott, N. J. Neall, Wm. Hoopes, Eugene 
Clark, Bion J. Arnold, W. D. Ball, F. A. C. Perrine, W. B. 
Jackson, H. B. Alverson, Peter Junkersfeld, H. C. Wirt, S. B. 
SCORE eelere i LAN AL Cer adene cvst arse facie Persbais Paneth vate heehee a 
Conditions for Continuous Service over Lines Operated in Parallel.— 
yg ie cleo Icinvened rerun CULL SET TCO) ae tera uae na eet feu eee 
Discussion by Ralph D. Mershon, P. H. Thomas.......... 
The Use of Ground Shields in Transformers.—By J. S. Peck....... 
__ Discussion by Ralph D. Mershon, H. C. Wirt, C. E. Skinner, 
garters hroivc Siar \ Vics Land Vc POLS aceon ete Pane ag coe aura | aye 
The Protection of High-Pressure Transmission Lines from Static 
Discharges.—_— By hl Co Wirt. Cllustrdted. eo. seeker: ae 2 
Discussion by J. S. Peck, Ralph D. Mershon, N. J. Neall, 
F. O. Blackwell, H. C. Wirt, R. F. Hayward, P. H. Thomas; 
Nie myc tae [Olam Pears Of Tangs sb. casey sede cruel easnele) duster teres 
Answers to Questions Relative to High-Tension Transmission. (A 
Report of the High-Tension Transmission Committee.)...... 
Discussion by J. H. Finney, Ralph D. Mershon, Peter 
Junkersfeld, Bion J. Arnold, L. Schuler, S. B. Storer, F. A. C. 
Perrine, Eugene Clark, W. B. Jackson, N. J. Neall, James 
ear ere Somer a eee ner emad Cee aap ae mee Aches xayeagaroneye a oh- tate oes 
General discussion on High-Tension Transmission by W. G. 
Carlton, Bion J. Arnold, Chas. F. Scott, Peter Junkersfeld, 
Ralph D. Mershon, N. J. Neall, G. N. Eastman, H. B. Alver- 
cone hw WioodmanceeiGs uk aGdleyae sae kinbals we kcje nd ones e 


ANNUAL CONVENTION. 


Sr. Louis, Sept. 14, 1904. 


President's, Address.—-Bby, Bion |; Arnold 222s... ee. eee ne 
Discussion on Different Methods and Systems of Using Alter- 
nating Current in Electric Railway Motors by Chas. P. Stein- 
metz, R. Kaye Gray, Professor Perry, B. G. Lamme, C. V: 
Drysdale, Bion J. Arnold, F. J. Sprague, Elihu Thomson..... 


TRANSMISSION OF INTELLIGENCE. 
MEETING At New York, OCTOBER 28, 1904. 
The Telautograph.—By James Dixon. (Illustrated.)............ 2 
The Transposition of Electrical Conductors.—By Frank F. Fowle. 
LEE UGS eR EAI) ORE R, SL aOR Le Pan RIE SA, 
HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. 


Meertine at New Yorx, NovemBer 25, 1904. 


Probiems in Heavy Electric Traction.—By O. S. Lyford, Jr., and 
WG INE Breda: OUIOR CL oN, 6.0 oormuorttied DOU BND ne url Die oa 


605 


609 


615 


691 


ie 


vili 


Discussion by L. B. Stillwell, C. O. Mailloux, H. Ward 
Leonard, W. S. Franklin, A. H. Armstrong, C. T. Hutchinson, 
W.N. Smith, E. E. Ries, O. S. Lyford, Jr.. Wm. McClellan.... 723 

Discussion at Pittsburg, December 5, 1904, by N. W. Storer. 752 


TRANSMISSION PROBLEMS. 


MeetiInG at New York, DECEMBER 23, 1904. 


The Maximum Distance to which Power can be Economically 
Transmitted.—By Ralph D. Mershon.  (//lustrated.)......... 759 

Discussion by John W. Lieb. Jr., H. G. Stott, Philip Torchio, 

P. G. Gossler, J. E. Wallace, M. H. Gerry, Jr., A. E. Kennelly, 


Chas. F. Scott, C. L. de Muralt, Ralph D.Mershon.......... 782 
Discussion at Pittsburg, January 9, 1905, by S. M. Kintner, 
Pl MM. Lincoln) Hi, Weel isher, Na) aN Call ogee ene ee 801 
‘Discussion at Philadelphia, January 9, 1905, by Wm. 
McClellan, A. BY Stitzer) Carl Herinie, so AL) Poster aes 805 
APPENDIX. 
Report of the Board of Directors for the Fiscal Year Ending April 
1904 eae ee se Ra eae reo AE itn cant ORT OES 807 
Report of Committee on Local Organizations.................... 815 
Report of Committee on the Cadmium Cell..................... 827 


Report of Library; Committee: .4.% 4.0. ee 833 


A paper presented at the 183d meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, fanuary 29, 1904. 

Copyright 1904, by A.IE, BE. 


SPEED-TORQUE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SINGLE 
PHASE REPULSION MOTOR. 


BY WALTER I. SLICHTER. 


The single-phase commutator motor has attracted consider- 
able attention of late, as there is quite a demand in railway work 
as well as in numerous other lines for an alternating-current 
motor that will start under a heavy load with a reasonable con- 
sumption of energy. At present it appears that a commutator: 
motor is the only type that will fulfil these conditions. 

For some months past the writer of this paper has been in 
charge of a series of experiments with various types of alter- 
nating-current commutator motors. During these experiments 
much attention was given to the repulsion motor. It is the 
purpose of this paper to place before the INsTITUTE some of the 
results obtained, and to point out some of the characteristics of 
the motor which give promise of making it a very prominent 
factor in some lines of electric railroading of the future. 

For the benefit of those not already familiar with this type of 
motor, it may be here stated that it is a single-phase commutat- 
ing motor, resembling very much a regular direct-current arma- 
ture in an induction-motor field. The resemblance to the induc- 
tion motor is carried still further in that there is no electrical 
connection between the primary and secondary. This makes 
it possible to wind the primary for a high line voltage, while the 
voltage of the secondary winding is chosen at such a value as 
may be commutated satisfactorily, since it is short circuited on 
itself through its brushes. 

The motor has the same characteristics as the direct-current 
series motor; namely, maximum torque at starting, increasing 
torque with increasing current and decreasing speed, and com- 
paratively constant efficiency through a wide range of speed. 

1 


2 SLICHTER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR. {Jan. 29 


The maximum speed of the motor is limited only by the load and 
impressed voltage and has no relation to the synchronous speed. 

Due to the reactance of the motor circuits, the power-factor © 
at starting is low and will be with any alternating-current motor, 
but in the repulsion motor a low power-factor does not mean 
small torque. On the contrary, the maximum torque occurs 
simultaneously with the lowest power-factor; that is, at starting. 
The power-factor of the repulsion motor rises very rapidly with 
the speed; it reaches a good value at one-third synchronous 
speed, and values near to 90% are obtained over a con- 
siderable range of speed. For this reason a large number of 
poles is not necessary and frequencies of 25, 40, and even 60 
cycles may be employed. 

The rotating conductors of the secondary cutting the primary 
flux generate a leading e.m.f., which causes a leading current to 
flow therein and gives the high power-factor of the motor. In 
the plain repulsion motor, this leading current never reaches a 
value great enough to compensate entirely for the magnetizing 
and other wattless currents at available speeds, but the phenome- 
non is utilized to obtain unity power-factor in the compensated 
type by the addition of a second circuit. The inherently good 
power-factor of the repulsion motor makes it possible to use 
larger clearance between field and armature than is permitted 
in induction motors, thus greatly increasing its value in railway 
work where comparatively large air-gaps are necessary. 

The curves given are partly from test and partly from calcula~- 
tion of motors having air-gaps of 0.125 inch on a side, and more. 
The air-gap of corresponding stationary induction motors would 
be 0.040 inch and more. 

The efficiency, while not so good as in a direct-current motor, 
is yet very good, reaching values of from 80 to 85, including 
gear-loss for sizes ranging from 50 to 200 horse-power. 

Commutation at normal speeds is inherently good, due to the 
revolving field. As the speed decreases, the current increases 
rapidly, producing a tendency to spark, but with the reduced 
voltage of starting the rush of current is limited to values 
within the range of good commutation, as in the direct-current 
motor. 

At higher speeds, ranging above one-and-a-half times syn- 
chronism, the frequency of commutation becomes high and 
sparking appears. 
“The motor of Fig: 1 will’ start with 75% of full 


1904.] SLICHTER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR. 3 


voltage and twice full-load current with no trouble from sparking. 
As these curves are prepared upon a railway-motor basis, and 
full-load current will produce a rise of 75° C. after one hour’s run, 
the ability of the repulsion motor successfully to commutate over- 
loads is equal to that of the direct-current series motor; in fact, 
better, due to the short-circuited commutator which makes 
flashing-over impossible. 

Fig. 1 shows the characteristics of a repulsion motor 
plotted with revolutions per minute as a base. These curves 
are taken from tests on a 60-horse power, 25-cycle, 500-volt 
motor; they show the rapidly rising efficiency and power-factor 


100 
PERCENT POWER = FAcToR | 
0 
ya CIENCY 
21 { | iz 
oo 
rare | | 
2300—+-70 t ae + 
| ‘ TEST-CURVE'S OF A 60-HORSE-~-POWER 


500-VOLT: 25-CYGLE, REPULSION MOTOR 


[ \ AMPERES 

2000: paeae 00 
IL sites he lt 

1600 ae; Bae | i; 400 


T ial [| 


Zo, 
Cup Ey Gia) Up 
80, 0. 200 


REV. PER 2()0 MIN. 400 600 800 1000 1200 


and the large torque at starting. The starting torque is 2300 
ft. lbs., with an input of 325 amperes, and the normal torque 
during acceleration, 450 ft. lbs. at 750 revolutions and 125 
amperes. Thus the starting torque is five times normal and the 
starting current 2.6 times normal; or the torque per ampere at 
starting is 1.92 times what it is at normal speed, should occasion 
demand the full starting capacity of the motor. 

This gives an idea of the steep speéd-characteristics of the 
motor, which are even better shown in Fig. 2. The full 
lines refer to a later type of repulsion motor and the broken 
lines to a standard direct-current series railway motor; these 
curves are plotted in the usual way with current as a base. 


4 SLICHTER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR. 


[Jan. 29 
This shows that the torque increases more rapidly with increas- 
ing current in the repulsion motor than in the series; and con- 

versely that the speed of the repulsion motor increases more 

rapidly with decreasing current than in the series motor. Effi- 
ciency, including 


gear-loss, is given and is 84.5% at the 


REV; PER MIN, 4 
1200+- | 3 
Zz ; 
A -_ 
ails 4 
a 3 FIG 2 
1100+ — m 
iA } COMPARISON OF SPEED AND TORQUE CURVES 
= 9. ; OF A REPULSION MOTOR AND A DIRECT-CURRENT 
0 \2 SERIES MOTOR, 500 VOLTS ON EACH. 
1000: 1005-2 p< — 
\3 
< ——EEEE 
Paitin a 
FOOT-LBS. 
800 80 +1600: 
=| f 
700+ 170 | Ny ele 1490 
i / i ei: 
600 60 = 
| - 9 
y wp ie 
2 
~ ~~ 
500 é 1000. 
4005 7 Ry 890: 
en + Sf ey =| 
¥ fe 
KA wy se 
a 7 (& a se! 
CS iy 
AS Foal gre pen 
A x 
900 6 
20} | = t—— ie 400: 
BP a i ila 
He 
AMPERES AT| 500 VOLTS 
4) 80 120 160 240 


maximum for the alternating-current motor. 


This motor was 
designed with the steep speed-characteristics for acceleration 


work, while the motor of Fig. 4 is designed for constant- 
speed running and has not such steep curves but better con- 
stants at light loads. 


1904. ] SLICHTER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR. i) 


The characteristics show the repulsion motor to be admirably 
adapted for acceleration work, the efficiency of acceleration 
being higher than in direct-current work, due to the possibility 
of obtaining fractional e.m.f.s with alternating currents without 
introducing the dead resistance losses of the direct-current 
system of control. 

This is shown in the curves on Fig. 3, which gives the 
acceleration curves from test of a 25-ton car equipped with two 
60-h.p. repulsion motors. The full lines indicate the repulsion 
motor characteristics and the broken lines those calculated for a 
direct-current equipment. The gearing is chosen for the same 


FIG 3 
COMPARATIVE SPEED-TIME CURVES 
i! OF 25-TON CAR WITH REPULSION MOTORS 
AND DIRECT-CURRENT MOTORS. 
ae = | ia | 
DIRECT-CURRENT KILOWATTS i | MILES PER HOUR 
35 
kw! & 
KVA. | eR HOS 
60: ) \ yes cee | 30 
\, = MILES 
Be ACTER NA TING ae 
Le 
ean, URRENT KILOVoLT- AMPERES 
40 Va ai S=CURRENT KitowArrq 20 4 
za | Zi = 
Ae | | bas 3 
i es 
2 | } | +—10+—-.2 
€s 
why | + es 
10 i. na 5 mI 
| TIME IN|SECONDS | 
5 15 20 25 80 35 40 45 50 55 60 


free-running speed, 33 miles per hour, the same average accelera- 
tion, and the same distance covered in sixty seconds. For the 
direct-current motor the curve of kilowatts input, miles per 
hour, and miles traveled, are given as calculated; and for the 
alternating-current motor the kilovolt-ampere input, kilowatt 
input, miles per hour, and miles traveled, from test. 

The repulsion motor remains on the controller only 16 
seconds and the direct-current motor 25 seconds. The maxi- 
mum power taken by the direct-current motor is 70 kw. and by 
the repulsion motor 61 kw. or 67 kilovolt-amperes. At the end 
of 25 seconds, the total kw.-hour input in the two cases is 0.375 for 
the direct current and .30 for the alternating current. At the 


6 SLICHTER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


end of 60 seconds both cars have covered a distance of 0.039 mile 
and have reached practically the same speed of 32.5 miles per 
hour, the kw.-hour input being 0.72 for the direct current and 
0.685 for the alternating current. 

By comparing the areas of the kilowatt curves in the two cases 
the gain or rather the saving by the use of the alternating car- 


ae | wl 
NE + EE We —— | 
pris epee MIN | healt ie [ 
i; t 
cot) | 999-1 
80: 800-- 
jae 
70. 700-+ 
{ Va 
60-+——- 600+ 
a 
50 oy a 
1-1-4909. 


FIG 4 


[—) CALCULATED CURVES OF 175-h.p 
REPULSION MOTOR, AT 1500 VOLTS, 


+ 800—- =a r 
| 
i T Le 
200 i a ~ 
| te 
eat [A T 
100 ——— 
AMPERES AT, 1600 VOLTS 


20 40 60 8 100 120 140 160 180 


rent is readily seen. It is also worthy of note that the volt- 
ampere input of the alternating-current motor is least at start- 
ing; that is, the line current is least. As this is the time at 
which the power-factor is lowest, it is seen that the effect of the 
low power-factor on the regulation of the system is much modi- 
fied by the small value of the current. 

Fig. 4 shows the calculated characteristics of a 175-h.p. rail- 


1904.] SLICHTER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR. 7 


way repulsion motor having an air-gap of 0.15 inch and wound 
for 1500 volts and 25 cycles. The efficiency, including gear-loss, 
is 85% at the maximum and the power-factor is 93. Such a 
motor is designed for heavy, slow-speed locomotive work, which 
is probably one of the most promising fields for the alternating- 
current motor. It is readily seen how well it is adapted for 
freight haulage by the fact that the efficiency of 85% is 
attained at a speed as low as 500 revolutions, thus permitting a 
speed of 12 to 15 miles per hour, with a good gear reduction. 

Thus the repulsion motor is well adapted for acceleration work 
as well as for efficient running at light loads, and having good 
constants at low speeds is well adapted for freight haulage at low 
speeds. 

The curves given in this paper all refer to the simple repulsion 
motor, the theory of which is given in the paper by Mr. C. P. 
Steinmetz. There are many variations of the repulsion motor, 
more or less complicated, from which a better power-factor and 
even a better efficiency have been obtained in test. However, 
a description of these various schemes with their characteristics 
would require sufficient space to warrant a distinct paper and 
itis hoped to present such to the INsTITUTE at a future date. 


* ' ~ hed | 
i 
0 P ‘i> 
® aay i 
Stee et i 
tl ee 
‘ t 
. ay 2 Pd iew * 
‘ eae 
é te 4 $4 
4 
~ whe ie An + 
¥ 1 . 
. ue te w 5 ae 
‘ ay oa 
* - > # . 
, eh ie 
‘ ‘i Rives 3, 4 
v ray 
heise! ial a ‘ 
t A z 
* J . . 
: 
ot 8 auear » 
\ ie 4 - ag ie 
Pad f “ Ww 
wh ESE ate Ge Sa Cee ee 
PAR en at ay 5 beh. hee 5 
Fethpot I Sea at ew A ry petal Rea : 
% ri Lae 
, eg yom, yo As 
Starr h Nath aaa DE a Gale Bares aie 
bat Br Lot 
‘ - 
%; ne : oe hh “ 
* . Yale Ales ear od Fe 
¥ ; Ae aaa 


+ 
- < 
c 
rs 
. 
: La’ 
¢ 
“4 ‘} 
hee 
. t 
re 
r ' . 
s } i 
’ ‘a ie 
& oS £ 
t o>. ad 
ea 
by 


A paper presented at the 183d meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, Fanuary 29, 1904. . 

Copyright 1904, By A. I. E. BE. 


THE ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILVAY MOTOR 


BY CHARLES P. STEINMETZ. 


For electric railroading a motor is required which maintains a 
high value of efficiency over a wide range of speed. That is, the 
torque per ampere input at constant impressed voltage must. 
increase with decrease of speed, the speed increase with decrease 
of load. 

In electric motors, torque is produced by the action of a 
magnetic field upon currents flowing in an armature movable 
with regard to the field. If then the field is constantly excited— 
shunt motor on constant potential—the torque is approximately 
proportional to the current, the speed approximately constant 
at all loads. If the field is excited by the main current of the 
motor—series motor on'constant potential—the field strength 
and thereby the torque per ampere varies approximately 'pro- 
portional to the current, and thereby the load, the whole torque 
approximately proportional to the square of the current and the 
speed inversely proportional to the current, leaving saturation 
out of consideration. ‘That is, the motor has the cha.acteristic 
specified above for a railway motor. 

Since the direction of rotation of the direct-current motor is 
independent of the direction of the impressed e.m.f., with 
laminated field the direct-current motor can be operated with 
alternating currents. By the use of alternating currents it 
becomes possible to transfer current from circuit to circuit by 
induction, and instead of passing the main-line current through 
the armature of the alternating-current motor, the armature 
circuit can be closed upon itself and the current induced therein 
as transformer secondary by a stationary primary coil in the 
main circuit surrounding the armature. | 

Condition of operation of the direct-current motor type on 

9 


10 STEINMETZ: ALTERNATING-CURRENT [Jan. 29 


alternating current is, however, that the current in field and 
armature reverses:‘simultaneously. This is by necessity the case 
in the series motor. In the shunt motor, however, the 
armature current as energy current should be in phase with the 
impressed e.m.f., while the field current as magnetizing current 
lags nearly 90°. To bring it back into phase, W. Stanley tried 
condensers in series in the field circuit, but failed, due to the 
impossibility of neutralizing the self-induction of the field which 
varies with the commutation and the frequency, by the negative 
self-induction of the condensers, which varies with the frequency 
in the opposite direction. The solution of the problem has been 
found by the use of polyphase systems, by utilizing for the field 
excitation an e.m.f. in quadrature with the armature currents 
acted upon by the field magnetism. As I have shown elsewhere, 
the polyphase induction motor can be considered as a develop- 
ment of the direct-current shunt motor for alternating-current 
circuits, and indeed has all the shunt motor characteristics 
regarding speed, torque, etc. As railway motor the induction 
motor has therefore not been exploited, although it has been 
strongly recommended in these very few cases where it appeared 
good engineering. Experimental work with polyphase induc- 
tion motor railways has been carried on continuously since 1893. 
While in the early days of alternating-current motor develop- 
ment, all other engineers were industriously developing the con- 
stant-speed stationary motor type, with shunt motor charact- 
eristic, only Rudolph Eickemeyer of Yonkers was far-sighted 
enough to realize the vast future of alternating-current railroad- 
ing, and to appreciate the absolute necessity of the series motor 
characteristic for railway work, and undertake the develop- 
ment of the single-phase alternating-current series motor. I 
had the good fortune at that time to be associated with Mr. 
Eickemeyer. 
As was pointed out by G. Kapp, I believe in 1888, the 
power-factor of the alternating-current series motor is inherently 
low, since the same magnetic flux which induces, proportional to 
the frequency of rotation, the e.m.f. of useful work in the arma- 
ture conductors, induces in the field coils an e.m.f. of self-induc- 
tion, proportional to the frequency of alternation. Hence, giving 
the armature the same number of turns as the field (which is 
more than permissible in good practice, since good practice 
requires weak armature and strong field), even at synchronous 
speed the e.m.f. of rotation of the armature would still only be 


1904.] RAILWAY MOTOR. lL 


equai to the e.m.f. of self-induction of the field; and the power- 
factor, allowing for an additional self-induction of the armature, 
would be below 70 per cent. This probably deterred the other 
engineers from considering the alternating-current series motor. 

Eickemeyer solved the difficulty by designing the armature 
with a number of turns several times greater than the field (24 
to 7in the first motor built) and neutralizing the armature self- 
induction and reaction by a stationary secondary circuit sur- 
rounding the armature at right angles electrically to the field 
circuit (the ‘‘cross-coil,’’ as he called it), and either short-cir- 
cuited upon itself or energized by the main current in opposite 
direction to the current in the armature. 

In January, 1891, I tested the first motor of this type, a 
bipolar motor with the following constants: 

Field: Two coils of 14 turns No. 10 B & S wire, connected in 
parallel. 

Armature: 24 coils of four turns each of No. 12 B & S wire. 

Secondary circuit: Two coils of 18 turns each of No. 10 B&S 
wire connected in parallel. 

At 100 cycles and 150 volts impressed e.m.f., this motor gave 
at three-fourths synchronous speed: 

Current: 45 amperes. 

I? R: 400 watts. 

Hysteresis and eddy ‘currents: 900 watts. 

Total output, including friction: 4000 watts. 

Hence: 

Efficiency, 75.5% 

Power-factor, 79% 

The starting current of this motor at 150 volts was 70 amperes. 

As bipolar motor with the very high frequency then used, the 
«soeed, 4500 revolutions at three-fourths synchronism, was unde- 
sirably high, so we immediately proceeded to build an 8-pole 
motor In this, solid copper rings were used as secondary cir- 
cuits surrounding the armature and neutralizing its self-induc- 
tion, with an effective copper-section more than four times that 
of the armature conductors. The ratio of armature serics turns 
to field series turns was about 4. This motor was tested in 1892. 
The record of tests is given in Fig. 1, the observed values being 
marked on the curves. For comparison on this sheet is also 
given the direct-current voltage required to operate this motor 
at the same speed and current. 

As seen, when approaching synchronous speed, the power- 


12 STEINMETZ: ALTERNATING-CURRENT [Jan. 29 


factor is nearly 90 per cent. The commutation was fair at 85 
cycles, the highest frequency at which our factory engine was 
able to drive the alternator, and perfect at 33 cycles. 


ue i 
e) ell SE a eo a 
ek | 
[ ia ee 
aj aps T T Sale PERCENT: 
es 
Wesll + 4 
Me HH +1150 
Wes? | “ 
;| & A ef 
(tes 7 Ky 140 
L S ie | 
; tty & 8B POLAR SINGLE-PHASE aa 
T & ALTERNATING SERIES MOTOR. 
i ‘a 5 7] 200 VOLTS, 85 CYCLES. 77 
| i ie a | | R.EICKEMEYER, 1892. ie 1199 
+» 
eS ‘maa j a | 
| | BI | 110 
4 =I IES ‘a 


| CI SPEED, | OF SYNCHRONISM | [ Tat Papp 
10 20 30 : 


40 50 60 70 80 90 | 100 aE hig 


A number of railway motors of this type were designed. The 
great difficulty, however, was that during these early days 125 to 
133 cycles was the standard equeney in this country, 60 
cycles hardly considered, and 25 cycles not yet proposed. 


1904. ] RAILWAY MOTOR. ; a 13 


The efficiency of this alternating-current series motor is 
slightly lower than that of the same motor on direct-current 
circuit, due: 

1. To the hysteresis loss in the field. 

2. The hysteresis loss in the armature core, which is of full 
frequency up to synchronism and of still higher frequency, the 
frequency of rotation, beyond synchronism. 

3. The /?R loss in the short-circuited secondary conductors 
surrounding the armature. 


s 


As seen, to make the alternating-current series motor practic- 
able, the transformer feature must be introduced, by having its © 
armature as primary circuit closely surrounded by a short-cir- 
cuited secondary circuit, as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 2. 
Instead of closing the stationary circuit upon itself as second- 


ary circuit and feeding the main current into the rotating arma- 
ture as primary circuit, mechanically the same results would 
obviously be obtained by using the stationary circuit as primary 
energized by the main current, and closing the armature upon 
itself as secondary by short circuiting the brushes and thereby 


14 STEINMETZ: ALTERNATING-CURRENT [Jan? 29 


keeping the main current and the line potential away from the 
armature, as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 3: This introduces 
the great advantage of reversing the sign of the uncompensated. 
part of the armature self-induction, so that it is subtractive, 
which results in an essential improvement of the power-factor, 
especially at low speed. 

This is shown in Fig. 4, where with the speed as abscissas, in 
per cent of synchronism, are plotted the power-factor of the 
Eickemeyer compensated series motor of Fig. 1, of ratio armature 
to field = 4, and the power-factor of one of the first railway 
repulsion motors, of ratio armature to field = 3.5. 


% 
100} 
| 
8 4 90} 
~ 
wey BS 80 
2 0. ee 
& 
z eS 
o i : 
“&S 
| & Fig. 4 : 
RS) | POWER-FACTORS. 
é | ss 
g io CI a 
Y | Jett 1 . 40. 
~ ws ae 
[aap i geal e 
Gi | | HW = 
beeen ¢ oF SYNCHRONISM _| | i 
| | ia is : 
10 [| 20 | 80 | 40 | 50 | co | 70 | 80 | 90 | 100 | 110 | 220 | 130 | 140 | 50 | 160 rol 


The compensation of the armature self-induction in Fig. 3 is 
based on the feature of the transformer that primary and 
secondary current are in opposition to each other. The second- 
ary current of the transformer, however, lags slightly less than 
180° behind the primary current; that is, considering it in the 
reverse direction, is a leading current with regard to the primary 
current. The current in the armature in Fig. 3 is, therefore, a 
. leading current with respect to the line current, and so not only 
does not add an additional lag but reduces the lag caused by the 
self-induction of the field-exciting coil. 

This motor then consists of a short-circuited armature sur- 
rounded by two coils at right angles with each other and con- 
nected in series, as illustrated in Fig. 5; the one, A,, parallel 


1904.] RAILWAY MOTOR. 15 


with the effective armature circuit, acting as primary of a 
transformer to induce the secondary armature current; the 
other, A,, the field-exciting coil. The ratio of turns of these coils, 
Ny, to N,, is the ratio of effective armature series turns to field 
turus, as discussed before. Obviously, these two coils can be 
replaced by one coil at an angle with the position of brushes as 
shown in Fig. 6, and the cotangent of the angle of the axis of this 
coil with the position of the brushes is above ratio; that is, the 
smaller this angle the greater is the ratio of armature to field 
turns; that is, the better the power-factor of the motor. 


Fic. 5 Mg 


M, 


This motor, Fig. 6, is Professor Elihu Thomson’s repulsion 
motor. 

In the armature an e.m.f. is induced by the alternation of the 
magnetic field, M,, of coil A, proportional to M, and to the 
impressed frequency and in quadrature with M,; and an e.m.f. 
is induced by the rotation through the magnetic flux M, of coil 
A,, proportional to M, and to the frequency of rotation and in 
phase with M,. These two e.m.fs. must be equal and opposite, 
since the armature is short circuited (neglecting the resistance 
and self-inductive reactance of the armature), and at synchron- 
ism, M, and M, are, therefore, equal and in quadrature with 


16 STEINMETZ: ALTERNATING-CURRENT [Jan. 29 


each other; that is, in the armature of the motor, Fig. 5, and 
therefore of the repulsion motor, Fig. 6, at synchronism a 
uniform rotating field exists and the hysteresis loss in the arma- 
ture core is therefore zero at synchronism and at other speeds 
proportional to the difference between speed and synchronism; 
that is, to the slip, just as in the polyphase induction motor; 
while in the motor, Fig. 2, the hysteresis loss in the armature 
core is proportional to the impressed frequency or the frequency 
of rotation, whichever is the higher frequency. The hysteresis 
loss of the repulsion motor is therefore lower than that of the 
‘same motor as compensated series motor, 


Fia. 6 


et 


M, 


In general, if in the repulsion motor in Fig. 6 the magnetic flux 
in line with the brushes, which does not induce e.m.f. by rotation 
but only by alter is denoted by M,; the magnetic flux 
in quadrature with the brushes which induces e.m.f. in the 
armature by its rotation but not by the alternation of the flux, 
by M,; and the magnetic flux in the axis of the primary coil A, 
which is much nearer to M, than to M 1, Since good power- Ee 
requires a small angle w, by M, the two e.m.fs. induced in the 
armature, by the rotation through the flux M,, are: 


1904. | RAILWAY MOTOR. 17 


E,=2aN, Myn, 
By the alternation of the flux M,. 

By = -j2xN Min 
Wherex = number of armature turns, 


N = impressed frequency ; 
N, = frequency of rotation. 


Since, approximately, F, = E,, it is, 
jIN,M,=NM, 
or 
j3M,:M,=N:N, (1) 

That is: 1, and , are in quadrature in phase and the ratio 
of their intensity is inversely proportional to the ratio of speed 
to synchronism. 

That is, in the repulsion motor an elliptically rotating field 
exists which becomes circular; in other words, a uniformly 
rotating field, at synchronism. Below synchronism the com- 
ponent Af,, which induces e.m.f. by the rotation of the armature 
is greater than M,, the more the lower the speed. The flux M@ 
interlinked with the primary coil is, however, nearer to M, and 
therefore below svnchronism, especially at low speeds, the 
magnetic flux which induces e.m.f. by the rotation of the arma- 
ture and so represents the useful work, is greater than the 
magnetic flux which interlinks with the primary coil and so 
gives the lag of the primary current. This accounts for the high 
power-factor of the repulsion motor at low speeds. 

Neglecting resistance and self-inductive reactance, it is, 


M = constant, 


corresponding to the impressed voltage. 
From equation (1) it follows: 
M, =] M,(N,/N) 


Hence, 
M = M,cosw+M,sinw 
= M, [sinw+7 (N,/N) cos a] 
M 
M,= 


‘sin w+. (N,/N) cosw - 


(2) 
a Mae 
2 ~~ cos w —f (N/N,) sin w 


12 STEINMETZ: ALTERNATING-CURRENT [Jan 29 


or, absolute: 


M 
My = \/sin av af ete) 

M i 
M, 


~ Veo at (NIN) Sint 
RE 
eR 


Fic. 7 
MAGNETIC FLUX 
ISTRIBUTION IN REPULSION MO 
@ = 16° 


Ra 
im 


At synchronism: N, = N, itis: 


My =v 
At standstill: N, = 0, itis: 
M 
1 sin w 
Me = 0 


In Fig. 7 are eaten the two quadrature components M, and 
M, of the magnetic field of the repulsion motor, for w = 16° and 
M = 1.0. 


1904.] RAILWAY MOTOR. 19 


In the theoretical investigation and practical calculation of the 
repulsion motor, just as in the polyphase and single-phase 
induction motor, the transformer feature is made the starting 
point and the motor considered as a transformer, the secondary 
of which is standing at a constant angle w with regard to the 
primary, so that motion results from the repulsive thrust existing 
between primary and secondary. 

Let in vector denotation: 

E, = impressed e.m.f., used as zero vector e,; 

T = primary current; 
I 1 = secondary current reduced to the primary by the ratio 
of turns (the same as customary in induction motors) ; 


Z = primary exciting impedance that is, primary induced 
e.m.f., divided by primary current at open secondary circuit; 

Zy) = primary self-inductive impedance; 

Z, = secondary self-inductive impedance reduced to the 


primary circuit; 

w = angle between primary and secondary. axis; that is, 
angle of shift of brushes from the position of complete trans- 
former action; 

a = (N,/N) = ratio of speed to frequency. 

The total m.m.f. acting upon the primary coil is then: Pri- 
mary current J plus component of secondary current acting in the 
direction of the primary, or T, cos w. 

Hence, 

[+I,cosw 

This, then, is the primary exciting current; and the primary 
induced e.m.f. is therefore (J+J, cos w) Z. 

The primary impedance voltage is TZ, 

Hence, 

en (1, cos.w) i Z,, 

In the secondary circuit ‘an e.m.f. is induced by its rotation 
through the magnetic flux M, in quadrature with the secondary 
axis, which is in phase with this magnetic flux. This magnetic 
flux M, is due to the component of primary current acting in this 
direction: / sin w, since the secondary current exerts no m.m.f. 
at right angles to the axis of the secondary coil. The e.m_f. in- 
duced thereby is in phase with /. 

This e.m.f., induced by flux M, is therefore, 

E, saxTsinw (4) 

In the secondary, an e.m.f. is induced also by the alternation 
of the magnetic flux 7, in the axis of the secondary coil. 


20 STEINMETZ; ALTERNATING CURRENT {Jan, 29 


This magnetic flux is produced by the m.m.f. of the secondary 
current /, and the component of primary current acting in this 
direction: 7 cos w, hence, due to 

I,+1 cos w 
and the e.m.f. induced hereby is 
E, = -Z (,+I1 cos w) 

The impedance emf. of the secondary circuit is Z, Ty, and since 

the secondary is short circuited, it is 
Z(UI,+Icosw)+Z,1, -axIsinw = 0 

These are the two fundamental equations of the repulsion 
motor: 

Primary circuit: 

€y = 2. (Taq cos w)+l Lis 

Secondary circuit: (5) 

0= -axIsnw+Z (,+ Icosw)+Z, ly 

Where we assumed the impressed e.m.f. ¢, as zero vector 

From the second equation it follows: 


; —I(Zcosw-a * sin w) 
4 — Z lems 
Z+2Z, 


Substituting this in the first equation, gives: 
Primary current ; 


y ee eee A Mn ny eee eS 


Z axsinwcosw+Zsin®=w+Z,+Z, + 


LF = (a, +f ay) 


Z 
(6) 
Secondary current; 
e ZCcOSw —ax sin w 
l=; Me GAT ae (6, +7 d.) 
ud x Sin w COs otZsimatZo+2Z,t—4 
Hence, 
a 
Power-jactor: COs @ = =e 
: Jae 4 a? 
Volt-ampere input; Op eal eewere Va?+a, 
2 
Power input; Pe = ey ey 


Power output; ee /E,1,/* = /axTIsinw,I,/' 
=axsinw/I,I,/' 


an 2a 
= axe, sin w (a, b, +a, b,) 


1904.] RAILWAY MOTOR. 21 


Torque; Te Pid) = Xe sin ail a 


= *é,’ sin w (a,.b,+a, b,) 


Efficiency ; r=) P _ axsinw (a, b,+4, b2) 
Po Gime 
Quer 
Substituting. 


Z, +2, = Z' =r -jx' = total internal self-inductive impe- 
dance. Neglecting minor terms, it is, approximately: 
Primary current, | 


[a Pou eid 23 
. (a x sin w cos w+r') —7 (x sin? w+2") (7) 


Secondary current; 


I iss é, (cosw —jasinw) 3 
; (ax sin wcosw+r') -7 (x sin’w x") oy 
x sin? w+x! 
A . ee : 
Eas iene axsinwcos w+r 9) 
Rerues T= €) x Sin wW COS w ato 2 


(a x sin w cos w+7")?+ (* sin? w+ x")? 


The secondary current leads the primary current by angle 
tan. x, = atan w 


The secondary current comes in phase with the primary im- 
pressed e.m.f. é, 


FT: asin w % Sin? a x" 
i i ee 
cos w axsinw cosSw +7 
hence, 
rt / x (1)? 
a> — ree. = +4/ oa Se 


2x sin w cos w xsintw | 42% sin? w cos? w 
Above this speed, the secondary current leads the primary 
impressed e.m.f. ¢ , hence magnetizes. 
Ata = 1, thatis, at synchronism, the secondary current equals 
the primary current, J, = J, but leads by the angle of brush- 
shift w. 


22 STEINMETZ: ALTERNATING-CURRENT [Jan. 29 


At infinite speed, a= ». 
I=0 
That is; the primary current decreases with increasing speed, 
down to zero at infinite speed.- (In the ordinary induction 
motor the current can never fall below a certain minimum value, 
the exciting current). 
In this case, 


that is, lags 90° behind the primary impressed e.m.f., hence is 90° 

ahead of the phase of a transformer secondary current, and sup- 

plies the magnetizing current of the magnetic circuit, just as a 

condenser in the secondary circuit of a transformer would do. 
At standstill: 


gi = Ye 

I <2 
r —47 (x sin? w+x') 

€y) COS Ww 

Whe ee 7 

: r’ — 7 (x sin? w+") 
x sin? w + x! 

tan p= fas : 


r 


_ _ @y X SiN w COS w 
(71)? + (% sin? w+ x1) 


Current and torque are a maximum, the power-factor a 
minimum at standstill. 
Backward rotation: 

For negative values of speed a the torque T is still positive, 
hence opposed to the rotation, and the repulsion motor with 
reversed brush-angle w acts as brake. 

The primary current, 


— —— —" = — — _ €o 
(ax sinwcosw+r') — 7 (x sin? w+ x") 


for negative values of speed a becomes wattless, when 


axsinwcosw+r! = 0 
or 


yi 


(ON 3 ee 


x sin w cos w 


1904. ] RAILWAY MOTOR. 23 


For higher negative values of a, or if at a speed greater than 
a = (r'/x sin w cos w) (a very low speed), the brush-angle w is 
reversed, the energy component of the primary current becomes 
negative; that is, the motor returns power into the line. . 

Unlike the plain series motor, which never returns power 
into the line, the repulsion motor when reversed becomes a 
generator, consumes mechanical power as brake and returns 
electric power into the line, even at low speeds. Experiment 
verifies this feature. 


DIScUSSION oF THEORY. 


In the preceding outline of the theory of the single-phase 
alternating-current repulsion motor, the impedances Z, Z,, Z,, 
have been assumed as constant. 

While this is approximately the case in the ordinary induction 
motor, it is not the case with the repulsion motor which works 
over a wide range of magnetic flux densities. 

With increasing load and thereby increasing current and de- 
creasing speed, magnetic saturation is approached and causes a 
decrease of the impedances Z, Z,. Z,, which has to be taken into 
consideration in predetermining the characteristic curves of such 
amotor. Furthermore, the different component magnetic fluxes 
are affected differently by saturation. The flux M interlinked 
with the primary coil is approximately constant and therefore 
affected by saturation only indirectly, while the flux M, at right 
angles to the line of polarization of the secondary coil is approxi- 
mately proportional to the load and so reaches saturation at high 
loads, and the impedances become thereby different in the differ- 
ent directions of the magnetic structure. 

The m.m.fs. in the preceding have been treated as vector 
quantities, independent of their distribution around the periph- 
ery of the armature. This distribution, however, is different 
with the different m.m.fs. The m.m.f. causing the effective flux 
M, is due to a zone of the primary winding within the angle + w 
from the axis of the secondary coil, hence nearly a concentrated 
' winding, which gives a flat-topped flux distribution, while the 
flux /, in the direction of the axis of the secondary coil is that of 
a distributed winding or peaked. For the same m.m.f. the 
effective flux M, is therefore greater than the effective flux M,,. 
Taking this into consideration, gives the motor somewhat better 
characteristics than calculated above. Due to the different 
wave shapes of the fluxes M/, and M,, they are-affected differently 


24 STEINMETZ: ALTERNATING-CURRENT fjan. 29 


by saturation. The flat-topped flux M, reaches saturation at a 
much higher value, but then over the whole range; while the 
peaked flux M, shows the effect of saturation at a lower value 
but then gradually, by a rounding off of the peak. In the repul- 
sion motor it is therefore not sufficient merely to consider the 
resultant m.m.fs. as vectors but their distribution in the air-gap 
and the effect of saturation must be taken into consideration in 
the calculation and design of the motor. An exhaustive investi- 
gation hereof has been made by my assistant, Mr. M. Milch, and 
may be communicated at a later date. 

The secondary circuit of the motor has been considered as the 
seat of two e.m.fs. induced respectively by the rotation through 
flux M, and by the alternation of flux M,. These e.m.fs., how- 
ever, have no separate existence. At synchronism, for instance, 
the magnetic field is an approximately umformly rotating field 
and therefore no e.m-f. is induced in the armature conductors 
except that required to overcome the resistance. The secondary 
frequency varies with the load and thereby the secondary self- 
inductive reactance which we assumed as constant in the pre- 
ceding discussion. This is best taken into consideration by a 
theory developed by my former assistant, Mr. S. Sugiyama, of 
Japan. The primary impressed alternating m.m.f. of the cur- 
rent / is resolved into two component m.m.fs. of half intensity, 
revolving synchronously in opposite directions. If now a = the 
ratio of speed to synchronism, the two oppositely revolving 
components of J revolve with regard to the secondary system 
with the speeds (1 —a) and (1+a) respectively. The same 
consideration applies to the secondary m,m.f., J,, andin the 
secondary system we then have induction at two frequencies, 
1 —a and 1+4a, of which the former becomes zero at synchron- 
ism. That is, at synchronism the secondary current in the 
armature conductors is of double frequency, similar as in the 
ordinary single-phase induction motor. At other speeds it is 
the superposition of two currents of the frequencies 1 —a and 
1+a, respectively. This theory more closely allies the repulsion 
motor with the ordinary induction motor. Using the same 
values of secondary impedance, Z,, for both components, ob- 
viously leads to identically the same equations as given in the 
preceding. 

The complete investigation of the repulsion motor must also 
take into consideration the current flowing in the armature coil 
during the moment where the coil is short circuited by the 


1904.] RAILWAY MOTOR. 25 


brushes passing from commutator segment to segment. The 
m.m.f. of this short-circuit current of commutation is at right 
angles to the axis of secondary polarization of current, J,, hence 
has the angle of brush-shift -(90 -w). A corrective term 
must therefore be applied, taking this phenomenon into consid- 
eration, essentially of the character of a repulsion machine with 
negative or generator brush-angle of (90 —w) and very high 
effective secondary resistance. This term is very small or 
negligible at speeds up to a point somewhat beyond synchronism 
but becomes noticeable at speeds considerably above synchron- 
ism, due to the decrease of the main current at these speeds. The 
main effect of this phenomenon is that the power-factor of the 
motor instead of increasing indefinitely with the speed up to 
100% at some very high speed (and then decreasing again 
slightly, with leading current), reaches a maximum somewhere 
between 90 and 97% according to the constants of the 
motor, and then very slightly decreases with increasing speed as 
shown in the curve of the power-factor of a repulsion motor in 
Fig. 2. 


26 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan.-29 


DISCUSSION OF STEINMETZ AND SLICHTER PAPERS. 


B. G. Lamue:—In «the paper” presented ™ betore = vic 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS in September, 
1902, the speaker called attention to the fact that there were but 
two types of single-phase alternating-current motors having 
suitable characteristics for railway service; viz., that called the 
‘‘ Series Type,” and the “‘ Repulsion Type.”’ Both of these motors 
have armatures like direct-cur1ent motors, with commutators and 
brush holders. Attention was called to the fact that both motors 
have suitable characteristics for railway service, as both auto- 
matically give variable-speed characteristics with changes in 
load. That paper primarily described a single-phase railway 
system, and the motor formed but an element in the general sys- 
tem. It was a very general opinion at that time that the success 
of the commutator type of motor for large sizes was doubtful, 
and the sparking feature was considered a fundamental source 
of trouble. It was generally conceded that if a motor with series 
characteristics could be made to operate successfully, it would be 
a great step in advance in the railway field. 

Since that time single-phase railway systems have been more 
fully developed. Practically no departures from the general 
system then indicated have been furnished, and the types of 
motors developed have been along the lines of the two motors 
indicated in that paper. 

Up to the present time the only suitable motors suggested 
for this work have been of the commutator type, and have been 
those having series characteristics. The speaker has suggested 
that all these motors can be considered broadly under the one 
class of series motors, as they all have the series characteristics 
of the direct-current series motor. The speaker further sug- 
gested that they be subdivided into the ‘‘ Straight-Series ”’ 
type and the ‘ Transformer-Series’’ type. The transformer- 
series could also be arranged in two classes; viz., one in which 
the armature or field is supplied by an external transformer, and 
one in which the transformer is placed in the motor itself; this 
latter is the repulsion type of motor. 

Figs. 1, 2, and 3 illustrate the three classes. Fig. 1 being the 
straight-series, Fig. 2 the transformer-series, and Fig. 3 the repul- 
sion motor. Fig. 2 would be considered as a true series motor, 
although the armature and field are not directly in series, yet 
most of the characteristics described as belonging in the repulsion 
motor apply directly to the transformer motor shown in the 
figure. Comparing the relations of these motors; viz., the 
straight-series and the repulsion motor, we will first take up the 
straight-series. 

In this motor, if properly designed, two pressures can be con- 
sidered; viz., that across the field circuit, and that across the 
armature circuit. The armature pressure can be made practi- 
cally non-inductive so that the input of the armature will 
represent practically true energy. The pressure across the field 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 27 


is practically at right angles to the armature pressure, and repre- 
sents very closely the wattless component supplied by the motor. 
The resultant of these two pressures will then be the line pressure. 
The power-factor of the motor when running is represented prac- 
tically by the pressure across the armature winding, increased 
slightly by the losses in the field-core and winding. Therefore, 
_ for high power-factors it is important that the pressure across 
the armature circuit be made as high as possible, relatively to 
the applied pressure, and that across the field as low as possible. 

There are three ways in which to increase the pressure acruss 
the armature; viz., by increase in speed, by increase in the 
number of wires in series on the armature, and by increase in flux 
through the armature. 

By increase in speed and increase of the wires in series, the 
armature pressure will be increased without affecting the field 


FIELD 


FIELD 
FIELD 


TRANSFORMER 


TRANSFORMER 


FIG, 1 . FIG.2 FIG. 3 


pressure, and therefore the ratio of the armature pressure to the 
line pressureis increased. Increasing the fluxinthe armature also 
increases the flux in the magnetizing-coil in the field, and the 
pressures of both are increased. Therefore this increase does not 
improve the power-factor of the machine. 

Instead of increasing the armature pressure, the pressure across 
the field winding may be decreased; this can be done in two 
ways; viz., by reducing the turns in the field coil, or by reducing 
flux through the coil. Reducing the flux through the field 
reduces the flux in the armature winding also, and therefore 
represents no gain; reduction in field-turns, therefore, is the 
feasible means of reducing the field pressure. Reduction in 
field-turns can be accomplished in two ways; viz., by decreasing 
the effective length of air-gap in the motor, and by increasing the 
cross-section of gap. By making the gap very small the pres- 


28 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


sure across the field could be made very small compared with the 
line pressure, and extremely high power-factors could be ob- 
tained, whether the motor is of the straight-series or the repul- 
sion type. Also by increasing the section of the air-gap the 
turns of the field can be decreased with a given total flux through 
the coil, and the power-factor can thus be very considerably 
increased. The first method, viz., decrease in gap, is limited by 
practical conditions which have been determined from long ex- 
perience with direct-current work. It should be borne in mind 
when published descriptions of such motors are given that the 
results, as regards power-factor, generally depend upon data 
which are not given in the description,—such as the magnetic 
dimensions of the armature and field, the length of gap, etc. 
Therefore, a machine may be described as showing an extremely 
high power-factor, which may in practice not be a commercial 
machine, from the standpoint of American railway experience. 
Increasing the section of air-gap without decreasing the 
length of gap also improves the power-factor, but makes a 
larger and heavier machine, as a rule. 

Both these modifications reduce the ampere-turns in the field. 
The direction of the improvement in the armature was shown 
to be in increased armature ampere-turns with a given speed. 
It therefore follows that almost any result desired can be ob- 
tained as regards power-factor by increasing the armature am- 
pere-turns, and decreasing the field or exciting ampere-turns. 
Reference will be made to this point in considering the repulsion 
motor. 

It should be noted that in all these motors there should be but 
little saturation in the magnetic circuit and but few ampere- 
turns expended in saturation of the iron under normal conditions. 
This consequent low saturation in such motors leads to certain 
characteristics in the torque curves which have been cited this 
evening as an indication of superiority of alternating-current 
motors over direct-current motors; namely, a torque increasing 
approximately as the square of the current. In fact, this superi- 
ority of torque should be charged to the low flux-density of the 
motor rather than to the alternating current. If direct-current 
motors were worked normally at as low density as the alternating- 
current motor, then the direct-current motor would show better 
torque characteristics, and would be comparable with the 
alternating-current motor. This claim for a better torque in the 
alternating-current motor compared with the direct-current 
motor seems to be making a virtue of a necessity. 

It is evident from what has been said that the power-factor of 
the straight-series motor can be made anything desired, it being 
a question of proportion between armature and field, length of 
air-gap, amount of material used, etc. In practice a compromise 
would naturally be made among the various characteristics, and 
a slight reduction in power-factor is probably of less importance 
than a corresponding reduction in size and weight. Also large 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. ‘ 29 


clearance is probably of more importance than an extremely high 
power-factor at normal load. In practice it will be found that 
the armatures of such motors have a large number of ampere- 
turns compared with the fields, in order to obtain comparatively 
high power-factors with large air-gaps. The number of poles 
need not be made such that the product of the poles by the normal 
speed represents the frequency of the supply circuit; good series 
motors can be made, and have been made, in which the number 
of poles were very much larger or much smaller than represented 
by this relation. 
Taking up next the transformer ty pe of motors—Fig. 2; the field 
is in series with the primary of the transformer, the secondary of 
which is connected to the terminals of the motor. The speaker 
would call this a true series motor, although it is not a straight- 
series motor. In this motor the pressure across the armature can 
be made practically non-inductive and the pressure across the 
primary of the transformer will be practically non-inductive. 
The voltage across the field winding will have practically 90° 
phase relation to that across the primary of the transformer, and 
the magnetic field, set up by the field winding, will have a 90° 
relation in time to the magnetic field in the transformer, as in 
the repulsion motor. In this motor the voltage across the trans- 
former will be highest at light loads and will decrease with load 
until zero speed is reached. At start there is lowest flux in the 
transformer and highest flux in the field winding. Such a motor 
will have speed-torque characteristics very similar to those of a 
straight-series motor, except as affected by the actions taking 
place in the transformer itself. If the transformer possesses no 
reactance, then at start the current in the armature should be 
the same as if connected as straight-series motor, and the condi- 
tions of torque at start should be the same. If the transformer 
has reactance, then at start the current inthe armature will not be 
quite equal to the current which the armature will receive if 
coupled as a straight-series motor, assuming the transformer to 
have a 1 to 1 ratio. Neither will the armature current be 
exactly in phase with the field current; therefore the starting 
torque of a motor connected in this way will be slightly less than 
the torque of the same motor if connected in straight-series. 
This is on the assumption that the transformer is one propor- 
tioned for small reactance; but if the primary and secondary 
windings of the transformer should be on separate cores with 
air-gap between, then the reactances of the windings are con- 
siderably greater than in the above case. Therefore, we should 
expect a motor with such a transformer to give still lower 
torque than the straight-series with the same current supplied 
from the line. ' 
In a repulsion motor the transformer is combined with the 
motor itself and the primary and secondary windings are upon 
different cores with an air-gap between. The starting condi- 
tions of such a motor as indicated above should be poorer than 


30 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. {Jan. 29 


the straight-series motor, or for the same starting torque some- 
what greater apparent energy should be required. It stands tc 
reason that applying the current directly to the armature wind~- 
ing should give greater ampere-turns and better phase relations 
than generating this current in a secondary circuit, and not 
under ideal transformer conditions. The tests which have been 
made, as well as the results shown in the curves of the papers 
given to-night indicate this. It is to be noted that the torque 
curve is not the same shape near the zero-speed point as the 
torque curve of the series motor. 

Series motors and repulsion motors may be indicated in the 
simple form shown in Figs. 4 and 5. In the diagrams of the 
repulsion motor (Fig. 5), two field-poles, FF’, are shown, and two 
transformer-poles, 77. To obtain high power-factors on such a 
motor the ampere-turns in J must be very much greater than in 
F’; which means that the ampere-turns in the secondary or arma- 


FIG. 4 


ture are much greater than in the exciting field, as in the series 
motor. The high power-factor obtained with these motors is 
therefore due principally to the small ampere-turns in the field 
and the small pressure across the field. 

For instance, with brushes set at an angle of 16°, from the 
primary or resultant field, the ratio of armature to exciting field- 
turns would be almost 5 to 1, a ratio which will also permit of 
extremely high power-factors in well-designed straight-series 
motors over wide ranges of speed. To this feature should be 
credited the good power-factors claimed for the repulsion motor. 
In either the series of repulsion type of motors, high power- 
factors, especially at low speeds, are directly dependent upon this 
fact of high ratio of armature to field, and with a high ratio high 
power-factors should be obtained without crediting the result to 
leading currents in the armature. In the diagram of the repul- 


-1904.] DISCUSSION: AT NEW YORK. : 31 


sion motors the line current indicated flows through both the 
field winding and the transformer winding. The primary cur- 
rent sets up a magnetic field in the exciting windings in phase 
with the line current. If it also set up a field in the transformer 
in phase with the line current, then the electromotive force gen- 
erated in the armature winding due to rotation would have a 90° 
relation to the electromotive force set up by the transformer, and 
a correcting or magnetizing current would flow. This flow is 
in such direction that it corrects the relation between the two 
pressires in the armature by shifting the transformermagnetism 
one-quarter phase later than the exciting field magnetism. This 
armature corrective current may thus be considered as mag- 
netizing the transformer, making the primary input to the trans- 
former practically non-inductive; but this magnetizing or cor- 
recting current may be considered as flowing in a circuit at right 
angles to the field magnetic circuit, and having practically no 
effect on the field circuit. Therefore, as a rough approximation 
the exciting field may be considered to represent the wattless 
component of the input, and the transformer field the energy 
component, as in the series motor. As to the statement that the 
magnetizing current in the armature reduces the wattless com- 
- ponent of the exciting field, the speaker does not accept it broadly. 
If this component is reduced, then another component of practi- 
cally equal value is introduced somewhere else, for the power- 
factors obtained with such motors can be accounted for by the high 
ampere-turns in the armature winding, compared with the field 
or exciting ampere-turns. If the armature current improves the 
power-factor by diminishing the magnetizing or exciting field, 
then the curves in Figs. 1 and 4 of Mr. Slichter’s paper should 
show it. The speaker has gone over both sets of curves calculat- 
ing the wattless components from the power-factors. From this 
and other data mn these curves, he finds that beginning near 
synchronous speed the wattless component in the motor goes up 
slightly faster than would be represented by the field excitation, 
assuming it to be entirely wattless. Therefore, according to 
these curves, the power-factors at lower speeds are not quite as 
good as would be obtained by a field entirely inductive and the 
armature entirely non-inductive, in a straight-series motor. 
These calculations are rather approximate, as the curves do not 
check at all well with each other. For instance, the output of 
the motor as represented by the input multiplied by the power- 
factor and by the efficiency, does not check with the output as 
represented by the product of speed by torque, in either set of 
‘curves, the discrepancies being as high as 10 percent. In Fig. 4, 
for instance, either the torque or the speed is too high for the 
lower speeds. Checking back on this curve, using either the 
speed and torque or the power-factor and efficiency for deter- 
mining the output, the speaker finds that the wattless component 
in the motor at 190 revolutions is approximately 20 per cent 
higher than it would be if the field excitation alone were wattless, 


32 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


assuming at 440 revolutions the wattless component is represented 
purely by field excitation; that is, from 440 to 190 revolutions the 
wattless component is increased 20 per cent over that which 
would be represented by field excitation alone. This indicates 
that not only should the field excitation be considered as practi- 
cally wattless, but that in addition there is a wattless component 
due to reactances in the armature windings. 

The armature current can be split into two components, one 
of which is partly magnetizing and represents no torque. The 
other component is in phase with the field magnetism and there-° 
fore represents torque. The magnetizing or wattless element 
may be comparatively small, as the number of turns in the arma- 
ture is relatively large, but the armature thus carries at times a 
slightly larger current than the straight-series motor. ; 

A further inspection of the diagram (Fig. 5) indicates how the 
power-factor of the motor can be made very high at synchronous 
speed. At all speeds the pressure generated in the armature due 
to rotation in the field of F is practically equal to the pressure 
generated by the transformer 7, thus making zero pressure 
across the terminals. But alsc at synchronous speed the pressure 
generated by the exciting field acting as a transformer, between 
the points a b, will be practically equal to the pressure generated 
in the winding by rotation of the winding in the transformer 
field. Therefore across ab the pressure is practically zero with 
these conditions, but the frequency remains the same as that in 
the field. If now the magnetizing current be supplied across the 
points ab, then the required ampere-turns for magnetizing the 
motor can be supplied at practically zero pressure, and the turns 
of the external magnetizing field can be omitted. Therefore, 
under this condition the wattless component is practically zero 
and the power-factor becomes practically 100 per cent. This 
is the method of excitation used on certain European single-phase 
motors in which high power-factors are claimed for full-load 
running. But this method of excitation does not improve con- 
ditions at start, as the same excitation will be required at stand- 
still, whether the excitation be supplied to the armature or to the 
field. Therefore this method of excitation does not help the 
motor at that condition of load which is the severest on the 
generating and transmission system. It has the advantage of 
omitting the field-exciting winding, but has the great disadvan- 
tage of requiring a double set of brushes on the commutator 
with but half the distance between the brushes found in the 
straight-series or the ordinary repulsion motor. The speaker 
does not believe that such methods of compensation are of suffi- - 
pier advantage to overcome the complications attendant upon 

At zero speed, both the straight-series and the repulsion 
motors have low power-factors, and with equal losses in the 
motors the repulsion shou!d have slightly lower power-factor 
than the series. This question of power-factor at start is largely 
a question of internal losses in the motor at rest, and the repui- 


1904. ] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 33 


sion motor in individual cases may show higher than the series 
motor, because it may be designed with higher internal losses. 
The real measureof effectiveness is not the p »wer-factorat start, 
but the apparent input or kilovolt-amperes atstart required fora 
given starting torque. With equally good designs of motors, the 
speaker’s experience is that the kilovolt-amperes will be found to 
be considerably less with the straight-series than with the repul- 
sion motor, due to the fact that the current is fed directly into 
the armature and not by transformer action, and therefore the 
conditions of phase-relation and amount of current in the arma- 
ture windings are more favorable. Therefore it follows that in 
order to have the same kilovolt-ampere input for the same 
starting torque, the repulsion motor should have a smaller 
length of air-gap than the corresponding straight-series motor, or 
should have a greater section of air-gap, which means greater 
weight of motor. This is one of the conditions which has led 


the speaker to the advocacy of the series motor rather than the 
repulsion motor, as he has considered this condition of starting 
of more importance than running; although he is satisfied that 
many of the running conditions of a well-designed series motor 
will be found in practice to be superior to those of an equally 
well-designed repulsion motor. 

Referring again to Fig. 5, it will be noted that two fields are 
set up in such a motor, and that at synchronous speed these two 
fields are equal. In the straight-series motor there is but one 
field set up, the other being omitted. It is evident that the 
straight-series motor with the current supplied directly to the 
brushes can have a smaller section in certain parts of the 
magnetic circuit than is required for the repulsion motor, and 
that therefore the weight of material would be less, and the ex- 
ternal dimensions can beless. InFig.7the heavy linerepresents 
outlines of series and the dotted line those of repulsion motor; 
therefore, it follows that for equally good designs and same fre- 


‘34 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


quency, the straight-series motor should be more compact, and 
should weigh less than the repulsion motor. It is reasonable 
to expect this, as the repulsion motor contains a transformer in 
addition to the other parts found in the straight-series motor. 
Furthermore, the transformer found in such a motor is one with 
an air-gap, and with the windings on two separate elements, and 
therefore cannot be so well proportioned as a separate trans- 
former could be. Also, there isa transformer for each motor, 
and in a 4-motor railway equipment, for instance, there would be 
four transformers of smaller size against one larger transformer 
used with the series motor, this larger transformer having a 
closed magnetic circuit, and of a highly efficient design com- 
pared with the transformers in the motors themselves. 


id Wi 
2 =) 
g g 
5 oc 
r 
a A 
rr a 
WW wi 
Be a. 
eo oO 


CURRENT CURRENT 


Straight Series Motor Repulsion Motor 


A further point should be taken up in the comparison of these 
motors; viz., the current in the coil short circuited by the 
brushes. This coil is a secondary to the field and the current in 
it is necessarily greatest at the period of strongest field. There- 
fore, this current will be greatest at the time of starting. If the 
repulsion motor and the straight series motor have the same 
field strength at start, then the short-circuited current should 
be the same in each. But as the current is fed into the armature 
in the repulsion motor through transformer action, it will, asa rule, 
be found that the starting field strength of such a motor is 
slightly greater and the starting armature strength slightly less 
for a given torque than is found in the straight-series motor hav- 
ing same ratio of armature to field windings. Therefore the 
short-circuit current at start will be somewhat larger for the 
repulsion motor than for the corresponding straight-series motor. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 35 


This short-circuit current may be somewhat less near full speed 
than in the straight-series motor, but it is not the full-speed 
condition which is the serious one. ‘The short-circuit current at 
start is one of the most serious conditions which confronts us in 
alternating-current motors, and is also of great importance where 
there is any considerable operation onlowspeeds. The speaker 
advocates a type which he considers gives the easiest condition in 
this regard. This short-circuiting cannot be entirely avoided 
in any of the motors brought out without adopting abnormal 
and questionable constructions, although devices :ike narrow 
brushes, sandwich windings, etc., have been proposed. In 
certain foreign motors the brushes used are so narrow that they 
cover practically the width of one commtuator-bar. As such 
motors are generally built with a very large number of bars, the 
brushes used are extremely narrow, being approximately 0.2 
inch thick at the tip. This will undoubtedly lessen the short 
circuiting, but simply transfers trouble to another point; a 
brush 0.2 inch thick is not practicable for commercial railway 
service; at high speeds, with only a moderately rough commu- 
tator, such brushes will be liable to chip and break; further, the 
brush on a street-car motor should bridge at least two bars to 
give good, smooth, brush operation; in practice, 20.5 inch brush 
on motors of 100 hp. should be used. 

The sandwich winding, which consists of two or more windings 
side by side, will prevent short circuiting at the brushes, but 
is only another way of transferring trouble to another point; it 
has been found in practice that it is difficult to run a sandwich 
winding without trouble at the commutator with direct current 
without a tendency to blackening and pitting the commutator, 
and with alternating current this tendency to pitting and burn- 
ing of the bars would be equally great. 

As a rule, there is little difference between the operation of 
repulsion and straight-series motors as regards sparking, except 
that the repulsion motors generally have greater current in the 
short-circuited coil near zero speed, and therefore show greater 
tendency to heat and spark. At or near synchronous speed, 
there appears to be very little difference in the commutation, 
although the speaker has never given the repulsion motor the 
same test of long-continued service as he has in the case of the 
series motor. These series motors have never shown any tend- 
ency to give trouble on the commutator, and on an exhibition 
car equipped with four 100-hp. motors, the commutators have 
never been sandpapered since the equipment has been put into 
service. This exhibition car is used principally for showing the 
accelerating properties of the motors; therefore, the speaker 
does not hesitate to say that the commutation of the straight- 
series motor will prove to be equal to that of the direct-cur- 
rent motor. Wide brushes are used with it, such as have been 
used in street-railway motors. 

It is well known that with large direct-current motors, espe- 


36 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


cially when operated at very high speeds, there is a tendency to 
flash across the commutator, or to the frame of the motor, if the 
field circuit be opened for a period long enough to allow magnet- 
ism to drop to zero, and then the field be closed again. In this 
case there is a rush of current before the field has had time to 
build up, and this rush of current, together with field distortion, 
may cause serious flashing. In the alternating-current motor, 
whether of the straight-series or the repulsion type, this ten- 
dency should be entirely absent: In the straight-series motor the 
magnetism falls to zero once in each alternation, and therefore. 
if this tendency existed, flashing would occur continuously. 
Furthermore, a properly designed straight-series motor can be 
short circuited across the brushes without injury to the motor, 
and can continue to operate in this way; therefore, if the ma- 
chine can be short circuited in this way, there is evidently no 
tendency to maintain an arc. 

Returning to the subject of power-factors it should be noted 
that high power-factors are very frequently found in motors of 
low or only moderately good efficiency. This low efficiency to a 
slight extent explains the high power-factor in some motors, both 
polyphase and single-phase. Low efficiency means higher true 
energy expended, and with a given wattless component it means 
higher power-factor. It is the old problem of increasing the 
power-factor by wasting energy in a circuit instead of reducing 
the wattless component. The power-factor of any alternating- 
current motor can be very considerably increased by putting 
resistance in series withit. Instead of this resistance the internal 
losses of the motor may be made higher, which will accomplish 
the same results. The motor will therefore appear to have a 
higher power-factor than it really deserves, if efficiency of the 
motor is taken into account. If, for instance, the efficiency at 
300 rev. shown in Mr. Slichter’s Fig. 4 would be made as high as 
on direct-current motors, then the power-factors with the same 
magnetizing and other conditions, would have been approxi- 
mately four percent lower. This lower power-factor 
would not have made any harder condition on the 
supply circuit, but actually would have made a some- 
what easier condition, as the supply system would 
have furnished about eight per cent less  kilovolt- 
amperes. For lower speeds this difference in power-factor will 
be greater, and less for higher speeds. A high power-factor at 
start, obtained by the use of resistance in series with the motor 
by high internal losses which do not represent torque, is there- 
fore a detrimental condition rather than a good one, as it means 
increased kilovolt-ampere expenditure for a given torque. This 
is merely given as an illustration showing that power-factor in 
itself is not a true indication of conditions, but must be accom- 
panied by other data; this is not a criticism of these motors, 
but 1s a general condition, found to a greater or less extent in all 
alternating-current motors, 


1904. j DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 37 


In conclusion the speaker wishes to ask a few questions in 
regard to some of the points brought out in these papers. One 
point in connection with Fig. 1, Mr. Slichter’s paper, is the high 
power-factor of 50 per cent shown at start. The sneaker would 
like to know how this power-factor can be so high when the 
motor is doing no work at this point. Is this power-factor due 
to high internal losses of the motor, or is an external resistance 
added? The speaker has tested a number of series and repulsion 
motors, and for motors of this capacity, as a rule, the power- 
factors have been somewhat lower than this; the losses in the 
repulsion motor for a given starting torque are always greater 
than in the straight-series motor, but the volt-ampere input for 
the same torque was also greater so that the power-factors in 
some cases were very nearly equal. 

Also, Mr. Slichter states that the motorshownin Fig. 4is forcon- 
stant-speed running; does this mean running at a practically 
steady load, or is this motor intended for constant-speed work, 
in the sense of a shunt-wound direct-current motor? 

In the comparison with the direct-current motor it is stated 
that the alternating-current motor remains on the controller for 
16 seconds, and the direct-current motor for 25. Would it not 
be true that the direct-current motor could remain on the con- 
troller for a shorter time, if designed with an unsaturated field, 
as the alternating-current motor? Is not this a property of an 
unsaturated motor, rather than an alternating-current motor? 

A.S. McA.tuister:—In the papers presented this evening, 
mention is made of the fact that the repulsion motor, when 
driven against its torque, acts as a generator; and when the 
negative speed becomes of a value such that its product»with the 
torque exceeds the internal losses of the motor, the machine will 
feed energy back to the line. The analytical equations given in 
Mr. Steinmetz’s paper furnish an explanation of the cause for 
this action on the part of the machine. These equations may 
be represented graphically by a simple diagram, and it is believed 
that the diagram affords a readier interpretation than do the 
equations. 

When the rotor of the repulsion motor is stationary, measur- 
ing instruments placed in the primary circuit will indicate an 
apparent impedance, having power and reaction components. 
The power component, which will here be termed “ resistance,” 
represents the resistance effect of the primary coil, the equivalent 
resistance effect of the secondary circuit, and the effect of the 
core loss at starting. In the impedance electromotive force for 
one ampere— diagram of Fig. 1 —this resistance, /X, is represented 
by the line A B, while the line B C shows the apparent reactance, 
X, and the cosine of the angle C A B gives the power-factor of 
the motor at starting. When the motor operates at a speed, S, 
the power component of the apparent motor impedance—volts 
for one ampere—is increased by a certain value P S, CD in the 
diagram, P being a coefficient depending upon the relative 


38 ALTERNATING-GURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


strength of the field which causes the generation of electromotive 
force in the armature conductors at speed S, and hence depends 
upon the position of the brushes. If the apparent reactance of 
the coils remained of value X at all speeds, then at speed S the 
apparent impedance of the motor becomes : 

Zs = / (R+P SS)? +X? 


and for impressed electromotive force of EF the current will be 


LE 
V(R+PS) 4X? 


and the power-factor, cos J, is 


oaD MB 
VJ (R+P SP +X? 


Impedance e.m.f- Locus of Repulsien Metor 
22.5 Cycles per second 
—--- OBSERVED LOCUS 
ASSUMED LOCUS 


ley 
oO 


AMPERE-REACTANCE 


r= 
Sc 


A 
\, 


c 
w 
gr 
oO 
F 
=a 
° 


ECTION OF 
CURRENT 


om 
Tie. 
OHMS. *V! 


RESISTANCE 


The power input is 


IPO 28S) 
el a Se 
cos 0 (REP S4X? 


If, independent of the change in speed of the rotor and varia- 
tion of the relative values of the primary and secondary currents, 
the total internal losses of the motor be considered proportional 
to the square of the primary current, the output would be 


PAS 

LE 00s. 0 — 2 hee 
AY (R+P SP+X? 

and the ratio of output to speed, the torque will be 


oe 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 39 


The discrepancies between the assumptions made and the 
physical facts involved will be evident from a study of the forma- 
tion of the above equations. It will be observed that the equa- 
tions here given will become identical with the approximate equa- 
tions of Mr. Steinmetz if for each value used above there be sub- 
stituted its equivalent as given below, 

Resurt 
X = X sin? w+X! 
P=Xsinwcosw 
S'= a 

An inspection of Fig. 1, or of the equations above, will reveal 

the fact that when S is negative and of a value such that — PS = 


LL 


| 
| 


ox 
Tz 
bowe 
PER MIN. 
ee 


“S 


IVALENT 


IN KILOWATTS AF 1000 REV. 


eG 
—J 
TOR a 
i 


x 
SS 
cS 
ot 


one 


ERA 
0 | een 
GENERATOR —~~<« [| >_> | MOTOR ee 


i} 
o 
E Observed performance Curves Fe 
io , of Repulsion Motor at 


C— 
o 
EXPRESSED AS E 


Eile STANDSTI 


ww 
| 
i] 
Ss 
i) 


c 
re) 
F 
1?) 
< 
40-—4 eee wei eR 
= ‘a> Positive and Negative Speeds 
z T% ee 125 Volts 22.5 Cycles per Second 
a. &; 
0 — 6000 az Bae ; aa at 
K ei 
Ss Ween, 4 FIG. 2 | | 
Soy z / 
30800 = Ne - / = 3 | alt - ul 
“Ow 2, c | 
ER 4; FE 
“crop SO | | | | 
100—1op00 % | ) i. 
SPEED |IN REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE 
— 1890 —1600 —1200 _—8)0 _ —400 0) 400 800 1200 1600 2000 


R, the apparent impedance of the motor becomes X; the current 
is E/X and represents no energy flowing either to or from the 
motor; that is, the machine is operating as a generator and 
supplying its own losses. A further increase of negative speed 
causes the power component of the apparent motor impedance 
to take on a negative value; the power-factor becomes negative 
- indicating that energy is flowing from the machine. 

The curves of Fig. 2 show the results of tests of a certain repul- 
sion motor while those of Fig. 3 give the calculated performance 
of the same motor, proper substitution having been made'in the 
equations above. 


40 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


In the discussion of the theory of the repulsion motor, Mr. 
Steinmetz states that the effect of the short-circuit by the brush 
of active coils tends to a reduction of the power-factor at high 
speeds; which statement may be taken as an explanation of the 
fact that the power-factor observed in case of high speeds is 
much below that calculated, as will be seen from a comparison of 
Figs. 2 and 3. 


POWER FACTOR | 


STANDSTILL 


TORQUE | 
EXPRESSED AS EQUIVALENT PCWER 
IN KILOWATTS AT 1000 RFV.PER M'N 


sonave 


GENERA 


Calculated performance Curves 
of Repulsion Motor at 
Positive and Negative Speeds 
125 Volts, 22.5 Cycles per Second. 


Z=(R+PS)+ X? 


R= +50 
P +24 
x= 1,10 
Siay ‘RPM. 
100 


&FACTOR 
| 
€TANDSTILL 


ce POWER 


FIG.'3 


2. 
ws 
00—10000 So 
vA 
S 


| SPEED in REVOLUTIONS PER! MINUTE 
=1600 —1200 —sto0 “400 400 


The neglect of the counter-torque, due to the local current 
flowing in the coils under the brushes, leads also to error in assum- 
ing that the repulsion motor tends to increase indefinitely the 
speed of its rotor as the applied electromotive force is increased or 
the load decreased, since in reality experiments show that the 
rotor tends to reach a certain speed above which, if it be driven 
oar ane : acts as a brake. 

_F RESIDENT AARNOLD:—Since this discussion may pr 
divided and naturally divides itself into two parts, Mee oe 
designing and the application of single-phase alternating-current 


1904.] ‘DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 41 


motors to railway work, it would be proper at the present 
time to give Mr. Steinmetz an opportunity to answer Mr. Lamme’s. 
questions and any of the other questions which have been asked. 

C. P. SteinmMeEtTz:—An alternating-current series motor, to 
have a reasonably good power-factor, must have a high ratio of 
armature magnetomotive force to field magnetomotive force: 
this conclusion, reached ten years ago by Mr. Eickemeyer and 
the speaker, is agreed to by Mr. Lamme; but there is a limit to 
the indefinite increase of this ratio, for the reason that the arma- 
ture circuit is not really non-inductive, and there comes a point 
when the increase in the armature self-inductance is greater than 
the decrease in the field self-inductance. For the motor on 
which experiments were made ten years ago, this ratio was be- 
tween 3.5 and 4, but very high frequencies were then used; with 
lower frequencies the ratio can be increased, yet there is still a 
limit to its indefinite increase. The fact of self-inductance in 
the armature explains the reason that the power-factor, calcu- 
lated as Mr. Lamme calculates it—on the assumption of a non- 
inductive armature—gives higher values than tests show. 
Moreover, a brush shift of 16° is not equivalent to a ratio of 1 to 5. 
The two sections of the winding must be combined approxi- 
mately vectorially, giving a ratio of sine 16° to sine 74°, or about 
1 to 2.86, and this ratio will correspond to a lower power-factor 
than that obtained for a ratio of one to five. 

One great advantage of the modern repulsion motor is that it 
uses a pole-arc of 180°, or the largest section of air-gap possible, 
and'so secures at low speeds so high a power-factor that it is not 
necessary to go to speeds far above synchronism. The result 
thereof is a small number of poles, great number of commutator 
segments per pole, hence small short-circuit current in starting 
and running, and a low-speed commutator. 

The repulsion motor has inherently such a high power-factor 
that a large air-gap and a high flux-density may be used, hence 
with heavy currents magnetic saturation is approached or 
passed in part of the magnetic structure, and a bend occurs in 
the torque curve. It is not feasible to use flux-densities quite 
as great as in the direct-current series motor. Further, at low 
speeds a point must be reached where the electromotive force of 
rotation becomes small compared with the electromotive force 
of self-induction, however small the latter may be, and below 
this speed the torque and current do not increase, but remain 
constant both in the repulsion and in the series motor. 

There is no doubt that a motor designed as a series motor will 
give larger output and greater efficiency than the same motor 
used as a repulsion motor, as Mr. Lamme states; but, on the 
other hand, a motor designed to be repulsion motor and then run 
as a series motor will give the opposite result—that is, the output 
will be greater and the efficiency better, when operated as a repul- 
sion motor. The reason for this is simple, and is found in the 
fact that a series motor must have definite polar projections, 


42 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. jJan. 29 


whereas the repulsion motor uses a distributed winding, similar 
to that of an ordinary induction motor; hence, a low inductance 
is obtained with a correspondingly high power-factor. Thus the 
transformer feature of the repulsion motor requires a change in 
design, and makes a comparison of the relative performance of 
a particular design first, as a repulsion, and then as a series 
motor, meaningless. 

P. M. Lincotn:—The observations made on a car of about 40 
tons, equipped with four 125-hp. alternating-current series 
motors, show that when in motion at speeds not above four or 
five miles an hour, the motor sends power back into the line on 
reversal as indicated by a wattmeter; the wattmeter reverses 
when the fields are reversed and current is on. The same char- 
acteristic has also been reproduced in shop tests, where a straight- 
series motor has been used as a generator to feed power back 
into the shop circuit to which it is connected, by driving it 
suitably by another motor. Another characteristic of the 
alternating-current series motor is that it will always build up 
as a direct-current generator when the reverse switch is thrown 
and no power applied; it acts just the same as the direct-current 
series motors and can be used in the well-known way as an emer- 
gency brake. In fact on one occasion, when the air brakes 
failed, when the car was running at high speed, this emergency 
brake was thrown and the car stopped very promptly, just as it 
would with a direct-current motor. 

On page 6, referring to the speed-time curves, Mr. Slichter 
gives the comparative inputs for alternating and direct current, 
for the same car running the same distance, as 0.72 kilowatt- 
hours for the direct and 0.685 for the alternating current, ap- 
proximately for the alternating current five per cent less energy ; 
but the rheostatic loss for the direct-current curve amounts to 
approximately 15 per cent of the total curvearea. Heaccounts 
for the difference of five percent, whereas the curve areas seem to 
indicate that there should be a difference of at least 15 per cent, 
since the alternating-current motor does not include the rheo- 
static losses. 

Mr. SLIcHTER:—The fact that the power-factor at starting, 
shown in the first curve, is as high as 50 per cent,is due to the 
large losses and low efficiency of this particular motor. This 
motor was designed some time ago, when the matter of com- 
mutation was considered to be very serious, and radical precau- 
tions were taken to prevent bad sparking at the expense of effi- 
ciency. Recent experience has shown that these precautions 
are not necessary and as a result it has been possible to improve 
the efficiency. 

This low efficiency, 80 per cent, is also the cause of the small 
difference between the energy consumption of the alternating- 
current motor and the direct-current motor as the length of run 
increases. The low efficiency of this motor at high speeds 
counterbalances the saving effected by potential control during 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW. YORK. 43 


acceleration. With a later design of alternating-current motor 
this efficiency would be much higher and the net saving by the 
use of potential control would be much more noticeable. 

Referring to the motor of Fig. 4, it is intended for hauling 
heavy trains at constant slow speeds with few stops; in other 
words, long-distance freight haulage. 

The fact that the controller of the alternating-current motor is 
cut out in so short a time, 16 seconds as against 25 for the direct- 
current motor, is due to the steep speed-characteristic of the 
motor. 

In reply to Mr. Lamme’s criticism of the curves, they are 
intended to give a general view of the characteristics of the repul- 
sion motor and are for this purpose extended over values of 
current outside the«working range of the motor? In this range 
of the curves there are several points of curvature which are 
difficult to check exactly, since only a few points were plotted 
to show the general direction. 

RautpH D. MersHon:—Mr. Slichter speaks of voltage control; 
what method of voltage control was used on these motors, was it 
such as would be used commercially? What were the com- 
parative weights of alternating-current motors, and direct- 
current motors, for the same work and for approximately the 
same performance, either on the basis of efficiency of the 
motor itself or the total efficiency of acceleration? What were 
the relative weights of the motor and of the complete car equip- 
ment, for alternating current and direct current? Also what 
pressure would he use with the alternating-current motor? Mr. 
Slichter says these motors can be wound for high-pressure; 
how high? and what method of control would be usedin that case? 
Another important point is, can the repulsion motor be so 
designed as to be a good repulsion motor, and yet be a pretty good 
direct-current motor? 

It will be quite difficult to get the people responsible 
for existing large direct-current railway systems up to the 
point of changing over any considerable portion of the 
road at one time. The change can be much more easily accom- 
plished if it can be made more or less gradually as, for instance, 
by changing outlying sections first, and this can be done if the 
motor is such as can be used on both thedirect-current lines and 
alternating-current lines. As a matter of interest, what was 
the number of poles of the motors represented by these curves? 

A. H. ARMsTRoNG:—The curves given on the first three pages 
of Mr. Slichter’s paper refer to four-pole motors and the curves 
in Fig. 4 to a six-pole motor, all operating at 25 cycles. Mr. 
Mershon stated the matter about right when he asked if a repul- 
sion motor could be designed to operate well on alternating 
current and at the same time be operative on direct current. It 
is not possible to get equally good results with both alternating cur- 
rent and direct current, but a good alternating-current motor will 
give sufficiently good results when operated on direct, current to 
enable a car so equipped to operate over direct-current lines. 


44 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


The repulsion motor can be wound for 2000 or 3000 volts: 
direct, without the use of transformers; but experience in operat- 
ing with such pressures on railway equipments is yet to be had, 
and it is not known how much deterioration will be produced by 
the constant jarring and crystallizing of the insulation. Should 
it become too expensive to maintain high-pressure motor wind- 
ing, it will be necessary to resort to the use of transformers; with 
the high-pressure motors, control will be effected by either a com- 
pensator or by the insertion of resistance, as in the present 
direct-current control. 

If a car stops once in five miles, the small difference in effi- 

‘ciency in starting between rheostatic and pressure control would 
have practically no effect upon the general efficiency of the sys- 
tem asa whole. A gainof one ortwoperceit in the average car 
energy would not compensate for the additional complication. 
It will be entirely feasible to consider 2000 or 3C00 volts on the 
field of the repulsion motor without any intervening apparatus, 
but this, as stated before, will be largely determined by com- 
mercial operation. The repulsion motor having no metallic 
connection between field and armature, and thus not being in 
any way limited by commutation can have its field wound for as 
high-pressure as operating conditions will permit. 
No definite figures can be given for the relative weight of 
alternating-current and direct-current railway motors. The 
capacity of direct-current motors has been very carefully worked 
out during the past few years; but the alternating-current motor 
is not in commercial operation, it has not been possible to obtain. - 
experimental data upon its relative capacity and hence its weight. 
and size compared with the direct-current motor must remain 
an open question for the present. The alternating-current motor 
will undoubtedly weigh somewhat more than the direct-current 
motor for the same service performed, but the percentage in- 
crease cannot be stated with any degree of accuracy at the 
present time. 

In a high-pressure motor system using trolley pressure directly 
on the field, the control system should not weigh much more than 
that required for direct-current motors. If, however, a low- 
pressure motor is used with the high-pressure trolley, it will 
require the installation of a step-down transformer, which weight. 
must be considered in addition to the regular control system. 
The average energy consumption of some of our suburban cars: 
reaches as high as 75 to 100 kw., and the addition of a 100-kw.. 
transformer of either the oil-cooled or the air-blast type will 
constitute an appreciable addition to the weight of the car equip- 
ment. 

PRESIDENT ARNOLD:—The question of the destruction of the 
insulation or crystallization of the metal used in the construction 
of high-pressure motors has been pretty thoroughly answered in 
practice by the use of such high-pressure motors abroad; the 
line in Italy, using 3000-volt motors, has been operated for two 


1904.] : DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 45 


. or three years and no such objection has been used against it. If 
abroad they can build motors which can run successfully under 
that pressure, we should be able to do the same. 

C. P. Steinmetz:—The present alternating-current motor, 
either series or repulsion type, has a somewhat lower efficiency 
and is somewhat heavier than the direct-current series motor, but 
this difference is less than would be expected; the principles 
involved in the design of the two types are quite different, so that 
no direct comparison of one with the other can be made. 

There is no inherent reason why the efficiency and weight of 
the alternating-current motor should not be on a par with those 
of the direct-current motor, after the type has been further 
developed. 

Rosert LuUNDELL:—A possible reason why the efficiency of the 
alternating-current motor is not as great as that of a direct- 
current motor is because the hysteresis losses and the eddy 
currents are bound to be larger in the alternating-current motor. 
In the alternating-current motor we have to take care of the eddy 
currents and hysteresis losses in an apparatus which must weigh 
more much than the armature of the direct-current motor. As 
the hysteresis or core losses are due to the cycles per second, the 
density of the magnetism and also to the weight, it seems to me 
that the weight is bound to be greater in the surrounding frame, 
that is, the field magnets which surround the armature of the 
alternating-current motor. Is not that one reason why the 
efficiency of the alternating-current motor can not possibly be 
as high as that of the direct-current motor? ; 

O. S. Lyrorp, Jr.—In a direct-current motor, we can get 200 
horse power in a motor on the truck, or 400 horse power in a pair 
of wheels on one truck; will Mr. Slichter say whether the 175 
horse power motor described on page 66 is of such dimensions that 
it could be placed on the ordinary interurban car-truck with 33 or 
36 inch wheels? How large an alternating-current motor can we 
get for a 33 or a 36 inch wheel? In other words, what is our 
limit at the present time in the motor-car field? 

W. 1. SuicuterR:—That motor is designed for locomotive work 
and would not be of dimensions to go under a car having 33 inch ° 
wheels. 5 

The ideas on this subject are developing very rapidly ; one could 
not say that a 100 horse power motor could be placed there, but 
perhips it would not be advisable to say that a larger motor 
could not be. 

B.G. Lamme:—The Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing 
Company is building 150-hp. motors which will go in on 33-inch 
wheels. closely; easily on 36-inch wheels It has been deter- 
mined that we can put 200-hp. motors on 36-inch wheels. ‘That 
is one limit. ; : 

Presipent ArNoLtp:—If you gentlemen who build railroads 
will call for the motors, you will probably get them. 

H. A. Wacner:—Does not the repulsion type of motor take 


46 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY: MOTOR. {Jan. 29 


somewhat more copper in the field than theseries motor? and in 
reversing the former, is it proposed to move the brushes or to 
feed the current into the stator at a different point? 

C. P. SteinmetTz:—The repulsion motor can be reversed by 
changing the point of entrance of the current to the primary 
wires, without changing the brushes; thus the primary winding 
may have current brought to it at several different points in the 
repulsion motor, and the brushes need not be shifted. The rela- 
tive amounts of copper in the armature and field may be varied 
to some extent to suit the design, but there is no essential differ- 
ence in the proportions of material. 

[COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT BY B. G. LAMME,] 

In the discussion of the papers of Messrs. Steinmetz and 
Slichter, the writer indicated in a very general way some of the 
reasons which led him to the advocacy of the straight-series 
motor. Some of the more important of these reasons can be 
classified as follows: ‘ 

Lighter weight with a given output and given performance. 

Larger air-gap with a given input at start. 

Less short circuiting at commutator at start, with a given 
starting torque. ; 

Ability to operate the motor on various pressures by simply 
using taps on the transformer which supplies the motors. For in- 
stance: a motor can be run at 3000 volts on one part of the line, 
or at 500 volts on another part by simply feeding the trolley 
circuit into a different point in the transformer. Also the trans- 
former can be readily stepped-up to a slightly higher pressure, . 
thus allowing a higher normal speed and ability to make up for 
delays. This general arrangement will be of especial importance 
in heavy railway work, now represented by steam service. 

The motor will be normally wound for low pressures. It has 
been claimed that the advantage of thealternating-current 
motor for railway work is that it can be wound for high-pressure; 
but, on the other hand, it enables us to wind the motor for low- 
pressure. Taking into account the troubles that are found with 
direct-current motors at 500 and 600 volts, the writer believes 
that one of the greatest advantages of the alternating-current 
motor is that the motor itself can be wound, if desired, for much 
lower than 500 volts, while a pressure of 2000 or 3000 can be 
supplied from the trolley. The writer does not believe 
that a pressure of 3000 should be supplied directly 
to the motor. This judgment is based partly on 
European experience with high pressures on railway 
motors. A motor wound for this pressure will neces- 
sarily be heavier than one wound for low-pressure, even if the 
same type of motor is retained. Therefore, if low-pressure is to 
be used on the motor with a step-down transformer on the car 
then the writer considers that the repulsion type of motor being 
naturally heavier than the straight-series, is used at a great dis- 
advantage, as the equipment contains not only transformers in 
the motors themselves, but also an external transformer. 


1904. | DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK, 47 


_ A further condition, applying to all alternating-current motors, 
is the fact, already published, that there is an active pressure 
between turns on the field of motors. This is of considerable 
importance considering the overload capacity of such motors. 
In the direct-current motor a short circuit can occur between two 
or more field-turns without immediately disabling the motor. 
In the alternating-current motor a similar short circuit will 
disable the motor. Therefore if the alternating-current motor 
is to meet the same conditions of service as the direct-current 
motor, it will require much more insulation in its windings than 
that required in the direct-current motor, and this in turn means 
that the motor must be either increased in size, or must be wound 
for lower pressure. The writer therefore believes that whether 
straight-series or repulsion motors are used, the motor should be 
wound for a relatively low pressure. 

Mr. Steinmetz’s suggestion that these conclusions in 
regard to relative weights of straight-series and repulsion motors 
were based on the use of series motors operated as repulsion 
motors, just as his conclusions were based on repulsion motors 
operated as series. motors, is incorrect; for these conclusions 
have been drawn from designs of straight-series and of repulsion 
motors, each type being proportioned for its own special method 
of operation; the writer has designed a number of motors of each 
type, and a repulsion motor of 125 horse power capacity was 
constructed for the purpose of investigation. 

Mr. Slichter states that the discrepancies in the curves of Figs. 1 
and 4, are due probably to the complicated nature of the calcula-. 
tions of these curves; but his paper states that the curves of 
Fig. No. 1 “ are taken from tests on a 60-hp. 25-cycle, 500-volt 
motor.’ If these curves were obtained entirely by calculation, 
there could be wide discrepancies which might have been over- 
looked, if the final results were not checked with each other. 

Mr. Steinmetz states that one advantage of the repulsion motor 
over the series motor lies in the fact that the magnetic leakage 
should be less, due to the distributed windings of the primary; but 
he overlooks the fact that in a series motor designed for high 
power-factor, the magnetic leakage of the exciting field-winding 
can be made extremely low; the leakage of the two motors will 
be practically equal if the primary fields are wound for equal 
pressure; if, however, the repulsion motor field is wound for high- 
pressure, with a comparatively small number of slots, the mag- 
netic leakage will be higher than on the low-pressure motor, 
and will there‘ore be higher than on the series motor. Mr. 
Steinmetz’s opinion of straight-series motors may be based on 
data obtained about ten years ago. There has been considerable 
improvement in the art since then, and the development of this 
motor for commercial railway service has undoubtedly led to 
proportions and forms of construction not contemplated ten 


years ago. 


48 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


[CoMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT BY Cuas. F. Scort.] 


The papers and their discussion are notable on account of 
several omissions. The subject under consideration, namely, 
the single-phase railway motor, brought forth no question as to 
the practicability of the single-phase system; 1t elicited no 
mention of the polyphase railway motor, it led to no questions 
regarding the matter of commutation of alternating currents. 

It must be borne in mind that it is less than a year and a half 
since the first authoritative announcement of the single-phase 
railway motor was made. ‘The announcement was the occasion 
of much surprise and many were sceptical as to the question 
whether the single-phase motor was practicable or even possible. 
The practicability of the single-phase motor is now received 
without question, and it is tacitly accepted that the single-phase 
motor and the single-phase system are factors of very serious 
‘consequence in the immediate extensions of railway work. 

At the Buffalo Convention of the InstiTuTE in 1901, a paper 
-was read by Mr. Berg in the discussion of which Mr. Steinmetz 
and the writer took part. We concurred with the conclusions of 
the paper that the polyphase motor was not suited for railway 
work, and that the efforts of European engineers to introduce 
polyphase motors for railway work were not along lines which 
would prove a general solution of the railway problem. There 
were criticisms at that time and subsequently in the technical 
press setting forth the backwardness of American engineers and 
indicating the forward steps which were being made in Europe 
in the introduction of alternating current for railway work. Our — 
contention, however, was not.against the alternating current but- 
against the induction motor for railway work. It is notable that 
since it has been stated that there is an American single-phase 
motor, European engineers have taken up the development of 
single-phase apparatus, indicating thereby the shortcomings of 
the polyphase railway motor. It is significant that the poly- 
phase motor did not come up for consideration in the general 
‘discussion of the single-phase motor in connection with the 
Steinmetz and Slichter papers. 

There was some disappointment in connection with a meeting 
-of the INSTITUTE a little over a year ago at which the single-phase 
seriesmotor was presented, because certain specific data regard- 
ing the design of the motor, particularly in connection with its 
commutation, were not given in connection with the general 
engineering presentation of the single-phasesystem. ‘Ihere 
seemed to be an idea that there was a mysterious something 
which had been introduced into the motor as a panacea for the 
evils of alternating-current sparking, which was being withheld. 
The papers now under discussion do not deal with the particulars 
of commutation. ‘The general statement that the single-phase 
motor, whether of the repulsion type or of the straight-series 
type, does commutate and commutate successfully, was accepted 
without question and without awaking any apparent curiosity 


1904.] SCOTT: COMMUNICATION. 49 


as to the methods or devices by which it is accomplished. This 
illustrates how quickly a new thing passes from the category of 
that which is doubtful and incredible to that in which it is an 
accepted fact, from which important commercial results are ex- 
pected to follow as a matter of course. 

The present papers and their discussion deal almost entirely 
with the presentation of one type of single-phase motor and a 
comparison bet ween it and a second type. The motor, however, 
is but one feature, although the fundamental one, cf the single- 
phase system. It is the general system which the motor makes 
possible, as was intimated in the remarks of President Arnold, 
which is the thing of real consequence. The significant result 
of the introduction of this motor is not the motor itself, but it is 
the use of alternating current throughout the whole system; it is 
the omission of synchonous converter sub-stations with syn- 
chronously running apparatus, rendering the present distribution 
system one which is inefficient, cumbersome, and sensitive in 
operation; it is the use of high-pressure and the resulting economy 
in transmission; it is the many advantages found in thecon- 
struction of controllers for heavy alternating current over those 
for heavy direct current; it is the advantages which come from 
pressure control instead of resistance control; it is the readiness 
with which energy may be returned to the circuit by the alter- 
nating-current motor having pressure control (which is not prac- 
ticable with the direct-current motor having pressure resistance 
control); it is the lessened concentration of energy in alternating- 
current circuits in case of short circuit; it is the safety to the car 
equipment on account of the non-flashing of alternating-current 
motors, thus avoiding one of the serious difficulties in direct- 
current motors on large equipments; it is the freedom from 
electrolysis, and, in short, it is the superiority shown by the alter- 
mating .current over the direct current in practically every 
element from generator shaft to motor shaft, by which the limita- 
tions found in the direct-current system are removed and a new 
field, the bounds of which are not yet determined, is opened in 
the development of electric railway service. The outcome of 
the synchronous converter which has been so great a factorin 
the railway extensions of the past half dozen years has been the 
suburban and interurban railway. The single-phase motor opens 
the way to a new system which has in it elements which promise 
far greater developments than those which followed the intro- 
duction of the synchronous converter. 


[CoMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT By B. A. BEHREND.] 


The writer wishes again to illustrate by a few diagrams the 
close resemblance between the alternating-current series motor 
with a compensating coil for the cross-ampere turns of the arma- 
ture on the one hand and the repulsion motor on the other. 
Fig. 1 shows the straight-series motor; Fig. 2 shows the series 
motor with compensating-coil. In order to obtain a high power- 


50 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. {Jan. 29 


factor it is necessary, as has also been pointed out by Mr. Stein- 
metz and Mr. Lamme, to make the armature magnetomotive 
force considerably greater than the field. This is indicated in 
Fig. 2 by showing the field-coil F with few turns and the com- 
pensating-coil C with a large number of turns; instead of passing 


FIG. 1 
Straight Séries Motor 


the field current through the compensating-coil C, this coil can be 
short-circuited itself as illustrated in Fig. 5. The main current 
also can be passed through the compensating-coil C in series with 
the field F and the armature be short-circuited on itself, thus 
making the armature the secondary and the compensating-coil 


FIG, 2 
Series Motor with Compensatins 


Coil 


the pr-mary instead of the reverse, as in Fig. 3. The coils F and 
C may be replaced by one resultant-coil R, leading to the repul- 
sion motor Fig. 5. 

From the above considerations, it follows that, with 
very close approximation, the torque, power-factor, and the 


1904.] BEHREND: COMMUNICATION. 51 


efficiency of the compensated series motor represented in Figs. 
3 and 4 are equal to those of the repulsion motor Fig. 5. ‘here 
is no reason why the power-factor of the repulsion motor should 
be better than the power-factor of the compensated series motor 


FIG.3 


_ Series Motor witli Armature 
as Primary and Compensating Coil. 


it Short-circuited as Secondary” 


of Fig. 2; and Mr. Steinmetz’s Fig. 4 showing the comparison 
between a repulsion motor and an Eickemeyer compensated 
series motor is therefore most misleading. If the motors are 


FIG 4 


Series Motor «vith 
Compensating Coil as Primary, 
and Armature Short-circuited as 
Secondary (Repulsion Motor) 


designed with the same degree of care they should have approxi- 
mately equal power-factors at all speeds. Mr. Steinmetz says: 
“The secondary current of the transformers, however, lags 
slightly less than 180° behind the primary current; that is, con- 


52 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [{Jan. 29 


sidering it in the reversed direction, is a leading current with 
regard to the primary current. The current in the armature in 
Fig. 3 is therefore a leading current with respect to the line cur- 
rent and so not only does not add an additional lag, but reduces 
the lag caused by the self-induction of the field-exciting coil.” 


FIG. 5 


Repuision Motor Field and Compensating 
Coil Combined 


Mr. Lamme says on this point: 

“In either the series or repulsion type of motors, high 
power-factors, especially at low speeds, are directly de- 
pendent upon this fact of high ratio of armature to 
field, and with a high ratio, high power-factors should be ob- 
tained without crediting the result to leading currents inthe 


FIG. 6 


Ey; represents e.m.f. of transformation, 
Er ta %  «« rotation 


armature.” 

The fact is, however, that the secondary current in the 
repulsion motor, beyond a certain speed of the armature 
leads in respect to the primary electromotive force as in a trans- 
former in which the secondary is working on slf-induction and 


1904.] BEHREND: COMMUNICATION. 53 


capacity, or on self-induction and an over-excited synchronous 
motor. The primary current, however, is always a lagging cur- 
rent in regard to its impressed electromotive force. ‘lhe repul- 
sion motor is like a combination of a transformer with a syn- 
chronous motor, the electromotive force of which is coincident in 


FIG. 7 O1 


B Magnetizing current 

OA Primary current 

AB Secondary current 

OC Primary starting current 
O Centre of circle 


phase with the primary current (Fig. 6). The electromotive 
force of transformation Ey and the electromotive force of rota- 
tion, Er (the latter is proportional to the speed of rotation) are 
in opposition and give a resultant electromotive force, which 


e.m.f. 


FIG, 8 


Vector diagram corresponding to Mr. Slichter's 
Curves of Repulsion Motor 
.OC_ Starting current 


produces the current through the ohmic resistance of the short- 
circuited armature. With Fig. 6 in mind it is easy to see that 
the secondary current leads the primary electromotive force at 
certain speeds of the armature. The polar diagram brings out 


54 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


this point even move clearly. Fig. 7 represents the vector- 
diagram of the repulsion motor with a small resistance in the 
armature. This is the theoretical vector-diagram of the repul- 
sion motor as developed a few months ago by Messrs. Osnos and 
Blondel; the writer’s tests, as well as Mr. Slichter’s curve, agree 
closely with this diagram; the polar diagram corresponding to 
Mr. Slichter’s curves is represented in Fig. 8. 

As has also been pointed out by Messrs. Osnos and Blondel, 
the torque of the repulsion motor, in contradistinction to the 
series motor, vanishes at a finite speed, hence the repulsion motor 
is not so likely to run away as. the series motor. For the sake 


e.m.f. 


_ FIG.9 


OB Primary magnetizing current 
OA Primary current - 
A represents locus of vector of primary current with resistance in 

B ie ee rs ou ‘ inductance a secondary 


Cc cb tt “a ob ve “ “6 oe capacity in 


of comparison, Fig. 9 shows the vector diagram for the poly- 
phase induction motor with (A) resistance in the secondary, (B) 
reactance in the secondary, (C) capacity in the secondary. (See 
Chapter VIII. of the writer’s book ‘“ The Induction Motor.” 
from which these diagrams are taken.) It is clear that the 
compensated series motor represented in Fig. 2 can be made 
with a better power-factor than the compensated series motors 
represented in Figs. 3 and 4, and hence the compensated 
series motor in which the main current passes through the 
compensating-coil, everything else being equal, has a higher 
power-factor than the repulsion motor, instead of a lower power- 
' factor, as Mr. Steinmetz seems to think. 

Mr. Lamme’s remarks are most interesting and instructive, but 
the writer believes Mr. Lamme is not correct in stating that the 


1994.] FRANKLIN: COMMUNICATION. 55 


power-factor of the repulsion motor is lower than that of the 
series motor, a conclusion which, by the way, is diametrically 
opposed to that at which Mr. Steinmetz arrived. Mr. Lamme 
assumes that the inductance of the armature is negligible, and 
then draws a parallel between the straight-series motor and the 
repulsion motor as illustrated by Fig. 4 in this communication. 
Granting the assumption of a non-tnductive armature (which is 
by no means permissible), Mr. Lamme’s conclusions are right, 
but on that assumption the compensated-series motor would 
give no better power-factor than the straight-series motor, which 
is obviously untrue. Mr. Lamme’s reasoning and his conclusions 
have therefore to be modified, and instead of stating as he does’ 
that the power-factor of the repulsion motor is lower than the 
power-factor of the series motor, it should be stated that the 
power-factor of the repulsion motor is slightly lower than that 
of the compensated-series motor, but considerably higher than 
that of the straight-series motor. From the English patent 
specification, it appears that Mr. Lamme’s motor is a compen- 
sated-series motor, corresponding to Fig. 3in this communication. 

In order to obtain high power-factors, it is necessary to design 
both the series motor and the repulsion motor on the same prin- 
ciples that have been found of importance in the design of induc- 
tion motors. The successful series motor, however, has to be 
built with defined poles. Very good repulsion motors can be 
built for 60 cycles, and maximum power-factors of 90 ts 95 per 
cent can be obtained even on small machines for comparatively 
low speeds. Such motors have very excellent series characteris- 
tics and can be used wherever the direct-current series motor is 
satisfactory. 


* 


By W.S. FRANKLIN.—(Communicated after Adjournment) :— 
On May 19, 1903, the writer had the privilege of debating some 
points in alternating-current theory with Mr. Steinmetz before 
the Schenectady Branch of the Institute. During the 
visit which preceded this debate, the writer discussed 
the theory of the repulsion motor, at length, with Mr. 
Steinmetz. The writer had very recently worked out 
the theory of the repulsion motor, outlined below, 
and his results are in substantial agreement, with Mr. Stein- 
metz’s; but knowing that Mr. Steinmetz had been working at 
the matter much longer, the writer urged him to present 
his work to the INsTITUTE, at an early date. 

At the time of the conference, it was clear to both Mr. Stein- 
metz and the writer that the ideal theory as given in Mr. Stein- 
metz’s paper, and as outlined below, did not take account of the 
very considerable distortion of the electromotive force wave due 
primarily to the fact that the two fluxes #’ and @” (see below) are 
not harmonically distributed around the periphery of the 


56 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR.  [Jan. 29 


machine. A first approximation to a correct theory is based 
upon the assumption that the fluxes are harmonic both in time 
and in space. A second approximation would be to consider the 
departure of the fluxes from harmonic space distribution, basing 
the calculations of this departure upon the first approximate 
solution by taking account of the magnetomotive forces gen- 
erated in the several parts of the windings by the harmonic cur- 
rent values arrived at by the first approximation. Whether a 
third approximation, based upon calculated departures of the 
fluxes from harmonic variation in time, would be required for 
practical purposes, could be perhaps more cheaply answered by | 
making a motor and comparing actual tests with second approxi- 
mate calculations than by the arithmetical determination of the 
magnitude of the corrections introduced by the third approxima- 
tion. 

The development of the theory (first approximation) of the 
repulsion motor following is essentially tne same as that of Mr. 
Steinmetz; it is given here because ‘of the slightly different point 
of view, and because it is an example of the right-handed notation 
(r-+7 x instead of r —j x.) 


P Motion Pp K 0 “ 


Jame, dk: 


2. OUTLINE OF THEORY OF REPULSION MorTor. 


* Fig. 1 shows the axis of commutation ss of the armature 
(secondary-tap axis), and the corresponding axis, p p, in the 
primary member of a repulsion motor. The primary current 
produces an alternating flux #’ at full primary frequency 7’ in the 
direction of the primary-tap axis, and the secondary or armature 
current produces an alternating flux 0” at full primary frequency 
in the direction of the secondary-tap axis. 
Let e’ be the value of and E’ the complex expression for 
primary impressed voltage. 
7’ the primary frequency. 
a’ the value of the primary current. The primary- 
current vector is taken as the reference axis and 
therefore 7’ is also the complex expression for the 
primary current. 


1904] FRANKLIN: COMMUNICATION. 57 


’ the value of the alternating flux due to the primary 
current 2’. 

0’ the phase-angle between E’ and 7’, positive when FE’ 
is ahead of 2’. 


Then 
Qs Ria” (1) 
in which k is the flux produced by unit primary current; and 
Ei’ = e’ (cos 0’ +7 sin 0’) (2) 


Furthermore, let Z be the number of conductors in the primary 
winding; the number of secondary conductors being assumed to 
be the same for the sake of simplicity. 

r, the resistance of the primary. 

x, the reactance value of magnetic leakage at primary 

frequency. 

j” the speed of the armature in cycles per second. 

a” the value of secondary current and /” its complex expres- 

sion. 

r, the secondary resistance. 

6” the phase-angle between 7’ and 7”, positive when 7” is ahead 

of 2’. 

” the value of the alternating flux due to the secondary cur- 

rent 2”, and @” its complex expression. 


Lien 
oO” = kI" (3) 
in which k has sensibly the same value as in equation (1); and 
I” = 2” (cos. 6" +7 sin 0”) (4) 


To establish the general equations of the repulsion motor we 
must consider (a) the voltages induced in the primary. Placing 
the sum of such induced voltages equal to — EL’ gives one equa- 
tion; and (b) the voltages induced in the secondary. Placing 

the sum of such induced voltages equal to +r, /” gives another 


equation. 
Equation of Primary Voltages —The total impressed ‘primary 


voltage is made up of the following parts: 
(a) The part (7,+ 7 x,) 7’ used to overcome primary resistance 


and magnetic leakage reactance. 

(b) The part +7. oe — reed to balance the electromotive 
force induced in the pe by the pulsating flux ¢’. 

(areThe ‘part hy. ee. Rey use to balance the electro- 


motive force induced in the primary by the pulsating flux 0”. 


Therefore: . e: y 0” Zi" 
= (7,45 %,)t'+ 7. ee +7. Gia cos A (5) 


58 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR.  [Jan. 29 


Equation of Secondary Voltages.—The total electromotive force 
induced in the secondary is used to overcome secondary resist- 
ance; it is therefore equal to r, /”, and it consists of the following 
parts: 

PREY AN fas 5 
(a) fhe parti 4s ia oe cos A produced by the pulsations 


of the flux ¢’. 


uv ff 
(b) The part —j oat produced by the pulsations of the 
flux 0”. 


2 
secondary relative to the flux #’. 


, W 
(c) The part -- et . sin 4 produced by the motion of the 


Therefore: : 
} % P , u / 
fli ee .sindA—J a! ah se ©) 


Equations (5) and (6), together with the equations of definition 
(1), (2), (8), and (4), are the fundamental equations of the repulsion 
motor. The assumptions upon which these equations rest and 
the extent to which these assumptions deviate from the condi- 
tions which really exist in a repulsion motor are discussed later. 
Three things only need be said to clear up the derivation of 
equations (5) and (6); namely, (a) only that component of a flux 
which is parallel to a tap-axis produces electromotive force by 
pulsation; (b), only that component of a flux which is at right 
angles to a tap-axis produces electromotive force by motion; 
and (c), all induced electromotive forces involvedin equations (5) 
and (6) are of the same frequency f’. ‘his is due to the fact that 
the electromotive forces induced in the secondary are referred to 
the stationary tap-axis S S Fig. 1; the electromotive force (or 
current) in a given moving secondary wire may be thought of as | 
having a frequency j”, while its amplitude varies at frequency /’. 
This is equivalent to the superposition of two genuine alternating 
electromotive forces of which the frequencies are f’+/” and 
j’ —j” respectively .* 

Substituting the values of $’, ®”, E’, and I” from equations 
(1), @), (3), and (4) in equation (5), we have: 


; a aes: +71 iat epee he Lael 
€. cos. 0" +7 e! sin 0% = 74! Pag ae ere 
1 1% J Wa 
ae Sad : 
9 hi C050 cos Arete 
ee ‘ 


* 2 [cos w’ f]. cos w’’ t = cos (w' +w’')t + cos (w’—w’") ¢. 


1904.] FRANKLIN: COMMUNICATION. 59 


ra rt | 
Rotor .sin 6” cos A. 1” (7) 


Substituting the values of ¢’, 0”, EF’ and I’’ from equations (1), 
(2), (3) and (4) in equation (6) and we have: 


AeA i 


r,2” cos 0” +7 7,0" sin ” = WERK sin A -2’ 
(8) 

—]. an .cosda.t’—] as .cos 0” 4” + a wSitO oily 
Let 

Caer 

he 

Wari 

AD? 


Then, separating real and imaginary parts, equation (7) be- 
comes 


¢’ cos* 0 = 7, 2. asin 0”’cos A 51” 
é sin 0! -=.4, 47-41’ +a cos 0” cos... 1” (9) 
and equation (8) becomes: 
; ft t0S- 0 st =O sin A. to a Sin O24” (10) 
r sin 0”. 4” = —acosd/1"—acos 0” . 1% 


The torque, power-output, power-intake, power-factor, and 
efficiency curves of the repulsion motor plotted on speed-base 
(/”) may be calculated from equations (9) and (10) as follows: 

In the first place, r,,e’, a, and x, are known from the design of 
the motor.and from the given value and frequency of the primary 
voltage. : 

In the second place, A and r, may be each varied at will, and 
therefore the curves are to be plotted for each of a series of 
arbitrarily assigned values of A and. r,. In the third place, j” 
may be taken as the independent variable, upon which the tracing 
of the curves depends, and the values of torque, power-output, 
power-intake, etc., calculated for various assigned values of j”. 

Thus, from an assigned value of 7” the value of b is known. 
From this, together with the known values of r,,e’, a, and x,; and 
the chosen values of A and r,, the values of 2’, 2”, 0’, and @” are 
determined by equations (9) and (10). Then for the given speed 
f? we have: 


power-intake = e’1’ cos @’ 
power-factor = cos 0’ 
power-losses = 17”7,+72”? r,+ core losses.* 


*Eddy current and hysteresis losses are to be calculated independently 
of the above ideal theory, from the known value of $’,®.’’,A,f’ andf’’ 
See following discussion of Mr. Steinmetz’s paper. 


60 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR.  [Jan. 29 


power-output = power-intake minus losses 
torque = power-output, + 27]” — 
efficiency = power-output + power-intake. 


The above outline of the method of calculating the characteris- 
tic curves of the repulsion motor is sufficiently simple as a matter 
of theory but it is quite laborious as a matter of fact; and there- 
fore certain of the terms of low value may be advantageously 
discarded in the final algebraic expressions for 1’,2”,6’, and 0”. 


3. Discussion. 


(a) It may be worth while to point out the correspondence: 
between Mr. Steinmetz’s quantities Z and x (see page 19 of 
Mr. Steinmetz’s paper), and the quantities which the writer 
represents by a and b, especially inasmuch as Mr. Steinmetz 
seems not to have specified the meaning of his symbol x. 

Mr. Steinmetz’s Z is identical with a, and Mr. Steinmetz’s * 
(see equation (4), page 19) is equal to j’//” xb. 

When magnetic leakage is not very great, an ampere-turn, 
whether on the primary or secondary, produces sensibly the 
same amount of flux through the secondary, and in this case Mr. 
Steinmetz’s Z and x are identical, if, as is assumed for the sake 
of simplicity, the primary and secondary have the same number 
of conductors. 

(b) Mr. Steinmetz seems to say on page 14 that inductance- 
reactance in the secondary of a transformer becomes capacity- 
reactance in its effect upon the primary! The fact is that the 
decrease of lag of the primary current of a transformer due to 
load on the secondary is essentially the same effect as the decrease _ 
of lag of total current when a circuit of comparatively low induct- 
ance is connected in parallel with a highly inductive circuit. 

Aside from difference in size or in design, it is not clear why 
Mr. Steinmetz’s Fig. 3 should have a higher power-factor than his 
Fig. 2 (this matter is considered in detail under c) and even if 
Mr. Steinmetz’s apparent statement regarding the relative power- 
factors of Figs. 2 and 3 is correct, his explanation is not con- 
vincing. ; 

The series motor provided with a Ryan compensating winding 
(c) to annul armature reaction is, when operated by alternating 
current, identical in its action to the repulsion motor, save 
in one respect, which is mentioned under d. 

Consider, for example, Mr. Steinmetz’s Fig. 5, which is equiva- 
lent to his Fig. 6. This constitutes a repulsion motor. The 
same structure with all three windings connected in series would 
be a series motor with a Ryan compensating winding. Let us 
consider the correspondences between the two machines on the 
assumption that coil resistances are zero; that magnetic leakage 
is zero; and that magnetic reluctance of core is zero. 

Under these conditions the compensating winding A, and the 
armature winding together constitute an ideal transformer (zero 


1904.] FRANKLIN: COMMUNICATION. 61 


resistance, zero magnetic leakage, and zero magnetic reluctance*) 
‘so that the current in the short-circuited armature of Fig. 5 is 
exactly equal in value and opposite in phase to the main current 
in winding A,, and the electromotive force induced in the arma- 
ture by motion is transformed to or exactly reproduced in 
winding A,, except that its phase is reversed. 

Now, the reversal of phase is merely a matter of reversing con- 
nections so that the current induced in the armature is exactly 
the current which would flow through the armature if it were 
properly connected in series with the two field windings; and the 
electromotive force which opposes the flow of current through 
the two field windings A, and A, in Fig. 5 is exactly the electro- 
motive force which would oppose the flow of current if the arma- 
ture were properly connected in series with the two field windings. 

Under the above-mentioned ideal conditions, the motor action 
of the device is exactly the same, its power-factor is the same; in 
fact, everything is the same, with the one exception mentioned 
under d, be the device connected as a repulsion motor or as a 
series motor. 

So much for the ideal case; but what are the effects of coil re- 
sistances, magnetic leakage and core reluctance? ‘These effects 
vitiate the motor action and they vitiate motor action more 
when the device is connected as a repulsion motor than when the 
device is connected as a series motor. This may be made clear 
by the following simple considerations: 

When all the windings are connected in series the current is 
the same in all and the armature current is exactly in phasc 
with the torque-producing flux. When the armature is 
short-circuited and the armature current produced by trans- 
formation from the winding A,, then (a) the armature cur- 
tent (secondary) is slighty less ian value than the main current 
(ratio of primary to secondary turns equal to unity) on 
account, primarily, of core reluctance; and: (b) the armature 
current differs in phase slightly from the main current and 
therefore from the torque-producing flux on account, primarily, 
of coil resistancesand magnetic leakage. 

Therefore, other things being equal, the torque is lessened on 
account of coil resistances, magnetic leakage, and core reluctance. 

(d) The one difference between the compensated-series motor 
and the repulsion motor is the above-described transformer action 
and the production of cross-flux (VM, in Mr. Steinmetz’s paper) 
associated therewith. 

This transformer action is, however, under ideal conditions 
entirely independent of motor action, whereas under practical 
conditions this transformer action, itself incomplete, detracts 
from the action of the structure. 


*It would be well if the “‘practicat man’’ realized that once ina 
while, at least, the ‘‘ theoretical man’’ sets forth ideal conditions in 
order that a practical matter may be made simple enough for the prac- 
tical man to understand. 


62 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


When the device (Fig. 5) is connected as a compensated series 
motor, no cross-flux is produced and the cross-reluctance of the 
core may be made high, perhaps with advantage; certainly with 
saving of material. 

(e) There is one point wherein the repulsion motor has an ad- 
vantage over the compensated-series motor, and in regard to 
which the writer agrees with Mr. Steinmetz. This is in the 
matter of hysteresis and eddy-current losses in the armature core. 

In the compensated series motor the armature is subjected to 
reversals of magnetization and the hysteresis and eddy-current 
losses are high. 

In the repulsion motor the effect of the cross-flux is to produce 
a resultant magnetization of the armature core, which rotates at 
synchronous speed. This rotating magnetization is elliptical 
below and above synchronous speed of the armature, and cir- 
cular at synchronous armature speed, so that in the repulsion 
motor the hysteresis loss in the armature core is large at stand- 
still; it decreases to zero at synchronous speed, and increases 
again at speeds above synchronism. 

The writer does not, however, agree with Mr. Steinmetz in his 
statements concerning the variation with speed of hysteresis loss 
in the armature core of the series motor. ‘This loss is large at 
standstill, it decreases to about 2H as great a value at syn- 


if 
chronous speed and increases again at speeds above synchronism. 


By B. G. LamMMEe.—(Communicated after Adjournment) :— 
It appears that there is a possible misunderstanding of the 
use of the term “ straight-series ’ as applied by the writer to 
one class of single-phase motors. By this term the writer means 
motors in which the armature and field windings are all directly 
in series, and in this class is included motors with compen- 
sating windings in the poles. In the discussion of Mr. Stein- 
metz’s paper the writer referred to the armature as being 
practically non-inductive and the field as being the inductive 
element. For best proportions such a motor would naturally 
be of the compensated type, and the writer’s discussion was 
based primarily upon “‘ straight-series ’’ motors having compen- 
sating windings, although no direct statement to that effect was 
made. ‘he series motor without compensating winding would 
undoubtedly have considerably higher armature self-induction 


than the compensated motor, and would naturally have lower 
power-factor. 


1904.] ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. 63 


[COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT BY Comrort A. ADAMS.]} 
Note:—Vectors are indicated by bold-faced capitals. 


In connection with Mr. Steinmetz’s very neat and compact 
treatment, the following graphical representation may be of in- 
terest: 

Assume that the reluctance of the main magnetic circuit is 
constant and the same in all radial directions. Reduce all sec- 
ondary quantities to primary turns, and at first, neglect primary 
resistance and core loss; these may be taken into account later. 

Referring to Fig. 1, which is a time vector diagram: 

I, = primary current and m.m.f. 

I, = secondary current and m.m.f. 

I,’ =I, cos & = the component: of the primary m.m.f. in the 
secondary axis, and 

I,’ = I, cos 8 = the component of the secondary: m.m.f. in 
the primary axis, where 

8 =the angle between the two axes, determined by the position 
of the brushes. : 

J,’ =1,4+I, cos @ = the resultant m.m.f. along the primary 
axis; 


Ss 
I 


the corresponding flux. 
7x) J’; = the corresponding primary e.m.f. in quad- 
rature with 0’,, where x, is the exciting reactance. 

$;’ ¢, = the primary leakage flux, in phase with and propor- 
tional to /,: 

E', E, = j1,*, = the corresponding primary drop due to the 
leakage reactance, *,; 

®, = total primary flux: ; (1) 

Draw J’, A parallel and proportional to ada re then 
OA = J, is the current which would produce the flux @, 
in nels main magnetic circuit. It is the total equivalent coger 
current in the primary axis. 

E, = j %o J, = total primary aces e.m.f., proportional to 


a 
H 


E, Re ihe See eee e.m.f. For the present J, 7, will be neg- 
lected and E, will be assumed equal to Ey, and constant 

f, and J, are then constant for constant E,. 

1,’ = 1,+1, cos # = resultant mim f. bone secondary axis; 

@,’ = the corresponding flux, and 


64 ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. ‘jan. 29 


E,’ = —j x) J’, = the corresponding induced e.m.f.; 

go! $2 = the secondary leakage flux; and 

E,' E, = —j1,x, = the corresponding e.m.f. 

®, = the total secondary flux; 

J, = the equivalent exciting current. 

E, = —j%)J2 = the corresponding e.m.f. (1a) 


| 


= I,r, = secondary ohmic drop. 


YO 


Cc 
T = jl,x, = E,E’, = secondary leakage drop, where r, 


Cc 


FiGey 


and x, are the secondary resistance and leakage reactance respect- 
ively. 

Let dg = the dynamic flux perpendicular to the secondary 
axis and produced entirely by the component I, sin f, of the 
primary m.m.f., since the secondary m.m.f. is perpendicular to 
that direction and contributes nothing. Then the dynamic e.m.f. 
induced by the rotation of the armature through this flux will be: 


1904. | ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. 65 


E, = ax,I, sin f, in phase with I,, where a is the speed in per 
cent of synchronism. (2) 
Ez +E’, = OT =1,Z,or 
Ez +E,= OS =I,r,and 


ax I,sin@—jx J,=1,7, (3) 
Complete the parallelograms O I’, A B and OI,’ A, B,. 
Let: ®, = reluctance of main ees circuit: 
R, = reluctance of primary leakage circuit; 
®, = reluctance of secondary leakage circuit. 
/ , 
eg oe pa ER cs a Bek No 
p's $y g', 2 $161 b2 P's 
HE I 
a,= 1 and @,= 2 
: o's py, : b's po 
Cee Ot Re eer re v,, the primary leakage coefficient, 
Js R, Xo (4) 
and 


ocd Pcs as Sed ee =v,, the secondary leakage coefficient. 


I R, Xo (4a) 
Then 
OB= v1, (5) 
and 
OB; =»,I, (5a) 
J, = ¥11,+1, cos 8 (6) 
J, =‘v, 1, +1, cos 2 (6a) 


Draw A D parallel to J, and BM perpendicular to Asli 
the triangle O A D, OA = J, is constant, and angleO DA 
= § = 90°+0, where @ is the small angle between E, and E,. 


It may be easily determined as follows: Express I, in terms of 
yetu.is: 


I J Tet] Xo Ye 
1s 7008 Bok, Y, sine (7) 
then tan (J,I,) = cot? = ae 
2 
and tan@ = —2- = which is constant. (7a) 


Vo%Xo Pas 2 


66 ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


Therefore < 6 = 90°+0= constant, and the point D will always 
fall on the arc of a circle e through O D A. 


Draw BC parallelto D A and J,;thonO C/O A = OB/OD 
but OB = »,7/, 


ee I, cos? B Sj [1- cos? a 


Vo Vy iat 
OnGrs 1 eis 
Therefore O7ae i cos? 8 + 6 
a Viv. 

where 

¢o=1- sae is the leakage factor. (8) 

Viv. 
Then OC = <. = a and is constant. (9) 


Thus, since angle 0 B C= 0= constant, the locus of B is the 
circulararcO BC ButOB = v,I,and BA = I, cos B, 1.€., pro- 
portional to 7, and J, respectively. The triangle O B A thus 
shows clearly the relative magnitudes and phases of J, and J,, for 
the various positions of B on the arcO BC. 


SPEED. 


The different positions of B correspond to different speeds and 
to different values of the angle 7. There is therefore some rela- 
tion between the speed a and the ang'e 7. But as the latter is 
the angle between E, and I, its value is readily found, thus; ex- 
press I,, in terms of E,; it is 


© oq _COSHi ge eas 
Lee *r, COS B+ Xq v2 sin B fo 


then tan (E,I,) = tan; = atanf (11) 
which is directly proportional to the speed, or 


_ tany 
yy tan 2 


(lia) 


It should be noted that the scale according to which tan 7 is a 
measure of the speed, depends upon the brush angle f. 
‘There aré'several linear methods of representing the speed, 
but the angular method is more convenient for the present 
‘ purpose. 


1994. ] ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. 67 


Referring to Fig. 2, extend B BM until it intersects the large 
circle at VN; draw NC, N A B,andOB,. Then 

<NCO= <NB,O = 8, being ineerined in the same arc 
ON. 
<NBC = 90°.:.NC isadiameter of circle O BC. 

Draw O h. making angle 0 with O A; then b is the center of the 
circleO Bu. 

As B moves around to the right, y and the speed decrease, 
until a = 0, when 7 and the speed are zero. Thus B, corres- 
ponds to a = 0, O B, is proportional to the primary and B, A to 
the secondary short-circuit current. 


TORQUE. 
The dynamic power is 
Pye fg) COs. (12) 
where 
a =7+0 (13) 
The torque, in synchronous watts is then, 
=-(1/a) Eg I, cosa (14) 
or substituting from equation (2) » 
Peete ad Sins, COS & (14a) 


Draw A H perpendicular to O B, then 
HB = J,cos) 8. cos a 


and since 


(15) 


Thus the torque is proportional to the product of OB and H B 
for any given brush position, but the constant of proportion- 
ality varies with the brush position. 

The locus of the point H is the semicircle O H A,since< OH A 
= 90°. * 

The Torque Efficiency, or torque per ampere, may be readily 
obtained by substituting for J, in eq. 14a, its value in terms of 
Jo? Anus, 

*NoTEe.—A very simple and elegant method of representing the torque 


by a single line, is given by Dr. Th. Lehmann, in L’Eclatrage Electrique, 
for February i3, 1904. 


63 ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. [Jan. 29° 


ee Oe Ee Dit a? * (7, + ¥5 my a tan f) | 
; 2 


Paty, Xo 
or, since 7”, is ordinarily negligible with respect to v,” x,” 


x, sin B cos B 
a) 


ite ie (1 —a tan @ tan f) (16) 
Again, a tan 6 tan 8 is very small at ordinary speeds and we 
have approximately: 


Teanre %, sin # cos 8 (16a) 


i.e., the torque is approximately proportional to the square of the 

current. It also appears from this last equation that the maxi- 

mum. torque efficiency corresponds to a brush angle B = 45°. 

This, however, is not the angle corresponding to the maxi- 

mum torque or the highest power-factor, as will appear, later... 
MAXIMUM SPEED. 

As B moves io the left the torque decreases and speed increases 
until B H, and thus the torque vanishes at B,,, which.corresponds | 
to the maximum possible speed. At this point a = 90° and 
7 = 90° — 0, but sinte @ is, under normal conditions, very small, 
tan 7 and thus the speed, is very large, much beyond.the safe 
mechanical limit as well as that of commutation. 

POWER-FACTOR. “se 

The angle ¢ (between E, and J,) decreases steadily from stand-_ 
still to maximum speed, as B moves from B, to By, and the 
power-factor increases accordingly,. The factors which affect ¢ 
for any given speed will be considered later. 

Eliminating between equations (1) (2) (8) and (6); 


E, Ve%o Je 


I, = 5 . ° 
Xo Vy Tota X Sin 6 cos 8-44 X69 705 


2 


Toe + OX v 
peal o°2 +ar,tan B tan 0+ 7 


a Xv, (1-29) ™ tan a 
ie ee fT, tax,v, tan B 4 lo«¢ (17) 


As 0 is normally very small, we have approximately 


oO oO 


aoe (l—«o)tany a (1a) tan8 


(17a) 


1904.] ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. 69 


which is inversely proportional to the speed. Mr. Steinmetz has 
given one explanation (page 25) why the power-factor does not 
in fact increase with the speed beyond a certain limit, but reaches 
a maximum and then falls off. 


PRIMARY PoweErR. 


P, = E, 1, cos ¢, is proportional to the altitude of the triangle 
OB A, (since £, is assumed constant), and its maximum value 
occurs when B is at the top of the circleO BC. 

The circle diagram’, Fig. 2, is thus a great help in picturing the 
general relations of the several variables (currents, power-factors, 
speed, torque, and power), and the manner of their variation 

It is also very useful in tracing the effect of changes in the con- 
stants of the motor, as will appear from what follows. 


IMPRESSED ELECTROMOTIVE FORCE. 


Since each line of the diagram is proportional to E£,, other 
things being equal, the currents will vary directly with FE, and 
the torque and power with £,’. 


PRIMARY RESISTANCE. 

If E, is assumed constant, E, (= E,+I,1,), the real impressed 
e.m.f., must vary slightly; and since the :ocus of the extremity of 
I, is a circle, the locus of the extremity of I, 7, is a’similar circle, 
as indicated in Fig. 2. 

But practically, Ly would be kept constant and £, would vary, 
decreasing slightly as /, increases, while the whole diagram 
shrinks in the same proportion. Otherwise the effect of the 
primary resistance is to throw E, more nearly into phase with /, 
and thus to increase the power-factor. 

Core LossEs. 
To take account of the core losses, a small energy component 


must be added to the primary current, which not only increases 
I, but advances its phase and increases the power-factor. 


EFFECT OF VARIATION OF CONSTANTS. 


_ Before proceeding, it will be convenient to assemble and trans- 
form a few of the equations which show the relations between the 
several constants and the diagram. 


1. Much the same diagram has been developed by Osnos, Elektrotech- 
nische Zeitschrift, October 29, 1903, and Blondel, L’Eclairage Electrique, 
November and December, 1903, but: by quite different methods, and 
from different starting points. 


70 ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


18) 
sa E, 
OA = I, i Xe 
GY op a (19) 
0 aX 
ae _ cos? Bf _ x9 (1 — cos? 8) +x (%,+%2) +% %2 
VY Kyi +X (KH, +%2) +X, Xy 
R, R, (1 — cos’ #) +R, (Ro +R, + K,) 
(20) 


R, K, +R, (Ry +R, + R,) 


faked 5 Ky (Xy~+%.) +4, Xp Ls ws Ry (Qo +R, +A,) } 
Sy Ky +X o(%,+%2) +%4%, KR, R,+ Ry (A, +R, +R) 
(21) 
OB eee 1 *ot. (22) 
0 


BA = I, cosB | (23) 


1904.} ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. 71 


12 > 


tan 0 = = 
2 Ye%X%q = Xo tX% a) 
tany = atanB (25) 
(ong ep eee (26) 


SECONDARY RESISTANCE. 


A change in r*, affects neither O A, OC, nor the relation be- © 
tween the speed and tan 7, but it does alter the position of the 


center 6 of the circle O BC, since 


Yr aa 
a ‘6 Vo Hae (27) 


t.@., an increase in r, means a proportional dropping down of b 
from OC, and when r, = 0, b lies at by, the circle always passing 
through O and C. In Fig. 3, several resistance circles are 
drawn, corresponding to resistances from zero to seven. 

Consider the movement of B corresponding to a change of r, 
under constant speed. 7.e., with 7 constant. 

Then < ABC = 90° —7, and is constant, and B will move on 
a circular arc A BC, whose center lies on the perpendicular 
erected at the centre of A C. 

Imagine B to move along one of these constant-speed circles 
until BAC = 90°, then BC will be a diameter of circle B AC, 


and the intersection of B C with the perpendicular m, m will be 
the center of the constant speed circle in question. Moreover, 


since ABC = 90°—y7, < ACm =y7. Thus, m,m is directly 
proportional to the speed a corresponding to the circle in question. 


E, atan8 
myn = m,C tan p= Jy 7 otanB = So oo, (28) 
cau hens 


When a = 0, thecenter fallstom,. Several constant speed 
‘circles are shown in Fig. 3. pals 

If B falls within the semicircle O A, the torque is negative, if it 
falls within the semicircle A C, the speed is negative, and points 
outside of semicircle OC correspond to negative values of 1. 


a 
*It is understood that r, includes the total secondary resistance, in- 


etrnal and external. 


72 ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. [jam29 


Therefore, it is evident that for operation as motor, B must fall 
within the area enclosed by these three semicircles. 

The variation of torque and power-factor with speed and 
secondary resistance can be readily traced on diagram, Fig. 3. 


rile, &. 


LEAKAGE REACTANCE. 


Leakage in primary and secondary have for the most part the 
same general effect, except that v, alone effects the scale accord- 
ing to which O B represents J, (eq. 22), and also the torque scale 
(eq. 26); while v, alone effects tan @ (eq. 24). But v, is constant 
in any given machine, varying only slightly in different types, 


1904.] ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR: 73 


whereas vy, which includes any external reactance connected 
between the brushes, may have a wide variation. 

Consider then, a variation in vy, or x,. Assume that there is 
no external resistance between brushes, then 7, may be neglected 
without seriously affecting the general results of the analysis. 

Referring to the equations of page 70, a change in v, or x, does. 
not affect O A, it does affect ¢ and thus OC. In Fig. 4, several 
OBC circles are drawn, corresponding to values of x,, varying 
from +4 to —4, 0.4 being the normal value for the machine in 
question. 

As x, decreases, passes Pecan zero and increases negatively, 
o decreases and passes through zero, and the point C moves out. 
to infinity on the right and comes back on the left. 

As r, was neglected, << OBA = 7, and if the speed be main- 
tained constant while x, varies, the locus of B will be a circle 
O A B whose center lies on the perpendicular at the center of O A. 
If g, is the center of the constant speed circle corresponding to 


a = 1,thenthe < 0q,A = twice the < OB,A A andOq, p = ji- 
Then, 
Oe Swtatey = ae tan 
PA 
Op eee Ee 
and bas = @ tan pe.  2a.%, tan 8 a) 


The effect of the secondary resistance will be to flatten the 
constant-speed circles slightly. 


Atr-Gap. 


An increase Ae air-gap means an increase in ®,, a decrease in %», 
and an increase in O A. An inspection of equation (20) shows 
that since (1 —cos? 9) is ordinarily a small fraction, and since 
®, R, is large as compared with ®, (Ry +R,+,), o falls only a 
little cet of being proportional to ®,. Therefore, OC(=O0A 
—-g) is nearly independent of the ae 

“The air-gap also affects the primary-current scale slightly 
(eq. 22), the torque scale to a greater extent (eq. 26), and 
tan 0 (eq. 24). 

It is seen from (eq. 16) that the current corresponding to any 


: ‘ vere 
given torque is otherwise approximately proportional to, / aan OF 
: e 


74 ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. [Jan 29 


to \/ Ry: - thus, to double the gap would add about 40% to 1,, 
and produce a considerable decrease in the power-factor. This 
is easily traced on the diagram by imagining O A to increase, 
without affecting OC. 
Brusu Position. 

Here, again, it is desirable to neglect r, inorder to getasimpler 
view of the effect of changing . 

O A is unaffected, but O C increases with decreasing /. 

The secondary-current scale (eq. 23), the speed scale (eq. 
25), the torque scale (eq. 26) and the torque efficiency (eq. 16) 
are also dependent upon . 


FIG. 4. 


The locus of the point B with varying # and constant speed, 
is not a simple curve, but has been drawn in on Fig. 5 for several 
speeds. Circles are also shown for values of @ varying from 0° 
to 90°. 

Since all losses have been neglected, the input is equal to the 
output, and for any given speed the altitude of the point B is 
proportional to the torque; 1.e., if B moves along one of the 
constant-speed curves, the maximum torque for that speed 
corresponds to the highest point of the speed curve under con- 
sideration. 

It will be observed that this maximum torque occurs with a 
very small brush angle @ for high speeds, decreasing to 45° at 
standstill. This maximum torque and maximum output are 
obtained at the expense of a low power-factor and excessive 


1904. ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. 75 


current, and are far beyond normal operation, except at reduced 
voltage. It is somewhat analogous to the maximum output 
obtained from a direct-current motor by weakening its field until 
the counter e.m.f. equals one-half of the impressed e.m.f. 

The best value of @ is that which gives the highest power 
factor; it is determined as follows, from (eq. 17a): 


tang = —*——_— (30) 


FIG. 5. 


Placing the derivative of tan ¢ with respect to cos @ equal to 
zero and solving 
Jani 


cos B = 4/ rege (31) 


which is independent of the speed. 
Substituting this in (30) gives for the minimum value of tan } 


9 he 1 
tan m= ae V1 Ye (32) 
liv, = p,-= Tel, = 23° and cos dm, = .703 forGiex 
pet aa 451.05, a = 17° and cos $m = .803 


76 ADAMS: REPULSION MOTOR. [Jan. 29 


The less the leakage the smaller the angle f,, for maximum 
power-factor. Eq. (32) shows clearly the factors upon which the 
maximum power-factor depends. 

Figs. 3, 4; and 5 together with the accompanying sgiavica 
give a fairly clear picture of the effect produced upon the op- 
eration of the repulsion motor by the variation of its several 
constants. 

GENERATOR. 

ne 5 lends itself readily to the tracing of the generator action 
of the repulsion motor. 

While the machine is running at any constant speed as motor 
on constant-pressure circuit, connect it to a prime mover run- 
ning at the same speed, then shift the brushes forward, the point 
B moving to the left, reaching A when 2 =90°, then moving out 
along a similar constant-speed curve below the axis, .P, reversing 
sign as B crosses the axis, OC. Under these conditions the 
power output as generator is dependent upon the brush angle, J, 
and the speed at which the machine is driven. It is not self- 
exciting, but receives its exciting current from the line, although 
at high speeds a a: of the excitation is supplied by the rotor- 
current. 

The curves of Fig. 5 were drawn for an ideal machine without 
losses, and the motor and generator portions are symmetrical — 
in consequence. 

The effect of the losses is to retard the reversal of P, until the 
brush angle has attained an appreciable negative ne such 
that the mechanical power supplied is just equal to the losses. 
This effect is readily shown on the circle diagram at the expense: 
of extreme simplicity. 


1904.) - COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT. 77 


[COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT. | 


DiscussInc Papers By SLICHTER, STEINMETZ, AND OTHERS 
RELATING TO ALTERNATING-CURRENT RaILwAy Motors. 


Ducatp C. Jackson:—The writer notices that Mr. Steinmetz’ 
attributes the modern form of repulsion motor to Professor Elihu 
Thomson, and others including-Mr. Blanck (whose discussions are 
stimulated by the papers of Messrs. Slichter and Steinmetz) 
attribute its development to Mr. Steinmetz. It seems only proper 
to point out that neither of these designations is historically 
correct. The repulsion motor capable of producing continuous 
rotation which was created by Professor Elihu Thomson contained ~ 
an armature with individual open coils. Thisarmature was caused 
to rotate by the repulsion brought to bear upon the coil which at 
any instant chanced to be in the most effective position,—this 
particular coil being short-circuited when in that position. A 
characteristic feature of the Thomson structure lies in the fact 
that the coils approach the most effective position with open 
circuit. When a coil reaches the effective position, it is short- 
circuited by the brushes and produces torque, for the short 
period of the short-circuit only, as the coil recedes from its 
most effective position. 

The device which has now come to be known by the name of 
repulsion motor (and which is referred to in the above-named 
papers) is distinctly different from this. The armature winding 
is a closed-coil winding and the whole of the armature winding 
may be traversed by the induced current ateveryinstant. This 
device was invented by Anthony, Jackson, and Ryan, in 1887, 
and the earliest published description of such a motor with 
which the writer is acquainted is contained in the Anthony- 
Jackson-Ryan patent No. 389 352 which was issued on Sept. 
11, 1888. Others are said to have independently invented the 
same device, including William Stanley and the late Charles J. 
Van Depoele in this country. 

This type of motor has been constructed for a number of 
yeats by the Wagner Electric Mfg. Company,—which company 
uses the repulsion arrangement in the starting of their single- 
phase induction motors. Those who have had to do with these 
machines have long known that the repulsion motors have 
characteristics which afford excellent reasons for their introduc- 
tion into electric railway service when the extension of electric 
railway lines produces a sufficient demand for an alternating- 
current railway motor. When used in such service it is desirable 
to introduce into their construction special means for reducing 
or abating the sparking at the commutator which is common 
to alternating-current motors constructed with a commutator. 


78 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Feb. 2 


Discussion AT PittsBpuRG, Fepruary 2, 1904, on ALTERNAT- 
ING-CURRENT Raitway Motors. 

V. KarapetorF:—The connection between ordinary direct- 
current series motor and the modern types of alternating-current 
commutator motor seems to be as follows: 

First of all a neutralizing winding, N, was brought in to com- 
pensate for the armature reaction (Fig. 1). Then the idea came 
that in an alternating-current motor induction can be used in- 
stead of conduction. This gave two different schemes (Fig. 2 and 
Fig. 4), with either the armature or the neutralizing winding as 
secondary. In the first of these ‘‘ transformer-type ’ motors 
(Fig. 2) both field coils have the same current, and can be re- 


N 


Fig. 1 ee 
N 
[| 
F 
Fig. 2 pa 


placed by a single coil having the resultant number of ampere- 
turns (Fig. 3); this is the repulsion motor. The second type 
(Fig. 4) can be simplified by using the armature winding itself as 
a neutralizing coil. To that end two auxiliary short-circuited 
brushes, N N, must be set at 90° to the principal brushes ( Pig 5)e 
this is the principle used in the Winter-Eichberg and in the 
Latour motors. 

The theory of the repulsion motor, as given by Mr. Steinmetz 
is based upon two equations: 

@ = Z(I+I,cosw)4+I Z, 
and 
0=-axIsinw+Z ([,+1 cosw)+Z, I, 


1904] DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG. 79 


The first of these equations expresses Ohm’s law applied to the 
primary circuit of the motor, and the second to the secondary 
circuit, if the em.f., ax J sin w, induced by rotation, be con- 
sidered as the applied e.m.f. of secondary circuit. All the rest 
of the theory simply consists in algebraical transformations ot 
these equations to get the power-factor, the input, torque, speed, 


and so on. 
Ba 
Fig. 3 : 
N 


F 


Fig. 5 


An analogous equation for straight-series motor can be given 
(one equation, because there is but one circuit.) Let Z, be the 
impedance of the field-magnet system, and Z, the combined im- 
pedance of armature + neutralizing coil. 
notations as in Mr. ‘Steinmetz’s paper 

e, = axI+I (Zn4+Zq); 


Then with the same 


80 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTOR. [Feb. 2 


that is, the impressed voltage minus the counter e.m.f. of rotation 
is absorbed by the impedance of the motor. 

By similar algebraical transformations, a complete theory of 
straight-series motor can be developed and formulas given for 
torque, speed, power-factor, and so on. 

An excellent performance diagram of the repulsion motor 
was recently given by Mr. Osnos in the Electrotechnicshe 
Zeitschrift, 1903, No. 44; this diagram is shown in 


E 
\ 


AT Cz Py 


Fig. 7 oi 


Fig. 6. A E is the direction of. the impressed 
voltage, A C, is the current with the armature locked 
drawn at an angle E AC,, corresponding to the power-factor 
when so locked. A Cy is the current at no load, and E AC ois the 
corresponding phase-angle. Draw an arc of circle, passing 
through Cy, C,, and the origin A. This is the circle of input 
and the angle E A C corresponds to the power-factor at any par- 
ticular load. Ordinate C C,, being the working component of 
the current, represents the input to the motor. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG. 81 


Describe the semicircle B C, D, which has its centre on A B, 
perpendicular to A EF, and passes through B and C,. Then on 
A D, as a diameter, describe a second semicircle A C, D. 
The first of these semicircles is the circle of speed and the second 
is the circle of torque. Thus, for a load C, the speed is repre- 
sented by the ratio 2 = and torque by the product C AxC T. 
Besides, DC represents the secondary current in phase and 
magnitude (reduced to primary circuit.) It may easily be seen 
that Cy is the locked point, because for this point the segment 
C S is equal to zero, hence the speed is zero. 

The point C, corresponds to no-load run, because for this point 
the segment C 7 is equal to zero, or torque is zero. 

This diagram takes into account primary and: secondary ohmic 
drop and primary and secondary leakage, but does not take into 
consideration iron loss and friction, which must either be added 
to the input or subtracted fron the output. 

A similar diagram can be developed for straight-series motor 
(Fig. 7), A & and AC, have the same meaning as before, but 
AC, B circle of input is a semicircle, having its center upon 
A B, instead of being an arc of circle, as in Osnof diagram. 
- Connect C, to B and draw the arc of circle A P B tangent to 
C, B and passing through A. Then draw any line parallel to 
Mab ase) 5,08 APB is the circle of output’ and S;5,.is the 
line of speed. For any load, as C, the vector A C represents the 
current; C C, is proportional to the input and P P, to the output ; 
the angle E AC corresponds to the power-factor; abscissa A C, 
measures the torque, and segment SS represents the speed. 
For C, (locked point) speed is equal to zero, and torque is 
maximum. For A (theoretical no-load) torque is zero, and 
speed equals infinity. The iron loss and .friction can be ac- 
counted for by drawing a certain line, # F, and taking output 
equal to P R instead of P P,. The torque can also be measured 
from a certain point, 7, instead of A, A T representing the torque 
lost by iron loss and friction. 


A paper presented ata Meeting of the Cincinnati, 
Branch of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers. Cincinnati, O. Feb. 15th, 1904. 

Copyright, 1904. By A.I. E. E. 


SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. 


BYS Wie) ALAN Cky 


In perhaps no line of electrical industry has there been greater 
activity than in that of interurban railway construction. At the 
present time in the United States, particularly in the Central 
States, this development has reached a magnitude entirely be- 
yond the expectations of the most sanguine of adecade since. In 
fact this development has gone so far that in some sections most 
of the best propositions are already exploited; however, there 
are still a great many, which, while of doubtful value with the 
present direct-current system+—involving the use of synchronous 
converter sub-stations and low trolley pressure—would be very 
profitable if a system could be developed that would materially 
reduce the cost. For some time the perfecting of the single- 
phase motor has been suggested_as the solution of this problem, 
since the application of this motor to electric traction means 
a great reductionin the cost of"the transmission system. The 
present activity in the evolution of the single-phase railway 
motor gives added interest to the problem of developing and 
perfecting all the other details of the single-phase system. 

The subjects to be considered’ in this paper are: 1, The 
fundamental characteristics of the various single-phase railway 
motors; 2, Certain details of line construction; and 3, The com- 
parative cost of installing typical power-houses, sub-stations in 
power-houses, transmission lines, sub-stations along the road, 
trolley lines and feeders, and bonding of rails for a 60-mile, single- 
track interurban railway on direct-current and alternating- 
current systems. 

The first problem to be solved is the development of a single- 
phase alternating-current motor that will operate satisfactorily 


83 


84 BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS.. : [Feb. 15. 


under the conditions imposed by railway service. The import- 
ance of this problem was early recognized and its solution has been 
sought by many of the ablest engineers both here and abroad. 

The attention given the single-phase system by the techni- 
cal press has brought it prominently before engineers, but a 
short resumé of the present state of the art may not be out of 
place. 


SYNCHRONOUS MOTOR 


t 


WARD LEONARD 
1aKey Ih, 


THE SyNcHRONOUS Moror. 

The synchronous motor requires aseparately-excited field, 
has no starting torque, and cannot be run at variable speed, 
therefore its direct application to railway traction is impos- , 
sible. It has been proposed by Ward Leonard to use the syn- 
‘chronous motor in combination with a direct-current generator, 
to furnish direct-current to standard motors. This idea shown 
in Fig. 1, which is lettered to be self-explanatory. 


1904 ] BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. 85 


Tue Inpuction Motor. 

In respect to starting and speed-control the induction motor 
shows the same peculiarities as the synchronous motor; to over- 
come these peculiarities, Bion J. Arnold proposes a suitable com- 
bination of an induction motor with a mechanical energy-storage 
contrivance, this contrivance consisting of an air-compressor 
and tank. The various members of this combination are indi- 
cated in Fig. 2. In this system both parts of the motor are 


INDUCTION MO7 OE 


4: 
ok 


ese A 


re. 2: 


free to rotate, and they maintain a constant relative speed. 
The rotor is geared to the axle and also connected to one 
air-cylinder. The stator is connected to a second air-cylinder, 
iin which, when the car is running at less than full speed, 
air is compressed. When the car is at full speed the stator 
is at rest and there is no compression. By admitting air to 
this cylinder and rotating the stator in the same direction as 
the rotor the car can be run at more than synchronous speed. 


86 BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. [Feb. 15 


This combination, with the induction motor continually run- 
ning, makes it possible to store energy when the car is coasting 
or stopped, and to use this energy when the car is accelerated. 
Further, this system allows the operation of thecar by com- 
pressed air for a limited time, should it be desirable to run 
without overhead conductor. 

THE SERIES Motor. 

The alternating-current series motor, as proposed by Lamme 
and Finziand manufactured by the Westinghouse Electric & Mfg. 
Company, possesess the characteristics of a direct-current 
series motor; it is, therefore, directly applicable to railway work. 


SERIES MOTOR 


LAMME — /yvzt 
1BKeS Be 


As shown in Fig. 3, the current passes in series through the field 
and armature. The armature is similar to the ordinary direct- 
current drum-type armature with commutator. As the direction 
of rotation in the direct-current series motor is not dependent 
on the direction of the current, it is evident that the motor will 
operate with alternating as well as with direct ‘current. 

Since the series commutator motor cannot be operated at high- 
pressure, it is necessary to use a step-down transformer in con- 
nection with a high-pressure trolley, thus increasing the weight 
of the car equipment. 


1904.] BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. 87 


THE REPULSION INDUCTION Moror. 


The repulsion induction motor developed by Steinmetz and 
Schuler and manufactured by the General Electric Company, 
shows in general the same characteristics as the straight-seires 
motor; it can be operated directly from the high-pressure 
trolley, since, as indicated in Fig. 4, the armature is independent 
of the field. The current is induced in the armature by trans- 
former action and can be of any desired pressure. The brushes 
are short-circuited and placed at an angle to give the best running 
conditions. 


REPULSION INDUCTION MOTOR 


STEINMETZ —SC/ULER. 
Fic. 4. 


Tue REPULSION SERIES Moror. 


The repulsion series motor developed by Winter-Eichberg and 
built by the Union Electric Company, Berlin, Germany, is similar 
to the repulsion induction motor with the addition of a second 
set of brushes, displaced 90° from the short-circuited brushes, as 
shown in Fig. 5. Through these brushes current is supplied by a 
series transformer; this is done for the purpose of decreasing the. 
sparking at less than synchronous speed, and securing the im-. 
portant additional advantage of raising the power-factor nearly 


to unity. 


“88 BLANCK* SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. [Péb. 15 


CONTROLLERS. 

i. dn general, the operation of the last three motor systems is 
effected by master controllers operated to get the desired com-' 
binations. To obtain the voltage variation necessary for speed= 
control, induction regulators are used in all three cases, thus’ 
avoiding the losses consequent to the rheostatic control of the 
direct-current system. 
Car WiRING. 

To protect passengers and crew from the high pressure used in 
this system, it is necessary that the wiring should be done im 


REPULS, JON SERIES MOTOR 


WINTER — LICABERG 
Fic. 5. 


metallic conduit; this should be connected to the trucks so that 
any defect in the insulation of the circuit will result in the tripping 
of the automatic circuit-breaker in the car. Moreover, it will be 
necessary. to insulate the steps and hand-rails to guard the 
passengers from shocks, which might occur during wet weather or 
from a car standing on a dirty rail. 
my) TROLLEY Bow. a 

' With the high-pressure working conductor it is necessary to 
provide against any possible short-circuiting of the trolley and ' 
its suspensions. On account of the serious results which would: 
follow the slipping of the trolley pole so common in the present : 
system, a suitable bow must be used instead. This trolley bow ' 
is mounted on a well-insulated platform on the roof of the car; 


1904.] BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. 91 


this platform also supports the springs necessary to maintain 
the requisite pressure between the bow and the trolley wire. A 
small air-cylinder, mounted on the same platform, operated by 
compressed air from the brake system, should be so connected as 
to lay the bow flat on the roof of the car, in case the necessity 
arises to disconnect temporarily the bow from the trolley. The 
contact part of the bow can be made either of soft copper or 
aluminum. The necessary lubrication is accomplished by grease 
applied in a slot extending the length of the bow. The bow 
should be of such length that no manipulating will be necessary 
when reversing the car. 

The trolley bow in use on the Valtelina road in N oe Italy 
with a working pressure of 3000 volts, consists of copper cylinders 
rolling in insulated ball-bearings. Brushes take the current 
from these revolving cylinders to the steel tubes carrying the 
contact-piece. 

TROLLEY-LINE CONSTRUCTION. 

In order to protect life and property, great care must be used 
in constructing the high-pressure trolley line. There is a pre- 
vailing idea that high-pressure trolleys are dangerous, and it is 
said that this condition will retard the development of alter- 
nating-current railways operated over public property ; but there 
is no reason why these trolleys should not be made as safe as the 
high-pressure distributing systems of lighting SEE now so 
common on public property. 

It is important to provide a hanger that will readily michetand 
the working pressure of the system, and one that can be easily 
replaced in case of mechanical or electrical defects. Fig. 6 shows 
a trolley-line construction with hangers similar to that used on 
the Valtelina railway. The bolt carrying the trolley-clamp 
is surrounded by an insulating compound, called ambroine, and 
set into a malleable iron bell provided with clamp-arms to secure 
it to the span-wire. A cast-iron cap-screw holds the insulated 
bolt firmly in place. 

Another construction used on the Lansing, St. foun & St. 
Louis Railway, in Michigan, is shownin Fig. 7. The hanger con- 
sists of a special high-pressuze glass insulator fastened to the span 
wire in the usual way. The working conductor is carried by an 
iron pin inserted in a wooden sleeve, on which is turned a'thread 
to fit the glass of the insulator. A thin lead bushing allows the 
insulator to be firmly clamped by the malleable-iron supports, 
thus preventing the hanger from jarring loose. | 


| ss ft feel} | I 
Pate cee AE 
ATE MLL 
CIT AVAL 
OLE I Mi 
. 
S 


. . : . pet . . 
oY a ae 
ae ee —h dt 
a a a - :] a a 

ih} 
rit 


TLC 


Seug 7907 


LLIOA OF2 


SLTOA DO00R 


SLIOA 00008 


DL7OA 0OOF 


MUST IV 


> 
9 
pe 
5 
© 8 
) 
2 P 5 
! 8 Ls *® zal 
hy OG, ~ = w ¥ 
ey v > 8 a 
8 x oS a x - 
aes aS 8 S- 
> 
2 § Ss » s = 
2 a 8 s ue 
o a4 
§ : : Pie 
& x S So 
nq $ i Pues 
g 8 8 \ g 8 & fy 
x 8 I\ x Ss y ie 2 
g nm 8 “a9 
a 8 / g + 
z a Neer 7: 
I 9 call 
y : 


rs ee 
= 
(Sy 


¥ug FOWOOVG ONY LN BITES ~—-~——" 


ee 


. » 2 
2 » 
& s 
£11 (8 
aE 
: 
: 
Ses 
: 
é 


1904.] BLANCK:: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. 93 


If the road operates on a public highway, special precautions 
‘should be taken to avoid accident. ,Qne. solution is. shown. in 
Fig. 8; in this the working conductor i is suspended at intervals, of 
about ten feet from two steel wires. In case of a mechanical 
break in the trolley wire it is evident that the end cannot reach 
the ground or injure passers-by. It might be noted in passing that 
‘this construction increases the carrying’ tapatity of the trolley 
with but slightly greater investment. A construction somewhat 
similar to this is in use on the single- phase railway near ‘Berlin. 

In regard to returning current through the rails, it may be said 
that with the proposed frequency ‘of 25 cycles per second and’ the 
small current required with the higher pressure, this loss will ‘be 
even smaller than in direct-current railway work, so ‘that for 
normal interurban service it will be sufficient to bond only one 

rail. This has the advantage, greatly to be desired in many 
cases, of leaving the other rail free for the purpose of block 
signals. Furthermore, the evils of electrolysis are completely 
avoided with the alternating-current system. | : 

In order to consider more in detail the relative merits bE the 
-alternating-current and direct-current systems of distribution, 
parallel computations and diagrams may be made for the case of 
a 60-mile, single track, interurban road. We shall assume the 
power-house to be located at the centre of the line and 
to contain one sub-station, and that four sub-stations are 
located at equal intervals on the line, as shown in Fig. 9. Al- 
‘though the alternating-current system will not require sub-— 
stations at as frequent intervals as in the direct-current system, 
they are retained on account of the advantage derived from 
-sectionalizing the line, and the better distribution of power due 
to the larger number of feeding points. 

The schedule proposed requires five local cars having one- 
‘hour headway; one express-car, making the round trip in 
three hours, and one freight- and baggage-car making the trip 
‘between the two terminals in about eight hours. 

The average power required by the various cars in kilowatts 


will be as follows: 


Weight Seba Watt- |Iilowatt- Average 
in tons. | SP°€¢ ™ lnours per | hours | power in 
miles per i 3 : 
ae ton-mile. | per trip. | kilowatts 
Locdlcarsi.c:aev BO fore BB ed yr 80 perde i148 be (80 oi 
Express- AE a acs 35 AS ee LUO Mn eo ke 165 , 


a ce teas 30 [oe 8 qe 126 er a 


94 BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. [Feb. 15 


With the schedule outlined above, the average load on all five 
sub-stations will be about 500 kw., or 100 kw. per sub-station, 
while the maximum load per sub-station under certain conditions 


— ALTERNATING CURRENT RAILMAY SYSTEM 


POMER HOUSE SUBSTATION 


is 450 kw., for instance, when the express-car is starting and two 
locals are running in one section. With a proper momentary 
overload allowance this assumed condition will requiré ore 


1904. ] BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS, 95 


300-kw. syncnronous converter per  sub-station in the 
direct-current system. In the alternating-current system, 
however, a static transformer of 200-kw. capacity per sub- 
station will be ample. The maximum load at the power-house 
will be 800 kw. and two 400-kw. units will suffice, if for the pur- 
pose of this comparative study no reserve capacity be provided 
either in power-house or sub-stations. 

Some idea of the relative simplicity of the transmission systems 
in the two cases may be obtained from a consideration of the 
accompanying wiring diagram, Fig. 10, showing the apparatus 
and connections required in each case. In both cases step-up 
transformers raise the total generator output to.the high trans- 
mission pressure, and a step-down transformer set is placed in the 
power-house. Although the power-house sub-station could take 
its supply directly from the generators, it is preferred to use one 
general form for all sub- stations, thus avoiding special switching 
arrangements. For, ‘tlie. three- hase transmission lines of the 
direct-current railway, system, three. No. 6 wires are. assumed, 
and for the single-phase transmission ae two No. M wires, cost- 
ing “respettively $10,000 and B11 500. Oe: 

The proportions of the’ distybuting system have been calcu: 
lated for the following conditions: | for :the direct-current system 
it is assumed that the maximum drop i in line Beer in the.case 
of a car starting at its maximum distance from sub-stations is 
approximately 200. volts, or about 30%. This condition 
can be obtained by: installing two No, 000 trolley wires and No. 
0000 feeder \capacity between \sub-stations, and 500 000. circular 
mils» féedeti for the stub-ends\"The cost of cee coppet under 
these iddnditions will.be abput $95 000. 

For the alternating” current system the size of the Hips wire 
has been. determined: from mechanical rather than. from electrical 
considerations., A No. 00 rooved trolley wire has been assumed 
installed throughout the le eth of the line, since for this class of 
service it is not practicable to use smaller sizes. The cost of the 
copper in this case will be $21 500. 

In determining the .: drop for this system, 80% power- 
factor is assumed.’ Iit will be noted that the maximum ‘drop 
under the same conditions as above mentioned will be 190 volts 
between sub-station, or 6.25%, and 380 volts on stub ends, 
or 12.5%. This shows aconsiderable advantage in favor of the 
alternating-current system. rut 

At present the alternating-current motor weighs somewhat 


96 BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. [Feb. 15 


more than the direct-current motor, and operates at.a slightly 
lower. efficiency. However, the smaller efficiency of the alter- 
nating-current motor is more than counterbalanced by the small — 


— DIRECT CURRENT RAILHAY SYSTEM — 


SUBSTATION © . 3 * POWER HOUSE 


bhi ad hhh 


mit 
0000 wOLTS i 


percentage loss in the alternating-current distributing system: 
And, furthermore, with the rapid development now taking place 
in the alternating-current motor, it is safe to'assume that in the 


1904.] BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. 97 


very near future its characteristics as to weight and efficiency 
will soon equal those of the direct-current motor, thus making 
the advantage of the alternating-current railway system still 
more evident. 

An idea of the relative first cost for the two systems may be 
obtained by arranging in parallel columns the cost of the various 
items; this is donein the accompanying table and diagram. 
It is not necessary to take up in detail all the items, as they 
speak for themselves, but it may be of interest to note some items 
in which the costs vary more widely: 

The single-phase generators, as would be expected, cost nearly 
30% more than three-phase generators, this increase in cost 
amounts to $5000. Small savings on switchboard and wiring 
reduce the total for the power-house $3500 in favor of the 
direct-current system. 

For the sub-station in the power-house, principally on account 
of saving in converter and transformer capacity, the balance is 
$8000 in favor of the alternating-current system. 

The transmission systems are approximately the same, there 
being $2000 in favor of the alternating-current system. . 

In the alternating-current distributing system, while the sus- 
pension of the trolley is noticeably more expensive than in the 
direct-current system, on account of special insulators, the im- 
mense saving in copper gives a balance of $78 000 in favor of the 
alternating-current system. 

The necessity of bonding only one rail effects a saving of 
$16 000,.in favor of the alternating-current system. 

A very liberal allowance has been made by placing the cost of 
the alternating-current motor equipments one third in excess of 
that of the direct-current motor equipments; this, as above 
noted, is the present cost of the alternating-current equipment, 
and without doubt in the near future this difference will be 
greatly reduced. 

The total investment for the direct-current system 
under the assumed conditions is $490 100, while that of the 
alternating-current system is $371 600. Reducing this to the 
cost per mile, it is found that the electrical equipment complete 
amounts to $8168 for the direct-current system, and $6193 for 
the alternating-current system, or a saving of $1955 per mile in 
favor of the alternating-current system. Expressed in percent- 
age, this means that the alternating-current system effects a 
paving of 25% of the cost & the diréct-current system; in 


98 BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. [Feb. 15 


other words, the cost of the direct-current system is 32% 
more than the cost, of the alternating-current system, a showing 


DIAGRAM OF INVESTMENTS 


$500 000 


} $350 000 


a 


$200 060 


k 


Rolling Stoc 


Line 


sation 


Power-House 


Tre 


most favorable for the latter, and this indeed during the first year 
that this apparatus has been on the market. _ 
With the alternating-current motor thus far perfected and 


1904.] BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. 


99 


the large number of propositions whose realization is conditioned 
by a cheaper electrical equipment, it looks as if the alternating- 
current system would be very widely adopted. 


ESTIMATED COST OF THE ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT OF A 
60-MILE, SINGLE-TRACK INTERURBAN RAILWAY. 


POWER-HOUSE. 


IEKOONGENES | oe Go 
LEGER LEN (a) YS aieciows CROC ices ecncione Seeo Clecad oar 
Bolersand Settings. 56a. sect nee es oie 
Steam PipingraMdtCoVerin germ pica treuy onsets 
BEM NS Sete eccttib tie FV oh LC Ry sate aS ot Ko ta 
Geterators: two,400-lw....0. 2.26 les bsdena ss 
Eis CAGCL SERIE cme Meare elects oe yin tel Segoe 
Step-up transformers, 800-kw................4- 
SN AUS mM of OYe 6 a chr RANI MON nc, ORG Pea acta tes elie, Aenea 
Wiring Rea Se ae osteo syd en ena 


Pures. EAS as ese Sone ccs een nec ae kre Prec a ce) earn 
Coal storage. See pene Lata yin GATE yor. Beck fic 
Smoke- stack and flues. ts GA eee Deane? 
Ente RECOMOMmIZenSe ta eye ine hacen aeelcion aware 
TOkersege ace 7: Dit AMEE LED eee volneredign vie depeiat ec Suenos 
erect clerical ls worn th. ateke dere cho bie cbake te ote murneet teks 


a 'SUB-STATION IN POWER-HOUSE. 

Building extension.............0. sense denen 
Synchronous converter, 300-kw...... 6.2.01. 
fee. 300-kw.; 200-kw. alternating cur- 


_Tent.....- 4+; Sentara cateicPecaiee ara vole’ oleate was canletanetotin j 


sas Ree Maa Oe ee BREE REO namie 
EKCLCLE MC aisee gh Utara WBA co ent Pic ckelaret ee elicn evel sore eawiers 


oe “48-MILE TRANSMIS ~i0N LINE. 
Poles charged toy qpolley line... .......665.---+- 
Copper.. (She CUS CIEE He 0.8 CERNE CO COREE) OF CORO 


Insulators, pins, odceTOSS-ATMS. 6.4 cece eee aes 
Erection Conor Bee PPG PEGNCR Ras cote hada ane tics ok Sata ele fericts is 


ee Totter SEERA aes ses heats 


Building... ccrge soe eee pejysings oveineaneye ea Pee 


Synchronous CONVELLET 4.5) oped iats bane tata Radel 


Step-down' transformers. . Me et oo oD 
Switchboard. . acl aah onaiciedens NC, Mo ee riers aio pwworaa 
Witing.. 2... .. STOR chine, Weer cue cabin) oe Pots 


Direct- 
Current 
System. 
$10 000 
2 500 
12 000 
7 500 
22 000 
18 000 
1 000 

8 000 

3 500 
3 000 
800. 
800 
1 000 
2 000 
3 000 
3 500 
4 400 


$103 000 


Direct- 
Current. 
$1 000 
4.800 


3 200 
2 000 
1 000 

600 


$12 600 


Durect- 
Current. 


$10 000 
7 500 
4 000 
1 000 


$22 500 


Direct - 


Current. 
$2 000 
4 800 

3 200 

2 000 

1 000 
500 


$13 500 
$54 000 


Alternating- 
Current 
System. 

$10 000 
2 500 
12 000 


$106 500 


Alternating- 
Current. 
$600 


2 000 
1 300 
500 
200 


$4 600 


Alternating- 
Current. 


$11 500 
5 000 
3 0CO 
1 000 


$20 500 
Alternating- 
Current. 

$1 000 
2 000 

1 300 
500 

200 

~ $5 000 


$20 000 


100 BLANCK: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS. [Feb. 15 


Direct- Alternating- 


TROLLEY-LINE AND FEEDERS Current Current 
System. System. 
Poles, 8500.2) tn acters eegete tiers hese eae ee Renee rete $17 500 $17 500 
Poles|distributedsand sets). 1. arene 4 000 4 000 
Guys andvanchorsim. strate aa ee ener erete 2 000 2 000 
Bracketsiwitiayhangersae eit eerie enone 18 000 25 000 
Copper, direct current: 
Feeder 12 miles, 500 000 cir. mils........ 
48 a NO OCOOR Siracmee tenons 
Trolley! 20s Nios 00 OF eine eter 95 000 
Alternating current: 
rolley, 6Omales NO. 00s nee ne 21 500 
Beeder insulators dhcnjaaen oleae ee 2 000 
Erection Ac. ojo mes eet) Seieeee ees ake eae ea 10 000 4 C00 
Incidentals.. sis.c samrso tee eo ECR ere: 7 500 4 000 
Total tci 280.5, erin cnaccetasien ein cee ee $156 000 $78 000 
BONDING OF RAILS. Direct-  Alternating- 
‘ Current. Current. 
Bothsrails-bondedira-acerani) ree eee $30 000 
Onefrail bonded Wyant ae nen eee ae $15 000 
Cross; bonds <ic). aie cnvcks sues eeeete a eis Pee rare 2 000 1 006 
Ota s soccer shee ek coascea cies ee eer eT ee $32 000 $16 000 
ROLLING STOCK. Dtirect- __Alternating- 
Current. Current. 
10 vestibuled passenger-cars, each equipped 
with 4 motors, and weighing about 30 tons. $75 000 $85 000 
2 express passenger-cars, equipped with 4 
motors and weighing about 35 tons......... 18 000 20 500 
2 Baggage-cars, each equipped with 4 motors 
and weighing about 30 tonsa ener eeenee <0 000 .2 000 
Snow-plow and construction-car............. 7 000 8 500 
TOtal.... x hesgicisnepe are eee ee ae ee eae $110 000 $126 000 
RECAPITULATION. Direct- _Alternating- 
Current. Current. 
Powershouse ss tc ccakin Deore tt a ence en a $103 COO $106 500 
Sub-station 1m power-loOtises a eee 12 600 4 6CO 
‘Transmission lines. cam vc ace) eee ee roa 22 500 20 500 
Sub=stations as. 4 osc. s sjecel le 3 Se eee eee eee 54 000 20 000 
diroiley -linelandeteeders sey. eie ene ene 156 000 78 OCO 
Bonding)... sek Acs wae 32 000 16 000 
Rollin gtstock. sc: arate aent a Stee een eee 110 000 126 COO 
PO tal ss sysis's seks sy ee cua) ae ee ee $490 100 $371 600 
Cost per mile, direct-current system...... 4490 100/60 = $8 168 
a alternating-current system.... 371600/60 = 6193 
Saving per mile, alternating-current system, $1 955 
The decrease of alternating-current cost in terms of direct-currenti invest- 
ment, 25%. 


The increase of direct-current cost in terms of alternating-current invest- 
ment, 32%. 


A paper presented at the 184th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, Feb. 26th, 1904. 

Copyrizht 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


THE CONDUCTIVITY OF THE ATMOSPHERE AT HIGII 
VOLTAGES. 


BY HARRIS J. RYAN. 
SYNOPSIS. 

The present paper gives an analysis of the factors that are 
responsible for the nature of the atmospheric loss occurring on 
high-voltage lines as reported by Mr. Charles F. Scott in his 
paper that was published in the A.I].E.E. Transactions, Vol. 
XV., p. 531, 1898, based upon results obtained by himself, and 
those obtained by Mr. Ralph D. Mershon. The analysis shows 
that the equation 


Brew = 2055 log, (—)e: (+a) x 10" zi 


expresses the relation between the voltage, conductor sizes, anu 
separation at which the sudden rise occurs in the curve of “ loss 
between wires’ at ordinary barometric pressures and tempera- 


tures wherein 
Emax = the maximum value of the voltage-wave applied to the 


line. 

r = the radius of the line conductor in inches. 

s = the separation of the line conductors from center to 
center in inches. 

d — the distance from the conductor surface at which the 


strain due to the electrostatic field causes initial 
atmospheric rupture. 

D’ = the strength of the electrostatic field of force (dielectric 
flux-density) that will electrically rupture the atmos- 
phere at the distance d from the surface of the con- 
ductor having a radius 7 measured in coulombs 
per square inch. 

101 


102 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF sy eel Rebs 26 


To this is added an account of the experiments that were made 
to determine the above values of d and D’ in relation tor and the 
effects due to barometric pressure and temperature changes and 
to the presence of moisture. 

The values found for d and D’ in relation to r at a barometric 
pressure of 29.5 inches of mercury and atemperature of 70° fahr. 
are given in the following table: 


By &S.G i d i? 
20 0.03196 0.0050 O00" Ko LOE 
15 0.05706 0.0100 300 x 105% 
10 0.10189 0.0180 a Bhoo eke 
8 0: 12849 6702902 PA Ye Gala 
Om 0.16202 0.03850 200 ie 
4 0.20431 0.0700 dW is ek PG sh 7 
2 0.25763 0.0700 ° L7ZO 6" LO Fe es 
Measure- 
ments up- 
on  con- 
ductors of ny 
ont orest 0.625 0.0700 IDe2eeih 
sizes to | | 
the limit] | | | 
of a dia-| | Me | 
meter of | | | 
0.625inch. | 


The experiments demonstrated that the voltage at which the 
atmospheric line loss is inaugurated varies as the atmospheric 
density; t.¢., directly as the barometric pressure and inversely 
as the absolute temperature. On substitution of corresponding 
values obtained by experiment, equation (10) takes the following 
practical form: 


17.94b 


Sd Sap Sy 


x 2055 log, (=)p (r+d) x 10” (12) 
wherein 

b = the barometric pressure in inches of mercury. 

t = the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. 


1904] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 105 


Since the values of d and D’ are constant for diameters of 
conductors larger than 0.250 inch, it follows that etna 
qd 2) for corresponding conductors reduces to 


Bipot = 4.250 O00 log, (=) (r+ .07) (13) 


) 


459 + 1 


The results obtained by calculation employing equations (12) 
and (13) are compared with the measurements made by Mershon, 
on the Telluride high-altitude line in 1898 and those obtained 
by Professor Harold B. Smith upon the Worcester Polytechnic, 
Institute laboratory line in 1901 and 1902 at ordinary altitudes. . 

Efforts were made to determine the effects. of the presence of; 
moisture upon the point at which the atmosphere about high- 
voltage lines becomes conductive, 7t.e., upon the point at which, 
the sudden rise in the loss-curve occurs. However, no definite 
effect of this sort could be found, and this is practically in accord 
with Mershon’s conclusions after his observations made upon the 
Telluride line under variable weather conditions. If there. 1s 
such an effect it must be small. 

The following table of values has been calculated by means af 
equations (12) and (13). | It shows the corresponding diameters, 
of line conductors that must be employed to avoid loss between; 
wires for a series of line voltages wherein the barometric pressure 
is 29.5.inches of mercury, the temperature 70° fahr., and the, 
distance between the conductors 48 inches. 


; acca nena SSS SOT ol 


Maximum volts | Corresponding | Operating | Diameters of | ! 
at which | effective volts pressure, 90 per conductors in 
atmospheric | (sine wave) cent of corres- inches. 
conduction loss ponding effective 
occurs. | volts. | 
| 
ara | 
78 500 | 55 000 50 000 0.058 
118 000 | 83 300 75 000 0.106 
157 000 | 111 100 100 000 0.192 
235 500 | 166 600 150 000 | 0.430 
314 000 222 200 | 200 000 0.710 
392 000 277 700 | 250 000 0.990 


The real voltage limit to-day in transmission is due to the insula- 
tor, where the line has to be exposed to the weather. Inthe future 
the insulator difficulty will be solved in one way or another and 
higher voltages will be used. Possibly in large undertakings the 
line may be protected from the elements by means of a con- 


104 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26 


tinuous. covering. It is evident that when such high volt- 
ages are employed atmospheric conduction, or “‘ the brush” 
(as one experienced high-voltage engineer termed it in 
conversation with the writer), must be avoided. High volt- 
age brush discharge was studied and reported upon in the 
A.J.E.E. Transactions by Dr. Steinmetz.* He applied to it 
the term corona. The present paper shows that the brush dis- 
charge or corcna occurs always when a definite strain exists in 
the atmosphere next to the high-voltage conductors, and that to 
avoid such corona with its destructiveness and waste of power it 
is necessary on transmission lines and auxiliaries to proportion 
things so as to keep the dielectric strain of the atmosphere 
below a definite point above which the corona will inevitably 
develop. 

In the above table a factor of safety of 1.11 or a margin of 
10 per cent has been allowed in estimating the safe voltage at 
which to operate so as to avoid losses due to brush discharge. 
This is a laboratory conclusion only. In application the follow- 
ing points must be kept in mind: 

1. Without special care there will be doubt in advance as 
to the exact value that the voltage wave will not exceed. Almost 
invariably the line-charging current will cause important line- 
voltage wave-distortion so that the maximum of the wave will 
exceed the effective value of the voltage by a factor much greater 
than the square root of two. The corona formation depends 
primarily upon the maximum and not upon the effective value of 
the wave; this has been found by Scott, Mershon and others, as 
well as in the present experiments. 

2. One must remember that unless the insulators are properly 
proportioned, after the cross-arms and pins have been exposed 
to the weather for some time and have become conductive, the 
presence of the insulators made of material that has a considerably 
greater permeability to dielectric flux (greater specific inductive 
capacity) than the atmosphere, will cause corona to a greater or 
less degree to form over the conductors in their neighborhood, 
even if the line has been proportioned so as to avoid corona or 
atmospheric conduction over the remaining portion of the con- 
ductors. The presence of corona upon the conductors in the 
neighborhood of the insulators will likely be accompanied by: 
corona over the pins inside the insulators, resulting in their 


-*TRansactions A.I.E.E., Vol. X, p. 85, 1893. 


1904.) ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 105 


ultimate injury if made of wood from this cause alone, even if 
the surface leakage current is so limited as not to injure the pin.* 

In view of the above it is evident that practical experience and 
not the laboratory must eventually determine the factor of 
safety that should be allowed under given circumstances in lieu 
of the 1.11 factor or the 10 per cent margin allowed in the above 
table. 

The paper closes with the suggestion that when viewed in the 
dark the corona formed upon wires of given diameters and dis- 
tances apart provides a method for gauging high voltages that 
is free from the short-circuit and surging disturbances occasioned 
by the use of the spark-discharge method. Either two parallel 
conductors or a conductor mounted at the center of a cylinder 
may be employed for this purpose. 

FORMER STUDIES OF ATMOSPHERIC CONDUCTION. 

The atmosphere is ordinarily the general medium in which 
electric circuits and apparatus are immersed. It is depend- 
ed upon to a greater extent for insulation than any other 
medium or material. 

Its dielectric strength to resist disruption by electric forces, in 
bulk, under ordinary conditions as to temperature, barometric 
pressure and entrained moisture, from an engineering point of 
view, has been the subject of extensive and critical investigation 
by Steinmetz, whose results have been communicated to the 
INSTITUTE in several papers. 

Steinmetz found in his studies of the electric disruptive 
strength of the powerful solid dielectrics that the atmosphere 
surrounding the solid dielectric specimen and the electrodes. 
applied thereto would break under the strain formed by the flux 
of electric force through it, much more readily than the solid 
dielectric. This gives rise to envelopes of conductive atmosphere 
located around the electrodes and over the surfaces of the power- 
ful dielectrics. This phenomenon, which has the appearance 
of the familiar brush discharges so easily obtainable in electro- 
static experiments was studied at some length and he applied to 
it the term corona. 

Scott subsequently investigated experimentally the conditions 
under which the atmosphere in close proximity to high-voltage 
lines is subjected to electric stresses that bring it to the breaking 
point, causing the formation of brush discharges accompanied 
by losses of power in measurable amounts. Mershon, 


et i rE 
*Burning of Wooden Pins on High-Tension Transmission Lines by C. C. 
Chesney, Transactions A.I.E.E., Vol. XX., p 435, March 22, 1903. 


106 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF ~ [Feb. 26 


independently of Scott, carried out a series of experiments at 
Telluride, Colorado, in which losses between wires due to high 
voltage were measured on a line 2.25 miles long, whereon the 
conductors having a diameter of 0.162'inch were mounted at 
various distances apart and between which pressures varying 
from 20 000 to 60 000 volts were applied. The results obtained 
through this series of investigations by Mershon and by Scott 
and his co-workers were reported by Scott to the INSTITUTE in 
a paper at the June meeting in 1898. 

The characteristic phenomena of greatest interest to the 
engineer, as brought out in this classic paper, are those to 
which the Telluride curves of voltage’ and line-loss apply and 
which are charted in Fig. 6, Vol. XV., p. 545, as determined by 
Mershon and which for convenience is reproduced as Fig. 1 of the 
present paper. . 

The experimental and analytical study upon which this paper 
is based was undertaken for the purpose of securing further 
knowledge of the nature of the line-loss as observed by the nieshit 
gentlemen. 

THE EvectrostaTic FIELp. 

When the terminal faces of a dielectric are in contact with 
conductors between which an electromotive force is applied, an 
electric force is exerted throughout the dielectric in variable degree, 
according to the position with reference to conductors. This 
electric force produces a distortion of the atomic structure of the 
dielectric; 1.¢., a displacement of the electrons forming the dielec- 
tric atoms. Such electron-displacement, while in progress, 
constitutes an electric current. The displacement encounters 
the reaction due to internal atomic forces which tend to maintain: 
the original structural form. This reaction is the cause of the 
formation of the familiar counter electromotive force of a 
condenser and is in proportion to the total amount of electricity 
or the time-integral of the current that was passed through the 
dielectric. When the process of atomic distortion proceeds’ 
beyond the point of structural rupture, the ordinary conduction-: 
current ensues. Thus through a dielectric prior to the rupturing 
point the only current that can be passed is a displacement 
current. The passage of such displacement current and the 
establishment of the corresponding field of electrostatic force are 
metely cause and effect in one and the same operation. In any’ 
portion of the dielectric the value of the strength of the electro- 
static field of force therein US is. S: proportional to the 


4 
jt? | 


1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 107 


displacement of electricity, t.e., to the time-integral of the dis- 
placement current that accompanied the establishment of such 
electrostatic field. For engineering purposes, therefore, the 
time-integral of displacement current may be conveniently em- 
ployed as a measure of the strength of the corresponding 
electrostatic field of force. 

The energy that is taken up in the formation of an electrostatic 
field of force per unit dielectric volume and which has been 
applied, therefore, in the passage of the corresponding time- 
integral of displacement current, is j 

J=tCe er) 
where C is the capacity in farads; 1.e., the coulombs of displace- 
ment current per volt. 

When an electromotive force of one volt is applied to the 
opposite faces of a centimetre-cube of air at ordinary barometric 
pressure and temperature, the energy taken up by the electro- 
static field formed thereby throughout the cube, will be 

441.7 x 10°" joules 

No important change in this value occurs with variation of 
barometric pressure and temperature. When it is substituted 
in equation (1) the corresponding strength of electrostatic field 
thus produced per volt per centimetre of air expressed in cou- 
lombs of displacement current per square centimetre is found to 
be 

C = 883.4.x 10° (2) 

For present convenience strength of electrostatic field of force 
will be referred to as density of dielectric flux. It may, therefore, 
be stated with reference to the dielectric permeability of air that, 

One volt applied through a distance of one centimetre in air will 
establish a dielectric flux density of 883.4 x 10°" coulombs per 
square centimetre. 

This is the same thing as the capacity in farads of a condenser 
having surfaced electrodes of one square centimetre each, facing 
opposite sides of a centimetre cube of air. 

In this method of designation it follows that the density of 
dielectric flux established per volt per unit area of conductor- 
terminal face is equal to the capacity in farads per unit area of 
such face. Thus in connection with a transmission line the total 
dielectric flux set up between conductors per unit length will be 
the product of the capacity of such unit length of line in farads 
and the applied electromotive force. The corresponding 


108 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26- 


density of dielectric flux extending from the surface of either con- 
ductor is the total flux per unit length divided by the correspond- 
ing conductor surface. 


ANALYTICAL STtuDyY oF MERSHON’s RESULTS. 

From the work of Steinmetz it is known that 

a. The atmosphere and the gases generally, conduct after dis- - 
ruption in two forms: ; 

1. Arcs or very hot streamers. A concentrated conduction . 
at high current-density. 

2. Corona or brush discharge. A diffused conduction at low 
current-density, developing heat at lower intensity. 

b. 1. The dielectric strength of the atmosphere in bulk is such 
as to require for rupture approximately a pressure-gradient of 
10 000 sine wave effective volts per inch. 

2. The thin zones of atmosphere that enclose the electrode and 
which are in immediate contact therewith have a far greater- 
dielectric strength than air in bulk, corresponding to a ratio of 
dielectric strengths of from five to ten. 

From the nature of sparking discharges through air the con- 
clusion is reasonable that whenever the flux of electric force, or’ 
more briefly the dielectric flux, through the air in a given state as. 
to temperature, pressure, and freedom from foreign material, 
rises to a certain value an atomic structural rupture of the air- 
will occur, resulting in conduction. 

From Steinmetz’s results it is evident that this maximum 
value of dielectric flux-density at which atmospheric disruption 
will not occur will depend upon the position of the particular 
portion of the atmosphere being considered relative to the 
conductors or electrodes between which the high voltage is 
applied. 

The classic electrostatic experiments as well as the modern 
Paschen’s law,* which has been tested to above five atmospheres 
and which asserts that the sparking discharge voltage through. 
given distances in air increases with the atmospheric density and, 
therefore, as the pressure and inversely as the temperature on 
the absolute scale, make it reasonable to conclude that the mini- 
mum dielectric flux density that will cause atmospheric conduc- 
tion will vary as the atmospheric density and therefore directly 


as the barometric pressure and inversely as the temperature on 
the absolute scale. 


*Conductivity of Electricity through Gases. J. J Thomson, Edition cf* 
1903, p. 367. 


-1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT.HIGH VOLTAGES. 109 


The researches of Hittorf, Crooks, J. J. Thomson and others, 
including some recent work upon this particular point by Dr. 
Blaker, make it reasonable to conclude that so far as concerns 
magnitudes which are appreciable in engineering, the atmosphere 
sunder ordinary conditions and fairly clean, 7.e., free from floating 


Loss on Circuit with Wires 


at different Distances ae ol ee) a 
Frequency 50.’ ‘Slotted Armature 


Weston Wattmeter 


Wires 15, 22, 35, und 52 inches apart 


, 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 62 56 60 
Thousands of Volts 
Eon GenLe 


conducting material, will not conduct appreciably in the neigh- 
borhood of high voltage lines when their surfaces are bare, so long 
as no portion of such atmosphere is permeated with a dielectric 
flux that is not sufficient to cause rupture at any one point. 


110; RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26 


When the dielectric flux exceeds the rupturing point, conduc- 
tivity ensues and there is a conductive transfer of current from 
conductor to conductor through the atmosphere. 

On continuous-current circuits the amount of transfer of such 
current must be small prior to the application of a voltage suffi- 
cient to break entirely through the dielectric atmosphere from 
conductor to conductor, when the familiar arcing discharge 
occurs, amounting in an engineering equipment to a short-circuit. 

On alternating-current circuits, as long as none of the atmos- 
phere in the neighborhood of high-voltage conductors is rup- 
tured, transfer will occur only of capacity charging current 
which is in leading quadrature with the voltage. However, as 
soon as the zones of atmosphere immediately surrounding the 
conductors are subjected to a dielectric flux exceeding the ruptur- 
ing point, such zones become conductive, thereby doing two 
things: 

1. The effective diameter of the conductor is increased by the 
presence of the conducting zone, thereby increasing the capacity 
of'the line and consequently the charging current. 

2, The presence of the conducting zone must act in effect to 
produce a high resistance which the charging current must 
traverse. This must produce a lag in the charging current. 
causing it to have a power-component in phase with the voltage. 
In effect such action is the same as though the power-component 
of the current, were conductively transferred through the 
atmosphere. ; 

Where the conductors of a high-voltage transmission line are 
separated a distance between centers of more than 20 diameters, 
the dielectric flux passes from the surface of a conductor of 
round section at a density that is so nearly uniform about the 
circumference that it may for practical. purposes, in the present 
instance, be assumed constant. In discussing these relations 
further the following symbols will be used: 

C, the capacity of the line in farads per inch of length. 

s, the distance between the conductors in inches. 

r, the radius of the conductors in inches. , 

do, the total dielectric flux established from conductor to conduc- 
tor, measured in terms of the corresponding displacement 
current; 7.e., in coulombs. 

Dg, the eicue Fees. -density at the surface “ the conductor in 
coulombs per square inch of sectional area. 

D’, the corresponding dielectric flux-density at a distance stipe 
remote from the surface of the conductor, where the 


1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 111 


extraordinary dielectric. strength of the atmospheric zone 
ceases and where occurs the region of greatest dielectric 
strain relative to the disruptive strength. 
D, the corresponding dielectric flux density at any point. 
_ The capacity between wires in farads per inch of line is 
Gre 0..00806 - yy qQ-t% (3) 


Ss 
logy (= ) 


The total displacement current and, therefore, the total dielec- 
tric flux established between conductors per inch of line at the 
line voltage, EF, is 


po ee 200806 SQUIB. SK GRY (4) 


ote (*) 


The pielectic flux density at the surface of the SOTgueLOr is 


D4 et ey”) 
Dy ee OES ee ee ah 18} 


s 
2 7iF 10849 (=) 


At a radial distance d froth the surface of the conductor, the 
corresponding dielectric flux density is 


Po : 
(es a 

var 2x (r+d) - (7) 
aa ogo ME Tae ¢ ea 


Dar Waylon, a) 
In alternating-current work the maximum values of D, and 
D’ are wanted, and the maximum values of the voltage waves 
must, therefore, be used fot E, as reduced from equations (7) and 
(8), thus: 
Ss : -10 (9) 
2055 logy, - oy ae Dx 10 


Pies 
Emax = 2055 log, - (+) (+d) D’ x 10" 


When Mershon’s results given in Fig. 1 were used to test these 
equations it was found that they correctly accounted for the 
relation between the separation of the conductors and the voltage 
at which the initial brush discharge took place. These results 
gave also a certain value for D, which would not give correct 

*Perrine and Baum, TRANG, A. I. E. E., Vol. XVII., p. 362, May 18, 
1900. © $ 


(10) 


112 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF - [Feb. 26 


results when used to determine the voltage required to start the 
line loss for the small wires used by Scott in some of his experi- 
ments at Pittsburg. 

At this point a rough laboratory test was made to see whether 
one would find the start of the loss between wires to occur at the 
same voltages for the same size of conductor and distances apart 


A 
18 

ES 
1a 
Ha 
no 
 & 


aojouTEE “Uy 6 FO" ONT 


aeyoureyd “Uy ¢ ‘poy Syyredeg 


Sno -y KF wUTP Ty gy ‘oqny, uosy-youg pormeajeH 


uscs0g Suppaung- epusyeg 


‘0 pue souuyonpuy : 


oa ere 
0} pezursin Ay1oede 
eee 
ACNEAT 


ToPOTPUT BAT Ay 


| 20 
03 


ie) 


AU 


aouilojsutiy, 


_ soUINYE 1 ‘ox, SuppooMMOD, 


OUTHOT PY 979078¢I}00) —F 


SiGe. 


that Mershon found. The results obtained were totally different. ° 
It became evident from this disagreement that barometric and, 


1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 113 


temperature variations exerted important influences. The differ- 
ence between the approximate results obtained by the author 
and those of Mershon indicated that the voltage starting the loss 
between wires would vary as the barometric pressure. When, 
however, the values deduced from the Telluride results were 
correspondingly corrected for barometric pressure and applied as 
constants in these equations the voltages observed by Scott for 
starting the loss on small wires were in no wise predicted. Upon 
thinking over the probable causes for this, it seemed that the 
reasons were most likely as follows: 

The dielectrically powerful atmospheric film surrounding the 
small wire would cause the initial rupture to occur at a distance 
from the surface of the conductor entirely appreciable with 
respect to the radius of the conductor, in which event some value 
of D’ different from D, would be responsible for the initial rup- 
ture of the atmosphere. The value of D’ would be indeterminate 
so long as we have no means for determining the distance from 
the surface of the conductor at which the initial rupture occurs. 
Again, it was apparent that the values of D’ and the, distances .at 
which they occur from the surface of the conductor. ‘might vary 
in an unknown manner relative to the radius of curvature of the 
conductor. 

It became evident that a series of experiments: would .be 
necessary in order to obtain all of the data required to 
write properly the formulas expressing the relation of all the 
factors that control the start of the. atmospheric loss, between 
wires. 

It was determined first of all to check by experiment the 
impression gained from the observations of Scott that the visual 
appearance of the corona or brush discharge on the wire occurs 
simultaneously with the initial formation of energy-loss, as the 
line voltage is raised; and to observe the nature of the charging 
current with respect to the line-voltage with a view to determin- 
ing more data regarding the origin of the loss. Should the start of 
the loss be accompanied simultaneously by the visual appearance 
of the corona over the wire, this‘ would be an easily discernible 
fact that would greatly facilitate subsequent experimental 
work. The point at which the atmospheric conduction-loss 
would occur in relation to diameters of conductors, their distance 
apart, applied voltage, barometric pressure, temperature, 
moisture, and the thickness of the dielectrically powerful but thin 
zones of atmosphere could then be noted simply by watching 
for the appearance of the corona. 


114 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26 


For this purpose it was realized that the most convenient 
and effective laboratory arrangement of the line would be to 
suspend a single wire for observation at the center of a metallic 
tube of suitable diameter much the same as originally suggested 
by Mershon. There are three evident advantages which this 
arrangement has in laboratory work of this character over the 
use of a pair of parallel wires. 

1. The dielectric flux established about the wire between it and 
the cylinder is easily and exactly estimated in terms of the dimen- 
sions of the wire and cylinder and the dielectric flux-constant or 
specific inductive capacity of the atmosphere. The flux eman- 
ates uniformly from the wire, thus making definite the results 
deduced from observations. 


Fie, 3: 


2. A lower voltage suffices to cover a given range of experi- 
mental study, 

3. The tube may easily be made to contain atmosphere at 
various pressures, temperatures, and degrees of entrained mois- 
ture. 

At this stage of the work in April, 1903, Mr. H. C. Ford, 2 
senior student in my classes, assisted by Mr. C. L. Wernicke 
undertook as a thesis to make the experiments. The author is 
greatly indebted to these young men for the energetic and 
effective manner in which they did the work. 


They erected apparatus, determined and charted results as 
follows: 


1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 115 


The general plan for observing the details of the corona and 
loss phenomena due to high voltages with the aid of a cathode- 
ray wave indicator is given in Fig. 2. A brass wire 0.049 inch in 
diameter was mounted at the center of a galvanized sheet iron 
tube 15 inches in diameter and 14.5 feet long, as shown. Be- 
tween this wire and the tube high pressure was applied and 
adjusted to any desired value up to 80000 effective volts by 
means of the transformers as shown. 

The arrangement permitted the coils C’ of the wave indicator 
to be inserted by means of a switch, as shown, in series with the 


- 


ateotti italic amt esa: 


Fic, 4. 


wire so as to indicate whenever desired the charging current set 
up from the wire to the cylinder. In order to note at a 
glance any departure of the wire charging-current 
the charging-current form that should exist if no 
atmospheric conduction were present, a 0.75 inch brass 
rod with well-rounded ends was placed outside the cylinder 
and connected through the switch to the same terminal of the 
transformer as the wire. The arrangement was such as to 
permit quickly the switching of the indicator col Oy, in 
series either with the wire or rod Then at low voltages prior 
to the disruption of the atmosphere about the wire, the indicator 


116 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26 


diagram produced by the wire and rod-charging currents were 
adjusted to equality by moving the rod in its position relative 
to the cylinder. 

A-sine wave current controlled by a proper circuit of induct- 
ances and capacity and passed through C”’, produced the known 
indicator motion. 

In the use of high voltages in this manner two precautions 
must be taken in the use of the wave indicator. It must be en- 
tirely enclosed in a potential-guarding screen set up on high-volt- 
age insulators and a connection must be made from the screen to 


iGo: 


the terminal of the transformer that is connected to the wire 
and capacity-rod. The sine-wave current must. pass through 
an insulating transformer and the secondary must be connect- 
ed to the guard screen so as to protect the low-voltage source 
and relieve the indicator of electric stress at all points. 

A three-phase source was employed so as to draw for conveni- 
ence the sine-wave current through an induction phase adjuster 
as shown. By shifting the sine wave, any intricate part of the 
unknown wave was made to occur when the sine wave was pass- 


1904] ATMOSPHERE AT IIiGH VOLTAGES. 117 


ing through zero and, therefore, changing most rapidly, thus 
unfolding the intricate portion of the unknown wave so as to be 
observed and recorded to best advantage. 

Figs. 3, 4,5, and 6 are half-tone reproductions of diagrams of 
line-wire and capacity-rod charging currents, photographed 
from the screen of the indicator. Eight of these were observed 


Pres 6: 


in this series at maximum voltage wave values varying from 
23 000 to 48 000 volts. To give a clear idea of the characteristics 
of these diagrams it is necessary to reproduce only the above four. 

In Figs. 3’, 4’, 5’ and 6’ the waves indicated in Figs. 3, 4, 5 
and 6 are drawn to scale in rectangular coérdinates. They show 
at once the nature of the phenomena of atmospheric conduction 


ECS: RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26 


giving rise to a loss between wires at high alternating voltages. 

The waves of line and condenser charging currents are identical 
in Figs. 38 and 3’, which were observed at a voltage having a 
maximum value of 23000. ‘he voltage was not yet high 
enough to cause the atmosphere about the line-wire to break and 
become conductive. The charging current applied from the wire 
to the cylinder was identical with the true capacity charging- 
curreat from the rod to the cylinder. 

When the.voltage was slightly raised, a well-defined though 
small change in the line charging current appeared as a hump 
on either side of its indicator diagram, (see Fig. 4), or a sudden 
increase in the current, just as it was about to pass through 
zero,.as seen in the rectangular coordinate diagram of this same 
wave shown in Fig. 4’. 


204-2 | 1 ih — T r 
- 
10-4 imetacto ete Se | + 
me | ang Condengd). (2, | | 
; Lier, , “@ 
( 0 Ln, 
Cp, 
8 te, } 
al sl 2} Waves a 
ale: saa eal > 
3/3 
Perales = + 
Si fey a uy T 
43 | Big.|3/ | 
a = : 
Eien 3 


At exactly the same value of voltage at which this hump in the 
ltne-current appeared the corona became visible when viewed in the 
dark, thus settling definitely this point and providing a convenient 
and reliable guide in subsequent experimental studies. 

It should be observed that the manner of departure from 
normal capacity-form of the line charging current is much as one 
would expect from prior knowledge. After the phenomenon 
has been started, at that instant in each cycle when the voltage 
attains a value of 20000, the atmosphere about the line-wire 
breaks and forms a conducting envelope about the wire. As the 
value of the voltage is very near the maximum it follows that 
the disrupting dielectric strain can last but a brief portion of a 
cycle. Beyond this the normal true capacity condition will be 
resumed in which the rod and wire charging currents are again 


1904.1 ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 119 


in agreement. The atmospheric conducting action in this 
instance, then, is to increase the capacity of the wire by covering 
it with a high resistance conducting envelope during that portion 
of the cycle in which the instantaneous voltage is high enough 
to maintain in the atmosphere next. to the line-conductor a state 
of strain sufficient to maintain disruption. 

Thus 1t 1s seen that the electric circuit from the wire to the cylinder 
changes during the cycle from a state of true and unvarying capacity 
to one of increased and variable capacity in series with a high 
resistance. 

These two actions evidently contribute to the same result ; viz., 
the establishment of a component cf current passing from wire 
to cylinder that is in phase with the voltage and which, therefore, 
dissipates energy in heat at a corresponding rate. 


Eee 


Kilovolts 
Milliamperes 
>) 2 


Fic. 4’, 


We did not succeed in starting the hump in the line-current 
wave at a lower voltage than that applied for Figs. 4 or 4’. By 
raising and lowering the voltage and watching the indicator it 

‘was evident that it required a slightly higher instantaneous 
voltage to start the conduction than that required to maintain it. 
It is highly probable that the high temperature reached by the 
conducting envelope, due to heat produced by the current, will 
account fully for this. 

As the voltage is raised the departure of the line charging- 
‘current from its normal true capacity form occurs to a remarkable 
degree. The maximum. value of the voltage-wave was set at 
26 500 volts and the card of Fig. 5 was obtained from which the 
waves of Fig. 5’ were determined. Qualitatively, there are here 
observed precisely the same phenomena as in Figs. 4 or 4’, The 
atmosphere remains conductive during a large part of the cycle 


207. RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26 


returning to the normal with corresponding coincidence between 
the condenser and line currents during the remaining small por- 
tion of the cycle. It may be noted that whereas 20 000 instant- 
aneous volts were required to maintain a minimum corona in the 
condition that produced Figs. 5 and 5’, the definitely lower value 
of 17000 volts is required due again probably to the higher 
temperature of the ruptured atmosphere. 

When the voltage wave was raised to the maximum value of 
48 000 volts, the cards and corresponding waves in Fig. 6 and 6’ 
were obtained, while the disruption evidently occurs at 17 000 
volts as before. So important a part is now taken by the 
resistance and fluctuating capacity that there is no longer a con- 
tinuation at any point throughout the cycle of coincidence be- 
tween the capacity rod and line-wire charging currents. 


30 | 3 


2 ae 
L 
Lind Re: 
S! 
10-1 as ; eI & bs 
Piaz a ip aN ey o7 
7 ‘0 & 
04 " “een S J? 
8 MN. \e i 
h 2 eS Urrent ened 
| 8 in Sie Lota 
re 3 Current Wave 
Ma 
ca Fig. 5’ | 


ies BY, 


These voltage-waves were determined by integrating the 
capacity rod charging currents. Their scale was obtained by 
observing the maximum values by means of a spark-gap. The 
wave-indicator scale for the currents in the case of each card was 
easily obtained from the effective value of the sine-wave current 
read from an ammeter connected in circuit with the coil C’’. 

In all, eight of these cards were taken and worked up in the 
foregoing manner. Products of the current and voltage waves 
were made and averaged by integration so as to obtain the watts 
lost in corona display over the wire at each corresponding alter- 
nating voltage applied. These results were charted in ‘Fig 7 
locating the curve there drawn. a 

The way was now clear to determine experimentally the 
validity of the expression derived above, provided there was 


aT 


1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 121 
some method for determining the distance from the surface of 
the conductor at which the initial break occurs. I am indebted 
to Mr. B. T. McCormick, a senior student in my classes last year, 
for a method by. means of which this may be accomplished. 
Assisted by Mr. C. L. Gillespie he applied it to many of the com- 
mercial sizes of conductors ranging in diameters from 2 to 625 
- mils. Atthe center of the 15-inch cylinder conductors of various 
diameters were mounted. An alternating voltage was applied 


res 


i 
| 
t 


Milliampe 


T 


N 
Kilovolts 


4 


Kilovolts 
Milliamperes 


Rien 67. 


between the conductor and the cylinder and elevated to the 
point at which corona is first visible in the dark. The diameter 
of the conductors and the maximum value of the voltage waves 
were observed by means. of thespark-gap. Corresponding to 
each conductor and the maximum value of the  volt- 
age at which its corona was initially formed, curves were 
located showing the relation between the dielectric flux- 
density and radial distance from the surface of the conductor. 
These curves were then plotted in rectangular codrdinates in the 


122 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26 


same manner as shown in Fig. 8. The envelope of these curves 
when taken at sufficiently small intervals of conductor sizes, gives 
the relation between the distance from the surface of the con- 


, Maximum Kilovolts 
25 30 35 


40 


TGs 


ductor and the dielectric flux-density at which the atmosphere 
first ruptured. In this manner the relation between the con- 
ductor-diameter, distance from surface and dielectric flux rup- 


1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 123 


turing density, was determined The values thus determined 
are given in the Synopsis; 7.¢., in the tables on page 4. 

One especially interesting feature of the results given in this 
table is that the distance from the surface of the conductor at 


Die’ectric Flux Density 


100 
Coulombs 
per Square 

Inch 


See See SS 


0 02 04 06 08 -.10 12 ld 16 
Distance from Surface in Inches 


Fie. 8. 


which the atmosphere first ruptures is constant at 0.07 inch. 
for all diameters above 0.25 inch and the corresponding rupturing 
flux value is constant at 170 x 10-° coulombs per square inch. 
_ The largest conductor used in these experiments was 0.625 inch 


124 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26: 


indiameter. It is, however, reasonable to expect that since there 
is no change in the value of d due to changes in the conductor- 
curvature when the diameter varies from 0.25 to 0.625 inch, 
there will be no important change in such value of d for conductors 
of larger diameters. At conductor-diameters smaller than 0.25 
inch, there is approximately a regular diminution with the 
diameter, of the distance of the initial rupturing-zone and a cor- 
responding approximately regular rise in the initial rupturing 
dielectric flux-density. 

To study the effects due to varying barometric pressures and 
temperatures, a conductor 0.125 inch in diameter was mounted 
at the center of a stout brass cylinder 20 inches long and 8.75 inch 


Kilovolts 


Fig. 9 


Barometric Pressure in Inches of Mercury 
20 25 


in diameter, provided with packing flanges and closed with 0.5. 
inch plate-glass at either end. By means of ordinary hand- 
pumps and a long mercury U-tube, the atmospheric pressure 
could be adjusted definitely to any desired value from 18 to 36 
inches of mercury. Alternating voltage was applied between the 
conductor and the cylinder and elevated to the point where 
the corona was observed in the dark to appear suddenly. The 
effective values of the voltage were determined by means of a 
Weston alternating-current voltmeter applied across the ter- 
minals of the low-voltage primary of the high-voltage trans- 
former. Throughout all experiments the form of the voltage- 
waves was approximately the same; viz., that given in Figs. 3/ 
4’, 5’ and 6’; frequency 130 cycles. 


1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 125 


With the atmosphere in the cylinder at the room-temperature 
of 70° fahr., the observations showing the relation between 
corona starting-voltage and atmospheric pressure were made that 
are found charted in Fig. 9. They locate a right-line relation, 
the equation of which is 


Ky, = 0.902 b+ 2.93 (11) 
wherein 
Ky, = effective kilovolts required to start the corona. 
b = barometric pressure in inches of mercury. 


To determine the effect of variation of temperature upon the 
voltage required to inaugurate the corona, the air in the tube was 
heated electrically and cooled by immersion in a salted ice-pack. 
However, the salted ice method for cooling was not a success and 
had to be abandoned, it being evident that a much more exten- 
sive method of cooling would have to be used in order to main- 
tain the surfaces of the glass plates closing the tube free of 
moisture, so as to ensure effective insulation and‘clear vision 
for the detection of the corona. The cooling facilities that are 
evidently needed were not at hand when these tests were made, 
last May, so we had to be contented with such temperature varia- 
tion of the air as could be obtained by heating the tube electri- 
cally by means of a jacket of German-silver wire and asbestos. 
Observations were made to determine the combined effects of 
temperature and barometric pressure variation by heating the air 
in the tube to about 200° fahr., at a given barometric pressure, 
then as the temperature dropped slowly by radiation and by 
maintaining the barometric pressure constant by use of the pump 
or by natural flow of the atmosphere, the voltage at the various 
temperatures required to start the corona were observed. The 
process.was then repeated for another barometric pressure until 
finally observations had been made covering the temperature 
range of from 70° fahr., to near 200° fahr., at barometric pres- 
ures ranging from 19 to 34 inches. The humidity present 
was that due to natural causes and was not observed. 

A target-diagram of these observations, including those 
made at 70° fahr., is shown in Fig. 10. The observations made at 
room-temperature are much more reliable than those made at 
other temperatures. The reason for this is the uncertainty of 
the actual temperature of the atmosphere in contact with the 
conductor at the center of the tube when at a different tempera- 
ture from that of the outside atmosphere. The difference in 
temperature causes a transfer of heat from one side to the other 


126 RYAN *CONDUCTIVITY OF [FPeb. 26 


that occurs largely by means of convection currents that give 
rise to the uncertainty of the temperature at the center of the 
tube. However, the observations made at the constant baro- 
metric pressures of 29, 26.5 and 19 inches of mercury left no 
doubt of the nature of the barometer temperature-voltage varia- 
tion as shown by the lines thus located in Fig, 10 and which indi- 
cate a close agreement between the variation of the corona- 
forming voltages and the atmospheric density. 

The fact that there is an addition-constant in the equation for 
the barometric pressure-kilovolt line for 70° fahr., in equation (11) 
shows that the barometric pressure-temperature-corona-forming 
voltage relation of Fig. 10, will not be accurately expressed in a 
formula which assumes that the corona-forming voltage varies 


Kilovolts 


1 

1 
10 Fig. 10 
1 

i] 

1 


ee in ria Se ey 

vey ; ; , i hell a 
were located are, beginning at the top : 34, 31.5, 29, 26.5, sore 
exactly as the density of the atmosphere. However upon trial 
it was found that the assumption that it does so vary will provide 
an expression giving the results charted in Fig. 10 with sufficient 
accuracy for practical purposes. 

The corresponding correction-factor to be applied to equation 
(9), to account for barometric pressure effects different from 
29.5 inches of mercury and temperatures different from 70° is 

17.94 b 
459 +t 
wherein 
bi the barometric pressure in inches, and 
¢th temperature in degrees on the Fahrenheit scale. 


1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 127 
e 

The final equation which allows for all important factors 

showing the relation between the instantaneous maximum volt- 

age, size,and separation of conductors, rupturing value of 

dielectric flux, and distance from the surface of the conductor at 

which the rupture occurs, causing initial corona formation 


should, therefore, be written : 
PUR ey peat S ; ss 
ea = 45041 X 2055 log.) (=) D’ (r+d) x10 (12) 


A determined effort was made to observe the effect upon the 
point of initial corona formation due to the presence of moisture 
in the atmosphere. The ordinary air in the tube was displaced 
with dry air and the corona-starting voltage was then observed. 
Steam was then admitted to the interior of the cylinder and after 
allowing sufficient time for the water that was not absorbed by 
the air to settle upon the walls of the cylinder, the corona voltage 
was again observed. By this method the effect of the presence 
of humidity could not with certainty be detected, leading one to 
conclude that such effect if it does exist is small. 

Where the conductors are 0.25 inch or larger in diameter, D’ 
and d remain uniform at 


D* 
d 


and equation No. (12) becomes 


ll 


170 x10°-°, coulombs per sq. in., and 
0.07 inch 


I 


17.946 S 
ea ie ee ! Jae 07 13 
Formax 159 1 350 000 log yo (- ) (r+ .07) (13) 


The data for Mershon’s experimental line are 


s = '15, 22, 35, and 52 inches. 

r = 0.081 inch. 

D’ = 200 x10-!° coulombs per sq. in. 
da-=+0,035, meh: 

t = about 60° fahr. 

b = about 20 in. 


1.71 = approximate ratio of maximum to effective value of 


voltage wave. 
Upon substituting these values in equation (12), the following 


results are obtained. 


128 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26 


en EIIEIIIIEIEt SIEISISISSIESSSSSSSSSSSS a 


Effective Voltage Mershon’s 
Separation of at which Observations. 
Lines. Initial Corona Effective 
Loss Occurs. Voltage. 
Inches. 

aes 43 600 43 500 

22 46 800 47 000 

35 50 700 49 000 

52 54 000 53 500 


In this table the values labelled ‘‘ Mershon’s Observations ”’ 
were taken at the point of intersection of the voltage base-line in 
Fig. 1 formed by the broken-line extension of the vertical portion 
of the loss-curves. Mershon’s conclusion is that the small loss 
portion, t.e., the horizontal portion cf these loss-curves, is due to 
the line insulators while the large increase of loss beyond the sharp 
rise in the curve is due only to the atmospheric loss. The labora- 
tory tests confirm this fully. Some will insist that if this is 
strictly so the sudden rise in the loss-curve should make an abrupt 
and not a gradual turn upwards. Upon further thought it must 
be evident, however, that as the voltage is raised atmospheric 
conduction will first appear over the sections of the. wire in con- 
tact with the insulators which have a higher specific inductive 
capacity, t.e., a higher permeability to dielectric flux than the 
atmosphere, causing the electrostatic field about the wire in the 
neighborhood of the insulators to be higher than in a position 
remote therefrom. On this account the initial start of the 
atmospheric conduction-loss will not appear abruptly when the 
voltage is increased gradually through the corona-forming value. 
It is to be noted that the vertical portions of these loss-curves as 
extended to the base of the diagram, form curves having sub- 
stantially the same character as the corresponding laboratory 
loss-curve given in Fig. 7. It is from this point of view that the 
above method was employed for locating the value of the voltages 
that started the corona losses on the Teliuride line. 

Professor Harold B. Smith has erected an experimental high- 
voltage line at Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 250 feet long, 
upon which conductors have been mounted varying in size from 
No. 10 to No. 2 B. & S. G. and high-voltage losses have been 
measured, due to electromotive forces ranging from low values to 


1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 129 


upwards of 250 000 volts. He has very kindly given me three 
of his voltage-line-loss curves taken from these lines, arranged as 
follows: 
Length of lines, 250 feet. Observed May 14, 1901; May 3 and 
28, 1902. Barometric pressure 29.5 inches; temperature, 70° fahr. 
Curve No. 1. Size of wire No. 10 B. & S. gauge. Separation 30 
inches, voltage-line losses measured over a range 
from 30 000 to 100 000 volts. 

Curve No. 2. Size of wire No. 2, B. & S. gauge., separation 24 
inches, voltage-line losses measured over a range 
from 30 000 to 145 000 volts. 


Curve No. 3. Size of wire, No. 2 B. & S. gauge., separation 48 
inches, voltage-line losses observed over a range 
from 30 000 to 150 000 volts. 

For a No. 10 B. & S. gauge wire: 

Gav —0.01S aeh. 

ry = 0.05095 inch. 

Dae 2 OCC LOS 
No. 2B. & S. gauge wire, 

Ga =30 07 auch. 

f, 20,1288 1neh: 

DES AOL: 

Substituting numerical values in equation (13) for the two No. 
2 lines and in (12) for the No. 10 line, the following results are 
obtained for comparison with the measurements by Smith. 
(See table on page 304.) 

Smith’s voltage-measurements were made with a special and 
highly satisfactory form of electrometer. Strict agreement of 
the calculated and effective results cannot, however, be expected 
without a knowledge of the ratio of the maximum to the effective 
values of the actual high-voltage waves impressed upon the line. 
The last column in the above table gives these corresponding 
maximum effective ratios that would bring the calculated and 
experimental results into exact agreement. The ratios indicate 
the use of a somewhat peaked line-voltage wave which is apt to’ 
be the case owing to the distortion produced in the high-pressure 
transformer by the delivery of the line charging-current. 

Naturally the conductor having a circular exterior section is 
the one best adapted, other things being equal, for the avoidance 
of atmospheric loss. The ordinary stranded cable exposes 
nearly a circular sectional area, so that in respect to the avoidance 
of this sort of loss the cable should give substantially the same 


130 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26 
results as the solid conductor. Evidently when the voltage is 


such as to demand a greater exterior diameter of conductor than 


that corresponding to the s 


olid section required for the economi- 


cal or efficient transmission of the current, the solid or stranded 


Line. Emax. Eg, Eg, oS 
“fF, 
Maximum in-| Reduced | Observed by | As a factor 
stantaneous from Smith. in lieu 
voltage Emax. by | (Located by of «/2 
at which the intercept required to 
corona loss factor upon bring 
occurs, ares voltage axis | calculated 
determined Me Serate of voltage- and 
by equations .| watt curve as observed 
(12) or (13). was done in results into 
connection exact 
with agreement, 
Mershon’s 
curves, Fig. |.) 
No. 10 
B. & S. G. 107 700 76 000 66 000 1.63 
30 in. 
separation. 
No. 2 
Bac s.0G, 158 000 112 000 100 000 1.58 
24 in. 
separation. 
No. 2 
Whe we Sy Ee 178 500 126 000 110 000 1.61 
48 in. 
eparation., 


conductor can be made hollow or provided with a non-conducting 
core. A few observations were made by using round, hexagonal, 
and square conductors at the center of a 15-inch cylinder for the 


1904.) ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 131 


purpose of obtaining comparative data, applicable to the corona- 
forming voltage as affected by those forms of sections. These 
observations are charted in Fig. 11, from which it is seen that 
while the exterior surface and total section of the hexagonal con- 
ductors are greater than for the same thicknesses of round con- 
ductor, yet the corona-losses are started at lower voltages. ' The 
same is true naturally to a greater extent for the square con- 


ductor. The cause of thic is obviously due to the concentration 
of the dielectric flux at the surface-angles of the non-circular 
sectioned rods. 


40) 


34 


—30 


Sine wave effective kilovolts 


28 


Distance between parallel faces through center of conductor 
.20 25 0 4 


The curves in Figs. 12 and 13 were determined from observa- 
tions made in the thesis work of Ford and Wernicke, and McCor- 
mick and Gillespic. They are reproduced here because they 
constitute original data that are useful for analogous purposes 
other than those to which they were applied in this paper. The 
curves labelled ‘‘ Sine Wave Effective Kilovolts”’ give the relation 
between the voltages and diameters of conductors mounted at 
the center of the 15-inch cylinder at which initial corona occurred 
for a diameter range of 3 to 600 mils. The remaining curves give 
the corresponding calculated dielectric flux-densities at the con- 
ductor surfaces. The voltages were determined by a spark-gap 
discharger having a scale laid off in terms of sine wave effective 
volts. 


132 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF [Feb. 26 


A SUBSTITUTE FOR THE SPARK-GAP METHOD FOR GAUGING THE 
Mamixum VALUES OF. HIGH VOLTAGES. 
The maximums of the highest alternating voltage-waves may 


wi 


“10 


a 
Ss 
— 2 


~) 
S 
Kilovolts 


§ per square inch when Multiphed by 10 


S 
i 


Coulomb 


Diameter of Wire in Inches 
02 03 


be gauged easily when applied between wires of suitable diameter 
the separation of which is adjusted until the initial corona appears 


1904.] ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES. 133 


in the dark. From the conductor diameter and separation, 
barometric, pressure and temperature, a determination of the 


ae 90— 


Kilovolts 


c= 
S 


Coulombs per square inch when multiplied by nie 


| 
nm 
x 
S 


Dielectric flux density at .07 inch from surface of wire 


Diameter.of Wire in Inches 


2 3 


maximum of the voltage-wave may easily be made that will be 
just as accurate as the constants in the equation (10), or the 
location of the curves in Figs. 12 and 13, or made with such 


134 RYAN: CONDUCTIVITY OF ATMOSPHERE. (Feb. 26 


increased accuracy as will be obtained in similar determinations 
in the future. This method is free from the fluctuating indica- 
tions and objections that attend the use of the spark-gap, while 
its only real objection is that the observations must be made in a 
place that is moderately dark. 

In conclusion, attention is called to the fact that no experi- 
ments were made to determine the effects that the presence of 
rain and snow in the atmosphere have upon the point of initial 
corona formation. It appears from Mershon’s Telluride results 
that there will be little effect from this cause. 

With regard to the effect of the presence of smoke it should be 
said that there is evidence that a very slight loss is produced at 
all voltages, which is greater at the higher values due to this 
cause. During the spring of 1903, on days when the atmosphere 
was very smoky on account of neighboring forest fires, Dr. 
Blaker observed in the Physical Laboratory at Cornell that the 
conductive discharge through the atmosphere was appreciable 
when a continuous voltage of 15 000 was applied between wires 
of such size and separation that no detectable conduction 
occurred when the atmosphere cleared. 

Those who have made line observations and who may use them 
to check the results given in this paper, must not fail to eliminate, 
first, the effects due to the presence of the supporting insulators. 

It is altogether unlikely that changes in frequency, even over 
wide ranges, will afiect appreciably the voltage at which atmos- 
pheric conduction is started when all other conditions remain 
the same. 


1904.) DISCUSSION. AT NEW YORK. 135 


Discussion 


C. F. Scorr:—The paper we have just heard read is a remark- 
able one, and will probably be considered unique among the 
papers presented to our InsTiTUTE. Our papers usually deal 
with results that have been accomplished, or with various 
methods of accomplishing ordinary engineering objects. This 
paper is of another order—it reaches into the future, and ex- 
plores the unknown field of high-pressure work. 

We can properly consider the work that has been done in high- 
pressure transmission in the light of an advance into an unknown 
and undeveloped country; some progress is made each year; 
within the last dozen years, pressures have risen by thousands and 
tens of thousands of volts; with each increase of pressure, new 
difficulties have arisen—new phenomena have appeared, new 
problems have come to the designer, to the operator, and to the 
experimenter. The paper is of particular interest, as it deals 
with things outside the present range of commercial practice, but 
toward which engineering work is now fast approaching. If 
this paper had been presented 15 or 20 years ago, it would 
probably have been regarded by the practical engineering world 
as visionary—something in the nature of static electricity, and 
something that active, practical people have little to do with; 
but to-day, engineering work is very near to those limits at which 
this paper indicates certain physical barriers to the further ad- 
vance in power transmission. 

The mention of the speaker’s name in the paper, suggests some 
reminiscences of early work on this subject. It was about ten 
years ago that the need of experimental investigation of very high 
pressure became evident; little or nothing was known regarding 
insulators for high-pressure work, and it was a question whether 
there might not be some new kind of phenomenon involved 
which was not then understood. At that time, the maximum 
pressure of transmission apparatus was about 10 000 volts; the 
experimental work involved the manufacture of a high-pressure 
transformer, the making of tests on insulators and lines, and the 
exploring, in a general way, of the phenomena of high pressures. 
A transformer of 40 kw.—then quite large—was built, for a 
pressure of 40 000 volts at one step, and was used in the various 
tests. Discharges from the surface of insulators were noted ; some 
of the lines that were run in the laboratory were 25 to 30 feet 
long, composed of small wires strung four or five inches apart, 
alternate wires being connected to the opposite terminals, mak- 
ing a network of high-pressure wires. As the pressure was raised, 
there was at first a slight hum; then a louder hum, and a glow, 
developing into a loud noise, accompanied by the smell of ozone; 
the appearance of light, sound, and ozone, appealing to the three 
different senses, meant the expenditure of energy in their pro- 
duction, and indicated a loss. Measurements of these losses were 
attempted, but the instruments at hand were not satisfactory, 
and the results not good. 


136 CONDUCTIVITY OF THE ATMOSPHERE. [Feb. 26 


Some time after that, as mentioned in Professor Ryan’s paper, 
Mr. Mershon took up the work at Telluride, and succeeded, after 
overcoming great difficulties, in obtaining the results with which 
his name is connected, and which reflect such great credit upon 
his persistence and ability. Professor Ryan took up the problem 
where Mr. Mershon left it. Mr. Mershon had measured the 
losses, which were of considerable magnitude, and increased very 
rapidly above a certain critical voltage. Professor Ryan has 
put these results to the test of a rigorous experimental investiga- 
tion, to determine the formula to express the beginning of this 
discharge, and has, moreover, investigated the exact nature of 
the discharge itself. 

In the discussion of Professor Ryan’s paper at Niagara Falls 
last Summer, the speaker took occasion to remark that his 
cathode ray indicator was valuable not only as a result of his 
research, and as a beautiful thing in itself, but also as a means— 
an instrument, by which results of a valuable character could be 
obtained. Now Professor Ryan has the honor to present to us 
a paper in which that instrument has been put to most excellent 
use. 

SAMUEL SHELDON :—There are four distinctly different types of 
conduction through the atmosphere at ordinary pressures and 
temperatures; namely, the glow discharge, the brush discharge, 
the spark, and the arc. 

The glow is blue-violet in color, is silent, forms in some casés. 
a velvety covering over the electrode terminal, is a continuous 
discharge to the same extent as is the current from a primary or 
secondary cell, and exhibits a polar preference starting, with 
dissimilarly shaped electrodes, at a lower difference of electrode 
potential in one direction than in the other. It may be made 
up of an innumerable number of little convexions of electricity, 
as is a current which comes from any electrochemical source. 
The dielectric field strength at which this discharge is started has 
-aminimum value. The discharge is maintained after this value 
is reached up to a certain limit, when the character of the dis- 
charge changes. 

The brush is red-violet in color, gives a hissing sound, is prob- 
ably intermittent in character, follows many unbranched paths 
which exhibit a tendency to separate from each other, and shows 
a polar preference similar to that shown by the glow discharge. 

The spark is noisy, often follows forked or branched paths, and 
is often oscillatory in character. It is white in color but partici- 
pates in the color of the incandescent vapors of the electrode 
materials. This coloring is prominent with iron electrodes and 
the characteristic ultra-violet radiations are very strong. 

The arc discharge is familiar to all, has the color of the incan- 
descent vapors of the electrode material, owes its conductivity 
largely to the presence of these vapors, and is quiet or makes 
characteristic noises. 


The glow and the brush discharges are probably due to gaseous 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 137 


ionization, and this corona discharge is probably a combination 
of both of these discharges. As the pressure rises, first comes 
the glow, and then comes the brush; and as it falls, the brush 
drops off and then the glow. There is a preference of polarity 
as shown in Fig. 4’ of the paper, where the little hump on the 
curve starts at a pressure of about 18 000 when the current is in 
one direction, and at about 21 000 when the current is in the 
opposite direction. This does not appear in Fig. 5’; but in Fig. 6, 
the pressure at the start of the prominent hump is something like 
17 000, whereas the second hump starts at a little less than 
20 000 volts. 

The dielectric field intensity which is necessary to start a glow 
or a brush discharge in the atmosphere at normal conditions of 
pressure and temperature is smaller than that necessary to pro- 
duce a spark. Therefore if the method of measuring high pres- 
sures which is suggested in the paper, be adopted, the breakdown 
value of 10 000 volts per inch in free air, which is the constant 
used in this paper and which is the value adopted by the Insti- 
TUTE as a result of Steinmetz’s experiments, should be aban- 
doned and a new constant should be determined. 

Harotp B. SmitH:—As a discussion of this paper was’ not 
contemplated for this evening there is but one point which, 
possibly, may be added to an expression of most thorough 
appreciation which is felt for the work that has been done by 
Professor Ryan and of all that it signifies for the development of 
high-pressure work. He makes a reference in his paper to the 
form of electrometer which we have used successfully at Worcester 
for two or three years, for high-potential measurements. Some 
details of the way in which this electrometer was developed may 
be of interest. In 1901, four graduate students in electrical 
engineering at the Instirute undertook the design and con- 
struction of a 500 000-volt transformer. In carrying out this 
work, we desired, after building the transformer and after getting 
discharges over spark gaps ranging up to four feet (1.22 metre), 
to measure the voltage; so it was proposed to use an electrostatic 
instrument measuring the voltages about the several coils of the 
secondary and adding them as a preliminary step. One or two 
of the men who were at work on this problem are in the audience 
and presumably they will remember the following circumstance. 
The electrostatic instrument registered as expected for the first 
few measurements, but the middle of the secondary of the trans- 
former being earthed, as we proceeded away from the earth the 
readings became less and less, although it was known that the 
number of convolutions in the several secondary coils had been 
carefully counted and did not vary. A point was soon reached 
at which a zero reading upon the instrument was given and then 
reversed deflections of the electrostatic voltmeter were secured. 

Proceeding from this point, the line of reasoning developed the 
conclusion that the absolute potential impressed upon the instru- 
ment was, in its effect, in excess of the effect due to the difference 


138 CONDUCTIVITY OF THE ATMOSPHERE. [Feb. 26 


of potential and so there resulted a repulsion of the parts of the 
electrostatic instrument in place of attraction as would ordinarily 
occur in the measurement of differences of potential. This at 
once led to the conception of the use of a repulsion voltmeter in 
which the fixed and movable parts were connected together and 
attached to a single wire leading to the instrument so as to 
depend wholly uvon the repulsion due to the absolute potential 
of the svstem. ‘This proved a peculiarly adaptable instrument 
for this work, where it was necessary to deal with potentials which 
would jump three or four feet, as it was necessary to lead but one 
wire to the instrument. Although the instrument was developed 
in this way, now that we have it in use it proves to be nothing 
more than an old-fashioned electroscope modified to meet suc- 
cessfully the conditions imposed by high pressures. 

P. H. THomas:—In speaking of the apparent enlarging of the 
diameter of the wire to a certain pressure, does Professor Ryan 
wish us to think of the phenomenon as though we actually had a 
larger metal conductor, and that the electricity passes into the 
air and stays there within a definite volume? Or is it more 
probable that when it has once left, the wire will remain mobile, 
and the distance the charge passes over the surface of the wire 
will depend upon the time of duration of the excessive strain. If 
the latter is the case, we should find a difference, with different 
rates of alternations, unless the greater duration of time required 
for one alternation exactly balances the effect of the variations 
in a number of alternations; but the writer understands that no 
such difference has been found. Is this correct? » 

Harris J. Ryan:—The question cannot be answered very 
directly. This much, however, is certain: that one can pass 
very small currents through the atmosphere over large distances, 
with low frequencies, or with direct currents, provided that the 
wire is so small that the atmosphere breaks around its surface; 
ionization occurs, or electrons are set free, and they go from one 
wire to the other; but there seems to be no conduction 
of that character of sufficient magnitude to give rise to 
quantities that must be reckoned with in engineering. 

P. H. Toomas:—The speaker cannot conceive, at the present 
time, of a limiting surface to the air to which the electricity 
would go and there stop, without some further condition entering 
to determine physically the demarcation of the conducting space. 
Can Professor Ryan suggest any such idea? The air being a per- 
fect gas, has, within itself, no force that can resist permanently 
at a definite point the tendency of the electricity to proceed 
further. 

Harris J. RYAN:—In the experiment just cited, if the diameter 
of the wire is considerable at ordinary pressures, then there will 
be no cischarge from one wire to the other. If the diameter of 
the wires is so small that at the pressure you apply between the 
wires, the atmosphere is broken around these wires, then there 
will be a discharge from wire to wire, In using high-pressure 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 188) 


continuous-current. dynamos connected up in series for checking 
these experiments, one gets the conduction effect a little before 
the arc forms between wire and wire. However, with a Holtz 
machine you can produce a continuous. pressure’ very much 
higher, and in the laboratory one can thus carry a small contin- 
uous current between small wires; for example, those having 
a diameter of three mils, from side to side through the atmos 
phere of a room. Such conduction will occur, however, only 
when the diameters of the wire are so small in relation to the 
pressure generated by the Holtz machine that structural rupture 
of the atmosphere occurs near the surface of the fine wires,—clec- 
trons are thereby set free, causing conduction. At certain 
larger conduction radii, dependent upon the pressure employed, 
appreciable atmospheric conduction will occur. 

P. H. Tuomas:—In passing electricity through a vacuum, 
which is almost perfect, we have three electromotive force re- 
sistances to consider; one is the force preventing the electricity 
from leaving one of the electrodes, another preventing it from 
entering the other electrode, and the third, the resistance to 
passing through the vacuum space. The resistance to passing 
through the vacuum, with high exhaustion, is not very consider- 
able, but is measurable. But with atmospheric pressures it 
must be tremendous. Have we not these elements in this case, 
or at least two, to consider; the force necessary to pass the cur- 
rent through the air and that of leaving or entering the wire? 
The resistance from the electrode is different from that 
into the electrode. If that is true, as Dr. Sheldon suggested, 
we should then find a difference between the positive and nega- 
tive limits of the alternating current due to the electrode effect, 
though not the portion of the total resistance which is due to the 
resistance of the air. Possibly that may explain the slight 
difference between positive and negative which he notes. Have 
you found any difference between the positive and the negative? 

Harris J. Ryan:—This matter has not been investigated 
and therefore the speaker has no knowledge of it. With alter- 
nating currents, of course, one conductor is first positive and 
then it is negative. The electrons are fired forth at one impulse 
and upon the following impulse they return again. With alter- 
nating current these phenomena are very hard to study. When 
we have very high continuous current dynamo pressures for 
laboratory work, those capacity phenomena that are ever present 
in our experiments with high alternating-current pressures will 
be eliminated, and with high continuous-current pressures this 

‘phenomenon can be studied with success. 

P. H: Tuomas:—Different materials require radically different 
electromotive forces to pass electricity to the electrode. It 
would be interesting to study those materials which have shown 
the greatest differences in this connection. Aluminum and 
copper would be two which would have a different effect, prob- 
ably. Have ou not tried these metals, to see what difference 


there is? . 


14U CONDUCTIVITY OF THE ATMOSPHERE: [Feb. 26 


H. J. Rvan:—Probably you are right, that the constants 
will be somewhat different for these different metals. Iron and 
brass and copper were used rather indiscriminately in deter- 
mining the flux densities at which coronas are established in 
relation to changes in the curvature of conductors, and no 
noticeable difference due to these different metals was found, but 
the subject being new, the measurements are not refined enough 
to study these matters to best advantage. They are important, 
and some one should take them up and study particularly the 
manner in which flux densities are different for the aluminum 
with respect to copper. 

P. H. Tuomas:—The speaker made direct measurements with 
a quadrant electrometer, used as a wattmeter, of the loss into air 
in a 50 000 volt circuit, nearly 100 miles long, the same instru- 
ment as described by Mr. Miles Walker before the INSTITUTE at 
the Great Barrington meeting. The losses began to be measur- 
able at about the same pressures found by Professor Ryan,—that 
is, at from 20 000 to 25 000 volts, to ground; the loss increased 
very rapidly. 

In the measurements made, the loss at 60 000 volts between 
the wires was approximately 10 kw.,—an insignificant loss as far 
as power transmission is concerned, but, nevertheless, very 
appreciable. 

P. M. Lincotn:—In reading over abstract of Professor Ryan’s 
paper on ‘‘ The Conductivity of the Atmosphere at High Volt- 
ages,’’ the questions which are apt to occur to the practical high- 
pressure engineer who has a line to operate are: 

1—Is there any loss in my line due to the effect which Professor 
Ryan calls the “corona” effect. If so, how much? 

2—If these losses are not taking place at present pressure, to 
what extent will they enter if pressure be raised? 

3—If these losses are taking place, what remedies can be ap- 
plied to prevent? 

How far are these questions answered by the paper which 
Professor Ryan has presented? To the first question the answer 
seems to be definite and complete. We may readily determine 
from the formula that for the worst conditions which would occur 
in actual practice; viz: a No. 6 wire with a spacing of say forty- 
eight inches, this corona loss at sea level does not begin until the 
voltage has reached the neighborhood of 100 000 effective. For 
the maximum altitude at which transmission is apt to be carried 
on, say 10 000 feet above the sea level, the pressure at which the 
loss begins may be as low as 65 000 for the worst cases, but even 
then the pressure at which the corona loss begins is still consider- 
ably beyond the limits of the actual practice of to-day. The 
question of corona loss, therefore, is evidently one for the future 
to decide and not one which should disturb high-pressure engi- 
neers of to-day. 

The formula which Professor Ryan gives at once tells us the 
pressure at which this corona loss begins to appear, and the 
other data cited apparently checks this formula closely. The 


1904.] COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT. 141 


voltage at which this loss begins depends upon borometric pres- 
sure, temperature, radius and spacing of the wires, and upon two 
additional quantities designated ‘“‘d’”’ and ‘‘D’.”’ These two 
last mentioned quantities are, so far as can be judged, from the 
abstract at hand, empirical in their nature. The pressure at 
which the loss begins is apparently entirely independent of fre- 
quency. : 

When we come to the second question, the answer is not so com- 
plete. To know the pressure at which this form of loss begins is 
of course important but it is even more important to know how 
much it amounts to for any given voltage excess above the point 
of beginning. For one particular case, which by the way is en- 
tirely outside the realm of practice, Fig. 7 gives the answer. 
What the relative losses are, however, for conditions which 
would occur in practice the paper leaves undetermined. 

Normal progress is bound to carry transmission pressures 
beyond those that exist to-day, therefore the third question as to 
remedies to apply has a decided bearing. It is well known that a 
good rubber insulation on the wire will almost entirely prevent 
this corona loss, at least within the lower limits of pressure at 
which the effect occurs. 

It would be interesting to determine the effect of various 
kinds of insulation on the wire, in so far as their influence in pre- 
venting this loss is concerned. 

The method applied by Professor Ryan is most ingenious and 
we hope that the record of the work done by him which is given 
in this paper is not the last which will be done along similar lines. 


[COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT By G. T. Hancuett.] 


In 1895 the writer investigated the visible phenomena sur- 
rounding the. electric discharge, and having no large sources of 
potential at hand, used an ordinary 1l-inch induction coil, and 
viewed the discharges under the microscope. Two terminals of 
thin metal foil were gummed to the slide of the instrument, and 
arranged so that they would appear in the field of a 0.25 inch 
objective, and passed discharges between them of varying 
strength. One of the most interesting points developed was that 
the negative terminal was distinctly hotter than the positive ter- 
minal, and when the discharge had reached the sparking point, 
the negative terminal melted very rapidly, while the positive 
remained practically intact. 

Professor Ryan’s investigations of the effect of temperature on 
the dielectric strength of air, together with this phenomena, seem 
to explain Dr. Sheldon’s remarks about the difference of potential 
required to strike between a knob and ball. When the point is 
the negative, the heat developed there is concentrated, the tem- 
perature is high, and the air breaks down easily at a low pressure. 
When the point is positive, the heat developed by the discharge, 
being large at the negative pole, is readily radiated by the large 
surface of the ball, the temperature is lower, and the discharge 
does not find as easy a path. 


142 CONDUCTIVITY OF THE ATMOSPHERE. [Feb. 26 


Concerning Mr. Scott’s remarks about the ozone that is gener- 
ated, it might be interesting to add that in case of direct currents 
it is easily shown that ozone is generated in larger quantities at 
the negative pole. The most convenient means of detecting this 
is a solution of starch and potassium iodide. 

Not the least feature of interest in Professor Ryan’s paper is 
his denial of the theory that a moist.atmosphere necessarily in- 
volves great leakage. His experiments conclusively show that 
this is not the fact, and we may therefore attribute any addi- 
tional leakage which our lines experience in moist weather en- 
tirely to the accumulation of moisture on the insulators, and not 
at all due to the increased tendency to brush discharge leakage 
through the atmosphere itself. 


[COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT BY ELinu THomMsoNn.] 


The paper of Professor Ryan brings out clearly the relation 
between the different factors which combine to influence the 
voltage at which atmospheric loss begins or becomes serious. 
He has been able to deduce a formula for calculating that voltage 
under varying conditions of atmospheric pressure, temperature, 
etc. The data obtained by Mr. Mershon and Professor Smith 
are shown to fit in with Professor Ryan’s results. As he points 
out, the lower values of effective voltages obtained in the Smith 
observations are without doubt due to the distortion of the wave 
form into one more peaked. The true character of the atmos- 
pheric loss is pointed out by Professor Ryan in connection with 
his very interesting plottings in Figs. 3’, 4’, 5’, and 6’. The loss 
is due to an enlarged capacity-current working over the high 
resistance layer, which virtually adds to the diameter of the con- 
ductor. The add?tion of this broken-down air layer takes place at 
a critical voltage and its amount rapidly increases with any in- 
crease beyond the critical value. In Fig. 6’ the effect is that of 
a greatly enlarged capacity coming into existence at something 
under 20 kilovolts in Professor Ryan’s experiment, if the writer 
correctly interprets the results. In Fig. 3’ the voltage wave 
attains a maximum of 22 kilovolts without showing the indica- 
tions of atmospheric loss. Increasing the voltage as in Figs. 
4’, 5’, and 6’, shows that the upward bend of the charging current 
curve begins at a value considerably below 20 kilovolts. This 
may be due to ionization or heating of the air layer by the prior 
waves. If this be true it should become more pronounced at 
higher frequencies. It might probably be a useful extension to 
study the effects when the conductor was kept hot and cold air 
circulated about it, and also the result when the conductor being 
maintained at a much lower temperature than the surrounding 
air. The highly interesting and practical results obtained by 
Professor Ryan serve as an illustration of the value of the inertia- 


less cathode ray wave indicator in the development of which he 
has succceded so admirably. 


1904.] COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT. 143 


[COoMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT, DiscussincG ‘‘ THE Con- 
DUCTIVITY OF THE ATMOSPHERE AT HIGH VOLTAGES.”’ 
By Ratpu D. Mrersuon.] 


This paper takes up a number of points which the writer was 
desirous of attacking at Telluride, but which lack of facilities 
prevented. 

The fact that the critical point in the loss curve; 7. e., the point 
at which the atmospheric loss suddenly begins, ismarked by the 
beginning of luminosity was appreciated by the writer in the 
Telluride work, and made use of to a slight extent in studying the 
question as to the influence which the material and the condition 
of the surface of the conducting wires had on the critical point. 
It was found that the condition of the surface as to its roughness 
had a very decided bearing on the critical point, any roughness 
causing it to occur at a much lower voltage than with a smooth 
surface. There was apparently also some difference in this regard 
due to the material of the conductor. 

Luminosity, however, is not the only evidence of the critical 
point. The rustling or crackling sound, very apparent in the 
case of an overhead line, is also coincident with it; also, curious 
as it may seem, the critical point is indicated very accurately by 
the twitching of the hair and moustache. ‘This was first noticed 
in some readings on a wattmeter inserted directly in the high- 
voltage circuit and over which the observer had to lean, bringing 
his face and body within 18 to 24 inches of the instrument. The 
metallic case of the wattmeter was connected to one leg of the 
circuit in order to take advantage of the shielding action of the 
case against any electrostatic influence. A number of trials 
showed that the observer could, with fair accuracy, tell when 
the critical point had been reached. 

As to the question of frequency, the Telluride measurements 
were conducted at a frequency of 60 cycles and also at 30 cycles, 
but no difference could be detected which could not be laid to 
errors in the instruments. 

There are two points in which Professor Ryan’s paper is in 
error. The work at Telluride was done in 1896-1897; the meas- 
urements were made at voltages as high as 72 000 volts and a 
voltage as high as 133 000 volts was impressed upon the line. - 
No measurements were taken, though several photographs were 
secured at this latter voltage. 

Referring to the possible contention, mentioned on page 128 of 
Professor Ryan’s paper, that the line-loss curves of the writer’s 
paper should be abrupt, there are some other points in support 
‘of Professor Ryan’s view One of these is that the line wires 
could not be absolutely the same through their length as to rough- 
ness and that at the rough portions the loss would first begin. 
This was very apparent when viewing the Telluride line at night. 
The line became luminous in spots, which at first seemed equally 
spaced but which closer examination showed to be unequally 
spaced. As the voltage was raised other luminous spots grad- 


144 CONDUCTIVITY OF THE ATMOSPHERE. [Feb. 26 


ually developed at points intermediate to the first ones, and this 
action continued until the whole line appeared more or less 
luminous but never uniformly so. The spots were never far 
apart, always at intervals small enough so that at a little distance 
the line suggested a string of luminous beads, and it shows as such 
in the photographs taken. Each one of these luminous beads 
had a bunch of fine purple streamers from it. Another reason in 
support of Professor Ryan’s view is that an alternating e.m.f. is 
dealt with. At first just the top of the wave rises above the 
critical voltage and as the voltage is raised, more and more of the 
wave is effective above the critical value. This in itself tends 
towards a more or less gradual increase in the loss curve. 


[COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT, Discussinc “ THE Con- 
DUCTIVITY OF THE ATMOSPHERE AT H1GH VOLTAGES.” 
By S. M. KInTNER.] 


The writer’s experience with the coronal formation on high- 
voltage lines leads him to believe that the surface condition of the 
wires is a factor that enters quite largely. This condition can 
hardly be incorporated in any formula expressing the relation 
among the various factors involved. An instance of this was 
quite forcibly brought to the writer’s attention while working with 
an arrangement of horizontal wires as a Hertz oscillator This 
oscillator had another circuit in proper relation to it to prolong 
the oscillations set up. The horizontal wires were bare copper, 
about No. 16 B. & S. gauge, carefully insulated from and parallel 
to the earth, at a height of about six feet, both ends of the wire 
oscillator being the same length. On carefully adjusting the 
oscillating period of the auxiliary circuit to that of the wires, as 
was told by two independent tests, and viewing the wires in the 
dark when the power was on, they were seen to glow very decid- 
edly throughout about two-thirds of their length, the glow being 
strongest at the ends and tapering down to darkness towards the 
middle. One wire was noticeably brighter than the other, An 
examination of the wires showed that one was old and very much 
weathered—this one glowed the brightest—while the other was 
new and had been exposed to the weather for the first time. On 
the substitution of an old wire for the new, the glow was prac- 
tically the same. 

Another point, suggested by the reported experiences of the 
Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company, in which they found it 
much easier to send messages by night than day, is the question 
of the action of light, ultra violet, etc., upon the formation of the 
corona and line losses at high voltage. It seems most likely that 
there is some such action. 

An examination of Professor Ryan’s formula brings out the 
great sensibility of the coronal formation to temperature varia- 
tion. A variation of 5° fahr. causing 1% variation in the voltage 
at which this phenomena takes place Taking as extremes of 
temperature variation for cases that would likely occur on trans- 
mission lines—say — 25° fahr. to 125° fahr.—a range of 150°, which 
would mean a 30% variation in the critical voltage 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG. 145 


Discussion ON “‘ THE CONDUCTIVITY OF THE ATMOSPHERE AT 
Hicu VoutaGEs,” at Pittspurc, Marcu 10, 1904. By 
H. W. FisuHer. 


The speaker has never made experiments to determine line 
losses due to very high pressures He knows, however, that 
unless the cable is well made, said losses can be considerable and 
the cables become very warm in consequence. When cables are 
being tested to from 30 000 to 60 000 volts, the ends have to be 
very thoroughly protected or else there will be long discharges 
over the insulation near the ends. A short time ago the speaker 
made a test of 55 000 volts between conductors of a non-leaded 
cable on a wooden reel The particular cable in question had 
three conductors and a test was made between one and the other 
two. All the spaces between the convolutions of cables were 
beautifully illuminated, and the noise of the discharges was loud 
and almost enough to make one feel nervous. The energy loss 
here must have been considerable because the cables became very 
warm. 

The speaker has obtained some beautiful and extremely inter- 
esting corona effects when making measurements of the spark 
distances corresponding to different voltages and different kinds 
of points. The tendency to brush discharges is apt to cause an 
actual spark to take place at distances which are not always 
normal. To obviate this, he has used concave discs whose edges 
are slightly back of the needle points, and by doing this he has 
obtained much more uniform results. 


[For further discussion on this paper, see page 168.] 


A paper presented at the 184th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York. February 26, 1904. 


Copyright 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


EUROPEAN PRACTICE IN THE CONSTRUCTION AND 
OPERATION OF HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION 
LINES AND INSULATORS. 


BY GUIDO SEMENZA. 


In Europe, as in America, the old practice in overhead line 
construction has always been to consider the construction of an 
electric transmission line.work that any man could do. It was 
sufficient to erect a number of wooden poles, fix on them some 
insulators and stretch some wires, and everything was expected 
to work well. The line was considered the simplest and the easi- 
est part of the plant. It is true, on the contrary, that the line 
was the part which gave the greatest trouble; but the line con- 
structors placed the blame upon atmospheric disturbances. It 
was only at the time of the Paderno (Italy) installation in 1895, 
I believe, that new views were entertained on this problem. 

The new way of considering the matter, originally due to Mr. 
Roethlisberger, an engineer of great skill in metal frame con- 
structions, was the following: an electric transmission line, 
being a structure every part of which has to bear certain strains, 
must come under the general head of engineering work, as would 
any similar structure. You carefully calculate a bridge; why 
should you not avail yourself of the benefit of statics and dyna- 
mics to make your line the strongest and the cheapest ? No ob- 
jection could be made to this simple reasoning and the Paderno 
line was constructed in accordance with these considerations. 

Following this principle, new solutions and views were gradu- 
ally entertained, and the different matters treated of in this paper 
are to be considered the result of a study of the subject by many 


engineers. 
147 


148 SEMENZA: EUROPBAN PRACTICE [Feb. 26 


The first question which requires consideration when a line is 
to be built and the pressure of the current has been fixed, is; 
which is the most advantageous wire-section to be adopted? Ina 
line you may allow any loss of energy, say between 2 and 20 per 
cent, but what will be the most advantageous value, considering 
both the cost of construction and economy of operation? In 
some instances the line-loss is limited by the regulation required 


ZS 
L 
ee 


Bete: Dimensions ou this cut 4 
are in Metric System, 


= 

a3} 
.t Aa! 

eS 

. 7 ira 

| Stee 

Ntos0 3 

iin 

3 

i 


1=00,564 


gs 


3}410 "363 
L50 x 50 : F 
Tey Sie | AE 
Note: Dimensions on this**!° 4 K a 
cut.are in Metric System, 305! os i 
J 3 > 
‘EIA, 
Py 3 
865 ie PI q 
al & VA 2 
30 = I\ | 493 
3% 925) a} Siva 
60 x oy 214 |, 13 
t + Ja 5 3 
A803 
985 2 NI a eae 
| J 50,50 
‘ re) 
TiT35¥ 
5 5 30, 
H A 50.4 50 1.046 Holby an 
fel ae jos 8 
1806— 3.7 BOF 
Iy50-=4 
5 1.7001 $60 | \Fig. 2 
(‘} 
, L A205 
126 | thd fs 
° = 190%, 
1230 


at the end of the line; or in cases of small powers and high pres- 
sure, by: the minimum section of the wire required to give the 
necessary mechanical strength; in other cases, the problem is 
generally purely one of economy. In the old practice, the most 
economical wire cross-section was determined without the aid 
of any calculation, in quite an empirical way based on the 
consideration of gross expenses, weight of wire, etc. However, 
a close examination of the subject shows this to be an important 
factor of economy. 


yt 4 


1904.) LINES AND INSULATORS. 149 


I beg to refer you to a paper on this subject I presented to the 
Italian Association of Electrical Engineers, in which the problem 
is exhaustively treated, so I shall refer here only to the principal 
points. The greater the weight of copper, the less the loss; so 
that by increasing the wire section we incur a larger outlay of 
‘capital and annual fixed charge in order to increase the possible 
income. But, while the income as a function of the copper-loss 
follows a linear law of variation, the outlay of capital follows a 
hyperbolic law. Consequently, at one of the limits we arrive 
at zero income for a definite expense, and at the other limit a 
definite income for an expenditure infinitely large. Between 
these two limits there must be, in each particular case, a value 
of copper-loss for which the profit from the undertaking is a 
maximum or any other economical condition is fulfilled. The 
condition to be arrived at or to be fulfilled must be determined 
from the data of the problem. Supposing, then, that the follow- 
ing values are known, namely: power produced; cost of installa- 
tion; selling price; operating expenses; the value of the copper- 
loss which will bring a maximum profit can be found. On the 
contrary, when the selling price is -not fixed, the value of the 
copper-loss which reduces to a minimum the anunal cost per 
kilowatt utilized may be the quantity to be determined. 

These problems may be worked out in an analytical way by’ 
writing down the equations and solving them by the differential 
calculus. But it is much better to draw the curves of the 
different elements and compose them. The graphical method 
permits one to take into account, in their true significance, some 
elements which vary according to laws we are not able to ex- 
press by analytical functions: for instance, the value of poles 
and insulators, which is not a constant, but varies with the 
number and section of wires, and especially all the quantities’ 
which enter into the problem when an auxiliary steam station 
has to be resorted to, as, for instance, the consumption of coal, 
the hours of utilization, etc. Moreover, the results which we 
‘obtain by the graphical method show quite clearly the behavior 
of the resultant value towards the maximum or minimum 
found, allowing a certain latitude in their adoption. An analyti- 
cal expression gives an isolated figure without showing very 
much of the curve to which it belongs. This method is an 
amplification of the well-known Kelvin law and permits one 
to apply the principle of this law to any case, however com- 
plex it may be. When the pressure and the cross-section of 


Note: Dimenstons on this cut 


150 SEMENZA: EUROPEAN PRACTICE [Feb. 26 


wire have been fixed, the question of the route of the 
line arises. In Europe, generally speaking, important lines 
are carricd across the country and not alongside roads; 
this is done for obvious reasons. The cross-country method 
allows the building of a straight line, thus avoiding angles 
to a considerable extent; then, again, the line is shorter. 
Of course, crossing cultivated land, as is generally the case in 


m 
b=10,737-1,86 =12.59 f 
6 606 | Mors de Xerre 


3 
em 
8 


per 
Ma 
mal 


| 


are in Metric System, IN 


| ok 


Note; Dimensions om thig 
cut are in Metric System, 


8,000} < 370 
870' SS 8,430) 
|_12*}| 440 + 
awe eh Fig, 4. 
8.8707 | s 200 | 8.870¥ 
eri 130 
10.70 j2,250 
® 1.860) '2.150 
aE meee 


Europe, the cost of building the line is increased on account 
of the expropriations; but in the greatest number of cases, 
the extra cost of purchase of land or of right of way, is 
more than compensated by the shorter line. It must not be for- 
gotten that the weight of copper increases in the ratio of the 
square of the length of the line, the loss remaining the same. 
It is often argued that following the high roads, the patroling of 
the line is much easier, but in many cases the right of way along 


1904.) _ LINES AND INSULATORS. 151 


the line across the fields is included in the purchase and the 
system proves very efficient. At all events, well-constructed 
and straight lines far from the roads do not show the necessity: 
of very close patrolling, although it is prudent to exercise it. 


Note:} Dimensions on 
this cut are in 
Metric System, 


Rise 


iF Note: Dimensions on this cut 
are in Metric System. 


; xz.200 | 
60 ny 
Scale 1:20 | ae 


Pie. 5: 


‘A most important question now arises: whether metal poles are: 
better than wooden poles? The principal reason for the adoption’ 
of wooden poles is the small cost of installation. For small lines! 


(152 SEMENZA: EUROPEAN PRACTICE [Feb. 26 


this may be true. Another reason is the assumption that 
wooden poles increase the insulation of the line; and this also is 
true, but only when the insulators are very bad. A close inves- 
tigation, however, will lessen the advantages claimed for wooden 
poles. 

First of all, I shall submit a brief history of the introduction 
of iron poles for transmission lines. The first iron poles erected 
for this purpose were very heavy. While no calculations were 
made for lines with wooden poles, it was expected that iron poles 
should stand, even with all the wires broken down on one side of 
them. This was an excessive requirement and not in the least 
justified; I have never heard of any line on which more than one 
wire broke at a time. In subsequent line-construction the 
hypothesis was accepted that iron poles should stand with one 
or two wires broken. Lighter poles could then be used. It was 
then possible to increase the spans, previously limited to 100 feet, 
to 200 feet, and later on to 250 feet; and at the present time some 
lines are constructed with spans ranging from 300 to 400 feet. 

The iron poles employed are generally constructed of lattice- 
work with a square base. They possess the same resistance in 
the direction of the line as across the line, and they can resist the 
strains in any direction. Examples are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. 

When more than two wires in a single-phase system, or more 
than three wires in a three-phase system are to be used, it may be 
found convenient to separate the wires into two lines, in order to 
render possible the repairing of wires on one side while the others 
are in circuit. In this case the support is formed of two poles 
placed apart and joined by cross-connections as in Fig. 3, ora 
support like the one shown in Fig. 4, is employed when it is im- 
portant to occupy as little land,as possible. A new form of 
double pole has been devised at the author’s suggestion. 

On straight lines:with equal spans, the only strain to be borne 
by the line is exerted by the wind. In this case.it is useless to 
employ poles.of equal resistance in all directions. A line support 
constructed on thésé considerations is shown in  Fig?.6.0 (This 
support is constructed with two U-shaped irons, cross- 
connected with angle-irons. It carries six wires divided into two 
sets, two metres, 6.5 feet, apart.... Having a very wide base, it 
presents a great resistance in the direction of the wind and a low 
resistance ‘in -the direction of the line}\in which -directiomit' is 
elastic and can’ deflect ‘over 16 inches without exceeding the 
limit of elasticity, and is called the ‘elastic support.” 


“f FQ 


1994.] LINES AND INSULATORS. 153 


In the event of one or two wires breaking, the two nearest 
poles will bend, which will discharge the following spans; and 
calculations show that the entire line will stand and no injury 
will be done to the supports. These poles are employed for 
spans of over 300 feet and are very economical. In fact, an 
elastic support for six wires and for a span of 300 feet weighs 
about 1000 lb. 


Kaw mammal 
4 | %, nae Vue de cote Elevation. 


aa | 
| 
: 
: 


2840— = 


Rae a 
bre 

9gu— - ———— - ——__- ———- 

40 


Oe a 
e 
7 z 


Note: 
Dimensions on this cut 
are in Metric System, 


1 
J 


Fig.6 


I shall now enumerate the principal advantages and disad- 
vantages of iron poles. 


ADVANTAGES. 

Duration—Wooden poles will last from two to ten years, 
according to the nature of the ground. The durability of iron 
poles cannot be definitely stated as yet, but they will surely last 
40 years, reducing the depreciation to a small amount. a 


154 SEMENZA: EUROPEAN PRACTICE [Feb. 26 


Large Spans—Spans with iron poles may reach from 300 to 400 
feet and in exceptional cases to 600 feet and more. This com- 
pensates for the higher cost of single supports, as in lieu of three 
or four wooden poles one iron pole can be adopted, reducing the 
number of insulators and consequently of weak points, and thus 


Ie. 7 


rendering possible the crossing of difficult passages, as shown in 
the examples which follow. 

Lower Cost of Maintenancc—The expericnce with existing 
lines constructed with iron poles, shows that the expense of 
keeping the line in proper repair and good working condition is 
very much reduced. With wooden poles the strain exerted 


\. 


1904.} LINES AND INSULATORS. 155 


by the wires will slightly displace the poles or rotate the cross- 
arms. . Dry or wet weather will lessen the connections between 
cross-arms and poles and between pins and poles. In some cases 
wooden poles will twist in time. 

All the above facts affect the insulators, pins, and bindings, so | 
that a certain amount of work is constantly required to keep 
them in good order. | 

In line-construction with iron poles, all these causes of deteri- 
oration are avoided and lines which have been in use from five 
to six years are in as perfect condition as they were when first 
constructed. The poles require repainting only every four or 
five years. 

DISADVANTAGES. 

A Somewhat Greater Capital Investment—To illustrate this 
point, I submit the following figures, showing the differ- 
ence between a line constructed with wooden poles and a-line 
constructed with iron poles, based upon European prices and for 
a three-wire line for high-tension transmission. 


% 


WoopEN POLEs. 


Iron Poves. 


53 Poles at $6.00.......... $318 16 poles at $24.00 555 oe" $384 
3 x 53 =159 Insulators with Concrete Foundation at 

biracketsatpl.00 5.2... - 159 9 OOM as ao a iearen see eee 144 
For right of land occupation, 3 x,16=48 Insulators -with 

EpocDer | DOlew i cecrcisro uyencnes 106 br2ekctsvatip sO Omaesi te 48 
For rizht of land occupation, 

at) $2.00) per polesige acts a: 32 

$583 ‘ $608 


Better Insulators Required—As a matter of fact, the breaking of 
aninsulator means acomplete grounding; but as we shall see, the 
insulators which can now be obtained reduce the frequency of 
this disturbance very much. On the other hand, it is not always 
true that wooden poles act as insulators as, for instance, in wet 
weather one cannot depend upon the surface-insulation of wood. 
Concludinz, from an economical point of view, iron poles require a 
larger capital investment; but the maintenance and depreciation 
are reduced to a minimum. ‘These considerations tend to make 
the adoption of iron poles for important transmission lines more 
and more general. 

We shall now proceed with the consideration of the best 
method to be pursued in the construction of a line, more espe- 


156 SEMENZA: EUROPEAN PRACTICE [Feb. 26 


cially with reference to important lines. When the land across 
which the line is to be constructed has been decided upon, a care- 
ful survey is made and a map drawn, on which the location of 
each pole is marked, the angles and eventually the prescribed 
height of the lowest wire from the ground. The single supports 
are then studied and calculated. These are divided into two 
classes; namely, normal and special. The normal supports are 
intended for small angles, equal spans, and normal height. The 
special supports are those which have to meet special conditions. 

Iron poles are calculated by the ordinary rules of mechanics. 
The forces acting on the poles are: the weight of the pole itself; 
the wind (both on poles and wires), and the strains transmitted 
by the wires. With equal spans on each side of the pole and no 


4 


Fic. 8. 


angles, the only forces acting on it are: the weight of the wires 
and the wind. When spans are not equal, there is a longitudinal 
strain which varies with the temperature. If an angle occurs, 
there is a component of the strain exerted by the wires which acts 
in a transverse direction. In the case of a vertical angle there 
will be a verticzl component. 
We must then begin with the calculation of the strains exerted 
by the wires. . In doing so the effect of wind and snow must be 
taken into account, allowing a tension which does not exceéd the 
limit of strain admitted for copper in coldest weather and with’ 
an overload of snow and ice. The maximum sag is also, calcu- 
lated in order to determine the height of the pole, as the wire 


1904:] LINES AND INSULATORS. 15 


“I 


must never come too near the ground:.. Taking into consideration 
all the above facts and effects, the poles are calculated in the 
same way as any iron structure. 

We must also calculate the weight of the necessary foundation, 
which must be sufficient to resist the overturning moment. In 
this calculation the resistance of the earth surrounding the con- 
crete foundation block is also taken into account, This having 
been done, the profile or ground cross-section is completed, by 
marking on it all the aforesaid data, including height of poles, 


Fic. 9, 


sag, Strains, etc. The strains exerted by the wires being trans- 
mitted to the poles through the insulators and the pins, these 
must be considered from a mechanical point of view, and cal- 
culated in accordance therewith. 

Wooden cross-arms are sometimes employed with iron poles, 
in which case any system of pins may be used; but in general, 
supports constructed entirely of iron are preferable. In this 
case either iron or steel pins are used on brackets composed of 
angle iron, as in Figs. 2 and 5, or even entirely of cast-steel,.as 
can be seen in Figs. 1 and 4. 


158 SEMENZA: EUROPEAN PRACTICE [Feb. 26 


A special cement is employed to fasten the insulators to these 
brackets, or, in the case of small lines, tarred rope is employed. 
This differs entirely with American practice, and no attempt 
is ever made here to use threaded insulators, as it is difficult to 
obtain good insulators with thread of the exact gauge. The best 
cement that can be employed for this purpose is composed of ten 
parts of litharge and one of glycerine, well mixed. 

The brackets and insulators cemented together with such a 
mixture form an indivisible unit, which must be replaced when- 


Fie. 10. 


ever the necessity arises to change one or more insulators; but 
on the other hand, the mechanical resistance is undoubtedly 
much higher. In fact, in a cemented insulator thc pressure 
between pin and porcelain is equally distributed over a large sur- 
face; while with the threaded-pin system, a slight bending causes 
the insulator to break, as it will in this case press against one 
point of the pin. The author has often tested insulators 
cemented on 1.5-inch rods, and always succeeded in bending 
the rods without breaking the porcelain. 


1904 | LINES AND INSULATORS. 159 


When the span exceeds a certain length, care must be taken 
that the wires do not come in contact through their oscillation 
due to the wind. It is obvious that in order to avoid such a 
contingency, it is necessary that two or more wires should never 
be placed on the same level, and the adoption of cross-arms as 
practised in America is not to be followed. In any case, it is 
easy to calculate the deflection of the wires from their vertical 
position, due to the force of the strongest wind prevailing in the 
country and midway of the span, thus finding the distance 
between the insulators to prevent the wires coming in contact. 

In the cases represented by Figs. 4 and 6 another solution is 
adopted: a line of six wires is divided into two sets of three 
wires each, one set on each side of the support and placed at a 
different height. Calculation shows that, if the two sets were 
placed at the same height, the wires would come in contact. 

Fig. 7 shows a view of a line constructed following the afore- 
said principles. 

One may ask if it is worth while to make such a careful calcu- 
lation. That is easy to answer: in order to reach a high economy 
in the use of iron poles, it is necessary to put in them only the 
quantity of iron that is absolutely necessary; and this cannot 
be done without a close calculation of every element of the line. 
The author had the opportunity of calculating the poles of a line 
built without much precaution, and found that each pole 
weighed about 200 pounds more than was necessary. As the 
number of poles was 600, the extra weight represented a total of 
about 60 tons of metal in excess of what was actually necessary. 

The problem of high-pressure insulation is very carefully studied 
by European electricians. It is well known that glass insulators 
are not used in Europe and the reason for this, I believe, is that 
good porcelain can readily be obtained here. Glass is considered 
to have a better dielectric strength, but not as good surface insu- 
lation; moreover, glass is weaker against meteorological agencies, 
the superiority of porcelain being due to the materials composing 
the glazing. It must be said at once that European engineers do 
not consider American porcelain as good as European porcelain. 
It is possible that they may be mistaken, but a few tests made by 
the author on American insulators showed a higher dielectric 
resistance for the European porcelain which in appearance, finish 
and homogeneity of material is much better. Perhaps the 
difference in these particulars may have had much to do with 
forming his opinion. 


160 SEMENZA: EUROPEAN PRACTICE [Feb. 26 


_ In this connection I might mention that it is the general 
practice to examine all insulators on their arrival from the fac- 
tory and put aside such as present a bad appearance; viz., such 
as are not glazed all over the surface, or that have cracks, spots, 
etc. This.examination is performed by an ordinary workman 
specially trained and the pieces. set aside are subjected to par- 
ticularly severe tests. A few hundred insulators of American 
manufacture came over to be tested, and they were put through 
the usual, examination. When the inspector came around, he 
found that all his American insulators were put to one side for 
surface faults. It must be said, however, that these insulators 
stood all the tests quite well. 

The fact is that in Europe insulators may be obtained quite 
perfectly finished. It is considered necessary that the head and 
all external parts should be thoroughly glazed; to insure this 
they are supported from the bottom in the baking process. 
Another advantage in favor of European insulators is that the 
factories are willing to make any shape desired, which facilitates 
the introduction of new types. 

In designing an insulator the following points are to be con- 
sidered: dielectric resistance;* resistance against surface- -arcing ; 
mechanical strength; facility of cleaning; ease of construction. 

The first two points have reference to electric qualities and an 
ideal insulator ought to be so proportioned that, under a certain 
voltage, it should break in both ways, by puncture and by surface- 
arcing. It is well known how the resistance against puncture 
can be increased, by making the insulators of several pieces, 
introduced one piece inside the other. In general, the different 
pieces are cemented together with a kind of glazing in the process 
of manufacture and put on the market as single pieces. 

The author does not follow this practice but prefers having 
them furnished by the factory in separate pieces, for the following 
reason: when the thickness of the porcelain reaches a certain 
limit, the ordinary testing will not puncture a sound insulator. 
In testing an insulator made up of two or more pieces, one layer 
of porcelain may be cracked but is protected by the other layers. 
When the tests are performed on the single composing parts, this 
cannot happen, and one is sure to have the insulators made up 
of suund parts. Moreover, each composing part can be better 
inspected and the character of glazing observed. Following this 
suggestion many factories produce insulators in two parts, which 
after test are put together with glycerine and litharge cement. 


1904.]} LINES AND INSULATORS. 161 


Experience has demonstrated that it is useless to increase 
the number of component parts; up to 40 000 volts two parts 
are quite sufficient and above that voltage not more than three 
are necessary. 

The ability of an insulator to resist surface-arcing is due to its 
dimensions and shape, the latter to be considered under a double 
aspect: 1. The protective action against moisture and rain; 2 
The property of giving origin to electrostatic phenomena. An 
insulator with a very large petticoat on the top and only 
a second petticoat round the pin will not afford a 


on this cut are im 
Metric System. 


very. good protection against rain and moisture, as dur- 
ing a storm the inner petticoat will get quite wet. Itis therefore 
good practice to have one or two intermediate petticoats, which 
will also ensure the dryness of some part of the surface in all kinds 
of weather. Care must however be taken not to put on too 
many of them, as their edges would come too near, thus forming 
a good path for the arc, besides increasing the difficulty of clean- 
ing the insulator. 


162 SEMENZA: EUROPEAN PRACTICE [Feb, 26. 


With reference to the influence of electrostatic phenomena. 
on surface-arcing it is only possible to venture some assumptions, 
although it appears that they have a certain basis of fact. It is 
well known to those who have studied tests on insulators, that. 
the surface-arcing does not always occur at once, but seems to be 
preceded by a number of static discharges between the petticoats. 
These discharges, of a bluish color, are very marked with insu- 
lators having petticoats close together, in which arcing seems 
also to occur with larger air spaces. It is not improbable that 
these blue discharges may produce an ionization of the air and 
moisture, which facilitates the striking of the arc. 

This would appear to be unfavorable to the introduction of 
intermediate petticoats, and it may be further pointed out that. 


\ 7/7) N 
KK WN 
\ 


\ 
SS 
SS 


\ 


Note: Dimensions on this cut 
are in Metric System, 


Fig, 12 


when a difference of potential occurs across a series of dielectrics. 
of different specific dielectric resistances, the drop of potential is 
distributed not uniformly, but in proportion to the dielectric 
resistances. Suppose then an air-gap so arranged that the drop of 
potential is 1000 volts per inch and that we introduce a porcelain 
diapraghm, the drop of potential per inch in the two resulting air- 
gaps may then be higher than 1000 volts per inch. Again, as 
it is desirable to have a low line-capacity, an insulator with a low 
capacity is to be preferred. Mr. F. Carcano has lately succeeded 
in comparing the capacity of different insulators by a very 
ingenious method. 

He arranged a Wheatstone Bridge with two equal capacities, 
a and b, a variable capacity c, and the insulator to be measured, 


1904.] LINES AND INSULATORS. 163 


of which we will call the capacity, x. In the place of the battery 
he connected a generator of electric oscillations, and in the: 
place of the galvanometer a vacuum tube. When c is different. 
from x the tube is bright, when by adjustment it is made equal 
to x, the tube is dark. By this method he was able to prove 
that the capacity of insulators of the various shapes used, vary 
from 1 to 1.9, a very large difference. The lowest capacity is 
shown by the insulators which have a few petticoats and one 
very open at the top, while the higher capacity is shown by those 
those which have two or more petticoats close together, and 
more so if the outer petticoat drops and surrounds the others. 

From all these facts and considerations we arrive at the con- 
clusion that the use of intermediate petticoats is to be limited to 
those strictly necessary to protect the inner part from rain and 
to ensure that a part of the surface shall be quite dry. Insu- 
lators which are supposed to meet the aforesaid conditions are 
shown in the annexed photo-prints and drawings. 

The insulator shown in Figs. 8 and 11 is composed of two 
pieces and is used for voltages up to 30 000 volts. The petticoats 
are conical and have an inclination of about 45°. The two 
insulators shown in Figs. 9 and 10 are composed of three pieces 
and are intended for 40000 volts. All these insulators have 
good mechanical strength, which is also an important considera- 
tion. 

This paper which I have the honor to submit to you, shows 
one of the ways in which you may study a transmission line; it 
is a method which requires study and calculation, but the results 
are satisfactory, and lines constructed according to these princi- 
ples are economical and, what is most important, safe in oper- 
ation. 


164 LINES AND INSULATORS. [Feb. 26 


DISCUSSION 


(J. W. Lieb, Jr., read the paper, and in conclusion, showed a 
number of lantern slides embodying details of construction of 
Italian pole lines for power transmission.) 

W. N. Smitu:—It is to be regreted that the author of the 
paper is not present to describe in detail the practical operation 
of the construction shown. The author concludes his paper by 
saying that “‘ the results were satisfactory,’ and that the lines 
were ‘‘ economical’? and “safe in operation.’”’ The methods 
outlined are so different from those in this country that it would 
seem very desirable to get in closer touch with the European 
engineers, and compare their results from operation with ours. 
A thorough discussion of details would tend to show clearly 
whether their methods are really an advance upon ours. The 
paper is an unusually valuable contribution to the cause of 
power transmission. , 

B. J. ArnoLtp:—There is a transmission line nearly com- 
pleted in Mexico, very similar to the construction described in 
the paper; it is one hundred miles long, built with steel towers 
of the regular windmill type, using from seven to twelve poles 
to the mile. This is supposed to be the most modern trans- 
mission line in existence. 

The New York Central Railroad Company has decided that it 
is safer and more reliable to have its transmission lines overhead 
on steel poles than to place the wires in conduits; this decision is 
substantiated by information secured from different transmission 
lines in operation in this country. Every competent engineer 
who was consulted, advised the company to put the wires over- 
head if possible, because it is easy then to locate trouble promptly 
and to make repairs, while if wires are underground in conduits, 
it is difficult to locate trouble and difficult to make repairs. 

L. L. Perry:—tThe type of European construction illustrated 
in Fig. 3 would seem to have been developed largely on account 
of the narrow streets requiring wires to be placed one above the 
other. This form of construction is a poor one for making inter- 
sections; a line of twenty or so wires so set would require a pole 
50 or 60 feet high. 

W. S. Drx:—-A disadvantage of long horizontal spans is the 
possibility of adjacent wires touching; the vertical arrangement 
of the wires would obviate this trouble. American manufac- 
turers of insulators are now following out the lines suggested by 
the author, and are reducing the number of petticoats, increasing 
the surface, and increasing the distance between petticoats,— 
thus reducing the arcing across. The insulators used at Shaw- 
inigan Falls have three petticoats, widely separated, and with 
these there has been no trouble. 

W. N. Smirn:—It is not clear from the figures that the three 
wires of a circuit are arranged at the points of an equilateral tri- 
angle. Do European engineers ignore the supposed advantage 


1904. ] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 165 


of putting three conductors at the points of an equilateral 
triangle? 

J. W. Lies, Jr.:—Several of the lines show clearly that a per- 
fect equilateral. triangular arrangement is intended. 

C. F. Scorr:—There has been a great difference between engi- 
neering work done inside of the power station and that done out- 
side of the station. The development of electric apparatus has, 
in general, been in the hands of a few manufacturing companies 
with a corps of expert engineers, who have developed the machin- 
ery to a very high degree of perfection. In general it is thought 
that any one can run a pole line, and the engineering of it is left 
to the wireman. The outside construction has been haphazard; 
it has been handled by many local companies with little or no 
consideration for engineering requirements; some of these com- 
panies have done their work well, but, in general, external con- 
struction lacks standardization, uniformity, and fails to receive 
the higher grade of consideration that has been given to other 
departments of the work. 

Mr. Semenza showed the speaker through the installation in 
Milan, and over the Paderno pole line; this line has the appear- 
ance of solidity and of being expensive, although the figures of 
cost given in the paper indicate that it is not unusually high. 
The substantial construction of the line and the respect which 
is shown to railroad crossings is a thing which impresses an 
American. The set of downwardly-pro]j ecting fingers about half- 
way up the poles renders the construction fool-proof as well as 
mechanically substantial. 

(A vote of thanks was given to Professor Ryan and Mr 
Semenza for their papers.) 


166 LINES AND INSULATORS. [March 10 


Discussion ON ‘‘ EUROPEAN PRACTICE IN THE CONSTRUCTION 
AND OPERATION OF HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION LINES 
AND INSULATORS,” AT PittsBuRG, Marcu 10, 1904. 

By N..J. NEALL- 


The speaker wishes to call attention to some points in the 
American practice of to-day. 

Iron Poles.—The employment of iron poles for long-distance 
transmission lines would probably meet with considerable oppo- 
sition in some cases where the freight and haulage charges are 
excessive. 

A 60 000-volt, 100-mile transmission plant has recently been 
completed in Mexico, where No. 1 B. & S. gauge hard-drawn, 
19-strand copper cables have been supported with porcelain insu- 
lators and iron pins by steel cross-arms on steel towers, there 
being usually 12 towers per mile, normal span 440 feet, although 
there are some spans of 1300 feet. . 

The speaker has never heard in American practice that trans- 
mission wires take up vibrations in opposite directions, and he 
believes that the possibility of line wires swinging together would 
be most remote. A line consisting of three wires in triangular 
formation swings in unison. On the other hand, it would seem 
that the construction shown in the paper might cause some diffi- 
culty from wires swinging together, and even more annoyance 
from a wire breaking and falling on a wire below it. 

Another condition which appeals to the speaker is the in- 
creased vulnerability of the metal transmission-pole to lightning 
disturbances. Itis a well known fact that in the Western United 
States lightning discharges often shatter wooden poles without 
impairing the service. Very often, in fact, the operators are not 
aware that such a circumstance has arisen until the patrolman 
discovers this fact on his rounds. If we are to follow a highly- 
insulated metal-line construction, the protective apparatus must 
be of the highest order to relieve this line of lightning and static 
discharges. The most common form of lightning arrester abroad 
is the horn-type, which depends for.its operation on the attenua- 
tion and consequent breaking of the arc after a discharge over the 
arrester, which takes considerable time. American practice is 
represented by a spark-gap or gaps between the line and ground, 
equipped with resistances in such a way as to cut down the short- 
circuiting current following a lightning discharge, and so com- 
plete the cycle of operation in a very short time. There is at 
present a tendency in California to try the horn-type arrester on 
a very large scale, but so far data concerning the worth of this 
type are wanting and it cannot be considered as strictly repre- 
sentative. Both here and abroad the horn-type arresters for the 
higher pressures embody some form of series resistance 

Insulators.—Both in this paper and the paper by Professor 
Ryan, we find the crux of the transmission situation to be the in- 
sulator. In all other points, generally speaking, high-pressure 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG 167 


operators to-day could, if it became necessary, increase the pres- 
sures were it not for the inability of the insulator to stand the 
increased pressure. It is not clear why the development of the 
high-pressure insulator has not progressed more rapidly. It may 
be due to the character of the materials which are considered 
proper for that device These are to-day, porcelain, glass, and 
possibly fibrous material. A common insulator to-day for 
higher pressure work weighs approximately 12 pounds, and some 
insulators in successful operation weigh as much as 50 pounds, 
the latter having stood a long-continued test of 120 000 volts. 

It is questionable whether glass insulators can be used for very 
high pressures, especially if the line should be constructed with 
metal towers and pins. It is perhaps known that a high-pressure 
condenser having glass as a dielectric will show a peculiar frosting 
of the glass surfaces under strain which on close inspection will 
be shown to arise from a tearing off of glass particles by the static 
stresses. The same action would doubtless arise in pole-line 
construction, perhaps in a lesser degree; but inasmuch as the 
surface of the insulator is a factor in the insulation, this deteriora- 
tion might have serious results. 


168 DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. [April 26 


MEETING AT CHICAGO, APRIL 26, 1904. 


Discussion ON ‘‘ EUROPEAN PRACTICE IN THE CONSTRUCTION 
AND OPERATION OF HiGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION LINES 
AND INSULATORS.” 

W. A. Buiancx:—The comparative figures given by Mr. 
Semenza for the cost of wood and iron pole-line construction 
include an item for right-of-way. It is considered necessary 
here, for good practice, to secure a full right-of-way for the pole 
line, and not separate patches of ground for each pole, in order 
to enable easy access to the line for inspection. Generally 
speaking, highways are selected for transmission lines here so 
that easy access may be secured with the least expenditure 
for right-of-way. 

The conditions for right-of-way are then the same for both 
wood and iron poles. The following table gives comparative 
prices for conditions here: 


Woop Pote.. 
53 wooden poles, 35 ft. with cross-arms and pins, $6... .$318.00 
Erection, $1.20.) fic neta ons ene een 63.60 
3: by 58 insulators, PION: 6 geile eee ee 238 . 50 


$620.10 
Iron Pore. 


9 steel towers with cross-arms and pins, 45 ft., $60... .. .$540.00 


Assetabling and” erections) (0a. kone ae 63.00 
3 by 9 insulators, $1 3070s ote ie aes ge . 40.50 
$643 . 50: 


Discussion ON “‘ THE CONDUCTIVITY OF THE ATMOSPHERE AT 
HicH VOLTAGES.” 

C. E. Freeman:—Professor Ryan’s paper raises some very 
interesting questions in connection with high-pressure trans- 
mission systems, and all apparatus and materials pertaining 
thereto. There is a feature connected with the experiments 
upon wnich the deductions of the paper-are based that is of 
especial interest. The speaker refers particularly to the 
method of measuring the voltage corresponding to the various 
conditions of brush discharge. 

During the past year or so the speaker has had consider- 
able experience in this, and has discovered, among other 
things, a most imposing array of difficulties. For example, 
in determining the sparking distance between needle points, 
it is very difficult to obtain consistent results; in fact with 
certain methods of operation it is practically impossible. 
If the needle points are fixed in position, and the pressure 
gradually raised until sparking occurs, data will be obtained 
which present decidedly irregular features due to the fact 
that even with the best regulation of pressure it is difficult 


——_—— . 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 169) 


to prevent its being raised or lowered by successive steps. 
Furthermore, the time during which the potential difference 
is applied materially affects conditions, as it charges the 
atmosphere if the surrounding space is enclosed as it should be, 
and causes any foreign particles to produce conducting 
chains between the points, produces charges in the points 
themselves, etc. 

The other method is to fix the pressure and then gradually 
reduce the gap until either the brush discharge or the spark, 
whichever one is sought, occurs. This latter method gives 
fairly consistent results. However, the character of the needle 
points imposes a most important operating condition. In order 
that this may remain constant it is necessary to change needles 
after each discharge, which, of course, results in different 
points being used for subsequent tests, the variation depending 
upon those which occur in the manufacture of commercial 
needles, which are most commonly used in this connection. 
Furthermore, the shape of the e.m.f. wave, having a given 
effective value, determines the breaking-down point of the 
dielectric under test. It is sometimes a question as to whether 
this shape is the same for the various conditions and operations 
under which the tests are being conducted, since the wave 
induced in the high-pressure winding is not necessarily the one 
operating at the terminals of the transformer. 

The other method of measuring the pressure over the spark- 
gap is to assume the ratio of transformation, or determine 
it for some low value, and assume that it remains the same 
throughout the range of operation of the transformer. Such 
a method is wholly unreliable in nearly every case, since in 
transformers of this character the’ excessive insulation re- 
quired results in very appreciable magnetic leakage in the 
transformer. Under such circumstances one of Professor 
Ryan’s problems in electrical engineering due to the conductivity 
of the atmosphere manifests itself. For the higher pressures 
the inevitable brush discharge from the windings of the sec- 
ondary causes the transformer to load up, and the ratio of 
transformation is by no means what it was under the unloaded 
condition which existed when the ratio was determined or 
assumed from the relation of the windings. We have at Ar- 
mour Institute a 25-kw., 150000-volt transformer of the 
core type. In order to test this feature the pressures of the 
primary and secondary coils were measured simultaneously. 
In order to do this something like 10 wattmeter multipliers 
were placed in series with a Weston voltmeter, and the com- 
bination connected across the high-pressure side of the trans- 
former. Upon increasing the pressure of the transformer 
another of Professor Ryan’s problems presented itself. At the 
higher pressures the brush discharge from the windings of 
the voltmeter so seriously disturbed its operation that at 
something like 10 000 volts potential difference of the high- 


170 DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. [April 26 


pressure side the indications of the instrument were practically 
useless. A Thompson voltmeter of the inclined-coil type was 
substituted and in this way this particular difficulty was re- 
moved. However, the result of the experiment showed that 
the ratio of the e.m.f. was by no means constant, nor did it 
follow any definite law, owing to the variation in those condi- 
tions which affect brush discharge. 

A most important point emphasized by Professor Ryan is 
that of the relation of the dielectric strength of the air to the 
barometric pressure. From his most recent investigations 
it would appear that this strength approximates 160 000 
volts per inch, at 200 pounds pressure. This is about four 
times the dielectric strength of ordinary transformer oil, as 
we have found it by tests in our laboratories. From this it 
would appear that Professor Ryan’s suggestion that com- 
pressed air or carbon-dioxid would form a most desirable 
substitute for oil is a good one, provided means could be had 
for maintaining such a pressure. -For large transformers 
there seems to be no reason why this might not be-done. 

Professor Ryan’s paper contains many suggestions through- 
out, and constitutes a distinct and valuable step toward the 
final evolution of high-pressure apparatus and transmission 
systems in general. 


A paper presented atthe 185th Meeting of . the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, March 25,1904. 

Copyright 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


THE RELATIVE FIRE-RISK OF OIL AND AIR-BLAST 
TRANSFORMERS. 


BY E. W. RICE, JR. 


Two types of transformers have been extensively used in 
electrical installations up to date, distinguished by the method of 
insulation and cooling employed. The “oil transformer ’’ 
telies upon oil as the cooling and insulating fluid. The“ air- 
blast transformer ”’ contains insulation material mainly of cloth, 
paper, and wood impregnated with oil or varnish, and is cooled 
by the circulation of a blast of air. In both types the insulating 
material is of an inflammable nature, and under certain abnormal 
conditions may take fire with more or less serious consequences. 

The electrical engineer must, therefore, consider carefully 
not only the relative but the actual fire-hazard which exists, and 
by proper and common-sense methods minimize such danger. 
Both types can be made entirely safe by correct methods of 
design and installation. 

I think it will be admitted that in general that type 
which contains the greater quantity of inflammable material will 
occasion the greater fire-hazard. The inflammable material in 
an air-blast transformer of say 1000-kw. capacity will amount 
to about 800 lb.; in an oil-cooled transformer of the same ca- 
pacity the amount will be about 7300 Ib. While this compari- 
son cannot be taken as a measure of the relative fire-risk, it is an 
indication to be considered, especially in view of the fluidity, the 
low temperature of ignition, and high calorific value of oil. 

While the quantity of inflammable material in an air-blast 
transformer is, as stated, relatively small, it has an extended 
surface exposed to a large volume of air, and therefore, if a fire 

171 


172 RICE : FIRE-RISK [Mar. 25 


starts from internal causes, such as short circuit or extreme over- 
load, is capable of rapid combustion. This combustion could 
be checked by shutting off the flow of air to a transformer by 
means of a diaphragm automatically closed by the melting of a 
fusible link, the fusible link so located as to be melted by the 
first contact with flame; a method similar to that employed for 
closing fire-doors in buildings. 

An oiltransformer properly cooled is probably not particu- 
larly subject to ignition of the oil from internal burn-outs or arcs. 
It is well known that oil is an excellent medium for the smother- 
ing of alternating arcs, and this principle is utilized in connection 
with oil-switches. The vapor above the oil, may however, be 
ignited by electrical discharges. Even inthis case, whilethe quan- 
tity of combustible material is enormous, the surface exposed 
is relatively small. The principle fire-hazard in an oil trans- 
former is due to the large mass of inflammable liquid material 
which undercertain conditions may become totally consumed. It 
becomes a special hazard in the case of fire from sources exter- 
nal to itself. , 

Considerations of first cost, economy of space, simplicity, 
operating costs, etc., have resulted in placing transformers in the 
same room with switchboards and other apparatus, such as 
synchronous converters, motor-generators, etc. Under such con- 
ditions, it would seem that the air-blast transformer constituted 
the lesser fire-risk than the oil transformer, and would therefore 
be generally employed if the fire-risk were the only consideration. 
The air-blast type, however, is limited in practice to pressures of 
about 30 000 to 35 000, as the static discharge which occurs at 
much higher pressures would in time break down the insulation. 
It is therefore necessary to employ oil insulation on the higher 
pressures now common. 

The fire-risk can be practically eliminated by placing such 
transformers in a room or rooms separated by suitable fire walls 
from the other part of the plant. This plan has already been 
proposed and introduced. An entirely separate building, sub- 
divided again into suitable rooms, may be employed where the 
maximum of safety is demanded. Much may be done to limit 
the risk, even when the transformers are placed in the same room 
with other apparatus, by proper systems of piping for draining 
the oil away from the building, by placing the transformers in a 
depressed area of concrete arranged for rapid drainage, etc. Of 
course any of the methods commonly employed for preventing, 


1904.] -OF TRANSFORMERS. 173 


limiting, or extinguishing oil fires may properly be employed. 

In closing 1 wish to state that I consider a discussion of this 
subject both timely and important. It is well for engineers to 
consider carefully the dangers of all kinds, both to life and to 
property, that may exist in connection with the use of electrical 
appliances. The art is not advanced by ignoring or belittling 
the existence of real difficulties, but rather by intelligently facing 
the problems which occur and seeking a proper solution. Elec- 
trical energy is capable of being produced, handled, and trans- 
mitted more safely than any other form of energy, and such 
dangers as exist usually can be foreseen and safe remedies can 
be applied. On the other hand, we must not exaggerate the 
danger of fire from the use of transformers of either the oil or air- 
blast type. I believe the fire-hazard is extremely small, and can 
be and is being reduced to a negligible quantity by the adoption 
of methods similar to those I have outlined here, 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 175 


Discussion ON ‘‘ THE RELATIVE FIRE-RISK OF O1L- AND AIR- 
Biast TRANSFORMERS.”’ 


F. A. C. Perrtne:—As regards the question of the relative 
fire-risk of oil- and air-blast transformers, the speaker disagrees 
materially from the conclusions and from some of the premises 
that Mr. Rice has laid down. The experience of the Fire 
Underwriters and particularly the practice of Mutual Fire 
Insurance Companies shows that: ‘‘In general that type 
which contains the greater quantity of inflammable material 
will occasion the greater fire-hazard”’ is not generally admitted. 
On the contrary, the question which is most important is not 
of the quantity of inflammable material, but of its disposition. 
Modern mill construction is one which shows a very large 
quantity of inflammable material, but its disposition is such that 
the relative exposed surface is small, and this is the most im- 
portant point. One question relating to the disposition of 
inflammable material is the presence of dust, not only in con- 
nection with the apparatus in question, but throughout 
the building. In the most important fires—of six or 
seven—the disastrous consequences have been due to the 
accumulation of dust. A small fire, where there is dust ac- 
cumulated, will distribute that fire very widely. In conse- 
quence, it seems to me that the fusible link is a very poor 
protection against fire, because if flame occurs we have the con- 
sequent danger from dust. In one instance of a wooden shop 
a single flame shot out, followed along dust-covered wires, 
and set fire to all parts of the building, so that the operatives 
had barely time to escape, although there were doors at both 
ends and in the centre of the building. This shows the im- 
portance in all fire-risks of avoiding the first evidence of flame. 

The writer also speaks of the protection that can be obtained 
by means of systems of piping for draining the oil away from 
the building and by placing the transformers in a depressed area 
of. concrete arranged for rapid draining. In the speaker’s 
experience there have been three very serious fires in which 
the transformers have suffered. In one case four 500-kw. 
transformers were installed on a wooden platform, each trans- 
former containing 14 barrels of oil. The fire occurred by 
reason of a small arc at the failure of an unimportant low- 
pressure switch. The fire, by dust and varnish, was immedi- 
ately conveyed to the woodwork supporting the switchboard 
and the transformers. When the woodwork burned away the 
transformers dumped over, the oil spread on the floor, and 
there was little left of the building or the transformers. A 
careful investigation was made at the time to ascertain whether 
the fire had been due at all to the transformers. Every foot 
of wire in the transformers was gone over by hand to find out 
whether there was the least evidence of an electric arc. Not 
only was there no evidence of arcing, but markings on the case 
were found indicating that so long as the transformers were in 


176 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


place and the water circulated in the transformer coils, the oil 
had not even evaporated. There were markings on the cases 
which showed plainly the level of the oil, and the markings 
opposite the water-coils showed that the transformers had been 
sufficiently hot to char the oil opposite the coils inside the 
transformer, but not to evaporate any considerable quantity of 
the oil. In the second instance where transformers were in- 
volved, the fire was occasioned by reason of a severe short 
circuit, distributing a flame to the insulation of the wiring in 
the station and to certain woodwork supports of the switches 
and other apparatus. The transformers were standing on a 
smooth cement floor and were not disturbed. All combustible 
material in the entire plant was destroyed, but on account of 
the continuous circulation of water in the transformers during 
the entire fire the only combustibles in the building which did 
not burn were the oil-transformers, and to-day every coil in 
every transformer is in operation. The wires were led into the 
transformers through porcelain bushings, surrounded by wooden 
bushings simply for the mechanical protection of the porcelain. 
The wooden bushings were burned out, but the oil was not 
materially evaporated in the transformers. In one or two of 
the transformers about one quarter of the oil was evaporated 
and in these the transformer coils were covered with a black 
sediment, but on clearing this off the transformers were put 
into and are still in service, the coils not having been injured. 

In another instance a short circuit occurring inside of a 
500-kw. transformer, the station attendant maintained the 
short circuit until he could telephone to the superintendent and 
have him come to the station. For about 20 minutes black 
smoke was coming out through the insulation bushings on the 
case by reason of the actual fire and short circuit which was 
occurring under the oil in the transformers; there was no flame 
and no conflagration due to anything inside of the transformers. 
The oil was simply boiled away. 

In a recent instance where a transformer house was destroyed 
by reason of an extensive wooden framework for wires above 
the transformers, the latter were also destroyed because the 
cases were made of thin metal soldered together, and the heat 
was great enough to unsolder the cases and spread the oil over 
the floor. 

The conclusion to which the speaker arrived from these facts 
is that the safest transformer, as regards fire-risk, is the one in 
which the combustible material is so disposed as to present the 
least surface to fire, and that is the oil-filled transformer. As re- 
gards further protection, he believes it is an error to provide means 
for draining away the oil. On the contrary, for absolute safety 
the transformer should be installed in a cement pit which can 
be filled, with water, but not above the level of the transformer, 
because if the water is flowed into the transformer the oil will 
run out and even oil on the surface of water will catch fire; but 


” 


1904.] : DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK, 177 


if the transformers are installed in a pit, which can be filled 
with water from an outside source, the pit can be filled with 
water and automatically drained away without topping the 
transformer. The latter is so connected by pipes that no 
falling part of the building can destroy the water connection of 
the pipe-coils in the transformer. In this way there is secured 
the safest possible installation of the transformer. Further- 
more in ordinary cases the pit arrangement is entirely unneces- 
sary, if only the water connection be arranged outside of the 
building so that falling parts of the building cannot destroy the 
piping. A number of years ago at a meeting of the Pacific 
Coast Transmission Association, Mr. George P. Low, who is per- 
haps the best electrical insurance expert on the coast, called 
attention to the great danger in transformers which have thin 
cases and particularly those in which the cases are soldered 
together, because oil can be heated to the temperature which 
will melt solder without setting the oil on fire. Mr. Low re- 
commended at that time to the insurance authorities that they 
prohibit the installation, where the building was insured, of a 
transformer in a case of thin metal, or where a part of a falling 
building could punch a hole in the metal of the soldered case, 
or where the soldered metal would melt. This is a wise position 
which he has taken, and as a consequence that transformer is 
safest against fire-risk which is an oil-filled transformer, water- 
cooled, and arranged so that the water can be kept in circulation 
no matter what happens to the building, and the case of the 
transformer is strong enough so that falling parts of the building 
will not puncture it. What the speaker refers to particularly 
is that when you have a fire which is not complete, and objects 
weighing 50 or 100 lb. may be falling, the case should be strong 
enough to withstand such impact and especially should be of 
such character and strong enough that the fire itself, from the 
outside, cannot, by melting the case or melting the solder, allow 
the oil to run out. With these provisions, the oil transformer 
is by far the safest transformer to install. 

J. S. Peck:—The introduction to the discussion on this sub- 
ject covers the matter in a brief but comprehensive manner, 
and the speaker is in substantial agreement with all of the 
statements made therein. 

It has been the speaker’s experience that the air-blast trans- 
former is more much susceptible to damage by fire which may 
be caused by static discharges, arcs, bad contacts, etc., than is 
the oil-insulated transformer, but on account of the relatively 
- small amount of combustible material in the former, and further 
as it is insolid and not in liquid form, it is possible to have 
such material entirely destroyed with comparatively little fire- 
risk to neighboring apparatus or buildings. 

In the oil-insulated transformer there is a very much greater 
amount of combustible material, which, while less likely to take 
fire, increases the fire-risk to neighboring apparatus or buildings. 


178 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


Under certain abnormal conditions, it is possible that the oil 
in a transformer may take fire, consequently it is essential that 
proper means be adopted for extinguishing the fire and for pre- 
venting damage to other apparatus. 

There are two sources of danger from the use of oil in a trans- 
former. First, the oil itself may take fire; secondly, a vapor is 
given off from hot oil, which when mixed with the proper pro- 
portion of air gives a highly explosive mixture. This may be 
ignited by a spark and cause serious damage to the apparatus, 
and even to the building in which it is contained. The first 
danger, that of ordinary burning, is fairly well understood: the 
oil being raised to a high temperature, takes fire, and so long 
as it can obtain asupply of oxygen, burns with an intense heat 
and gives off a very dense, black smoke. 

The oil used in transformers has a comparatively high burning 
point (a fire-test of approximately 400° fahr.), and it is necess- 
ary that the oil be raised to this temperature before it can be 
ignited. On account of the large amount of oil ina transformer, 
it would be necessary to supply a great amount of heat and for 
some considerable length of time in order to raise the entire body 
of oil to the burning point,—a condition which rarely or never 
occurs. It is possible, however, to have local heating in the oil 
so that a very small portion of it may be raised to a dangerous 
temperature and this may then be ignited. This local burning, 
if not stopped, will gradually heat the neighboring portions and 
resultin ageneral conflagration. Suchlocalheating may be pro- 
duced, for example, by an arc drawn just below thesurface of 
the oil. 

The nature of the second danger; that is, explosions, is not 
so generally understood. It has been found that with the best 
proportions of illuminating gas and air under atmospheric pres- 
sure the greatest pressure which can be obtained from an explosion 
is somewhat less than 100 lb. per square inch, and it is probable 
that with the best mixture of oil-vapor and air at atmospheric 
pressure, a force of more than 100 Ib. per square inch cannot be 
obtained. 

The speaker has made a number of tests on transformer cases 
with the view of determining the conditions under which com- 
bustion of the oil, and explosions of mixtures of oil-vapor and 
air may be obtained, also to determine the best methods of 
extinguishing the flames. 

A sheet-iron case provided with a tight cover was used; the 
oil was brought to a burning temperature by means of an elec- 
tric heater and then ignited by an arc at the surface of the oil. 
As long as the cover was removed from the case so that a fresh 
supply of air could be obtained, the oil would burn fiercely, 
giving off a dense, black smoke. Placing the cover on the case 
would almost instantly extinguish the flames. It was also found 
that a liquid chemical fire-extinguisher was very effective but 
did not act so quickly as the method of excluding the air. 


1904.] PISCUSSION AT NEW YORK, "179 


As long as the oil was maintained at a temperature slightly 
above the fire-point no explosion was obtained, but when the 
oil was raised 30° to 50° above the fire-point, so that fumes 
were given off at a very rapid rate, it was possible to obtain an 
explosion which would lift the light sheet-iron cover several 
inches off the case. If it settled back over the case the flames 
would be immediately extinguished. This explosion could be 
obtained with almost every trial, but not unless the cover was 
first removed and a supply of air permitted to mix with the 
oil-vapor. From the nature of these explosions it was evident 
that the pressure per square inch at the time of the explosion 
was very small. The test was of a qualitative instead of a 
quantitative nature, and no attempt was made to find definitely 
the exact pressure generated. 

In this connection, another instance is worth citing. A trans- 
former which had been removed from the oil, and therefore 
thoroughly oil-soaked, took fire from a torch used for unsolder- 
ing a connection. In a few seconds the insulation was burning 
fiercely ; the transformer was quickly replaced in the tank of oil, 
and the flames were immediately extinguished. 

From these tests it is apparent that if a transformer case can . 
be made reasonably air-tight, combustion of the oil cannot con- 
tinue. Where it is possible to use a riveted boiler-iron case 
with cast-iron cover, it may be constructed so that it will readily 
withstand a pressure of 100 lb. per square inch, and if it is 
properly vented a pressure above atmospheric cannot be ob- 
tained before the explosion unless vapor should be given off 
from the oil at such a rate that its escape is throttled by the 
vent-pipe, an almost impossible condition with a vent-pipe of 
suitable size. Even if vapor is given off at such an enormous 
rate, it seems likely that the supply of air would be driven out 
from the case, so that the mixture left would have little or no 
explosive force. Where this type of construction can be used, 
it seems desirable to make the case of sufficient strength to 
withstand an internal pressure of 100 lb. per square inch with 
a reasonable factor of safety, and to provide a vent-pipe of 
suitable size. In such a case oil cannot burn, and should an 
explosion occur it can do no harm. Eee. 

Where a self-cooling sheet-iron case is used, it is impossible 
to make it sufficiently strong to withstand an internal pressure 
of 100 Ib. per square inch, and for such construction it seems 
best to make the case practically air-tight so that oil cannot 
burn in it, and to provide a large safety-valve which will be 
- lifted in case of an explosion and will then automatically close, 
thus extinguishing the flames. 

It is well to consider carefully all dangers, no matter how 
remote they may be. How remote is the danger from the oil- 
insulated transformer is shown by the fact that, although there 
are several thousands of them operating to-day, many of an 
old type and often installed without apparent thought of the 


180 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


fire-risk, it is probable that the number of cases of serious trouble 
resulting from oil fires may be counted upon the fingers of one 
hand, and in the majority of these cases the trouble has started 
outside the transformer. In fact, the speaker knows of but one 
instance where the transformer was directly responsible for the 
trouble. This was the recent fire at Snoqualmie Falls, Wash- 
ington, and as it bears directly on the matter under discussion, 
the following facts will be of interest: 

The water-wheels and generators at Snoqualmie are located 
in a pit about 250 feet below the top of the falls. The raising 
transformers are located in a building at the top of the pit. 
There were twelve 550-kw. self-cooling transformers located in 
the same room. ’ : 

The first indication of trouble was the melting of the insula- 
tion from the conductors leading to the transformers. When 
an attendant reached the transformer house one transformer 
was found to be on fire; this was extinguished by means of a 
Babcock extinguisher. It was thén discovered that another 
transformer was on fire, but as the contents of the extinguisher 
had been exhausted and as there were no other means of extin- 
guishing the flames, they soon burned through the wooden top 
covering the case, then melted the solder in the side of the case, 
thus permitting the burning oil to flow out upon the floor. The 
burning oil melted the solder in the seams of the other cases 
and permitted the additional oil to flow out. The conduits for 
the low-tension leads acted as a drain and carried the burning 
oil down into the wheel-pit, and for a time the whole plant was 
threatened with destruction. Fortunately the flames were ex- 
tinguished without other loss than the transformer house, part 
of the transformers, and the low-pressure cables. This trouble 
at Snoqualmie Falls, taken in connection with other informa- 
tion concerning oil transformers, leads to certain conclusions: 

1. Where practicable, the transformers should be placed in 
a boiler-iron case, capable of withstanding an internal pressure 
of 100 lb. per square inch, the case to be suitably vented. 

2. Where a sheet-iron construction is necessary, the case 
should be made practically air-tight and provided with a very 
large safety-valve, so that an internal explosion cannot burst 
the case. 

3. Provision should be made for rapidly drawing off the oil 
in case it becomes necessary to do so. 

4, Individual transformer units, or groups of units should be 
located in fire-proof compartments, such compartments to be 
suitably drained so that in case the oil escapes from the cases 
it can flow out where it can do no harm. 

5. Adequate means should be provided for extinguishing fire, 
and the station attendants should be trained to know what to 
do in case of emergency. 

With such reasonable precautions the fire-risk to other appar- 
atus from oil-insulated transformers will be no greater than 


1904.) — DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 181 


from air-blast transformers; with either type the fire-risk is 
practically negligible. 

Dr Perrine has referred to the fire-risk of transformers 
mounted in cases made of sheet-metal, having seams riveted 
and soldered, and has pointed out the greater safety of the water- 
cooled transformer mounted in a boiler-iron case with seams 
riveted and caulked. Unfortunately this latter construction 
cannot be used on cases for large transformers of the self-cooling 
type; and as there is and will continue to be a great demand 
for self-cooling transformers it will be necessary to take such 
precautions in the installation as will reduce to a minimum the 
fire-risk resulting from cases of this type. It is, of course, recog- 
nized that a self-cooling case made without rivets and solder 
is to be greatly desired. It is hoped that a case of such con- 
struction may at some time be devised: 

CALVERT TOWNLEY :—Strongly emphasized the fact that neither 
type of transformer constitutes a serious fire-hazard. He stated 
that such fire hazard as does exist should be divided into two 
classes; first, a source internal; secondly, a source external to 
the transformers themselves. The papers and most of the pre- 
vious discussion has had to do with the internal source of fires, 
but if transformers themselves constitute a low fire-hazard the 
internal source is of minor importance. The chief danger from 
internal fire is perhaps the blast of air in an air-cooled trans- 
former, which may carry internal fire to adjacent apparatus or 
to inflammable parts of the building. It is sometimes but not. 
always possible or easy to place transformers so that the exhaust. 
air will impinge only on non-combustible materials. An auto-- 
matic device for shutting off the air, which may not be operated. 
for several years, is not likely to work when it is necessary. 

For a fire external to transformers the air-blast type is more 
subject to attack: 

First, from flames, because it has no protecting case. 

Secondly, from water, which, while it will not destroy, may 
put the transformer out of service for many days. 

In a large installation, where both air-blast and oil-cooled 
transformers are installed in about equal capacities in the same 
transformer house, a somewhat severe fire occurred external to 
the transformers. The fire was extinguished after burning 
furiously for a time without damage to either type, but water 
completely soaked the air-blast transformers, which were out 
of service’ several days or until they became thoroughly dry, 
while the oil-cooled transformers were in use as soon as the con- 
nections could be re-established; that is, in a few hours. 

Many people are misled as to the risk from oil-insulated 
transformers by the word “ oil.” That word suggests kerosene 
and the idea of very inflammable material, whereas oil of 400° 
fire test, such as is used for oil transformers, is far from an in- 
flammable material at any but very high temperatures. A 
burning brand may be plunged into it and the fire will be ex- 


tinguished. 


182 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


Both types of transformer can be constructed and installed 
so that the fire-risk will be very small, and there is no reason 
why engineers or manufacturers should particularly favor the 
use of either type against the other. 


Ravpu D. Mersuon :—The speaker must differ from Mr. Town- 
ley in regard to one statement and that is that the fire-risk due 
to high pressures is greater than with lower pressures; if any- 
thing, the contrary is true. The speaker agrees with Dr. Perrine 
in regard to the relative fire-hazard, that it is not entirely de- 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 183 


pendent on the amount of inflammable material, but is dependent 
more on the location and distribution of material. It also de- 
pends on the relative effectiveness of the provisions that can be 
taken for coping with fire. The scheme of installing oil trans- 
formers in separate rooms is not the best practice. In the case 
of high-pressure transformers it involves complications in wiring 
which are not advisable to use. The speaker is in favor of bare 
wiring for high pressures, and the moment you put these trans- 
formers in separate rooms you get into trouble with the high- 
pressure wiring. If the rooms are to be a thorough protection 
against fire they must be in the nature of vaults, which makes 
the wiring still more difficult. Ifthe transformers are surrounded 
with fire-walls in a building of ordinary construction, and a 
transformer gets on fire, the transformer goes, and the oil may 
get away from you by the melting of the case. 

In the case of an emergency such as might call for getting rid 
of the oil in the transformers, it- seems a dangerous proceeding 
to draw the oil out of the case, when drawn out of the bottom, 
because in so doing air must get in at the top and there is a 
chance of an explosion, and that chance becomes greater as 
more oil is taken out of the case. This question of protection 
against fire has been carefully considered in the case of oil 
transformers, with reference to a plant of 50 000 volts and over, 
where the ultimate irstallation will mean transformers contain- 
ing a good many hundred gallons of oil. The different methods 
of protection against fire were carefully considered and the 
scheme shown in the diagram finally adopted. The transformer 
case is built so that it will stand the maximum pressure which 
an explosion would cause, and all leads brought out through 
stuffing-boxes which will stand that pressure. To the middle 
of the top of the tank is brought a pipe running to the sewer 
and at the bottom of the transformer case is brought a water- 
pipe which has two valves in series, and between the two valves 
a drip cock to avoid any possibility of water leaking into the 
transformer through a leaky valve; the idea being in case of a 
fire emergency the water will be turned into the bottom of the 
transformer and drive the oil out at the top. No fire-walls have 
been installed in that plant although there will probably be 
some such walls between groups of transformers as an addi- 
tional protection. As a last resort such an arrangement is about 
as safe as anything that can be thought of. Another advantage 
of this arrangement is that it leaves the whole space between 
the transformer free for a high-pressure wire, which can prefer- 
ably be a bare one. 

CG. E. Sxinner:—An element to be considered in the oil 
transformer is the quality of the oil itseli. It is extremely 
important that an oil be selected which has a flash-test con- 
siderably above the temperature at which the transformer will 
run in normal operation, including overload. At the present 
time a mineral oil is almost always used and can be obtained 


184 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


with a great range of flash-tests. One having a flash-test not 
greatly above the normal operating temperature of the trans- 
former will begin to give off fumes before the flash-point is 
reached, and these being explosive when mixed with air form 
a source of danger. An oil should be selected which has a flash- 
point not lower than, say 175° cent. Such an oil, if properly 
made, will have practically no evaporation whatever at 
100°cent., this being higher than will be found except under the 
most extreme conditions of temporary overload. Too high a 
flash-test oil is undesirable on account of the viscosity being so 
great that the power to carry heat from the transformer to the 
cooler case is greatly reduced, and on account of its being un- 
pleasant to handle. 

Oil as a body cannot be set on fire easily; in fact a torch 
held to the surface of a body of oil will not set it on fire until 
the oil itself has reached the flashing temperature, or slightly 
higher. It is well known in the operation of oil-switches that 
an arc may be drawn under the surface of the oil and no fire 
results. This is true even though the temperature of the oil is 
above the flashing-point when such an arc is drawn, as air is 
absolutely necessary to the continued combustion of the oil. 
It is also true that an oil fire may be smothered with compara- 
tively little difficulty, provided the oil is not allowed to spread. 
It is therefore obvious that a well-constructed fire-proof case 
with a cover which can be made practically air-tight, placed in 
a fire-proof compartment with means for draining, as mentioned 
by Mr. Rice, will reduce the fire-risk of oil-insulated transformers 
to aminimum. ‘The great advantages of oil in insulating and 
cooling make it inadvisable on account of fire-risk to attempt 
to discard oil-insulated transformers, but to provide the neces- 
sary precautions to reduce this risk to the smallest possible 
amount. 

H. G. Storr:—He thoroughly agrees with the view taken by 
Mr. Rice, that the fire-risk is absolutely proportional to the 
amount of inflammable material contained in a transformer. 
When the insurance inspector makes an inspection of the build- 
ing upon which he is about to issue a policy, he does not merely 
look at the outside walls of the building but makes a most careful 
examination of the contents—and the rate depends greatly upon 
these contents—so that nomatter what arguments may be used 
as to the method of quickly getting rid of the oil and preventing 
it from flowing out of the case, thus spreading the fire, it should 
be treated as an extra risk as compared to an air-cooled trans- 
former. A number of instances of serious fires due to oil-cooled 
transformers have been mentioned to-night, but nothing what- 
soever has been said of a fire due to an air-cooled transformer, 
and the speaker cannot recall ever having heard of such a case 
where damage was done externally to the transformer through 
fire communicated by it. 

Referring to the general subject of fire-risks and efficiency 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 185 


of apparatus, he desired to call attention to the importance of 
having skilled attendants in all power-plants and sub-stations. 
The difference in paying the men $2.00 a day or $3 00 a day is 
very small at the end of a year, but the skilled attendant at 
the higher price will invariably save many times the extra cost 
of his salary. It seems the height of folly to expend hundreds 
of thousands of dollars on the very best apparatus which can 
be bought and then, for the sake of saving a few hundred dol- 
lars a year, turn it over to be operated by men of no technical 
education or special training. 

The very best automatic apparatus will soon become inop- 
erative if not given the proper amount of skilled attention. In 
at least two cases mentioned to-night of fires by transformers 
due to melting of the solder on the cases, it is quite evident that 
had there been an attendant present with the requisite amount 
of knowledge the fire would certainly have been limited to the 
transformer which was in trouble, instead of destroying the 
whole station. When anything happens to electrical apparatus. 
there is no time to telephone to any one for information as to 
what to do; the man on duty must be competent to take care 
of any emergency which may arise. 

P. N. Nunn:—The fire-risk due to the oil transformer is not 
negligible. In a large, modern power-house filled with expen- 
sive apparatus the large amount of oil contained in a full 
equipment of oil transformers is a. constant menace to the entire 
plant. This is shown by the present record of fires and by 
the average station record of accidents which might have caused 
fires. The risk to each transformer, due to accidents within 
itself, may not be serious, but the combined risk due to many 
such transformers is very serious, because it applies to the 
whole investment in the plant. While compelled for the present 
to use oil transformers, the conservative engineer, in designing 
high-pressure work, cannot afford to neglect or underestimate 
their danger, or fail to employ every reasonable precaution, 
even perhaps some extreme measures, for protection. On this 
account exception is taken to the spirit of some remarks made 
this evening. Their effect has been to discredit the importance 
of this risk, and the protective measures suggested. 

Within a few years the Telluride Power Company has lost 
two complete sub-stations; and while the fires may not have 
oritinated in the transformers themselves, the loss suffered, of 
which the transformers were but a small part, was chiefly due 
to the oil. It is this danger, to which all surrounding apparatus 
is subjected by the oil transformer, which constitutes the chief 
argument against it in favor of the air-blast transformer. 

It might be possible to use some highly insulating gas inca- 
pable of supporting combustion, which might be circulated, 
perhaps under pressure, through both transformer and cooling 
coil. 

P. M. Lincotn:—To start and sustain a fire two distinct ele- 


186 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


ments are necessary; first, a combustible, and secondly, a sup- 
porter of combustion. Bearing this in mind, suppose we analyze 
the relative fire-risks of air-blast and oil-insulated transformers. 

In the air-blast transformer we have present constantly and 
unavoidably both the essentials necessary to start and maintain 
a fire, the insulation of the transformer being the combustible 
and the cooling air the supporter of combustion. The only 
thing needful, therefore, to start a fire in the air-blast trans- 
former is simply a sufficient amount of heat at any point. In 
this respect, however, the air-blast transformer does not differ 
from any other combustible structure, except that under nor- 
mal conditions the supply of air is by forced draught. 

On the other hand, when we come to examine the oil-insulated 
transformer we find a structure in which the combustible and 
the supporter of combustion are capable of being easily segre- 
gated by a fire-proof wall. Relative fire-risk is not simply a 
question of the relative amount of inflammable material as 
Mr. Rice intimates, but it must also involve the question of 
the probability of a fire being started. The oil transformer, 
although it contains a considerably larger amount of inflam- 
mable material, has the advantage of segregating this inflam- 
mable material so that it can be made almost impossible for a 
fire to start within the transformer, and can also be shielded 
from a fire outside of the transformer. 

The speaker’s only personal experience with a transformer fire 
has been with the air-blast type. This leads him to doubt the 
practicability of Mr. Rice’s suggestion of a fusible link in con- 
nection with a Gamper to shut off the air. In the instance 
mentioned not only was it necessary to close the damper in 
the transformer but also to shut off the air and finally to turn 
the hose on the burning transformer. 

In the speaker’s opinion the greatest danger in the use of 
oil-insulated transformers comes from improper installation and 
consequent probability of the floor becoming oil-soaked. When 
properly installed, neither the air-blast nor the oil-insulated 
transformer involves a serious fire-hazard; but if compelled to 
choose between the two types the speaker would, for reasons set 
forth above, be inclined to choose the oil-insulated transformer. 

C. L. pE MuraLt:—He does not agree with Mr Rice that the 
greater quantity of combustible in the oil transformers neces- 
sarily makes it a greater fire-risk. Transformers as a whole are 
not by any means the greatest fire-risk in any central station. 
In Europe, at least in Switzerland and France, the air-blast 
transformer is considered a considerably higher  fire- 
risk than the oil transformer, and possibly for the 
following reasons: when air-blast transformers are 
overloaded, the insulation gets very much heated, and 
it is just possible that it breaks down somewhere, and takes 
fire either through the arc or through the heating of the insu- 
lation. In the oil transformer the oil forms, so to speak, asort 


1904,] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 187 


of safety-valve, in that an overload will make itself felt only 
after a much longer time, when the other safety devices will 
probably have had time to come into play and cut the trans- 
former out. This may be one of the reasons why air-cooled 
transformers in Europe are generally not used for sizes larger 
than about 150 kw. Oil transformers can be made almost fire- 
proof, and it is a good plan to put them in separate buildings. 
This necessarily does not mean complication in the wiring. In 
the case of hydro-electric plants, which will mostly have to do 
with high pressures, the building is generally pretty long and 
narrow, with the units placed on one of the long sides. If the 
switchboard is placed in the centre of the other long side, it is 
easily possible to place the transformers in a room right back 
of that switchboard; similarly, if it is placed along one of the 
short sides; and in both cases the transformer room will prob- 
ably not be much longer than the width of the main part of 
the central station. In both cases the leads from the generators 
will go to the switchboard, from the switchboard to the trans- 
formers, and as there need not be any switches in the high- 
pressure side of the transformers, they may go straight out. If 
the need for switches in the high-pressure side is felt, they can 
as well be placed in the transformer room and actuated mechan- 
ically from the switchboard. Thus, the line equipment will be, 
if anything, simpler than in the arrangement with the trans- 
formers in the central station itself. 

In looking at the design which Mr. Mershon shows tc-night, 
it would appear that when there is a necessity for flooding the 
transformers in order to bring the oil out, there is evidently a 
large fire, and every reason to suppose that the roof will come 
down and possibly break the oil piping which connects the 
transformers with the sewer. If this takes place, there may be 
serious danger of the oil doing more damage than if it had re- 
mained in the case. If transformers are located in a separate 
building, as just described, and placed in strong cast-iron boxes, 
or else in casings made of boiler-iron, riveted and caulked, and 
strengthened by angle-irons, and if these cases are well covered 
by a tight-fitting cast-iron cover, there is absolutely no fire-risk, 
either from the inside or from the outside, and such a trans- 
former installation may be called as fire-proof as a brick wall. 

O. S. Lyrorp, Jr.:—Before this discussion is closed more 
emphasis should be laid on a point raised by Mr. Townley. 
The title of the paper on transformers has naturally led to a 
discussion which gives the impression that these transformers 
constitute a very serious fire-risk. The fact cannot be em- 
phasized too strongly, that although transformers are fire-risks 
these are not risks which cannot be successfully coped with. 
The speaker does not agree with Mr. Nunn as to the seriousness 
of the risk of the oil. This transformer subject ought to be 
separated into three heads instead of two; namely, the oil- 
insulated, water-cooled transformer; the oil-insulated, air-cooled 


188 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


transformer; and the air-blast transformer. That they are all 
good should be emphasized. There is, however, a place for 
each type, as is usually the case with a number of good things 
of a similar character. Where water is available for cooling 
purposes, there is little question that the oil-insulated, water- 
cooled transformer is the type to be used. Where water is not 
available, the choice lies between the other two; but there is a 
distinct field for each. For instance, in a small sub-station, as 
in the case of an interurban railroad, there may perhaps be a 
couple of 250-kw. synchronous. converters and an equipment 
of from three to six transformers of moderate size. In such a 
case the blower equipment is an unnecessary nuisance and the 
oil-insulated, self-cooling type has the advantage. On the 
other hand, in a large sub-station, such as one of those on Man- 
hattan Island, there may be 20 transformers or more, and there is 
again by placing the transformers close to the synchronous con- 
verters and consequently distributing them throughout the 
building. Moreover with such a number of transformers the 
blower equipment is relatively a simple proposition, and all 
things considered, the advantages are in favor of the air-blast 
type. Therefore it seems to the speaker that a type of trans- 
former for each specific service should be selected, and having 
done so it is perfectly possible so to design the plant that the 
tisk of fire is extremely remote. In this day and generation 
it is seldom that we cannot afford to make a fire-proof building; 
many things besides transformers justify this precaution. The 
advantage of a fire-proof building was clearly demonstrated at 
Baltimore when practically the only two buildings left intact 
were the new power-station and the sub-station of the electric 
company, which were fire-proof, the fire could not get into 
the buildings. An electric plant costs so much money that the 
percentage added to make the building fire-proof is extremely 
small. With the surroundings fire-proof and the transformers 
properly located, the risk, as before stated, is extremely remote. 


[CoMMUNICATED By LETTER.] 


Howarp Baynu:—Mr. Rice’s paper refers briefly to the neces- 
sity of employing proper means of preventing or extinguishing 
oilfires. In this connection the writer suggests the consideration of 
the use of steam as a means of putting out such fires. When prop- 
erly applied, this hasbeen found by those experienced in the 
oil business to be the best method of extinguishing an oil fire, 
particularly when the fire is serious. 

Proper arrangements should be carefully planned and must 
be permanently installed. The transformers should be placed 
in a separate vault and in case of a large number they might 
be distributed among several vaults. Suppose each vault was 
equipped with one or more permanent two-inch steam lines, ac- 
cording to the amount of space in the vault. In case of fire, 
all outlets, such as doors and ventilators, should be closed and 


1904. ] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 189 


the steam turned on. Both or either of these operations could 
be arranged to work automatically. The fire would be smothered 
in a very few minutes or possibly in less than a minute. The 
prime requisite is to have a large volume of steam turned into 
the vault quickly. If the fire is confined to the surface of the 
oil and the core and windings remain covered with oil, the trans- 
former could be used again with very little, if any, delay. 

The efficiency of steam in fighting oil fires is surprising. To 
illustrate: the company which the writer represents owned an 
large earthen storage tank at Gladys, Texas. It covered 
five acres and contained 200 000 bbl. of crude oil which was 
most inflammable since it gave off naptha vapors and hydrogen 
sulphide. On August 11, 1903, lightning struck the point of 
the conical roof. The small hatch at the apex was blown off 
and a tremendous blaze started. After several minutes the 
men got the hatch on again and turned steam into the tank. 
The blaze grew perceptibly less almost immediately, diminished 
tapidly, and finally went out. 

The writer mentions this incident to show what can be done 
by smothering an oil fire with steam in a case where the fire 
has most favorable conditions for persisting. Compared to 
these conditions, those existing when oil in transformers catches 
fire would render the fire easy to extinguish. With oil-cooled 
transformers in ‘‘ fire smothering ’”’ vaults the writer thinks 
the fire-risk would be almost nothing. 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 


W. L. Warters:—The question of the relative fire-risk of oil- 
cooled and air-blast transformers can be best decided by con- 
sidering the different cases of transformers in stations with at- 
tendants, and transformers in stations without attendants. 
And also by considering fires due to internal causes and fires 
due to external causes. 

Considering first fires due to internal causes. Inanoil-cool- 
ed transformer it is almost impossible to start a fire due to a 
short circuit or a burn-out in the transformer itself, unless there 
is nearly unlimited power back of the short circuit. The oil 
will smother the fire so effectually that usually the mains will 
go before the transformer catches fire. gets 

On the other hand, in an air-blast transformer a short circuit 
will turn the interior of the transformer into a blazing furnace, 
and even though the air supply is automatically cut off the 
transformer will certainly be totally destroyed unless it is cut 
out of the circuit. Whether the burning of the transformer 
itself starts a general fire depends, of course, on the arrange- 
ment of the building. If there are attendants present they 
can take care of the burn-out and can cut out the transformers . 
before the situation gets serious 

In the case of an ordinary fire due to external causes the oil- 
cooled transformer will be completely protected from damage 


190 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


by the oil, as the latter will not be heated to ignition point 
and will prevent the heat from reaching the transformer itself. 
An air-blast transformer in a similar case would probably be 
ruined, though it might not add much fuel to the conflagration. 

In the case of a large fire, the oil in an oil-cooled transformer 
would be ignited, and on account of the large quantity of in- 
flammable material the results would be disastrous. This might 
be prevented if attendants were present to draw off the oil, or 
if automatic arrangements were employed for draining the oil 
in case of fire. But, in any case an oil-cooled transformer is a 
very serious risk in a large fire. 

Speaking generally, then, an air-blast transformer is at the 
mercy of almost every fire, no matter how started; and though 
a single transformer may not add much to the conflagration it 
will almost always be seriously damaged itself. On the other 
hand, an oil-cooled transformer is in practically no danger except 
in a large fire, and then the risk is serious. Generally a set of 
oil-insulated transformers will be a much safer installation than 
a corresponding set of air-blast transformers. 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 

Irvinc A. TayLor:—lIt appears to be generally conceded that 
oil transformers are a greater fire-hazard than the air-blast type. 
Fire is not liable to start inside them, but in the case of an ex- 
ternal fire the oil is liable to catch and produce a very hot fire. 
Internal short circuits are not likely to start a blaze, provided 
they are well under the surface of the oil, but if the latter is 
low, or the design is such that the coils are normally near the 
surface, an arc is liable to reach the surface, produce gas, and 
so set the oil on fire. The oil level should therefore be well 
above the coils. 

In transformers which are sealed air-tight, a short circuit is 
likely to set up a sufficient explosive force to blow the cover off 
or to crack the case, the oil either running out or being thrown 
out—possibly on fire. Covers should therefore not be air-tight, 
but should prevent a circulation of the air. One of the greatest 
dangers from oil transformers is the fact that they are likely to 
leak under ordinary or extraordinary conditions. In the first 
instance, surrounding floors, whether of wood or concrete, be- 
come impregnated with oil and are very dangerous in the event 
of fire. Where cases are made of sheet-iron, or jointed with 
lead, an external fire is likely to open up the seams and let the 
oil out, with disastrous effect. All cases should positively be 
made of substantial cast-iron, without joints if possible. 
Where leaded joints are necessary, the lead should not be de- 
pended upon for holding the case together, and the latter should 
be fairly oil-tight without the lead. 

Where oil transformers are used in large quantities. they 
should, where possible, be installed in a thoroughly fire- proof 
building used exclusively for the purpose and isolated from other 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 19] 


buildings. They should not be placed in buildings like hotels, 
or in any room not thoroughly and heavily fireproofed. 

It is sometimes desirable to install oil transformers where 
artificial cooling is not commercially feasible, or where water- 
cooling is more convenient than air-blast. Otherwise, where 
the pressure will permit, air-blast transformers are always 
cleaner in operation as well as safer, and their use is therefore 
more satisfactory. 

Mr. Rice’s proposal to use fusible links in air-blast trans- 
formers is highly practicable. They should be combined with 
air-tight dampers, and should be hooked in place so that the 
dampers may be worked periodically for inspection purposes. 
While such links would naturally be placed in the draught at 
the top of the transformer, it would seem that the dampers 
should be piaced at the bottom so as to prevent burning material 
being dropped into the air chamber and in that way carried to 
the other transformers. 

There should be no inflammable material, either in the path 
of the air-blast above the transformers or in the ducts, and the 
wiring should preferably be by lead cables enclosed in tile right 
up to the transformer. Where it is necessary to use rubber- 
covered wires at the cable heads in the ducts, they should be 
thoroughly fireproofed. 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 

Norman T. Witcox:—He believes that where properly in- 
stalled, the fire-risk with oil transformers is not so great as 
many imagine. In two cases of fire started by lightning in the 
step-up transformers in the Canyon station of the Colorado Elec- 
tric Power Co., he found that they were caused by an arc, 
which would not have occurred if the oil had been kept to its 
proper height in the transformer. There was some trouble in 
putting out the fire, especially on account of the gauze ventilators 
in the top of these transformers. In one case these spaces were 
blocked up with waste, which had been soaked in water, 
thereby choking off the air supply and smothering the flame. 
In the first case, the engineer of the station threw off the cover 
to the transformer, which resulted in a lively blaze. This was 
carried up the wires to the wooden framework almost directly 
over the transformers supporting the high-pressure circuit- 
breakers. 

He would not use an air-blast transformer on high-pressure 
work if he could avoid it, as he believes that not only is the insu- 
lation better with oil, but the oil prevents the insulating material 
from baking, drying out, and cracking, and insures a longer life 
to the apparatus. 


[CoMMUNICATED BY LerTrTeER.] 


A. C. Pratr:—For maximum safety, oil-cooled transformers 
should be placed in a strong boiler-steel case, with the cover 


192 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 2¢ 


well bolted on. The latter should have a relatively large flap 
opening to act as a safety-valve, so arranged that it will not 
of itself remain in the open position. 

There seems to be no doubt that inflammable and explosive 
mixtures accumulate above the oil in transformers; but the 
self-closing cover will promptly smother any fire which might 
be started from this cause. These gaseous mixtures seem to be 
formed, at least in part, by minute brush discharges in the oil, 
which break up the mineral oil into light volatile constituents 
and heavy asphalt-like residue. These effects may be readily 
produced experimentally, even at pressures below 10 000 volts. 

There should also be a considerable air-space to allow for a 
possible boiling of the oil without boiling over. Such a trans- 
former will most naturallly be o: tne water-cooled variety, and 
.will always be mounted on a fire-proof foundation. Risk from 
external fire should be small. A large body of oil in a substan- 
tial case, with relatively small exposed surface, will pass through 
a fire, such as would make scrap of an air-cooled transformer, 
and be ready for service in a day or two, upon renewal of leads 
and bushings. Incidentally the transformer cover should be 
water-proof to such an extent that water from a hose will not 
fall into the hot oil. As a final precaution, arrangements should 
be made to drain spilled oil away from the building. 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 


H. A. LarpNER:—In the discussion as to the relative fire-risk 
of oil- and air-blast transformers, the opinion developed that 
large oil-cooled transformers in boiler-iron cases with suitable 
covers and vents were practically fire-proof, provided they could 
be suitably protected from intense heat from the outside. A 
suggestion was made that this class of transformers be installed 
1n a pit which could be flooded to within a few inches of the 
top. While this gives the needed protection, it is an extremely 
inconvenient method of installation, owing to the necessity of 
occasionally moving the transformers. On account of the high- 
pressure connections overhead it is usually undesirable to have 
a crane in the transformer room, and the most common method 
is to mount the transformer on trucks so that they can be 
drawn out of their position and under a suitable lifting device 
in another part of the transformer house when repairs are 
necessary. 

Naturally the installation of transformers in a pit will neces- 
sitate the use of a crane and is therefore objectionable. It 
occurs to the writer that, as transformers are usually arranged 
along one side of a room, they might be mounted on trucks as 
usual and a comparatively light boiler-iron tank installed around 
them. The back and possibly the two ends would be supported 
by the walls of the building while the front could easily be 
held in place by tie-rods. The tank should be provided with 
an overflow of ample capacity to prevent the water reaching 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 193 


the leads, bushings, or running into the transformer case. The 
front of this tank should be made in sections so that a section 
could be removed and a transformer wheeled out to the repair 
room when desirable. 

It would not be a serious fault if this tank were not entirely 
water-tight, as water would only be turned into it during a fire, 
and some leaking would not be objectionable. : 

The method of protecting transformers by submerging them 
in cooling water is believed to be good, as there can be no ob- 
jection to turning water into the tank immediately upon an 
alarm of fire and the protection need not be left until a last 
resort. It also seems to be well established that, if the attend- 
ants will promptly disconnect a transformer on fire from in- 
ternal causes and cooling water be applied externally to a suit- 
able air-tight case, the internal fire will generally extinguish 
itself. 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 


H. F. ParsHaLty:—The experience gained in England would 
indicate that there is no great risk from either type of trans- 
former so long as it is intelligently installed. It has been pretty 
fairly proved that the oil transformer is more reliable over a 
wide range of conditions. The principal advantage of the air 
transformer is in installations like the Central London Railway 
where an accident to an air transformer brings no risk to the 
working staff, whereas an accident to an oil transformer might 
bring about serious consequences. Where, however, the trans- 
formers can be installed so that no matter what the occurrence 
there is no danger to life, the oil transformer is, in the writer’s 
judgment, to be preferred 


[CoMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 


R. S. Kertscu:—As regards the relative danger or risk in the 
use of oil- and air-blast transformers, the writer considers the 
use of oil transformers extremely dangerous, unless they are 
installed in isolated buildings. And even then, he would hesi- 
tate a long time before being responsible for the installation 
of several banks of transformers, with each transformer con- 
taining from five to thirty barrels of oil. 

The writer has as yet been unable to obtain an oil transformer 
where the case was oil-tight, notwithstanding the fact that the 
contract specifically stated that in order to be accepted it must 
be oil-tight. The writer has visited many plants and has not 
seen an oil transformer that was free from leakage. As a rule, 
a large drip-pan was placed under the transformers, to catch the 
leaking oil. 

In one instance three 70-kw. transformers for supplying power 
to induction motors were installed in a building, and during a 
thunder storm at 2 a.m. one of the transformers failed. After 
the fire the evidence showed that a short circuit had occurred 
at a point near the top of the transformer coils, burning a large 


194 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


hole in one of the cases and allowing the oil to escape, catch on 
fire, and destroy all three transformers as well as the building. 

In another instance, a plant in Montreal was supplied with 
5000-volt, three-phase power from a water-power plant. There 
we.e three 150-kw. transformers for reducing the pressure to 
2000 volts. The building and contents were of a temporary 
nature. A short circuit ignited the oil that had previously 
leaked from these transformer cases, and that which had been 
forced out of the cases by the heat and the entrance of water 
into the transformers. The entire contents of the building were 
destroyed, only the walls remaining standing. In this same 
building, having wooden floors and temporary switchboards, 
an air-blast transformer of 250-kw. connected solid to the bus- 
bars, fed by eight 750-kw. generators was completely destroyed. 
It burned for fully four minutes before the current was cut off, 
but did no damage outside of the transformer itself. 

In another instance in Montreal, two 2000-kw. 25 000-volt, 
air-blast transformers failed. There were no automatic switches. 
and in order to get the current off it was necessary to telephone 
the power-house to shut down. This required nearly two. 
minutes, which would be time enough to burn a hole through 
an iron tank filled with oil and allow the oil, already ignited, 
to run over the floor; but in the case of these 2000-kw., air-blast. 
transformers, there was absolutely no damage, except to the 
transformer itself. 

From his experience with both types of large capacity, the 
writer would not use oil-filled transformers, unless compelled 
to do so. He does not imply, however, that an air-blast trans- 
former in a frame building with a 12-ft. ceiling would be consid- 
ered safe, but in making the comparison, he refers to the installa- 
tion of transformers oi large capacities in a modern fire-proof 
station. The danger in one case arising from the possibility 
of the flames due to the air-blast reaching inflammable mate- 
rial, as against oil escaping from the tank becofming ignited and 
covering the floor of the station with a sheet of fire. While 
the oil used in transformers does not ignite readily, and will 
permit a red-hot iron to be plunged into it without danger, a 
heavy short circuit will ignite the oil, and in these circum- 
stances becomes a dangerous piece of apparatus. 

The writer suggests that air-blast transformers be equipped 
with a positively air-tight damper to shut off the air. The 
damper generally furnished is practically useless in the event 
of the transformer failing, but he has had transformers equipped 
with dampers which were practically air-tight. The parts were, 
however, not rough castings, but consisted of a cast-iron frame 
with brass gates machined so as to make a perfect fit. They 
are operated by a key hung in a convenient place on the trans- 
former. It may be argued that this introduces a possibility 
of damaging the transformer, but not to any greater degree than 
the use of a valve to let water into the transformer or to allow 
the oil to escape. 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 195 


[COMMUNICATED By LETTER.] 


H. W. Topry:—Many engineers contend that air-blast trans- 
formers are the safer of the two types. The preference being 
due, the writer thinks, to two reasons: first, because the con- 
taining tanks of oil-insulated transformers have been made 
extremely light and constantly leak oil, and in case of fire will 
often open and allow the entire contents to escape; secondly, 
because of the use of a poor grade of oil. With substantial 
tanks and an oil having a high flashing-point, these two draw- 
backs are entirely removed. 

The oil-insulated transformer is capable of withstanding severe 
and long-continued overloads without injury, while in the case 
of a short circuit within the winding it is entirely under oil 
and the arc will be extinguished before injuring more than a 
single coil. Leads coming from the various coils are always 
a source of danger unless carefully insulated and surrounded by 
oil. 

Relatively to the ability of oil-insulated transformers to with- 
stand fires due to extérnal causes, the writer can instance an 
interesting experience of a large power company in the West. 
At the time of the accident, the transformer equipment con- 
sisted principally of a large number of 840-kw. units, all oil- 
insulated and water-cooled. These were arranged in groups of 
three each for stepping up from 2300 to 50000 volts. A fire 
starting from some external cause spread to the transformer 
room where it burned for three-quarters of an hour. At the end 
of this time a pipe line above the power-plant was opened and 
the place was deluged with water for over eight hours. It 
would seem after treatment of this kind that little would be 
left of the transformers except scrap-iron and copper. On the 
contrary four transformers (which were somewhat beyond the 
hottest part of the fire) were put back into service without re- 
pairs. Others were dried out with current for a few hours and 
after being filled with new oil were also ready for service. There 
were only four which actually required repairing. On these the 
porcelain insulators had been entirely destroyed and the covers 
were badly cracked. The inside surface of the tanks, together 
with the coils and cores, were covered with a thick deposit of 
carbonized oil. A large amount of water had also gotten into 
the tanks. 

The cores were taken down, the coils cleaned, and the outer 
layer of tape replaced with new. The parts were then reassem- 
bled and the transformers put back into service where they are 
still in successful operation. It is not difficult to imagine what 
would have become of this apparatus if it had not been immersed 
in oil. 

This brings up an interesting question. Is it good practice, 
as many maintain, to empty oil-insulated transformers in case 


of fire? 


196. HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 


Wm. J. Hazarpv:—In an oil-cooled transformer, seal the space 
above the oil as thoroughly as possible and provide an adjust- 
able vent. Fill this air-space with some inert gas such as carbon 
dioxide, supplied by a gas generator which will automatically 
maintain a slight pressure, just sufficient to prevent the entrance 
of air to the case. The writer believes this would effectually 
prevent the ignition of the oil gases, and hence add to the safety 
of the apparatus. The extra complication and the cost of 
maintenance would be insignificant. The amount of gas neces- 
sary would of course depend on the rate of leakage. 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 


E. P. Roperts:—In the matter of oil transformers, the prac- 
tice of the firm with which the writer is connected has been for 
some time to place such transformers in a fire-proof room, be- 
lieving that the fire-risk justified the slight additional expense. 
Our practice has been somewhat of an evolution. The Dayton 
& Northern power-house, designed in 1900, had a separate room 
built on the outside of the building and to one side of the gen- 
erator room. This additional room was fire-proof construction 
with fire-door between same and the engine-room, with the floor 
on the same level as the latter. The one sub-station of this 
road had a fire-proof room built into the balance of the building, 
which consisted of a synchronous converter room, the fire-proof 
static transformer room, a storage-battery room, freight and 
passenger offices, and, above the latter, living rooms for the 
attendant. The floor of the static room was on the same level 
as the floor of the synchronous converter room. 

In each static transformer room the high-pressure lightning 
arresters and switches were placed. Since then this has been 
modified, and for the Dayton & Muncie Traction Co., now 
under construction, the design is as follows: 

For the power-house there is an addition to the building 
immediately in the rear of the switchboard. The addition has 
two floors and the whole is of fire-proof construction, using steel, 
brick, and concrete. The upper floor is on a level with the 
engine-floor level and herein are placed the high-pressure light- 
ning arresters and switches, while there is a fire-proof door into 
the engine-room. The lower floor is below the level of the 
engine-room basement and has a fire-proof door from such base- 
ment. In this room are placed the static transformers. The 
floor is of concrete, with drains, and in case a transformer should 
catch fire and the oil escape, it will run into the drains and be 
smothered. But even if the drain should not take it off with 
sufficient rapidity, it could not run into any other room. 

The additional cost of the building is slight, as, in any case, 
room must be provided for the transformers and high-pressure 
switches and arresters, and placing these immediately behind 
the board is convenient, and does not necessitate complication 
jn wiring or in mechanism for controlling the switches. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 197 


The sub-stations, of which there are three, are two new build- 
ings and one old one. The new buildings have fire-proof static- 
transformer rooms with wire towers; the floor is drained and 
is below the level of the other rooms, and a fire-proof docr con- 
nects to the synchronous converter room. Bp 

The old building is a remodeled warehouse in the center of 
the town. The static transformers are placed in a fire-proof 
room in the basement and a tight brick shaft runs from this 
room to the third floor. The high-pressure wires entering the 
shaft through large tile ducts, which together with the shaft 
act as ventilators for the room in the basement, pass from the 
pole line down the shaft to the transformer room. Cold air is 
taken from an area way under the sidewalk. 

The synchronous converters are placed on the first floor, on 
foundations extending into the basement and adjacent to the 
static room. The high-pressure lightning arresters and switches 
are placed in the static room, the switches being controlled 
from the switchboard in the synchronous converter room. 
This is not quite so convenient an arrangement for attention as 
the other sub-stations, but it is expected that it will prove sat- 
isfactory; it was necessitated by the local conditions and the 
decision of the engineers relative to placing the static trans- 
formers in independent fire-proof quarters. 


[COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT] 


W.S. Moopy:—Some of the gentlemen who have discussed 7 
Mr. Rice’s paper seemed to have missed the real point which 
he brought out in this paper. He refers, not to the relative 
liability of fire orginating in the two types of transformers, nor 
even the question of relative damage which the transformer is 
likely to experience should fire develop in it, but the relative 
“ fre-rigsk ”? of a station equipped with one or the other type of 
transformer. It is not necessary in considering this point to 
assume that one or the other type of transformer is inherently 
the safer or even that fire originates in the transformer at all. 
The simple question is, how much does the eddition to a certain 
building of a certain small amount of inflammable material such 
as is contained in the air-blast transformers, increase the fire- 
risk on the building and contents as compared with the 
addition to the same building of transformers containing 
several hundred barrels of oil. ; 

The question seems hardly to admit of discussion. The - 
chances of a fire external to the transformer communicating 
itself to the interior is also slight. But granted a fire can 
originate somewhere and that it may set the insulating material 
on fire beyond control, then will not a few pounds of varnished 
wrappings constitute a perfectiy negligible risk as compared 
with many barrels of oil? 

(For further discussion on this paper see pages 236 and 246.] 


“1 paper presented at the 185th Meeting o} the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, March 25th, 1904. 

Copyright 1904 by A. I. E.E. 


THE USE OF GROUP-SWITCHES IN LARGE POWER- 
PLANTS. 


BY L. B. STILLWELL. 


In a number o. large electric generating plants recently de- 
signed in America, the feeder circuits are divided into a plurality 
of groups, and a switch designated a ‘“‘ group-switch ’’ is con- 
nected into the circuit between the main bus-bars and each 
group of feeders. Obviously, no switch should be added to an 
organization of switch gear already very complicated and expen- 
sive, unless practical usefulness fully justifies its adoption. 
As this subject has never been discussed: by the INsTITUTE, 
the writer avails himself of the opportunity presented by the 
invitation of the Chairman of your Transmission Committee to 
introduce it. 

In considering a subject such as this, accurate generalization 
is difficult if not impossible. Probably no one who knows what 
engineering means would affirm without qualification either that 
he approves the use of group-switches or that he does not approve 
their use. There are few hard and fast rules in engineering. If 
such matters as the use or non-use.of group-switches could be 
settled once for all, and for all plants regardless of size, function, 
or attendant conditions, the purchasing agent would soon suc- 
ceed the engineer, the pharmacist would take the place of the 
physician, and the capitalist investing his money in electric 
power development and use would have no occasion to seek 
among technical advisers for sound judgment resting upon broad 
experience, and exercised in full knowledge of the existing state 
of the art, as well as recognition of its general direction and 

199 


200 STILLWELL GROUP-SWITCHES. [Mar. 25 


tendency. Instead of attempting a generalization, therefore, we 
may consider more profitably the arguments for and against the 
group-switch in the case of a typical plant, and then glance at 
some of the modifications of function and circumstance which 
in the case of other plants would affect our conclusions. The 
group-switch first appeared in the plant of the New York 
Street Railway Company at 96th Street, but as the writer 
had nothing whatever to do with the design of that plant, he 
selects for consideration the plant of the Manhattan Railway 
Company. 

In this plant two complete sets of main bus-bars are used. 
Switches are provided by means of which each of these 
sets may be divided into two independent sets of bus-bars to each 
of which four alternators and four groups of feeders may be con- 
nected. Eight group-switches are provided, through each of 
which current is supplied to a set of auxiliary bus-bars, to which 
in turn the individual feeders are connected through their respec- 
tive switches. One of the eight feeder-groups is used to supply 
power to auxiliaries in the power-house. The other seven groups 
supply power, respectively, to the seven sub-stations which re- 
ceive power from this central source. All switches in the high- 
pressure alternating-current circuits are of the motor-operated 
oil type. ; 

The arguments in favor of the group-switch as used in the 
plant of the Manhattan Railway Company are: , 

1—It affords an additional means of opening a feeder-switch 
that may fail to open its circuit, when operated for that purpose. 
The advantages of the group-switch in respect to this function 
to-day appear materially less than they did five years ago, for 
the reason thatthe power-operated oil-switch within the period 
named has demonstrated a high degree of reliability. However, 
it cannot be assumed that the feeder-switch is invariably re- 
liable, and, therefore, judgment of the weight of the argument 
in favor of the group-switch, based upon its use as a reserve 
for the feeder-switch, becomes a question of judgment of the 
chances of failure of the feeder-switch on the one hand and the 
seriousness of total interruption of power supply on the other. 

2—It affords means of reducing aggregate load upon the 
power-house in case of necessity, more rapidly and otherwise less 
objectionably than the usual method of cutting off individual 
feeders. It will sometimes happen in the operation of a power- 
plant that it becomes necessary suddenly to shut down one of 
the generating units. If the load carried at the time be such 


. ‘ *: a aw - ‘. 
at = ae Seals ma be 
vu . : 
ca! x re Fe Mae te : < 
RS ,OIL7-SWITCHES AN 
os nee 1 eae pan Spe ate 
74TH STREET POWER STATION AND SUB-STATIONS 
+a et oe TS 
c L D £ La A 8 c L D e 
by | ey : On aa 
| 6 6 s s 


Sus Station No & Sup Syarion No 7 Sue STATION No 6 


I 
| 


"al 


dal 
I TS 


Bus Junction 
Swirenes 


/ 


Gemtraton Generator 
Ne 7 No 6 


OUR cenciusi 


Baars - mowady” 


cmp naen 
sainarenly 


Tone fete 


ot 5 oe 


- a 


beret em ton 


Nei cs 
‘ VAs - 


1904 J STILLWELL : GROUP-SWITCHAES. 201 


that the shutting down of the generator implies reduction of the 
external. load, this can be accomplished most conveniently by 
operating one or two group-switches. 

3—Where duplicate main bus-bars are used it facilitates 
transfer of load from one set to the other, in case it becomes. 
necessary suddenly in operation to make such transfer. As bus- 
bars and connections are now installed in our best plants, this. 
necessity does not arise frequently; nevertheless it is liable to 
occur, and obviously half a dozen group-switches may be used to’ 
effect the transfer in much less time than would be required were 
five or six times that number of individual feeder-switches used. 

4—The grouping of the external feeder-circuits in group units. 
bearing a simple fixed relation to the generator units establishes a 
symmetry and proportion most useful to the operator, particu- 
larly in times of emergency. In the case of the plant under con- 
_ sideration, at times of full load, the power passing through each 
group-switch is substantially equal to the output of one generat- 
ing unit. This relation of course does not exist under partial 
loads, but under such loads it is not difficult usually to keep in ser- 
vice generating capacity exceeding the load by a margin sufficient 
to make it possible to shut down one generator without cutting 
off feeders; and in cases where this margin of capacity is not kept. 
in service it is, nevertheless, a more speedy and certain operation 
to cut off the necessary number of groups of feeders than it would 
be to cut off a proportionate number of individual feeders. 

The arguments against the group-switch are: 

1—It introduces additional apparatus and, therefore, in itself 
increases the risk of interruption due to failurein switch insulation, 
etc. The successful operation of many plants, particularly in 
America, has been interfered with by the introduction of too 
much switch gear and too many safety devices, automatic and 
other; these additions in themselves being responsible in some 
cases for more trouble than they prevent; and it is to be noted 
that the group-switch implies the auxiliary bus-bar. Hereagain 
it is unwise to dogmatize, for as the result of additional ex- 
perience the judgment of to-day may be reversed five years 
from now. As an expression of personal opinion, however, | 
may say that if the group-switch and the auxiliary bus-bars be 
reasonably well insulated and installed, the interruptions or- 
iginating in this additional apparatus should be almost ne- 
gligible in the case of sucha plant as that which we are con- 
sidering. 


202 STALLWELL :GROUP-SWITCHES. [Mar. 25 


2—The group-switch and its bus-bars imply, of course, an 
increase in cost of the plant. In case of the Manhattan plant 
this increase is about 10% of the cost of the switch gear 
and measuring apparatus, and about four-tenths of one per cent 
of the cost of the plant. To put it another way, the cost of the 
group-switches and bus-bars for the plant approximates $20 000, 
and the annual cost, assuming this to be 10% of the invest- 
ment cost, is $2000, which is about two-tenths of one per cent of 
the annual cost of operating the entire plant, including sub- 
stations. 

In the plants in which the feeder unit equals or ee the 
dynamo unit of power, the group-switch, of course, disappears. 
In this case, however, it may still be advisable to use two feeder- 
switches in series in order to avoid the necessity of shutting down’ 
the entire plant in case of the failure ‘of a single feeder-switch. 

Obviously, also, there is no reason for attempting to use group- 
switches in cases where the total number of feeders is small. 

For plants comparable in magnitude to the plant of the Man- 
hattan Railway Company, using a very considerable number of 
feeders, the group-switch is important and its use generally 
advisable. 


204 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


DISCUSSION ON THE USE oF GROUP-SWITCHES IN LARGE POWER- 
PLANTS. 


ALEx Dow:—As to group-switches ; the speaker considers that 
the separation of not only the feeders but generators into groups 
is now accepted as good practice. The drawing illustrating 
Mr. Stillwell’s paper showed a condition normal in some plants 
but not representative of general practice. The accepted 
practice is, according to the speaker’s observation, not to 
operate all the high-pressure generators in multiple but to 
separate the generators either individually or into groups and 
to give to each generator or group of generators its own group 
of feeders. The plant operated in multiple but only through 
the low-pressure distribution system—not on the high-pressure 
bus-bars; excepting, of course, that generators were put in mul- 
tiple for the purpose of transferring load or taking machines 
in and out of circuit. The separation of generators and feeders 
into groups is indicated as advisable excepting where the trans- 
mission system has considerable resistance and inductance. A 
most notable exception which—like the tied-up air-switches— 
has also come recently under the speaker’s observation is the 
Pacific Coast practice of running not merely several generators 
and feeders but several power-houses in multiple. The feeders 
and .the tie-lines between power-houses are overhead and have 
high inductance, either natural or artificial. The frequency 
is high. Such a Pacific Coast system always “ hangs on” to a 
short circuit. In one of these systems the established rule for 
dealing with a short circuit is to pull the field-switches of all 
synchronous apparatus—generators, synchronous converters, 
and motor-generators—excepting at one generating station. 
None of the apparatus is cut off from the system. -The obvious 
result is that the remaining power-station has to supply a very 
large lagging current; the e.m.f. falls, and the short circuit 
breaks; whereupon the operators at the other power-stations 
and at the sub-stations re-excite the fields of their machines 
and normal conditions are re-established. A high-pressure sys- 
tem which can be dealt with in this manner has no occasion 
for group-switches. When, however, the. conditions permit the 
concentration of a tremendous amount of energy on one fault, 
the group method is indicated and is already accepted as stan- 
dard. 

Ratpu D. MersHon:—The reasons given by Mr. Stillwell 
for the use of group-switches undoubtedly had great weight at 
the time the plants referred to were designed. That was when 
the oil-switch had not demonstrated its reliability, so thor- 
oughly as it has now. In the present state of the art some of 
the reasons do not seem to stand very well. The oil-switches 
for pressures up to 10 000 which are constructed to-day seem at 
least as reliable, if not more so, than the apparatus which they 
control. If that is the case, it would seem that one is not justi- 
fied in putting a number of switches in series, As regards the 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 205 


ease with which the load can be thrown off the power-house, 
that can be taken care of by having tripping arrangements 
which will operate a group of switches which can be tripped 
at once. As regards the transferring from one set of bus-bars 
to another, there is a great advantage for the group-switch if 
the transferrence must be made quickly. If time can be taken 
to do it, a selector-switch might be used instead of two oil- 
switches. 

H. G. Srotrr:—Referring to Mr. Stillwell’s paper upon group- 
switches, the speaker considers the group-switch as a species of 
insurance. The more valuable the contents of a house, the 
more insurance a man wants upon it and its contents; and in 
the same way the more expensive a plant is and the more im- 
portant the service supplied by it, the more important it be- 
comes to take every possible insurance against a shut-down 
due to any cause, as a shut-down of no matter how short a 
duration has a most disastrous moral effect upon the entire 
business connected with it. As a matter of actual experience 
of more than two years with over 160 oil-switches, the speaker 
has never yet had a single case where they failed to open the 
circuit when required. In some short circuits over 100 000 kw. 
were concentrated, so that certainly they have had a severe 
enough test to prove their reliability under all conditions. 
However, it would require a great deal of courage to advise 
leaving out group-switches in plants above 35 000-kw. capacity 
of generating apparatus. 

In regard to Mr. Dow’s statement as to the operation of 
plants without generators being in multiple or upon groups of 
feeders, the speaker does not know of any plant of any size 
that is operated in this way. In all large plants in New York 
City with the.exception of the New York Edison Co., everything 
is operated in multiple. He believes the New York Edison Co. 
operates its station in two sections, but in each of these sections 
several generators are operated in multiple. 

Lewis B. StirtwEeLi:—In the discussion, two things had par- 
ticularly attracted the speaker’s attention. One was the re- 
markable short circuit Mr. Scott developed when he endeavored 
to induce Mr. Nunn to open an air-switch; the other was the 
interesting and original design which Mr. Mershon had adopted 
in the important plant at Montreal. This design the speaker 
considered well worthy of careful study, although he had not 
definitely formed his opinion in respect to it; it impressed him | 
as being a substantial addition to engineering practice in the 
matter of oil-insulated transformers. 

So far as the subject of group-switches was concerned, he 
was glad to know that Mr. Stott, who is now in responsible 
charge of the operation of the Manhattan plant, agreed with 
him in believing their use to be advisable. Obviously, their 
use or non-use depended primarily upon the degree of import- 
ance attached to an interruption of service and there was one 


206 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 26. 


way to state the case in respect to the particular plant to which 
he had referred in his introduction which was perhaps stronger 
than any which he had used; viz., by comparing the annual 
cost of the auxiliary group-switches and their bus-bars with the 
revenue earned by the system in a short interval of time. As 
he had stated in the introduction, the cost of the group-switches 
with bus-bars is not over $2000 a year, allowing 5% for interest 
and 5% for maintenance, while the gross receipts of the system 
in rush hours often exceeds $5000 an hour. When the subject 
is looked at in this way, it is evident that the additional pre- 
caution is well taken. The speaker did not agree with Mr. 
Mershon in regard to the use of group-switches. The speaker 
understood Mr. Mershon to say that if by using a single switch 
for each feeder the risk of interruption of service by reason of 
switch failure was reduced to a point where it did not exceed 
the risk of interruption due to failure of the apparatus con- 
trolled, it would be unwise to double the switches. The speaker 
felt that this view was not correct and pointed out, for exam- 
ple, that if in a given plant using no group-switches six inter- 
Tuptions of service should occur in the course of a period of 
five years by reason of dynamo failures and six interruptions 
by reason of switch failures, it would be wise to use group-switches 
which might be reasonably expected to reduce the interruptions 
due to switch failure and so reduce the total interruptions of 
service. 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 


Wixiiam B. Jackson:—In determining the best arrangement 
of the switching equipment for a power-plant, two prime con- 
siderations and one of lesser importance must be the deciding 
factors. These are in order of importance: the reliability of 
service that may be expected from the system under considera- 
tion; the convenience and flexibility of operation; and the cost 
and depreciation of the equipment. 

The use of duplicate bus-bars throughout electric power- 
plants as well as two single-throw selector-switches for trans- 
ferring from one set of bus-bars to the other in place of one 
double-throw switch, has come to be recognized as standard 
construction. 

No single arrangement of switching devices can be laid down 
as the perfect one for all plants. In general, however, the most 
reliable service is attained by bringing directly to the main 
bus-bars all of the generator and feeder circuits. Each circuit 
in this case should be supplied with a master-switch by which 
it can be disconnected independently of its two selector-switches. 
With such an arrangement of circuits no local accident which 
may occur beyond the main bus-bars and ‘their connections can 
interfere with more than one circuit. Also no switch need be of 
greater capacity than that of its circuit. As the quantity of 
energy which must be handled by a switch has much to do with 
the reliability of its operation, this latter consideration is of im-. 


1904.1 .. DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 207 


portance; especially as the individual circuits of large power- 
plants usually transmit as much power as can be conveniently 
handled by one switch. 

In a group-switch arrangement as described by Mr. Stillwell 
the reliability of service is not so great as in the arrangement 
above described, since it introduces auxiliary bus-bars and 
associated connections, an accident to which will disturb the 
operation of all of the circuits in the group; also by the addition 
of currents of several circuits at the group-switch a’troublesome 
switching problem is engendered. 

By carrying each of the circuits directly to the bus-bars a 
more convenient and flexiblc system of switching can be ar- 
ranged. The individual circuit, which is the natural unit of 
distribution, is duly recognized in this arrangement. By this 
system each circuit, whether it be a generator circuit or feeder 
circuit, has its own individual group of switches the operation 
of which will effect its connections alone, and it may be con- 
nected to either or both sets of bus-bars or disconnected there- 
from with complete independence. 

Although more switches. are required for a reliable system 
for individual circuit control, yet the fact that each switch has 
to do with its own circuit alone permits of a switching system 
of great simplicity, and of perfect flexibility. The controlling 
table and instrument board can be arranged so that each circuit 
may have its own individual sections upon which all controlling 
levers, or switches, and all indicating instruments may be ar- 
ranged so that the exact condition of the circuit can be instantly 
seen, from the observation of a single section. 

It is entirely unnecessary to use a group-switch system to 
permit of simultaneously disconnecting or transferring groups 
of circuits. With most of the methods of switch control, 
whether they be mechanical, electrical, or pneumatic, master- 
control can readily be arranged for operating the switches of 
two or more circuits simultaneously, while the several circuits 
still retain their individual control. 

In the element of cost the use of a group-switch arrangement 
will usually reduce the actual first cost of the switching equip- 
ment as compared with a thoroughly reliable system where each 
feeder is brought to the bus-bars, owing to the greater number 
of switches that must be installed for the latter case. For 
instance in the arrangement described and illustrated by Mr. 
Stillwell, six circuits are handled by use of six single-throw 
circuit switches and two group-switches. To control six cir- 
cuits where each circuit is brought to the bus-bars, twelve 
selector-switches and six master-switches would be used. 

The matter of: depreciation will also favor the group-switch 
arrangement owing to the less number of moving parts therein 
contained though this will not be so great as might be supposed, 
since it is necessary to introduce the higher-capacity switches 
in the group system as already referred to. 


208 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


The cost of the switching devices required for any power- 
plant is exceedingly small as compared with the total cost of 
the plant, and a slight gain in reliability, ease and flexibility 
of operation will more than compensate for any added cost 
and depreciation that may be occasioned by the bringing of 
each circuit to the main bus-bars. 

The plant referred to by Mr. Stillwell is an unusual case in 
which each set of feeders that are controlled by the group- 


Main Bus-bars 


= a Main Bus-bars 


all Transformer Groun-switches. ) 


reacts ns eet Transformer Bus‘bars ) 


Individual 
Transformer-switchea 


Transformers 


switches may apparently be considered, under ordinary circum- 
stances, as a multiple-feeder carrying current to the same set 
of sub-station bus-bars. Under such conditions it would always 
be necessary to transfer all of these circuits simultaneously. It 
would seem that a more perfect result might be attained by 
arranging the system throughout so that all of these feeders 


would not of necessity be operated from the same set of main 
-bus-bars, 


1904.} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 209 


In power-transmission plants, where step-up transformers are 
employed, a use of switches is made that may properly be con- 
sidered in this discussion, but which is somewhat different from 
the group-switch arrangement described by Mr. Stillwell. In 
all plants where A-connected single-phase transformers are used 
it is desirable to be able to disconnect any one transformer 
without disturbing the others. Also, it is quite important that 
in changing from one set of bus-bars to another all of the trans- 
formers be transferred simultaneously. It is therefore quite 
desirable that the individual transformer circuits should be 
provided with their own disconnecting devices while transformer 
group-switches be arranged for transferring the A from one 
set of bus-bars to another. The arrangement is shown in the 
accompanying sketch. 

Taking everything into consideration, it is the opinion of the 
writer that the arrangement of group-switches as described by 
Mr. Stillwell is one of limited usefulness, and that an arrange- 
ment wherein the individual circuits are brought directly to the 
main bus-bars is usually to be preferred. 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 


Irvine A. TayLtor:—Mr. Stillwell has enumerated, in very 
concise form, the several advantages in favor of group-switches. 
No. 1 is that they provide an additional means of breaking the 
circuit in case of failure in the feeder-switches. Nos. 2, 3, and 
4 cover advantages of group operation. 

It seems as though the latter class of advantages might be 
obtained as readily and more simply and cheaply by the use 
of multi-point control-switches, used in parallel with the ordinary 
ones; as group operation could be easily obtained in this way. 

Advantage No. 1 was certainly very strong at the time the 
plants in question were designed, but, as Mr. Stillwell says, is 
not so important to-day, on account of the reliability of the 
oil-switch, but yet has some weight. 

There are few plants, even of great magnitude, where a com- 
plete shut-down for five minutes (sufficient to clear a defective 
switch), once a year or two, is of sufficient importance to warrant 
the expenditure of several thousand dollars to prevent it. Prob- 
ably large lighting companies, having a low-pressure network, 
are an exception to this, on account of the difficulty of starting 
up after a shut-down. With this exception, it looks very diff- 
cult to decide in favor of group-switching at this point of time, 
and this applies particularly, as inferred by Mr. Stillwell, as 
plants are smaller. 

Another point that has to be considered in arranging feeder- 
or generator-switches is that few men of sound judgment would 
allow a man to touch lines, or even the coils of a generator, if 
an. open oil-switch were the only thing between the man and 
death. The risk is not much; but life is too important to assume 
it. An oil-switch handle may be open, but one line may be 


210 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


short-circuited in the switch, or the latter may be broken. 
Therefore, some kind of an air-switch should be provided in 
series with each feeder or generator oil-switch, for use on such 
occasions. An ordinary air-switch having short break, but pro- 
vided with barriers, seems to be very proper for the generator 
circuit. On feeders, it seems as though a fuse-block could be 
used to advantage, as it will not cost materially more than 
the air-switches and will give additional means of automatically 
disconnecting the circuit, as well as fulfilling the above functions. 
In any case such switches or fuses should be installed between 
the bus-bars and the oil-switch. 

Expulsion fuse-blocks with spring tension have proved to be 
very reliable on ordinary power and lighting circuits, provided 
they are occasionally inspected. It would be interesting to 
know whether such fuses are really reliable for breaking high 
currents to synchronous apparatus, as this is the worst possible 
condition. The writer understands that this fuse-block has not 
the same vital objection as the air-switch, in causing an ab- 
normal rise of pressure or breaking the circuit... It may seem 
like a step backward to propose fuses, but if the objections 
noted are set aside, it would seem as if this were their proper 
field. 


[COMMUNICATED By LETTER.] 


GILBERT Wricut:—The writer suggests that in place of 
the arrangement of group-switches, selector-switches, and bus- 
bars shown on the plan submitted by Mr. Stillwell, one set 
of main bus-bars be used instead of two, and that the feeders be 
tapped directly from this one set of bus-bars, the feeders to 
be controlled electrically, singly, and in groups. This method 
of control; that is, single and group, is very readily accom- 
plished by installing one control-switch for each feeder and one 
master-switch for each group. This reduces the total number 
of switches by 32, eliminates one set of main bus-bars, eight sets 
of group bus-bars, with the necessary wiring between the switches 
and bus-bars. 

Mr. Stillwell says that the group-switches and the group bus- 
bars in this station cost $20 000. Estimating the cost of the 
16 selector-switches for the generators and the extra set of main 
bus-bars, with the necessary wiring, to cost another $20 000, 
would make a total saving of $40000. By spending, say, 
$10 000 of this in improving the feeder-switches and in addi- 
tional insulation and fireproofing of the main bus-bars and wiring, 
and on the additional control-wiring necessary to control the 
feeders singly and in groups, it is the writer’s opinion that a 
greater factor of safety on the whole plant would result and that 
the same facility of handling changes in load would be obtained 
as by the plans described in Mr. Stillwell’s paper. 

The writer looks upon group-switches, duplicate bus-bars, 
and the necessarily complicated wiring for connecting same in 
‘the -power-house, as so much insurance on the continuous opera- 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 21f 


tion of the plant; this insurance placed in small amounts, in a 
great many places and at a cost much too large in proportion 
to the results obtained. It will be seen that, a possible saving 
of $30 000 could be made on this plant by the method described 
above. 

The writer would suggest for general station practice to use 
as few switches, bus-bars, and as little wiring as possible, and make 
switches larger, more rugged, and with capacity to handle not 
once but many times the maximum load that they may under 
any conditions of service be called upon to handle. 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 


Joun B. TayLor:—The writer agrees entirely with the author 
of the paper, that no hard and fast rules can be laid down as to 
the conditions under which the use of the group-switch is, or 
is not, advisable. Apart from the question of mere additional 
cost, the following features in connection with the plant have 
some bearing on the matter: 

_ (a). Pressure.of the system. 

(b) Number of cables or independent circuits supplying energy 
to each of the sub-stations. 

(c) Liability of trouble occurring on any of the conductors 
or cables, requiring disconnection from the network. 

(d) Reliability in operation of the high-pressure switching 
apparatus used, as shown by behavior of a number of switches 
in practical service. 

(e) System of connection of low-pressure distribution; that is, 
with one sub-station out of service can cars be kept in operation 
adjacent to this sub-station, through power supplied by other 
sub-station? 

(f). Character of service,—whether city work or interurban. 

Taking up in order the various arguments given in the paper: 

I. ‘ Additional means of opening a feeder-switch that fails 
to open its circuit when operated for that purpose.’”’ The need 
of two switches in series for all circuits, both generators and 
feeders, connecting to the main bus-bars, must finally be largely 
‘a matter of personal opinion, based mainly on what the designer 
of a new system has observed or can learn from others regarding 
the behavior of. the high-pressure switch it is proposed to use, 
under severe service conditions. 

“TI. “It affords means of reducing aggregate load upon the 
power-house in case of necessity, mere rapidly and otherwise 
Jess objectionably than the usual method of cutting off individual 
feeders.’ It is evidently advantageous to cut off all energy 
supply to a single sub-station without the necessity of locating 
_and individually operating five or six controlling switches located 
at a greater or less distance from each other. While the use of 
the group-switch and the bus-bar gives the complete control of 
power supply to each, sub-station through an individual switch, 
“it should be noted that this same control could be obtained at 


212 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


an expense extremely small, compared to the cost of a group- 
switch and additional bus-bar, by bringing to a central point 
the wires which control the opening of the feeder-switches. A 
single motion of a gang-switch would simultaneously open all of 
the four or five or more feeders supplying the sub-station to 
be-cut out. 

Ill. ‘‘ Where duplicate main bus-bars are used, it facilitates 
transfer of load from one set to the other...” Obviously 
for the Manhattan station, fewer switches are necessary with 
the group bus-bar than would be required if two switches (one for 
each bus-bar) were supplied for each of the feeders. He thinks 
that in many plants the extra expense and complication of a dupli- 
cate bus is unnecessary and undesirable. In most cases, a single 
set of bus-bars, properly installed, with knife-blade disconnecting- 
switches, will be found cheaper, simpler, and quite as reliable. 
With very few exceptions, a spare bus-bar when installed is made 
use of only to allow men to work safely upon, or near, the regular 
bus-bar. The disconnecting-switches above referred to need 
occupy no additional space, and a judicious placing of same, 
to suit number of generators, number of feeders, character of 
load, etc., will permit cutting out a portion of the bus-bar, so 
that same may be handled with safety. 

IV. ‘“‘ The grouping of the external feeder circuits in group 
units bearing a simple fixed relation to the generator units 
establishes a symmetry and proportion most useful to the oper- 
ator, particularly in times of emergency.’’ This symmetrical 
relation between number of generators and groups of feeders, 
is obviously not necessarily a general case, and while the pro- 
portion will hold more or less closely in most cases of city work, 
the relation between the number of generating units and outgoing 
feeders in a power-plant supplying an interurban system or a 
portion of a main trunk-line will be quite different. In the 
case of the city system, each sub-station is supplied by a number 
of independent cables, while in the general case of the inter- 
urban system or trunk-line, there are relatively very few feeders, 
which may supply several sub-stations, passing in and out of 
the stations intermediate between the generaing stations and 
the most distant sub-station. For service of this character, 
there could in many cases be but two groups, each consisting 
of the line either way from the power-plant. In the latter case, 
a group-switch is likely to be of very little benefit. 

Regarding the two arguments cited by Mr. Stillwell against 
the use of the group-switch; that is, additional apparatus which 
may of itself increase the risk of interruption of service and che cost 
of installation and maintenance, the writer comments as follows: 

The advantages to be gained through a complicated system 
of connections and switches equipped with all the various 
automatic and protective devices for overload and reversal in 
direction of energy transfer, with arrangements for instantaneous 
operation and adjustable time-limit, are always more plainly 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 1213 


evident on paper than in a plant in practical operation. It is 
better to err on the side of simplicity, giving the reduced amount 
of apparatus rigid inspection and attention, than to go to the 
other extreme of constructing a cumbersome switching arrange- 
ment, which is flexible only in theory, and confuses the operators 
in times of emergency by offering a number of possible combi- 
nations, each of which may be right, but no one of which is the 
only thing to be done, and that in a hurry. 
Referring to the diagram of bus-bars and switches in the 74th 
Street station of the Manhattan Railway Company, it will be 
noted that each of the group bus-bars is fed at a single point and 
has no sectionalizing switches. Now this means that no work 
can be done on agroup bus-bar without entirely shutting down a 
sub-station, and any trouble occurring on this bus-bar or on the 
connections between it and the switches, will cause a complete 


Feeders to 
Sub-station 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
FE AEN pene mens Sy SO 0s cares Sao Si DP SoraS aoa S eh Rh ee ad EN 
veal H Wpotti ' | a ' t 
Group 4 } Y 
sf i sig tas 


fe) MG Ok ah NOP RI Gn a Ora 20 | 


CONNECTIONS OF SWITCHES AND BUS-BARS 
FORA 
LARGE POWER PLANT 


we Knife disconnecting switch 


we ration NOTE: A single conductor of three-phase system is Shown in diagram 
(55) High-pressure oil-sw 


shut-down of a sub-station, until the trouble can be repaired 
or cleared. This criticism could easily be avoided by feeding 
the auxiliary bus-bar at the middle instead of at one end, and in- 
serting knife-blade sectionalizing switches either side of the 
feeding point. Such an arrangement would permit the opera- 
tion of the sub-station with half of the feeders, while work might 
be done on the other half of the group bus-bar. Astill better ar- 
rangement would be to tap one of the group-switches at each 
end of the group bus-bar, knife disconnecting-switches being in- 
serted in the middle of the group bus-bar. 

Inthe accompanying sketch, the writer has drawn up an arrange- 
ment of switches and bus-bars which is essentially a single main 
bus-bar and aseries of group bus-bars, which, however, may be in- 
- terconnected to form a reserve main bus-bar in case of trouble or 
to facilitate work upon the main bus-bar. It willbenoted that this 


214 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


arrangement in its normal connection retains the group switch 
and also provides two switches in series between each generator and 
the bus-bar. The writer has shown the same number “of generators 
and groups as are shown in the Manhattan diagram, and it will 
be noted that sixteen less high-pressure oil-switches are re- 
quired. Oil-switches might be substituted for the xnife-switches 
connecting the different group bus-bars and also in place of 
the knife sectionalizing-switches inthe main bus-bar, but the 
writer considers the use of oil- switches at these points unneces- 
sary. 


[CoMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 


H. F. ParsuaLi:—So far as the writer is aware the only in- 
stallation in. Great Britain using group-switches is that of the 
Glasgow Corporation Tramways Department, the sole reason 
at the time being to safeguard against the failure of individual 
switches. With absolutely reliable switches there would be no 
possible advantage in such an arrangement. Granted that 
each switch safely and reliably controls its own circuit a duplica- 
tion of switches is unnecessary and undesirable. 


[For further discussion on this paper see pages 238, 247, and 249} 


A paper presented at the 185th Meeting of the ° 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, March 25, 1904. 

Copyright 1904, by A. 1. ELE. 


OIL-SWITCHES FOR HIGH PRESSURES. 


BY E. M. HEWLETT. 


This paper naturally compares the oil-break switch with 
the air-break switch. In treating- this subject the, following 
points appear to be the main points for consideration: 

1—Abnormal Rise in Pressure: owing to the fact that in 
oil-switches the circuit is opened at the zero point of the wave, 
the rise of pressure found in the air-break switch is not experi- 
enced. This point is of particular importance in high-pressure, 
long-distance lines, and in cables carrying considerable energy. 

2—Capacity: experience has proved that oil-switches may 
be designed to break circuits of practically unlimited capacity. 

3—Length of Arc: owing to the smothering action of the 
oil on the arc the length of arc under oil is only a fraction of its 
length in air. 

4—Insulation: the insulating qualities of the oil decrease 
the distance required to prevent leakage and arcing. 

5—Size of Switch: owing to the fact that the arc length is 
materially decreased and the value of the oil as an insulation 
reduces the creeping surface, an oil-switch can be made very 
much more compact than an air-switch. 

6—Remote Control: the design of the oil-switch lends itself 
readily to operation by control from a distance. 

7—Arc Confined: the fact that the arc is ruptured under 
the oil within the switch has two advantages; lst. switches can 
be placed close together without danger of short circuit; 2d. in 
case of emergency, confusion is avoided as there is no visible arc 


to disconcert the attendant. 
Bits) 


216 HEWLETT : OIL-SWITCHES. [Mar. 25 


8—Station Arrangement: the flexibility of the oil-switch 
places no limitations on the station arrangement, permitting 
the circuits and bus-bars to be arranged in the most advantage- 
Ous manner. 

9—Isolation of Phases: the possibility of complete isolation 
of the phases in a reasonable space is easily secured by the use of 
oil-switches 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. oz 


Discussion ON “ O1L-SwiTCcHES FOR HIGH PRESSURES.”’ 


C. C. CHEsNEY:—(A) Itis quite apparent that inthe rapid evo- 
lution and in the perfecting of electrical machinery for power- 
stations, switch and switch-control design have been more or 
less neglected. On account of the great importance to all 
power stations of good switching mechanism, the reason for 
this neglect is rather difficult at this date to understand, although 
it is evidently more or less due to the apparent simplicity of a 
rather difficult problem. While dynamo, engine, and wheel de- 
sign have been reduced to an almost exact science by the best 
talent of the engineering profession, the switch and the control- 
ling mechanism have been refused the attention they deserve, 
although it may be safely stated that in power-stations of this 
country there are more shut-downs due to defective and inad- 
equate switching mechanism than to any other one cause. Mr. 
E. W. Rice, several years ago in his paper on “‘ High-Potential 
Control”’ pointed out the inadequate means at hand at that 
time for controlling and switching currents of large volume and 
pressure. In the same paper he described certain switches 
designed by the General Electric Co., which from extensive tests 
were believed would meet any and all requirements of heavy 
station-service. Since then these switches in actual service have 
fulfilled the designers’ expectations. During the same period, 
the other manufacturing companies specially interested in high- 
pressure alternating-current machinery have developed high- 
pressure switches, on more or less different lines, which are 
believed to be equally good. However this may be, it can 
hardly be expected that the design of any of these switches is 
final and that there is no room for further improvement. The 
following notes are therefore offered in order to outline the more 
important features and essential elements which have made 
some of the later switches successful, but without any attempt 
to describe any particular make of switch or describe any par- 
ticular switch design. 

(B) Types: on American high-pressure transmission lines there 
are four general types of switches now in use: 
1 Switches designed to break the circuit in the open air. 

2 Switches designed to break the circuit in an enclosed air- 
space. 

3 Switches designed to break the circuit with the aid of an 
enclosed metal fuse. 

4 Switches designed to break the circuit under oil. 

Type No. 1. The large amount of space required by this 
switch in order to be certain that the are will be broken makes 
its use impossible except in rare instances and then it can be 
used with safety only when the line pressure is comparatively 
low, for the reason that a circuit containing inductance and 
capacity may have very high-pressure oscillations set up in it 
by an open air arc, unless the current is broken at zero value. 
The result of the increased pressure 1s likely to be the destruc- 


218 _ HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


tion of the insulation’ on some part ‘of the system, suse) 
that of the transformers. 

Type No. 2. This switch is a decided improvement over: 
Type No. 1, as far as the amount of space occupied is concerned, 
but its effect on circuits containing inductance and capacity is, 
very little different. from Type 1,so that there will be the same 
oscillatory rises of pressure and the same destruction. of the 
insulation on opening the circuit.. In addition, the explosion. 
on opening heavy currents with this switch is at times so terrific 
as. to endanger not only the switch itself, but all. delicate in- 
struments in the immediate neighborhood. : 

Type No. 3. Two. forms of. this. switch has been more or less. 
used. In the first form the fuse is connected in parallel, and in. 
the second in series with the current carrying parts of the switch. 
The first form is limited to low-pressure circuits, because of the. 
total unreliability of the enclosed fuse on comparatively high 
pressures when the circuit is fed.from large central stations. 
The second form operates through the severing of. a metal fuse 
within an enclosing tube filled with powdered -carbonate. of. 
lime, or some other non-conducting. powder. The end of, the 
fuse is drawn through the tube by the moving arm of.the switch. 
and the circuit is opened’ without serious..commotion- if.;the, 
switch has been well designed and care has been taken properly: 
to fill the tube. | The switch will open safely almost any circuit 
at almost any pressure, but like the open air-switch is limited 
by the amount of space required, while the powder. set, flying 
by. the explosion of the arc is a decided objection if there i is any 
moving machinery in the same room. 

Type No. 4. This typeof switch has within the. past, year 
been. almost’ universally. recognized as the only switch to jbe 
used for high-pressure work, for the reason that it can be made. 
in compact form..at reasonable. cost and. when. properly. built, 
will disconnect from the generating system with certainty, and 
safety any circuit under any condition of load, even .a.low re- 
sistance short circuit.. Contrary to general expectations, it has 
been shown by a number of experiments that the opening. of a 
circuit by an oil-switch is not a quick break; the oscillograph 
shows that the effect of, the oil is to allow the arc to continue 
for several periods and ‘then, as a rule, to break the current at the 
zero point of the wave. Asa consequence, the opening of any 
circuit with oil-switches is rarely accompanied by destructive 
rises of pressure. The true reason for this fortunate action of 
the oil-switch is rather difficult to see, One prominent ex- 
perimenter has attributed it to the “ practical incompressibility 
of the oil, and, in consequence, the gas bubble which is formed 
at the terminals of the switch is under an enormous pressure 
and holds the arc up to the next zero value of the current. At 
the next zero value of current the liquid pressure blows out 
the arc.”’ Another holds that by the breaking up of particles 
of oil by the arc, a high resistance conducting strata is formed 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 219 


between the terminals of the switch, which allows the circuit 
gradually to discharge itself. It is probable that both of these 
phenomena may simultaneously enter into the action, because 
it is true that an oil-switch creates less fuss in the oil if it is. 
opened slowly; but it is also true that an oil-switch for 40 000 
or 50 000 volts must have a depth of oil over the terminals of 
at least four or five inches. If less depth of oil is used, the oil 
is likely to be thrown out of the oil pots, on the opening of the 
circuit, although the arc will be broken. 

Of the two types of oil switches, used on 20 000,- 30 000-and 
40 000-volt circuits, one, the plunger type, breaks the arc in a 
vertical plane, while the other: breaks the arc in»a ;horizontal 
plane. The plunger type has been used quite extensively in 
the larger power-stations of the East. The other form has been 
used more particularly by one or two of the larger Pacific Coast 
long-distance power-transmission companies. Some time ago 
the writer had an opportunity to test thoroughly a switch of 
the latter type on the circuits of the Bay Counties Power Com- 
pany. 

The switch was of the three-pole type and was arranged to 
break simultaneously the three legs of the three-phase circuit. 
During the regular running of the plant it had given satisfactory 
results under rather trying conditions. In order more thor- 
oughly to test the arc-breaking qualities of the switch, one pole 
was connected across the main transmission line and the line 
was short-circuited at the full line pressure. The short circuit 
was then opened by one pole of this switch. As the switch 
was hand operated, there was no record of the exact time length 
of the short circuit, but it was not over one second. These 
experiments were repeated a number of.times at both ends of 
the 150-mile line of the Bay Counties Power Company. Each, 
time the circuit was opened without disturbance of any kind, 
and, as far as it could be determined, the short circuit was 
opened equally as well at either end of the line. During these 
experiments the Bay Counties Company were supplying their 
regular customers, and were operating at a line pressure be- 
tween 45 000 and 46000 volts. All of the alternating current 
generatorsat both power-houses were in operation and theoutput 
amounted to about 11 000 kw. 

Fig. 1 shows one pole of this switch and gives the approximate | 
dimensions. The mechanical construction of the switch is ex- 
tremely simple. The contact-arm is mounted on an insulator 
at the end of the vertical operating rod. The outer ends of 
the contact arm carry fingers, which make contact with ter- 
minal-blocks on the ends of the studs which pass through the 
porcelain insulators to the line. It will be noted that each pole 
has two breaks in series, each about nineinches long. Theswitch 
was operated by rotating the operating rod which moved the 
contact arm through an angle about 90°. The oil-tank was 28 
inches in diameter and there were about five inches of oil over the 


220 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25: 


contacts. During the test the cover of the switch was off so that. 
the. breaking of the arc could be observed. At each break 
there was a small arc formed at the terminal-blocks, but there 
was only a very slight elevation of the surface of oil immediately 
over the arc. 


| i 
at 
A;-- +t 
ii 

i 
\\ 


X Position of Contact’ 
«\when switch is open 


| 
— 


ve 


° 


i = 


ihe 


Bee A 
Kanda 
% 


WY) 
Erout Elevation, Section of Tank 
ana-Slab on line A-B 


IRIE IG 


(C) On the assumption that the oil-switch, in the present 
state of the art, is the only switch to be used for high-pressure 
work, the following points of construction will bear consideration 
after the particular form of oil-switch has been selected: 


1904.] . DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 221 


1 Rating: The performance of the switch under abnormal 
conditions of a low resistance short circuit should be considered 
as well as the capacity of the switch under normal operating 
conditions. 

2 Oil: Any good paraffine oil will answer, but it should have 
about the following characteristics: : 


PAS HID Cs Olibee en cece et cries tee 215° cent. 
Bife? Bestest. Gai eae are tree eer eee 250° cent. 
SPECINCLOEAVIU a enc Soke eee 0.865 
NVESCOSULM eatmee tat et etre tute oe eee 

RCL Ae eee er Ee cen es Ne a ae Be None. 

DAK Oia tare tani, RE ka eee None. 
PUG apOtalOM se. uk te a. eae eee NN Coole: 


3 Insulation: The insulators and insulating bushings should 
be either glass or porcelain. The switch should stand a break- 
down test between the live parts and the metal case ar.d frame- 
work of at least twice the working pressure. The external 
terminals should be far enough apart, or sufficiently well in- 
sulated, so that there can be no possibility of the current striking 
across through the air from terminal to terminal. 

4 Location: Oil-switches should be placed away from the 
switchboard as well as the generating and transforming ap- 
paratus. Each pole should be piaced in a separate fire-proof 
cell, so that by no possibility can an arc or explosion in one cell 
be communicated to another or to the neighboring machinery. 

5 Method of Operation: All switches should be either mag- 
netically or electrically controlled from a central switchboard, 
and all the poles of a switch should be operated simultaneously. 
It is also desirable to equip each switch, especially if it is auto- 
matic, with a time-element attachment, so that the circuit 
cannot be opened for at least a second after the operating 
mechanism is set in motion. 

F. A. C. PERRINE:—The speaker wishes to describe some ex- 
periments tried last fall with three oil-switches operating on the 
same principles as the one Mr. Chesney describes. The three 
switches were connected up at Mission San José in California, 
98 miles from the power-plant of the Standard Electric Com- 
pany, and the experiments were carried on during the night so 
that command of the entire generating station could be had. 
This station contained four 2000-kw. machines. A single handle 
controlled all three switches so that they opened simultaneously. 
The three-phase line was first connected through the switches, and 
the three phases short-circuited at the other side of the switches, 
thus putting a switch in series with each break. The line pressure 
was 40 000 volts. Theswitches were opened and closed about six or 
eight times that night. Then the work was shut down until 
the next night, when the switches operating as a short circuit 
between the wires of each phase could be connected, so that 
each switch formed a short circuit on a phase, the three 


222 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


switches short circuiting the entire line, which is very much 
more severe service than in the former connection. The 
line was short-circuited and the switches were opened several 
times, first opening the switches quickly after they had been 
closed, and afterward holding them in short circuit. The 
switch operated successfully, the machines held the speed and 
the voltmeter showed the pressure was held up. The ammeters 
went off the scale at 12500 kw. Finally the experiments were 
discontinued because at the power-house end of the line the 
lightning-arresters arced over. These were a series of the so- 
called Dutch-horn lightning-arresters which, especially for the 
experiments, were set 4.5 in., so that from line to line the gap 
was nine inches. The arc in almost every instance when we open- 
ed the switch went across these lightning-arresters and finally they 
were destroyed, the pole head was destroyed, and the No. 0 
ground wire was entirely fused. The superintendent said that 
the appearance at the station was as though the sun had come 
down in the back yard. The interésting thing was that those 
switches did not fail to open the circuit on any one of the ex- 
periments, and the experiments were only discontinued on 
account of the danger to the generating and transformer ap- 
paratus due to the apparently high-pressure as shown by the 
current jumping across nine inches of open air space. 

Arex Dow:—In his opinion the oil-switch had definitely 
arrived—it was not merely coming. In Pacific Coast installa- 
tions visited within the past thirty days he had found the air- 
break switches carefully tied up so they could not be operated; 
and in series with them, oil-break switches which were regularly 
used. This substitution of a nine-inch oil-break for a six-foot 
air-break was general on the Pacific Coast. 

RatpH D. Mersuon:—Referring to Mr. Hewlett’s paper, the 
speaker did not agree with Mr. Dow that the oil-switch has 
necessarily come. It has come for some pressures, but not 
necessarily as yet for 30 000, 40 000, or 50 000 volts, as any con- 
struction which in the present state of the art means going into 
cables with high pressures is objectionable. With such oil-switches 
as thespeaker is familiar with, this is necessary or else a 
large amount of space for their wiring and installation becomes ~ 
necessary. If.an oil-switch could be put.up in the roof truss of 
the building, being made as it were a part of. the high- 
pressure conductors,—then it seems that the oil-switch would 
be a very advantageous piece of mechanism to use in connection 
with high-pressure plants, but until that is done it does not 
appear attractive. < 

C. F. Scorr:—So much has been said about the oil-switch and 
so little that was favorable about the air-switch that the speaker 
thought of asking Mr, Nunn to say a few words on the subject. 
The air-switch a few years ago was introduced in high-pressure 
work when there was no oil-switch for that. work, and it seems 
it still has a large field. of its. own.in. places where the 


1904.] . DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. . 923 


pressures are high and the amount of power as for instance in 
small sub-stations, is small; where the oil-switch, as developed 
now, will be too expensive to install. In the first high-pressure 
plant of 40 000 volts, installed at Provo, Mr.-Nunn had certain 
air-switches which it is understood rendered excellent service. 

P. N. Nunn:—The impression is conveyed by Mr. Scott that 
a defence of the air-switch may be expected. The high-pressure 
air-switches at Provo are rapidly being replaced by cil-switches. 
This is in order to avoid the line disturbances caused by air- 
switches, and also in order to substitute the automatic feature 
of the oil-switch for the fuses necessary with air-switches. It 
is true that oil-switches are very expensive, but, while a reduc- 
tion in cost will be most welcome, even at present prices, they 
will undoubtedly be used in all future high-pressure work. 

C. L. pe Muratt:—The speaker’s firm uses both oil-type and 
air-type switches, the former in preference in all important in- 
stallations, at least in the main leads. But there are cases 
where it would be very expensive to have oil-switches in every 
single place where the current may have to be interrupted at 
some time or other. Therefore, in places where such interrup- 
tions occur only once in a great while, or only in cases of an 
emergency, he sometimes, when economy is necessary, employs 
switches which resemble somewhat the horn-type of lightning- 
arrester. The main part is in fact built exactly like one of these 
lightning-arresters, the air-gap being bridged by a terminal 
part which, when the switch is actuated, is drawn away. The 
arc then breaks itself by drawing toward the upper ends of the 
horns, which are wider apart. The current of a 1500-kw. gen- 
erator at 26 000 volts has been ruptured in this way, which is 
a fairly severe test. For oil-type switches he uses a switch 
which can either be manipulated manually or mechanically or 
automatically as a time-limit overload switch. The latter ar- 
rangement is as follows: the switch is held in position by a trip- 
ping device. If the latter is tripped a spring will open the 
switch. That tripping can be done either manually or by means 
of a magnet. The magnet in its turn can be energized either 
by directly closing a switch in the circuit providing it with 
current, or by a relay, the latter being actuated by overload 
currents. These currents set up in the relay a magnetic field 
which tends to turn an aluminum disc and the turning of this 
disc winds up a weight. As soon as the weight comes to its 
top position it closes the relay circuit. If the overload is very 
heavy the disc will revolve very haste and thus the switch will 
-be quickly released. If the overload is light, it may happen 
that it ceases before the weight reaches the top position and 
it will then re-descend and the switch will not be tripped. This 
constitutes an absolute time element overload relay, and makes 
out of the switch an ideal automatic circuit-breaker. 


224 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] 

H. F. ParsHa_yt:—Before the perfection of the oil-switch,the 
air-switch with long break and large clearance for flaming was 
the most reliable device and many of the early installations owe 
their success to the use of the air-switch. Subsequent experi- 
ence gained is that oil-break switches can be installed in a 
great deal less space and can be depended upon to open the 
circuit with much less damage to the switches. The one con- 
dition which his experience would lead him to impose in connec- 
tion with oil-switches is that there must be absolutely no in- 
flammable material in the switch other than the oil; that is to 
say, the use of wood and such like materials for separators and 
insulators is to be avoided. | 


In a brief written communication. A. R. Henry described a 
switchboard of the Canadian Electric Light Company’s power- 
house, Chaudiere Falls, Quebec, 


[For further discussion on this paper see pages 242 and 249] 


_A paper presented at the 185th Meeting of the’ 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, March 25th, 1904. 
Copyright, 1904. by A. I. E. E, 5 tae 


TERMINALS AND BUSHINGS FOR HIGH-PRESSURE 
TRANSFORMERS. 


BY WALTER S. MOODY. 


This subject will include cables, straps, connectors, etc., for 
both high- and low-pressure side, designed both for terminal 
connections and for changes in the ratio of transformation, to- 
gether with their insulation. In transformers for moderate 
pressure and having but two high- and low-pressure terminals, 
the problem of terminals is a simple one; with higher pressures 
and numerous changes in the ratio, however, the design of these 
parts of the transformer often becomes a most difficult problem, 
upon the proper solution of which depends, to no small extent, | 
the reliability of the transformer. 

. LOCATION OF TERMINALS ON COILS. 

It is much better to have the high- and low-pressure terminals 
at opposite ends of the structure, for it is almost impossible to 
keep safe distances between the terminal and connecting coil 
leads when all are at one end, ,..In a shell-type structure, having 
its coils in a vertical position, this requires one set of coil terminals 
to be at the bottom of the case, but to bring these safely to the 
top isnotas difficult as to separate high- and low-pressure con- 
ductors that are at the same end of the windings. 

INSULATION OF TERMINALS ON COILS. 

In an oil-immersed transformer, this presents little difficulty, 
as it is simply necessary to have all leads rigidly spaced. a safe 
distance from each other and from the.coils, and covered with 
sufficient waterproof insulation to prevent any moisture. pene- 
trating the coil around the terminals before the oil is put in. 

225 


226 MOODY : TERMINALS [Mar. 25 


In air-blast transformers, however, the case is different; here 
all terminals must be covered with an insulation integral with 
that on the coil itself, to a distance from the coil that provides 
sufficient surface insulation, even when the lead is well covered 
with dust and dirt. 

Often the dielectric strength of a transformer is materially 
lowered by allowing the coil-terminals or taps to project beyond 
the sides of the coils, thus shortening the distance between 
primary and secondary. ‘‘ Spreading ’’ the exposed ends of the 
windings removes this difficulty, except when the terminal 
comes from a point well within the coil, but introduces a more 
serious defect, lack of rigidity to withstand the strains of short 
circuits. Usually the problem can be solved by so winding coils 
as to have only outside terminals and locating such coils as have 
taps on the outside of the coil structtire. 


LocaTIon oF Main TERMINALS. 


The best location for these naturally varies with the type of 
transformer and its pressure; for the air-blast type, the air- 
chamber forms a convenient and natural location forthe low- 
pressure wiring, and the terminals of these are therefore usually 
located in the base of such transformers and made accessible by 
doors in the side of the base. For pressures not exceeding 25 000 
volts, the high-pressure wiring can also be placed in the air- 
chamber, without making the air-chamber of excessive cross- 
section, so that all transformer terminals are in the base and 
exposed wiring is avoided. Heavy rubber-insulated cable is to 
be avoided in such construction, however, for should the rubber 
take fire from short circuit or other causes a draft of air will 
carry the fire rapidly along the duct and into the transformers. 

In oil-filled transformers the terminals are, of necessity, 
located at or near the top of the case. Often for convenience in 
external wiring, projecting pockets are provided through which 
terminal-leads may leave the case in a downward direction. 
With such construction, it is necessary to have a solid section in 
the cable, just above the oil line, and to have this section insu- 
lated or covered with an insulation impervious to oil, otherwise 
the cable and insulation will act as a siphon and discharge oil. 

INSULATION oF Main HiGH-PRESSURE TERMINALS. 
Below 40000 volts, the insulation of terminals offers no 
special difficulty; porcelain or glass bushings can readily be 
obtained that are safe for this pressure, even if the conductor 


1904. ] AND BUSHINGS. 227 


has no insulating covering. For higher pressures, the problem 
is more difficult. If noinsulation is used on conductor, the bush- 
ings become expensive and so large that there is scarcely room on 
top of a moderate size transformer for as many terminals as are 
often required. The following are some of the more common 
forms of bushings that have been used: 

Wooden tubes; 

Hard-rubber tubes; 

Glass and porcelain tubes, both single and concentric; 

Numerous forms of molded porcelain bushings. 

Wooden tubes of the necessary size cannot be thoroughly 

dried and filled. Hard rubber iseso apt to contain impurities 
that it is unsatisfactory; moreover, it deteriorates rapidly if 
ozone is generated near it. Glass is fragile and must be pro- 
tected with other semi-insulators. Porcelain, or any smooth 
tube, must be very long if it have sufficient leakage surface to be 
safe when dirty, and even the best shapes of corrugated bushings 
are large and expensive. when capable of withstanding a test of 
from 75 000 to 160 000 volts. All things considered, the writer 
has found the following practice quite satisfactory for test- 
pressures not exceeding 160 000 volts. 
' Insulate the lead with varnished wrappings that will safely 
withstand for one minute about half of the test-pressure to be 
applied, bringing out this lead through a porcelain bushing having 
the same strength as the insulation of the lead, and sufficient 
surface to prevent leakage at this pressure when dirty; in other 
words, let the insulation of the leads be sufficient for the working 
pressure, and the porcelain be of such strength as to give the 
factor of safety desired. This combination forms a far safer 
insulation than a bare conductor and a larger bushing which 
would stand the same puncture test as the combination, from the 
well-known fact that oxidized linseed oil is an insulation that 
will momentarily stand several times as much as it will for any 
considerable length of time, while porcelain, glass, etc., have no 
such time-factor. 

In leads requiring a test of 100 000 volts or more, and insulated 
in this manner, an additional difficulty is met in the induced 
charge on the outer surface of the insulation; at this pressure the 
surface is covered with a heavy brush discharge that so reduces 
the surface resistance to leakage that 100 000 volts will travel 
along several feet. It. is.usually impracticable to make the 
insulated lead long enough to withstand the pressure under 


208 MOODY : TERMINALS [Mar. 25 


these conditions, but the discharge may be broken up, so 
that it will not appreciably reduce the surface resistance, by bell- 
shaped pieces of rubber, porcelain, or other insulation slipped over 
the lead before all the varnished wrappings are put on, and 
having its small end so shaped as to allow of its being buried in 
the outer wrappings. 

In transformers designed for Y-connection and grounded 
neutral, some transformer builders, in order to save expense on 
high-pressure bushings, have grounded one terminal on the case 
and insulated only such leads as are to be connected to the line; 
this prevents operation with A-connections, but otherwise seems 
unobjectionable. In similar manner, the use of three-phase’ 
transformers with the inter-connecting between the phases made 
within the case reduces the expense | and possibility of Oe 
with bushings. 

Eighty thousand volts is the Highsst pressure that is now 
practicable for transmission work, but transformers and inst- 
lators must be tested, consequently there is some demand for 
transformers working up to 200000 volts. The insulation of 
the terminals of such transformers is the most formidable part of 
their design. As yet, I know of no satisfactory solution of thé 
problem except to use oil-filled tubes as terminals. A terminal 
that has withstood 375000 volts without any indication ’ of 
weakness is constructed as follows: 

The tube was the shape of two truncated cones, bases ropeanees 
about 12 inches in diameter at the centre, and four inches at 
either end; it was built up of thin wooden rings, telescoped a 
short distance into each other, and held together by the con- 
ductor which, for mechanical purposes, was made quite heavy, 
and which was located in the axis of the cones and supported 
by washers at either end of the tube; between each section of the 
tube were collars of insulating material, some three inches larger 
in diameter than the tube, which served the purpose of greatly 
increasing the leakage surface. After the sections were drawn 
tightly together by nuts at each end of the conductor, the whole 
structure was repeatedly dipped in varnish and dried, thus 
sealing all joints. The terminal was mounted with the lower end 
several inches under the oil in the transformer and with its 
largest diameter on a level with the cover; the lower end of the 
tube was tightly sealed, making the tube perfectly oil-tight. 

INTERNAL TERMINALS. 
At present we are passing through a perioa of devclopment in 


1904.] AND BUSHINGS. 229 


line construction. Each engineer of a new transmission system 
of considerable length desires to use as high pressure as possible 
with a line construction of reasonable cost, but few are sure 
whether 50, 60, 70, or 80 thousand volts is the safe maximum for 
their conditions. It is common, therefore, for the manufacturers 
to be asked to make transformers that can be operated at several 
voltages on the high-pressure side. The result, whether accom- 
plished with series-multiple connection, changing from A to Y, 
or simply by taps, usually requires so many terminals, that it 
becomes quite impracticable to place all the necessary leads 
outside of the case, even were it desirable to do so; consequently, 
accessible terminals inside the case must be provided. Again, 
at these and lower pressures also, it is usually desirable to pro- 
vide for limited range of adjustment in the ratio, say by 2% steps, 
with a total of 10%; such changes are usually too small 
to be made except by means of taps on the high-pressure wind- 
ings. Except in transformers of very large capacity, there would 
be no room safely to insulate so numerous terminals above the 
surface of the oil; the practice is therefore to locate such ter- 
minals just under the oil and make them as accessible as possible, 
either by the removal of the transformer top, or through an 
auxiliary cover on the top of the case. It is better that each of 
these terminals be separately supported by glass or porcelain 
insulators; for a single support, such as a slab of marble, is 
almost sure to collect sufficient semi-conducting material to 
cause trouble sooner or later. Such terminals being, at best, 
rather inaccessible there is danger that a wrong or imperfect 
connection will be made when changes are desired. The following 
method of mounting transformers in the tank greatly simplifies 
the problem of getting at such terminals, especially when trans- 
formers are installed under a crane: instead of supporting the 
transformer proper on the base of the case as usual, it is hung 
from a strong cover; the interior terminals are placed in about 
the usual position, but are supported by the bolts carrying the 
transformer. To get at these terminals it is then simply neces- 
sary to raise the cover with the transformer, until the terminals 
are on a level with top of case; connections may then be made 
with convenience and safety and the transformer returned to its 
position in the tank. 
Low-PRESSURE TERMINALS. 

Usually these present no special difficulties; when trans- 

formers are connected in multiple and deliver 500 amperes or 


230 MOODY : TERMINALS AND BUSHINGS. [Mar. 25 


more, special caution should be taken that all joints are soldered 
or that terminals are of such construction as to have extremely 
low contact resistances. Taper plugs and receptacles are per- 
haps the most reliable form of contact for the purpose.. 

Current in excess of 500 amperes should never be brought. out 
through, separate openings in the case, otherwise there will be 
local heating around the terminal and needless reactance intro- 
duced into the circuit. Currents over 2500 amperes should be 
brought out by means of intermixed. bus-bars for the same 
reason. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 931 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘ TERMINALS AND BUSHINGS FOR TRANSFORMERS.” 


RatpH D. Mersnon:—In Mr. Moody’s paper there is one 
point in regard to the terminals for high-pressure transformers 
with which the speaker thoroughly agrees. The speaker con- 
siders that the marble terminal board has no place in high-pres- 
sure transformers. The leads should be brought out to por- 
celain insulators located underneath the oil, each to its separate 
insulator. In a number of cases troubles have occurred on marble 
terminal boards, at times too difficult toremedy. A marble ter- 
minal board scored by a discharge and afterward apparently 
made perfectly clean by scrubbing, will not stand the normal 
pressure when again put into service, and the only way in 
which it can be made to stand is to chip out the marble where 
the discharge occurred. Instead of using rubber-covered cables 
in air-blast transformers for high-pressure terminals, as Mr. 
Moody suggests, the speaker prefers to have these terminals 
come out into the air and remain bare during the rest of their 
course to the sub-station or the next bank of transformers. 

C. E. SKINNER:—Every transformer designer who has had to 
do with pressures of 20 000 volts or over appreciates the diffi- 
culty of bringing out the high-pressure terminals from such 
transformers. It not infrequently happens in extra high- 
pressure work that the size of the transformer, and particularly 
the containing case, is materially modified by the requirements 
for bringing out the terminals. In the case of air-blast trans- 
formers pressures are limited by the tap to an amount which 
makes the problem comparatively simple, provided a large num- 
ber of ratios have not been required to increase the flexibility 
of the system. 

In the case of oil-insulated transformers the pressures have 
already gone as high as 55 000 volts in actual service, and higher 
pressures are now being seriously considered. As stated by 
Mr. Moody in his introduction to the discussion on this subject, 
these higher pressures present a very formidable problem to the 
designer, and this difficulty is sometimes still farther increased 
by the requirements for the transformer case to be able to with- 
stand considerable mechanical pressure. Mr. Moody has men- 
tioned some common forms of bushings, which have been used 
for the purpose of insulating the main high-pressure terminals. 
Wooden tubes alone are not satisfactory for pressures, which 
at the present time may be considered as high. Hard-rubber 
tubes deteriorate rapidly. Glass and porcelain are mechan- 
ically fragile, and it seems next to impossible to get a moulded 
porcelain of sufficient dimensions for some of the higher pressure 
now being required. ee 

As a general proposition it is necessary for the higher pressures 
that the distance between the high-pressure conductor and the 
metai of the case, where the conductor passes through, must be 
of such a value and the material of such quality that there 
will be no appreciation brush discharge at this point. Where 


232 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 25 


the transformer tanks are not required to withstand heavy pres- 
sures a satisfactory construction consists in fastening a slab of 
insulating material, such as marble, in the top of the cast-iron 
cover into which are placed heavy tubes for the conductors 
with sufficient extension to give the necessary surface insulation. 
Tubes made up from alternate layers of varnished paper and 
mica have proved very effective. In one instance where the 
line voltage was 50000 the transformer case was required to 
withstand a pressure of approximately 100 pounds per square 
inch. In this instance the marble slab mentioned above was 
not allowable on account of the mechanical pressure require- 
ments and the problem was solved by making extra heavy bush- 
ings, which passed through stuffing-boxes arranged to clamp 
the tube very tightly. This has given excellent service. 

An interesting example of bushing trouble occurred on a 
55 000-volt line where the bushing consisted of a glass tube with 
0.625-in. wall incased in a heavy wooden bushing for mechan- 
ical protection, the combination being set in a wooden cover. 
The static discharge over the surface of the glass tube scored 
the tube to a depth of 0.0312 in. to 0.0625 in., making the 
surface rough and finally a breakdown occurred directly through 
the tube, shattering it into many pieces. This shows that glass 
has a time-factor at extra-high pressures. 

Mr. Moody mentions the complication frequently imposed in 
the construction of the transformer itself by requiring combina- 
tions for various pressures and for a slight amount of regulation 
by bringing out taps from the high-pressure windings. From the 
designer’s standpoint the speaker wishes to protest against this 
practice of requiring almost universal flexibility. After the trans- 
formers are in service the operating man considers that the 
paramount idea is continuity of service. Every extra lead and 
tap complicates the design and makes the construction more 
expensive and difficult. It is possible, of course, to secure great 
flexibility by such means, but the chances of trouble from those 
leads and taps which are not in service, and the possibility of 
making a wrong connection, greatly increase, and itis the speaker’s 
experience that in many cases where such elaborate systems are 
required they are never used. 


[ComMMUNICATED By LETTER.] 


Irvine A. TayLor:—Instances have been noticed in air trans- 
formers where an uninsulated or lightly insulated tap is brought 
out through the external coil insulation and a lead soldered 
on and the joint insulated. This leaves a weak spot on the 
lead insulation just where it enters the coil insulation. Leads 
should be heavily insulated to a point well within the coil-jacket 
and should pass through the latter in a slanting rather than a 
straight direction, so as not to leave a vulnerable point in it at 
the point of entrance, 

_In some cases internal leads are brought up through the top. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 233 


layers. This is a grave source of weakness as it gives a creeping 
surface through the inter-layer insulation. It also makes it’ 
necessary to wind the upper layers around it, and these are 
therefore liable to be crushed together. Taps from inner layers. 
should always be brought out from the end of the layer, and 
in such a manner as not to cut the inter-layer insulation. 

_ Where main terminals are located in the path of the air-blast, 
a great deal of surface dirt and consequently a long, creeping 
surface should be reckoned on. Terminal boards in air-blast. 
transformers for this reason appear to be a source of danger, 
and where there are not many terminals it would seem best to. 
use cables with heavy caps, the joints being made inside the 
case and above the fire-damper, if such is used. Fuire-proof 
cables should be used in or near the air chamber. 

Leads from oil transformers give a great deal of trouble by 
syphoning oil, and it is not at all easy to suggest a certain 
way of stopping it. Mr. Moody’s remark that a solid section 
in the lead is necessary is correct; but it is difficult to insulate 
this section in practice so that the oil will not creep between 
the layers of insulation and on to the stranded cable. After a 
good deal of experimenting, the writer used a porcelain tube 
(filled with sulphur) over this solid section, and found it to be 
about the only successful method of stopping creepage. Bush- 
ings through the case should be extended well above the iron 
and the cable should be sealed in with non-solvent, insulating 
compound (sulphur may be used), so arranged as not to pocket 
any oil, but. to drain it off. It is best not to have the braided 
covering of the lead extend inside the case as it is liable to carry 
oil out. 

Where transformers are connected to outdoor leads they 
should have a solid section, well covered with water-proof mate- 
rial, in the external lead, as water will follow through a stranded 
cable for a long distance and in large quantities. This is a fre- 
quent source of burn-out in cable heads, etc. 

All transformer cases should be grounded to prevent fire and 
make them safe to handle. Attention should be given to the 
fact that the ground wire should be heavy in proportion to the 
circuit protecting devices used. Thus, a No. 8 wire should not 
be used on transformers protected by 300-ampere fuses on the 
secondary side. The ground connection should be electrically 
sufficient and its resistance should be tested to determine this, 
a moderate pressure being used. 

Where rubber-covered leads are used, the rubber should be 

heavy (not less than 0.25-in. wall per 10 000 volts) and of high 
quality, and fire-proof covering should also be employed. Extra 
flexible cable is usually preferable. 

While taps allow one of the greatest advantages of the trans- 
former to be utilized—that: of obtaining different pressures from 
the same apparatus—it seems as though many specifications re- 
quire more taps than are actually necessary, Taps cost money 


234 HIGH-PRESSURE FRANSMISSION. [March 25 


on account of the necessary space, and besides are nearly always 
a source of weakness. They should therefore be avoided unless 
their use is absolutely justified. Except where transformers are 
to be used partly as pressure regulators, one 5% or 10% tap 
should give sufficient adjustment of ratio to meet lighting or 
railway conditions. Mr. Moody’s remarks regarding the use of 
separate porcelain insulators instead of terminal boards. are 
entirely correct. The writerthinks that the necessity.of using 
a crane and taking a transformer apart to change or make in- 
ternal connections, is hardly justified. Transformers ‘should 
always be tested before connecting to their bank to discover 
wrong connections. 


[COMMUNICATED BY LETTER.] ; 
N.M.SnypEer:—The writer suggests that the design of the 
high-pressure insulator be drawn on—for meeting the conditions— 
without resorting to the oil+filled tubes for ‘high-pressure ter- 
minals. First by making a suitablé insulator for the glazed 
porcelain bushing, e.g., to fit inside, having the conductor pass- 
ing through its centre. : 
The insulator being double petticoated as the cut shows, gives 
a much greater resistance path than the straight bushing. 


In bringing out heavy currents from transformers in multiple 
he concurs with the idea of sub-division of terminals, while it 
may introduce the necessity of more openings it has the advan- 
tage of distributing the load more evenly on the windings, 
assures less local heating and greater terminal surface for cool- 
ines 

[ComMMUNICATED BY LETTER] 


A. C. Pratt:—In considering the location of internal ter- 
minals in transformers one point might well be brought to the 
attention of the designer of relatively high-pressure apparatus. 

Many transformers for power transmission are provided for 
adjustment of pressure with taps on the high-pressure winding 
for cutting out perhaps 10% to 15% of the winding, These 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 235. 


adjustment taps are usually either in whole or in part located 
on the outer coils nearest the line terminals. If the line ter- 
minals be connected to a pair of these taps, cutting out say 5% 
on either end of the coils, then the maximum pressure to ground 
within the transformer becomes 10% more than from either line 
wire to ground. This material increase of insulation strains is 
especially undesirable in high-pressure transformers, where 
small brush discharges become troublesome, not only in air- 
cooled but alsoin oil-cooled transformers. Moreover the outer 
turns fear these taps must be heavily insulated from-one an- 
other to withstand lightning and other static stfains. 

If all these taps be made on adjacent ends of coils nearest the 
middle of the total winding, then the internal pressure in the 
transformer never, exceeds line pressure; lightning strains are 
confined to the outer ends of the end coils, and when the taps 
are connected to cut out, say 10% of the total turns, the effect 
is merely an electrical over-lapping of the turns which are cut 
out, and the latter, if of equal number on the two adjacent 
coils, might even be connected in parallel, saving, in this assumed 
case, 7.5% of the J? R loss in the high-pressure winding. . 

As to bushings, glass is being rightfully tabooed; it is fragile 
and necessarily of too small a diameter, thus naturally carrying 
too dense a charge on its surface, as noted in the paper. The 
tube is a condenser, the entire bore being at the pressure of the 
wire, and some other pressure, usually ground, applied near 
the middle of the outside of the tube. Charging current flows 
to and from the ground, along the tube, held close to the 
smooth surface of the glass, thus breaking down a thin film of 
air. The thinness of the film may be illustrated by wrapping 
strips of tape around the tube, when, upon applying test-pressure, 
the breakdown discharge will pass between the glass and the 
tape. 

Whe remedy is, first, to increase the thickness of the tube 
wall thus decreasing the capacity (which is also affected by the 
kind of dielectric employed) and at the same time increasing 
the surface along which the charging current will flow, thufs in 
two ways decreasing the current density on the surface of the 
bushing; secondly, further to break up and dissipate the surface- 
charging current by insulating rings set approximately at right 
angles to the axis of the bushing, as suggested in the paper. 

It is essential that the wall of the tube be so made as to avoid 
long, thin air spaces extending along the axis of the tube, as 
these will be the seat of local currents, which may lead to the 
failure of the whole bushing. 

[For further discussion on this paper see page 243] 


936 —~ HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 29 


MEETING AT CHICAGO, MARCH 29, 1904. 


Discussion ON “‘ THE RELATIVE FirE-RiskK oF OIL- AND AIR- 
BiLast TRANSFORMERS.” 


James Lyman:—The following features should determine the 
selection of transformers, as well as other electric apparatus: 

1. Reliability of service, including capacity for all probable 
overlead conditions of practice. 

2. Efficiency, regulation, the low rise in temperature under 
the various operating conditions. 

3. Safety against personal danger to operators and safety 
against fire-risk, either from internal or external cause. 

4. Compactness, simplicity of design, easy access to parts, and 
general cleauliness. 

In small sizes the external surface of well-designed trans- 
formers is ample to radiate the heat due to copper and iron 
losses. The radiating surface per kilowatt, however, rapidly 
diminishes as the capacity increases, and in large sizes, from 
1000 kw. up, it becomes absolutely necessary to carry off the 
heat by some circulating fluid, such as air, blown directly 
through the coils and the iron core, or water circulating in a coil 
of pipes suspended in the oil. While in transformers from 50 
to 300-kw. capacity, it is perfectly practicable to design them 
of the self-cooling oil type, it is frequently more desirable to 
have them cooled from some entirely external source, such as 
by air-blast or water, as they can then be installed in a limited 
space where proper surface radiation cannot normally ‘be ob- 
tained. The air-blast transformer has the advantage over the 
oil- or water-cooled type in being pretty nearly fire-proof. The 
insulation on the winding is the only combustible material in 
its construction, and this amount is comparatively small. 
Burn-outs in properly designed air-blast transformers are ex- 
- ceedingly rare, due to the fact that a comparatively low tem- 

perature can be maintained even under heavy overloads by 
varying the air-blast. The power required for driving the 
blowers is generally from 0.1 to 0.3% of the rating of the 
‘transformers, according to their sizes, so that the power re- 
quired need not be considered in the efficiency of ‘the trans- 
formers. In cases where burn-outs have occurred in air-blast 
transformers the writer does not know of an instance where the 
fire has extended beyond the damaged transformer, the shell 
of the air-blast transformer acting as a good fire-proof casing, 
and in case of external fire the air-blast transformer is seldom 
seriously damaged. When properly designed for thorough cir- 
culation of oil through the core and around the coils, and with 
properly-designed tanks, oil-cooled and water-cooled trans- 
formers should not offer serious fire-risks. The speaker be- 
lieves that within the limiting pressure for which air-blast trans- 
formers can be used they are decidedly preferable to the oil 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 237 


cooled. They are clean, compact, thoroughly reliable, and fully 
equal in efficiency and other characteristics, and, if anything, 
capable of greater overload abuse than the oil type. Above 
30 000 volts the oil-cooled and water oil-cooled transformers 
must be used. 

W. A. BLancx:—In regard to the two types of transformers 
for transmission plants mentioned in Mr. Rice’s paper, it is the 
speaker’s opinion that a pressure of 30000 volts forms the 
upper limit for the air-blast and the lower limit for the water- 
cooled oil transformer. 

If the transformers be installed in the power-house and not 
separated from the engine-room by a fire-proof wall, the speaker 
is in favor of air-blast transformers on account of smaller first 
cost, convenience in securing proper attendance, and the con- 
siderably smaller fire-risk due to the small quantity of inflam- 
mable material. 

If conditions call for a separate transformer house without 
special attendance, the speaker is in favor of water-cooled oil- 
immersed transformers set over suitable trenches so that any 
overflowing oil would be properly discharged outside of the 
building. The principal trouble encountered so far in oil trans- 
formers seems to arise from external sources, such as arcing 
switches and lightning-arresters mounted on wooden frames near 
the transformers. To overcome these fire-risks it will be neces- 
sary to use oil switches in brick compartments and to install all 
wiring on insulators carried by iron supports. Moreover the 
most essential requirement is to make the transformer house 
completely fire-proof. 

If for any reason self-cooled oil transformers are installed, 
the cases, if made of corrugated iron, should be strong enough 
to withstand external heat and should also be set over a suit- 
able trench to discharge any overflowing oil. A fireproof 
housing is also greatly to be desired. ; 

P. JUNKERSFELD:—One advantage of the oil-cooled type 
would appear particularly in those instances where large cur- 
rents are taken from transformers for synchronous converters, 
at comparatively low pressure. Connections of sufficient cur- 
rent carrying capacity for 1000 kw. at 160 volts, would be 
difficult to bring into the top of an oil-cooled transformer. 

Under such circumstances the air-blast type would have the 
advantage of making possible a shorter and more satisfactory 
heavy copper connection between transformer and synchronous 

“converter. 

G. N:. Eastman:—He asks if any one has ever seen an oil- 
cooled transformer burn up; that is, the oil actually take fire 
and burn. 

D. W. Roper:—A case of that: kind occurred in the East 
some time ago. A large single-phase, low-pressure trans- 
former had the two sides of the secondary circuit brought out 
through different holes in the iron case. The hysteresis loss 


238 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 29 


in the iron produced enough heat to start a flame at one 
end, but the transformer did not burn up. The circuit was 
opened and the blaze was smothered. 

In another case at the same plant an oil-cooled transformer 
of an early type was cooled by means of a water coil, in a tank 
removed from the transformer. An electric arc in the chamber 
in which the transformer piping was located burnt a hole in 
the pipe, which led from the transformer to the oil-tank. There 
was no check-valve in the pipe, and the arc set fire to the oil. 
The blaze continued until all the oil in the tank was consumed. 
This took some time, and in the meantime the switchboard 
operator tried to pull switches in the endeavor to put out the 
arc. Long before the fire stopped every switch in the plant was 
open. Those are two cases where fire occurred without destruc- 
tion to the transformers. 

G. H. Luxes:—If a device for smothering a fire in air-blast 
transformers is desired, use might be made of carbonic acid 
gas, which is easy to obtain. In case of a fire in an air-blast 
transformer, the air could be shut off and the carbonic acid gas 
turned on, when the fire would be quickly put out. 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘ GROUP-SWITCHES IN LARGE POWER-PLANTS.”’ 


W. G. Cartton:—In laying out a distributing system for 
high-pressure work, simplicity should be aimed at in the switch- 
ing arrangements at both the generating and receiving ends of 
the lines, and also in the way of avoiding taps on the lines as 
far as possible. If the system is of any size, conveniences for 
testing should be provided so that no unnecessary time will 
be lost in starting up the system after a shutdown, and also 
so that in case of trouble on a line the latter can be easily and 
quickly tested without interfering with the operation of the 
rest of the system and without danger to the persons making 
the test. This matter is frequently lost sight of in the design 
of a station, and the men who must operate it are placed at a 
disadvantage. 

Oil-switches on high-pressure lines are commonly provided 
either with a straight overload tripping attachment, with an 
overload time-limit. element or with no overload at all. If it 
is necessary to use any overload device, and it frequently is, 
it should have a time element depending on the load. 
To illustrate: if the normal maximum is 300 amperes, the 
overload should be set so that it would hold 450 amperes for 
three seconds, but would open instantly on 700 amperes. 
These figures are used for illustration and would vary with 
conditions. 

The straight time-limit device is all right in case of an over- 
load, but if this overload approaches short-circuit conditions, 
the switch will not open before the overload has dropped: the 
pressure on the system sufficiently to cause synchronous ap- 
paratus to drop out of step. This has caused the abandonment 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 239 


of straight time-element overload devices in the care of one 
station. 

Underground high-pressure transmission lines should be care- 
fully protected in manholes, both to provide against fire 
spreading from one cable to another and also to confine the 
are in case a cable burns out. In the case of an unconfined 
are if the system is of any size, excessive pressures are likely 
to be set up due to resonance, and the insulation of other 
cables and apparatus is likely to be broken down. Various 
forms of protection have been used. One of the best is split 
vitrified clay tile, using 45-degree elbows for the bends in the 
cable. When carefully installed, this gives practically a con- 
tinuous conduit line through the manhole. On long lines the 
lead sheaths of transmission lines should be broken at suit- 
able intervals to prevent the flow of stray currents. 

P. JUNKERSFELD:—In connection with Mr. Stillwell’s paper, 
he would like to emphasize the fact that it is difficult to dis- 
cuss this problem without referring to a particular case. Mr. 


Outgoing Line 
Line Oil-switch 


Continue ectional Line Bus-bar 


‘Continue ‘ansfer Busebar 


Generator 
Selector switch 


Generator Oil-switch 


FIG. 1 
HIGH-PRESSURE 


CONNECTIONS 
Harrison St. Station 
Chicago Edison Co. 


Generators 


Stillwell selected the case of a large power-house for street- 
railway systems. The conditions were known; that is, the 
load was pretty well known in advance, and the location of 
the sub-stations and the arrangement of the system could be 
figured out quite closely in advance. It was a conversion 
from steam to electric motors in the case of the Manhattan 
system and with the road in operation they could determine 
readily the load on transmission system. Likewise with the 
Metropolitan. ; rote 

In a central-station system engaged in the lighting and 
power business for instance, the conditions are somewhat 
different. It is not only a problem of designing the switch- 
ing apparatus for conditions as they then appear, but also of 
meeting the conditions that arise in a rapidly-growing system. 


240 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 29 


Due consideration must be given to the percentage of total 
investment involved in different parts of the system. For 
instance, an additional investment in switches would often 
be small compared to an additional investment in lines. There- 
fore, while the number of long lines and the number of gen- 
erating units are comparatively few, it will very often pay to 
introduce more flexibility in oil-switches and bus-bars. 

To illustrate, in one of the Chicago stations, which is de- 
veloped to its ultimate capacity, the high-pressure switching 
apparatus was entirely rearranged and overhauled during this 
last year. In that case the problem was not difficult and 
somewhat similar to that cited by Mr. Stillwell. The solution, 
however, was slightly different. Instead of the group-switch 
arrangement, a sectionalized bus-bar scheme was used as shown 
in Fig. 1. This line bus-bar is sectionalized in such a way 
that each generator may be made to supply its own section 
independently if desired. The transfer bus-bar canbe divided 
into two sections only. Each generator has.two selector- 
switches by means of which it can be connected:either to its 


300C00 Cir. Mite, 3 Conductor Cable 250000 Cir. Mils, 3 Conductor Cable 0000-3- Conductor Cable. 
o “ y “A Neate 


v st | Outgoing Line 
55 Line Oii-switch ay: 
Qoutinue) i ectional Line Bus-bar ( 
= rAuxiliary Bus-bar 
a 3 l s l 1 ansfer Bus-bar 
Continue, __ Generator’ ' 
0 0 a Q Qu a goog oo09 oon 05 9~~ Selector-switch 


Generator Bus-bar 
Generator Oil-switch 


FIG. 2 
HIGH-PRESSURE 
CONNECTIONS 
Fisk St. Station 

Commonwealth. 
Electiric Co.. 


Exciter Oil-switch 


50 kw, Induction 
Motor Generator 
Exciter Set 
500 kw, Turbo- 

alternator 


own section of the line bus-bar or to the auxiliary bus-bar. 
With the generator-switch open and the two generator selector- 
switches closed, we also have a tie between a section of the 
dine bus-bar and the auxiliary bus-bar. While each line has 
‘only one switch, there would, in case of trouble on line, always 
be two switches in series as the tie-switch would be used to 
cut off the section having trouble, in case the line-switch failed. 
This case is the Harrison Street Station of the Chicago Edison 
Company. The conditions were fairly well known when the 
overhauling was done, and the general design was, therefore, 
a comparatively simple matter. 

In another case, the Fisk Street Station of the Common- 
wealth Electric Company, it was somewhat different: The 
scheme adopted is a little more complicated, at least it will 
‘be during the earlier development of the station. As the 
station grows larger, any one generator or line going out of 
service is a smaller percentaze of the total and will not cripple 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 241 


- the system so seriously as in the first few years. The scheme 
is similar to the one previously outlined and shown in Fig. 1, 
except that there is an additional bus-bar introduced. 

As shown in Fig. 2, there is a sectionalized line bus-bar, a 
transfer bus-bar and a third bus-bar known as an auxiliary 
bus-bar. In this case, there are three instead of two gener- 
ator selector switches, and two instead of one line switch. 
One or more lines can be connected to the transfer bus-bar 
only through the medium of the generator selector switches, 
which under that condition perform the function of so- 
called group-switches. The installation of selector switches on 
each line and of the auxiliary bus-bar introduces a little more 
complication than the scheme shown previously, but the total 
number of switches is not greater than used in most high- 
pressure stations, having same size of generators and number 
of lines. Ultimately it is hoped to have simply the section- 
alized line bus-bar and the one transfer bus-bar similar to the 
scheme shown in Fig. 1. 

W. A. Branck:—Mr. Carlton’s remarks in regard to time- 
limit devices in connection with high-pressure oil switches are 
very interesting, but disappointing to learn that these devices 
in which so much hope has been placed for the satisfactory 
operation of a high-pressure distributing system have been 
discarded. Why has this been done? 

W. G. Cariton:—lIn regard to the straight time-limit switch, 
a number of cases of trouble occurred, such as a short circuit 
on an underground line. If there is a time-limit switch on 
that line and the time limit is held on and will not allow the 
switch to open, the short circuit will work back and affect the 
whole bus-bar with which the line is connected, and, as a rule, 
will shut down everything running on that bus-bar. There 
have been a few cases of trouble on underground lines, not ex- 
actly in the nature of short circuits, possibly a ground, or 
something which would cause a good heavy overload and when 
the time limit has not been on, the switch has opened and cut 
out the line; when it has been, it has shut down everything on 
the bus-bar. 

W. A. Buancx:—Could not that difficulty be overcome by 
the proper setting of the time-limit devices, for instance the 
feeder-switches for two seconds and the generator-switches 
for four or six seconds? 

G. N. Eastman:—The trouble with setting the time-limit 
switch for any given predetermined time is increased by the 
size of the system and the manner in which the lines are run. 
Conditions will arise in almost any system where there will be 
time-limit devices on lines which normally are not in series 
but under conditions of short circuit will be fed in sertes. 
The result is that other circuits are interrupted which have 
time-limit devices on them and always will be interrupted 
unless on that circuit on which the short circuit occurs, the 
time limit is set so that it operates before all others. One 


242 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [March 29 


can readily conceive how impossible it will be in a large sys- 
tem to vary the time so that these different time-element de- 
vices would be caused to operate for the location at which 
there is a short circuit. 

P. JUNKERSFELD:—It seems that the original time-limit 
device was developed when the high-pressure system on which 
it was used was comparatively small and had comparatively 
few lines or branches. As the systems grow much larger, 
particularly in the cases cited by Mr. Carlton and Mr. Eastman, 
the straight time-limit relay is satisfactory for overload, but 
it is unsatisfactory for serious trouble on cables. Before such 
a time limit operates a good many things happen and it is 
necessary to have a device which will open very quickly and 
positively. 

W. G. Cartton:—In the matter of the time limit, if the time 
is at all appreciable, before that time has elapsed with a heavy 
short circuit, unless there is a very large amount of power on 
the bus-bar, the pressure on that bus-bar willydrop sufficiently 
so that synchronous apparatus will all be stopped. That is 
one.of the serious objections to a time-limit device. 


Discussion ON ‘‘ O1_L-SWITCHES FOR HiIGH PRESSURES.”’ 


W. A. BiancKk:—The superiority of oil switches over air- 
break switches for high-pressure work, in so far as it relates 
to reliability of operation and line disturbance, is very well 
recognized, but still there are many cases where the much- 
abused air circuit-breaker in the form of a fuse breaking under 
oil or a lead fuse in connection with a spring-operated lever is 
the only device suitable to be installed. 

In the case of a high-pressure transmission line passing a 
mining district, where the customers are usually widely scat- 
tered over the territory, and sub-stations with static trans- 
formers of less than 100 kw. capacity are often required, it 
is evident that an automatic oil circuit-breaker in. a brick 
compartment would involve nearly double the investment of 
the transformer. 

But as a matter of fact the high-pressure tap to the trans- 
mission line will be interrupted only in case of a breakdown 
of the transformers, since all secondary shorts or overloads are 
limited by properly dimensioned secondary fuses, so that the 
action of the air circuit-breaker, installed in connection with 
a set of disconnecting switches, is only called for in utmost 
emergency. 

James Lyman:—In most cases the source of current supply 
for operating oil switches is a storage-battery, and whcrever 
it is used it has proved a very reliable source. It is very sel- 
dom that an automatically operated oil-switch fails. 

P. JUNKERSFELD:—He believes that although switches are 
carefully built and located in the station, but little thought is 
given to the arrangement of the connections. This should not 
be the case. 


1904] DISEUSSIONTA DiGHICAGO: 243 


DIscUSSION ON “ TERMINALS AND BusHINGS FOR HIGH-PRES 
SURE TRANSFORMERS.” : 

W. G. Cartton:—The speaker desired to know if any one 
present could state whether or not there are any 80 000-volt lines 
in operation. 

E. O. Sessions:—In California the lines are operated from 
45 000 to 60000 volts, depending upon the reactance in the 
line. 

P. JUNKERSFELD:—In a very large proportion of high-pressure 
work oil-switches play rather an important part. One question 
of importance is the building of suitable doors for oil-switches. 
The question has been discussed in different parts of the coun- 
try as to what is the best and most satisfactory door for an oil- 
switch compartment. The glass door and wire glass door can 
readily be seen through for inspection purposes. While with 
the iron door or with the Alberene or slate slab you cannot readily 
inspect, and are liable to use the switch when it is not in order. 
- Alberene slabs and iron doors can not be so easily and safely 
removed as glass ones and consequently the switches are not 
so frequently inspected as they should be. 

G. N. EastmMan:—One instance might be cited where a com- 
pany operating in Chicago had a solid door and for some reason 
the oil suddenly disappeared from the oil wells. There was 
only a slight indication of this from the oil on the floor outside. 
The switch, however, operated satisfactorily on closing, but 
not so well on opening the circuit. When the doors were re- 
moved it was seen that there was considerable oil inside the 
switch. 

W. G. Car_ton:—The speaker thinks the amount of wood in 
the frame of the door is not enough to cause much fire. There is 
practically an equal amount of inflammable material close to the 
switch in the insulation of the leads. In operating a number 
of lines on one bus-bar, when several switches open up due to 
trouble, it is not always possible to tell on which line the 
trouble is. If the oil-switch opens up a line on which there is 
a short circuit, some oil will generally be thrown from the 
switch. With a glass door the attendant can see where oil 
has been thrown out of the switch and thus save time in lo- 
cating the trouble, as has been proved by experience in a number 
of cases. There is the possible objection of breaking the glass, 
but there is not much fire-risk with the amount of wood avail- 
able. 

I. E. Brooxe:—In the construction of some oil-switches it 
seems as if an iron door comes rather close to the live copper, 
and that the liability of grounding on the iron door would more 
than overbalance the objection to the fire element on a wooden 
door. 

Mr. THomas:—The speaker believes it has been the practice 
to ground the framework of the oil-switch as well as the door. 
He approves of it and considers that everything in the shape of 
framework on a switchboard should be grounded. ° 


244 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION, [March 29 


P,. JUNKERSFELD:—One point particularly has been brought 
out in connection with oil switches, and that is that they need 
a great deal of attention. A switch is looked upon as some- 
thing which can be operated occasionally and then left alone; 
but that is not the case with an oil-switch. It must have fre- 
quent and good inspection, and in order to get good inspection 
it must be arranged so that the operator may easily see its 
condition. One of the speakers has made the suggestion to 
have an iron door which would open outward and downward. 
Why' does he say you get better inspection when a man opens 
an iron door than when he looks through a glass door? 

E.O. Sessions :—The speaker has used wooden doors with glass 
windows for the switch-cells, but they were replaced by iron 
doors, about eight and a half inches away from switch-tank 
with a two-inch air-space all around the door, on account of the 
destruction of the wooden ones. : 

P. JUNKERSFELD :—Glass doors of heavy plateg-lass in three sec- 
tions, which will enable every part of the switch from. the bot- 
tom terminal to be seen, have been in service for some time.. 

W. G. Car_ton:—lIn the case Mr. Sessions mentioned of the 
glass door being blown off, why would not the same thing 
happen to an iron door? also trouble has been caused by 
switches grounding to an iron door. 

E. O. SEesstons:—With wooden doors the case was. fitted 
tight, while about the iron doors there was left a two-inch space. 
With glass doors after one blowout of the switch, the glass 
would be so obscured that it would beimpossible to note what hap- 
pened without opening the door, but arranging the iron door 
so that it lacks two inches of closing will permit the inspection 
of the switch. 

R. F. Scoucnarpt:—To illustrate the point brought out by 
Mr. Brooke, the speaker cited the following case: An oil-switch 
had opened on a very heavy overload and some of the porcelain 
posts were so badly broken that one of the oil-wells fell for- 
ward. After the switch was opened the lower part connected 
to the oil-wells was still alive and if this well had fallen against 
an iron door thoroughly grounded, the resultant short circuit 
would certainly have caused great damage. With a wooden 
door with a glass front no live parts could come in contact 
with metal. 

E. O. Sessions:—In the Waterside Edison station in New 
York all the doors are made of soapstone, or Alberene, as it is 
called, and are fitted in close against the brickwork. 

Epw. SCHILDHAUER:—If Mr. Session’s advice is followed to 
erect the door two inches from the brickwork, the fire-proof 
advantage of the iron door is nil. It would look rather odd 
to see a brick switch compartment lined with Alberene stone 
on three sides and equipped with an iron door on the fourth 
or front side, while the distance from the oil vessel to the door 
is the same as to the Alberene. If an oil vessel bursts with 


*: 
1904.) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 245 


enough generator capacity back of it, the speaker believes 
that there will be in most cases very little left of the iron door. 

P. JUNKERSFELD:—The large companies in Chicago have 
had some oil-switches in operation for a number of years; in 
fact, some of the first hundred switches that were made for 
the Metropolitan station in New York, which was the first 
extensive installation of the compartment-type of switch, were 
shipped to Chicago. The first had the asbestos and iron doors, 
then followed Alberene doors, and more recently the advan- 
tages of the glass door appeared. One or two experiences 
brought out very forcibly that it was desirable to have a glass 
door and at the same time a fire-proof door. That, of course, 
meant a metal casing. After that, however, it was realized, 
as Mr. Carlton pointed out, that what little wood is introduced 
does not seriously diminish the fire-proof character of the door 
and does not increase the danger. The fire-proof barriers be- 
tween the phases are really depended upon to prevent trouble. 
It is not often that the switches are gotten close enough so 
that anything thrown out at the front would be a serious matter. 
 G. N. Eastman:—Some five years ago, when the question 
first came up about using oil-switches in preference to air- 
switches, he made some tests to determine what the relative 
rise in pressure in the cable would be upon opening the circuit. 
He found that in a three conductor No. 00 cable three miles 
in length, the changing current’was great enough so that upon 
opening the circuit with an air-switch, the arc could be grad- 
ually drawn up, and an increase in pressure of 50% “‘ noted 
by a static voltmeter’ could be obtained. If the switch was. 
opened quickly, using a single break in the oil, no increase in 
pressure could be noted. Drawing the arc out in the oil a rise 
of from 10 to 15% was obtained. By connecting four breaks 
in series in oil it was practically impossible, under any condi- 
tions, to obtain a rise in pressure. 

The speaker believes that upon opening a short cir- 
cuit the tendency of the arc to hold would be reduced by 
having breaks in series. With some conditions, it is only by 
holding the arc—‘‘the arc acting as an interrupter ’’—that 
you obtain a rise in pressure. The rise will be more severe with 
a short. circuit under certain conditions than with only the 
charging current. 


246 HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. , April 7 


MEETING AT PITTSBURG, APRIL 7, 1904. 


Discussion oN ‘‘ THE RELATIVE FireE-RiskKs OF OIL- AND AIR- 
Buiast TRANSFORMERS.” 


J. W. Farvtey:—For fires inside of transformers themselves, 
a chemical extinguisher can be used to good advantage. If a 
flash should occur inside the transformer, and ignite the oil 
which has soaked up on the insulation on the leads, the fire can 
be put out with ease by means of an extinguisher, which will 
be very effective even if the surface of the oil is actually burning. 
_ Light brick walls may be built between the different trans- _ 
formers and low deflecting walls may also be arranged so that 
in the event of an accident to the transformer case, due perhaps 
to the falling of a beam or tile from the roof at the time of a 
fire, the escaping oil would be prevented from spreading over 
the premises and would be diverted, either into a sewer or out 
of the building at some point where it would do the least 
damage. It is always a good plan to pipe from the transformer 
cases to a storage-tank or to a pit or sink-hole located in the 
most advantageous place, in order that in time of emergency 
the oil may be withdrawn from the transformers. 

One field for the air-switch is its use for high pressures, 
where the amount of power is not very great. Under these 
conditions the air-switch will act just as satisfactorily as an oil- 
switch and often is very much cheaper than the latter. This 
is particularly true for pressures between 20000 and 40000 
volts, and where the amount of power available on short cir- 
cuit 1s comparatively small, as at the end of a transmission 
line at a sub-station with an output of 600 or 800-kw.  Air- 
switches can easily be installed and at a cost probably not one 
half that of installing oil-switches. 

Regarding the relative amount of space required by air-. 
switches and oil-switches, in a complete layout for a typical 
transformer station for a single-phase railway plant it was found 
that the use of air-switches made just as compact, if not a more 
compact, plant than could be secured with the oil-switches, as 
the latter needed disconnecting switches and series transformers 
for their operation. 

N. J. Nearyt:—The speaker has noticed that in the West so 
much more account is taken of the ability of electrical apparatus 
as to afford continuous service than of its efficiency. One in- 
stance of what is now considered an old station has the high- 
pressure transformers in the main power-house only a slight 
distance from the generator. During an accident to the switch- 
ing apparatus considerable burning oil was thrown out on the 
floor of the power-house; this heated up the transformer cases 
but did not injure the transformers. 

Another plant visited had placed each transformer in a com- 
plete building by itself, the idea being that if one transformer 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG. 24 


“I 


went out it would not communicate fire to the adjacent trans- 
’ formers. 

A. B. Bonp:—There is one point in connection with air-break 
switches which has not been brought out to-night and that is 
the question of thoroughly drying out the switch before its 
installation. Conditions sometimes arise under which the 
wooden parts of the conventional fuse-switch may become 
damp and thus introduce an element of danger to the attendants. 

In a prominent Western plant considerable trouble was ex- 
perienced with fires in the oil-filled transformers. The cases 
were perforated at the top,,and it was found that by thoroughly 
caulking up all openings, the trouble from fire was eliminated. 
In this plant it was customary to use sand for fires in trans- 
formers. A patent extinguisher was also employed in which 
the novel feature of an interrupted stream was incorporated. 
With this extinguisher it was impossible for an attendant to 
receive a serious shock in consequence of directing the stream on 
live high-pressure wiring—a danger that exists where a con- 
tinuous stream is used. 


ee 


DiscussIon ON ‘‘ THE USE oF GROUP-SWITCHES IN LARGE 
PowER-PLANTs.”’ 


B. P. Rowr:—It appears that the use or disuse of group- 
switches is one which will be mainly decided from the station 
operator’s standpoint. The fact that the Metropolitan Street 
Railway Company in their 96th Street and Kingsbridge stations 
and the Manhattan Railway Company in its 74th Street station 
are both in-favor of using group-switches seems to indicate that 
there must be enough good reasons for. using the system to 
overbalance the objections Mr. Stillwell mentions, and any 
others he has not mentioned. The speaker has noticed that 
other large stations beside those of the Metropolitan and Man- 
hattan companies are being laid out with group-switches, and 
for large stations of this class, with a large number of feeders, 
there seems to-be.a decided sentiment in favor of using this type 
of switch. 

In the first place, if a power station is a large one no one 
questions the advisability of using two sets of bus-bars. If 
every feeder must be capable of being thrown to either of the 
two sets of bus-bars, there are required three oil-switches to 
each feeder. If the feeders are grouped as Mr. Stillwell has 
described, the two switches which act as selector-switches for 
one feeder will, if large enough, be suitable to transfer a whole 
group of feeders. so that with a double-throw system, the group- 
switches, acting as selector-switches, are rather a saving in ap- 
paratus than otherwise. , 

But when a single set of bus-bars is used, with the ring system 


248 © HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION. [April 7 


and junction-switches, the group-switch is undoubtedly an extra 
to be considered, just as Mr. Stillwell has considered it. Such 
a case as this is the Kingsbridge power-station, where the group- 
switches were installed by the Metropolitan Street Railway 
Company, who already had had the experience of operating the 
96th Street station to guide them, and considered them necessary. 

Under such conditions, an arrangement of feeders is made, so 
that the opening of a group circuit-breaker does not shut down 
an entire sub-station. Mr. Stillwell presents a diagram which 
indicates that if the operator suddenly opens a group-switch 
in an emergency, to cut out a bank of six feeders, he thereby 
shuts down an entire sub-station» The arrangement the writer 
has in mind is to have one or two feeders from a group carried 
to one sub-station and the balance distributed to other sub- 
stations, so that each sub-station draws its supply of current 
through two or more group-switches. Thus the liability of 
shutting down sub-stations is not so great. The writer under- 
stands that the Kingsbridge and 96th Street feeders are con- 
nected in this way. 

A point not brought out by Mr. Stillwell is that when a group- 
breaker is installed it must have a capacity sufficient to carry 
all of the feeders in the group and to open the total load under 
the worst conditions. Now if the feeders in the group are carry- 
ing large amounts of energy it is manifestly a more difficult thing 
to open it all on one switch than to divide the load and open it 
instead on the several feeder switches. In some cases it means 
a large switch and the amount of energy to be handled intro- 
duces an element which can hardly be neglected. There is 
obviously more liability that the large switch will cause trouble 
than any one of the smaller ones. In such a case a station operator 
would probably rather consider the group-switch an emergency- 
switch than to be habitually breaking large amounts of current 
on it to save time in transferring feeders or cutting them out 
of circuit. : 

This would seem to indicate that where feeders are of very 
heavy capacity so as to require large group-switches, they might 
be a source of trouble rather than a benefit unless they are reli- 
able. Reliability is demanded because the group-switches are 
connected directly to the bus-bars.. In the Kingsbridge power- 
station the opening of the group-switch automatically opens all 
the feeder-switches connected to it. This insures that there 
shall = two breaks in the circuit and might help out the group- 
switch. 


‘1904.], DISCUSSION AT PHILADELPHIA. 249 


MEETING AT PHILADELPHIA, MAY 9, 1904. 
Discussion oN “THE Use or Group-Swircnes IN LarGE 
PoweEr-PLaAnts.” 

H. F. Sanvitte:—For an important installation, which 

must consist of a large number of feeders all of considerable 
energy capacity, the extra expense of the additional switches 
is warranted. For such systems as the Manhattan, New 
York Edison, Metropolitan, and Rapid Transit in New York, 
it is almost, if not quite, necessary to adopt the group arrange- 
ment. In these systems each group runs to a separate sub- 
station, so when a station is shut down it is possible to test 
the mechanical operation of the mechanism from the controlling 
panel without’ any interference with service and without 
opening the lever disconnecting switches. 
' The necessity of the group-switch in series with the feeder- 
switch was a development of the uncertain operation of oil- 
switches under emergency conditions. It has since been 
found, however, that the switches are extremely reliable and 
will rupture circuits carrying almost unlimited amounts of 
energy. tg 

The high rupturing capacity of the switches makes it de- 
sirable that the group-switch be made automatic only through 
a time-limit relay, which will allow a defective feeder to dis- 
connect itself from the group bus-bar without necessarily 
shutting down the entire group. 

By the proper arrangement of controlling switch circuits 
reduction of load can be readily made without the use of a 
group-switch and the load may also be transferred. In some 
installations a sectionalized ring bus-bar atitomatic switch 
has been used in place of group-switch. 


Discussion on ‘‘ O1t-SwitcHes FoR HicH Pressures.” 


H. F. SAaNnvitLE:—Recently a series of tests of oil switches 
were made including over 1000 records of currents from short- 
circuited alternators varying from two 300-kw. machines 
at 13.000 volts to a generator capacity of three 3750-kw. 
machines at 2200 volts, including also a number of tests at 
75 000 volts. It is almost invariably the rule, as shown by 
the records, that the circuit opens at or near the zero of the 
wave, in almost every case the circuit opens on three consec- 
tive zeros in the three phases; fewer than 10 exceptions to 
this were recorded. In the exceptional cases the current of 
one phase holds for one or two cycles beyond the first one to 
rupture. It may be of interest to state the conditions of some of 
the short circuits which have been successfully opened by oil 
switches during the last few years. 

1. Seven 5000-kw three-phase, 11 000-volt generators on 
the Manhattan System were connected to the bus-bar. A 
short circuit occurred within 300 feet of the station, the 


250 HIGH-PRESSURE. TRANSMISSION... ; [May 9 


automatic switches opening without difficulty. There were 
at this time some coincident cable breakdowns, due probably 
to the resonant effects set up by the enormous arc at the 
subway junction box where the short circuit occurred. Since 
that time a steel tape has been used at the cable connections 
to prevent a short circuit developing an air arc, 

2. New York Edison System.—Seven 3500-kw. 6600-volt 
generators were on one bus-bar and four on a second. A 
connecting switch was accidentally thrown in with the bus- 
bars out of phase; the oil-switch ruptured the circuit without 
causing any disturbance to the system. 

3. Niagara Fails.—Five 5000-h.p. generators on the bus-bars 

stepping up through 25 000-h.p. transformer capacity to 22 000 
volts on the Lockport feeder. A short circuit was made by 
a wire thrown across: the vsansmission line and che circuit 
was successfully opened by the oil switch on the high-pressure 
side. 

4. Niagara Falls—In power house No..2 of the Niagara 
Falls Power Co. two weeks ago, a short circuit developed on 
the 11 000-volt feeder running to the Canadian side with seven 
5000-kw. generators on the bus-bar. The cables made a pe- 
culiar rattling sound from the movement of the insulators, 
but no damage was done the circuit being opened without any 
disturbance of the system by the oil-switch on the-2200-volt 
feeder to the transformer. house. 

5. Some time ago some short-circuit tests were made on 
the 33 000-volt system of the Aurora, Elgin, & Chicago Railway 
Co. These tests were made single phase and three phase at 
the main station and also at the Warrenville sub-svation at 
the other end of the line. The circuits were opened without 
difficulty by the oil switches; then the switches were made 
double-break for opening ..the..three-phase..shorts instead of 
three breaks; 12.e., the middle leg of the switch was short cir- 
cuited, but no difficulty was experienced in opening the circuits. 

6. In another test a 2500-kw., 2200-volt alternator was ex- 
cited to 2500 volts and stepped up-to 75000 volts by three 
750-kw. transformers, giving a total transformer capacity 
of 2250 kw.. The standard 60 000-volt oil-switch operated 
as a single-break switch by cutting out one row of pots, opened 
three-phase short circuits without the slightest difficulty. 

W. C. L. Eciin:—Most of the difficulties in the use of oil- 
switches are not in the electrical but in the mechanical features. 
The clutches between the motor and the switch mechanism, 
and the devices to maintain the switch either in its open or 
closed position, have been responsible for most of the failures, 
necessitating frequent inspections and .adjustments of these 
parts of the switch. Proper alignment of parts, rigid construc- 
tion, and ample capacity in clutches, with stops arranged 
to hold positively the switch in an open or closed position are 
essential to the satisfactory, operation of an oil-switch. 


4 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT PHILADELPHIA. 251 


The care of the oil is very important. After the oil has 
been in use for some time, it will deteriorate, due to the opera- 
tion of the switch and to the collection of foreign material in 
the oil. Care must be taken to prevent water from mixing 
with the oil; the oil should be completely changed at regular 
intervals, and means be provided to keep the oil clean. In one 
case of failure of an oil-switch the current jumped a distance 
of half an inch in the oil, and punctured the fibre lining of 
the oil case. The oil was examined and there was found 
sediment of dirt and dust at the bottom of the oil tank. This 
switch had been cleaned within six months. 


Bee dene entre Smeg aes see 


A paper presented at the 186th Meeting of the 
American Institute of [Electrical Engineers, 
New York, April 22. 1904. 
r Copyright 1904, by A. I.E. E. 


THE MECHANICAL CONSTRUCTION OF REVOLVING- 
FIELD. ALTERNATORS. 


BY DAVID B. RUSHMORE. 


INTRODUCTION. : 

The mechanical design of alternators is undergoing rapid 
evolution. Among the first commercial machines in this country 
were the generators with stationary fields of cast iron, the yoke 
and poles being cast together. The armature had a smooth core 
and carried surface-wound wire in the form known as the “ pan- 
cake’ coil. The common frequencies were from 125 to 133 
‘cycles per sec., and outputs ranged from 25 to 200 kilowatts; all 
the machines were belted. 

On account of the small amount of wire carried, these machines 
had excellent regulation; the flat coil gave a nearly perfect sine 
wave. The single-phase reaction—for polyphase currents were 
not then in general use—caused the solid poles to heat; and the 
relatively large number of poles of uneconomical section, tovether 
with the large mechanical clearances, made the machines heavy 
and costly. The armatures were hand-wound and the windings 
were often entirely destroyed by striking the pole-pieces, due to 
wear of bearings, or by a piece of metal falling on the armature. 

The next step was to laminate the poles and to cast them into 
the yoke; the armature was made iron clad, with one large tooth 
per pole and the machine-wound coils were drawn up under the 
projecting tooth-face and held in place by wooden wedges be- 
tween the coils in the same slot. Mechanically; this machine was 
a great improvement; the regulation and wave-form suffered 
greatly and soon the armature was changed to a many-slot dis- 
tributed winding, at about the time when the use of polyphase 
currents was becoming general. With various small modifica- 


253 


254 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


tions this machine was standard for some time, until higher 
pressures and increased ‘outputs made it desirable to revolve the 
field instead of the armature. Increasing sizes brought about 
the development of the “‘ engine-type ’”’ generator, in which the 
revolving field was mounted on the engine-shaft, and for the past 
few years this has been the standard type in this country. 

Generators driven by water-wheels have always been special, 
when direct-connected, units have been used; the alternator is 
designed to suit the speed of the water-wheel, which in turn is 
determined by the type of wheel, the outputs and the head of water. 

The indications are that the greatest development of the 
alternator driven by the steam-engine has been reached and that 
in the immediate future such units will be driven by steam- 
turbines and to some extent by gas-engines. It seems proper 
at this time to bring together in one place illustrations of present 
practice in the mechanical construction of engine-driven, re- 
volving-field alternators, together with the development which 
has already taken place in turbine-driven sets. There is, to 
the writer’s knowledge, no place where such information can be 
found; much of that given here has never before been published, 
and descriptions of foreign machines are scattered among so many 
sources as hardly to be available for American engineers and 
students. Discussion of the inductor alternator, except for afew 
minor details, has purposely been omitted. A special descrip- 
tion of this excellent machine will be given later elsewhere. With 
this exception, the intention has been to illustrate modern prac- 
tice as completely as possible, without including curiosities. 
Electrical and mechanical design are so closely related that a 
discussion of one necessarily involves the other; commercial 
designing involves such broad considerations of all factors of 
labor and material, as well as technical electrical points, that 
mechanical considerations, instead of following the electrical 
calculations, must now often precede them. 

The prices of material and the cost of labor vary at different 
times and in different countries. The best designs of machines 
must, therefore, vary. The same specification can often be met 
by two radically different generators. Commercial considera- 
tions often limit designs, especially from the point of utilization 
of standard frames and parts. The factors of output, frequency, 
phases, pressure, regulation, heating, and efficiency are so closely 
related, that if one or more of these be fixed, the others can be 
varied only within limits. As all locscs result in heat, which must 


HA 


LANA 


( 


ites o, Woke Seckore 


Yoke-Sections. 


iL. 


Fic. 


| 


i 


'1904.] OF ALTERNATORS. 255 


be radiated from a surface determined in part by magnetic con- 
siderations, the questions of heating and efficiency are closely 
related. The sinallest gap being fixed by mechanical reasons, 
there is a minimum value to the kilowatts per pole which can be 
economically used. If other factors remain constant, we cannot 
save in weight of active material by increasing the speed of 
revolution unless we, at the same time, increase the peripheral 
velocity, which may not be possible. To some extent regulation 
and efficiency are incompatible; cheap electrical designs may 
necessitate expensive mechanical features. These are but a few 
of the items which indicate how broad a view must be taken in 
designing alternators. In most machines of to-day, it is usual to 
work out a preliminary electrical design; the mechanical features 
are then developed, and the necessary modifications are then 
made in the original calculations. 
SMVORES: 

The yoke or armature frame is one of the most important 
mechanical parts of the engine-driven alternator. Its object is 
to support rigidly the armature laminations and winding while 
affording good ventilation and giving an artistic appearance to 
the machine as a whole. The commercial object of course is to 
attain this end with a minimum of labor and material; to this 
end a large number of different designs have been made, some of 
which areshown in Figs. 1 and2. For the past decade the output 
of single units has increased rapidly, while the speed for large 
sizes has remained fixed at 75 rev. per min. The outside diam- 
eter has thus increased constantly and with it the difficulty of 
proper yoke-design, without excessive weight. Probably the 
maximum diameter has already been reached, for with the 
introduction of turbine-driven alternators, the sizes of machines 
for the same output are very much reduced. The speeds of 
various types of alternators are shown in Figs. 3 and 4. 

While there are many different yoke-sections, there are but few 
different types; first, there is the cast-iron box-section, in which 
the frame is divided horizontally, forming a beam or arch sup- 
ported at each end, uniformly loaded; the _ greatest 
moment of inertia, with the least weight, is aimed at; 
the outside of the shell is well rounded to give a 
finished appearance. The expensive patterns formerly 
necessary are now dispensed with by ‘‘sweeping-up”’ the 
mould. Air-gaps or mechanical clearances vary from 0.125 in. 
to 0.75 in. in engine-driven machines, hence any appreciable 


256 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


deflection of the yoke. would be inadmissable. The deflection of 
the yoke is due to its own weight as well as to that of the lamina- 
tions, winding, etc.; in order to provide for wear in the bearings 
it is usual to set the revolving field high, which brings an addi- 
tional stress on the yoke, due to the unequal magnetic pull. 


2200 
Ie 
be100 ‘aie 
9600 = = | 
| ree | — 
3400. T i. Fig. 3 re 
CURVES 
+1600. ice Showing the Relation of 
Speed and Output of 
Lito | Alternators 
ihe. | +t. — 
1600 fot ca 
1 eS Sai | 
my + 
1400 tee 
| Linch DABS) | 
1300 
3 Ie -, { 
1200 3 7 r | ct 
re ns 
1100. 5 2! Sf, 
fe] 2 oI | 
1000-= = ‘ 
g S| (i 2 ‘a + 
900-2 ae 
= "i [| 
| s00_& e: 
) ® 
=) 
Te : et za EH ze 
3 
i} > _— - 
(st 
60 5 i= a 
Oo 
S 7 
[500 = z Lf} _t_ i 
2 eee - 


g |g 
PME. BS? 
alee! 
Ay Le 
et 
a 


Ce 
f 200 | 7 ele : 
1100 , 
Rey. per Min. ah 
50_| 190 | 239 | aco | 40 | 390 | 350 | 490 | 450 | 500 | 550 | coo | 620 | 700 | 730 | 800 850 


Large boring machines are usually horizontal, so it is ap- 
parent that the geratest care must be used in machining the 
frame in order to allow for the deflection which will be found 
under conditions of service. With this style of yoke, the feet 
on which the frame rest are sometimes given a pressure toward 


1904.] OF ALTERNATORS. 257 


the centre and the lower part of the frame is supported by jacks 
at one or more places. If alternate layers of laminations are 
lapped and strongly clamped together, the friction between plates 
_ Gives them a resistance against deflection, which may be consider- 
able; if the laminations are firmly dove-tailed into the yoke, the 


ee 


a EEECEEEEEEEEECEECEEEEEEH 
SS SSeS = + Hoan | i [ | i z 
CURVES ry 
an i i: Shgaving the Relation of |~{_|~ |_| _, a 
y ‘ imal Speed and Output of +++ 
| r is Alternators 
4 


i | |_| 


= cia ma el eeal si EERE E+ 
ma CECE 3 
ec tt i A 


co 
| : 
FE 


ts ADAG 3 
we 
| i} 


2 
b-Ki 
it 

sl 
ae 
| 


Peco aE i 
zoo S| |_| rt } \ [ - 
i | [ at 


= 
L 
Peer 
ie 
| 


} 
7 ef | | 
i il ¥ i lia 
AI Shen 5 are | Zz 
S! LO» ( 
1000 t- SLi Saainal = 
he | <Liy \. Seo, ee 
Sh, 
Pak 44-5 |_ Ut 
> : f — 
q 
Sah val bes 
aa a SCs Sm bs el 
n - ary 
z= Rev. per Min, | + 
eso) 500 | | | 750 1000] | | 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250 2500 


resistance is still further increased.. It is customary ‘to arrange 
for sliding the stationary armature on the base, in order to gain 
access to the windings and poles. The standard form of cast-iron 
yoke is shown in Fig. 5. 

Where the cast-iron yoke is divided vertically, each half of the 


[April 22 


RUSHMORE; CONSTRUCTION 


258 


io 


oe mee ew 
ae 


S| 


i 


4 FS 
VAT 


1904.] OF ALTERNATORS. 259 


frame is constructed as a cantilever, growing smaller in section 
toward the top. With this construction, in which the machine 
is supported at the bottom, more difficulty is experienced in pre- 
venting vibration; there is here no base for yoke and bearings, 
which are supported on independent foundations. Access to 
the winding is had by sliding the armature back from the shaft. 
When it is desirable to do so, for reasons of transportation or 
otherwise, the frame may be subdivided into more than two 
parts. 

In some cast-iron box-sections such as are shown in Nos. 26, 27, 
28, 29, 33, 34, etc., the frame is divided by a plane perpendicular 
to the shaft. The clamps for the laminations are cast on the 
frame and the active iron is held by bolting together these parts. 

Another type of box sectional construction, illustrated in No. 
35, has been used by Brown Boveri & Co. The frame is light and 
is supported mainly by flanged arms, which join all parts of the 
circumference to a ring supported on a trunion surrounding the 
bearing. In place of the usual foot there is a screw for prevent- 
ing rotation of the armature, and when thisis removed the whole 
frame may be revolved upon the trunnion bearings. This design 
gives a light yoke-section, and thus a light machine; the arma- 
ture is difficult of access on account of the number of arms, and 
it is not easy to provide for wear in the bearings. When properly 
erected this construction should be very firm. In some cases 
instead of channel-arms, rods have been used, but they are liable 
to vibration, if long. The construction of this type is illustrated 


in Fig. 6. 
A large variety of box and shell cast-iron sections are 
possible, asshown. These vary in minor details, but all 


perform the same general functions. A modification of the 
box-section is that in which a small box is stiffened 
by wide rings, which are made removable; one ring may 
be cast with the box-section. Yoke No. 41, illustrates a 
distinct type, shown more clearly in general construction in 
Fig. 7. In this the non-active metal is reduced to a minimum. 
The frame is braced by two sets of tie-rods, forming chords, which 
connect to rods passing through or just back of the laminations; 
instead of the box-frame we have a single cast ring on each side 
of the active iron. It is claimed that in large machines the weight 
of the frame can be made less than one fifteenth that of the box 
construction. A modification of this type is to make tangents 
of the tie-rods instead of chords; the ends of these rods are 


260 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


fastened to pivoted arms in the vertical plant of the laminations; 
‘tthe rods are drawn up when cold and as the machine heats the 
desired stress is brought upon them. These constructions, which 
are the inventions of Mr. Lasche of the Allegemeine Elektricitats 
Gesellschaft of Germany, offer many advantages from a manu- 
facturer’s point of view. With the exception of the end-rings, 
which may easily be kept in stock for different diameters, the 


Suse alee eee 


de 


Itc. 6. Frame of Brown, Boveri & Co. 


remainder of the material is easily adapted from supplies which 
may be kept on hand, and machines of any diameter or practical 
length may be quickly manufactured, as the long waits incident 
to pattern shop and foundry workare eliminated. Thelaminated 
iron is well exposed to the air and the ventilation is excellent which 
should, where the larger part of the heating is due to iron loss, 
result in a better utilization of material. The light construction 
wculd be liable to vibrate with large diameters, and the rouch 


1904. Ol ALTERNATORS. 261 


appearance has been the subject of criticism, as well asthe lack of 
protection to the winding. 

A third distinct type is shown in yoke-section No. 43, various 
modifications of which follow. In this the supporting section, 


: 
Laas Lil 


re tee 
c 
MUI ZZ WX 
tH WN 
> WN 
IA 


F277 SS 


LIL TENET: he 
Fic. 7. Braced Tie-Rod Construction. 


instead of being a cast ring, is constructed of rolled plate and 
angle-iron. The laminated iron is built up separately and ‘s 
then placed in the casing and held in position by bolts. This ‘s 
shown clearly in Fig. 8. Yoke sections No. 43 to 54 show differ- 


‘Fic. 8. Rolled Plate Box-Yoke. 


ent frames built up in this general manner. The strength of the 
supporting structure is obtained with light weight and a minimum 
material; the electrical part is well protected and it is not neces- 
sary to bore out the frame as with the cast construction. The 
ventilation may be made good, and the appearance is pleasing. 
In this construction a considerable amount of labor is required in 


262 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


bending and fastening the plates and angle pieces composing the 
frame. While the cost of material may be small, the cost of labor 
will be high. There is at present no construction more satis- 
factory for large machines than the cast-iron yoke of box-section 
with laminations held by dovetails. 


‘LAMINATIONS. 

A designer requires primarily an accurate knowledge of the 
properties of his materials. While the constants for mechanical 
strength and electrical conductivity of the various metals are 
well known and the dielectric strength of insulation requires a 
not unusually large factor of safety, the magnetic properties of 
rolled-steel plate are not controlled with. the certainty which is 
desirable. Much has been done in this direction, and the solu- 


METHOD OF SUPPORTING ARMATURE, LAMINATIONS.- 
{ 


Fie, 9. 


tion of this problem is now being sought by many minds. Guar- 
antees of heating and efficiency are largely dependent upon the 
iron-loss, and any uncertainty regarding this demands a greater 
margin than otherwise would be necessary. In the tests which 
are always made before iron is used, the results may vary less 
_ than five per cent for a considerable time, when some iron may be 
received with several times allowable loss, which, so far as is 
known, has received the usual treatment. The hysteresis loss 
may increase with time, an effect called aging; to prevent this 
certain chemical composition and treatment is necessary. In 
order to reduce this loss, iron must be annealed at a high tempera- 
ture after rolling; this is sometimes done after punching and 
sometimes before: if done after punching, the shape of the plate 


1904.] OF ALTERNATORS. 263 


may change, and filing of the slots may be necessary to a con- 
Siderable extent; when annealed before punching, difficulty may 
be experienced in working with a soft metal which drags on the 
edge of the die, especially with thick plates, and the lamination 
is thereby hardened for a short distance on the edge.’ 
The thickness of rolled plate for armature work is 0:014 in., 
or 0.018 in., and for field punching may be as thick as 0.062 in., or 
0.125in. A cubic inch weighs a little less than 0.280 lb. Insula- ° 
tion separating adjacent sheets may be japan, a silicate prepara- 
tion, or thin paper. The space occupied thereby is about’ 
10% of the apparent section, but this varies with the thickness 
of plate; the section used is of peculiar form and from 20 
to 60% of the original sheet is lost. The construction’of dies: 


SLOTS /N ALTERNATOR AEB: 
\ 


| | 
} 
: | 
Ha 
: 
8 
=e 


2 
] 
| 
| 
| 


9 We ° 


seal os 


© 


| 
| 
15 /6 


necessitates that the length of lamination should not be much 
greater than 24 in., and complete form may be punched out at 
once, or by using blanking and slotting dies, in several operations. 

Wrought iron has been almost entirely superseded by steel for 
armature plates; the steel is made by the open-hearth process, 
either acid or basic, and limits are set to the allowable percentages 
of carbon, manganese, sulphur, phosphorus, and silicon which 
may be present. The combined iron-loss per pound for a certain 
thickness of sheet at given frequency and density is limited, and 
also the percentage increase of this loss under continued heating 
at a fixed temperature for one month. 


SUPPORTS FOR LAMINATIONS. 
If the alternate layers are lapped and the clamps drawn to- 


264 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


gether with a strong pressure, the laminated ring will be self- 
sustaining. It is, however, necessary to support the activeiron 
from the yoke by one of anumber of possible methods; those in 
common use are illustrated in Fig. 9. The laminations may be 
supported on bolts or rods, the ends of which are held by the 
frame. Nos. 1, 2,and 6 show variations of this kind of support; 
first, where the rod passes through the active section; secondly, 
where the laminations project back for the bolt-hole, and a modi- 
fication in No. 6 which prevents the active flux from cutting the 
bolt. This manner of supporting the iron is economical and 
satisfactory on machines of certain dimensions. If the density 
in the armature core is high, No. 1 should not be used; witha 
considerable length of armature core and especially with much 


Slot Inductance. 


radial depth of iron, the surface of the core may bulge or the size 
of the bolts to prevent it may become excessive. Insulated bolts 
may be used but as a rule are undesirable from a mechanical 
standpoint. 

No. 3 is a very satisfactory method for use with a cast-iron 
yoke. Dovetails are cut in the frame, parallel to the shaft, 
and into these corresponding projections on the laminations are 
fitted; this makes an absolutely reliable method of retention; 
somewhat expensive, but suitable for the largest machines. 
Instead of the preceding, a key may be screwed to the frame as 
in No. 4, which gives results similar to the dovetail and offers 
several constructional advantages. 

No. 5 shows a method where the key-seat in the frame is 
straight and the key used only for alignment. A driving fit 


MN 


OF ALTERNATORS. 


1904]. 


‘gilog ainjeully 8utj{09}01g 10} pletyS “EI ‘ld 


‘syootg-soedg suneyus, 


“GT “91H 


266 RUSHMORE © CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


holds the key to the frame, while reliance’ is placed on the 
friction between plates and keys to keep proper form. No. 7 
shows a peculiar method used abroad, and No. 8 a form of key 
used on small machines and for holding light weights. No. 9 
is simply an aligning key, and No. 10 the same as No. 4, except 
that the key is in a projection instead of in th active part. 
Where the support is back of the core-section proper, more plate 
is required but less loss occurs in the bolts or keys. 

CLAMPS FOR LAMINATIONS. 

In order to prevent humming of the iron and to give continuity 
to the magnetic circuit, it is necessary to clamp the laminations 
under considerable pressure. Methods for doing this are clearly 
shown in the sheet of yoke-sections. In most machines, one side 
of the frame projects nearly to the inside armature surface, and 
the other side, which is,removable, is drawn tightly against the 
laminations by bolts which pass either through the active iron or 
immediately behind it. In some machines the claniping pro- 
jections are both cast on the frame which is parted in the middle; 
both rings may be removable. Instead of rings, we may have 
a large number of small retainers which are either drawn together 
by bolts or each is fastened directly to the frame. With small 
radial.depth and small length over laminations, the problem of 
properly clamping the iron is simple, but in machines of large out- 
put and low frequency much care is required. 

SLOTS. 

In the early days of the “‘ pancake’ coil and the smooth core, 
the winding was placed on the surface of the armature, but 
present practice is to place all coils in slots. To do this satis- 
factorily the shop work must be carefully done. The die is 
expensive, as the number of slots is increased, and the cost may 
be much affected by the form of slot. The number of slots in 
the punchings is preferably even. to make the lapping of adjacent 
sections possible, otherwise the punchings must be reversed; 
punchings are preferably made between 24 and 36 inches in 
length for large machines; filing of slots is to be avoided as much 
as possible, hence an additional allowance is made in slot-width 
which becomes more important as the number of slots is increased 
and their dimensions diminished. Electrical demands are con- 
flicting; economical utilization of material and low cost of pro- 
duction demand few and large slots, while the requirements of 
heating and regulation call for many small ones. A general rule 
of electrical design is to avoid concentrations of magnetomotive 


1904.]'\.'-- OF ALTERNATORS. A ; 267 


forces and of sources of heat, while opposed to this, are the best 
conditions for manufacture; hence the result therefore is always 
acompromise. Where the slots are large and wide, and especially 
if the teeth are narrow, the reluctance of the path of magnet flux 
varies, introducing harmonics into the e.m.f. wave, and causing 
vibration of the teeth; this, in certain cases, has broken them off. 
A sharp corner to the pole-piece accentuates the trouble; with 
solid pole-faces, the ratio of gap-length to slot-width must not be 
less than a certain figure, or undue losses and heating will occur 
in the pole-shoes; under the same condition, copper damping 
devices cannot be used close to the armature. ; 
Slots may be punched in the armature at the same time that 
the lamination section is punched from the sheet; the lamination 
may first be blanked out and the slots punched one or more at a 
time on a special machine, or the plates may be built up into the 
armature ring and the slots formed with a milling cutter. The 
first and second are in use in this country, and the choice depends 
upon whether the number of plates to be punched will pay in 
the saving of labor for the greater cost of a complete die. The 
first method gives the best results; the second is apt to require 
more filing; the third method is foreign but is open to criticism 
because of the increased iron-loss which must result therefrom. 
It was used in the early days of railway-motor work, but has long 
since been abandoned here. Some of the machines at the recent 
Paris Exposition were slotted in this way. Fig. 10 shows most 
of the forms of slots in use at the present timeinalternating-cur- 
rent machines; they may be divided into three classes: Open 
slots, partially-closed slots, and closed slots. The advantages 
and disadvantages of each are partly mechanical and partly 
electrical; open slots permit the use of machine-wound coils, 
which may be entirely insulated before being placed in position, 
a thin paper slot-insulation being used for thechanical pro- 
tection. The insulation may be continuous; the filing of the 
slots need not be excessive. Coils are easily placed in slots 
or removed in case of accident and the self-induction of the slot 
is less. In certain cases small harmonics may be introduced into 
the wave-form, the excitation is greater for the same gap or we 
have a smaller clearance for the same excitation. Foucault 
losses may be produced in the pole-shoe or damping devices. 
Open slots are shown in Nos. 1, 2,8, 9, 18, and 14. Partially- 
closed slots are of two kinds, those which may be wound through 
the opening and those wound from the end. Slots 7, 10, and 11 


22 


[April 2: 


RUSHMORE. CONSTRUCTION 


268 


‘sgloljdog-qn}y pure sUlny-Wiiy Fi old 


W/L 


Y Y) a 


$1 bry 


o/ 


aq 


ie 


Y 


Wy 


1904.] OF ALTERNATORS. 269 


may be wound from the surface while such forms as 3,5, 12, and 
15 must be wound from the end. Where such slots are wound 
from the surface, a wedge is used and held in place by the pro- 
jecting corners. Partially-closed slots require greater care in 
construction and render the problem of insulation more difficult 
than open slots. They decrease the gap-reluctance and the 
foucault loss in the pole-face while increasing the self-induction 
of the winding. The magnetic flux undergoes less variation and 
the clearance may be greater. Slot 10 may be wound from the 
surface where a heavy slot insulation is used sufficient to fillup 
the distance over which the corner projects. Slots 7 and 11 
may be surface wound with two conductors, having a depth equal 
to that of the useful part of the slot, or with four coils or con- 
ductors per slot. 

Where closed slots are used it may be assumed that labor is 
cheap and that wholesale manufacturing is not in vogue. The 
slots must be carefully filed if the space is well utilized; the insu- 
lation as well as the winding must be introduced from the end; 
in long cores this is difficult, especially where there are many 
turns per coil. In some cases with closed or partially-closed 
slots and a many-turn coil the latter is machine-wound and then 
cut, straightened, threaded through the slot and every turn 
separately soldered. With closed slots, the regulation is worse, 
and for standard guarantees the machine becomes very heavy. 
There appear to be no compensating advantages for this form 
of slot. 

The closed and partially-closed slots prevent foucault losses 
in solid conductors; with open slots the bottom conductor may be 
made solid and the top one of cable if necessary, to prevent 
foucault losses. 

To illustrate the importance of slot-shape on inductance and 
consequently on regulation, Fig. 11, showing a partially-closed 
slot is given. The inductance varies with the magnetic per- 
meance (A), where 


eee ee: 
A = Constant i a + a =r 


2 ds) 


x dy \ 


x length of iron core. 


Where the slot is round or where the corners are formed 
by quadrants of considerable radius, there is much less danger 
of insulation rupture due to the sharp bend. 


270 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


ARMATURE WINDING. 

The conductor used for alternator armature winding may be 
round or square copper wire, rectangular strip, or stranded cable. 
The cost of the generator is largely dependent upon the propor- 
tion of the slot cross-section which is occupied by active copper. 
There is a practical limit to the size of strip which may be used in 
the top of the slot and above which stranded cable is necessary. 
Cable has an effective section slightly over three-fourths of the 
apparent area, but with its use much less heating may result 
from the increased resistance loss than would come from the 
foucault currents induced in a solid conductor of the same 
apparent section. After manufacture cable is round but must 
be rectangular before it can be used, and must come very 
closely to gauge without being hardened in the process. 

Where cable is used it is customary to give the coil a vacuum 
treatment which thoroughly impregnates all the interstices with 
an insulating compound. This removes all moisture and makes 
the coil solid and firm while entirely eliminating foucault losses. 
In some cases a solid conductor is used in the bottom of the slot 
and cable at the top. 

Insulation is almost entirely an electrical problem, but one of 
the greatest dangers to which it is exposed is from vibration of 
the coil as a whole or of the individual conductors in the coil. 
For this reason, which explains the great advantage of the sta- 
tionary over the revolving armature, the insulation should 
possess elastic properties. Coils must fit slots tightly and allow- 
ance must be made for a small decrease in size due to drying out 
under long-continued heating. With deepslots and narrow teeth 
the latter may vibrate slightly as each pole passes under them, 
and with very high-speed machines, especially those direct- 
connected to water-wheels, a certain vibration of the whole 


machine is inevitable. The end cross-connections must often be ' ~ 


securely held for this cause as well as to protect against the 
bending action due to heavy short-circuits. 
VENTILATING SPACE-BLOCKS. 

Some years ago a radical improvement was made in dynamo 
design by the use of air-ducts in the armature core. This has 
since been a standard method of construction for all cores whose 
length exceeds 5 or 6 inches. As heating is one of the principal 
limitations to the output of an alternator, the relation between 
the losses and radiating surface is most important; in direct- 
current work it is sometimes used as a starting point for the 


1904.]" ; aw! OF ALTERNATORS: zel 


design. It.is' usual to allow for effective radiating surface at 
least one side of the exposed iron in the duct, so it is easily 
seen that the radiation from the armature may be increased by 
the introduction of ventilating spaces into the cores, which cause 
but slight increase in volume or weight of the machine. 

It is desirable that consistently-designed machines reach their 
limits of temperature and regulation at the same time. The 
external dimensions of the core are largely determined by mag- 
netic reasons and the proper choice of number and size of air- 
- ducts:is therefore the point which largely decides. the armature 
heating. In very small machines ventilating spaces have been 
made 0.156 in. wide; for most engine-driven alternators a width 
of 0.312 in. to 0.375 in. is used; in large machines of great radial 
depth of lamination, 0.5 in., 0.75 in., and even 1 in. ducts have 
been used; two spaces each of 0.5 in. are, however, preferable to 
one space of twice the size. The best width depends upon the 
depth of laminated iron, the peripheral velocity of the revolving 
field and the type of space-block used. The distance between 
ducts in core varies from one to three inches. Small ducts at 
frequent intervals help to reduce foucault losses; it is usual to 
place a space-block on each end of the core between the lamina- 
tions and clamps. 

The first space-blocks were made of brass or composition cast- 
ing consisting of a solid flat plate with raised fingers on one side. 
The necessary thickness of the plate occupied half the distance 
between laminations and the blocks were expensive as well as 
inefficient. Fig. 12 illustrates some modern types; the first is a 
cast block such as it is desirable to use in certain cases, especially 
at the core ends; it is of skeleton form to give the least weight and 
to permit the greatest effective width of duct. The second type 
is the best construction; it is made entirely of steel; a plate 1/32 
in. of thickness, of same form of armature lamination, has sup- 
porting pieces punched in, as shown, which in turn support 
steel fingers so formed as to be securely held in place. This 
construction is very firm and gives the maximum effectiveness 
of ventilating space, and without the introduction of non- 
magnetic material. The third type shown has the same advan- 
tages as the second with regard to space; the upright fingers are 
' supported in a different manner. 

Where the poles are laminated and placed close together, 
it ig sometimes found desirable to have ventilating ducts in the 
revolving field-frame opposite to those in the armature; in some 


972 ~ RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


foreign machines, ducts in the one are staggered with respect to 
those in the other. 
SHIELDS. 

To give access to the armature winding it is usual to make the 
‘yoke-section so that all coil-ends and cross-connections are well 
exposed, an essential consideration from the standpoint of ven- 
tilation. To protect the cross-connections from mechanical 
injury, shields are fastened to each side of the frame, projecting 
out and over the cross-connections. These shields are sometimes 
made in a continuous ring and support the yoke. Many varia- 
tions inform are found, but a typical modern design is shown in 
Fig. 13. The lignt iron casting is well opened to give good venti- 
lation and is of such length as to be easily handled in assembling 
or making repairs; a minimum of machine-work is required; pro- 
jecting lugs on the inner ends engage with adjacent sections 
securing accurate alignment. 

Rims, ARMS, AND Huss. 

The fly-wheel is at times a part of the generator construction. 
At the higher frequencies the natural velocity of the revolving 
field approximates that which is used for fly-wheels and the two 
are often advantageously combined. At 25 cycles this does not 
give good results nor for direct-current generators, where fre- 
quency is much lower’than 25 cycles. Fly-wheels are used for 
two purposes; 2.¢., to give uniform angular velocity through one 
revolution and to give uniform speed over short periods of time. 
The usual specification is that the variation in angular velocity 
shall not exceed from 2.5 to 3 electrical degrees in one revolution; 
as the frequency and the number of poles is increased, the differ- 
ence between the real and the electrical angle becomes greater, 
and the fly-wheel must be heavier. 

With alternators the problem of the fly-wheel is almost entirely 
that of the requirements for parallel running; much has been 
written on this subject with but little of definite results. To 
give briefly the necessary relations, it may be said that in itself 
variation in angular velocity has but little to do with trouble in 
parallel running, except as it is related to other constants. The 
impulses from the piston give a frequency equal to the revolu- 
tions per second; the moment of inertia of the revolving part 
and the electrical constants of the machine give a natural period 
of oscillation; if these are equal we have the condition of reso- 
nance. It is necessary for successful work that they bear an 
-approximately fixed relation to one another; it is also necessary 


273 


OF ALTERNATORS. 


1904.] 


ae 
Ae 


Fly-Wheel Type Revolving Field. 


274 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


to have some electrical damping either inherent in the design of 
the machine or else obtained by special devices; when these con- 
ditions are observed, successful parallel] operation is insured. 

Sections of rims,arms, and hubs of revolving parts are shown 
in the accompanying sheet (Fig. 14). Rims are made of cast 
metal, either iron or steel, of laminated or rolled plates, or of 
combinations of both. The allowable peripheral velocity of cast 
iron is about 5000 ft., of steel-casting 8000-10 000 ft., and lam- 
inated rims may have velocities of from 14 000 to 18 000 ft. per 
minute. 

Where cast-iron rims are used the poles are sometimes counter- 
sunk to give additional contact-area. As a rule, solid rims are 
made of steel and may be in one piece with the arms and hub or 
may be separate and the spider be of iron. In the latter case, the 
rim may be shrunk on the arms on bolted to it. "When shrunk 
on, one or more keys are placed on the periphery for driving. 
The rims are occasionally made of standard fly-wheel construc- 
tion with one arm and the corresponding portion of rim to a 
section, the whole held together by links. Making the arms 
separate from the rim, removes the shrinkage strains, and allows 
the use of a cheaper metal—cast iron forthe arms and hub—while 
requiring more machine work. Alternators with bad regulation 
will often run for a considerable time on short-circuit without 
harm, so that the resultant shocks from such causes are less than — 
with direct-current generators. When the field and fly-wheel 
are combined, both the driving and the retarding forces are 
located in the fly-wheel rim and the only stresses in the arms and 
shaft are such as come from the prime mover. 

As a general rule and within limits, the higher the speed the 
lighter in weight will be both the prime mover and the generator. 
Commercial considerations in some instances and the height of 
waterfalls and water-wheel design in others, demand a high 
rotative speed and a high peripheral velocity for units of large 
output. Now alternators are always designed with regard to 
limits which are different for different conditions. For units of 
high speed and large output these are the mechanical stresses in 
the revolving part. In most cases, these must have a con- 
siderable factor of safety at 50% above normal speed; a condi- 
tion which may easily exist. It is then necessary to work with 
materials the properties of which are accurately knownand which 
has the greatest possible strength. For these reasons, the best 
practice is to make rims of built-up rolled-steel plates riveted 


/ 


1904.] OF ALTERNATORS. ~ OTs 


SEN 
XS ] Te 


i 


a! we 
TTD 


ps 


N 


LLM 


SS 
N 


BNE AN 


a oe 
it 


ir 


( 
saute 


| 
pcs —\|\ I 


es 


¢ 


RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION ‘April 22 


276 


irewu | ae mn 


eee akg 


\ 


CZ 


Turbine Alternator Constructor. 


1904.] OF ALTERNATCRS. 277 


together into a solid self-contained ring. The dovetails in the 
arms may be straight, in which case they are used simply for 
driving, and the only tension on the arms is such as comes from 
their own weight. In other cases, the resisting stresses may be 
divided between the arms and the rim. The poles are either 
made in one piece with the rim laminations, in which case the 
shoe, if there is one, is made removable and retains only itself and 
the field coils, or the pole may be held by any of the various 
methods shown. 

Fig. 15 illustrates the. constructicn of a modern fly-wheel 
alternator of the “‘ engine-type ’’; the hub is split and the arms 
are hoilow; two different rim-constructions are shown; the rim 
is built up of laminated iron, in one case held to the inner cast iron 
by small dovetails with nearly straight sides, the only object of 
which is to drive, and in the other a radial cast-iron section, 
projects through the laminations, which are held together by 
through rivets in both cases. The poles are held by dovetails 
and keys on tne outer surface of the fly-wheel rim. The lam- 
inated places lap in alternate layers, giving a rigid construc- 
tion. <A cast-steel construction is illustrated in Fig. 15a. 

While high-speed water-wheel and turbine-driven alternators. 
do not have fly-wheels in the ordinary sense, the rim-construction 
must be unusually strong, and for this purpose a number of 
interesting solutions have been found. Fig. 16 shows a construc-. 
tion for small machines where it is possible to make the rim from 
one sheet, and the projecting pole-shoes are made removable. 
Fig. 16a shows a modification of the preceding assembled field. 

A peculiar tangential, bicycle-spoke construction is clearly 
shown in Fig. 17. A high-speed water-wheel type of built-up 
laminated rim with plate supports is illustrated in Fig. 18. 

In many cases two rows of arms are preferable; it is desirable 
to have the number of poles a multiple of the number of arms, 
although this cannot always be done; in engine-driven machines 
the number of poles should if possible be divisible by four. 
Where a separate fly-wheel is used, it is sometimes bolted to the 
arms of the revolving part to relieve the shaft from sudden 
shocks; arms are elliptical in section, either solid or hollow. 
Sometimes they are cast into various channel- and I-forms. 

Hubs do not vary much in design; conveniences of manufac- 
ture or transportation may make it desirable to part the hub, 
otherwise it is made in one piece and pressed on the shaft. In 
small high-speed machines the laminations may be mounted 


273 RUSHMORE CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


AM iy a tS 
Gates cers 


i i 


ih 
A 


77a 


| HI Hl 
i : | 
fli! 


5 SSS 
— 
an ae oe od 


es 
—- 
_— 


A. 


FEES 


Rees 
x 
<© 
<{(9) 
— 


a 
SES 


Bicyele-Spoke Construction. 


1904. ] OF ALTERNATORS. 279 


directly on the shaft, in which case it is desirable to use at least 
two keys. 
FIELD-CoILs. 

Field-coils are wound with either wire or copper strip; the 
number of poles and necessary exciter pressure sometimes pro- 
hibit the use of strip winding, but wherever possible it is now 
used. The art of bending thin copper strip is one of recent 
development; coils wound in this manner have radiation con- 
stants several times greater than wire-wound coils. The outer 
surface of the coil is exposéd to the air and thin sheets of paper 
separate adjacent strips. by baking the coils under pressure, 
the separate layers may be cemented into a solid mass. Wooden 
or fibre washers are placed at top and bottom of coil and insula- 
tion between the winding and the pole core; the terminals are 
riveted and soidered to the strip and are made of a material that 
does not crystallize by vibration. Strip-winding is much easier 
to retain in place at high speeds, but still requires additional 
retainers under abnormal conditions. The centrifugal force 
acts in a radial direction and with few poles may cause a bulging 
of the winding unless prevented by such devices as are shown in 
Fig. 19, which illustrates field-coil sections and methods of insula- 
tion in use at present. 

The ends of the coils may be either round or straight. With 
high-speed machines, it is necessary to relieve the pole as much as 
possible from supporting the coil, and straps are commonly placed 
over the ends and fastened, independently of the pole, to the re- 
volving rim. With slow-speed machines, a cast-metal retainer 
projecting over the exposed portion of the pole is fastened to the 
pole-end. Brass rings are occasionally placed around the poles 
to prevent injury from accidental field opening. 

Potes, Pote-SHOES, AND METHODS oF FASTENING. 

The various poles, pole-shoes, and methods of fastening the 
same are shown in Fig. 20, whichillustrates most of the modern 
forms. Poles may be either of solid section, steel casting or 
wrought iron, or may be built up of laminations of rolled plate. 

Laminated poles are of known strength and section built up 
into an even form, require no machine work, may be made in 
one piece with laminated rim, and necessitate a rectangular pole- 
section. They allow the use of wide slot openings and small 
mechanical clearances, the easy introduction of pole-face wind- 
ings, the sudden variation of magnetic flux. With them the 
effective cross-section is reduced from 5 to 10%, depending on 


280 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION {April 22 


aw = 


ll 


High-speed Water-wheel Construction. 


1904.]} 


Field-Coils. 


= 


S51 


282 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


the thickness of the plate used, which varies from 0.0125 to 
0.125 in., the thicker plates being used for large mechanical 
stresses. Laminated iron has more uniform properties than cast 
metal and may be safely worked at higher magnetic densities. 

Cast poles are almost universally of steel. They are likely to 
contain sand or blow-holes, require machine work for mounting, 
unless, as in very exceptional cases, cast on the rim. The sides 
may be irregular and require machining or wedges for fitting 
field coils. Cast poles may be made of any desired section, 
suffer no reduction in effective cross-section and are easily held 
by bolts. If the tip or shoe is also solid, small gaps require closed 
or partially-closed slots but offer a resistance to hunting. With 
very high peripheral velocities separate cast poles become im- 
possible due to the necessary size of bolts to retain them. 

The number of poles being fixed by the speed and frequency 
by the relation 
No. Poles x rev. per. min. 

120 

The peripheral velocity is consequently dependent on the pole- 
pitch. 

Peripheral velocity (ft. per min.) = 10 x pole-pitch (in.) x 
cycles per second. 

The accompanying sheet, Fig. 21, shows clearly the relations 
and limitations in this respect. A minimum pole-arc being 
practically fixed by the desired winding distribution, the neces- 
sary gap is determined for mechanical reasons and economical 
magnetic densities. It-is seen that the limiting peripheral 
velocity is more quickly reached as the frequency increases. If 
the peripheral velocity is kept constant, it is not always possible 
to save in material by increasing the speed. The natural rela- 
tions which determine the peripheral velocity may be seen in 
part from the following: 

The slot-depth is fixedby electrical reasons, and for a givenline 
of machines approximates more or less closely to a constant 
value. The slot-width and its relation to the slot-depth are 
variables, only within limits, as well as the relation between the 
widths of tooth and slot. The current-density and space-factors 
being determined by other reasons of heating and dielectric 
strength, there results a value for width of tooth and slot and for 
the amperes per inch of circumference, a nearly constant quantity 
for a given type of machine. The number of slots per pole for 
two- or three-phase must be divisible by the number of phases, 


= frequency, in cycles per second. 


283 


TERNATORS. 


OF AL 


1904.] 


‘Sulusysey JO spoyjyoW pure secys-efog ‘sejog 


isc 
NS 
2) 

Cy 


284 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION {April 22 


and when the same punchings are to be used for either, must be 
divisible by six. It therefore happens that most alternators are 
built with 6 or 12 slots per pole, 12 slots being used where the 
kilowatts output per pole is high and it is not desirable to increase 
the length to the amount necessary for six slots. Nearly all 
engine-driven alternators have six slots per pole, which gives a 
pole pitch of about 10 in., and a peripheral velocity which varies 
directly with the frequency. The peripheral velocity in ft. per 
min. might very roughly be taken as 100 x frequency. This is 


TH 19 XPole}-Pitch xPeriods+pe: 


ian 


Acerec t= 
mim. 


per 


heral Speed ft. 


: 
app 
i 


P 


= 


|_| 

Sie 

NSC 
IANS 


N 


RELATION BETWEEN 
Peripheral Velocity  ' 
Pole=Pitch & Frequency, ae 


§ 20 24 28 | 


however, subject to wide modifications and machines of low fre- 
quencies usually run at much higher velocities than this would 
give. The peripheral velocity may vary as the square root of 
the frequency. The relations between peripheral velocity, pole- 
pitch and frequency are shown in Fig. 21. 

Round poles may be used under certain conditions and allow 
of saving in field copper and give good ventilation. Rectangu- 
lar poles which depart far from square do not best utilize active 
materia’, 


1904.] OF ALTERNATORS. 285 


The desired relation between magnetic densities in the pole- 
core and at the pole-face necessitates that the pole-shoe extend 
beyond the core around the circumference. This also serves to 
hold the field coil in place. The length of the pole-arc varies 
from 50 to 70% of the pole-pitch; the relation being a com- 
promise between opposing tendencies. In one type of alternator 
the tip is not extended; the coil is held in place by a wedge ex- 
tending between poles; in this machine the magnetic relations 
are necessarily of different values. 

Pole-tips or shoes may be in one piece with the pole or separate; 
the shoe may be laminated while the pole is either laminated or 


Forms of Pole Shoes, 


solid. It is necessary to have the field-coil easily removable and 
in some cases to be able to remove the poles in order to gain access 
to the armature coils where there is no arrangement for sliding 
the yoke along the base. No. 6, 8, 9, and 14 show methods of 
attaching laminated tips to solid poles. 

Pole 1 is of representative form for laminated section, although 
it might be used for solid. . The method of holding the pole is of 
interest. The dovetail is cut diagonally in the rim which is 
usually of solid-steel section. The dovetail projection on the 
poleisstraight,7.e., paralleltoshaft. There is a key on each side of 
the pole. One side of the key—that against the pole—is straight, 
while the other side is inclined-to fit the groove intherim. The 
shoulders of the pole rest on the rim while a slight clearance exists 


RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION (Apri: 22 


286 


SBUTY-1OJOITJOD 


=. 


Wily 


NZAZ — 


Np" 


ae 


1904.] OF ALTERNATORS, 287 


at bottom. The heating of the pole will tighten the joint, the 
keys allow the pole to be accurately centered and by theinsertion 
ot shims under the shoulders, the clearance may be changed 
slightly. Poles are interchangeable and with end-plates against 
keys cannot become loose during operation. The laminations 
are held in place by bolts or rivets and are assembled as solid 
pieces. The dovetails are cut in the rim by first cutting out the 
rectangle with a slotter and then the angles with an end-milling 
cutter. 

Pole No. 2 is a modification of No. 1. The dovetail is cut 
straight and the two taper keys are on the same side of the pole. 

Pole No. 3 is the same general plan. Instead of using keys 
the pole is slotted at the bottom and after being placed in the 
dovetail, a round key with inclined parts is driven in the central 
hole spreading the iron sufficiently to insure a tight fit. There 
may be two or more slots. 

Pole No. 4. Shows two methods of holding pole which are 
self-explanatory. 

Fig. 5 shows a method of bolting laminated poles to yoke. 
A square or round bar runs lengthwise of the pole through the 
laminations into which the bolts are tapped. The contact-area 
and section are slightly diminished. The pole may easily be 
saturated. An alternative method is to sink the bolt-head into 
the laminations instead of the bar. This method of holding the 
pole is well adapted for use on engine-type generators. It 
allows of easy assembling and removal, and in practice is found 
not to become loose. 

Fig. 6 is a solid pole with laminated tip dovetailed and the 
whole bolted to the yoke. 

Fig. 7 is a solid pole bolted through from top. 

Fig. 8 is a curious and apparently expensive foreign con- 
struction. In this case the pole is round and is fixed in position 
by a dowel-pin. 

Fig. 9 is of interest as showing a unique method of holding 
pole-tips. 

Fig. 10 shows a method of retaining poles used by the Allege- 
meine Elektricitats Gesellschaft for machines with high per- 
ipheral velocities. . 

Fig. 11 shows a method for retaining poles where the rim con- 
sists of laminated iron as well as the poles, and where the ex- 
tended pole-tip is in one piece with the pole-core. The lamina- 
tions in the rim are built up in short sections of from one to two 


3 


288 RUSHMORE: CONSTRUCTION [April 22 


inches, which are riveted and the whole held together by through 
bolts. The pole laminations are alternated as shown to match 
the similar sections of the core and the whole is held by taper 
keys as shown. 

Fig. 12 shows a design for the same purpose as the preceding. 
The pole is built up solid from laminated iron and inserted end- 
wise into the rim. It is there drawn tight against the rim by 
taper keys. This is used on high-speed machines of large output 
and has proved a very satisfactory method where the mechanical 

stresses are great. 

Fig. 13 shows a foreign method of countersinking a round pole 
into the rim, and the use of a dowel-pin topreventturning. With 
a cast-iron rim this construction is good, but also expensive. The 
added security against tilting of the pole is not great. 

_ Fig. 14 shows an unusual construction, sometimes used in 
small machines, of casting the pole in one piece with the rim. The 
shoe which may be solid or laminated, is screwed on from the top. 
Should the poles come unevenly spaced on the casting it is diffi- 
cult to compensate therefore by a small shifting of the shoe. 

Figs. 15, 16,17,18, and 31 illustrate different methods of hold- 
ing the poles on inductor alternators. 

Fig. 15 illustrates present practice in this country. Fig. 31 
illustrates a cheap method of holding by babbitt which can only 
be used where the centrifugal force is small. 

Fig. 19 is the same method as in Fig. 12, except that the keys 
force the pole up instead of drawing it down. It does not appear 
to have any compensating advantage. 

Fig. 20 shows a method which is often cheaper than the dove- 
tail construction. 

Fig. 21 shows a foreign construction. The windings placed 
directly on the poles which are then mounted adjacent to each 
other and supported entirely by the through bolts as shown. 

Fig. 22 illustrates a construction used in this country where 
the pole-tip is not extended and where the yoke-ring is laminated 
and made in one piece with the poles. The rim may be used fora 
fly-wheel or not as conditions prescribe. The field-coil is retained 
by a wedge between adjacent poles. 

Fig. 23 is a very interesting construction used for high-speed 
machines. The lamination embraces two poles and extends on 
one side to the air-gap and.on the other to the bottom of the 
pole-tip. The plate usedis0.125in. thick and anumber of similar 
plates are built up together. As the plates cover two poles but 


1904) OF ALTERNATORS. 289 


one-half of the rim-section between is iron, and by building up 
three plates of each kind before reversing we have numerous ven- 
tilating ducts alternating with the iron section extending across 
the core and affording excellent ventilation. Numerous bolts 
pass through the laminations, making the whole self-contained 
and independent of the dovetail supports which are used merely 
for construction and alignment. The pole-tips are senarate and 
are inserted between the projecting laminations after the coils 
have been put in place. Rods are then run through, securely 
fastening the tipsin place. Inthis manner the central part of the 
pole face is continuous, while the edges where the tips project, 
are broken. 

Fig. 24 is similar to 22 except that the pole-tips project and the 
poles are wound by hand with flexible cable after the field-iron 
is assembled. 

Fig. 25 is a construction used for small high-speed machines 
such as are suited to turbine work. The pole and central part 
are made in one piece and are riveted in sections the whole being 
held together by long bolts or rivets. The pole ends inadouble- 
curved surface which is reversed every alternate section. Two 
adjacent sections of the pole-shoe are riveted together and are 
then inserted into the corresponding places in the pole-end. 
Long rods running through both hold the shoe in place. 

Fig. 26 is a variation of the same method. 

Fig. 27 is a method of retaining the poles by double row of bolts, 
and Fig. 28 of simply tapping directly into the laminations. 

Fig. 29 shows each pole with a separate base which latter is 
bolted to the rim and Fig. 30 another method of bolting and a 
detachable pole-shoe. 

Form oF POLE-SHOES. 

The distribution of the magnetic flux on different parts 
of the pole-face, is largely determined by the length of gap 
at any point to which the magnetic density is almost inversely 
proportional. If we have one slot per pole per phase, the wave of 
electromotive force practically coincides with that of, field dis- 
tribution. With more than one slot per pole per phase, the ten- 
dency is for the wave of e.m.f. to approximate a sine form inde- 
pendent of the law of distribution of the magnetic flux. If with 
open slots the strength of the field be not graded near the pole- 
edge, harmonics are introduced into the wave form. There are 
several methods of shaping the pole-face in order to get the 
desired sine wave with a sufficient degree of approximation. 
(Shown in Fig. 22.) 


290 RUSHMORE: ALTERNATORS [April 22 


No. 1 shows the pole ona S.K.C. inductor alternator. Here 
the gap is so laid out as to give a theoretically perfect sine wave. 
The distance between the centers of two consecutive poles in this 
type of machine represents 360° electrical. Starting from the 
centre of the pole with a gap equal to g, we have for the gap g', at 
any point + at an angular distance from the centre line equal to 
a electrical degrees. g' =~ Be 

cos a 

Fig. 2 is for a machine the adjacent poles of which are of 
opposite polarity. Here the distance “between pole centres 
represents 180° electrical, and the pole-face is laid off as before 
with this difference. 

Figs. 3,4, and 5 show methods of approximation which may 
give results which agree quite closely with those obtained from a 
theoretical curve. Fig. 3 is a compound curve. Fig. 4 has the 
central part of the pole-arc drawn from the centre of the arma- 
ture. The edges of the poles have straight bevels. In Fig.5 the 
pole-arc is drawn with a radius less than that from the armature 
centre to gap. With proper judgment any of these methods 
will be found to give satisfactory results. 

: CoLLECTOR RINGs. 

A great disadvantage in the revolving-armature type of alter- 
nator is the difficulty of taking high-pressure current from the 
machine. The continuity of insulation must be broken and the 
exposed brushes and collector are always possible sources of 
danger. While with the inductor alternator we have no 
moving wire and consequently no moving contacts, with the 
revoiving-field generator the low pressure exciting current must 
be led into the field-coils by means of collector rings. The forms 
in common use are shown in Fig. 23. The rings are usually made 
of cast iron, and carbon brushes are employed. Several brushes 
per ring are used to allow for repairs or adjustment without inter- 
ruption of service. The collector is preferably made open, especi- 
aliy if much heat is generated. Different methods of supporting 
and insulating the rings are shown. 


A paper presented at the 186th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers. 
New York, April 22nd, 1904. 

Copyright 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


A CONTRIBUTION TO THE THEORY OF THE REGULA- 
TION OF ALTERNATORS. 


BY H. M. HOBART AND F. PUNGA. 

The interesting paper recently contributed by Behrend to the 
proceedings of the INstiruTE has incited the writers to the 
preparation of the present paper, which sets forth their own 
views regarding the regulation of alternating-current generators. 

It is unnecessary to refer to the theories of others, since these 
have so recently been discussed by Behrend*, who has shown by 
means of practical examples that none of these theories give cor- 
rect results for different types of machines. 

The theory which the writers describe in this paper has been 
tested on but a limited number of machines, but has in these 
cases given such excellent results as amply to justify its publica- 
tion, in the hope that this will lead to its being subjected to 
further tests in impartial quarters. Moreover, the wri- 
ters entertain the hope that the, theory itself will, inde- 
pendently of practical examples,. prove convincing in virtue 
of its freedom from hypothetical assumptions. Neverthe- 
less its reliability must of course be demonstrated by test- 
ing it by a large number of practical examples of various. 
types of machines. It 1s our intention to bring together 
such practical examples in a treatise on the design of 
alternating-current generators, in which this theory will 
be employed in the sections relating to pressure regula- 
tion. 

The change in the pressure of a constantly-excited alternating- 
current generator when its load is varied in nature or amount, is 


*Trans. Am. Inst. Elec. Eng’rs., Vol. XXI., p. 497. 


291 


292 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


chiefly occasioned by the magnetic flux set up by the current in 
the armature winding and linked with the turns constituting the 
winding. These lines may be classified according as they flow in 
one or the other of three paths, as shown in Fig. 1. 

First Path—The lines never emerge fromthe armature. They 
consist of those which cross the armature slot from side to side, 
and those which are linked with the end connections. 

Second Path—The lines emerge from the armature and cross 
the air-gap toward one end of the pole-shoe, and after passing 
along the pole-shoe, return across the air-gap to the armature 
from the other end of the pole-shoe. 


Third Path—The lines, aftcr emerging from the armature, 


Ce 8 ee ate ee! 


Nee / 
Fic. 1 \ A 


traverse successively the air-gap, pole-shoe, magnet-core, yoke, 
adjacent magnet-core, and pole-shoe, and after again traversing 
the air-gap, re-enter the armature. 

The lines following the first path are purely self-inductive, and 
all methods of treatment in which they are correctly handled 
are applicable also to our theory. 

Hence for sine curves of electromotive force and current, one 
applies the recognized vector diagram of Fig. 2 in which 


OA = The electromotive force generated in the armature wind- 
ing by the lines crossing the air-gap = internal e.m.f. 
OC = Current flowing in the windings. 


OD =BE = The reactance-pressure generated in the armature 
winding by the current O C flowing in it. 

AB = Pressure-drop due to ohmic resistance. 

OE Terminal pressure. 


ll 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 293 


Qa = Angle A O E between internal e.m.f., O A, and terminal 
ennnbO Ee 
@ = Angle E OC between terminal e.m.f OF and currentOC, 


The magnetic flux belonging to the second and third paths, 
can be best considered if we, for the moment, neglect the mag- 
netic reluctance of the iron (armature laminations, magnet core, 
and yoke). 

In Fig. 3 is shown a magnet-pole with a single armature con- 
ductor at the centre of the polar pitch. When the conductor 
carries no current, the magnetic flux across the air-gap will 


4 


ease 
ees 
sasstetaees 


se 
a 


stat 


= 


SRNR 


santas 


be generated solely by the field magnet ampere-turns, and will 
be uniformly distributed over the pole-arc. It may be repre- 
sented by the rectangular area 12 3 4, the spreading at the 
pole-tips being neglected. 

Let us now consider the case when a current of 7 amperes flows 
through the conductor; the ampere-turns per field-spool will be 
denoted by A; the total armature strength per pole, denoted by 
1/2,is, according to the conditions of load, to be added orsubtracted 
from the field ampere-turns A. 

In the case shown in Fig. 3, the left half of the pole-arc is sub- 
ject to the influence of (A —2/2) ampere-turns; the right half, to 
(A+i/2) ampere-turns. The density of the magnetic fluxis pro- 


294 : HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


portional to these ampere-turns, since the magnetic reluctance 
of the iron is, for the time, neglected. The distribution of the 
magnetic flux may now be diagrammatically represented by the 
area 156784 shown in Fig, 3. What now, is the effect of 
this distribution? 

In the case under consideration, where the conductor lies at the 
middle of the pole-pitch, the total number of lines of force 
entering the armature is unaffected by the armature current; 1.e., 
the area 15678 4 is equal to the area 1 23 4 and what 
has beer. lost on the one side of the conductor has been exactly 
made up by the gain on the other side. 

2. The internal electromotive force generated by this flux is 
not only not decreased, as might hastily have been concluded, 
but is even slightly increased, as is evident when we consider 
the electromotive force formula : 


B= he INV XO 


The periodicity NV, the total flux M,and the turns per phase 
T have not been altered, but k has become slightly greater, 
for the alteration in the form of the magnetic field has precisely 
the same effect on k as would occur in virtue of a decrease in the 
ratio of 

pole-arc : pitch.* 

3. Another effect of the current in the armature conductor in 
Fig. 3, relates to the shifting of the central line of the total mag- 
netic flux.t It may be seen from Fig. 3 that the centre of the 
figure representing the magnetic flux is no longer the same as 
when the armature-conductor carried no current. The line g then 
represented the centre of the flux; the magnetomotive force of the 
current in the armature-conductor has shifted the centre of the 
resultant flux distribution to the line h. These considerations 
are capable of being readily extended to the case of the flux 
distribution where the conductor occupies any other than the 
middle position opposite the pole-arc. The flux distribu- 
tion in such a case is illustrated diagrammatically in Fig. 
4, and the principal difference between this flux distri- 
bution and that of the previous case where the conductor 
occupied the middle position is seen to consist in a decrease in the 


*The dependence of k upon the ratio of pole-arc to pitch was probably 
first pointed out by Kapp. It is very exhaustively treated on pages 82 
to 85 of ‘‘ Electric |Generators.”’ 

_ tFirst pointed out by Blondel (L’/ndustrie Electrique, 1899). 


1904. REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 295 


total number of magnetic lines due to the current in the con- 
ductor, whereas in the former case the total number of magnetic 
lines remained unchanged. 

Of the three considerations enumerated above, we shall confine 
our attention to the first and third; since the influence of the 
change in k is comparatively slight, and since also it is, inactua! 
practice, largely or altog her offset by the increasing magnetic 
reluctance of the teeth, consequent upon the increased local 
saturation brought about by distortion. Hence it is not only 
simpler, but actually more correct to disregard both of these 
opposing influences. 


SSS 


se 


b> 
eset 


ore. 
SRE 
Seles 
See 
SNS 
mo 


ST 
SL 
SS 
Se 
rot 


= 
i 
ter 


eet 
Sef 


OR 
SER 
= 
iste 
SS 


BS 


ne 


In order to study more carefully the influence of the armature 
magnetomotive force upon the magnitude and distribution of the 
magnetic flux, the diagram of flux distribution in Fig. 4 has been 
reproduced in Fig. 5. Since our purpose is to compare the flux 
distribution in.the same machine under two different condi- 
tions we do not need to employ absolute values, but mav repre- 
sent by A the ordinate of the plane rectangular figure 
representing the flux distribution when there is no current in 
the armature-conductor, setting its abscissa, the pole-breadth, 
equaltob. The abscissa representing the position of the con- 
ductor measured from the right-hand end of the pole-face, may 
be designated by x. From the figure we obtain at once: 


296 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


Number of magnetic lines entering armature when there is no 
current in the conductor = AD 

Number of magnetic lincs entering armature when the conductor 
carries the current? = A b— (1/2 b+%1). 

The calculation of the amount of shifting of the centre of the 
total magnetic flux consists in ascertaining the position of the 
ordinate passing through the centre of gravity of the surface. 
When no current flows, it is obvious that the magnetic and 
geometric centres are identical. But this identity must also 
occur in the extreme case represented in Fig. 6, where the arma- 
ture magnetomotive force, 2/2, equals that of the field-magnet 
spool. The magnetic and geometric centres are also identical 
in all intermediate cases. Returning to the diagram of Fig. 5, 
let the distance of the magnetic centre from the mid-pole posi- 
tion be designated by y; then: Lies 


ae x (b—x)14 
ve AB G42 yet 


Conductors lying between adjacent pole-tips are without influ- 
ence upon the factors x (b — x) 4 and x7, which are proportional 
to the distortion. They exert a direct demagnetising influence 
and thus affect the total flux. Hence, in obtaining the values 
of the factors’x (b — x) 1 and x1, only those conductors are to be 
considered which lie directly opposite the pole face. But in ob- 


*This formula is derived as follows (Fig. 5): 


t 
Total surface Xv = surface (1 234) x (- ; ) + surface (3 6 7 4)X 
(+ 56/2)-+ surface (5 8 9 6) X (6/2 — x/2) 
Since surface (1 2 3 4) = surface (3 6 7 4), we have 
Surface (5896) /b x ) 
a 252 


Total surface 


Surface (5896), . 
is, however, 


The ratio 
Total surface 


equal to 


x4 


Ab —(bi/2)+-x4 


hence, in general 
x (b--—x)1 


2 pr ea eee 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 297 


taining the value of (b 7/2), the total number of conductors per 
pole should be considered. 

The calculation of the pressure-drop ina machine would by this. 
method be far too laborious. But fortunately the method may 
be greatly simplified for the case of sine curves of electromotive 
force and current.* 


SINE-WAVE ALTERNATORS. 


In the many cases where we may for practical purposes assume: 
a sine-wave form of electromotive force and current, the decrease 
in total magnetic flux as the result of the armature interference, 
may be attributed to and derived from the demagnetizing 


ae 


A 


{ 
ee 
oy ee = 


ampere-turns, and the shifting of the flux centre, to the distorting 
ampere-turns. 

The magnitudes of these values, as dependent upon the ratio 
pole arc: pitch are given in Table I.} for a single-phase alternator 


*Since it is sometimes required to calculate the pressure-drop for 
machines where sine-wave assumptions are not permissible, this general 
analytical method is followed out to its conclusion in the Appendix, and 
therein are also set forth the uninteresting but essential steps leading up. 
to the derivation of Table I. which result alone amongst the matter con- 
tained in the Appendix is essential to the application of the theory to those 
alternators in which a sine-wave assumption is justifiable. For practical 
purposes this is generally found to be the case, hence the contents of the 
Appendix possess interest only for those who wish to follow through the 
steps leading up to the practical results. Those who only wish to satisfy” 
themselves of the soundness of the method, can do so by applying it to 
machines with which they are familiar, in the way illustrated in this paper. 


+The derivation of Table I. is given in Appendix, as indicated in the 
preceding footnote. 


298 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


with one slot per pole, when loaded to an armature strength of 
n 7 effective armature ampere-turns per pole. 


TABLE I. 
DEMAGNETIZING AND DistorTING AMPERE-TURNS FOR THE CASE OF A 
UnNI-SLoT, SINGLE-PHASE ALTERNATOR. 


Bye (005 b/t= 06 db/t= 0.7 


Demagnetizing ampere- 
CUTTS Aran IN 0.82(n 2)sin pr 0. 78(n 1)sin ’ |0.75(112)sin f’ 


Distorting ampere-turns.. .!0.11(1 7)cos’ |0.15(m 2)cos ’\0.20(n 2)cos fi’ 


* 


In Table I.: ¢’ is the angle between pole-centre and that 
position of the armature-conductor where it carries maximum 
current and, consequently, exerts its maximum magnetomotive 
force, the polar-pitch being taken as 180°. While the demag- 
netizing ampere-turns are to be directly deducted from the 
field-spool ampere-turns in determining the resultant magneto- 
motive force, we may, from the distorting ampere-turns, de- 
termine the angular distance, /, from the magnetic centre by 
means of the equation for the degrees shift of the magnetic centre; 


Bs Distorting ampere-turns per pole x 90% 
*  Air-gap ampere-turns per pole 


The influence of the pole-arc on the demagnetizing and distort- 
ing ampere-turns is of considerable interest. With increasing 
ratios of | 

Pole-are : pitch 


the demagnetizing ampere-turns very slowly decrease. But the 
distorting ampere-turns, on the other hand, increase, and very 
rapidly; in fact their rate of increase is as the square of the in- 
crease in the ratio of pole-arc to pitch. This circumstance may 
be of importance in the choice of the pole-arc. When, for in- 
stance, a certain closeness of regulation for cos ¢ = 1, is re- 
quired, it may be distinctly advantageous to design the machine 
with a relatively small pole-arc and thus decrease the distor- 


*It might be more exact in some cases to make some allowance for the 
magnetomotive force required by the testh. 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 299 


tion. But when it is required to obtain a given degree of regula- 
tion for cos ¢ = 0, one will obtain the best results by means of a 
larger pole-arc. 

SINGLE-PHasE DiIsTRIBUTED WINDINGS. 

It is relatively simple to extend the calculations to other types 
of winding. Thus, when the single-phase alternator has many 
slots per pole, or a uniformly distributed winding, both the de- 
magnetizing and distorting influence will be somewhat less; since 
for the different sections of the winding the maximum magneto- 
motive force occurs when these sections occupy different positions 
with respect to the pole-centre. When, for example, one side of a 
winding covers one-third of the pole-pitch, it will be necessary 
to multiply the values given in Table I. for the armature in- 
terference, by 0.95. This quantity is designated the “ breadth- 
factor’ and has, for various types of winding, the values set 
forth in Table IT. 


TABLE II. 
Percentage of polar' 
pitch covered by one) ‘Breadth 
side of the armature| Factor’’ 
winding. 
20% 0.99 
40% 0.94 
60% 0.86 
80% 0.76 
100% 0.64 


APPLICATION TO POLYPHASE GENERATORS. 

Nothing new is encountered in applying these principles to the 
case of polyphase generators. One must merely first calcu- 
late the armature interference for one phase and then multi- 
ply the values thus obtained.by the number of phases. 
The ampere-turns are thus combined algebraically and not 
geometrically.* The correctness of this proposition is at once 
recognized when it is considered that all the phases are identical ; 
for we have the same number of turns, and the same current 


*An experimental proof for this assertion may be found in Table IV, 
page 197, which shows the agreement between observed and calculated 
values for 7 single-phase generators and for 11 three-phase generators. 


300 HOBART AND PUNGA: {April 22 


per turn, and the current reaches its maximum value for all 
phases when at the same distance from the mid pole-face posi- 
tion. 

In order to make the final forms of the expressions for the de- 
magnetizing and distorting ampere-turns as simple as possible,. 
we shall denote the effective ampere-turns per armature pole by 
nt, and combine the results of Tables I. and II. in Table III. 


TABLE III. 


GENERAL CASE FOR DEMAGNETIZING AND DISTORTING AMPERE-TURNS.. 


Armature Ampere-turns (effective) per pole. 


b/ 5 — 0:5 lye (OG) Dt — aaa 
Demagnetizing am- 
pere-turns.......0.82Bnising’ | 0.78 Bunisind’ |0.75Bnisin dp’ 
Distorting ampere- 
turns:.........../ O11 Buecosp’| 0.15 B72 cosh’) 0.20B 1200s 67 


The application of these principles to the results obtained 
experimentally on a typical alternator will suffice to show the 
method of applying this theory of the regulation of alternators. 
The machine investigated was one of the three-phase gener- 
ators installed at the Shepherd’s Bush Power-House of the: 
Central London Railway. The rated output is 850 kw. at 
unity power-factor. The machine has 32 poles, and a speed of 
94 rev. per min., the periodicity being 25 cycles per second. The- 
pressure between terminals is 5000 volts, corresponding to 2880: 
volts per phase, and for each of the Y-connected armature- 
windings. . 

The leading dimensions.are set forth in the following specifica— 
tion: 


ARMATURE. 
Internal; diameter’. <.\....05 «<1. ene eae eae eee 3666 mm. 
Gross width of armature core between flanges............. 368 a 
Num ber‘of ventilatinge’ducts)5.0- senate ee ee 5a 
Wadthiot each) ventilatinies dict ia. reliant ren nn 13° mm. 
Effective width of armattreicoress1a0) eee 274 * 
Numiber.of* slots: 5 «ce -.i00) @is-ceerseiecie Seen ee 192 
Numberofislots per poles periphascescnmree iin i ner 2 
Depth: of Slotiniite:s «+ 9\s-0.s1.5 diese 8 ated ene ee 92 mm. 


Width of Slotic ine. cscice sin dete ae eee 33.4 mm. 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 


FIELD 
Pent nr cmp ole-arcy ane chk ice st crt Ne eevee Rial See ti ts, 228 
Polampitclaferctas\scvesue- stv 6 seis the eee ae ain < sae Pastas 3 360 
Ia toro tno@le-arcetOl pitch yy sean ves ceicamteye aeons ae reretn =< 63. 
acdialslengtivotenla met cones en ara wen eit cies erie 840 
WiamelerOn held tupac sae Crem cad cae tee a cho ltenrche rey 3690 
acialkaepthorair-Capitc secrete esc chee ciclcle a is emia acts 8 
Dimensions of cross-section of magnet-core............. 16.5 X 37 
WINDING. 
Ninn Deroleatinia tunescon cdma ClOLs awe entire. ite eis eins te 2688 
Number per slot. fyainetame. oe coe vem aps ete ohesies Stet) hee 14 
Numbesiol turns per polerandeper phases. rac eenae eerie: 14 
Effective armature ampere-turns per pole and per phase at 
fall-load current on 9Sfamperess: as re sete ets eee 1380 
Each armature conductor consists of 26 strands of No. 17 
B. W. gauge. 
Meanvlencthi oh onerarmatunes turn r-rctee fiero ete aoa lot 
Embedded length macy air raneren EE Cao 55 
Brees lem oGly ey cgarasyepse et sro aieah epee bone ol =, osha eee re sess see LOS 


We shall first calculate the short-circuit current, since 


301 


cm, 


“ec 


“6 


this is 


generally experimentally observed, and constitutes a good test of 
the theory. The estimation of the short-circuit current requires 


a determination of the inductance of the winding. 


With 


straight-sided slots a good approximation to the inductance 


302 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


of the embedded part may be obtained by elementary mag- 
netomotive force calculation thus: 
Let D = depth of slot in centimetres. 
d = depth above top of winding in centimetres. 
W = width of slot in centimetres. 

The number of lines per ampere-turn per centimetre of embedded 
length, may, for the case of the inductance of the winding of a 
single slot, be taken as approximately equal to 

4n 4 (D—d)+d_ D+at 


10 WwW ssyiy oo WwW 


In the case in question (see Fig. 7) 
D = 972 GEA W=3.3 


Number of lines = 


= 1.99 per centimetre of embedded length and 

per ampere-turn. Now, there are two slots per pole per phase, 

hence the length of the magnetic path through air is doubled and 

the number of lines per ampere-turn per centimetre of embedded 
length becomes 1.99/2 = 1.00. 

It has been demonstrated* that the number of lines per ampere- 

turn per centimetre of free length may be taken at from 0.4 to. 


* Modern Commutating Dynamo Machines, with Special Reference to-. 
the Commutating Limits,” by H. M. Hobart, Proc. Inst. Elec. Engrs., 
Volrsl, pp. 170, 

+Those components of the magnetic dispersion associated with air- 
gap and ventilating ducts, which in practice it is troublesome to: 
calculate, are taken into account by increasing the theoretical value 


4 (Dia to (D-d). 


1904.j REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 303 


0.8. Asa rough approximation we may estimate them as follows: 
0.8 lines for 1 slot per pole and per phase 
Ortis zh aa ee ane oa aa 
OO aie ae ae Ce ans 
Thus in the case under consideration we obtain: 55x1.00+ 

106 x0.7 = 55+74 = 129 lines per ampere-turnf. 

The inductance per spool of 28 turns is 
28? x 129 x 10% = 0.00100 henrys 
and the reactance is 
2z X25 x0.00100 = 0.157 ohms 


E A 
B 
Fic. 9 

Oo 


As there are 16 such 28-turn spools per phase, the reactance 
per phase is 
16 x 0.157 = 2.51 ohms. 
The reactance-pressure with full-load current of 98.5 amperes 
is 
98.52.51 = 248 volts 
From the saturation curve of Fig. 8, we find that 500 ampere- 
turns per field-spool are necessary for this pressure. 
The demagnetizing ampere-turns equal (see Table III). 
3 x0.77 X0.96 x 1380 = 3050 
Hence, one requires 
3050 + 500 = 3550 


tIt is interesting to note that the end connections contribute more to 
the total inductance than the embedded length. 


304 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


field ampere-turns per pole to generate full-load current in the 
short-circuited windings. The observed value was 3625 ampere- 
turns. 

This agreement, within two per cent , is, of course, better than 
canbe relied upon, orindeed than isatall necessary; but by this 
method it appears that an accuracy of from five to ten per cent 
is generally attainable in predetermining the excitation corres- — 
ponding to a given short-circuit current. 

We have checked the experimentally observed short-circuit 
current on 18 different machines and in 89% of all cases 
the agreement was within seven per cent. These are given 
in Table IV., which shows the agreement between calculation 
and experiment for seven single-phase and eleven three-phase 
machines, these being the only machines to which the calcula- 
tion has been applied:—see next page. 

An interesting point to be noticed in the short-circuit current 
relates to the very small value of the reactance-pressure as com- 
pared with that generally ascribed to such proportions. This 
arises from the elimination of all fluxes emerging from the arma- 
ture, the remaining flux being, in our opinion, the only one cor- 
rectly to be considered as pertaining to the reactance-pressure. 
Now, we should readily admit that with the data at present 
accessible, the determination of the inductance can only be very 
rough. But as it exerts so slight an influence upon the result, 
this inaccuracy in its predetermination is of less importance. 
In fact, it was the experimental observation that in a great 
number of machines examined, the short-circuit current deviated 
but slightly from that corresponding to a magnetomotive force 
equal to that of the field-spools, that led one of us in a series of 
articles in which he collaborated,* to neglect the inductance-flux 
as directly affecting the value of the resultant flux, and to employ 
it merely in deriving the angular distance between mid-pole 
position of the centre of one side of the armature coil, and the 
position corresponding to maximum value of the current in the 
armature coil. This theory gave very satisfactory results, 
on machines for low and medium saturation. But of 
course the present method which is supported by a sound 
theory, is preferable especially for high-saturation machines, 

In the predetermination of the characteristic curves, one hz3 
frequent occasion to employ the following values: 


* Design of Alternators,’’ Engineering, Vol. 70, p. 107. 


1904.] 


REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 


TABLE IV. 


Rated Periodicity 
ec esta pone Seeoadyt 
aca 

Single-phase | 

Generator... | 75 8 60 
is 120 14 125 
a 100 20 60 
ae m0) 10 125 
gs 300 32 125 
i 180 20 125 
i 150 20 125 

Three-phase 

generator, Y- 

connected... 360 12 60 
: 300 12 35 
ee 225 6 25 
* 150 14 60 
* 150 12 60 
ee 75 20 25 
¥ 250 24 25 
ss 100 2 60 
e 150 12 60 
ae 250 16 60 
+ 200 48 40 


Ampere Turns on the 
Field Spool. 


Percentage 
Deviation 


Calculated} between 


from 


Observed, | Short-cir- 


3550 


cuited cur- 
rent. 


Calculated 
and 
Observed 
Results. 


5.5 


9.3 


306 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


Ohmic (7 R) drop per ampere, 0.33 volts. 

Reactance-pressure per ampere, 2.52 volts. 

Demagnetizing ampere-turns per ampere = 3 X0.77 X0.96 x14 
Xsinid’~= 3] sind’ (see Table 111): 

Distorting ampere-turns per ampere = 3 X0.17 X0.96 x14 xcos 
dh’ = 6.8 cos d’ (see Table III). 


CALCULATION OF THE ARMATURE INTERFERENCE FOR FULL 
Loap AND Cos ¢ = l. 


In the diagram of Fig. 9, the vectors have the following magni- 


tudes: 
O E = 2880 volts. 


EB = 98.5X2.52'= 248 volts. 


BA = 98.50.33 = 32.5 volts. 
OA = /(OE+B A)+ (EB) = 2915 
Hence 
= sin-! 248 
S 2915 
= sin-' 0.08 


= 4.8° 


The distorting ampere-turns equal 8.6 x98.5 xcos ¢’ = 670 
cos p’. 

gd’ is not yet determined, but it is evidently small—of the- 
nature of 15°—and hence cos ¢’ is approximately equal to unity 
and the armature distortion to 670 ampere-turns. 

For 2915 volts per phase we see from the straight sloping line 
in Fig. 8, that the air-gap reluctance requires 5600 ampere-turns. 
Hence / which equals 


Distorting ampere-turns 


=! = te) 
Ampere-turns for air-gap ae 


is equal to 


670 


(oye ° 
5600 x90°= 10.8 


1904.1] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 307 


og’ = a+ = 4.8°+10.8° = 15.6% 
The demagnetizing ampere-turns 
= 31 X98.5 xsin d’ 
31 X98.5 x .262 
= 800 
From the saturation curve in Fig. 8 we findthat 7900 ampere- 
turns are required for 2915 volts per phase. Hence the total field 


excitation required for full-load current of 98.5 amperes at unity 
power-factor, is 


800+ 7900 = 8700 

But at this increased magnetomotive force the leakage coeffi- 
cient of the magnetic circuit has also increased, and at the high 
saturation values often met with in modern alternators this may 
amount to a very appreciable influence. We take account of it 
in our. theory, though in the interests of simplicity, only in a 
roughly approximate manner, as anything approaching an exact 
estimation requires too much timej; to be employed in practical 
designing work. 

We adopt Hopkinson’s definition for the leakage coefficient ; 
namely, 

Useful flux + leakage flux , 


Leakage coefficient = Rye EE ee : 


the leakage flux is equal to a constant x the ampere-turns per 
field-spool multiplied by 


pe (see Fig. 10) 
c 


for cores of rectangular cross-section and by 
WES 


a 
for cores of circular sections. 
The constant may be taken at about 1.7. tas 


*If greater accuracy should be considered desirable, one could, now that 
_ a better approximation to d’ has been obtained, make a final precise cal- 
' culation of B, as follows: 
cos 15.6° 
: cos 0° 
= .963 X 10.8° 
= 10.40 
and.’ = 4.8°-+ 10.4° = 15.2° 
+See Kapp’s ‘ Elektromechanische Konstruktionen,” 1902, p. 28; 
Arnold, E. T. Z., 1902, p. 251. 


x 10.8° 


308 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


assumed that pole-arc is between 0.55 and 0.70 of the polar pitch. 
For no-load and 2915 volts per phase we obtain a leakage 
coefficient equal to 1. 20.* 
At full load the leakage coefficient increases t~ 


In Fig. 8 are plotted in addition to the right-hand curve of total 
saturation, two other curves, the intermediate one corresponding 
to the ampere-turns required for air-gap and teeth, and the left- 
hand curve corresponding to the ampere-turns required for 
magnet-core and yoke. For our purpose it has been sufficient to 
take the saturation for air-gap as a straight line through the 
origin tangent to the curve of total saturation, and to derive the 
curve for magnet core and yoke from the difference of the other 
two curves, taking into account the ampere-turns for the teeth 
at high saturation. 

For a no-load potential of 2915 volts per phase (O A of Fig. 9), 
1950 ampere-turns are, from the left-hand curve of Fig. 8, found 
to be required for magnet core and yoke. But so far as relates to 
the magnetomotive force required for magnet core and yoke, the 
increase in the leakage coefficient from 1.20 to 1.22 has the same 
effect as would result from an increase in pressure per phase from 
2915 to 


bo 
bo 


x 2915 = 2960 volts 


| 


ik 
is 


1) 
= 


with constant leakage coefficient. From the left-hand saturation 
curve of Fig. 8 it is found that for 2960 volts, the magnet core 
and yoke would require 2050 ampere-turns. 
2050 — 1950 = 100 ampere-turns 
is the increased excitation required for magnet core and yoke in 
virtue of the increased leakage coefficient. 
From this we finally find that a total magnetomotive force of 
8700+ 100 = 8800 ampere-turns 


*Ampere-turns per field-spool = 7650. 


25 b= 37. d=. 16 
2915 
. ful flux = M= Say SH 6 
fotal useful flux 4.44% 448% 25x108 5.8 X 10 
F 1.7X 7650 X 25 (87+ 15 
Leakage coefficient = 1 + 22008 (a 10) == e1220 


5.8>¢ 10°15 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 39 


per field spool is required to obtain 5000 terminal volts (2880 
volts per phase) for the full-load current of 98.5 amperes at unity 
power-factor. 

To obtain the inherent regulation,* one compares the voltage 
per phase (2880) thus obtained, with the pressure correspond- 
ing to the same excitation at no load. 

This is found from Fig. 8 to be 3030 volts, and the inherent 
regulation is therefore: 


3030 — 2880 ete 
Boag 100 = 4.9% 


In this manner the field ampere-turns have been estimated for 
various pressures and various amperes output and the results are 
plotted in Fig. 11. Experimental confirmation of the upper 


D B A Cc 


curve (that for 2880 volts per phase) is found in the group of 
observed points plotted in Fig. 11 for these conditions of load and 
pressure. In Fig. 12 the right-hand saturation curve for full- 
load current of 98.5 amperes at unity power-factor has been 
derived by observation, while the plotted points are taken from 
the calculated curves of Fig. 11. The left-hand curve of Fig. 12 
is merely the no-load saturation curve which has been reproduced 
from Fig. 8. 


*We define the ‘‘ inherent regulation "’ for a given power-factor as the 
percentage increase in pressure occurring when the load is decreased from 
rated full-load current to no load, the excitation remaining constant. 

The “ excitation regulation ”’ is also a useful conception, and for a given 
power-factor is defined as the percentage increase in the excitation required 
to maintain constant terminal pressure, as the lead is increased from no 
load to rated full-load amperes. 


310 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


CaLCULATIONS FOR Cos ¢ = 0, 

For a power-factor of zero, the calculations become exceed- 
ingly simple. The armature distortion becomes equal to zero, 
but the demagnetizing ampere-turns have a great influence upon 
the -results. The ohmic drop can be altogether neglected 
because of its vector position, while the reactance-pressure swings 
nearly into phase with the terminal pressure. 

For full-load current of 98.5 amperes, the calculation is as 
follows (see Fig. 13): 


4 [ aes ] 
» 
000 are Sp 
UNITY POWER-FACTOR ary 
= Le 
-10000—-—+ f Bos 
) 1 
coal 5 auth t 
& we eS 
[a] gi 
e2 
rr | wry | 
we x eX ° 
oc] ly|x < | 
a oY Z. 
71 wh & S) 
AD mS 
olor s ‘ 7 
; Re BS 
ial —+ i = | 
a RS < \ 
fs UNG ' 
apes. ae H 
< 
| 
tt 
J t 
+ 
X OBSERVED POINTS AT UNITY POWER-FACTOR 
7 AND ATA 
TERMINAL VOLTAGE OF 2880 VOLTS PER PHASE 
paella 
"TERMINAL VOLTAGE PER PHASE|= | _ 0} | 
TERMINAL VOLTAGE PER PHASE|= [50 F | = 
TERMINAL VOLTAGE PER PHASE|== 100 G. 14 
~~; AMPERES-QUT T-RPER-PHASE 4 
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 


EB = 248 , 
OA = OB (approximately) = OE+EB 
= 2880+ 248 = 3128. 
Demagnetizing ampere-turns = 3050 
Ampere-turns per field-spoo] required to generate 3128 volts 
= 9400. 
Total = 3050+ 9400 = 12450 
12 450 


Leak ffici = 2 ——— 
eakage coefficient = 1+0.20 x 9400 1.27 


1904.] . REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 311 


Increase in excitation required in virtue of increased leakage 
coefficient = 4100* — 3000 = 1100 ampere-turns. 

Total excitation per field-spool required for 5000 terminal 
volts (2880 volts per phase), for 98.5 amperes output at cos d =0 
is, therefore, 


. 
000 1s | 
balcelie: aia 
i 
+ { at 
000-- —+ 
1500+ mah SEE 
(ea AS (eee + if + 
4000-— * malar | 
9 
Lg | : 
< a 
= = 
S600 — 
Ee 
: ee | ES 
wy. s 4 
ently o, 1 r 
< | | 
8000 S - 
< Be 
k Ny lo 
0 
ah reas 
iL a ly 
X POINTS pALDU ATER 
R - TAGE 
FOR FULL-LOAD Vol | 
Fig, 12 
-|—— - | 
— +——t ae 
sae 
+— ——+ 
AMPERE-TURNS PER a aes eee 
6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000 


*4100 and 3000 are the excitations for magnetic core and yoke cor- 


7.21 ‘ 
responding respectively to 1.20 > 3128 = 3300 and to 3128 volts. 


312 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


12 450+ 1 100 = 13 550 ampere-turns. 

Corresponding to the group of curves of Fig. 11 relating to 
cos ¢ = 1, there has been prepared for cos 6 = 0, the group of 
curves shown in Fig. 14.  Experimentally-observed points 
could, of course, not be obtained for cos f = 0, but a number 
taken for values of cos ¢ lying between 0.10 and 0.25 are given 
corresponding to the upper curve for 2880 volts; 12.e., 5000 
terminal volts. These observed points lie somewhat below the 
calculated curve, and even when the difference in power-factor 
is taken into consideration, are slightly too low. This presum- 
bly arises from the tooth-saturation which for these conditions 
reached 17.500 lines per ‘square, centimetre; and jocca- 
sioned a slight decrease in the inductance, below the short- 


circuit value, where the agreement was so excellent. The 
authors are not of opinion that a precise predetermination of 
the influence of the tooth-saturation is possible. F ortunately, 
also, the method, without consideration of the influence of the 
tooth-saturation on the inductance, gives much more precise 
results than are required in practice. 

These groups of curves (Figs. 11 and 14), afford a simple 
means of deriving curves of the performance of an alternator 
under all conditions of load. Should one, for instance, wish to 
plot a curve showing the dependence of the terminal pressure on 
the current for constant field excitation, one draws a horizontal 
line corresponding to this constant value of the excitation, and 
the intersection of this line with the curves for different pressures, 
give at once sufficient points for plotting the desired curve. This 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 313 


has been done in Fig. 15 for four different cases, for which 
experimental data were also available. This agreement is very 
close. 

For values of the power-factor intermediate between zero and 
unity, one carries out the calculation in the same manner as has 
been illustrated for cos¢ = 1. One employs for the purpose the 
vector diagram of Fig. 2, in order to calculate O 4 and the angle 
a it is preferable to employ the graphical method, taking the 
values directly from the diagram, and thus avoid the necessity 


T ] T 7 
| \ 
| | 


co 
Laas 
eo! 


es 
Se 


E 


=FIEl 
Py 


=) 
ANS-PER 


co 
c 


a BSERVED POINTS AT A POWER-FACTOR 
Ve OF .15 TO .25 AND A TERMINAL VOLTAGE | — 
OF 2880 VOLTS PER PHASE 


ZERO POWER-FACTOR 
4 


4900 4 lan . 
; AMPERES-OUTPUT PER-PHASE 


1 T 
ao | 40 | 60 | 80 | 100 | 120 | 140 | 160 | 10 | 200 | 220 | 240 | 260 | 20 


for analytical calculations. ( is obtained from the value of the 
armature distortion and one thus obtains 
bp’ =a+ht¢ 

The remainder of the calculation proceeds in precisely the same 
manner as for cos ¢@ = 1 and cos ¢ = 0. 

The authors are of the opinion that in the course of time it will 
become customary to specify merely the regulation for a pure 
inductive load; for, just as in the calculations this was shown 
to be the simplest case to handle, so also is it in practice the case 


314 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22 


which can be most cheaply, simply, and accurately experimentally 
determined. 

For approximately unity power-factor, it is exceedingly diffi- 
cult, even with the best of wattmeters and of other measuring 
instruments, to demonstrate the presence or absence of a slight 
difference of phase, and to measure it, although such a slight 
phase difference has a great influence on the regulation. For 
very low power-factors, 1.e., for cos ¢ = 0 as the limit, a phase 
difference of from 20° to 30° only slightly influences the result. 
Furthermore, for tests with cos ¢ = 1, a certain fall in speed is 
difficult to avoid when throwing on the load. Forthe same current 
at a low power-factor this difficulty in an experimental deter- 
mination of the pressure regulation, is avoided. 


XM,OBSERVED POINTS AT UNITY POWER-FACTOR 
@ OBSERVED POINTS AT POWER-FACTORS 
OF .15 TO .25 


PTT TTT rete 
Zh shel Teulada 
Pe 
eas 3 Gi ea 
bela 


eoip 
TERMINAL vourace fy | 
fi 
, q 


All these factors tend to make the introduction of the per- 
centage inherent regulation at cos 6 = 0 as an important criterion 
of the design, a very desirable step. Should such a course be 
adopted generally, it would perhaps be necessary specially to 
consider those factors that may make the inherent regulation, at 
unity power-factor, poor, without impairing the inherent regula- 
tion at zero power-factor. These factors are: 

1. The ohmic drop.° 

2. The ratio of pole-arc to pole-pitch. The influence of the 
ohmic drop amounts,in the design we have considered, to about 
25% of the inherent regulation at cos $=1, and is negligi- 
ble at cos$ = 0. Therefore it is necessary to specify the ohmic 
drop separately, and a resistance measurement with direct cur- 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 315 


rent at the fnal temperature of the generator is quite sufficient 
for the purpose. 

The ratio of pole-arc to pitch may havea decided effect, if 
quite abnormal dimensions are adopted; but inasmuch as other 
considerations, especially increased magnetic leakage, would 
prevent the use of a high ratio, the writers propose, for sim- 
plicity’s sake, to disregard this factor. The writers put for- 
ward, therefore, the following specification as regards inherent 
regulation: 

The generator shall, when loaded with the full rated current, 
lagging in phase behind the pressure by an angle corresponding 
to a power-factor of less than 0.2, at the temperature which the 
generator attains after 10 hours’ full-load working, increase its 
normal pressure by no more than — per cent, when the load is 
thrown off, the excitation remaining constant. 

The ohmic drop, calculated with rated full-load current, and a 
resistance determined experimentally at the final temperature 
with direct current, shall not amount to more than — per cent. 

The calculation of these data may be briefly repeated in 
tabular form: 


Output at unity power-factor. 0.0.0.1 1 1. eee eee eee tees 850 kw. 
MWe Obi WTACAN Shy, c. a, a iNadone elle oi viele ca) aimee cane ince almvs ogehole Misra sus Me 
Biecstire mer Puasa. cage ar sie ote a ess nim ge ier eecelnile 2880 
Amperes per phase at full load......... 6... eee e eee e eee eee 98.5 
Number of armature-turns per phase.................-.05% 448 
INGeAITEe Ole OO) Shoo focus hbo Cao eon. wlajieo ona bmjb.cla adic 32 
Number of armature-turns per pole and per phase........... 14 
Number of effective armature ampere-turns per pole and per 

POEVASS ites het ajar ney er  F ih shiecnib ms inde peers ales iMaln wise ake 1380 
Ratio of pole-are to pole-pitch.............. sees eee ee ees 0.63 
Space taken by one side of the winding, per pole and per phase 

in per cent. of pole-pitch....... 0.5... cee eee ee eee eee 33% 
Brand tuimactos (is) ence timc ietaae verse ateelNer eerste eietey Steitenonele 0.95 
Demagnetizing ampere-turns per ampere............++.---- 31 
Demagnetizing ampere-turns at full load(a)...........-+... 3500 
INKcsaa er Gir DOS « aogone cbuee Codd ome odeictdn SavKd0e oo GoD. 192 
Number of slots per pole and per phase...............+-+-- 2 
Depth Of slot (Dyas MG 125 ansaid aes a eas oneal os 9.2 mm, 
Depth of slot above winding space (d)............4.0seeees teen 
Cult LOR SIO Pak LING LOO Me co s.c ctor Gate Wace estc steele she wie Sas REC y es 
Wiadthnotislotiat: tmecvemdaertrsiy i srotyern aus chensieteee eis is aieleratel CHERE A 
c.g.s. lines per ampere-turns per cm. length of winding in one 


316 HOBART AND PUNGA: [April 22° 


c.g.s. lines per ampere-turn per cm. length of effective winding 1.00 
c.g.s lines per ampere-turn per cm. length of free winding...... 0.7 


Length of one turnin iron) (effective length) i nr. einen BD ete 
Length of one turn in air (free length)....................- 106° 
c.g.s. lines per ampere-turn due to effective lengthof aturn... 55 
c.g.s. lines per ampere-turn due to free length of aturn....... 74 
C.g)S- lines'per am pere=turn piper rere eer ee te eee 129 
Inductance oi one: Coils) eran sete oe eee 0.001 henrys: 
Reactancecof one coilliiriacis cits emer aaa ice ane 0.157 ohms. 
Reactance of all coils peri phasesaqtam nein meee teint eee PAR 
Reactancé-pressure: per amipereseiy iinet eet rer rie eater 2.51 volts. 
Reactance-pressure per phase at full load.................. 2430Re 
Total'internall préessure:.n.. cee eee eee eee eee 3128 meee 
Ampere-turns required for internal pressure (A)............ 9400 
Demagnetizine ampere=turns (@) airline eee 3050 
Pee Ee rt a ee ene Miran Ee ota Rin WE Biers Bhd Ameo eo Gta 12450 
Shape ofimapnet cross-sectiOnin sae ena ne erent rectangular 
Width of magnets... eer eee eee OA Va SA SD NaNorag BE 37 cm. 
Radialilensth of magneticoresa- ris eerie iii hier ae Dy 
Smallest distance between magnet cores midway along their 

lengthy. &0 i dirt cece Ae ene eno tees ila Se 
Leakage c.g.s. lines corresponding to internal pressure = 1724xX 10" 

, Usefulaltets 1. cP Ga, eee oe ees ee 6.2 X10" 
Leakage coeticientiec oni ee ee eee Sr pete 1.20 
Leakage coefficient corresponding to internal pressure ampere- 

turns + demagnetizing ampere-turms.................. La2a 
Ampere-turns for (field-++ yoke) corresponding to internal pres- 

Cd: Seen Peete eee. omnia Oho a Ss Cp wd Gs Od Glow oo ete 3000 
Ampere-turns for (field+ yoke) corresponding to the increased 

leakage factor, 20.b Srstaurciterar eel eee eae 4100 
Ditterencelnampere-tunmon(© erent ere 1100 
Amipere-turns for Gatenialipnessuncus eerie rain neree 9400 
Demagnetizing ampere-turnsma(G)e). oats oe eee 3050 
Total ampere-turns at full load... (8 + A+ a).......... 13556 
Internal pressure (Z) corresponding to total calculated am- 

pere-turns at nO loadon.cpieaene ee naer ee ane 348 volts. 
Inherent regulation at zero power-tacton..) 0s. eae eee 23% 
Inherent regulation at power-factor up to 0.20 (estimated)... 21% 
Length ofone turn... «ci, vec ee eee eee Ieyl Cornel 
Motalileneth of the tums) of oneyphasc seein aes G20 5a 

Cross-section of onelcondtlicton een eee enn Etre 44 .2sq. “ 
Cross-section of all parallel conductorsys- pee eee cee 44.2 * 
Resistancejot one phasevat. 60 chee eae et 0.33 ohm. 
Ohmicidtop per phase| per amperesas eee eee 0.33 volt 
Ohne dropsper phase ati tulllload aera eae enn an ee 32) Gme 

Ohmic drop in per cent. of pressure per phase............... 1.13% 

APPENDIX. 


Derivation of the tables set forth in Table I., and consideratio: 


of the general solution for any wave-form of electromotive force : 
and current. 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 317 


We have considered the case of armature interference 
due to a single conductor per pole, traversed by a con- 
stant current of 7 amperes, the conductor occupying a fixed 
position opposite the pole. (See Figs. 3to6.) But of course the 
occurrence in a dynamo consists in the flow of an alternating 
current in the conductor, and the conductor moves past the pole 
at a rate corresponding to the frequency of this alternating 
‘current. Hence the amount of the interference of the armature 
magnetomotive force instead of being constant, varies from 
instant to instant. The magnetic flux will tend to respond to 
these variations in the armature magnetomotive force, but in so 
far as it responds it generates eddy currents, so that the 
amplitude of these periodic variations in the magnetic flux is very 
small in comparison with the amplitude of the periodic variations 
in the total magnetomotive force. Thus it is justifiable to assume 
a mean maguetic flux corresponding to the mean total magneto- 
motive force. For various symmetrically situated positions of 
the conductor, we calculate the armature interference in the 
manner already illustrated and take a mean of these results for 
the final value. We shall now explain the derivation of this 
mean value for the case of a single-phase alternator with one 
slot per pole, on the assumption of a sine curve of current. 

If we let the slot contain 2 ~ conductors, we have 1 ampere- 
turns per pole. Letting 7 denote the effective armature current 
then evidently: 

ni“V2 = maximum armature ampere-turns per pole. Let us 

-subdivide the pitch into 10 sections corresponding to the values 
ra x= 2 ip) etc, 
.and let us first consider the case where maximum current is 
reached when the conductor reaches mid-pitch position. One 
-sees at once that in this case the total number of magnetic lines is 
not affected by the armature interference, 7.e., the demagnetizing 
-ampere-turns are equal to zero. Hence, in our formula (see 
page 188 and footnote). 


a—10) ee 


Ce Ot 
o> Ah = Go) eat 


Since we have’ 2 1, conductors for every one conductor of the 
«elementary case, the formula now reads, 


318 HOBART AND PUNGA: {April 22 


Mera x (b—x)4 K2n 
Ab—nib+2xin 


or, reduced 


x (b — x) tn 
Ab—nib4+2x1% 


the denominator, which as we have seen represents the entire 
surface, remains constant. In order to derive the average value 
of the armature distortion we have only to consider the variable 
numerator. 
x (b—x)in 

The calculation can best be arranged in tabular form and this 
is done in Table A for the case of 50% pole-pitch, » turns per 
pole and one slot per pole. 


TABLE A. 

CALCULATION OF ARMATURE DISTORTION FOR THE CASE OF A UNI-SLOT 
ALTERNATOR WHERE MAxIMUM CURRENT IS REACHED WHEN THE 
ConbDUCTORS OccUPY THE MID-POLE POsITION. 

Ratio of Pole-arc to Pitch Equals 50% . 
Distance from Centre of the Armature Magnetomotive Force to Mid-pole 
Position equals 0. 


Magnetomotive force x(b-xdin 
Distance of group of in ampere-turns, of 
conductors from b-x one group of conduc- [the product of the values 
pole-tip tors, at different in the first three colums.] 
positions. 
0 5 7/10 nirn/g X 0.71 0 
t/10 47/10 BIAS 2X 0.89 HAis/o 3:59 (t/10)? 
2X 7/10 5 3cc/10 nIi/2 X 0.99 nirn/9 5.92 (t/10)? 
3Xt/10 | 2X t/10] nia/g X 0.99) n14/9 5.92 (7/10)? 
4x 1/10 1X 7/10 ntr/Q X 0.89) nira/g 3.55 (1/10)? 
57/10 0x 7/10 ntr/9 X 0.71 0 


In Table A the distorting effect of the component group of con- 
ductors when lying under the pole-face has been estimated. It 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS 319 


has already been mentioned that the conductors when not lying 
under the pole face, exert no distorting influence; hence we 
obtain the average value for 
4 (G0) a 
by adding together the six values in the last column of Table A, 
and dividing by 10, the total number of sections into which the 
pitch, t, has been subdivided. 
This average value is 
E91 \/2 (7/10)? = 0.02747 
The magnetic centre has therefore been shifted by the amount 
0.027 1.” 7? 
i A abet 


0.027 2 n oi 
O5Art 


17 


I 


We must next proceed to consider the case where the centre of 
the group of armature conductors is at a distance t/10 from the 
pole centre at the instant when maximum current flows. Thus 
it now becomes necessary to consider the alteration not only in 
the form of the flux distribution but also in its amounts. 

The change in magnitude; 7.c., the armature demagnetization, 
is dependent upon the expréssion 

(b—2 x) n1* 

With reference to Table A we have stated that the conductors 
only cause a distortion of the field when lying under the pole face, 
and have hence considered only these positions of the con- 
ductors in estimating the distortion. But in estimating 
the decrease in the total flux, armature conductors in 
all positions have to be taken into account. One sees 
this best by considering Fig. 6 and 10. x is taken as positive in 
the direction from A to B. (Fig. 10). We may integrate from 
C to B or from one to the next of any other two points separated 
from one another by a distance equal to the pitch. In all cases 
where these conditions are complied with, the same result will be 
obtained. The plan pursued in deriving the following Tables 
has been to integrate between points C and B. 67 is derived by 


the armature demagnetization This is evident from Fig. 5. 


320 HOBART AND PUNGA: (April 22 


calculating the mean magnetomotive force in ampere-turns 
exerted by the armature conductors in moving from B to C. 

B C is divided into 10 parts and as we know that the maximum 
value of the sine wave of current occurs when the conductor is 
distant by +t/10 from the mid-pole position, one can readily 
derive the corresponding values for all the other positions and 
thus obtain the mean value, which is 

0.400 (2 n) t 

The value 2 x 12* must of course also be obtained from the 
mean of this same range of positions, 1.e., from B to C, x being 
taken as positive in the direction A B from A. But the influence 
of the conductors when lying between A and C is evidently zero, 
since the air-gap may be taken as infinitely great. Hence, we 
have, just as in Table A, to consider only the conductcrs lying 
directly under the pole-arc. ‘ 

So we again take ten symmetrically- -situated pon Goes of 
which only the values for the five lying between A and B need to 
be calculated, while in the remaining positions 

2 xn t=O 


TABLE B. 
‘CALCULATION OF 2% ”2IN OBTAINING THE ARMATURE DEMAGNETIZATION 
FOR THE CASE WHERE: MAXIMUM CURREN! IS REACHEL WHEN THE 
Conpuctors Occupy a Position Distant By T/10 FROM MipD-potE 


PosIrTIon. 
x 
Distance of groupof | Magnetomotive force of one | 2x4 
conductors from mid- group of conductors, in ampere-|t.e., the product of the values in 
pole position turns, at different positions. | the first two columns. 
0 inr/2 X0.89 0 
t/10 tna/2 X0.99 0.099./2 (ni) 7 
27/10 ina/z X0.99 0.1984/9 (i) t 
| 
3 7/10 tnr/g X0.89 0.2674/9 (n1) Tt 
47/10 ina/s X0.71 0.2844/5 (i) 
5 7/10 tnrx/g X0.455 0.227,/9 (ni) t 


_ 


*1,.e., 2x (armature ampere-turns per pole). 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS 321 
A summation of the values in Table B gives us 
1.36 (7 4) ¢ 
Hence, the mean value of 2 x 17 is 
1.36 (v1) t 
10 
= 0/136 @ 4) ¢ 
and we at once obtain the distortion as 
(b—2x)n1t 0.400 (x 2) 12% 0.136 (nt) 
0.128 (n 12) ¢ 
The shifting of the magnetic centre (t.e., the armature distor- 
tion) is calculated just as in Table A, and as it is only the final 
results which are of interest this calculation will not be repeated 


here. The results of these calculations are brought together in 
Table C. 
* TABLE C. 
PoLte Arc = 50 PERCENT oF PITCH. 
: Amount of shifting 
Distance from Decrease in flux of centre of mag- 
Mioscceea Gia ae Olen EG ee WO.027 Coad? 
where the current} 7.e., the armature t.e., the armature 
in the armature | demagnetization. distortion. 
coilis amaximum 
0 0 0 0.027 (2m) t? 0.027 
t/LO 0.128 (@2)t 0127 0.0254 (4) 1? 0.0256 
27/10 10244 1) & 0.241 0.0217 () t? 0.0219 
37/10 0.33 (in) Tt 0.331 | 0.0158 (2 2) r? 0.0159 
47/10 0.39 (an) Tt 0.404 0.0079 (¢ 2) t? | 0.0084 
rey KO) O41 @x) cz 0.41 0 0 


—_— 


As one sees from the table, the agreement with the sine curve 
is practically perfect, and we are fully justified in drawing the 
conclusions expressed in the two following equations: 
(b — 2x) nt = 0.41 (v1) tsin fd’ = armature demagnetization, 
x (6 — x) nt=0.027 (n12).c? cos ¢? = armature distortion. 

In the same way the corresponding values for a pole-arc equal 
to 70% of the pitch, have been found to be 
(6—2x) ni = 0.52 (ni) rsingé’ =armature demagnetizaton. 
x (b—x) nt = 0.0707 (7 2) 7? cos 6’ = armature distortion. © 


oo 
bo 
bo 


HOBART AND PUNGA: {April 22 


We have now arrived at the stage where we may drop the 
original assumption of a magnetic material without reluctance, 
and we will examine into the alterations thereby involved: 
up to this point we have reckoned throughout on the basis of 
the magnetic flux having only to cross the air-gap, so far as relates 
to the reluctance encountered. Now, those magnetic lines which 
must also traverse magnet core and yoke will thereby have to 
encounter a much greater reluctance than we have up to this 
point assumed. 

Much the simplest way of taking account of this influence, is 
to alter the expressions from magnetic flux to magnetomotive 
force. It should be observed that this only applies to that 
portion of the magnetic flux which traverses magnet and yoke; 
for that portion which only brings about a shifting of the mag- 
netic field the retention of the magnetic lines is correct. _ Never- 
theless, in order to preserve uniformity in expression we shall 
also transfer the latter into equivalent magnetomotive force, 
employing, mot the total field magnetomotive force A 
but the magnetomotive force A‘ (in ampere-turns). 
which is necessary to drive the magnetic flux across the 
air-gap. That portion of the armature magnetomotive force 
which acts to change the magnitude of the magnetic flux is 
denoted by armature demagnetization, and that which acts to 
change its position, by armature distortion.* 

Returning now to the example which we have been considering, 
we have 
Armature demagnetization (for b = 0 0.82 (2 n) sin p’ 

ee m (for:b =10: 0.75 (¢ 2) sin d’ 
distortion, (for b = 0.5 t) = 0.108 (2 2) cos f’ 
¢ zs 0.202 (2 n) cos d’ 

While the armature demagnetization must be deducted 
directly from the field magnetomotive force, one employs the 
armature distortion to determine the displacement of the 
magnetic centre, expressing this either in the form: 


Non 
“a 

e_“_=Ne 
ll 


Il 


IN 
na 
fe) 
ben 3 
o 

Il 
= 
~J 
a 

VY 
I 


Armature distortion 


Gap ampere-turns ne 
or in degrees: Armature distortion . 
b= qi x 90' 
Qe Armature distorti 
ee i ion ~ 90° 


Gap ampere-turns 


$$ SSS 

*The term “ Armature Distortion ’’ as employed in this paper involves 
a different conception from that heretofore associated with the term. It 
has always been a very vague expression. Real physical significance 
attached only to the angle @. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 323 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘CONTRIBUTION TO THEORY OF THE REGULATION 
or ALTERNATORS’’ AND ‘' THE MECHANICAL CONSTRUCTION 
OF REVOLVING-FIELD ALTERNATORS.” 


C. A. Apams, Jr.:—Owing to the difficulty of checking the 
specified regulation of a large alternator by direct test, many 
efforts have been made to devise an indirect test which shall 
be reliable, simple, easily applied under shop or installation 
conditions, and shall involve the least possible calculation. 

The two’ methods most commonly used during recent years 
fairly satisfy all these conditions except the first, which is the 
most important, and which, as has already been pointed out, 
they do not at all satisfy except with particular types of ma- 
chines. They both require the observed saturation and short- 
circuit curves. 

The method of which the above named are special cases, 
called by the speaker the General Method,’ requires the same 
two observed curves, involves considerably more computation, 
but is far more reliable. 

Behrend’s method of opposing the two halves of the field 
with unequal currents is ideal in many respects, although the 
speaker has not as yet tested it experimentally. Its applica- 
tion, howe er, appears to be limited to machines with a large 
number of poles, although some method of correcting the error 
due to a small number of poles may be devised. This method 
is Obviously inapplicable to any of the machines with single 
field-coil. 

The method of Messrs. Hobart and Punga requires only the 
saturation curve, and is otherwise a complete predetermination 
involving a very considerable amount of calculation. From 
the single example given by the authors, it appears to give 
good results as a means of determining the excitation and reg- 
ulation. This is, however, a very narrow experimental foun- 
dation, and the speaker would like very much to see the method 
applied to other types of alternators. Even though this method 
should fulfil all of the author’s expectations, it is nevertheless 
decidedly unsuitable as a check on specified regulation, since 
it is primarily a method for predetermination, a method for 
the designing engineer. It takes account of one generally 
neglected factor, the effect of the ratio or pole arc to pole-pitch, 
and gives a very interesting method of analyzing armature 
reaction, an objection to which, however, is the “ cut and try ”’ 
process involved in its application. - 

There are several statements which require special attention. 

1. The authors start out by assuming that all other methods 
give inaccurate results for ‘different types of machines.” 


1. The e.m.f and m.m.f. methods, or, as Mr. Behrend has most ap- 
propriately called them, the pessimistic and optimistic methods. 

2. Harvard Engineering Journal, 1902-03. The speaker makes no 
claim to originality in this method, as it is the direct application of the 
methods of arialysis used in connection with transformers and induction 
motors for at least ten years. 


324 ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. [April 22 


The method referred to above as the “‘ General Method ”’ has 
been in use by the speaker for several years and has been ap- 
plied to a variety of types. In no case where the experimental 
data were reliable, have the observed results differed in an 
important degree from those calculated by this method. The 
types tested include revolving field, inductor, and a machine 
with a closed coil, three-phase armature. This last was a very 
trying case, owing to the three-belt armature winding, each belt 
occupying 120 electrical degrees of the armature surface. 

Some of the results referred to are given in the accompanying 
table taken from the Harvard Engineering Journal for April, 
1903. Column A gives observed results; B, calculated by 
“General Method ”’; C, e.m.f. method; and D, m.m.f. method. 
Machine No. 1 is a G. E. 50-kw. revolving-field alternator with 


3 Non-inductive Load, 

i= 

aS Full Load Excitation, * Regulation %. 

S Power- 
3 Factor. 

A B G D A B (S D 

No. 1 ilyil 15.4 ier UG. 2 9.8 On 12 eT LOL 8 
No. 2 | 150 149.5: | 174 147.3 4 3.9 8.4 3.4 8 
No. 3 80.8 79.5 87 72.6 7.4 7 9.8 3.9 8 
No. 4 = 9 
No. 4 | 1382 139 197 131 4 5 12 3.8 aie 
No. 5 | 141 39 5 146 134.5 5.5 5 fio 3.9 .85 
No. 6 2.99 2.97 3.07 2.89] 23.8 23.5 25.9 21°05 .75 
< Inductive Load. 

fe 

‘is Full Load Excitation, Regulation %. 

g Power- 
S » Factor. 

A B (C) D A B (e D 

No. 1 20 24.5 19.6 Shao 46 ol 8 
No. 2 200 350 181.3 14.5 36. 10.1 8 
No. 3 146 250 84 24.5 3623 8.6 8 
No. 3 | 108 107 12755 76.5 19.3 18.8 23.8 8.4 9 
No. 4 | 200 206 400 158 14.8 15.5. 49 9.1 ae 
No. 5 | 168 169 220 146 13.6 14 23 6.8 85 
No. 6 3.89 3.91 4.52 3.58 46.6 47 yf ais) 39.5 13 


practically no saturation, No. 2 is a G. E. 1500-kw. revolving- 
field alternator with moderate saturation; No. 3 is a 750-kw. 
Stanley inductor alternator with high saturation; No. 6 is the 
closed-coil machine mentioned above; No. 4 and No. 5 are 
European machines the data for which were taken from pub- 
lished tests. In the other cases the tests were made with great 
care under the personal supervision of the speaker. It is not 
claimed that this method is theoretically as sound as that of 
Messrs. Hobart and Punga, but simply that it does give good 
results. 

2. The authors claim on the first page of their paper that 
their method is free from hypothetical assumptions is doubt- 
less intended only as a relative claim, since they have eliminated 
only one or two of the numerous assumptions and approxima- 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 325 


tions ordinarily made use of to simplify this naturally complex 
problem. One assumption which has a_ particular bearing 
on this method is that the air-gap is constant under the 
whole pole-face, which is often not the case, the pole pieces 
being backed off at the edges in order to produce a desired 
wave shape. The result of this is to reduce the effective pole 
width by an amount only determinable by laborious calculation. 

3. The authors have placed cross-magnetization where it 
belongs, although the same end is obtained vectorially with much 
less trouble and a little less theoretical accuracy in the ‘‘ General 
Method.”’ 

4. The relative importance of the leakage reactance as com- 
pared with the armature m.m.f. is somewhat underestimated 
by the authors, at least the example given is not an average 
one in this respect. This relative importance is measured by 
the ratio, at short circuit, of field m.m.f. to armature m.m-.f., 
which is from the example given, 1.16. The speaker has 
worked this out for a number of typical cases, where it was found 
to vary from 1.1 to 2, the highest values occurring in inductor 
alternators. 

5. The author’s suggestion as to specifying regulation at a 
low power-factor rather than at power-factor = 1, is in accord 
with opinions expressed in these meetings, and points to Mr. 
Behrend’s field-bucking method as the best check in the case 
of large, many-pole alternators. 

Remembering that it is the wattless component of the cus- 
rent which has the greatest effect upon regulation, the fol- 
lowing table makes very clear the reason why a small deviation 
of the power-factor from unity makes such a great difference 
in the regulation, whereas a considerable deviation from zero 
makes practically no difference. 

Powersiactors ees 0299502992093 05907- 07200710 
Wattless component.......0.10 0.14 0.20 0.435 0.98 0.995 

B. A. BEHREND:—We designing engineers, and men in charge 
of manufacturing concerns, receive specifications from the con- 
sulting engineers, which call for a regulation of say, 6, 7, 8, 9, 
10, or 11% on a power-factor of 100%. Who among you has 
ever made a test on a large unit on a power-factor of 100%? 
The speaker has never had the pleasure of being able to get 
1000 kilowatts of load with a 100% power-factor. Experiments 
of this nature are confined to small units of 100 or 200 kw. in 
which the load may consist of German-silver strips wound 
non-inductively. A water load is a load which may have 
considerable electrostatic capacity. This was pointed out 30 
years ago by a venerable German teacher, Professor F. Kohl- 
rausch, by passing an alternating current through an 
electrolyte. Now, if there is a very small electrostatic 
capacity, there is a small leading current, and a small 
leading current represents a current magnetizing the arma- 
ture, and you may say after your test is made that the 


326 ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. [April 22 


machine is the best you ever saw—that the regulation is 3.5%, 
while we know it is 7%. This is also the reason why it has 
often been said that the regulation of the inductor type of alter- 
nator is so satisfactory, because when it is tested on a water 
load it is easy to obtain excellent regulation. Tests on large 
units at 100% power-factor are a farce. It is next to impos- 
sible to measure accurately a power-factor at 100% and we 
therefore have to confine ourselves to the determining of the 
regulation under conditions which can be determined by actual 
experimental test. Such tests can be made on a power-factor 
of zero at which the regulation can be actually measured. By 
using two machines, one as a synchronous motor and one as 
generator, such regulation tests can be obtained. The speaker 
indicated half a year ago how, by splitting the fields, such reg- 
ulation curves may be obtained on a single machine, and 
fairly accurate regulation and heating data may be secured. 
More and more, prominent engineers seem: to realize the 1m- 
portance of a regulation at low power-factors, as has been indi- 
cated since reading the writer’s paper a year ago, by expressions 
from Mr. W. L. Waters, and now from Messrs. Hobart and Punga. 
But the regulation on zero power-factor does not give the reg- 
ulation on 100% power-factor, even if, as Mr. Hobart says, 
you specify the ohmic drop, and the ratio of pole-are to pole- 
pitch, as you may shape the saturation curve so that you get, 
for instance, a regulation of 5% on purely inductive load, and 
a regulation as poor as 10% or as good as 4% on non-inductive 
load. 

It appears to be wise to admit the existing dilemma. The 
question of accurately determining the regulation of alternators 
cannot be solved. Many questions in natural science are not 
capable of an accurate solution. Let us acknowledge our ig- 
norance instead of trying to deceive one another that we know 
something which we do not know. It seems to the speaker far 
more dignified and more in accordance with the science that 
we are working in, to say that this case is so complex, so in- . 
tricate, there are so many factors to be taken into account, 
that it can no more be solved than you can state to one-thou- 
sandth of an inch the distance between two chalk marks drawn 
on the floor. 

W. L. Waters (by letter):—This theory of the regulation of 
alternators hardly seems to possess that freedom from hypo- 
thetical assumptions that Mr. Hobart claims for it. Mr. Hobart 
commences accurately enough by classifying the self-induction 
lines linked with the armature winding into three groups;— 
the lines across the slot itself, the cross-magnetization lines, 
and the back-magnetization lines. But he then makes the 
statement that it is more accurate to neglect the cross mag- 
netization lines as they have practically no resultant effect. 
Mr. Hobart has apparently confused the variation of the ar- 
mature self-induction lines, due to the rotation of the magnets 


1904] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. S07 


with the variation of those lines as the armature current fol- 
lows a sine function all the time. In considering the cross- 
magnetization lines, Mr. Hobart considers them as being fixed 
relatively to the pole piece and swept across the armature con- 
ductors, as the pole piece moves past them. He seems to forget 
that these lines are an integral part of the self-induction proper 
of the armature, just as much so as those lines linked only 
with the slot and that often they form the greater part of the 
armature self-induction lines. 

Some years ago while working on the question of regulation 
of alternators, the writer made numerous experiments, meas- 
uring the self-induction of alternator armatures under various 
conditions. And the following figures taken from the tests on 
a large number of machines show very well the proportion that 
these cross-magnetization lines bear to the total self-induction 
lines in standard alternators. 

The table gives the self-induction per unit length of the ar- 
mature. “ A.’’ when the armature stands alone, the magnets 
not being in position, and “ B,”’ when the magnets are in position 
and the armature winding opposite the center of the pole face. 

Self-Induction of Armature. 


No. Machine. Position ‘‘A’’ Position ‘“‘ B”’ 
1 300-kw. 60-cycle 34 60 
Dy, 450-kw. 60- “ 509 93 
3 ANOS, HO 78 120 
4 HOw 40 =. 30 7S 
i) (Osa. GUS © 24 50 
6 400-kw. 60= ~ 38 94 


Position ‘‘A”’ gives practically the self-induction of the 
slots alone, while position “ B”’ gives the self-induction of the 
slots and the cross-magnetization lines. It will be seen that 
the total self-induction of the coils averages about double that 
due to the flux in the slots alone. 

At the time of making the above tests, the writer tried cal- 
culating the regulation of these alternators on non-inductive 
load by figuring the self-induction e.m.f. from the self-induction 
given in position ‘“B” and simply taking this e.m.f. in quad- 
rature with the main armature e.m.f. A comparison of the 
calculated and actual test results are given in the following 


table: 
Regulation Per Cent. 


Machine. Actual Test. Calculation. 
IN Ree ee et ee ee ee erie core 7.4 8 

TP ES ETI i are form By 

Git, ear ee een: cnn 9.4 8.3 

a ee Pa eee ea es ie 8.7 8.5 

Gh Me CR ee ae te Sern ae Ga) Goll 


The method appears to give fair results... But°it ‘is very 
evident that, if in addition, we tried to take into account the 
back ampere-turns on the armature, the calculated results 
would differ greatly from the actual test figures. And if the 


328 ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. [April 22 


cross magnetization was taken into account by Mr. Hobart 
on the 850-kw. alternator he describes, the calculated and test 
regulations would show a wide discrepancy. 

Mr. Hobart’s method should be added to the list of empirical 
methods and when the various coefficients have been determined 
by experiments on a number of machines, it will probably be 
capable of giving good results in practice. The calculation 
of the short-circuit current of an alternator cannot be con- 
sidered as a test of any theory. A single coefficient to give 
the armature reaction effect is all that is required, and this 
coefficient varies only very slightly with the different standard 
commercial designs, so that the short-circuit current is the 
simplest calculation to make in connection with an alternator. 
The real test of any theory is to calculate the regulation of an 
alternator on inductive loads. In connection with this 
the writer thinks Mr. Hobart is doing service in again empha- 
sizing the advisability of guaranteeing regulation on a low 
power-factor, preferably on power-factor zero, rather than on 
non-inductive load. 

Probably the most important point in Mr. Hobart’s theory 
is the way in which he takes into account the effect of the in- 
creased leakage caused by the back ampere-turns on the arma- 
ture. This increased leakage has been mentioned before as 
being detrimental, but this is the first time that any method of 
calculating the effect has been published. Mr. Hobart deserves. 
due credit for emphasizing this point. 

C. A. Apams, Jr.:—The speaker wishes to take exception 
to the last statement in Mr. Waters’ communication. The 
method employed by Messrs. Hobart and Punga.for taking ac- 
count of the extra leakage was described by the speaker in de- 
tail in the Harvard Engineering Journal, November, 1903; and 
January, 1904. Even the approximate method of getting the 
air-gap line by drawing a tangent to the lower end of the satu- 
ration curve was there explained. 

B. A. BeHrenp:—The speaker wishes to take this oppor- 
tunity to make good a sin of omission of which he feels guilty 
in connection with his paper presented a year ago. Professor 
Alexander Potier published some four years ago a theory based 
on tests on alternators, which the speaker placed at his dis- 
posal, which is substantially the same as that suggested by 
Professor Adams,—the one used in the speaker’s paper and the 
one which it is believed has found its way into almost all the 
calculations of designing engineers; namely, the splitting of the 
armature reaction into two components, one pure reaction 
and the other pure reactance. The speaker wishes to go on 
record as giving Professor Potier credit for his part in this work. 

Gano S. Dunn:—In the absence of the authors, Mr. Dunn 
presented the paper by Messrs. Hobart and Punga and called 
attention to points which he thought they would wish to make 
were they present. He said in answer to Mr. Waters’ discuss- 


1904. | DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 329 


ion that as he read the paper, the authors did not take the 
position that the lines linked with the armature conductors, 
never emerging from the armature, following path J, are really 
the only lines that should be included in the calculation of the 
armature’s inductance. Hobart and Punga’s paper said: 

“An interesting point to be noticed in the short-circuit 
current relates to the very small value of the reactance pressure 
as compared with that generally ascribed to such proportions. 
This arises from the elimination of all fluxes emerging from the 
armature, the remaining flux being in our opinion the only 
one correctly to be considered as pertaining to the reactance 
pressure.” 

This would mean, taken in connection with statements later 
in the paper, that the authors are willing to admit that the 
calculation of the absolute inductance of the armature by itself 
should not be limited to the lines in path 7. In the present 
method of determining the regulation of machines, the lines 
in the other two paths are merely not classed as self-inductive 
but as distortive. They are not neglected, however, but are 
taken care of in the calculation of the distortion constant. 

In response to Mr. Behrend’s remarks in regard to the neces- 
sity for including the degree of saturation of the magnetic cir- 
cuits as a factor in the problem of regulation, Mr. Dunn pointed 
out that although not considering this as important a factor 
as did Mr. Behrend in his paper on the subject, they had in- 
cluded it as could be seen by reference to Fig. 14 where the ex- 
citation curves were given for a large number of particular 
pressures. 

Mr. Dunn expressed appreciation of Mr. Behrend’s views in 
his book on induction motors, and also as given verbally to 
the meeting, to the effect that engineering and designing of 
the kind under discussion, was not a science but an art. It 
required the consideration of innumerable factors, many of 
which were human rather than mathematical, and one should 
go at the business of designing without being too tightly ham- 
pered by purely physical or purely mathematical considerations. 

Mr. Dunn inquired in reference to Mr. Rushmore’s paper, 
whether the author had ever used and whether he approved 
elastic spokes for holding the revolving rings of generators— 
a spoke that permits the bursting strain to be taken by the 
ring as an annulus and not by the spokes in longitudinal tension. 

Davip B. RusHMorRE:—In reply to Mr. Dunn’s question the 
speaker would say that most of the high-speed machines which 
have been shown this evening are so constructed that the rims 
are self sustaining, the purpose of the dove-tails and arms being 
simply to drive the outer rim. These rims are built up of 
laminated steel sheets riveted together. 

The regulation of alternators is a very important subject, 
both to the designer and to the operator. The importance 
comes not so much as a question of what change in pressure 


330 ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. [April 22 


will take place under certain conditions, as it does with regard 
to the necessary change in exciting conditions to sustain the 
pressure under these varying loads and power-factors. Unless 
a large margin is left in the generator field rheostat or in the 
exciter pressure, and the iron is worked well below the knee 
of the saturation curve, it is necessary to predetermine the re- 
lations which will hold in the generator between the exciting 
current and the exciting pressure and the pressure, current, 
and power-factor of the armature load. It may be of interest 
to state that the regulation of alternators can now be predeter- 
mined for all conditions within the limit of commercial neces- 
sities. 

It is possible that the speaker does not quite understand Mr. 
Behrend’s remark about obtaining the actual regulation of an 
alternator of large output at unity power-factor, but a short 
time ago the actual regulation at unity power-factor and at 
other power-factors, both lagging and leading, was obtained 
on a generator of 3500-kw. output. In this particular case 
the actual results were in very close agreement with the esti- 
mated values. 

Gano S. Dunn:—Replied that the spoke Mr. Rushmore de- 
scribed was not an elastic spoke, but a loose one, and said he 
had found such a construction bad, especially in the case of a 
laminated ring, because it was impossible to shrink the ring on 
or in other ways to make it fit the spokes tightly, and there was 
in consequence considerable play as a result of the clearance 
necessary in assembling. When the centrifugal forces came 
into play this clearance made the ring slightly loose on its 
spider, and this slight looseness increased with wear, with very 
bad effects. The elastic spoke referred to was for the object 
of permitting the ring to yield away from the center a slight 
amount sufficient for it to take up its own strain and yet to 
keep it sufficiently rigidly bound to the hub to avoid looseness. 

F. A. C. PerrinE:—Mr. Rushmore showed one picture in 
which that was described exactly. It was a revolving field 
which had a smooth, uniform rim bolted to spokes with extended 
ends; the spider construction not being continuous. These rims 
are bolted to the spoke with a bolt that is capable of extension 
so arranged as to produce the elastic spoke which Mr. Dunn has 
spoken of. This theory was discussed about four or five 
years ago in connection with some high-speed water-wheel 
plants, and the bolt construction was adopted at that time. 

BrapD Ley T. McCormicr (by letter) :—In considering the subject 
of regulation of alternators, it may be of interest to note a 
simple graphic method by which the regulation for any current 
and power-factor can be obtained, when the saturation curve 
is given and the load characteristic for the same value of cur- 
rent at zero power-factor. 

Fig. 1 is a vector diagram of an alternator, which hardly needs 
explanation. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 331 


E = terminal pressure. 

V = pressure to which machine would rise if the load were 
removed. 

L = inductance drop. 

R = resistance drop. 

A = drop due to demagnetizing effect of armature reaction. 


Reactance Drop 
Resistance Drop 
Impedance Drop 


Excitation. 


T= current: 

The armature reaction component A is represented in quad- 
rature with the current since, like reactance, its effect is max- 
imum when the power-factor is zero. 

Let A B, Fig. 2, represent the saturation curve and C D the 
regulation curve at zero power-factor. For any excitation 


| 332 ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. [April 22: 


such as A H the drop is ad‘ and may be made the hypotenuse: 
of a right triangle, as in Fig. 1, with the resistance drop as one 
leg, and the reactance drop plus armature reaction drop as 
the other. As the resistance is relatively small, no great error 
will result by swinging the impedance pressure » around to b 
and. considering the distance bd as armature reaction drop, 
instead of 1d, bc will then be the armature reaction expressed 
in ampere-turns, or exciting current, according to which we: 


t Circui 


2 


mperes Shor 


Amperes Excitation 


plot as abcissas.” The total drop ad may be designated as: 
synchronous impedances. The distance cb is constant for a 
given current, no matter what position along the curve it may 


_ 1. The diagram is not strictly correct since the drop ad is represented 
in phase with Hd. Fig. 1 shows that the total drop D can not be in: 
hase with V, even at zero power-factor, unless the resistance is zero.. 
owever the resistance is small, so no appreciable error results. 
2. ‘‘ Experimental Basis for the Theory of Regulation Alternators,’” 
paper read by Mr. B. A. Behrend before the InstiruTE May 19, 1903 ; 


.1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 333 


have, so also is ab. However the distance bd is not constant 
for a given current but depends upon the position on the curve 
(t.e., is dependent upon the degree of saturation). Since ab 
and bc are constant, the hypotenuse ac is also constant, and 
from this it follows that having the two, curves A B and C D 
given by experiment, if we can by trial find a line such that its 
direction and its length between the curves is constant, as we 
move it along the curves, we may construct a right triangle 
upon it, with legs parallel to the codrdinate axes and equal 
Tespectively to armature ampere-turns and impedance drop. 

It is also possible to calculate cb from known current and 
number of conductors, from which ab can be obtained by con- 
structing the triangle. The following formula is found to give 
fairly accurate results. 

Atif 2anl =O0Lan tl. 

Where 4 is the demagnetizing effect of the armature turns 
per pair of poles a, the number of conductors per phase per 
pole, and 7 the number of phases. 


2 me |e 

; _ ‘ 

g i 4 a a é “anle | a8 
ge) n vo Ay i Gowt\o On 
s a eo 5 a & Qe sje = ae 
3 - - Re | ag 5 gesiu | 334 
SS a S) 2a, AG oKN)S Ei ae 
rs) e 6 5 Fay o MAS |e o 3 
b 3 o 2% 3 4 : 25 
3 - 9 as a es || a 
ie] a iS BA a 3 . e]@) 
g g 3 E . 5 gs | o¢ 
2 Z ze 5 2 4 aa & BS 
Z, A } a < ES a gs 

ga 

1 3 8 15 213 239 35.7 38 
2 3 8 48 512 Bliee Zola. — 
3 B 72 32 89 30 22.9 24 
4 3 20 36 141 55 29.8 32 
5 3 6 48 420 26 6.3 6.5 
oe ae 4 192 704 20.5 7.9 8.2 
7 2 26 64 205 25 11 11 
8 2 16 72 254 38 15 13.5 


The accompanying table shows the values of A calculated 
for eight machines, also the values obtained by constructing 
a triangle. As the curves are plotted with exciting current as 
abscissas the expression for ampere-turns is divided by the num- 
ber of field turns per pair of poles. In each case the proper 
triangle was found by trial. In most machines the hypotenuse 
of the triangle makes an angle of about 45 degrees with the 
coordinate axes. Figs. 3 and 4 are the curves for machines 
numbered 2 and 3. The saturation curves and curve for power- 
factor less than 20% have been ploted by results obtained 
when the machines were tested. The latter curve was obtained 


334 ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. [April 22 


Excitation 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 335 


by loading the generator with an under-excited synchronous 
motor. It is impossible to obtain a strictly wattless load, but 
when the power-factor is below 20% the error in considering 
it as zero is very small. 

Suppose we have the regulation curve for J amperes at zero 
power-factor, C D Fig. 5, and wish to find the curve for some 
other value of current; for example //x, at zero power-factor. 
Both armature reaction and impedance drop are now 1/x of 
their former value. Lay off cf =cb/x and Oop Oi a 
Construct triangle cfh. Now as the line ca moves along the 
curve, the path traced by the point h will give the desired 
curve £ F for //x amperes, 


Cds. Power-factor 


Fig. 6 


Current Vector 


As an illustration of the method, the regulation curve at 
zero power-factor for 20 amperes has been calculated for machine 
No. 3, see Fig. 4. The line C A corresponds to 30 amperes, 
so for 20 amperes point H is located 2/3 of the way between 
Cand A. The triangle is then moved and the point H de- 
scribes the desired curve. The accuracy of this method for 
power-factors other than zero is somewhat questionable. The 
regulation curve for //x amperes at zero power-factor should 
first be determined, and from this, if.desired, the regulation 
at any other power-factor can be calculated by the following 
method. 

Draw B D, Fig. 6, parallel to OC a distance from it equal 
to the resistance drop. Lay off O/ the current axis, normal to 


336 ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. [April 22 


OC and draw a line O Q making with O/ an angle whose cosine 
is the power-factor for which we desire the regulation. For 
any excitation such as A H, Fig. 2, measure the drop da, and 
using it as a radius strike an arc with O as a center, cutting B D 
at E. Now with E as a center strike an arc equal to the no-load 
pressure Hd, Fig: 2. This cuts OQ at kK. “The length Ou 
is the terminal pressure for the excitation A H. This process 
is repeated for a number of points and a curve drawn through 
them. The work is greatly simplified if the same scale is 
adopted in Fig. 6 as that used in Fig. 2. 

Having already obtained the regulation at zero power-factor 
and 20 amperes for machine No. 3, the regulation for 85% 
power-factor has been calculated by the method just described. 

For a method of determining the regulation curve at zero 
power-factor, from the short-circuit curve, the reader is re- 
ferred to Mr. Behrend’s paper read before the INsTiTuTE, May 
19, 1903. 


a ee 


BRANCH DISCUSSION. 337 


MEETING AT PITTSBURG, MAY 5, 1904. 


DIscussION ON ‘‘ CONTRIBUTION TO THEORY OF THE REGULA- 
TION OF ALTERNATORS.” 


V. Karapetorr:—The paper under discussion gives a com- 
plete method for the predetermination of characteristics of 
an alternator from its design. Three elements causing drop 
of pressure (beside ohmic drop) are taken into consideration: 
armature demagnetizing action, armature distorting ampere- 
turns, and armature self-induction. As these three causes 
are more or less independent of each other, they can be dis- 
cussed separately. 

1. Armature Demagnetizing Ampere-Turns.—The table given 
on page 298 of the paper by Messrs. Hobart and Punga gives 
in the first line demagnetizing ampere-turns for different ratios 
of pole-are: pitch for a winding of one slot per pole. The nu- 
merical coefficients given there check very closely with the old 
formula: 


ry 


where m is the ratio of pole-arc to pitch, given by G. Kapp 
several years ago. The method of computation given in Ap- 
pendix, page 320, shows that the same mathematical method 
was used as in Kapp’s dynamos, with the only difference that 
Kapp directly integrated the expression for an instantaneous 
armature reaction, whereas Messrs. Hobart and Punga selected 
a long way of elementary mathematics. Their table for the 
‘‘ Breadth Factor.” on page 299, given without explanation, 
checks very closely with Professor Arnold’s factor, 


Su ( a =) 


where —— is the ratio of (coil breadth: pitch). As the table 
a 


presupposes a distributed winding, the above factor must be 
integrated along one side of the coil, which gives 


bc ane 3) (F <) 

x(a —c) 2 a 
and this last expression gives precisely the same results as the 
above table. If, however, the winding is distributed in but 
two or three slots per pole and phase, it seems more advisable 
to calculate directly the coefficient for each of the coils. The 
authors do not bring anything new into the method of deter- 
mining armature demagnetizing action and use an already estab- 
lished and accepted theory. 


338 BRANCH DISCUSSION. 


2. Armature Distorting Ampere-Turns.—The authors make 
two assumptions to arrive at their results; namely, that at 
every instant the distorted flux acts as if it were concentrated 
in its center of gravity, and that the whole distortion corre- 
sponds to the average position of the center of gravity for an 
alternation. Once these assumptions are admitted, the results 
given in the second line of the table on page 298 are correct. 
But the assumption that a non-uniformly distributed flux can 
be concentrated in its center of gravity does not seem to be 
legitimate in this case. The authors begin with the distribu- 
tion of the flux at a certain moment of time (Fig. 5 on page 297), 
and this is perfectly right. Now, if the distribution is known 
at any moment, the average distribution can only be found 
in a correct way by properly integrating the corresponding 
function, which expresses this distribution over a complete 
cycle, and not by making a new assumption. Once the prob- 
lem is definite, every new assumption is superfluous, and there 
fore it can either be deduced from the data of the problem, in 
which case it is not necessary, or it contradicts these data and 
so leads to wrong results. If the authors would have followed 
the above-mentioned way, beginning with Fig. 5, they would 
have arrived.at Guilbert’s formula. 

From a practical standpoint it is important to note that 
Guilbert’s formula gives higher values for distorting ampere- 
turns than the method proposed in the paper under discussion. 

3. Armature Self-Induction.—The authors do not establish 
any new data for the influence of self-induction, and they agree 
that with our present knowledge only a rough approximation 
in this respect is possible. They cite a formula for self-induc- 
tion of open slots, based on calculation of the permeance of 
the paths for stray lines of force. For half-closed slots used 
in this country the corresponding formula is more complicated. 

For free length of the coil they assume from 0.4 to 0.8 lines 
of force per centimeter of length. This is based on the fol- 
lowing method: 

Free ends of coils are supposed to have a semicircular shape; 
Professor Perry has given an approximate formula for self-in- 
duction of a flat circular coil without iron. The authors apply 
this formula to their case, forgetting that self-induction of a 
semicircle is by no means equal to half the self-induction of a 
complete circle. Besides, the proximity of the iron completely 
changes the conditions under which the formula has been de- 
duced; moreover, usually the ends of the coils are not semi- 
circular, and we do not know how far a change in shape 
affects the self-induction. Thus, the above data, 0.4 to 0.8 
lines of force, seem to have no sufficient justification. The 
question of mutual induction of the phases is not mentioned at 
all in the paper under discussion. 

Concerning an experimental verification of their method, 
the authors give results of short-circuit tests on 18 different 


BRANCH DISCUSSION. 339 


alternators, most of which check verv well with thcir formulas. 
But it must be borne in mind that on short circuit the current 
is lagging almost 90° behind the e.m.f., so that there is no arma- 
ture distorting action, only demagnetizing ampere-turns, for 
which the authors use the commonly-established, generally- 
accepted theory, which thus seems to get a new verification. 
As armature self-induction has only subordinate action in well- 
designed modern machines, the above results can hardly be 
considered as sufficient for accepting the method of calculation 
of self-induction proposed by the authors. This is the more 
true, as they do not take into account. the mutual induction 
of the phases, which according to the data recently published 
by Professor Niethammer, in certain cases can almost double 
the effect of self-induction. 

Of course, the authors give in their paper a complete verifi- 
cation of their method of calculation on a machine, including 
tests of high power-factors, where distorting action comes more 
into prominence; but on the other hand, Mr. Guilbert also 
verified his formula on a number of ‘alternators which had been 
tested at the last Paris Exposition; so that so far the question 
remains undecided. 

Messrs. Hobart and Punga certainly deserve our grateful 
acknowledgments for publishing a complete method with nu- 
merical applications. They bring it forth in a popular form, 
and every simplification of theory which makes it easier for 
practical application promotes a better design; at the same time 
it gives more opportunity for verification of the theory itself 
and separates its sound principles from mere hypothetical 
assumptions. 


340 HOBART AND PUNGA: COMMUNICATION. [June 21 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘ CONTRIBUTION TO THE THEORY OF THE RKEGU- 
LATION OF ALTERNATORS.” 


H. M. Hospart and FRANKLIN Punca (by letter): The au- 
thors agree with Mr. C. A. Adams, Jr., that their theory is 
suitable primarily for the designing engineer, and starting from 
this basis, all the factors involved in the armature reaction 
have been calculated. But to make this theory applicable as a 
check on specified regulation it is not necessary to invent an 
altogether new and different theory, as all the factors exam- 
ined in the one case also exert their influence in the other case. 
It is, however, very desirable that further experimental in- 
vestigations should be made bearing on the nature and magni- 
tude of those components the predetermination of which is 
still inexact. These components are: ; 

The self-induction of the armature itself; 

The leakage-factor of the field-spools; 

The saturation curve. : 

The self-induction of the armature itself may be experi- 
mentally determined in two ways, and the possibilities of 
having two different methcds fcr its determination should 
give a much desired additional check. The one way is to 
measure the self-induction of the winding, and at the same 
time, by means cf an exploring coil, the component crossing 
the air-gap; the difference between the two fluxes thus deter- 
mined would give the stray flux in the slcts and associated 
with the free length of the winding. A second way of meas- 
uring the pure self-induction is by means of the short-circuit 
curve, which contains the effect of self-induction and of de- 
magnetizing reaction. As the demagnetizing ampere-turns can 
be calculated fairly accurately—even for air-gaps not at all 
uniform—this would allow of a determination of the remaining 
part, z.¢e., of the pure self-induction. 

The measurement of the leakage-factor and the plotting cf 
the saturation curve involve nothing new. The measurement 
of the armature reaction at full load and zero power-factor 
would serve as a further check on the exactness of the calcu- 
lation. 

It is quite true, as Mr. Behrend points out, that the shape 
of the saturation curve may—besides the ohmic drop and 
the ratio pole-arc to pole-pitch—change the relation between 
regulation at unity power-factor and at zero power-factor. A 
machine with large air-gap and low field saturation may have 
the same regulation at zero power-factor as another machine 
with small air-gap and high field saturation, but the regula- 
tion at unity power-factor will most probably be considerably 
better in the first machine; or if the regulation at unity power- 
factor is the same for both machines—ohmic drop and ratio 
of pole-arc to pole-pitch and all other important factors being 
the same—the machine with the greatest part of its field am- 
pere-turns required for the saturation of the iron will have 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 341 


she lowest regulation at zero power-factor. Such extremes as 
5% on purely inductive load and 10% on non-inductive load, 
as mentioned by Behrend, are impossible, unless the ohmic 
drop is from 5% to 10%. This point possesses considerable 
interest as regards the design of alternators, but not as regards 
the reliability or unreliability of the method under consideration. 

We find the statements of Mr. W. L. Waters to be somewhat 
confusing and are obliged to differ with him with respect to 
most of his criticisms. From his “ theoretical conclusions ”’ 
Mr. Waters maintains that the lines which cross the air-gap 
should also be considered as belonging to the pure self-induc- 
tion, but his practical experience leads him to think that such 
a step would show a wide discrepancy between observed and 
calculated points; and so it would. Hence the fault must lie 
in Mr. Waters’ theoretical conclusions. 

The authors were not aware of Mr. Adams’ publication in 
the Harvard Engineering Journal (Nov., 1903), but they have 
never intended to claim any priority for this method of cal- 
culating the influence of the leakage, as Rothert and many 


Q) 
m 


a a ne a a ee 


wa ee ewe 


PIGi le 


others had already employed it, and the authors considered 
it as an already well-known method. To whom the pricrity 
in this case belongs the authors are not prepared to state. A 
complete investigation of the priority in such a case is a very 
considerable undertaking. It possesses but little interest to 
most engineers and might with advantage rather be left to 
books than to papers, though, on the other hand, acknowl- 
edgement of priority should preferably be made when readily 
practicable and not involving an exhaustive historical research. 
It is, however, surely beyond the scope of a paper dealing 
with a problem in practical engineering, to carry this matter 
so far as Mr. V. Karapetoff would require, in acknowledging 
the ‘‘ breadth-factor’’ to Professor Arnold as the term has 
long been a familiar one in the sense employed by us. 

Mr. Karapetoff has confined his criticism to stating that each 
component of the complete theory has already been used by 
other authors. Even if this were the case the usefulness of 
the theory as a whole is in nowise less; the authors are never- 
theless of the opinion that there are a few points which have 


342 HOBART AND PUNGA: COMMUNICATION. [June 21 


‘been neglected in all previous theories relating to this subject. 
‘These, of course, would be the essential parts, so far as priority 
is concerned, but they need by no means be the most important 
parts of the theory as a useful whole. The chief point is that 
the armature stray lines crossing the air-gap cannot be defined 
as pure self-induction, that they therefore cannot be treated 
like an ordinary vector, that they only increase the angle of 
lag between mid-pole position and centre of armature ampere- 
turns, and that they have no effect on the internal pressure. 
Mr. Karapetoff asserts that no account has been taken of 
the mutual induction of the coils. This is another essential 
point in which we claim priority, for the mutual induction has 
been taken’ into account in our method. Thus all those lines 
crossing the air-gap and defined by many authors as belonging 
to the self-induction, are produced by the sum of all the arma- 
ture conductors. It is exactly this mutual induction which 
causes the stray flux (Path II), to have a nearly constant 
position with reference to the main flux in polyphase generators. 


For the pure self-induction (Path I), the mutual induction 
has been neglected, as it is very easy to see that it can never 
amount to more than 5% or 10% of the total pure self-induc- 
tion, and as this latter is only a*small component of the total 
armature reaction, it is evident that taking into account this 
mutual induction would be an absurd refinement. 

Conductor I carries current, while its mutual inductance 
toward conductor II has to be determined. It is clear that 
the stray flux has to follow the path A BC (Fig. 1), thus con- 
stituting self-induction, or the path A B D E, thus constituting 
mutual induction with respect to conductor II. q 

The amount of the flux following these two paths will be 
inversely proportional to the resistance along BC or BD 
and as in the one case, the flux has to pass along through the 
tooth, in the other case, through a large air gap—width of 
slot—the flux following the path BD will be far smaller in 


1904.] REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 343 


amount than the flux following the path BC. As in modern 
generators there are seldom less than two or three slots per 
pole per phase, the percentage of the mutual self-induction 
will be at least two or three times smaller than in the above 
case, so that it can easily be understood that the mutual in- 
duction component of the pure self-induction is only a few 
per cent.—say 1% to 5%—of the pure self-induction. 

Quite different is the case with the lines emerging from the 
armature and crossing the ‘air-gap (Path II). The lines fol- 
lowing path abcd (Fig. 2) have approximately the same re- 
sistance in the magnetic circuit as the lines following path 
abef and constituting the mutual induction. 

This is one of the reasons leading the authors to split the 
armature stray flux into three classes; and the mutual induc- 
tion in Path II has been regarded as an important factor which 
has been taken into account in no other theory. 

It would thus appear that Mr. Karapetoff’s criticism has 
chiefly related to deploring the absence of the very factor 
which is for the first time provided for in the authors’ method. 


dadt Mes pele 
acted. 


ae ™ = 


A paper presented at a Meeting of the Sceatile 
Branch of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Seattle, Wash., April 14, 1904. 


Copyright 1904, by A. I.E. E. 


OPERATION OF SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. 


BY S.C LINDSAY. 


It is the purpose of this paper to give a history of the expe- 
rience we have had with 60-cycle synchronous converters in 
Seattle during the last three years and a half. As the Seattle 
Electric Company has a greater capacity in 60-cycle synchronous 
converters in daily operation than any other company in the 
United States, and as they have been operated under a variety 
of conditions, the writer thinks that his experiences might be 
of interest to others who are operating the same class of ap- 
paratus. 

In the summer of 1900 we put into service two 550-volt com- 
pound-wound synchronous converters which were supplied with 
alternating current from the Snoqualmie Falls Power Com- 
pany, the direct current from these synchronous converters 
being used to operate street cars and stationary motors. At 
that time the Snoqualmie Company was transmitting to Seattle 
at 15000 volts over two- to three-phase lines, the conductors 
for each line being No. 2 solid aluminum wire. It was orig- 
inally planned to use one line for power and the other line for 
lighting and such power loads as were not subject to large and 
sudden changes. The current for the synchronous converters 
was transformed to 340 volts by three 500-kw. transformers 
connected in A on both sides. 

With 15 000 volts on the lines and the lines in multiple, one 
synchronous converter would operate satisfactorily up to full 
load; when the second synchronous converter was put in they 
would begin to pump immediately, although the load would 
not be increased beyond the capacity of one synchronous con- 
verter. If both machines were left in circuit the pumping 

345 


346 SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. [April 14 


would soon become so violent that the transmission line circuit- 
breakers at the power-house would open. Various adjustments 
of the field strengths between maximum and minimum im- 
proved matters very little. It was tried a number of times to 
operate two machines under this condition, but without success. 
At times there would be several hundred horse power of in- 
duction motors in Seattle operating from the same system. 
We tried to operate the synchronous converters both with and 
without the induction motors in service, but without success, 
the results being a little more favorable with the induction 
motors running. 

When the transmission lines were separated in Seattle, but 
still supplied from the same bus-bar at the power-house, we 
tried to operate a synchronous converter from one line and the 
induction-motor load and lights from the other line; with a 
very weak field a single synchronous converter would run com- 
paratively steady without load, but would pump violently 
when loaded to one third of its rated capacity, especially if it 
were a street-railway load. With the lines divided as above 
two synchronous converters were synchronized on the same 
transmission line, but were not loaded nor even paralleled on 
the direct-current side. After running under this condition for 
a few minutes they began to pump, and the pumping soon be- 
came so violent that they had to be shut down. 

After these results, no further attempts were made to operate 
two machines at a time until the power company began to 
transmit at 30 000 volts, when it was found that both synchron- 
ous converters would operate entirely satisfactorily up to their 
full capacity with the transmission lines in parallel; and when 
the lines were separated one synchronous converter would 
operate perfectly up to full load and 50% of overload, but when 
the second machine would be switched in pumping would com- 
mence unless the load was reduced. We could carry more load 
without any disturbance on one machine than we could on the 
two. It must be borne in mind that when these attempts were 
made to operate two synchronous converters from one line the 
line was loaded in almost every case with the induction motor 
and lighting load that was always carried when both lines 
were in parallel. 

Inthe spring of 1901, a third 550-volt synchronous converter 
was installed in the same sub-station with the other two ma- 
chines, and connected to the same bank of step-down trans- 


1904. ] SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. 347 


formers. When the three synchronous converters were runmng 
at the same time they were, of course, in parallel on both their 
alternating-current and direct-current sides. 

A 250-volt shunt-wound 500-kw. two-phase synchronous con- 
verter was also installed at the same time in another sub-station 
about one-quarter of a mile from the station where the 500-volt 
synchronous converters were installed, and was operated from 
the same system. 

The addition of these last synchronous converters caused no 
trouble whatever as long as both transmission lines were in 
parallel,, but when it became necessary to place the entire 
Seattle load on one line it was found that the 250-volt syn- 
chronous converter and one 550-volt synchronous converter 
would operate satisfactorily, but that two 550-volt synchronous 
converters would not operate satisfactorily when the 250-volt 
synchronous converter was shut down. 

When the transmission lines were multipled at Renton, and 
one line cut out between Seattle and Renton, all of the load in 
Seattle being carried by a single line between these two points 
and the two lines between Renton and the power-house, all of 
the 550-volt synchronous converters and the 250-volt syn- 
chronous converter could be operated at the same time; but 
when all of them were heavily loaded there was more or less 
pumping, but it was not serious enough to interfere with the 
lighting to any great extent. Within the last year the con- 
ductors in the transmission lines have been changed from No. 2 
aluminum to 0000 aluminum between Renton and the. power- 
house, and to 00 aluminum between Renton and Seattle. Since 
this change two or more 550-volt synchronous converters can 
be run from a single line without any trouble. The trouble 
experienced when first trying to operate more than one syn- 
chronous converter from a single line must have been due to 
excessive line drop which caused an interchange of current 
between the synchronous converters. 

While operating the three 550-volt synchronous converters 
from the same bank of transformers it was necessary to use 
great care in adjusting their field rheostats so as to keep the 
load equally divided among the synchronous converters. If 
one synchronous converter was given a weak field and the other 
two a strong field, pumping would commence and soon become 
serious if the proper adjustment were notmade. Wehadallthree 
synchronous converters thrown out of synchronism several times 


348 SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. [April 14 


fromimproper adjustment of their field currents. While operating 
under this condition it was found that a dirty commutator or too 
much oil applied to a commutator for the purpose of lubrication 
would cause serious trouble, and on one or two occasions threw 
all machines out of synchronism. Shifting the brushes to find 
the neutral point was also a prolific source of trouble. After 
these causes of trouble had been discovered we got fairly good 
results, but only by the most careful attention to the machines. 

Experience with these rotaries operating from one bank of 

transformers leads the writer to believe that a worse combina- 
tion cannot be had, and is something that should never be done 
except as a makeshift. 
. After running under this condition for two months a separate 
bank of transformers was installed for each synchronous con- 
verter, each bank consisting of two 300-kw. transformers, trans- 
forming from 2200 to 340 volts, these transformers in turn being 
connected to a single bank, transforming from 30000 to 2200 
volts, both transformations being made on the Scott two-phase 
to three-phase system. This change in no way affected the 
results of an attempt to operate on a single transmission line, 
but the troubles experienced from operating the three synchron- 
ous converters from a single bank of transformers were entirely 
removed. 

The one thing that has caused more trouble than any other 
in the operation of synchronous converters, and the thing that 
has been responsible directly and indirectly for over 90% of all 
the troubles we have had with them, has been the frequent 
breaking down of the transmission line. Almost every time the 
line would break, all of the 550-volt synchronous converters 
then running would flash-over at the commutator, making a loud 
report very similar to the discharge of acannon. The breaking 
of the line caused a rise of pressure at the commutator of the 
synchronous converters great enough to jump the space between 
the positive and negative brush-holders of the machines. There 
were only two or three cases when the line broke down that the 
flashing-over did not occur. On several occasions when the line 
broke armature coils were burned out simultaneously with the 
flash. The flashing did considerable damage each time it oc- 
curred, by burning the commutator and brush-holders and 
tearing away parts of the mica insulation between the copper 
segments, which left small pockets that soon filled up with 
particles of copper and carbon dust. Whether the rise of pressure 


1904.] SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. 349 


at the commutators was caused by the sudden opening of the 
line or by a short circuit between the broken wires and the other 
‘two line wires is a matter that has never been determined, as no 
one qualified to make an intelligent report was ever present at 
the point of trouble when a break occtirred. This trouble 
‘was finally stopped by grounding the neutral point of the two- 
phase windings of the step-down transformers. Although this 
‘was done primarily for another purpose it produced an effect 
-on the synchronous converters that we had long desired. 

If the commutators are in first-class condition the damage 
done by a single flash has never been sufficient to cause serious 
trouble unless armature coils were burned out; the damage to 
‘the commutator being quickly removed by the use of a file and 
coarse sandpaper. When line troubles were quite frequent, say 
three or four times a week, the damage done to the mica seg- 
ments by one flash would not be removed before another flash 
would occur, and the result was that a number of mica segments 
in each commutator would be wasted away from 1/32 to 1/16 
an inch below the surface of the copper segment. These places 
would soon fill up with particles of carbon and copper dust, caus- 
ing short circuits between segments. These short circuits would 
burn out, causing a flash and explosion at the commutators 
very similar to that caused by line troubles, the principal dif- 
ference being that current did not disappear from the trans- 
mission line when trouble was caused by these short circuits. 
We experienced a great deal of difficulty from these short cir- 
‘cuits before the cause of the trouble was determined. The 
ditficulty in locating the trouble was due to the fact that when 
.a flash-over would occur and throw the synchronous converter 
out of synchronism they could be immediately brought to 
voltage, synchronized, and loaded again without giving any evi- 
dence of the cause of the trouble. Sometimes the synchronous 
converters would be thrown out a number of times in a day 
from this cause, and again they would run for one or two days 
without any trouble. The cause of the trouble being determined, 
it was easily remedied by turning the commutators down until 
the mica and copper segments were even. 

In the summer and fall of 1902 all of our synchronous con- 
verters were moved to the Post Street station, which had just 
been completed, and we now have in this station nine 500-kw. 
‘synchronous converters, five of which are 550-volt, three-phase, 
the other four being 250-volt, two-phase, which are used on the 


350 SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. [April 14 


three-wire lighting system. As stated previously, each syn- 
chronous converter is connected to its own bank of trans- 
formers, the transformers for the 500-volt synchronous con- 
verters being connected on the Scott system transforming 
from two-phase to three-phase. 

The power purchased from the Snoqualmie Falls Power Co. is 
also delivered to this station, making it a combined generating 
and sub-station. The synchronous converters operate equally 
well from the steam-driven generators in this station without 
the use of special inductance coils as they do from the trans- 
mission lines, the only exception to this rule being when the 
steam-driven generators were operating considerably below their 
normal speed, say 114 rev. per min., their normal speed being 
120 rev. per min. The action of the synchronous converters 
when run from the steam-driven generators at this reduced speed 
seems to be a tendency to slow down every time the engines pass 
their centers, which produces a very noticeable effect on all in- 
candescent lights supplied from the generators and lighting 
synchronous converters. This trouble is caused by the irregular 
angular velocity of the prime movers and cannot be considered 
as synchronous converter trouble. In no case has this caused 
any trouble other than the effect on the incandescent lamps, even 
when the speed of the generators would fall as low as 110 and 112. 
rev. per min. As stated before, this effect entirely disappears 
when the generators are running at their normal speed. 

During the last 18 months the transmission line troubles have 
been very much less than they were before, and the troubles 
with thesynchronous converters have practically disappeared.’ As 
the grounding of the neutral point of the secondary winding of 
the step-down transformers prevents the synchronous converters 
from flashing-over at the commutators when line trouble does 
occur, and various other improvements have been made in the 
transmission line, we have not had any more trouble with these 
synchronous converters than would be had with an equal number 
of direct-current generators of the same capacity. 

Having the two sources of supply in the same station, where 
all of the synchronous converters are located, it has been neces- 
sary to operate some of the synchronous converters from the 
steam-driven generators and some of them from the power sup- 
plied by the Snoqualmie Falls Power Co., all synchronous con- 
verters being operated in parallel on the direct-current side. 
This combination is used with both types of synchronous con- 


1904.] SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. i 351 


verter, the pressure of each synchronous converter being con- 
trolled by Hartford regulators. This arrangement serves to 
steady the pressure variations caused by the fluctuations of the 
street-railway load; and the results are very much more satis- 
factory for smoothing out the load, than when all synchronous 
converters are operated from the same source of supply. 

As for care and attention necessary for synchronous con- 
verters, it is substantially the same as that required by direct- 
current generators of the same pressure and capacity. The 
commutators require sandpapering about once a week. Occa- 
sionally a commutator will require sandpapering twice in one 
week. No. 24 sandpaper is used to bring the commutator toa 
smooth surface, and it is then finished with No. 1 sandpaper. 
A small amount of oil is used on each sheet of sandpaper to 
prevent the dust from flying. Itis very bad practice to saturate 
sandpaper with oil for use on a commutator, as the excess of oil 
will form a paste with the copper dust that~ 7111 be forced into the 
mica, if the mica is as soft as commutator mica should be. The 
excessive use of oil is especially bad if there happens to be a 
number of mica segments in a commutator that are not uni- 
formly even with the copper segments. Very good results are 
obtained by spreading the oi] evenly over the sandpaper, then 
absorbing the greater portion of it with clean waste, leaving 
enough to prevent the copper dust from flying, but not enough 
to form a paste. 

We have tried for a long time to get a carbon brush thgt 
would be satisfactory, and we think that we have found one. In 
the meantime we have found a great many that were not satis- 
factory, the average life of a set of carbon brushes being from 
three to six months. We havea set of brushes in a synchronous 
converter that were put in the 28th of last May, and they are 
about half worn out. The wear on this commutator has been 
very small also. We have a set of brushes in another machine 
that has been in use since February 23, and the wear on these 
brushes was found to be about 3/16 of an inch when measured 
to-day. The brush just mentioned is a medium-soft brush 
with a good deal of graphite in it. Pure graphite brushes are 
not at all satisfactory for synchronous converters. 


a 
cae 
Hs 4 
[> 


ay 7 =e gpadimng? ch 
es os : 
‘angie pet yd tines 


A paper presented at the 177th meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, May 17-18, 1904. 


Copyright 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


NOTES ON FLY-WHEELS. 


BY H. H. BARNES, JR. 

The choice of a fly-wheel for reciprocating engines direct 
connected to alternators is a somewhat serious matter in view of 
synchronous operation. With prime movers giving a uniform 
torque, and for belted units, a fly-wheel for the general purpose 
of obtaining a proper mechanical balance for the operation of the 
engine is all that is required, and the fact that an alternator has 
to be driven does not enter into the problem. With direct- 
connected reciprocating engines, however, it is customary to 
specify a fly-wheelthat will limit the angular displacement from 
the mean position under the worst conditions to a given number 
of degrees, the limit usually being set at + 2.5 electrical degrees. 
This rule, it has been claimed, gives the best all-round results for 
the operation of alternating-current machinery. In the follow- 
ing pages an outline has been given of comparative tests of alter- 
nators with both light and heavy fly-wheels, the results of which 
go to show that a good word may also be said for somewhat 
lighter wheels than the ones to which the above rule leads. 

Anyone who has watched the generator instruments in a plant 
operating alternators in multiple will have noticed a slight 
periodic swing of the pointers. A closer study of these beats 
shows there are two distinct varieties. Usually the swing is in 
step with the revolutions of the engine and 1s entirely independent 
of the field excitation of the alternator. In other cases the 
beats have a distinct period of their own that varies with the 
field excitation and consequently with the bus-bar pressure. In 
the first case the variation in the driving torque of the engine, 
which repeats itself periodically with each revolution, imposes 
itself upon the alternators and gives forced oscillations. The 

353 


354 BARNES: FLY-WHEELS. - [May 17 


variable period, on the other hand, is that of natural oscillation. 
Natural oscillations invariably appear when an alternator is 
paralleled a little out of step, and under some other conditions 
as well, and occasionally even predominate to the exclusion of 
forced oscillations. At all events, it is an easy matter to deter- 
mine the natural period experimentally. Its importance and 
its intimate relation to fly-wheel capacity will be more thor- 
oughly appreciated if we analyze the results obtained in three 
different plants in which alternators of identical design are 
direct connected to cross-compound reciprocating engines. The 
interesting feature 1n these plants and the reason for singling them 
out being that, while the generators are identical and the engines 
nearly so, the fly-wheels differ very considerably in weight. 

The generators throughout are 500-kw., two-phase, 100 rev. 
per min., 60-cycle units of the inductor type. Their short-circuit 
ratio with no-load excitation is 3.5. ° - 

The following table gives the fly-wheel data: 


; 
Fly-Wheel. Moment of Inertia in lbs. x (ft.)? 
Plant. | Weight of rim | Outside diam- | Fly-wheel. Revolving element Total. 
in Ib. eter in feet. of alternator. 
30 000 15 | 46 150 16 900 63 050 
50 000 16 92 430 16 900 109 330 
60 000 18 143 500 16 900 160 400 


The natural frequencies .obtained experimentally for each 
plant at no load are shown in Fig. 1 on next page. 

It will be noted that the units with the lighter wheels have the 
higher natural frequency, as was to beexpected. The effect of 
this difference in natural frequency upon the behavior of the 
engine-governors is marked. With the governor dash-pots in 
the condition in which the engine builders left them, parallel 
operation at normal pressure was a failure in all three plants. 
Upon throwing two units together, cross-currents would build 
up, and eventually the surging would become so violent that 
the machines would have to be separated. The frequency of 
surging was that of natural oscillation throughout. With the 
same setting of the engine dash-pots, however, the machines in C 
would run together acceptably at no load at pressures of 60% and 
less of normal, and the machines in B at pressures of 40% and 


1904.) BARNES: FLY-WHEELS. 355 


Jess of normal, whereas those in A failed to operate satisfactorily 
at 50% of normal, which was the lowest pressure tried. 

By artificially decreasing the oscillations of the governors, by 
means of the dash-pots, the units in A could be made to operate 
well at normal and higher pressures. The units in B showed an 
improvement at pressures considerably above normal (tests at 
reduced pressures had to be omitted here to avoid interfering 
with the commercial operation of the plant), while no improve- 
ment whatever was noticeable in C,, except for the lower pressures. 
The former average limit of 60% of normal being extended to 
over 80%. 


loo 
iz 
son 
owW 
Fr oa 
- Boe NATURAL FREQUENCY OF OSCILLATION. 
2 DF SOO K.W. IOORPM.60 CYCLE 


2 PHASE 


are INDUCTOR ALTERNATORS 
AT NO LOAD 
60 
sO 
ao 
30 
Au 
an Per eer A 63050 MASS -LBS. Xx (FT)2 
Re ea B 109330» ” ” 

Aaa c 160400 » » ve 

10 Fee BOSS 
AGA 

a** 200 400 609 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600 2800 VOLTS 


Fig 1. 

A still further increase in the damping of the governors in C, 
however, resulted in a decrease in the limiting pressure, until with 
completely-blocked governors parallel operation became impossi- 
ble at any and all pressures. This result and similar ones ob- 
tained elsewhere would indicate, it seems, the existence of an 
inherent tendency toward cumulative surging that is in no way 
connected with the behavior of the engine governors. 

The origin and nature of this tendency are not directly appar- 
ent. It seems likely that they are intimately connected with the 
armature reaction of the alternators, but whether a departure 
from a uniform turning moment in the. prime mover is also 
essential to its appearance may be doubted. As far as 
the writer is aware, there is no indication in dynamics in the 


356 BARNES: FLY-WHEELS. [May 17 


theory of forced and natural oscillations of a possibility of forced 
oscillations producing cumulative surging. If this is so, it might 
be imagined, although there is no direct experimental evidence 
to support the idea, that the surging which so frequently appears 
and is at times so hard to control, in alternators operating in 
multiple (to limit ourselves to a definite case) is due, not tothe 
lack of uniformity in the turning moment, but rather to the effect 
of heavy wheels upon armature reaction phenomena. It 1s alse 
probable that we have operating, in addition to this, causes of the 
same nature as those that produce cumulative surging in a Watt 
governor system. It should be clearly understood that this is 
hardly more than a guess. But it is one that would be worth 
while checking up by making the following test. for which the 
writer has unfortunately not had an opportunity. 

In a plant in which direct-connected alternators are given to. 
chronic cumulative surging that will not disappear even when 
running on the throttle with governors blocked, disconnect the 
engines and drive the alternators by means of individual constant- 
current motors. If we parallel the alternators under these con- 
ditions and surging still persists, we will have eliminated from 
the problem the angular variation of the engiae. If it should 
fail to appear, however, the origin of the trouble would be defi- 
nitely located in the engine. Whatever the origin of this inhe- - 
rent tendency to surge may be we must more than counteract its 
effect to insure successful parallel running, a result that may be 
brought about in two ways: by using heavy wheels—or else by 
operating at reduced pressures—the natural period of the unit 
may be lengthened to such an extent that the engine governor, 
instead of adding to the disturbance will have time to grapple 
with any surging that may appear, and wipe it out. An example 
of this is the behavior of the machines in plants B and C at re- 
duced pressures. This solution has the drawback of leading to 
wheels of prohibitive weight for slow-speed units, and further- 
more, of making the successful operation of the plant dependent 
to a certain extent upon the adjustment of the engine governors. 

The second and better way to overcome the inherent tendency 
to surge is to provide sufficient electrical damping. Any oscilla-— 
tions that may appear will then be taken care of by the damping, 
and the assistance of the governor will no longer be required. In 
fact the damping action will be more rapid and final if the 
governor dash-pot is adjusted so that the governor will not 
respond to natural oscillations, as, in the majority of cases, it 


(ss) 
Or 
“I 


1904.] BARNES: FLY-WHEELS. 


would only strive to maintain the latter if left free to act. As it 
is easier to adjust the dash-pot with this end in view, to bridge 
over a short period than a long one, we see that light wheels with 
their short periods are more desirable in this respect than heavy 
ones. This argument may seem weak at first when applied to 
plants in which forced oscillations predominate, but experience 
teaches that the disturbing influence of the natural period is felt, 
even when there is no immediate indication of its existence on 
any of the switchboard instruments. More delicate instruments 
than the ones usually used would probably reveal the natural 
period, and even with instruments which appear at first to indi- 
cate forced oscillations only, a battle for supremacy between the 
forced and natural periods may frequently be detected by scrutin- 
izing the movements of the pointers with more than usual care. 

To bring out a little more clearly the effect of a change in 
weight of wheel upon the behavior of the engine governor, we 
might say that with very heavy wheels and consequently long 
natural periods the governor is able to kill off unaided any surg- 
ing that may attempt todevelop. With very light wheels, on the 
other hand, the governor is barely affected by surging and the 
task of holding it down devolves upon the electrical damping of 
the units. There is an intermediate zone between these two ex- 
tremes in which the governor would directly assist the tendency 
to surge if it were not prevented from doing so by special adjust- 
ment of its dash-pot. If such adjustment is not made, it is evi- 
dent that what electrical damping there is will be more sorely 
taxed, and the heavier the wheel the more likely it will be that 
the damping will be unequal to the task of carrying this additi- 
tional burden and that cumulative surging will set in. 

If neither of the conditions we have been discussing is met, as 
in plants B and C at normal voltage, successful running may be 
said to be out of the question. The best remedy for the cumula- 
tive surging that will undoubtedly set in in such cases is to in- 
crease the electrical damping of the machines, until it is able to 
hold in check the inherent tendency to surge. This was done in 
the above plants with eminently satisfactory results. 

It may also be pointed out that the successful running at 
normal pressure with dampened governors in plant A, compared 
with the failure to run in plants B and C, would indicate that the 
relative increase in electrical damping is more rapid than the 
corresponding increase in the inherent tendency to surge for a 
given decrease in weight of fly-wheel, Should this be corroborated 


358 BARNES: FLY-WHEELS. [May 17 


by similar observations elsewhere, a further most weighty argu- 
ment would be added in favor of light wheels. However this 
may be, the tests already described, and they are but a few of, 
those that could be cited, lead to the conclusion that a decrease 
in fly-wheel capacity is not synonymous with an increased ten- 
dency to surge on the part of alternators. The following observa- 
tions will emphasize this point still further. 

In plants A and B individual exciters are belt driven from the 
shaft of each alternator, and facilities for paralleling the exciters 
are provided, besides the usual switches. With this arrangement, 
if two alternators are paralleled while energized by their own 
separate exciters, and the pressure and dash-pot conditions are 
such that cumulative surging sets in, the surging may be very 
rapidly stopped at all loads by simply paralleling the exciters. 
Tests were made to ascertain the nature of this action of the 
exciters. The results proved that it is directly comparable to 
that of electrical or viscous damping and not related to the 
constancy of the exciter pressure. 

Other conditions ‘being the same, it is reasonable to assume 
that the time taken to dampen out cross-currents by paralleling 
the exciters would give a fair indication of the relative tendency 
to surge existing in these two plants. Actually, the average time 
required is about the same in both plants, with possibly a slightly 
quicker action ‘n A. From which the conclusion must again be 
drawn that a decrease in fly-wheel capacity and consequent, 1n- 
crease in angular variation while running does not decrease the 
stability of the generators. In making these tests it was noticed 
that individual results in A were affected to a very slight extent 
by the relative position of the driving cranks of the engines. In 
B and C and numerous other plants experimented upon, this 
influence, if it existed at all, was so slight that it was impossible to 
distinguish it from that due to other causes. 

Passing on to another phase of the subject, we find that the 
limitation usually imposed upon the maximum angular variation 
of alternators is intended, among other things, to limit the 
cross-currents due to this variation. Thus, for a variation of 
+ 2.5 electrical degrees and a short-circuit ratio of 2.5, the 
cross-current will amount to approximately 10% of the full- 
load armature current, and no more. If we consider, however, 
that a 10% current resultsin an J? R loss of less than 1% of normal, 
and that the normal /? R armature loss is itself but a fraction of the 
total loss in the generator, we realize that at least a 25% cross- 


1904.) BARNES: FLY-WHEELS. 359 


current may be permitted without fear of appreciably increasing 
the total losses. Especially as such cross-currents would appear 
under the most unfavorable conditions of load and cut-off only, 
the average exchange of current during the day's run undoubtedly 
remaining well below the maximum. It might be well to add 
that there should be not any trouble from blinking of the lights 
if the cross currents do not exceed the value mentioned. There 
do not appear to be any very good reasons, therefore, why objec- 
tions should be raised on this score to the use of lighter fly-wheels 
giving a considerably great variation than the customary 2.5 de- 
grees. 
We shall now examine the effect of a light wheel on the generat- 
ing units upon the behavior of synchronous apparatus. Wehave 
in © a good example of a plant working under these conditions. 
Exceptionally light wheels are in use there and numerous syn- 
chronous motors and rotaries are in operation on the system. 
Not a trace of trouble has developed in this plant since the start, 
however, notwithstanding the light wheels. 
Some interesting experiments that are very much to the point 
were made recently by Mr. P.C. Oscanyan. Ina plant equipped 
with 850-kw., 60-cycle, 90 rev. per min. alternators, direct con- 
nected to cross-compound reciprocating engines, the fly-wheels 
were designed to maintain the angular variation within + 2 
degrees of mean. The rims of the wheels were laminated and 
weighed normally 1000001bs. Witha machinewith less than one- 
quarter of its rim in place running singly and in parallel with a 
completed unit, no difference whatever could be detected be- 
tween the behavior of the incomplete machine and that of its 
neighbors. It would operate in parallel under all conditions of 
load, and when running singly would carry a load of synchronous 
converters without any indication of trouble. On the strength 
of this, and without going further, it may be said that surging and 
allied troubles in synchronous apparatus are not necessarily asso- 
ciated with light wheels and increased angular displacement. 
They are due, it would appear, more to certain imperfectly 
understood relations between the number of generating and 
receiving units, their moments of inertia, output, speed, etc., 
than to the existence of a more or less pronounced angular varia- 
tion dependent upon the fly-wheels. 

The question of electromechanical resonance remains as being 
about the only possible further source of trouble that might be 
introduced by a change in weight of wheel. Resonance, it may 


360 BARNES: FLY-WHEELS. [May 17 


be added by way of explanation, is said to exist in a system when 
the ratio of forced and natural frequencies is nearly or exactly 
equal to unity; its effect is a tremendous amplification of the 
original forced oscillation. 

By referring to the curves of natural frequencies on page 355, 
we see that the normal natural frequency of the units in plant A 
is 81 per minute. The forced frequency determined by the 
revolutions is 100. By forcing the excitation until we reach 
pressures and consequently natural frequencies, that are con- 
siderably above normal, we might expect to see the effects of 
approaching resonance. In reality, noticeable cross-currents 
begin to appear at a frequency of 87; at 90 they are already quite 
pronounced. They are not cumulative, however (provided the 
engine dash-pots are in order), but increase and decrease periodi- 
cally with a main frequency equal ta the difference between the 
forced and natural frequencies. The slip, as it were, between the 
two frequencies may be counted in this way with great precision. 
We have here the phenomenon of interference, which appears 
whenever the damping of a system is very weak. If we 
increase the damping in this case, as, for instance, by 
paralleling the exciters, the main period disappears, and the 
cross-currents take on an average value with a regular but slight 
beat of forced frequency. A further increase in natural fre- 
quency runs up the cross-currents very rapidly until they are far 
in excess of the full-load armature current for a ratio of fre- 
quencies nearly equal to unity. These results show clearly 
enough that resonance is a real and very serious danger, and one 
to be avoided with the utmost care, as there is no acceptable 
way of overcoming it when encountered in practice. In order 
to avoid it, we should have a formula for predetermining the 
fly-wheel and the corresponding natural period, which we could 
then make as different as we choose from the forced period, 
already determined by the revolutions of the engine. 

The oldest and at the same time the best formula for this 
purpose that the writer knows of, was published by Paul Bou- 
cherot in 1892, in Vol. 45, issue No. 31 and 32 of La Lumiere 
Electrique. It is, with a recent slight modification: 


/ M 
T= O8LN\/ pre eree 


where 
T = Natural period of oscillation in seconds at no load. 


1904.] BARNES: FLY-WHEELS. 361 


N = Revolutions per minute. 

M= Total moment of inertia of all rotating parts (fly-wheel, 
crank discs, inductor or revolving field, etc), expressed 
i Ios (Et)? 


i Electrical frequency per second. 

E = Effective e.m.f. per phase or leg. 

I, = Effective short-circuit. armature current corresponding 
to E. 

p = Number of phases. 


The greatest discrepancy that has thus far appeared in checking 
this formula experimentally in nearly a dozen plants is one of 
+ 6%, the calculated period being that much longer than the 
observed one. The mean error for all the plants was + 3%. 
The reliability of the formula for practical purposes is therefore 
beyond doubt. 

With this formula to assist us, it is an easy matter to predeter- 
mine a fly-wheel that will at least avoid resonance once-we have 
agreed upon the closest ratio permissible between the forced and 
natural frequencies. The choice of this ratio depends upon 
numerous considerations. In the first place we have, as the 
essence of resonance, the increase in angular variation that is 
bound to appear after paralleling, even when absolute resonance 
is still quite remote. There is also the possible error between 
the calculated and the actual fly-wheel, the rather doubtful 
values that are sometimes used for the short-circuit current and 
the increase in natural frequency with the load and with a de- 
creasing power-factor. Making due allowance for these various 
factors, let us assume for the moment a natural frequency at no 
load equal to 70% of the forced. 

If we introduce this condition into the formula on the pre- 
ceding page, and substitute P xk for ExI. xp, and W r’ for M 
wherein P is the normal output of the alternator in kilowatts, k, 
the ratio between the short circuit and full-load armature current, 
W the weight inlb. andr the radius of gyration in feet of all the 
revolving parts combined, we get 


Wr = ph Xixk 


(ico) 
100 

It remains to be seen if a wheel based on this formula is suffi- 
ciently heavy to keep the cross-currents within bounds. It ap- 


pears upon examination that for such a wheel the maximum 
cross-current between alternators driven by any average cross- 


362 BARNES: FLY-WHEELS. [May 17 


compound steam-engine would not exceed 25% of the full-load 
armature current, even under the worst conditions, which may be 
considered an entirely permissible figure. 

For an ordinary cross-compound unit and a short-circuit ratio 
of k = 2.5, the maximum angular variation may be assumed to be 
within + three electrical degrees of mean when running singly. 
With a 70% ratio of frequencies, however, the angular variation 
of a unit running singly may be practically doubled upon par- 
alleling it in with its fellows, and it is upon this increased varia- 
tion that the calculation of the cross-currents has been based. 
With alternators with a higher short-circuit ratio and therefore 
better regulation, the angular variation will be less on account of 
the heavier fly-wheel called for by the formula. The cross-cur- 
rents, on the other hand, remain the same for a given type of 
engine regardless of the regulation of the alternators. With 
single-crank engines these currents will be somewhat heavier than 
with cross-compound engines, and with multi-cylinder engines a 
trifle less. The difference in the latter case will hardly be suffi- 
cient to demand a separate formula, and the same may be said of 
vertical as compared with horizontal types of engines. With 
single-crank engines, however, the maximum angular variation 
should be determined and if the design of the engine is such that 
the variation in a single engine materially exceeds + three elec- 
trical degrees, it would be advisable to modify the constant in the 
formula to a slight extent. 

While there are apparently no disadvantages connected with 
the use of relatively light wheels, there are, at least, two 
distinct advantages that should not be overlooked. We have 
already seen that a light wheel means a high natural frequency 
for which it is relatively easy to get the engine governors to 
behave properly. In practice this is a very real and important 
advantage, and one not to be lightly dismissed. 

A considerable saving in first cost may also be affected by 
using lighter wheels, especially in the case of slow-speed units, 
where the amount of iron that may be saved in the fly-wheel foots 
up to quite a respectable sum At the same time the general 
wear and tear upon the bearings of the engiries are lessened. 

We believe, therefore, that the formula given above may be 
used with perfect safety in predetermining fly-wheels for direct- 
connected steam-engine drive, with the following excep- 
tions. For high speeds the wheels obtained, while meeting all 
electrical requirements, would hardly be heavy enough to give 
the engine a proper mechanical balance, and in such cases 


1904.) BARNES: FLY-WHEELS. 363 


heavier wheels, as determined by the engine builders, should be 
used... Variations of the formula will also suggest themselves in 
individual cases. Thus, for instance, with engines giving an ex- 
ceptionally even driving torque connected to alternators of 
excellent regulation, the permissible ratio between natural and 
forced frequencies might be advanced to 0.75 or even more with- 
out serious risk of encountering resonance phenomena or of intro- 
ducing troubles of other origin. With single-crank engines, on 
the contrary, it will occasionally be necessary to use a somewhat 
heavier wheel than the one indicated by the formula. 

To sum up our main conclusions, we may say that the fly- 
wheel—as distinct from the assistance given either by the engine 
governor or the damping of the unit—is impotent to ensure 
satisfactory synchronous operation. - Except for these two 
influences, the inherent tendency toward cumulative surging 
existing in the unit would predominate, and parallel running 
would be impossible 

It also seems advisable to use a somewhat lighter fly-wheel 
than would be considered conservative practice to-day. This 
greatly facilitates the adjustment of the engine governors while 
it does not decrease the stability of the system. For it would 
appear that the electrical damping of the units (which varies 
with their natural period and consequently with the fly-wheel) 
at least retains its relative strength as compared with the inhe- 
rent tendency to surge for wide variations in weight of wheel. 
Therefore, if the damping is sufficient to hold the tendency to 
surge in check when a heavy wheel is «sed, it remains so for a 
light wheel. This argument applies to a change in weight of 
wheel for a given generating unit only, and should not be con- 
strued as one in favor of increased angular variation as such. 

We also find that electromechanical resonance is a serious 
danger that must be avoided by making a proper choice of fly- 
wheel. A wh»el selected with this end in view is at the same 
time satisfactory for general operating purposcs, provided there 
is sufficient damping in the unit to check the inherent tendency 
to surge. 

If we inquire, in concluding, what fly-wheel capacity suggests 
itself for direct connection to gas-engines, it must be said that it 
would be a little venturesome to advance a cut and dried rule at 
present in view of the limited practical experience with this type 
of prime mover. By analogy with steam-engine experience, 
however, it may be said that light fly-wheels and vigorous elec- 
trical damping ‘is the combination that is most likely to win out 
for this class of work 

[For discussion on this paper, see page 461.] 


A paper presented at the 187th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers. 
New York, May 17-18, 1904. 


Copyright. 1904. By A. 1. E. E. 


PREDETERMINATION OF SPARKING IN DIRECT-CUR- 
RENT MACHINES. 


BY W. L. WATERS. 


Speaking generally, dynamo design did not become an art 
until after the old two-pole smooth-core Siemens and Edison 
machines came into extensive use for lighting. The original 
design of these machines was more or less guesswork; but 
after a few machines had been made to run satisfactorily the 
designer was able to lay out a complete line of machines, 
designing them partly by eye and partly by some empirical 
rules, which he decided on as he built successive machines. 
The armatures were designed more froma mechanical than 
from an electrical standpoint, the length being limited by 
the stifiness of the shaft rather than by questions of commuta- 
tion. The armatures were not ventilated and the output was 
necessarily limited by heating. The armatures being of the 
smooth-core type, the self-induction of the armature coils 
was so small, even with the length of armatures in general 
use, that usually it was not necessary to conside.: it in 
connection with the sparking of the machine. It was, how- 
ever, generally recognized that if the -magnets were too 
weak the machine was likely to spark, so the length of the 
air-gap was usually determined by some empirical rule ob- 
tained by experiment. When slotted armatures were adopted 
extensively they were designed along the same lines as smooth- 
core armatures. These armatures were so badly ventilated .hat 
the output was limited by heating to about one half that of a 
modern armature; but in spite of this it was found necessary 
to use carbon brushes to obtain good commutation. 

To economize in dies several different lengths of armatures 
were frequently built on the same diameter, and to economize 

365 


355 WATERS: SPARKING IN [May 17 


space the armatures were often built smallerin diameter and longer 
than they otherwise would be. Experience with these different 
forms of armature made it very evident that a long armature 
had a greater tendency to spark than a short one; this became 
especially noticeable as the ventilating of armatures was im- 
proved and the output increased, so as to take advantage of 
the cooler running. 

Up to this time a great deal had been written on the theory 
of commutation in dynamos, but had been ignored by the prac- 
tical designers who had more faith in experimental results. 
This bad behavior of long armatures as regards sparking called 
attention to the theoretical work, and designers began to con- 
sider whether or not the self-induction of the commutated coil 
did not, after all, decide the amount of current the machine 
would carry without sparking. In the first attempts to 
take into account the self-induction of the commutated coii, 
the self-induction of a one-turn coil was considered as being 
simply proportional tothe length of the armature core; that 
is, the shape and size of the slot, the number of coils per slot, 
and the self-induction of the end connections—all were neglect- 
ed. This gave a very simple formula for the self-induction: 

De Sala 
Where / = length of armature 
n = number of turns per coil, 

And the self-induction e.m.f. of commutation (the reactance 
voltage as it was called) which is an estimate of the difficulty of 
commutating the current, was given by 

E=In?If 

I being the current per coil and j the frequency of commuta- 
tion. 

This formula gave good results when applied to machines 
designed along the same general lines. The allowable value of 
the reactance pressure could be obtained from experiment on one 
machine and used in the design of other machines. But, if 
applied to machines which were designed differently, the formula 
showed wide discrepancies; so it soon became recognized that 
the formula was at best only a rough approximation. 

Early slotted machines were designed with one coil per slot; 
two coils per slot obviously saved insulation space and was soon 
tried, but it was found that generally every other bar on the 
commutator became badly marked. _ 


As it was imperative to save space in car motors, three coils 


1904.] DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 367 


per slot were adopted, and in extreme cases four, or even five 
coils per slot were used. It was generally found, however, that 
whenever more than one coil per slot was used some of the 
commutator-bars were marked, and that it was possible to 
count the number of coils per slot by the recurrence of the 
marking on the commutator. This marking was attributed to 
the inequality. caused. by using a’small number of slots, and so 
the general rules were adopted—to use as many slots as possible 
and to make small machines with one coil per slot and large 
machines with two coils per slot. 

It was also noticed that the dead coils necessary in certain 
multipolar wave-windings often caused some of the commutator- 
bars to be marked; this was naturally attributed to the dis- 
symetry produced in the winding, and it became generally 
recognized that anything tending to produce inequality in the 
commutation conditions, such as few slots or many coils per 
slot, or dead coils, tended to make perfect commutation more 
difficult. 

With increased competition came the necessity of cheapening 
the cost of building these machines; designers then returned to 
the construction of several coils per slot. In reducing the 
amount of copper on the armatures to save in the cost of mate- 
rial, it naturally happened that shallow slots were used. And 
it was found that with these wide and shallow slots it was pos- 
sible to obtain good commutation with several coils per slot, 
under conditions where it would be quite impossible with the 
old deep and narrow slots. Obviously this was due to the lesser 
self-induction of a wide slot compared to a narrow one, and it 
was soon acknowledged that the shape of the slot should be 
considered in calculating the self-induction of the commutated 
coil. 

When designing an armature for small self-induction it would 
be natural to make it large in diameter and short in length; that 
is, with a large pole-pitch. But in carrying this to an extreme 
it was found that it did not give the good results expected. It 
was suggested that this result was due to the fact that the self- 
induction of the end connections had been neglected and that in 
armatures with large pole-pitch and short length of core, the 
self-induction of the end connections was comparable with that 
of the conductor embedded in the slots. 

In the light of these experiences it is evident that the design 
of a direct-current machine in regard to sparking is a compromise 


368 WATERS: SPARKING IN [May 17 


between a number of conflicting conditions. It is not possible 
to obtain a formula which will give a strict measure of the com- 
mutating qualities of all machines; but by taking into considera- 
tion the more important conditions which effect the sparking it 
is possible to obtain a formula which will give fairly accurate 
results when applied to machines similarly designed, and which 
will give some idea of the sparking when applied to machines 
of widely different design. Such a formula, when it has been 
applied to a number of machines of different types, so that 
the allowable values for the sparking constant have been 
determined, can be taken as a fair working formula, and can be 
placed in the same category as empirical formulas for deter- 
mining the regulation of alternators. Such formulas are not 
intended to reduce the designing of machines to mere slide- 
rule work, but are intended simply to give an idea as to the 
experimental results to be expected from individual design. 

As outlined above, the most important conditions to be taken 
into consideration are the self-induction pressure of the com- 
mutated coil and the inequalities introduced by the conditions 
of commutation. 


I.—SELF-INDUCTION PRESSURE. 

This is given by the formula; V = self-induction of one coil 
times number of coils commutated in series timescurrent in coil 
times frequency of commutation. 

The self-induction of one coil = (self-induction of one con- 
ductor embedded in the slot +self-induction of one end connec- 
tion) times (number of turns per coil)?. 

The self-induction of one conductor embedded in the slot = 
Lk. Where / is the length of the core and k is a constant de- 
pending on the dimensions of the slot. 

By determining the self-induction of a large number of slots 
we find that this constant k can with sufficient accuracy be 
taken as a function of the ratio 


width of slot. 
depth of slot. 

A curve can be plotted connecting r and k, determined experi- 
mentally from tests on a number of armatures; such a curve is 
shown in Fig. 1. 

Take the self-induction of the end connections = length of 
end connections timesconstantc’. Andasthelength of end con- 


nection is approximately proportional to the pole-pitch this can 
‘be written with sufficient accuracy = pc. 


1904.] DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 369 


Hence the self-induction of one coil = n? (lk +pc). 

The number of coils commutated in series, N, is, of course, 
one in a parallel or lap-wound armature, and equal to the num- 
ber of pairs of poles in a series or wave-wound armature. 

The current per coil J in a series or wave-wound armature is 
equal to one half the total current in the machine, while in a 
parallel or lap-wound armature it equals the total current 
divided by the number of poles. 


INDUCTION 


SELF 


SLOT WIDTH 
SLOT DEPTH 


Rie Ik 


RATIO 


The self-induction pressure of the commutated coil is then 

given by 
Venr(L_k+pc)NIf 

Where f = frequency of commutation = number of commu- 
tator-bars times speed in rev. per min. 

The width of the brush is neglected in calculating the fre- 
quency of commutation, since it is found by experiment that 
within the ordinary limits of practice the thickness of the brush 
has no effect on the operation of a machine, unless the current 


370 WATERS: SPARKING IN [May 17 


density is excessive. The probable explanation of this is that 
a thicker brush gives more time for commutation to take place; 
but it means that more coils are commutated at the same time, 
thus increasing the self-induction effect. These two effects ap- 
parently counterbalance each other to a great extent. 


II.—INEQUALITIES DUE TO CONDITIONS OF COMMUTATION. 

These are due to the use of a few slots; more than one coil 
per slot; and to dead coils. 

If there is only one coil per slot the use of few slots does not 
in itself affect commutation, unless the number of slots is ex- 
tremely small; for though the slot may move through quite an 
appreciable arc while the coil is being commutated, the condi- 
tions are exactly the same for every coil when it is commutated. 
So there is no tendency to inequality in the conditions, and if 
the brushes can be set so that one coil can be commutated satis- 
factorily then commutation will be satisfactory all round the 
armature. 

But if the number of segments is extremely small, say less 
than six per pole, then the coils will move in such a widely 
varying magnetic field, and will come so close to the strong field 
under the pole-tip while it is being commutated, that the local 
currents under the brush are liable to produce marking of the 
commutator-bars even if the brushes apparently do not spark. 
Of course this is only important in very low-pressure machines; 
it need not be taken into account in the sparking constant. It 
is sufficient to say that the number of commutator-segments 
in the polar-gap; that is, the arc between the two pole-shoes, 
must never be less than two and should generally be three or 
more. 

With several coils per slot inequalities are introduced: 

1. Due to the different self-induction of the different coils; 

2. Due to commutation under different conditions. 

The self-induction of all the armature coils will be the same 
when there are only two:coils per ‘slot,:as it is obvious that the 
configuration of the conductors and neighboring iron is the same 
for both coils. But when there are three or more coils per slot 
the self-induction of the various coils will vary, as they occupy 
different relative positions in regard to the iron; the self-induction 
of the center coil will be less than the self-induction of the outer 
coil. Investigating conditions at the point of commutation in a 
modern generator by means of a pilot-brush, it is found that in 
practically all cases commutation goes on at a point where there 


1904.) DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 371 


is no resultant magnetic field; that is, at a point where the arma- 
ture field just counterbalances the field due to the magnets. 
In other words, there is resistance commutation; the armature 
current is commutated by the varying resistance of the brush, 
rather than by a reversing’ e.m.f. due to passing through a 
magnetic field. This being the case there is need to consider 


i 
= 


Fic. 2.—Showing position of armature at beginning and e ding of 
commutation period. 


only the self-induction of those coils which have the greatest 
self-induction. If these are commutated satisfactorily by means 
of the varying resistance of the brushes, then those coils which 
have a smaller self-induction will also be commutated satis- 
factorily. Hence the variation in the self-induction of the coils 


372 WATERS: SPARKING IN [May 17 


need not be considered and in the formula all that needs to be 
considered is the self-induction of those coils which have the 
greatest self-induction. 

The chief inequality introduced into the commutation by 
having more than one coil per slot’is due to the various coils in 
the slot commutating when they are in different magnetic fields. 
This is evident from Fig. 3, which shows the position of the arma- 
ture when the first and the last coil in the slot are commutating. 


Fic 3.--Armature with two coils per slot showing positions of armature 
when the two coils are being commutated. 


If the brushes are set so that the magnetic field is right for the 
first coil it will be wrong for the last one, and vice versa. So 
whenever the machine is loaded to its limit the commutating 
conditions will be so bad for some of the coils that in time some 
of the commutator-bars will become pitted and there will be 
that well-known regularly recurring marking of the commutator- 
bars. 


1904.] DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES 373 


The question now is how to take this inequality into account 
in the sparking formula. To do this, make the assumptions 
that the magnetic field varies uniformly from the neutral point 
to the pole-tip, andthat in order to obtain perfect commutation 


Fic 4 


CIRCUMFERENCE OF ARMATURE 
Fie. 5. 


it is necessary to move the brushes from a position at the neutral 
point at no load to a position half-way between the neutral 
point and the pole-tip at full load. Calling the distance 
between the neutral point and the pole-tip 2d, and assuming 


374 WATERS: SPARKING IN [May 17 


the brushes fixed on the line O P half-way between the pole-tip 
and the neutral point, then if any coil is commutated when it is 
at Q distant “a” from P, then it will only commutate perfectly 
a 

a load l- Ph 

Just what this assumption means can be seen from Fig. 5. 

Abscissa represent positions along the polar-gap corresponding 
to Fig. 4, and ordinates e.m.fs. 

The line N A gives the e.m.f. induced at various points by the 
conductor moving.in the field due to the magnets. . 

C P, the ordinate of the line B B, gives the e.m.f. necessary to 
reverse the full-load current / in the coil. 

If the coil is commutated at the position Q instead of at P 


Fic. 6.—Armature with 20 slots per pole and three coils per slot. 


then the commutation conditions will be perfect only for a cur- 


DQ 


rent CP: I. Hence we assume that if we have several coils 


per slot, and that if in consequence of this we have to commutate 
some of our coils in a position E Q and E’ Q’, then the current 
which the machine will carry without sparking is reduced in the 
ae that is +e : 

It is very easy to figure out just what this inequality amounts 
to in any particular case. Take 20 slots per pole, 3 coils per 
slot, pole-face = 75% of pole-pitch. 

There are 2.5 slots between the neutral point and the pole-tip. 
Assuming that the conditions are perfect for the center coil, the 
outer coils are 0.333-slot pitch out of thismost favorable position. 


ratio 


1904.] DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 375 


And 1.25 slots corresponding tc variation from no ioad to full 
load, hence an equality of 0.333-slot pitch gives an inequality 


factor “se = 0.26. Hencethe sparking constant should be mul- 


tiplied by the inequality factor 1.26. 
Curves can very easily be plotted for different numbers of 
slots per pole, and coils per slot, in order to facilitate the calcu- 


um iLs bi {— 
3 coi LsiPeR i 
R ra PER SLOT 


lation of this inequality factor. 


INEQUALITY FACTOR 


Were) teaaat (etoile 
Fic.-7. 


The assumptions on which this calculation is based are to a 
great extent rational, and though we cannot pretend that the 
calculation has a rigid basis, yet it is probably as correct as the 
other sparking calculations, and used with discretion it gives 
fairly reliable results. 

The inequality introduced by using a dead coil on the arma- 
ture is similar tu that due to several coils per slot. The dead 


376 WATERS: SPARKING IN [May 17 


coil produces a break in the uniformity of the winding; and if 
the position of the brush is correct for commutation of the coil 
immediately on one side of the dead coil then it will be 
just one segment out of the correct position for the coil imme- 
diately on the other side of the dead coil. The inequality intro- 
duced can be calculated, and allowed for in the sparking constant 
exactly in the same way as we allow for the inequality due to 


Fic. 8.—Armature with dead coil showing positions «f armature wien 
the two coils next to dead coil are being commutated. 


several coils per slot. Assuming that the brush is in a mean 
position then it will be just half a segment out of position for 
the two coils which are next in position to the commutated coil. 

Making the same assumptions as before; if there are » com- 
mutator-segments per pole, and if the pole face = 75% of pole- 


pitch then the inequality is equivalent to es Thus if there are 


20 segments per pole a dead coil produces an inequality equal 


1904.] DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 377 


to 40% of the load, and the inequality should be introduced 
intc the sparking constant by the factor 1.4. A curve can readily 
be plotted between the inequality factor and the number of coils 
per pole. Such a curve is shown in Fig. 9. 

Combining all the different factors which affect sparking we 
get our complete formula for a sparking constant. 


Oe rape) NEP tO 


INEQUALITY FACTOR 


10 “20 Xe) 40 


CoiLS PER POLE P)TCH. 
BiG. 9: 


P being the inequality factor resulting from a number of 
coils per slot. 

Q being the inequality factor resulting from a dead coil. 

This formula is not put forward as being scientifically exact, 
but as an empirical formula which has gradually been built up 
as the result of experience, different terms having been added 
to the formula from time to time as it was found necessary to 
take different conditions into account. As the formula stands 


378 WATERS: SPARKING IN [May 17 


it gives excellent results. When we know the value of C we can 
allow for the particular design of machine we are dealing with. 

The relative values of C that have been found allowable in 
different cases are somewhat as follows: 


2-pole 20 
4-pole, series wound 35 
6-pole, “ : 50 
4-pole, multiple wound 30 
6-pole, BS ‘i 35 
gradually increasing to 

24-pole, multiple wound 50 


Of course, all the machines in each class are designed alike; 
that is, they have approximately the same densities inthe teeth, 
and have the ratio of ampere-turns per pole on the armature 
(armature reaction) to the ampere-turns required for the teeth 
and air-gap approximately constant. If these vary much it is 
impossible to get consistent results. 

The brush-gear and the current density in the brushes also 
play an important part in the sparking. If the brush-gear is 
weak mechanically, or if the commutator is in bad condition, 
the machine is sure to spark. And with ordinary-grade carbons 
the brushcs will usually glow when the current density reaches 
50 amperes per sq. in. 

The shape of the pole-tips has some effect on the operation of 
the machine. But so long as they do not come too close to- 
gether and so long as they are shaped so that there is a commu- 
tation field which varies gradually, the exact shape need give 
us no concern. 

The density in the armature core (behind the teeth) has also 
a considerable effect on the allowable sparking constant. If the 
core is highly saturated it can be run with a constant consider- 
ably higher than if it is unsaturated. 

Assuming ‘that all these conditions are uniform and satisfac- 
tory, the variation in the allowable value of C shows that the 
formula does not take into account all the conditions that affect 
the sparking, so the formula must be used with considerable 
discretion. It cannot be claimed that the formula is in any way 
accurate, but it certainly is an empirical working formula, 
capable of giving very good results when carefully used, and 
as such it is put forward. 


[For discussion on this paper, see page 443.] 


A paper presenied at the 187th Meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, May 17-18, 1904. 


Copyright, 1904. By A.I. E. B, 


4 


EFFECT OF SELF-INDUCTION ON RAILWAY MOTOR 
COMMUTATION. 


BY E. H. ANDERSON. 


This paper deals with fundamental features of railway motor 
commutation. Oscillograph records are employed to illustrate 
these features and no mathematical deductions are attempted. 
I would call your attention to the following: 

1. The pressure produced by interrupting the line current 
flowing through the conductors connected to two adjacent com- 
mutator-bars, or what might be termed reactance volts of 
commutation based upon line current. 

2. The pressure produced by interrupting local current which 
is additive to that produced by interrupting the line current, 
and the causes for the local current. 

Direct-current railway motors are usually designed for 500 
volts, having series drum distributed armature windings con- 
nected directly to the commutator; have definite polar projec- 
tions and field-coils, the brushes being fixed in a mechanical 
neutral and suited to operate equally well in both directions of 
rotation. 

Reactance pressure of commutation of line current may be 
calculated directly as any ordinary reactance, depending upon 
the shape of slot, length of iron in armature body, speed, kilo- 
watts, armature diameter, frequency, etc. From any general 
expression for this reactance volts, there will appear in the 
numerator kilowatts and in the denominator amperes; which 
is to say that the greater the amperes, the less the reactance 
volts—at first seemingly absurd, but when it is considered that 
all other values are constant the expression means that the 
greater the amperes the less the pressure, and that the reactance 

379 


380 ANDERSON: RAILWAY MOTOR (May 17 


pressure of commutation of line current decreases as the pres- 
sure of the motor; in brief, this means that a motor of identically 
the same design will commutate better at 250 than at 500 volts. 

This is a matter of everyday OE, experience, and needs no: 
further discussion. 

The point brought out in the above is that high-pressure: 
machines are difficult to build; and good commutation with 
reasonable cost is unfortunately limited to relatively low working 
pressures, low compared with the power involved. 

Taking the frequency of commutation as the relation of the 
number of commutator-bars to the width of brush, a low value 
of reactance volts is calculated. For good commutating ma- 


A 


es Ih 


chines this value is a fraction of a volt. Reactance pressure 
between the commutator and the brush, as indicated by the spark, 
is evidently much higher, and oscillograms hereafter given show 
this to be so. Fig. 1 appears to me to explain this. Esti- 
mating on a uniform change of current throughout the width 
of the brush, we get a maximum value represented by C D. 

Consider that for the first half of the brush the line current is 
being increased by the addition of local current, then the 
pressure across the first half of the brush will be negative; as. 
the commutator bars proceed across the brush the sign of the 
pressure reverses.* In the latter part of the brush the current 


1904.] COMMUTATION. _ 388i 


-decreases, the change in current becoming more and more rapid 
as the bar nears the edge of the brush, until at the point of rup- 
ture the change of current is very great, the frequency thus 
represented being many times that of the frequency indicated 
by the number of commutator-bars to width of brush, conse- 


‘quently we get a value represented by O A instead of the value 
CD) : 


OScILLOGRAM 1. 
General Electric railway motor. Pressure between two exploring 
brushes 7-32 in. apart, one 1-16 in. behind motor brush. 304 amperes 
in field and armature; 453 volts, 482 rev. per min. 


‘Oscillogram 1 shows the pressure between two exploring 
‘brushes, one placed under the brush and the other 1/16 in. 
ahead of the brush. The maximum values are, as indicated, 
‘approximately four volts, and since there are evidently some 
losses in the contacts of the exploring brushes, the real pressure 
may be more than indicated. The motor on which this oscillo- 
gram was taken is rated on the hourly basis at approximately 
300 amperes and 500 volts. The armature is designed with five 
coils—10 conductors—per slot; and while this may apparently 
be a radical distribution of conductors, the values in the oscillo- 
gram of the pressure of commutation over all bars are approxi- 
mately the same. This indicates that even with five coils per 
slot the armature can be so connected as to equalize the commu- 
tation for all bars, and still got the advantages of five coils per 
slot construction. 

The pressure produced by interrupting the local current is of 
course dependent upon the frequency as above outlined in Fig. 
1;in fact the whole current, line and local, produces the.reactance 
volts of commutation. This local current is produced by a pres- 
sure generated in the conductors connected to the commutator- 
‘bars which lie under the brushes. This pressure is due to the 


382 ANDERSON: RAILWAY MOTOR [May 17 


shifting of the field caused by the armature magnetizing effect, 
and is influenced somewhat by the volts per bar of the motor. 
It will be appreciated that this local current must be cut down 
as much as possible, since the brushes are always in mechanical 
neutral, and consequently railway motors have, as a rule, low 
armature turns and very high flux and field turns compared with 
those in the usual direct-current generator. 


OSCILLOGRAM 2. 
General Electric railway motor. Pressure between one brush or motor 
and anexploring brush. 300 amperes; 520-trev.permin. Run asa motor. 


OscILLOGRAM 4. ’ 
General Electric railway motor; 300 amperes in field, 500 rev. per min. 
Carbon brushes removed. Pressure between commutator-bars, 5-6. 


Referring to Oscillogram 2, the minimum pressure between 
the motor brush and the exploring brush is higher than can 
be accounted for by the 7 R drop of line current—evidently 
there is added to the line current enough local current to pro- 
duce this drop. Since in large motors the local copper circuit 
is of low resistance compared to the brush contact, nearly all the 
energy of the local current is delivered as heat on the commu- 
tator. Should the motor be very large, the stability of the field 


1904.] COMMUTATION. 383 


relatively to the armature must be great in order to limit the 
local current to a low value, else the motor will spark and glow 
at the brushes. 

Conversely, on small machines the resistance of the local 
copper circuit may be high compared to the carbon contact re- 
sistance. The same volts induced in the local circuit produced 
by the distortion of the field do not cause proportionately great 
local currents to flow, thus greater reactance pressure and 
greater current density in the brush can be used in design. 

Oscillogram 3 is a record of pressure between two commutator- 
bars with full field excitation, the armature being driven and no 
current flowing through it, showing the distribution of the flux. 


OSCILLOGRAM 3. 
Pressure between commutator-bars 4-5; 300 amperes, 465 volts, 497 
rev. per mun. 


Osc’LLOGRAM 5. 
Pressure between commutator bars 1-2; 90 amperes, 475 volts, 950 
rev. per min. 


Oscillogram 4 is the same as Oscillogram 3 except that the 
armature is loaded and the machine runs as a simple series 
motor with full rated current. Note that the flux is shifted 
slightly and the pressure peaks of commutation are shown near 
the zero line. Several pressure peaks are shown which are evi- 


384 ANDERSON: RAILWAY MOTOR [May 17 


dently caused by the mutual induction, other conductors in the 
same slots being commutated. 

In Oscillograms 3 and 4 two adjacent commutator-bars were 
connected to collector rings and the record of PERS a taken 
between these. 

Oscillogram 5 is taken under the same condition as Oscillogram 
4 except that the load on the motor is slightly less than one-third 
the rating. With one-third excitation the densities are approxi- 
mately one half, and from Oscillograms 4 and 5 it will be seen 
that the distortion of the flux at one-third load is much greater 
than with full load, indicating that the stability of the flux is 
quite essential to good commutation. Theoretically this sta- 
bility can be gotten in two ways: 

1. The usual method of great saturation. 

2. By compensating for the disturbing element (armature re- 
action). 


7 bat 
Y/4 WEE 
Hd NN lite on \ 
fii ify, re vA wits Ata \ Wb cn at 
eines ES ia 
WN SSS AN ph uy 
\ \ SS ae 
WSs AN . “Lyf 
Ss 
ae, 
Df | N ; 
lee! Fug. 2 


Theoretically the latter points to a motor with distributed 
winding on the field, pole-faces of greater pitch, equal density 
over the pole-face, relatively few field turns, and the possibility 
of higher pressure motors. 

Fig. 2 shows the effect of armature m.m.f. when there is no 
main flux and no compensation. 

Oscillogram 6 shows the pressure between two commutator- 
bars when there is full-load current in the armature and no 
current in the field, the motor being driven at approximately 
tated speed. It will be seen that this agrees with Fig. 2. Were 
the armature completely surrounded with iron pole-face, the 


1904.] COMMUTATION. 385 


peak of the wave would occur where the brushes are located. 
The position of the brushes is indicated by the several minor 
peaks of pressure caused by the commutation of the line and 
the large local current. 


OSCILLOGRAM 6. 
Pressure between commutator bars 5-6. No current in field. 300 
amperes in armature, 500 rev. per min. 


OSCILLOGRAM 7. 
General Electric railway motor. Nocurrentinfield. Pressure between 
one brush of motor and an exploring brush; 307 amperes in armature, 
530 rev. fer min, 


Oscillogram 7 indicates very forcibly the action of the brushes 
when running with full current in the armature and no field flux. 
The pressure between the motor brush and the exploring brush 
just ahead of the motor brush is at the minimum, six to eight 
volts, and since only about one volt can be accounted for by 
the J R of the line current, there is probably a density in the 
brush contact six to eight times as great. The brushes under 
test actually get very hot and act badly. It will be seen that 
there is an average drop of about 10 volts and with 300 amperes 
line current will give 3 kw. which will account for the heating 
of the brushes. 

Oscillograms 6 and 7 and Fig. 2 will be referred to later 
where their practical value will be seen. 


386 ANDERSON: RAILWAY MOTOR [May 17 


There is another phase of this subject which is rather new in 
the electrical world and of considerable importance to engineers 
and to operators of large direct-current motors. I refer to the 
proper design of these large direct-current motors so as to 
eliminate as much as possible the tendency of motors to flash- 
over when running at free speeds and light currents, the current 
being interrupted and contact restored again with full pressure 
across the motors. For some time I have had the opportunity 
and pleasure of investigating these phenomena for the General 
Electric Company. The investigation has been continued over 
considerable time, and a great many tests of almost every char- 
acter have been made. A few of the fundamentals will be illus- 
trated by oscillograms. 

Field-coils consisting of ribbon-copper wound into mica- 
insulated brass or metallic spools, the last turn of each section 
riveted to the turn below, fornting a band which holds the 
winding and terminal firmly in place, will, for lack of a better 
name, be called standard fields. We shall also take another 
construction of field winding where the brass or metallic spool 
is not used, or approximately the same condition where the 
spool is cut so as not to form a continuous metallic belt around 
the pole. The last turn in each section instead of being sweated 
and riveted to the turn below is insulated therefrom, thus doing 
away with the copper belt round the pole. Coils constructed 
in this manner, will, for lack of a better name, be called special 
fields. 

It was found that motors with exceedingly good commutation 
at normal loads and even on overloads at rated pressure, and 
motors which would commutate without flashing-over with full- 
load current at double rated voltage, had a peculiar tendency to 
flash-over when the current was changed rapidly or the circuit 
interrupted and made again with full pressure on the motors. 
This phenomenon almost disappeared at heavy loads; that is, at 
low armature speeds, but increased and became serious at light 
free-running speeds; that is, high armature speeds with light 
loads. The flashing pressure sometimes came within the range 
of high sub-station pressure. These phenomena were reproduced 
on the stand in various ways and the flashing points determined 
for a great number of conditions of load, time of interruption, 
character of contact points, etc. The flashing-over could be 
accounted for in two ways: 

1. That the main flux of the motor changed very rapidly 


1904] COMMUTATION 387 


(when current was applied at full pressure) through the frame; 
and since the armature coils lying under the brush would en- 
circle the whole of this flux, a great transformer pressure 
would be induced in these coils causing large local current to 
flow in the coil and through the brush contact. On interrupt- 
ing this current as the coil passed out from under the brush, 
there would be a flash across the mica from bar to bar; and 
there would be sufficient pressure to maintain it, consequently 
the line current would follow the local flash from bar to bar and 
thus flash-over. 

2. That the predominating cause was the slowness of the 
main flux to respond to excitation, allowing a great rush of cur- 
rent. All metallic belts around the main flux acted as short- 
circuited turns and absorbed the excitation, only a small portion 
acting to create the main flux. 

Since there would be little or no main field, the m.m.f. due 
to armature turns would create a considerable field where the 
brushes are located. If the speed were high enough and the 
armature amperes great enough, there would be produced a con- 
siderable e.m.f. in the local circuit under the brush, causing local 
current to flow. Commutation of local and line current would 
tend to cause flashing from bar to bar and a flash-over of the 
motor before the main flux rises to any appreciable value to 
aid in commutation. 

Another way of looking at it is to suppose a motor operated 
at a constant pressure of say 500 volts. to have its field reduced 
to one third or one fourth of its value, the armature being 
speeded up three or four times its full field-speed, and a load of 
two to three times normal current put on the armature. Any 
one familiar with the operation of 500-volt machines will appre- 
ciate at once the likelihood of a flash-over. . 

In order to segregate these causes and find the value of each, 
the following tests were made: 

The railway motor was driven at various speeds, the current 
through the field was interrupted and made with various max- 
imum currents and pressures in the circuit. The armature was 
open-circuited, the brushes, however, being well fitted to the 
commutator. Should causes outlined above in 1 be ruling, 
flashing would be produced. 

The speed and excitation under which these tests were con- 
ducted generated approximately 1500 volts across the commu- 
tator, and throughout the entire tests there was not even the 


388 ANDERSON: RAILWAY MOTOR {May 17 


slightest sign of flashing, showing that the condition outlined in 
1 was not in any way ruling, and that conditions outlined in 2 
were by far the ruling causes of flash-overs. 

The oscillograph was employed to record the current, pressure 
across the armature, and the pressure across the field. The 
tests were taken with standard field and with special fields, and 
are compared on the following oscillograms: an explanation of 
these will suffice to bring out the facts. 


OSCILLOGRAM 8. 
Standard field. Pressure across motor field. 67 amperes, 30 interrup- 
tions per min. 


Oscillogram 8 shows pressure across the standard field when 
current is broken and circuit made again. At A current is 
interrupted and there is self-induction pressure which lingers 
for an appreciable time. At B the circuit is made again, the 
time from A to B is approximately one second, the motor running 
free on the stand at approximately one-third load and at double 
full-load armature speed. 


A 
aeceaniiietiiaeiecabaisetcaia™ saat ~ 


OSCILLOGRAM 9. : 
Special field. Pressure across field of motor. 538 volts, 60 amperes, 
30 interruptions per min. 


Oscillogram 9 is the same as Oscillogram 8 except the field- 
foils are special (all short-circuiting effects removed), the effects 
vf the solid-steel frame, however, remaining. The particular 
point is that the self-induction pressure across the field-coils is 
more than twice as much with special fields as with standard 


1904.] COMMUTATION. 389 


fields, and it will be seen later the maximum current with special 
ficids is about half that of standard fields. 


gt ORE AE LED NESE 


: OscILLoGRAM 10. 
Standard field. 61 amperes, 30 interruptions per min. 


! 

Oscillogram 10 shows the pressure across the armature with 
standard fields. From A to B is about one second. The pres- 
sure gradually fell and at the end of one second there was still 
sufficient flux to give 101 volts, or about one fifth of the field. 
It will be noted that at B a sharp peak occurs which evidently 
is the self-induction pressure of the armature. As soon as the 
current has reached its maximum this pressure is zero. In the 
meantime, however, the main flux is rising slowly so that the 
e.m.f. wave drops down and continues to record th» counter 
e.m.f. due to the main flux of motor. The action will be clearly 
seen by a slight analysis of the curve. 


F a 
fa 


vintir 49. 


OSCILLOGRAM 11. 
Special field. 60 amperes, 30 interruptions per min. 


Oscillogram 11 is the same as Oscillogram 10 except the fields 
are special. Note how rapidly the main flux decreases, the pres- 
sure falls from 538 to 49 volts; to less than 1/10. Note also that 
the armature self-induction pressure record disappears and the 
counter e.m.f. due to main flux rises very rapidly. 

Oscillogram 12 shows the’current in the motor with standard 
fields. At A the current is interrupted; after a lapse of one 


30 ANDERSON: RAILWAY MOTOR |May 17 


second the circuit was again made at B. The motor was running 
free at 61 amperes and when circuit was made again the current 
rose to a maximum of 303 amperes, a ratio of about five times 
vhe minimum and about 50% more than the hourly rating of 
the motor. 


OSCILLOGRAM 12. ? 
Standard field. 518 volts, 30 interruptions per min. 


x 


ep nelanceicowpenacieincraemsngianitn oe 


OSCILLOGRAM 18. 
Special field. 588 volts, 30 interruptions per min. 


Oscillogram 13 shows same as Oscillogram 12 except that the 
fields are special. The current was interrupted at A and after 
a lapse of one second the circuit was made at B. The notice- 
able feature is that the maximum current is less than one-half 
that in Oscillogram 12 and only about 70% of the rated current 
of the motor. 

Compare Oscillograms 1 and 7. In 1 the motor is operating 
on a steady full load. The pressure of commutation indicated 
is in the neighborhood of 3.5. In Oscillogram 7 there is no field 
excitation and simply the full-load current is passed through the 
armature, the armature being driven at approximately full-load 
speed and the pressure from brush to commutator shows 10 to 
12 volts. Should the speed have been 2.5 times the full-load 
speed, as occurs often in practice with the minimum free-running 
current and maximum current passing through the armature 
50% more to twice as great as the full-load current, it is reason- 


1904.] COMMUTATION 391 


able to estimate that the pressure between brush and commu- 
tator bar of 45 to 60 volts may exist, or 12 to 15 times as great 


as when that motor is carrying a steady full-load current at full 
field and full pressure. 


|For discussion on this paper, see page 443.] 


A paper presented at the 187th Meeting ot 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, May 17-18, 1904. 


Copyright, 1904. By A.I, E.E 


ON THE CALCULATION OF LINE BATTERIES. 


BY W. E. WINSHIP. 


Storage-batteries have found a legitimate use in electric rail- 
way work for the purpose of maintaining the line pressure at 
points distant from generating stations. There is at present 
very little literature on this subject, and it is the purpose of the 
present article to discuss the calculation of such battery installa- 
tions, and to compare in a general way the results with those 
which may be obtained by the use of copper. Independently 
of maintaining the pressure on the line, obviously something 
toward load regulation is obtained through the use of batteries. 

Line batteries are installed in either of two ways; they may 
be fed over a boosted feeder with the average current which 
would be demanded from a sub-station maintained at the same 
pressure as the average pressure of the battery, the latter charg- 
ing or discharging the difference between the instantaneous 
current and that supplied over the boosted feeder, or they may 
be simply floated on the line; that is, connected across 
the feeder and rail, in which case the battery will charge 
when the demand on the line is light and discharge when it is 
heavy. Such floating batteries are a close analogy to an air 
chamber, or a stand-pipe on a pipe line. Obviousiy, if the de- 
mand varies but very slightly, there is no occasion for such a 
reservoir; just as obviously if the demand is variable it would be 
a decided advantage. 

The calculation of batteries to be fed over a boosted feeder 
from the power-house is extremely simple when the section 
operated on the battery is insulated from the other feeders from 
the power-house. We have simply to install the number of cells 
corresponding to the average pressure desired at the battery 


393 


394 WINSHIP. CALCULATION OF [May 17 


location, and, when we determine the average demand at this 
point, decide on the size of feeder advisable and hence determine 
the amount of ‘‘ boost.’”’ The size of the feeder should involve, 
however, the consideration of losses in transmission, and a bal- 
ancing of this loss against the amount necessary to expend for 
copper. 

With a floating battery the determination is not quite so 
obvious, and the writer purposes to take up this calculation 
more in detail. 

We consider, first, the case of a concentrated load at a point 
between two stations at different pressures. Let V, be the 
pressure of Station 1; V, that of Station 2; / the load;r the re- 


We 
a 


dé TOE 


sistance between Station 1 and the load; s the resistance between 
Station 2 and the load; R, the total resistance; J , and J, the 
currents furnished by Stations 1 and 2 respectively. Then by 
a consideration of the drops from 1 and 2 we have 


TL = S LoVe ea see 
I,+1I, = I; hence 


Se ae 


[el = Va 
(2) ie - 


If we have distributed loads of 7,, 7,,7,,..7, amperes and the 
resistances from Stations 1 and 2 and the points of location of — 
these loads are r,, 72, — Tn, 51, So, Sg. .Sn, Tespectively where m+ 5m 


1904.] EINE BARLERIES. 395 


= I, the resistance between Stations 1 and 2, a generalization 
of equations (1) and (2) will be 


Se a) 


pues tine aie 
(4) I, a 
Obviously, 

rai Atend a! 
(5) ee eee ae aa 


R 


where / is the sum of all the currents. It is possible to interpret 
these equations very simply in a geometrical diagram. 


A a B 
ye ee ee 
t ee P 
G 126 
In the figure C G represents /, the total current; G H is the re- 
sistance Ki AC = IN =k] = a a a current which 


would flow from Station 1 to Station 2 with no load on the line. 
G D is the diagonal of the figure D HG,andG J = J rzt/S 1. 
The point / thus corresponds to the center of gravity of the loads. 
We have then LN = 1,andK L=TI1,. The application of this 
diagram we shal! take up below. 

Preliminary to the determination of the proper location of a 
floating battery we shall next. consider the problem: with a defi- 
nite current, 7, on the line at various points what is the value 
and location of minimum pressure? We preserve the preceding 
notation. 

We have as the drop in pressure from Station 1 


Deere, 
or from equation (1) inserting the value of J, 


Bees i te Vea Vall 
D=- + 1, ie + See | 


396 WINSHIP: CALCULATION OF [May 17 


and therefore, as the pressure on the line at any point, 


oom | eS sy 
Va Vee —D= R Shey E = Taran +V, 
This equation has the form 

y= A?4+B2£4+C 


and represents a parabola whose axis is paralleltoO 7. Ifwe 
make the substitution x = «+e we may make this equation take: 
the form 


y= APE 
Bhd Pie 4), 
(6) if -3, |: ae eee 
and . 
PM Pat CV aa) 
(7) POS a en ee 


E is then the minimum pressure on the line with the current /,. 
and ¢ is its distance from Station lin ohms. Beyond Station 2 
the drop will be simply the resistance multiplied by the current. 

In general, with definite feeder and return circuit the best re- 
sults as far as line pressure is concerned will be obtained by 
making the minimum pressure with maximum demand between 
Stations 1 and 2 equal to the minimum beyond 2. With a 
number of cars on the line it is not of course sufficient to con- 
sider the total current as concentrated at the center of gravity of 
all the currents and then calculate the drop to this center of 
gravity; determined in this manner it would be much too large. 
We must consider the separate currents and then determine 
the minimum pressure. The best point of location of the bat- 


1904.) LINE BATTERIES. 397. 


tery is, in any case, readily determined. It w'll plainly depend 
on grades and accelerations, but it may be said that the point 
is ordinarily between 0.66 and 0.75 of the distance from the 
power-house to the end of the line. 

The open-circuit pressure of a battery varies from 2.05 to 2.12 
volts per cell according to the acid density, temperature, and 
state of charge. It is usual for regulation work to allow a bat- 
tery to float in approximately a three-quarter charged condition 
as the efficiency is best in the neighborhood of this point and 
the pressure fluctuations on charge and discharge are less. We 
shall take 2.1 volts per cell as the proper value on open circuit— 
it is actually a trifle less—and assume the battery as equivalent 
to a station operating at a pressure of 2.1 times the number of 
cells. The pressure will ordinarily vary on charge and discharge 
from 3% to 6% above and below this value, but since the battery 
will charge and discharge by correspondingly less amounts, our 
calculations will not be vitiated as far as the determination of 
the number of cells is concerned by taking the above value. 
We shall afterward point out the effect of the pressure variations. 

Floating batteries are quite often installed, so that over a 
complete cycle of the car schedule they experience neither a 
net charge nor discharge excepting a certain amount necessary 
to make up the internal loss of the battery; this is, however, 
an extremely small amount, as the ampere-hour efficiency of a 
storage-battery is extremely good. In order for a battery to 
operate in this way all of the conditions of operation, including 
schedule, station pressure, feeder, etc., are fixed, and if any of 
these conditions are departed from the battery will either charge 
or discharge. It is obviously possible with a regular daily 
schedule, which may however vary from time to time during 
the day, so to install a battery that the net charge during the 
lighter hours will equal or slightly exceed the net discharge. 
This may be done by keeping the power-house at approxi- 
mately a constant average pressure with a varying schedule, 
provided the battery has the proper number of cells; if, however, 
the net discharge over any maximum period exceeds the 
ampere-hour capacity of the battery,it will be necessary either 
to vary the pressure at the power-house or vary the number of. 
cells of the battery with varying schedule conditions. 

In this connection it is proper to note that the capacity of 
the battery should be reckoned approximately at the rate cor- 
responding to the duration of all the net discharges, and not at 


398 WINSHIP: CALCULATION OF [May 17 


the rates at which the separate discharges occur. This is due 
to the recovery element of a battery; that is, if a battery is 
discharged at a high rate for a short time and then allowed to 
recover, and the same cycle is repeated a number of times, then 
the ampere-hour capacity of the battery on this work very 
nearly approximates the capacity at the rate corresponwine to 
the total time elapsing. 

Quite usually the conditions of operation are that in early 
morning and late at night the schedule is less frequent than 
during the major part of the day; during this latter time the 
loads vary at different times. Generally the calculation of a 
battery for this sort of schedule would be based on the deter- 
mination of an average running current per car under different 
conditions. These values would be most suitably determined 
from station wattmeter readings, dividing by the pressure of the 
station, time elapsing between readings, and the number of cars. 
The battery should then be so calculated that it receives a net 
charge during the early morning and late at night, floating dur- 
ing the greater part of the day and discharging during the max- 
imum hours. The net charge should slightly exceed the net 
discharge to make up for the inefficiency of the battery. 

With reference to the formulas (3) and (4) and their geomet- 
rical interpretation in the diagram, Fig. 2, it is obvious that if 
we base our calculations on the number of cars distributed on 
the line, each taking the average current per car, then a battery 
installed at the point JJ, of average voltage V,, so determined 
that (V,—V,)/R=J/K = J © (hat is}so thatek comcides 
with L), will neither experience a net average charge nor dis- 
charge over an interval corresponding to a complete cycle in car 
schedule. If during any instant the current demand of the cars 
departs from the average values then the battery will charge 
or discharge according to the variation of these currents. It 
will be noticed that the center of gravity oscillates in general 
between certain limits even if we assume that the cars all take 
a constant average current. In any particular case it will ap- 
pear, whether it suffices to take the point J as the average of 
the centers of gravity, or, if it will be necessary to take several 
different positions, according to the number of cars on the sec- 
tion J to JJ. In case the number of cars on the section varies 
from time to time it is convenient to calculate separately the 
components of the battery discharge and obtain the mean. In 
the calculations all cars beyond the battery are to be considered 
as concentrated at Station 2. 


1904] LINE BATTERIES 299 


If a battery is to float absolutely; that is, stay at the same 
state of charge, an extremely simple pressure diagram may be 
drawn: 


| 
| 
a 


B /) i 


Make AB=V,,5D = wend ie Vk Je then GeV 5 


r| 


rt 
1 


The problem of a floating battery may take either of the three 
forms: (a) with a given feeder andrail circuit and definite schedule 
determine the pressure at which a battery will float; (b) assuming 
a definite pressure at the battery location, with a definite sched- 
ule, how much copperis necessary? or(c) withdefinite copper and 
return circuit and a.definite schedule what will be the battery 
charge or discharge? We are in a position to solve eachof these 
problems, or a combination of them. 

In (a) we determine the center of gravity of the average run- 
ning currents; then in the diagram we obtain /K = J L. 
From the relation {| K.="j/ £2 = (V,—V,)/R we obtain V,. 
In (b), similarly, we obtain / L and from the same relation deter- 
mine R. In (c) we obtain / K = (V,—V3)/K and obtain from 
the diagram K L = J] L— ] K, the battery discharge. We have 
the possibility of regulating arbitrarily either singly, or in com- 
bination, V, or V,, perhaps even R, to accommodate. for any 
schedule variation which we do not wish to impose on the bat- 
tery capacity. To regulate V, we either cut in or out a certain 
number of cells or arrange certain cells for grouping, either in 
series or parallel. 

The diagram, Fig. 2 shows also the extent to which the total 
instantaneous current demand comes on‘the power-house if we 
draw the diagram for the instantaneous currents of the separate 
cars. Very clearly, the nearer a heavy load is to the power- 
house the larger is the portion of this load furnished by it. If 


400 WINSHIP: CALCULATION OF _ [May 17 


the heavy currents are demanded near to or beyond the battery, 
the latter furnishes the major portion of the load. If grades and 
starts occur near the end of a line the battery will very materially 
steady the power-house load; and under these conditions it will 
often be possible to carry the load with less units, raising the 
load-factor of those in operation, and thereby decrease mate- 
rially the cost of power production. The pressure variation of 
the battery is of particular influence in this determination. 
The power-house load will be greater than if the pressure did not 
fall as it actually does, and in determining the amount that 
either the battery or power-house does under definite conditions 
the actual value of V, must be assumed approximately. 

In case a floating battery is to be installed between two 
power-stations, the calculation would be as follows:—calculate 
the currents ] L for the battery and each power-house sep- 
arately; if J is the sum of these two currents, and the battery 
is to float, then we must make 


(8) V, fies, Vz) aE (V, — Vs) — 


R, ie t 


where V3 is the battery pressure. 

The condition that in addition to floating on a feeder system, 
the battery receives current over a boosted feeder, with the sam 
track return, is also very simply calculated. : 


Preserving the previous notation with the exception that we 
indicate the feeder and ground return resistances separately by 
subscripts , and , respectively, and indicating the booster pres- 


1904.] LINE BATTERIES. 401 


* 


sure by V,, the resistance of the separate feeder by r’ and its 
current by J’, we shall have in the network the currents marked 
in the diagram, where also, (by a consideration of pressure drop), 


Vea Vo Ger) lr, 
SV Cig) io +55 1" 
Or writing 73.477, = 7;5,+38, = s:andr,+s, = Kg, the resistance 
of the return, we obtain 
(erty ss WV eV RT 
together with (10) 7,+/, = 1. 
The solution of these equations is 


ist+[(Vi-= Vi) —RK IY} 


(11) RUN R 
on ese ora) 
(12) 2 R | 


Where there are several loads, 7,, 7,, —72, the generalization of 
this solution is 
oe er Stats Wr Va) = Tt 
(13) f R 


{2 1, ty LV Ve) alte [yt 
R 


(14) eae 


The condition that the battery should float is 7, = J’, In- 
serting this in (14) we obtain 
Leg (VV) 

(15) (R—R,) 

The modification in the diagram, Fig. 2 is to make the line 
AB = R—R,. It should be noticed that X is the resistance of 
the circuit exclusive of the boosted feeder. 

The solution of our problem is therefore obtained by finding 
the value of 7, and supplying this current over the auxiliary 


I,= 


feeder. 
The booster pressure we obtain from the diagram since we have 


Vet Ves tel ot VY, +521’ —1) 4 rt 2) 


or assuming /’ = /,, 


402 WINSHIP LINE BATTERIES. {May 17 


Generalizing for a number of cars on the line, the amount of 

‘“Doost ’’ is therefore 
Va= 1, +4 %41-14-VD 

We have thus developed a method of caiculating line batteries 
under various conditions. To compare absolutely the results 
obtainable with copper and with batteries is impossible without 
taking up each problem and investigating it for itself, as there 
are too many factors entering into the comparison. We should 
consider first the costs of copper alone, and copper with bat- 
teries for equivalent line voltages; also the interest and depre- 
ciation in the two cases, together with the transmission losses. 
The battery should be credited with the influence which - the 
load equalization effected would have on the cost of power pro- 
duction; and, also, the emergency value of the battery, in case 
of temporary breakdown, should .receive consideration. This 
latter value is extremely difficult to express in a money equiva- 
lent. In some cases, however, it is so important as far to out- 
weigh any question of economy of operation. It may be stated 
that with fairly long lines, say lines whose ends are six, to ten or 
twelve miles distant from a power-house, and if the cars run 
are relatively few in number and heavy, a battery installation 
will generally cost less than equivalent copper. If grades and 
starts occur, principally distant fr»m the power-house, the value 
of the battery as a load equalizer would nearly always justify 
its installation. 

In any event, a careful comparison of the results which can 
be obtained with batteries should be made with the other feasible 
ways of obtaining the desired ends. In case of comparison 
with sub-station installations we must not forget that the bat- 
tery requires almost no attendance in comparison with an alter- 
nating-current sub-station. 


[For discussion on this paper, see page 457.] 


A paper presented at the 187th Meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, May 17-18, 1904. 


Copyright, 1904. By A. I.E. E. 


WAVE FORM VARIATIONS OF A LONG-DISTANCE LINE. 


BY GEORGE H. ROWE. 


The map, Fig. 5, shows the lines of the Standard Electric 
Company’s system on which the following oscillographic curves 
were taken. At the head of the system, Electra, the power- 
house contains five 2000-kw. three-phase generators of theS.K.C. 
inductor type, each giving 2200 volts at 60 cycles persec. These 
generators are supposed to have an inherent regulation of 3% 
on full non-inductive load, and 15.5% on full kilovolt-ampere 
load, 70% power-factor. The normal exciting current for full 
load, 100% power-factor, is 150 amperes at 2200 volts, with a 
limiting field-current of 250 amperes. 

The Bay Circuit shown on Fig. 5 is fed from two banks of 
three transformers each, both high- and low-pressure circuits of 
which are /A-connected. The ratio of transformation is 16.4, 
and therefore the line pressure is above or below 36 000, depend- 
ing on the load and power-factor of the system. Besides the 
Bay Circuit, several mining circuits extend to neighboring 
mining camps in Ammador and Calaveras counties. The max- 
imum length of these is about 30 miles. They are operated inde- 
pendently of the Bay Circuit at about 17000 volts. The Bay 
Circuit lines, consisting of aluminum cables, extend to San José, 
a distance of 113.6 miles; to Oakland by way of Mission San José, 
a distance of 128.8 miles, and to San Francisco by way of Alviso 
_a distance of 153 miles. The calculated charging current of the 
system at 40 000 volts is about 30.3 amperes on the assumption 
of a sine wave. ~-From the generators this would mean 500 am- 
peres line current. 

In Fig. 6 will be found curves of observations taken on January 
16, 1904, at Electra. The power curve is derived from 15-min- 

403 


404 ROWE: WAVE FORM VARIATIONS OF {May 17 


ute readings of the integrating wattmeters and is probably 
considerably in error, both on account of the manner of taking 
and on account of the large leading current. 

It is difficult to give an accurate idea concerning the nature 
of the load. At Stockton are two 150-kw. synchronous motor- 
generator sets. The San José division contains one 250-kw. and 


» 
»> 


a 


Be 
ea 
re 
DE 


QO: 


pe 
ee 
re 
> 


Fog ’ Fig 2 Fig. 3 Fig. 4. 
Elects a Sam Jase Staniovd Saw Pvawces co 


one 150-kw. synchronous motor-generator set, both used for 
street railway and general power work, the generators being 
operated in parallel with a storage-battery. The direct-current 
motors range in size from 0.5 to 20 horse power and aggre- 
gate about 500 horse power. There are also induction motors 
operating from the lighting circuits, ranging in size from one to 


1904.] LONG-DISTANCE LINE. 405 


75 horse power, ar’? aggregating about 300 horse power. The 
total peak supplied to the San José sub-station is about 1000 
kilowatts. 

The San Mateo division is operated from the sub-station at 
Redwood. Distribution is made at 6000 volts, two-phase, to 


| 

/ 2 ff ' 
{2 Sf" | 
\ SH Bativia | 
IS, “as ' 


Dyeavitie \ 
RY Elniira { 
° , A WN 


io 
{lission S.Jose 


& WA 


OF LONG DISTANCE ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION =) 
IW CALIFORNIA 

STANDARD ELECTRIC CO'S LINES appa 

BAY GOUNTIES POWER CO’S LINES 


Railroads peptone 
SCALE OF MILES 


coy TO 20 3 
Copyright 1901, by Stanley Electric Miz. 
Relics mv ie TEP ittstield Mass. 


neighboring small towns. Induction motors in this division 
range in size from one to thirty horse power, and aggregate about 
500 horse power, constituting chiefly a day load. The maximum 
load supplied to the station occurs between the hours of five and 
nine p. m., giving a peak of about 400 kilowatts. 


406 ROWE: WAVE FORM VARIATIONS OF [May 17 


At the San Francisco sub-station, the low-tension circuits are 
‘Y.connected with the neutral grounded, and supply power at 
4000 volts between lines to station B, and to station C of the 
‘San Francisco Gas and Electric Company. At station C are two 
-500-kw. synchronous motor-generator sets, and at station B 
there is one 400-kw. synchronous motor-generator set. Station 
B also contains two 1200-kw. and one 600-kw. G. E. revolving- 
field generators, one or more of which were operated in parallel 
during these tests with the Standard system, being thrown in 
at apout 5 30 p. m. and off at about 10 30 p.m. The peak was 
about 2000 kilowatts. These were the conditions during the 
tests. Since the consolidation of the Standard and Bay Counties 
‘systems, the above description does not hold. 


=e weal Ge 
Fig. 6 
Electra Jan. 16, ’04 


5 6 
Hour 


The instrument with which the following tests were made was 
the well known Blondel oscillograph. Briefly, it consists of two 
thin strips of soft iron stretched vertically between the poles of 
a powerful permanent magnet. _ Very small mirrors are attached 
to these strips, and each strip and mirror is placed in a tube 
containing glycerine or vaseline oil. The natural frequency of 
the instrument as given by the maker is about 1000 cycles per sec. 
About each of the mirrors as centers, two bobbins or coils serve 
to produce fields, one proportional to the current, and the other 
proportional to the electromotive force. The current coil re- 
quired about 10 amperes to produce a convenient deflection on 
the plate, and the electromotive force about 0.333 ampere. A 
diagram through a vertical section of the instrument is shown 


1904.) LONG-DISTANCE LINE. 407 


in Fig. 7. Light from the arc A passes through the slits S, 
through the small lens Lin the oil tube to the mirror M, then 
through the cylindrical lens C to the vibrating mirror V and 
thence to the ground-glass screen or photographic plate DG. 
The mirror V vibrates so as to produce motion of translation of 
the point of light from D to G, the vibration being produced by 
the cam K operated by means of a small synchronous motor P. 
The apparatus is equipped with an electrical shutter which cuts 
off the return curve from G to D and further allows the taking of 
photographs. 

The apparatus was connected in the following tests as in Fig. 
8. A non-inductive resistance R consisting of incandescent 
lamps was placed in series with the pressure coil, and the current 
coil was shunted across the non-inductive resistance R’ through 
the series resistance R”. 


EtGends 


This apparatus was tried on generators of known wave form, 
on non-inductive loads, on leading and lagging currents supplied 
to a synchronous converter, and found to give consistent results. 

During November 1903, a large number of observations was 
made at Stanford University of the electromotive force waves 
from the lines of the Standard company, which supplies the 
university with light and power. It soon became apparent that 
the wave form varied considerably, the distortion varying ap- 
parently with the time of day, and hence probably with the load. 

On Saturday November 28th, negatives were made at ap- 
proximately 30-minute intervals, beginning at 300 p.m. and 
ending at 12 30a.m. on Nov. 29th. Tracings of these waves 
are shown in Fig. 3, the time of taking being given at the left of 


408 ROWE: WAVE FORM VARIATIONS OF [May 17 


each curve. They were taken across the terminals of one of two 
transformers arranged to supply a 120-volt, two-phase syn- 
chronous converter, the synchronous converter being discon- 
nected. The electromotive force varied between the limits of 
88 and 103 volts during the test. Counting from the power- 
house, this pressure was the result of four transformations; 
namely, from the generator at 2200 volts to 36000 volts at 
Electra; from 36 000 to 6000 volts at Redwood sub-station, and 
also a phase transformation from three-phase to two-phase; 


CurrentCoit 


Pressure Coil 


Fic. 8 


from 6000 volts to 2300 at Stanford power-house; and from 
2300 volts to 90 volts in the transformer from which readings 
were taken. The original curve taken at 715 p.m. is repro- 
duced in Fig. 9. This curve was enlarged photographically, so 
that the length of one cycle was 2z inches when its equation 
was found to be 

y = 1.718 sin (6 — 0° 20’) +0.063 sin (30+177° 31’) 

+0.138 sin (50 — 29° 15’) +.0.028 (76 — 90°) + 0.001 sin 

(96 — 90°) 


1904.] LONG-DISTANCE LINE. 409 


The positive and negative halves of the wave are not quite the 
same, due probably to a slight pumping of the synchronous 
motor operating the vibrating mirror. The above equation 
represents two half-waves similar to the positive half-wave. It 
will be noticed that the 12 30 wave approaches sine-wave form. 

On Thursday December 31st 1903, the waves represented 
in Fig. 2 were taken at San José. The pressure coil of the in- 
strument was placed across the 2300-volt mains through lamps 
in series, and the current coil was shunted across a non-inductive 
resistance placed inside the A. The distortion first appeared 
at 4 36, when the lighting load began to come on, the day being 
dark and rainy. This curve together with one taken at 7 28 
are reproduced in Figs. 10 and 11. The wave taken at 7 28 
was enlarged so that one wave length was 2z inches in length, 


TOP 
—— 
TOP 


TOP. 
9 10 11 


and analyzed graphically, for the first three harmonics. The 
ee is as follows: 
= 2.89 sin (@— 17’) + .0283 sin (30+ 56° 58’) 
fe 22 sin (50+ 180° 6’) 

The small motor operating the mirror pumped badly. The 
above equation shows a 9.7% third harmonic and a 7.6% fifth 
harmonic. Since synchronous-motor load nredciuinated the 
current leads by a small angle. 

On Saturday January 16th 1904, the curves shown in Fig. 1 
were taken at Electra. The connections were the same as those 
at San José, the electromotive force being taken across the 2300- 
volt mains and the current being shunted across a non-inductive 
resistance inside the A. The pressure waves show little varia- 
tion throughout the night. From 245 p.m. until 1200 mid- 
night two generators were in parallel. At 210 p.m. and at 
200 a.m. are shown the wave forms of a single generator. 
The original curves taken at 2 10 p. m. when the load was light, 
and at 741 p.m. when the peak occurred, are shown in Figs. 


410 ROWE. WAVE FORM VARIATIONS OF [May 17 


12 and 13. Large leading current is shown in both. The aver- 
age output at the peak is 3700-kw., the line current 1150 
amperes and the pressure 2280 volts. The power-factor by switch- 
board instruments would therefore be 80%, indicating a lead of 
37 degrees. The curve, Fig. 13, shows greater lead than this. 
The calculated charging current for the Bay Circuit is about 
30.3 amperes on the assumption of a sine wave with a corre- 
sponding generator current of 500 amperes. The line current 
at 210 p.m. was 550 amperes. The power-factors figured from 
the curves and from instrument readings do not agree. The 
curves show a gradual change in lead angle from 2 10 to 7 41 
while the wattmeters indicate only a small change in power- 
factor. The wattmeters probably do not indicate correctly on 
the very large leading current. 

In Fig. 14 are shown the waves,of electromotive force and 
current supplying the mining circuits at 17 000 volts, the lagging 
induction-motor load neutralizing the charging current. 


TOP 
— 


TOR, TOP,, 
13 14 
2 


The curves reproduced in Fig. 4 were taken at the San Fran- 
cisco sub-station on Feb. 6th. The transformers, as before 
stated, are here Y-connected to the 4000-volt mains of the San 
Francisco Gas and Electric Company. The pressure coil was 
connected between the neutral and one line, the current coil 
being shunted across a non-inductive resistance as in the pre- 
ceding cases. The original curve reproduced in Fig. 15 was 
taken at 740 p.m. The last wave taken at 1 30 is seen to be 
practically the generator wave as shown at 210, Fig. 1. Al- 
though these observations were not taken simultaneously, load 
conditions were probably nearly the same for all of the four sets. 
The load curves also were much the same as those plotted for 
Jan. 16th. 

Figs. 2 and 4 are seen to e similar. Had a fourth set been 
taken at Redwood from the three-phase circuit, it would have 
been probably similar to 2 and 4. Pressures corresponding to 


1904.] LONG-DISTANCE LINE. 41) 


the waves as given in Figs. 1, 2, 3, and 4are given in the following 
table: 


Electra. San José. Stanford. San Francisco. 
2200 2200 98 2500 
2200 2240 96 2500 
2200 2240 103 2500 
2200 2220 95 2500 
2200 2220 92.5 2500 
2200 2300 90 2520 
2200 2340 88.5 2600° 
2300 2300 89 2600 
2300 2300 89 2600 
2300 2300 89 2600 
2300 2320 90.5 2600 
2280 2340 90 2590 
2280 2320 95 2500 
2280 2300 96 2500 
2280 2220 94 2500 
2280 
2280 
2280 
2200 
2200 
2200 


While taking observations at San José, there was considerable 
pulsation on the line, especially at 6 38, due to the generators 
of the San Francisco Gas and Electric Co. which were operating 
in parallel. The effect as observed on the ground-glass screen 
of the instrument was a see-sawing of the two peaks of the 
wave: when the amplitude of one increased, that of the other 
diminished, and the reverse. This phenomenon suggested that 
perhaps the distortion was entirely due to the influence of the 
San Francisco generators This assumption is, however, not 
borne out by Fig. 16 taken at San Francisco with the generators 
disconnected. The wave form of the San Francisco generators 
is shown in Fig. 17. A moving film attachment to the instru- 
ment would give much valuable information on surging caused 
by switching, short circuits, or pulsations due to any cause. 

The effect of the variable wave form in low-tension circuits 
as shown in Fig. 3 on the accuracy of an induction meter was 
investigated and found to be negligible. It is, however, prob- 
able that the accuracy would be considerably affected on wave 
forms like those shown in Figs. 2 and 4, depending on the ampli- 
tude and phase relations of the harmonics. 

The variation of the core losses has not yet been determined. 
The ratio of maximum to virtual in curve 7 28, San José, is 1.4, 


412 ROWE: WAVE FORM VARIATIONS OF [May 17 


and the ratio in curve taken at 11 p. m. is 1.55, indicating a 10%, 
variation and therefore, an inverse variation in core loss. Maxi- 
mum pressures as derived either from spark determination or 
from transformer ratio may also be considerably in error. 

There is reason to believe that greater variations occur on 
long lines which are more fully loaded. The large wattless cur- 
rents sometimes observed in synchronous motors and synchron- 
ous. converters with fields adjusted for minimum current are 
probably due to wave-form differences. These together with 
pulsation difficulties could be satisfactorily observed with a 
moving-film oscillograph. 

Where so many disturbing elements are present it is difficult 
to select the predomniating cause of distortion. Doubtless it is 
due to the influence of synchronous motors of dissimilar wave 
form, to alternators of dissimilar‘wave form, and largely to the 


TOP 
— TOP. . 
hs 


Ph Pf Ad 


16 


pulsation of reactance. Mr. Pikler* has shown that when a 
generator gives sine wave form, variation of resistance inter- 
pesed between generator and transformer, the latter working on 
normal voltage, produces distortion of wave form in the trans- 
former secondary. Similarly figures 1, 2, 4 and 6, show that 
with sine wave form at the generator, distortion in the 2300- 
volt secondary varies with the line drop. 

The following summary of conclusions is suggested for con- | 
sideration: 

1. Advisability of substituting induction motors for syn- 
chronous motors on lines with large charging current, and the 
use of the latter as synchronous compensators properly dis- 
tributed. 


2. The impossibility of designing machines to suit all wave 


forms. 

3. The oscillograph offers the best means of studying varia- 
tions in wave form, amplitude factor, surgings, pumping, etc. 

* See Elec. World, Aug. 8, 1903. 


’ 


1904.) LONG-DISTANCE LINE. ce 


4. The best form of oscillograph for this work is the moving- 
film or falling-plate type, without the synchronous motor attach- 
ment. It should be insulated for use on high pressures, and 
fitted with non-inductive metallic resistances. 

5. The variation in amplitude factor in a long line may be 
considerable. 

6. Core-loss variation may also be considerable. 

7..The charging current may differ from that calculated on 
the assumption of a sine law. 

8. Assumption of sine-wave form on long lines and applied 
to insulator and insulation testing may lead to error. 

9. Variation of wave form partly due to distorting effect of 
hysteresis loop under different conditions of load. 

The writer wishes to acknowledge the courtesy of Professor 
J. N. LeConte in allowing the use of his harmonic analyser, and 
‘for valuable assistance in its use. The writer also wishes to 
acknowledge the assistance of Mr. Joseph Mini, Jr., whose ex- 
‘perience in high-pressure work rendered his services particularly 
efficient. 


414 ROWE: WAVE FORM VARIATIONS OF 
APPENDIX. 


In an article by the writer on Wave Form Variations, 
the prediction was made that the core losses in apparatus op- 
erated from the lines of the Standard System would vary 10% 
under normal conditions of operation due to change in form 
factor of the electromotive force wave. 

To verify this statement the following tests were made, 
June 17, 1904, on a 300-kw. Stanley transformer. Pressure 
from the standard line was applied at 2300 volts to the trans- 
former through an induction regulator, by means of which the 
pressure was maintained constant. The core loss was meas- 
ured by means of a Weston wattmeter supplied with a non- 
inductive multiplier. The speed of a synchronous motor run- 
ning light was used to determine any variation of the frequency. 
Pressure was applied to the transformer 24 hours before taking 
observations, water being allowed to flow through the cooling 
coils until temperature conditions were constant. 

The following readings were taken: 


Time Volts Speed Temp. fahr. Kilowatts 
9 00 2300 518 94 5.92 
9 35 2300 el Oe 94 5.92 
10 05 2300 518 94 5.92 
10 35 2300 520 94 5.72 
11 00 2300 519 94 5.72 
11 30 2300 519 94 5.92 
11 55 2300 520 95 6.02 
12 55 2300 518 96 6.12 
i Bass 2300 520 96 5.92 
1 55 2300 520 96 6.12 
2E25 2300 519 97 6.12 
3.00 2300 520 97 6.12 
3 30 2300 518 98 6.12 
4 00 2300 519 98 6.12 
4 30 2300 519 98 6.32 
4 55 2300 519 98 6.12 
5 30 2300 520 98 6.12 
6 05 2300 520 98 6.12 
6 30 2300 520 OS 6.12 
7 00 2300 520 98 6.12 
7 30 2300 520 98 Gal2 
8 00 2300 520 98 6.02 
8 30 2300 — 520 98 5.92 
9 00 2300 520 99 5.92 
9 30 2300 520 102 6.00 
10 00 2300 520 100 6.02 


LONG-DISTANCE LINE, 415 


AP PEND IX, 
Time Volts Speed Temp. fahr, Kilowatts 
10 30 2300 520 100 5.92 
11 00 2300 520 99 5.96 
ial SO) 2300 520 100 5.94 
1 00 2300 520 98 5.9 
2 00 2300 515 96 5.82 
3 00 2300 518 94 5.9 
4 00 2300 519 94 5, 72 
ONO) 2300 519 93 Siete 
6 00 2300 519 92 5.82 
6 30 2300 518 > Re 5.9 
7 00 2300 519 94 5.87 
7 30 2300 520 94 5.9 
8 00 2300 520 94 5.92 
8 30 2300 519 93 5.92 
9 00 2300 520 93 Bs 


The results show a total variation in core loss of 10% of the 
mean value. If correction is made for the variation of tem- 
perature on the assumption of 8% variation in core loss for 
40° fahr. variation in temperature, the variation due to variable 
wave form is increased to 10.8%. The variation in speed is 
insignificant. 


[For discussion on this paper, see page 469.] 


A paper presented at the 187th Mceting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, May 17-18, 1904. a 
Copyright 1904. By A.I.E.E. 


DATA AND TESTS ON A 10000 CYCLE-PER-SECOND 
ALTERNATOR. 


BY B. G. LAMME,. 


In the early part of 1902, M. Leblanc, the eminent French 
engineer, was in this country, and spent considerable time at the 
Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Company’s work. at 
East Pittsburg. M. Leblanc was very much interested in cer- 
tain special telephone work, and in connection with such work 
he desired for experimentation a current of very high frequency. 
He took up with the writer the question of building a successful 
alternator for generating current at frequencies between 5000 
and 10000 cycles per second. He was informed that the ma- 
chine would necessarily be of very special construction, but that 
it was not an impossible machine. Later he took up the 
matter with Mr. Westinghouse, who, upon receiving satisfactory 
assurance that such a machine was possible, advised that the 
generator be built. A preliminary description of the general 
design was given M. Leblanc before he returned to Paris. He 
was somewhat surprised at certain of the features proposed, 
especially at the fact that an iron-cored armature was consid- 
ered feasible for a frequency of 10 000 cycles per second. 

The machine was designed and built on practically the lines 
of the preliminary description furnished M. Leblanc. The fre- 
quency being so abnormal, the writer believes that many features 
in the machine, with the results obtained, will be of scieritific 
interest, and therefore the data of the machine, and the tests 
obtained are presented herewith. 

The starting point in this machine was the sheet-steel to be. 
used in the armature.. No direct data were at hand. showing 
losses in sheet-steel at such high frequencies, nor was there at 

417 


418 LAMME: DATA AND TESTS [May 17 


hand any suitable apparatus for determining such losses. As 
preliminary data, tests at frequencies up to about 140 cycles 
per second were used, and results plotted in the form of curves; 
these results were plotted for different thicknesses of sheet-steel. 
Also, tests were obtained showing the relative losses due to 
eddy currents and hysteresis, and these were plotted, taking 
into account the thickness of the sheets. These data were not 
consistent throughout; but the general shape of the curves was 
indicated, and in this way the probable loss at the frequency 
of 10000 cylces per second was estimated for the thinnest 
sheet-steel which could be obtained. The steel finally obtained 
for this machine was in the form’of a ribbon about 2 in. wide, 
and about 0.003 in. thick, which was very much thinner than 
any steel used in commercial dynamos or transformers, which 


varies from 0.125 to 0.0280 inch. Theretore the machine had to 
be designed with the intention of using this narrow ribbon of 
steel for the armature segments. 

A second consideration of great importance in the construc- 
tion of such a machine is the number of poles permissible for 
good mechanical construction. For instance, at 3000 revolu- 
tions—which was adopted as normal speed—the number of 
poles required is 400 for 10000 cycles per second. The fre- 
quency, expressed in terms of alternations per minute, multi- 
plied by the pole-pitch in inches, gives the peripheral speed in 
inches. At 1 200 000 alternations per minute (or 10 000 cycles 
per second) and a pole pitch of 0.25 in., for example, the peri- 
pheral speed of the field will be 25 000 feet per minute. It 
was therefore evident that either a pole construction should be 


1904.] 10 000 CYCLE ALTERNATOR. 419 


adopted which would stand this high peripheral speed, or the 
pole-pitch should be less than 0.25 in. It was finally decided 
that an inductor type of alternator would be the most convenient 
construction for this high frequency; with the inductor type 
alternate poles could be omitted, thus allowing 200 pole projec- 
tions, instead of 400. The field winding could also be made 
stationary instead of rotating, which is important for such a 
high speed. This construction required a somewhat larger ma- 
chine for a given output than if the usual rotating type of 
machine were adopted; but in a machine of this type where 
everything was special the weight of material was of compara- 
tively little importance, and no attempts were made to cut the 
weight or cost of the machine down to the lowest possible limits. 

The following covers a general description of the electrical 
and magnetic features of the machine: 

Armature-—The armature was built up in two laminated 
rings dovetailed into a cast-iron yoke, as indicated in Fig. 1. 


The laminations were made in the form of segments dovetailed 
to the cast-iron yoke (Fig. 2). Special care was taken that the 
laminations made good contact with the cast-iron yoke, as the 
magnetic circuit is completed through the yoke. 

The armature sheet-steel consisted of plates of 0.003 in. 
thickness. The skeet-steel was not annealed after being re- 
ceived from the manufacturer; it was so thin that to attempt 
annealing was considered inadvisable. To avoid eddy currents 
between plates each segment was coated with a thin paint of 
good insulating quality. This painting was a feature requiring 
considerable care and investigation, as it was necessary to obtain 
a paint or varnish which was very thin, and which would adhere 
properly to the unannealed laminations. These laminations 
had a bright polished appearance quite different from that of 
ordinary steel. They were so thin that the ordinary paint or 
varnish used on sheet-steel made a relatively thick coating, 
possibly almost as thick as the plates themselves. <A very thin 
varnish was finally obtained which gave a much thinner coating 
than the plate itself, so that a relatively small part of the arma- 
ture space was taken up by the insulation between plates. 


420 LAMME: DATA AND TESTS [May 17 


_ Each armature ring or crown has 400 slots. Each slot is 
circular and 0.0625 inch diameter (Fig. 3). There is 0.03125 
. inch opening at the top of the slot into the air-gap, and the 
thickness of the overhanging tip at the thinnest pointis0.03125 
inch. 


Fig. 4 


Fig. 6 


The armature winding consists of No. 22 wire, B& S gauge, 
and there is one wire per slot. . The entire winding is con- 
nected in series (Fig..4). The measured resistance of the wind- 
ing is 1.84 ohms at 25° cent. 

After the sheet-steel was built up in the frame, it was roaee 
out carefully. The laminations were then removed, all burred 
edges taken off and the laminations again built up in the frame. 
The object of this was to remove all chances of eddy currents 


1904.] 10 000 CYCLE ALTERNATOR. 421 


between the plates due to any filing or grinding. The finished 
bore of the armature is 25.0625 inch. 

Field or Inductor.—This was made of a forged-steel disc 
25 in. diameter turned into the proper shape, and the poles 
were formed on the outside by slotting the periphery of the ring. 

e general construction is indicated in Figs. 1 and 5. The 
poles were 0.125 in. wide and about 0.75 in. long radially and 
were round at the pole-face. Fig. 6 shows the general dimen- 
sions of a pole. 

The field winding consisted of No. 21 wire, B. & S. gauge. 
There were 600 turns total arranged in 30 layers of 20 turns per 
layer. The field coil after being wound was attached to a light 
brass supporting ring. The general arrangement of the field or 
inductor, armature yoke, and bearings, is as indicated in Fig. 1. 
The measured resistance of the field winding is 53.8 ohms at 
25° cent. 

Tests.—The machine was designed primarily for only a small 
output, but was operated on temporary test up to 2kw. A 
series of curves were taken at 500, 1000, 1500, 2000, 2500, and 
3000 revolutions, giving frequencies from 1667 to 10000 per 
second. At each of the above speeds, saturation curves, iron 
losses, and short-circuit tests were made. Friction and wind- 
age were also measured at each speed. 

On account of the high frequency, the machine was worked 
at a very low induction; consequently there is an extremely 
wide range in pressure, the normal operating pressure being 
taken at approximately 150 volts. 

On curve sheet No. 1, the saturation curves for the various 
speeds are given. These curves check fairly well, the pressure 
being practically proportional to the speed with a given field 
charge. This is to be expected at the lower speeds, but it was 
considered possible that at 3000 revolutions the air-gap might 
-be slightly lessened, due t» the expansion of the rotor under 
centrifugal action; and it was also thought that eddy-current 
loss due to the high frequency might affect the distribution of 
magnetism at the armature face; but the armature iron losses 
were comparatively small, and there appeared to be no such 
effect. Also there appears to be no effect due to expansion at 
high speed. The air-gap specified for this machine is 0.03125 in. 
on each side or 0.0625 in. total gap. A very small varia- 
tion in the diameter of the inductor or the bore of the armature 
would make a relatively large per cent. in the effective air-gap. 


422 LAMME: DATA AND TESTS [May 17 


Therefore no reliable calculations can be made on the saturation 
curves of this machine based upon the specified air-gap. 

Curve sheet No. 2 shows the iron losses at various speeds 
from 500 to 3000 rev. per min.—1667 to 10 000 cycles per second. 
These losses are plotted in terms of watts for a given exciting 


+ a 

| 
HIGH FREQUENCY ALTERNATOR 
10000 Cycles per Second 


Saturation Curves 


_—— 


Curve Sheet No.1 


0 O22 10.4. (O16 70S ean! On IE Can Oo 
Field Amperes 


current. These curves show a rather unexpected condition as 
regards the losses. According to the original data showing the 
relative losses due to eddy currents and hysteresis, the eddy- 
current loss even with these thin plates should have been much 
higher than the hysteresis loss, but these iron-loss curves show 


1904.] 10 000 CYCLE ALTERNATOR. 423 


losses with a given field charge almost proportional to the fre- 
quency, which is the ratio that the hysteresis loss alone should 
show. As the eddy-current loss varies as the square of the 
frequency, the writer expected this to be a large element in 
the total iron loss, especially at the higher inductions. 
The six curves shown on this test-sheet are fairly consistent 


nm . 
$ aaa ] 
3 
; hep raaed | 
1400 ee 
NMIGH-FREQUENCY ALTERNATOR | 
1300 10000 Cycles per Second “ = el a 
Iron-Loss Tests | 
1200 a | ——— 
1100 — {oe ies 
4 
1000 ig 5 = 
+ |g 
| 2 Ss 
» AG 
Curye Sheet No.2 Ss 2 
[ie eee. eee afl /\ 
800 $ a 
a/ og yy, 
gfig s 
700 _— ats f—# i 
Sf */| of 
600 + — = “Sf 
y, / & RS, 
2 = 
K af Wh EN =~ 
500 aS ‘< 
Y oy » 
400 1 x01 
Oy oy 
Bs 
| (ey) RS f | 
300 y = ; 
Es y oot 
ca : # eo) f 
+ yt 
—_ YZ sao so 
Es 4) ea ie = 
e FA Ls Toot C3 ce 
Zea 


0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 L.4 1.6 18 2.0 2.2 
Field Amperes 


with each other, but it should be remembered that in making 
measurements of such abnormal apparatus little discrepancies 
in the curves could easily creep in. For instance, in the satu- 
ration curve a series of experiments were first made to find 
whether usual types of voltmeters were satisfactory, and a num- 


424 LAMME: DATA AND TESTS: (May 17 


ber of different methods for checking these readings were used. 
In determining the iron losses in curve sheet No. 2, the machine 
was driven by a small motor and the losses measured with dif- 
ferent field charges. Under most conditions of test the iron loss 
was a small element of the total loss, and therefore slight varia- 
tions in the friction loss would apparently show large variations 


HIGH-FREQUENCY ALTERNATOR 


_—— 10000 Cycles per Second ain 
Short-Circuit Tests 


Curve Sheet No.3 


0.3 0.4 0.5 
Field Amperes 


in the iron losses. Also the fly-wheel capacity of the rotating 
part of the alternator was comparatively high. Therefore, if 
there are any variations in the circuits supplying the driving 
motor, there would tend to be considerable fluctuations in the 
power supplied. Considering all the conditions of test, the 
curves appear to be remarkably consistent. 


1904.] 10 000 CYCLE ALTERNATOR. 425: 


Curve sheet No. 3 shows the short-circuit curves at speeds 
of 1000, 2000, and 3000 rev. per min., or frequencies of 3333, 
6667, and 10 000 cycles per second, respectively. It should be 
noted that ata given frequency the short-circuit current is pro- 
portional to the field current over the entire range measured, 


3750 


HIGH FREQUENCY ALTERNATOR 
3500 =) 10000 Cycles per Second 4 r 


Windage and Bearing Friction 


Curve Sheet No.4 


A a 
- Pstimate 
sno Friction 
Bear ing i 


500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 
rev. per mun, 


but that the short-circuit current is not the same for the same 
field current at the various frequencies. According to these 
curves the current on short circuit increases somewhat with the 
given field charge as the frequency is increased. 

Curve sheet No. 4 shows the measured windage and fecnon 
losses plotted at speeds from 500 to 3000 rev. per min. This 


426 LAMME. DATA AND TESTS [May 17 


curve indicates clearly that the windage is the principal friction. 
loss at the higher speeds. The writer has added two curves, 
one showing the estimated bearing friction loss, and the other 
the estimated windage, based upon the assumption that the 
bearing friction varies directly as the revolutions and the wind- 
age loss with the third power of the revolutions. The small 
circles lying close to the measured loss curve show the sum of 
these estimated losses, and the agreement with the measured 
loss is fairly close over the entire range. 


T 7 7 7 

=| HIGH-FREQUENCY ALTERNATOR 

EB 10000 Cycles per Second 

& Regulation Test at 10000 Cycles per Second 

Smee: 

33 a 

& > . 
0.8 150 No.2 Constant e.m-f. i 
©.7 145 nt-e-m-f 

piel a Charge for Constat 
0.6 140 No.l Constant Field Char ge| i 
» Xe, 
0.5 135 Si 
| Curve Sheet No.5 N¢ 
(J 
0.4 130 Ny, 
a 
0. 
4, 
0.3 125 O;| 
‘dp, 
Se 
0.2 120 | = —= ee} 
0.1 115 T - 
2 4 6 8 


Amperes Load 


Curve sheet No. 5 shows regulation tests made at 150 volts. 
The power-factor of the load on this test was not determined, 
as it was extremely difficult to make accurate measurements. 
The load consisted of incandescent lamps and the wiring from 
the machine to the lamps was non-inductive for the usual fre- 
quencies; but at the abnormal frequency of 10 000 cycles per 
second it is more difficult to obtain a true non-inductive load 
with ordinary apparatus. The tested regulation indicates that 
the load was practically non-inductive. 

In first undertaking tests on this machine there was consid- 


1904.] 10 000 CYCLE ALTERNATOR. 427 


erable difficulty in measuring the pressures. It was found that 
at a frequency of 10 000 cycles per second the Weston voltmeter 
did not work satisfactorily. Practically the same deflection 
was obtained on the high and low scales of a 60-120 volt Weston 
alternating-current direct-current voltmeter with the same 
pressure. 

Very good results were obtained by the use of a form of 
static voltmeter devised by Mr. Miles Walker. This voltmeter 
is of the same form as the static wattmeter described by Mr. 
Walker before the American INSTITUTE oF ELECTRICAL EN- 
GINEERS, May, 1902.* Tests were also made with the Cardew 
hot-wire voltmeter with the high frequencies, and the results 
checked very satisfactorily with the static voltmeter. 

For measuring the current a current dynamometer was used 
which had wood -upright supports and a celluloid dial. The 
only metal parts outside of the copper coils were brass screws 
It was found that the current dynamometer is not affected by 
frequency, unless there are adjacent metal parts in which eddy 
currents can be generated which react upon the moving element. 
The dynamometer used had but a few turns in order to reduce 
the pressure drop across it. This dynamometer was checked 
very carefully at different frequencies and apparently gave 
similar results for any frequency between 25 and 10 000 cycles 

Several temperature tests were made on this machine. The 
heaviest load on any test was 13.3 amperes at 150 volts, or 
2-kw. output. This test was of two hours’ duration, and at the 
end the armature iron showed a rise of 16° cent.; the armature 
copper 21° cent. by resistance, and the field copper 17.3° cent. 
Air temperature 19° cent. The machine showed a relatively 
small increase in temperature at this load over the temperature 
rise with one-third this load. This was probably due to the 
fact that the windage loss was so much higher than the other 
losses of the machine that the temperature was but little affected 
by the small additional loss with increase in load. 

: Attempts were made to utilize the current from this machine 
for various experiments, but difficulty. was at once found in 
transforming it. At this high frequency no suitable iron-cored 
transformer was available. Transformers with open magnetic 
circuits were tried and operated better than those with iron cores 
but were still rather unsatisfactory. It was decided that noth.ng 
could be done in this line without building special transformers. 


{*Transactions of the A. I. 1D, 185, Weebl sores joy, IORI, 


428 LAMME: DATA AND TESTS. [May 17 


Among the few experiments made was that of forming an arc 
with current at this high frequency. This arc appeared to be 
like an ordinary arc so far as the light was concerned, but had. 
a very high-pitched note corresponding to the high frequency. 
This note was very distressing to the ears. 

This machine is in reality of the nature of a piece of labora- 
tory apparatus; and at present it has no commercial value. It. 
was designed primarily for scientific investigation, and appears. 
to be a very good machine for that purpose. 


[For discussion on this paper, see page 459.] 


«A paper “presented at the 187th M eeling of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, May 17-18, 1904. 

Copyright 1904, by A. I. BE. B. 


THE SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTOR. 


BY WILLIAM S. FRANKLIN 


Fig.1 represents a rotor having 2 Z conductors, surrounded by 
a stator having a two-pole winding of N conductors spread 
over two opposite arcs each of 90° span. Each rotor conductor 
is supposed to be short-circuited through the conductor lying 
opposite to it so that the rotor presents Z independent cir- 
cuits each of resistance R. In case the rotor conductors are 
short-circuited by end-rings, as in the squirrel-cage rotor, it is 
an easy matter, knowing the resistance of each rotor conductor 
and the resistance per unit length of the short-circuiting ring, 
to calculate the value of R for an equivalent winding of the 
type here specified.' 

This rotor whether standing or running is magnetically sta- 
tionary and magnetically equivalent to a rotor such as shown 


ae, Z 
in Fig. 2 having a-concentrated winding A A’ of qT ~=«oturns 


mi Zz, 
each of resistance kK, and a concentrated winding B B’ of ae 


turns each of resistance R*. 
Consider an alternating flux, 9, Fig. 2, stationary in space 
but harmonically distributed around the periphery of the rotor 
2s it flows into the rotor from the stator, or into the stator from 
the rotor. Let E, be the pressure induced in the 2 N conductors 


1. In fact R is equal to the resistance of two conductors of a squirrel- 


* PF 
cage winding plus = times the resistance of an arc of one of the short- 
circuiting rings of which the length is equal to the diameter of the ring. 

*This result is reached by integrating the magnetomotive force of Z/2 
independent phases of alternating current around the periphery of the 


motor. 
429 


430 FRANKLIN: SINGLE-PHASE [May 17 


(N turns) of the stator winding by this alternating flux and 
Fy, the pressure which this flux induces in the Z con- 
ductors (Z) turns of the rotor winding B.. Then #,/E, = 
0.901 x N/Z/2 = 1.802 xN/Z, 0.901 being the ratio of the chord 
to the arc of -90°f. Therefore to give a 1:1 ratio of transfor- 
mation between stator winding and rotor winding B; that is, 
to make E, = E,, we may change the stator winding to give 
N = Z + 1.802. Along with this change of N we may imagine 


Biers 


the value of the supply pressure to be changed in the same 
ratio, and the sectional area of the wire used in the stator 
winding to be changed in theyinverse ratio. In this way any 
given single-phase motor with any type of rotor and having a 
stator winding of any number of turns spread over any arc 
may be reduced to the equivalent 1:1 arrangement, and there-- 


t. See Franklin and Williamson, pages 121 to 123. 


1904.] INDUCTION MOTOR. 431 


fore the following theory is worked out for this 1:1 arrange- 
ment. 

It is to be noted that the flux @, Fig. 2, which is stationary 
in space but alternating at a given frequency 7 induces the same 
pressure in any winding (distributed or concentrated) as would 
be induced in the same winding by a flux having a constant 
value equal to the maximum value of @ but rotating at a speed 
equal to the frequency 7, provided that the flux is in each case 
harmonically distributed around the periphery of the rotor. 


Oo O 
°d0qg0000 


BiG. 2: 


The spec.al use to be made of this fact later is that, from it, 
we know that the pressure induced in the B winding by pulsa- 
‘tions of @ is to the pressure induced in the A winding by the 
turning of the rotor through @, as the frequency of pulsation 
of @ is to the speed of rotation of the rotor. 

It is furthermore to be noted that the windings A and B, 
Fig. 2, which represent magnetically the actual rotating wind- 
ings of the rotor, are stationary, and therefore all electromotive 
forces induced in rotor windings and all rotor currents are to be 


432 FRANKLIN: SINGLE-PHASE [May 17 


considered to have the same frequency as the electromotive 
force applied to the stator windings." 

Fig. 3 represents diagramatically the stator winding of a 
single-phase induction motor and the two stationary windings 
A and B which represent the moving rotor windings at each 
instant. When a periodic pressure F, acts upon any electro- 
magnetic system the electric and magnetic effects produced are 
of the same periodicity. The most completely general periodic 
flux through the rotor Fig. 3 consists of two periodic fluxes @ 


g. 


direction 


(4) 
Y obation 


Dtator 


Wind 719, 


IO, Bs 


and @, perpendicular to each other in space and of which the 
phase difference in time may be anything whatever. We as- 
sume these periodic fluxes ® and ®, to be harmonic, and we 
shall develop the theory of the single-phase induction motor 
upon these fluxes as a basis. We shall call a pressure which 
is induced by the time variation of a flux a pulsational pressure, 
and a pressure which is produced by the cutting of flux by 
motion a rotational pressure. 


1. See Franklin and Williamson, pages 244 and 245. 


1904.] INDUCTION MOTOR. 433 


Notatior. 
E’ = primary impressed pressure. 
FE, = part of primary pressure which is over and above the 
the part used to overcome primary resistance R’ 
and primary magnetic leakage reactance x.* 

j = primary frequency 

n = rotor speed 

M = magnetizing current in primary 

Z, = load current in primary 

ZI, = current in rotor winding A 

Z, = current in rotor winding B 

= total resistance of winding A and of winding B 
/2 = turns in winding A and turns in winding B 
N = turns in primary winding 

The two fundamental equations of the single-phase induction 
motor express the following two conditions: 

(a) That the sum of rotational pressure in A due to @ and 
pulsational pressure in A due to ® shall be equal to RJ,, and: 

(b) That the sum of the rotational pressure in B due to @, 
and the pulsational pressure in B due to @ shall be equal to R /,. 

In considering these pulsational pressures and rotational 
pressures in A and 6B careful attention must be given to the 
matter of algebraic signs. 

The positive directions of @ and ®, are chosen as represented 
by the arrows in Fig. 3 and the positive directions around wind- 
ings A and B are chosen as customary in relation to the positive 
directions of 9 and @,; that is, the positive direction around A 
is the direction in which a right-handed screw co-axial with @, 
would have to be turned to travel in the positive direction of 
@, and the positive direction around B is the direction in which 
a right-handed screw co-axial with ® would have to be turned 
to travel in the positive direction of 9. Therefore the positive 
direction around A is up A and down A’, and the positive direc- 
tion around B is up B and down B’. 

With this choice of signs the pulsational pressure in A due 


to ®, is equal to 2 zf - ®,// 2 where @, represents the max- 


imum value of the cross-flux, and this pulsational pressure is 


*When the magnetizing current of a transformer is small compared 
with load current, primary and secondary currents are nearly in phase 
and all magnetic leakage reactance, both primary and secondary, may 
be located in the primary. See Franklin and Williamson, page 176. 


434 FRANKLIN: SINGLE-PHASE [May 17 


90° behind ®, in time phase. Therefore this pulsational pres- 
sure in A may be written 


ce 


, afZo 
is War 


Similarly the pulsational pressure in B due to @ is 


xz} ZO 
GN eee 
The rotational pressure in A due to @ is in phase with @ 
and positive when 9 is positive. It is-therefore equal to 


Ys 
9 te 
AUT zn Zo 
or to ‘+ - 


eee 
/ 2 AN 


The rotational pressure in B due to ® is in phase with % 
and. negative when ®, is positive. Therefore it is equal to 


znZ O,. 
A oe 


Therefore we have the fundamental equations: 


iL On eee 
el aa Ae NE gx (1) 
Ripe EO ae (2) 


Vo Nes 


It is desirable to transform these two fundamental equations 
so as to eliminate the two quantities 9 and ®,. To this end 


Ae oer 
we mav write k /, for Tie where k is a constant, This is 


a 


evident when we consider that the flux @, is eer by the 
K ieee 

<) e 
inasmuch as the pulsational. pressure in B is opposite to E, 
in phase, and equal to Ey if we make N equal to Z/1.802. 
Therefore equations (1) and (2) become 


current J, Furthermore we may write E, for 7. 


1904. ] INDUCTION MOTOR. 435 


Rl es meds j ek ids (3) 


Rin=—k wl, Es (4) 


Now /, is wholly a magnetizing current and it is therefore 
comparatively small in value so that as a first approximation 
RI, may be placed equal to zero. The effect of R/, upon the 
performance of the motor will be considered later. Therefore 
equation (3) becomes: 


o= NE, +kP I, (5) 
or 
nw Ee 
lke an (6) 


Substituting this value of 7, in equation (4) and solving 
for J], we have: 


E. = 
I, af. eae (7) 
(oer die 
or, since J, =—J/, we have 
Ee 
hee 
(5) ® (8) 
P12 


which shows that the load current, /), in the primary may be 
thought of as being produced by the useful part E, of the pri- 


mary pressure through a fictitious resistance en Ko~ This 


fact enables us to apply a modified form of the Heyland* 
‘diagram to the calculation of the performance curves of the 
single-phase induction motor. 

Before proceeding to this application of the Heyland diagram 
it is interesting to consider the relation between @ and @, on 
the assumption that K/, is equal to zero. Upon this assump- 
tion equation (1) reduces to: 

o=nO—-7fO, (9) 
er 
0. = —j.7.0 (10) 


eer ee ee 
*See Franklin and Williamson, page 256. 


436 FRANKLIN: SINGLE-PHASE [May 17 


which shows that ® is 90° behind @ in time phase and that 
the ratio @,/@ is equal numerically to u/f. Therefore the cross- 
flux @, is zero at standstill and it is equal to @ at synchronous 
speed. Furthermore at standstill only the simple pulsating 
flux @ passes through the rotor, as the rotor speeds up the re- 


A, A, B, 


Fic. 4, 


sultant flux through the rotor becomes an elliptically rotating 
flux, and when n = f the resultant flux through the rotor be 
comes a rotating flux of unvarving value exactly as in the 
polyphase induction motor. Furthermore the. magnetizing 
current 7, being proportional to and in phase with @, is 90° 


1904.] INDUCTION MOTOR. 437 


behind @ or 180° behind E, in time phase, it is equal to zero 
at standstill, and it increases in proportion to rotor speed, 
reaching at synchronism a value sensibly equal to the mag- 
netizing current M in the primary winding. 

The action of the single-phase induction motor running at 
speed 7 is as follows, magnetic leakage and primary resistance 
being ignored: the primary pressure acting on the primary 
winding produces a pulsating flux @, Fig. 3, which produces in 
the primary winding a pulsational pressure sufficient to balance 
the impressed pressure. This flux ® produces in winding A, 
Fig. 3, a rotational pressure A,, Fig. 4, which produces the mag: 
netizing current 7,, which in turn produces the cross-flux @,, 
and this cross-flux in its turn produces a pulsational pressure 
A, in A which is equal and opposite to A,, k /, being negligible. 
This cross-flux @, produces a rotational pressure B, in B which 
opposes the pulsational pressure B, due to @ but is considerably 
less in value so that the sum of B, and B, is an unbalanced 
pressure in phase with @ and this unbalanced pressure pro- 
duces a large current 7, in B. -The effect of this current /, is 
to permit the flow of an equal and opposite load-current /, 
in the primary coil by virtue of which the primary pressure 
delivers power to the motor. We shall now proceed to develop 
the equations of power and torque with the view of applying 
the Heyland diagram. 

The total power delivered to the rotor is delivered to circuit 
B, Fig. 3, and it is equal to the product of /,? inte the fictitious 


2 
) Ree ibatess: 


resistance (. aed 


2 
Total power delivered to rotor = /?, RK (aes) (11) 
Furthermore: 
Power lost in circuit B as heat = fe I (a2) 


The difference between (11) and (12) is the power which is 
developed by the torque T which is exerted upon rotor circuit 
B. Therefore this difference must be equal to 32 zn T so that 


1 nN 
i — on is (e aa) (13) 


This is the equation which will be used in connection with 
the Heyland diagram, but a better idea of the relation between 


438 FRANKLIN: SINGLE-PHASE (May 17 


corque and speed may be obtained by eliminating /,? from (13) 
using equation (7). This gives: 


i we nN n3 
Poh eee (eee) ne 


Therefore, if there is no magnetic leakage so that HE, may be 
considered as constant, the torque of a single-phase induction 


; ; ns : 
motor is proportional to (n— an and the torque is zero at 
/ 


standstill [7 = 0], and also at synchronous speed [u = f.] 

' The cross magnetizing current J, in so far as it represents 
loss of power gets its power from the revolving rotor through 
the action of a back torque, thus lessening the effective torque 
of the motor or with given, motorv.load causing a slight decrease 
in speed and a corresponding slight’ increase in /, and in the 
primary load current /, which is in phase with E,> The power 
loss represented by J, is partly /,7 R. The eddy current and 
hysteresis losses are distributed between the primary mag- 
netizing current M and the cross magnetizing current J, ap- 
proximately as follows: at standstill all the core loss is supplied 
by the power component of M and at standstillthe core loss is 
large inasmuch as the rotor iron is then the seat of considerable 
loss. With increasing speed the total eddy current and hyster- 
esis losses decrease and are shared between WM and /,, the part 
supplied by /, being proportional to the speed and equal to 
half the whole at synchronous speed. Therefore the power 
cemponent of /, increases with increasing speed while the power 
component of M decreases with increasing speed, but the in- 
crease of power component of J, with speed means an increase 
of load current /, which supplies to the rotor the mechanical en- 
ergy which is delivered to J, by back torque due to /,, and one 
may think of this slight increase of J, as compensating the 
slight decrease of the power component of M so that it is per- 
missible to consider the whole of the core losses as supplied by 
a constant or nearly constant primary magnetizing current, in 
which case the loss J,’ R is the only loss to be associated with 
the cross magnetizing current /,. 

The cross magnetizing current /, in so far as it is wattless 
causes a slight pulsating increase and decrease of speed as it 
takes energy from and gives it back to the revolving rotor. If 
the moment of inertia of the rotor is large this pulsation of 


1904.] INDUCTION MOTOR. 439 


speed is exceedingly small and in this case the wattless compo- 
nent of J, has no effect whatever upon the primary current. 
It is to be particularly noted that time lag of J, behind the 
rotational pressure due to @ which produces /, does not involve 
any space lag so that the magnetomotive force due to J, has 
no component which opposes the flux @ either when the re- 
sistance of winding A is negligibly small or when the resistance 
of winding A is large. In other words the currents produced in 
the actual rotor windings by the rotational pressure due to @ 
are always symmetrically distributed with respect to @ (no 
space lag) although the maximum value of these currents may 
occur later than the instant at which g is equal to zero. 
' The idea of the’ carrying of the rotor currents around by the 
moving rotor out of the position in which they would be at 
standstill, thus creating a cross magnetomotive force,is entirely 
foreign to the fundamental idea of the magnetic representation 
of the rotor windings by the stationary windings A A’ and B B’; 
in fact the writer believes that this idea of the production of cross 
magnetomotive force by the carrying of rotor currents around 
out of opposition to the primary is essentially a wrongidea. The 
cross magnetizing current /, is produced through the mediation 
of a rotational pressure which is produced in the rotor conductors 
as they cut the flux @ as above explained. 

The wattless component of the primary magnetizing current 
represents a flow of energy from the source of supply to the 
magnetic field of the motor and back again, while the wattless 
component of J, represents a flow of energy from the kinetic 
store of the rotor to the magnetic field of the motor and back 
again. When a two-phase induction motor has one of its stator 
windings detached from the-source of supply, thus becoming a 
single-phase motor, the wattless component of the magnetizing 
current in the remaining stator winding is unchanged in value, 
the power component of this magnetizing current is doubled, 
and the rotor, before rotating at constant speed, now rotates 
at a speed, which rises,.and falls‘slightly at a frequency 27. 
This rise and fall of speed at zero load is due chiefly to the 
above-mentioned exchange of ‘energy between rotor and cross- 
flux through the mediation of the wattless component of J,, 
while under load the pulsations of speed are due not only to 
this cause but also to the fact that the load torque is steady 
while the driving torque, equation (13), pulsates between zero 
and. 


440 FRANKLIN: SINGLE-PHASE {May 17 


The applicability of the Heyland diagram depends, as stated 
above, upon the fact that the flow of energy between the primary 
winding and the B winding of the rotor is identical to the flow 
of energy by ordinary transformer action from the primary 
winding to the B winding on the assumption that the B winding 


; \ 2 
has its resistance increased to the fictitious value (~H2)R 


The ratio of transformation being 1:1 the equivalent resistance 
2 
of the primary circuit is R’+ (La)R This resistance varies 


i. 


with speed. The reactance x of the primary is equal to 2 zf 


O 


Fic. Ds 


times the inductance value of magnetic leakage which may be 
easily calculated from the dimensions of the motor. This re- 
actance is constant. Therefore the locus of. Ty is a circle @f 
which the diameter is equal to E’/x and at right angles to E’, 
and the locus of total primary current M+/, is the same circle 
with the origin displaced as shown in Fig. 5. 

Having calculated M and x the diagram Fig. 5 is completely 
determined. To calculate a set of corresponding values of 
speed torque, etc., proceed as follows: choose any point P Fig. 5. 
This determines at once /,, total primary current M+J/,, power- 
factor, and total power intake. Subtract from the power rep- 


1904.] INDUCTION MOTOR. 441 


resented by the load current J, the resistance loss in the pri- 
mary; namely, (M+/,)? R’,and we have the total power delivered 
to the B circuit of the rotor. Thus from equation (11) the speed 
n may be calculated, J,, R, and fj being known. Knowing n, 
the total torque exerted on the B circuit may be calculated 
from equation (13) from which total torque the amount [,? k/2zn 
is to be subtracted, this being the back torque due to rotor 
circuit A. To calculate this back torque consider that /, is sen- 
sibly equal to the wattless component of the primary mag- 
netizing current M. The total power output of the motor, 
ignoring friction, may now be calculated from speed and net 
torque. Then the efficiency may be calculated. Proceeding 
in this way for a series of points P Fig. 5 the data for plotting 
the complete performance curves of the motor may be obtained. 

The author’s thanks are due to Mr. S. S. Seyfert for a careful 
verification of the equations given in this paper. 


[For discussion on this paper, see page 466.] 


wT 


i: 
% 
; 
: 
: 
a 


if 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 443 


Discussion ON ‘‘ PREDETERMINATION OF SPARKING IN DiRECcT- 
CURRENT MACHINES’”’ AND ON THE ‘‘ ErFect OF SELF- 
INDUCTION ON Raitway-Motor ComMutTaTION.” 

W. L. Waters:—lIn the last two or three years the formula 
presented in this paper has been checked up on a complete line 
of machines which has been designed and built in sizes from 
2 to 1000 kw. As indicated above, the allowable value of 
the sparking constant was found to vary with the number of 
poles, and the output and the type of winding on the armature; 
but among machines which were directly comparable in these 
respects the formula gave quite good results and usually the 
sparking limits of the machines could be predicted to within 
about 10 per cent. 

Occasionally, however, we would come across machines, 
which gave results which varied quite considerably from those 
predicted by the formula. This variation being in some cases 
as much..as. 40. per cent.. No apparent explanation of some 
of these variations was found and they were considered merely 
as evidences of the fact that this sparking formula does not 
by any means take into account all the conditions wnicn 
affect the sparking, so that though the formula gives in general 
good results it should be used with a certain amount of dis- 
cretion. 

E. R. DoucLias:—Referring to Mr. Waters’ paper, the speaker 
wishes to discuss, not the inequality factor, but the funda- 
mental part of the formula which concerns the self-induction 
of the coil itself. On page 368 we read: 

“The self-induction of one conductor embedded in the slot 
equals 1k, where / is the length of the core and F is a con- 
stant depending on the dimensions of the slot.” 

- On the next page is a curve, showing the relation be- 
tween k and the proportions of the slot. This formula 
makes the self-induction of the coil depend entirely on the 
flux within the. slot. itself; neglecting a system of flux which 
is much more important in causing self-induction. Fig. 1 
shows an armature of which but two slots, a and b, are drawn. 
A coil cd lies in those slots. The current in that coil sets up 
a certain flux surrounding the conductors of the coil. A part 
of the flux, it is true, goes directly across the slots above the 
coil and through the wire itself, ase f. This is what Mr. Waters 
has considered. But a further and larger portion of flux goes 
around in great sweeps g, which, if the armature were out of 
its magnet frame, would be uninterrupted ‘to an indefinite 
distance. That portion of the inductance due to flux around 
the core may be greater than that due to flux within the slot. 
This was called to our attention in a paper entitled “ Spark- 
less Reversal in Dynamos,” by Mr. H. N. Allen, in the Journal 
of the British Institution of Electrical Engineers, in April, 1898. 

Contrary to Mr. Waters’ practice, Mr. Allen neglects the flux 
within the slot, but pays much attention to the flux around 


444 COMMUTATION AND SPARKING. [May 17 


the core. He assumes a very long drum armature, so that the 
ends do not come into consideration. In Fig. 2, let a and b 
represent cross-sections of two long parallel conductors carrying 
currents in opposite directions. ‘The lines of magnetic flux 
surrounding these conductors will be represented by the lines. 
c, and the equipotential surfaces of this magnetic flux by the 
lines d. The sections of flux and equipotential surfaces form 
two systems of circles cutting each other orthogonally. It is 
not difficult to compute the flux due to such a system. 

If the space within any equipotential surface, as d’, be filled 
with material of perfect permeance, the values of the flux will 
be doubled in amount irrespective of which equipotential sur- 
face be chosen. Allen’s formula is based on this conception, - 
but is not satisfactory when applied to the ordinary type of 


armature, because the ordinary armature is not a long cylinder, 
and the effect of the end connections is great. 

A different conception was introduced in some work done by 
engineers of the Crocker-Wheeler Company. Instead of con- 
sidering an infinitely long cylindrical core with two parallel 
conductors, a spherical core was assumed having a circular 
coil lying on it. Current circulating in the coil would set up 
a flux through the coil, spreading out in all directions. 

The flux through a circular coil entirely surrounded by air 
is susceptible of calculation. If that coil be placed on a 
sphere of perfect permeability the flux will be increased, and 
it is also possible to calculate the increase. The flux around 
a circular coil on a spherical coil of high permeability may 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. _ 445 


therefore be known. Fig. 2 will also represent such a cir- 
cular distribution, ab being sections of the conductor of the 
circular coil, and xy the axis. The surfaces of flux and 
of equipotential are very nearly spherical. 

The ordinary armature coil has somewhat the shape of a 
regular hexagon. The inductance in air of a circular coil of 
the same enclosed area will not be very different from that 
of the hexagonal coil. The actual coil is laid on a core of high 
permeability; that core, it is true, is not spherical and does 
not touch the coil all around, but the inductance calculated 
for the circular coil and spherical core comes very near to 
the actual inductance. Of course it does not take into ac- 


Bice. 


count the inductance due to flux within the slots. That must 
be calculated separately. 

Mr. Allen, in his paper, shows that the inductance of acoil 
in commutation on an armature running in a frame 1s nearly 
the same as if the armature were running out of the frame. 
The fluctuations of current in the coils being commutated 
tend to set up variations of flux through the iron of the yoke. 
That iron is surrounded by coils of a large number of turns, 
which are in parallel with the armature and which act as the 
short-circuited secondary of a transformer. The effect of 
the short-circuited secondary is to oppose the variations of 
flux and nearly to nullify the effect of the iron in the yoke, 


446 COMMUTATION AND SPARKING. {May 17 


so that the total flux surrounding the coil is not much greater 
than if the armature were spinning in air. Whether the 
armature be spinning in air or in the fields an approximation 
can be made to the inductance of the coils by this method 
of taking an approximating circular coil, computing the in- 
ductance of the circular coil on a spherical core of perfect 
permeability, and adding to this the inductance due to flux 
within the slots. The details of the calculation will merely 
be indicated here. 


In his ‘‘ Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism,’’ Maxwell. 


gives the total inductance ‘of a circular coil in air, due to 
flux circulating both around and within the material of the 
conductor. To find the inductance due to flux o tside the 
conductor alone, it is necessary to subtract from Maxwell’s 
result that portion of the inductance due to flux circulating 
in the interior of the conductor. 

The effect of the spherical core of perfect permeability on 
the flux through a circular coil laid upon it is to double that 
flux. Therefore the effect of the actual iron armature core 
and flanges is assumed to be the doubling of the flux which 
would circulate if in air alone. As a result, the permeance 
of the magnetic circuit in question is 


P¥ 3.3 /7p (Foals Noe 


a 


In this formula p is the chordal coil-pitch, J the length of 
the core, and / the extension of the coil beyond the core on 


one end, all in inches. That portion of the coil inductance 


due to flux over the slots and around the ends of the coil is 
then readily determinable, being equal to the product, 


P" x n? x 1078. 


The formulas which have been presented this morning 
assume: that the inductance due to the flux which crosses 
through the slot has some relation to the ratio between width 
and depth of slot. This flux has a definite relation to the width 
of the slot; it is inversely proportional. If the coil completely 
filled both slots in which its conductors lie, this flux would 
also be directly proportional to the depth of the slot, and that 
proportion of the coil inductance due to the flux across the 
slot would be proportional to the ratio, slot-depth + slot- 
width. 

Actually, however, the coil on one side lies in the bottom 
half of the slot, although not usually at the very bottom, and 


on the other side in the top half of the slot, although not usu- ~ 


ally coming. clear to the top. Moreover, there is a space re- 
quired for insulation and unoccupied by windings in the middle 
of the slot. Finally,.a certain amount of flux crossing at the 
top of the slot arches up above the height of the teeth, adding 
to the effective slot depth. ; 


vy 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 447 


Flux crossing through the winding which induces it has 
zero density at the bottom of this winding and increases to 
a maximum at the top of the winding. Below the winding 
no flux passes, and above the winding the flux density is con- 
stant at the maximum value. It results that the inductance 
due to flux through the coil follows a cubic law, while for 
that above the coil it does not. Careful computation requires 
that these factors be included. This is a matter of only the 
slightest additional labor, after the proper formula has once 
been written, and may affect the result by 10% or more. 

In fact, after the determination of the formulas, the calcu- 
lation of armature coil inductance by the method described 
is extremely simple, and may be done in a few minutes. The 


Pre 3. 


results obtained are found to be quite accurate; for example, 
the computed permeance of the magnetic circuit of self- 
inductance about a certain armature coil was 233, while the 
experimentally found result was 229, an error of only 1.75 
per cent: 

Since part of the flux set up by an armature coil passes 
around the core and through other armature coils, the effects 
of mutual inductance on commutation are great. Coils in 
commutation, not only one or two bars removed from the 
coil in question, but even removed one coil-pitch, will have 
to be considered. The mutual effects of coils not in the same 
slot are due entirely to the flux which goes over the outside 
of the core and surrounds the end connections. This can be 
determined experimentally. Fig. 3 is a curve showing the 


448 COMMUTATION AND SPARKING. [May 17 


mutual effect of two coils when removed from each other by 
varying percentages of the coil-pitch. The effect is greatest 
when the coils lie near. together, it becomes 0 at about 80% 
removal, is a negative maximum at full-pitch removal; and 
continues negative on around the core. For removal 0 per 
cent. the coils coincide, and the ordinate of the curve repre- 
sents. that portion of the self-inductance due to flux around 
the core and around. the end connections. The mutual : in- 
ductance of two coils not in the same slot is therefore obtained 
by substituting the ordinate taken from this curve for the 
factor 8.3 in the formula for P”, the permeance of self-induc- 
tance due to flux around the core. 

Great changes in the relation of core-length to coil-pitch 
make only slight differences in the curve. The upper dotted 
curve is for core-length equal to 0.5 coil pitch, the middle full 
curve for core-length equal to co:l-pitch and the lower dotted 
curve for core-length equal to 1.5 coil-pitch. The curves 
shown are taken from a four-pole machine and would be 
slightly different for a two-pole machine, but scarcely at all 
different on machines of six or more poles. 

Mr. Anderson’s paper refers to railway motors, but a good 
deal of what he has shown is perfectly general, and will be 
discussed as to its bearing on design of motors of all types. 
Refer to the oscillogram entitled No. 3, but which should have 
been called oscillogram 4, at the neutral points, near the 
neutral line, appear systems of peaks. The curves are the 
same as those found during some experiments on this subject 
made in the laboratory of the Crocker-Wheeler Company some 
years ago. They were then made in a different manner and 
with different apparatus from that described here. These 
peaks have their maximum near the brush, dying out toward 
the poles. Under the poles they are scarcely noticeable. At 
the next brush they appear again. The space from peak to 
peak is equal to the spacing of commutator bars. These 
peaks are peaks in pressure between adjacent bars. As the 
commutator moves forward the pressure between two bars 
is continually varying as shown by the curve. Even when 
two bars are short-circuited by the brush these same waves 
are found. A curious thing found was that in the region 
lying a slight distance beyond the toe of- the brush the curve 
is very unstable, so unstable that it is almost impossible to 
determine it. The form of the curve as a whole in this region 
appears to vary from bar to bar continually. This peculiarity 
has not yet been cleared up. As stated at the bottom of 
page 383 and top of 384, these peaks are caused by mutual 
inductance with other conductors being commutated, con- 
ductors which may be several slots removed from the coil in 
question, or even under the next pole. 

There is a close relation between the heights and locations 
of the peaks and the operation of the machine. Under certain 


1904 | DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 449 


conditions these peaks will be high near the heel of the brush, 
and under other conditions high near the toe. It is under 
the latter condition that severe sparking is found to occur. 
Slight visible sparking, or sparking which is invisible, being 
under the brush, may take place when high peaks occur 
back from the brush toe. The sparks caused by this may 
be carried forward to the toe and show shghtly. Under 
conditions of heavy load or otherwise the peaks move for- 
ward until one of them reaches the toe, when the sparking 
becomes vicious. The difficulty in finding a satisfactory cri- 
terion of sparking arises from the difficulty in telling where 
the peaks will come and how high they will be. To deter- 
mine this it will be necessary to take into account not only 
the self-inductance of the coil, but its mutual inductance 
with every coil which is in commutation. 


R. B. Treat:—There are so many independent factors 
affecting sparking that it does not seem advisable to collect 
them all within a single “ Criterion of Sparking ’”’ formula. 
The collective result might be favorable—and the machine 
spark. Any one of the factors may be the disturbing one. 

The equation given by Mr. Waters, 


C=n(lkt+poNIFPQ 


does not include several sparking factors equally important 
to those mentioned. We should, however, be grateful to 
him for presenting the ‘‘ Inequality factor ”’ to us in so tangible 
a form. 

W. L. Waters:—Mr. Anderson calls attention to the fact 
that in the oscillogram shown on page 381, the pressure is 
indicated at about four volts, whereas we should expect a 
self-induction pressure of only about half a volt. The ex- 
planation of this appears to the speaker to be quite simple. 
When running with brushes on the neutral point, we are, in 
reality, running in a magnetic field, which is by no means 
zero. The magnetic field due to magnets, is zero, but the 
magnetic field due to the cross magnetization of the armature 
is considerable. This is shown quite plainly in  oscillo- 
gram No. 6. The fact that the short-circuited armature coil 
is running in this magnetic field causes a large short-circuit 
current to be induced in this coil, and it. is the breaking of 
this short-circuit current rather than the commutating of 
the normal armature current which causes this high e.m.f., 
shown in the oscillogram. The correct way to obtain an 
oscillogram indicating the self-induction e.m.f. due to the 
commutation of the armature current would be to take the 
armature and run it without the field magnets, passing full- 
load current through it. This method was, I think, proposed 
by Gano S. Dunn about eight years ago, 


450 COMMUTATION AND SPARKING. [May 17 


Referring to Mr. Anderson’s statement that you can run 
with impunity with 5, 6, or 7 coils per slot, the speaker wishes 
to point out that this is due to the peculiar conditions, which 
you have in a railway motor. The magnetic field at the 
neutral point varies very slightly as we move away from the 
exact neutral. The field due to’ the magnets is zero, while 
that due to the armature is at a minimum point. The result 
of this is that a small variation of the point of commutation 
from the exact neutral.is not of much consequence. But 
these-conditions do not by any means apply to the standard 
direct-current generator. The magnetic field at the point of 
commutation in a direct-current generator varies very rapidly, 
and hence the slight inequality of the position of commutation, 
caused by using four or five coils per slot, produces quite a 
considerable variation in the sparking conditions, so that the 
case of a railway motor must be considered as quite a special 
one in respect to the possibility of using several coils per slot. 

THORBURN ReEip:—The speaker is very much interested 
in Mr. Waters’ paper, especially with reference to the in- 
equality factor, which appears to him to be an ingenious sclu- 
tion of that problem. Just what fact Mr. Waters’ assump- 
tion was based on is not clear, the only one shown being the 
figure on page 373, and the speaker is unable to discover 
upon what physical fact that figure is based. Mr. Waters. 
said it gave him a formula which enabled him to design dynamos. 
within 10% of accuracy as far as sparking was concerned; 
that being the case, the speaker does not think the establish- 
ment of an actual basis for his assumption is a matter of any 
importance. 

What the speaker especially wishes to draw attention to is 
the sparking constants given on page 378 and the cause of 
their variation with different numbers of poles. One part. 
of that variation, he thinks, would be found’to rest on one 
of the elements of the formula for the sparking constant; that. 
is, the inductance e.m.f. 

The speaker has been working for the last two or three 
years, as he got time, at this same problem of a sparking con- 
stant and has gotten his investigations nearly to the point 
where he is ready to bring them before the Institute. He 
is sorry he could not get them ready for this meeting, but has. 
gotten far enough along. to be able to give the members at 
least one piece of information on the subject that he hopes. 
will be of value, and would like to give-it now, in advance, 
in order that others who might have a chance to make ex- 
periments on the sparking constants of dynamos may be able 
to take up these constants by experimental work. The speaker 
has no facilities for doing this at the present time. 

-.The speaker found that with one set of brushes the variation 
of the current from what might be called perfect resistance 
commutation depends, not on inductance e.m.f., but on the 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 451 


ratio of the reactance to the contact resistance of the brush 
surface. The reactance pressure may vary very widely with- 
out affecting this ratio at all; on the other hand, the reactance 
pressure may remain constant-and this ratio vary very widely. 
Mr. Waters’ constant is based on reactance pressure alone 
and apparently as the number of poles increases there is a 
change in the ratio of the reactance to the contact resistance 
which has something to do with this change in his constant. 
If that factor were used in place of the reactance pressure, 
the speaker thinks he would find an entirely different relation 
in the variation of the constant. What it would be the speaker 
cannot say at the present time, because there is another factor 
affecting it of which he would speak later, which had come 
within the range of his investigation in the last few weeks. 
That ratio the speaker would put on the board which would 
enable him to present the matter to the members a little 
better. The factor is L/R T,L being the ordinary coefficient 
of self-inductance of the coil under commutation, R the con- 
tact resistance of the commutator for the brush surface, and 
T the time of the commutation reckoned from the time the 
brush first touches the segment until the time it leaves it. 
That factor determined, as the speaker has said, the variation 
of the actual commutated current from the theoretical. Per- 
fect commutation might be expressed in this way. The cur- 
rent increases in the same proportion as the area of contact 
of the segment with the brush increases, in such a way that 
the current density on the segment is constant and the energy 
density developed on the segment surface is constant. When 
there is an inductance factor we would find that the current 
increases at a less rate than does the segment contact area, 
as the segment comes under the brush, and as the segment 
goes out from under the brush the current decreases at a less 
rapid rate, and as the coil inductance increases, that variation 
increases, as shown in the figure. 

The density of the current in the brushes with straight-line 
commutation is constant. With the distortion due to in- 
ductance the current density gradually increases all the way 
from the beginning of the commutation to the end, and as 
the ratio L/KT increases and the curve varies still more from 
perfect commutation, the current density comes up higher 
and higher until finally at the end of the commutation period 
with high values of L/RT, the current density reaches infinity 
theoretically, so that the values of the factor L/RT enables 
us to determine, as the speaker will show when he is able to 
present his paper at the INSTITUTE, both the total increase 
of the energy developed at the brush contact-surface during 
the commutation period and the law by which this energy 
varies during the commutation period; and gives the means 
of forming a sparking criterion which the speaker hopes—he 
might say he ventures to hope—will be general in its applica- 
tion to all the different forms, at least of generators. 


452 COMMUTATION AND SPARKING. [May 17 


A further factor that affects this question is the frequency 
of the commutation periods. As a segment goes under the 
brush it receives energy in its different parts in different 
amounts; that is, the part that touches the brush first gets 
very little energy. The edge-that leaves the brush last gen- 
erally gets a maximum of energy with the result that the 
sparking or pitting usually occurs at the receding edge of the 
segment. The segment has energy poured into it through 
each brush as it passes underneath it; as it passes from one 
brush to the next, energy is conducted and radiated away. 
The speaker thinks the amount radiated has little bearing 
on the final temperature of the receding edge of the segment; 
that the main point is the amount that is conducted away 


ty 


ft 


To Intengj 


——} 


CE CV VICES 


| 


& 


Entering Seg¢iment INS Receding Skgiment | |? 
es ntering Segimer AS ean 1 | 


oI 
4 


ey 
= 


oy 


c ar 


d 
| 
=| 
\ 
r—J 
a as] & 
~ ~~ 
se 


I 


aan RS 
a 


i- 


Be 5) 
ae 

Ai 
Ss— 
—— ai) 


— 


~ Ap 
LZ 
4 VAVA a. / \sied : 
7 |7 
" I~ [Ene Direct-Current Cormeen tant m 
2 elas ed Dish 1 “The VY 
1 


i RT (* urrents in per centof |brush current 
a4 for vari le {| Y, 
real ee | for various values of >7,—1— KM 
ae te i ee Kia RDC aR 
L 
| 


Lat 
— 
ws & 


Ss) 


NS 
| Zz 
e 


TZ 


= 
7 


ae 
—ts 
ro) 
in 
& 
a 


Current densities in per cent of |current density 
2 for jvarious yalues of | 


L L 
rT]? art | eet 


towards the center and front edge of the segment, but during 
the time the segment is passing from one brush to the next, 
its temperature falls, and when it goes under the next brush 
it receives another block of energy which raises the tempera- 
ture again, until finally, if the sparking constant is too high, 
the temperature is raised to the melting point and pitting 
occurs. The speaker has determined the increase of energy 
due to the increase in the sparking constant at each commu- 
tation period, thus leaving that to be multiplied by the num- 
ber of commutation periods in a stated time in order to arrive 
at the total amount of energy poured into the receding edge 
of the segment, and that is the part of the investigation that 
he has not yet been able to take up. ‘But he would like to 
ask those of the members who have had a chance to make 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 453 


the calculation to use in their formulas the criterion of sparking’ 
L/RT in place of the inductance e.m.f., and see if it does not 
give them better results. The speaker thinks it will give 
better results because it is nearer the truth of the actual con- 
ditions of commutation. 

The speaker would say one word in conclusion regarding 
the calculation of the self-inductance of the armature coil. 
He did a considerable amount of work on that some years 
ago and reached such very discordant results that he came 
to the conclusion that the simplest possible method of calcu- 
lating the inductance, at least in practical work, was the best-s 
Mr. Waters’ method differs from his slightly, perhaps he should 
say it differs from it a good deal. Instead of using the total 
depth of the slot, as Mr. Waters did, the speaker used the 
depth of the slot above the winding. The width of the slot 
he used as did Mr. Waters. He had tried various other 
methods but did not find any of them to be especially accurate. 

Mr. Waters has shown even by these rough values given 
for the sparking criterion some variation which has not been 
explained as yet, so that these very accurate determinations 
of the self-inductance seems to the speaker, at least at the 
present stage, to be refinements not warranted in practical 
work. 

The speaker hopes that he will be able to present the formulas 
and curves on which his sparking criterion is based at an early 
date. As he had said before, he would be very glad indeed 
if any of the members who were able to calculate or make 
over their calculations on sparking constants would use the 
ratio L/RT in place of reactance pressure, and he will be glad to 
have any information on that subject, because he can assure 
the members that the investigation he has been making is 
about as complicated and as difficult as any he has ever 
tackled in his long experience. 

E. H. Anperson:—One or two points the speaker would 
like to bring out. In the reactance formula, Mr. Waters says 
L is the length of the armature and K is the slot constant. 
Mr. Reid understood it to be the relative value between the 
width and the depth. The point the speaker wishes to bring 
out is this—that there is a permeance between tops of teeth 
in addition to that through the slot above the copper and 
through the slot where the copper is located. Including these 
three factors gives a permeance that works fairly well in de- 
termining the sparking value. However, in the discussion it 
was brought out that there was permeance trom all tooth 
tops enclosed by coil which simply increases the , estimated 
pressure possibly not over 10 per cent. Estimating by either 
of these methods will give a set of comparative numbers, 
and that is all the method gives anyway. A point was brought 
out by Mr. Reid which is good. One can calculate the ten- 
dency to spark according to Mr. Waters,.but the actual com- 


454 COMMUTATION AND SPARKING. [May 17 _ 


‘ mutation depends upon how much energy is liberated on 
the commutator and how well the commutator handles it. 
Mr. Waters speaks from the direct-current generator stand- 
point, and the oscillograms given in the speaker’s paper are 
from the railway-motor standpoint. The railway motor does 
not need to have its pressure across the commutator bars con- 
tinuously. Consequently, we can use a radical distribution 
of conductors. We can use self-induction of commutation 
two or three times as high as in generators for the simple 
reason that the power is on at low pressure to start with, it 
rises with full intermittent current to full pressure and then 
the current drops, so that half of the distance through which 
the cars travel the commutator is polished. If there had 
been etching going on all the time, the commutator would not 
operate so well. Consequently, following out this idea, a 
railway motor on a particular duty may commutate well 
indeed; put it on another duty where the pressure and current 
are on longer, the motor may be heated somewhat more and 
the etching is too great for the polishing, with the result that 
the commutator does not run well. So it is possible to have 
the same motors on approximately the same service, but the 
service be different enough for one commutator to run bright 
and one to run black and give a lot oftrouble in flashing. 
It comes down to the question that Mr. Reid brought out,— 
that the proper way to see whether a commutator is going 
to work satisfactorily in service 1; to find out how much 
energy is delivered to it and how much it can stand. How- 
ever, the sparking value and the stability of the machine are 
a pretty safe indication as to commutation in service. 

The large number of coils per slot and the high sparking 
quality all naturally go with a large motor in a small space, 
and it is only by reason of being in the railway service and 
having a polishing period that the commutator is really able 
to run so well. So that the question of design taken up in 
the speaker’s paper relative to railway motors and the ques- 
tion of design taken up in Mr. Waters’ paper relative to rail- 
way generators of course must be quite different. The speaker 
was very much interested, and agrees with Mr. Waters very 
decidedly in his inequality factor, because he has seen a one- 
coil-per-slot machine run very well although its calculated 
sparking was high. Three- and five-coils-per-slot machines re- 
quire lower reactance pressure (calculated) in order to run as 
well, comparing somewhat in the order of 10, 7, and 6 for one- 
three- and five-coil-per-slot machines respectively. 

W. S. FRANKLIN:—It seems to the speaker that the loss of 
pressure in direct-current machines on account of inductance 
of the armature sections is a phenomenon identically the 
same, front a physical point of view, as the ‘“‘ skin effect” 
in large wires. The analogy can be made clear as follows: 
on account of inductance in the armature section, the arma- 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 455 


ture current is made to follow a larger resistance path in 
flowing through a section than it would if there was no in- 
ductance in the section, because then the current would go 
directly to the brush. The effect of inductance of armature 
sections is to increase the resistance of the armature between 
the brushes. On account of this increased resistance of the 
armature between the brushes there is’ an increased loss of 
e.m.f., exactly as in the case of a wire. 

CLARENCE P. FELpDMAN:—Mr. Waters considers only the 
self-induction of the windings and the effect of inequalities 
produced by placing more than one coil into each slot. Now 
it is well known that a four-pole series-wound armature will 
run without any sparking, even with the inequality produced 
by using, say, 93 coils and 47 slots. 

On the other hand, he greatly underestimates the influence 
of the shape of the pole pieces; the main difference in European 
direct-current dynamos is to be found in the shape of the 
pole pieces, special forms of which have been patented by 
Kando, Arnold, and others. The reactance pressure, which is 
strongly advocated by so able a designer as Hobart, is a safe 
guide only for one special type of machine; it is merely a rule- 
of-thumb that has to be changed for every new design. A 
machine with high reactance pressure may work all right, 
and another one, with low reactance pressure, may show a 
tendency to spark. 

Mr. Anderson’s beautiful oscillograms, especially Fig. 1, 
page 381, show clearly the five points corresponding to the 
five coils per slot, a lower one and four of about equal height. 
His statement that a motor of identically the same design 
will commutate better at 250 than at 500 volts seems some- 
what misleading or inexact. If he takes the same current at 
the same speed and half the field, the commutation will be 
worse; if he takes, as he probably intended, half the current 
at half the pressure, the commutation will be better, as he 
commutates one-half the current at one-half the pressure, or 
one-quarter the energy per bar. 

The results obtained by Mr. Anderson with what he calls 
‘standard fields ’’ show that the short-circuited winding acts 
as a damper, impeding any rapid change of current or pres- 
sure. This explains the low rise of pressure in Fig. 8, as 
compared with Fig. 9, and the slow drop from it to B, Fig. 10, 
as compared with Fig. 11. 

Mr. Reid has justly stated that not only the self- but also 
the mutual-induction between adjacent armature coils should 
be taken into account, and that other points, 2.e., the frequency 
of commutation, the contact resistance of the brushes, etc., 
are of marked influence upon commutation. He seems to be 
on the right path, but Professor E. Arnold, of Karlsruhe has, 
with the assistance of Professor Mie, now of Kiel, completely 
solved the differential equation for the case in question in 


456 COMMUTATION AND SPARKING. [May 17 


98, and has lately, in his book on continuous-current ma- 
chines, succeeded in showing the real shape of the commu- 
tating field for a novel design, taking the shape of the pole 
piece, self- and mutual-induction, number and width of bars, 
width and resistance of brushes, etc., in consideration. The 


single rule which he gave in his first paper was aa 1, where 


T = period of commutation. 
R = contact resistance per cm.? 
L.= inductance, 


In his new book he completes his formula by giving all data 
necessary to figure self- and mutual-induction for any arrange- 
ment of coils in the slots. 

W. S. FRANKLIN:—Whether mutual-inductance as well as 
self-inductance of the coils in a slot need to be considered 
in connection with the theory of commutation seems to be 
open to question. It is very douptful if mutual-inductance 
has much to do with it. There is actually one current changing 
at one time, and that is the current in one coil, unless, of 
course, the brush spans three or four commutator bars, and 
then the mutual-inductance effects need to be taken into ac- 
count. 

THE PRESIDENT:—The paper yesterday showed that it did. 

H. Warp Leonarp:—For the last 15 years the speaker has. 
advocated the use of separately-excited field magnets for rail- 
way motors, in place of the ordinary series winding, and has 
pointed out theoretically the great difficulty that would 
arise by suddenly applying pressure to a series motor, indi- 
cating the results found by Mr. Anderson. ‘he series motor 
formerly was generally used in elevator service, which is very 
similar to railway service, but has been practically given up 
for this use. The importance of having the field magnets fully 
excited when the pressure is applied to the armature is very 
clearly brought out in the paper in question. In examining 
the papers that have appeared in the last six months, on the 
single-phase railway motor, the speaker has been struck with 
the fact that the chief virtue claimed for the single-phase 
railway motor has been that it is a series motor, and there- 
fore the only proper kind of motor for railway work. 

_ The speaker has recently changed the field winding of an auto- 

mobile motor from series to separately excited, and as a result. 
in addition to having more perfect control of the car, has found 
that the fields practically reach saturation at 120 watts, while 
the series field, on the same grade, required 1100-watts. The 
separately-excited field can carry 120 watts indefinitely, 
whereas with 1100 watts they would soon be destroyed. The 
principal reason, in the speaker’s opinion, for the use of series 
motors is the matter of patents. Seer a 


1904.]} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 457 


[COMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT.] 


THORBURN Rerip:—It was brought to the attention of the 
writer at the meeting by several members after he had spoken, 
that the sparking criterion, L/T R, has already been deduced 
by Arnold and Mie in Germany, a fact of which he was not 
aware at that time. In fact, the writer had not known of 
their investigations at all until some time after his own equa- 
tions were deduced, which in their differential form are similar 
to Arnold’s and Mie’s, but in their integral form are entirely 
different. Z 

The fact that the current density at the end of the com- 
mutation period would theoretically reach infinity for any value 
of L/T R equal to or greater than unity, the writer had also 
deduced before he had heard of Arnold’s and Mie’s investiga- 
tions, but while he agrees with them that sparkless commu- 
tation can probably not take place if L/T R is equal to or 
greater than one, he is satisfied that sparking can take place 
for values of L/R T very much less than unity and also that 
sparking may occur for values of L/R T equal or greater than 
unity that will not, however, injuré the commutator in any 
way. The writer’s explanation of these facts is too long to 
give now and will be given in full in the paper he is preparing 
on the subject. 

The writer wishes to add that on reading over his paper on 
“ Sparking; Its Causes and Effects,’’ read before the INsTITUTE 
in December, 1897, he finds that the method of analysis after- 
wards used by Arnold and Mie was suggested in it and that 
the sparking criterion finally reached by their analysis was 
given in the writer’s paper with the difference that, as he had 
not at that time made any mathematical analysis, he did not 
know that the resistance of the coil under commutation could 
be neglected as compared with its reactance, and therefore 
gave the criterion as the ratio of the impedance of the coil 
under commutation to the segment contact. resistance. 


Discussion ON ‘‘ ON THE CALCULATION OF LINE BATTERIES.” 


F. J. Wu1tE:—Doctor Winship states that the best method 
of determining the average running current percar is by 
station wattmeter readings. That method will give the average 
current for the average car, but not the variation of the cur- 
rent throughout the line, and very often that variation will 
alter the location of the centre of gravity. Take, for example, 
an interurban line; it will be found that the traffic is heaviest 
near the city and that there is an increase of the average cur- 
rent of the car cver this section, which throws the centre of 
gravity nearer that point. With regard to sub-stations 
versus the line battery, where the average schedule is light, 
say half-hour or hourly cars, we find the battery is more eco- 
nomical to install; that is, it is cheaper in the first cost and 
the running expense is considerably less. Of course, this only 


458 LINE BAT TERITES: [May 17 


applies where the consumption of power is small and the peaks 
are heavy in comparison-to the average work. 

LaMAR LynponN:—The speaker notes the results that Doctor 
Winship has obtained correspond in general with those of M. 
Sarrat, of Brussels, who developed a graphic method which was 
published in the Revue Electrique of February, 15, 1904. The 
speaker also obtained similar results which were published 
in 1902, and which practically correspond with Doctor Win- 
ship’s. In the formulas of M. Sarrat and the speaker, 
the internal resistance of the battery was considered, and 
this Doctor Winship has apparently neglected. The inter- 
nal resistance of the battery is made up of a number 
of factors, the principal of which is polarization. There is a 
definite drop on discharge, and a definite increase of pressure 
on charge, and this factor must be reckoned with. Also the 
character of the generator from which the load is supplied 
must be considered; that is, in Doctor Winship’s equations, 
V, and V, are considered fixed pressures, whereas V,, at least, 
is variable; V, is variable unless the generator be compounded 
for constant pressure. the variation in the value of V, will 
shift the minimum point of line pressure; that is, the vertex 
of the parabola, indicated by equation top of page 396, will 
shift in its location between two stations with load changes. 

The resistance of the battery is not merely of academic in- 
terest. Its practical importance may be indicated by citing 
some computations which the speaker made on an equipment 
for a line battery placed at some distance—five miles—from 
the power station and controlled by a constant-current booster 
in the station. Two sets of calculations were made. In the 
first the changes in V, with change of load were allowed for, but 
there was no account taken, however, of the change in the loca- 
tion of the point of maximum pressure drop; that is, the point 
of minimum line pressure. As one of the results, the booster 
required, worked out 24 kw. with a correspondingly large driv- 
ing motor. A re-computation, in which the factor of change 
in pos tion of minimum line pressure due to the drop in battery 
pressure on discharge was taken into account, showed that the 
proper size of booster for this particular piece of work was 12 kw. 
In other words, it cut the size of the machine in two, with its 
attendant losses. 

In a constant-current booster, feeding a line battery, the total 
booster input is lost. This, therefore, is a practical question. 
Of course, with Doctor Winship’s equations, if two or three 
values of V, are assumed, accurate results would follow; but 
as they now appear, the speaker should not say that they are 
general equations. 

W. E. Winsuip:—With reference to Mr. Lyndon’s criticism 
that the virtual internal resistance of the cell should be taken 
into consideration in calculating a line battery. It has not 
been the experience of the speaker that it is possible to obtain 
expression of this sort which one could work with for this 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 459 


purpose. The potential difference of a cell is a function of 
two variables: the current charge or discharge and the time 
of its duration. This potential difference is not a linear func- 
tion of either of these variables, but is an extremely complex 
expression and the periods of discharge and charge are variable. 
The calculations as given in the paper conform with results 
obtained in experience to within one or two per cent. 

With regard to variable running currents on different sec- 
tions of a road. It is well to increase the average running cur- 
rent at points where grades occur, especially if they are long 
and serious, thereby allowing for the increased consumption 
at such points. The assumed currents can vary three or four 
per cent. and not affect the final results seriously. A variation 
of three or four per cent in the running current means a cor- 
responding variation in the drop to the battery; this means 
only one or two cells difference in the installation, and one 
does not expect to calculate a line battery closer than this. 

THE PRESIDENT:—The speaker is much interested in line 
batteries just now, having under consideration the equipment 
of eight sub-stations, and if it is decided to use batteries this 
will be the largest installation of batteries, judged from the 
standpoint of first cost, yet attempted. In general, however, 
when a regulating booster is not used. The speaker has always 
‘made it the practice to connect up a number of the terminal 
cells with a lead to each cell and connect these leads through 
single-pole switches to a bus-bar extending along the tier of 
cells, in such a manner that more or less cells could be cut in, 
depending on the daily load, in order that the battery may be 
kept properly charged when floating on the line. It is not un- 
usual to install five to ten more cells than are needed in normal 
operation. The speaker usually installs a certain amount of 
capacity in battery plates and leaves room in the tanks for 
the installation of as much more as conditions, due to natural 
growth of the plant for a few years, may warrant. For this 
reason the best calculations seldom fit a case on the start, or 
if they do they are not correct for the plant soon after it is 
placed in operation. 

Discussion ON ‘‘DaTa AND Tests ON A 10 000-CyCLE-PER- 
SECOND ALTERNATOR.” 

F. D. Newxpury:—The speaker had the interesting experi- 
ence of testing this high-frequency generator. Mr. Lamme 
has given fully the results of these tests, but the speaker may 
add something of interest concerning how the tests were car- 
_ried out-and the incidents that occurred during them due to 
the use of this frequency. 


MEASUREMENT OF PRESSURE. 
As Mr. Lamme has said in the latter part of his paper, the 
Weston voltmeter was entirely unsuited for use at this fre- 
quency, on account of its high inductance. At the time the 


460 10 000-CYCLE ALTERNATOR. [May 17 


generator was completed and ready for test, Mr. Walker had 

in the testing department an electrostatic wattmeter which he 
was developing at that time. By a very simple change in. 
connections this wattmeter could be used as an electrostatic 

voltmeter, which gave an instrument obviously suited for 
measurement of pressure at this high frequency. The current 

taken by the instrument as a condenser was entirely negligible - 
even at 10000 cycles. The static instrument gave very satis- - 
factory results both as a voltmeter and later on as a wattmeter 

in some tests for iron loss in samples of sheet steel. The Car-- 
dew voltmeter mentioned by Mr. Lamme was of low range— 

150 volts—and was used only as a check on the static instru- - 
ment at low pressures. 


Iron-Loss TEstTs. 


Mr. Lamme mentions that difficulty was encountered in: 
obtaining satisfactory results in the iron-loss tests. These- 
tests were made in the ordinary way with separate direct-. 
current driving motor, the losses being measured as part of 
the driving-motor input. The most important reason for this: 
trouble was the small value of the iron loss compared with the - 
friction losses. For example, at 150 volts and 3000 rev. per- 
min., the friction loss is 4000 watts while the iron loss is less. 
than 200 watts. In addition, any fluctuation in the supply 
pressure of the drivingxmotor circuit caused an exchange of 
energy between the revolving generator field and the electrical cir- 
cuit that caused fluctuations in the electrical input to the motor. 

Consistent results were obtained by taking a large number of 
independent readings and by plotting auxiliary curves in the 
following ways: 

From the data for different frequencies preliminary curves. 
were plotted with watts and field amperes as codrdinates. In 
these curves the points from different tests checked closely for 
high inductions but for low inductions the points from different 
‘tests were widely scattered. In order to locate the lower part 
of the iron-loss curves, curves were drawn for different field 
amperes with watts and frequency as codrdinates. These 
curves showed the loss very nearly proportional to the fre- 
quency.. For this reason the lower part of these curves could 
be accurately drawn as they were very nearly straight lines. 
Final watt field-ampere curves were plotted from coérdinates. 
taken from the watt-frequency curves. 


SHORT-CircuUIT TEsTs. 


It was necessary to obtain a current reading with soi 
pressure drop. A dynamometer with a small number of turns- 
was secured for this purpose. A hot-wire ammeter was also 
tried. On account of the retentivity of the forged-steel field 
the residual pressure of the generator was large and at the high 
speeds was large enough to circulate full-load current through 
the armature on short-circuit. For this reason the magnetic 
circuit had to be demagnetized before each short-circuit reading. : 


“T904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 461 


EFFECTS OF THE HicH-FREQUENCY CURRENT. 


(a) The coils of the dynamometer used became very warm , 
with small current. This was probably due to so-called ‘‘ skin ° 
effect ” of the eddy currents generated in the wire. 

_ (b) The eddy currents in all parts of the circuit were very 
marked. The stray-fields were also marked. During tests it 
was necessary to separate instruments widely. 

(c) With sheet steel of ordinary thicknesses temperature rise 
was so great on account of iron loss that nothing could be done. 

(d) It was attempted to measure high pressures obtained 
from air-core transformer by spark-gap, but as soon as spark 
jumped an are was formed which burnt up the needle points. 

(e) Very marked resonance effects were obtained with an 
air-core coil and condenser of usual construction connected 
in series. 

F. B. Crocker:—It would be well to remind the InstituTE 
that Mr. Tesla had a machine similar to this one which he used 
in his high-frequency experiments in 1891. He had it operating 
at Columbia University, where he gave a lecture. This ma- 
chine was designed to give about 10000 cycles-per-second. 
(See Tranasctions, Vol. VIII., page 267.) 


Discussion oN ‘‘ NoTES ON FLY-WHEELS.” 


H. H. Barnes, Jr.:—The suggestion is made in the paper 
that the angular variation of the prime mover is not neces- 
sarily responsible for the cumulative surging of alternators 
operated in parallel. The usual argument advanced to prove 
the opposite is the behavior of water-wheel driven units, with 
which cumulative surging is unknown. This argument, how- 
ever, is not conclusive, as will be seen from a more careful con- 
sideration of the conditions. 

Let us assume that two alternators direct connected to 
water wheels (turbines or impulse wheels) are thrown together 
a little out of step, thus producing oscillations, which, it is 
needless to add, will be natural ones. The two machines will 
then oscillate back and forth, one machine traveling too fast . 
when the other is traveling too slow. But this variation in 
speed means a variation in the driving torque of the wheels. 
As the speed rises above normal the driving torque decreases 
and vice versa. We have, therefore, in this variation of the 
driving torque a parallel to viscous damping. This variation 
will assist whatever electrical damping there may be in the 
machines, and the alternators will settle down to steady mul- 
tiple running. 

Let us now consider for a moment the behavior of alter- 
nators direct connected to overshot water-wheels. If we as- 
sume that the same amount of water is delivered to the indi- 
vidual bucket, irrespective of variations in the speed of the 
wheel, the driving torque of the wheel will remain constant re- 
gardless of the speed, and the driving power will vary as the 


462 NOTES ON FLY-WHEELS. {May 17 


speed, a condition tending toward instability. The conditions 
in this case, therefore, differ considerably from those existing 
when turbines are used. As a result of this difference, it seems 
highly probable that alternators direct connected to overshot 
water-wheels,.and equipped with heavy fly-wheels would not 
operate satisfactorily together and that cumulative surging 
would set in. 

If we turn now to the action of a reciprocating steam-engine 
equipped with a delay dash-pot, or, better still, with an en- 
tirely-blocked governor, we see that in a broad sense the action 
of the engine strongly resembles that of the overshot water- 
wheel while it differs from that of the turbine. At all events, 
we are not justified in saying that because turbine-driven units 
operate successfully, alternators direct connected to recipro- 
cating-engines would do so also if 1t were not for the lack of 
uniformity in their driving torque. The two cases are not 
sufficiently similar to be compared in this way. 

The same may be said of belt-driven units. Furthermore, 
the fly-wheel effect provided is always much smaller for water 
wheels and belt drive than it is for direct connection to engines. 
This gives a higher natural frequency and consequently more 
vigorous electrical damping, which, in itself, is an additional 
source of stability in favor of belts and water-wheels. 

The statement that with a 70% ratio of frequencies the 
angular variation of an engine running singly may be doubled 
upon throwing two machines together, needs a little explana- 
tion. We would certainly get this increase—according to the 
general laws of resonance—if the original displacement foliowed 
the sine law and had a period equal to that of a revolution of 
_the engine. In reality, however, the displacement curve is 
irregular. When developed into a Fourier series, we find that the 
maximum amplitude usually belongs to the second term, which 
has a period equivalent to half a revolution of the engine. The 
amplitude of the first term, with a period equal to one revolution 
of the engine, is relatively small. As there is a doubling of 
the amplitude of the first term only, and an increase of but 
some 15% in the amplitude of the second term, it is really unfair 
to say that the maximum displacement originally calculated 
for an engine running singly is doubled upon throwing: it in 
with others. This extreme case, it is safe to say, will never be 
realized in practice. We have, therefore, this additional mar- 
gin of safety to protect us when we use the formula for fly- 
wheels suggested in the paper. Instead of getting cross currents. 
equal to 25% of the full-rated current as a maximum—which 
we might get if the original displacement were doubled—we 
may expect to see the cross currents limited to 15 or 18% at 
the most. This additional margin is ample to take care of any 
unbalancing of load between the cylinders of the engine, or of 
any other similar emergency that may arise during routine 
operation. 


—_——_ ee 


1904. ] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 463 


W.S. FRANKLIN:—Two or three years ago the speaker worked 
out a mathematical development which bears upon this ques- 
tion; namely, the theory of hunting and its dependence upon 
field distortion and pressure regulation of alternators. A final 
equation was reached, the denominator of which covered two 
pages and the numerator seven pages of paper, hence it was 
never offered to the INSTITUTE. 

In the case of an ordinary undamped mechanical oscillation 
the force of restitution for a given displacement is the same 
on an outward as on a backward excursion. In this case the 
oscillation has no tendency to grow larger and larger, and if 
there is any damping whatever it has a tendency to grow less 
and less. If, on the other hand, we had a mechanical system 
in which the force of restitution for a given displacement were 
greater on a return than on an outward excursion, there would 
be a tendency for the oscillations to grow more and more violent, 
unless the tendency is balanced by very great damping. Now, 
in the case of an alternator connected to a synchronous motor, 
we have conditions exactly analogous to this second case. That 
is to say, the forces which tend to bring the two alternators 
into their normal, steady, running relation with each other are 
greater while they are returning toward that state than while 
they are departing from it, and consequently their oscillations 
have a tendency to increase. The cause of this is as follows: 
in the first place any change in the e.m.f. acting on a system 
requires some time for the corresponding change of current to 
‘become established. In the second place, as two alternators 
oscillate with respect to each other, the resultant e.m.f. is contin- 
ually varying in value, and the current conditions in the system 
do not keep pace with the changing e.m.f. conditions; so that 
the current values, while the system is departing from a certain 
state, do not correspond to the current values while the system 
is returning to that state. The result of this is that the oscilla- 
tions of the synchronous motor are increased on account of the 
fact that torque values, which correspond to current, are greater 
while the system is returning to its steady running configuration 
than while it is departing from it. Therefore, any slight dis- 
turbance of the synchronous motor tends to cause a continual 
“increase of violence of hunting oscillations unless balanced by 
damping. ; 

Can Mr. Barnes say whether the increase of damping ob- 
served when the exciters were connected in parallel might 
not be ascribed to the fact that the field coils under these con- 
ditions act like short-circuited copper conductors around 
the field poles. 

H. H. Barnes, Jr.:—The speaker would say that as he under- 
stands Professor Franklin, we would get the same result if we 
excited the two alternators from one exciter. 

W. S. FRANKLIN:—Yes. 

H. H. Barnes, Jr.:—If you excite from one exciter, you 


464 NOTES ON FLY-WHEELS. [May 17 


also have the two field circuits in series. This was tried, but 
no change was noticeable in the surging; it proceeded exactly 
as it had done before when separate exciters were used. The 
following test was alsomade. ‘Thinking that by cross-connecting 
the exciters we might possibly counteract the effect of any 
variation in speed and stifle the tendency to surge, each alter- 
nator was excited from the exciter of the other. But we found 
no change whatever in the behavior of the machines. The 
only way these machines could be made to hold together was 
by paralleling the exciters. Therefore the speaker believes 
that the only correct explanation is that we actually have a 
pronounced damping effect in the exchange of energy between 
the two exciters as the two alternators oscillate back and 
forth. : 

CLARENCE P. FeLpMan:*—Mr. Barnes is correct in saying 
that gas-engines driving alternators need less fly-wheel capacity 
and heavier damping. Mr. Rosenberg, formerly chief en- 
gineer of Koerting’s Works at Hanover, has tested this point 
by paralleling three-phase alternators with light fly-wheels. It 
is not probable that it was by chance that Le Blanc, of Paris, 
made the experiments with his damper at St. Ouen with a 
single-cylinder steam-engine. Some two years ago, the speaker 
was asked to give his opinion upon the question of the opera- 
tion in parallel of two stations in Italy, having alternators 
of different construction,—one with two slots per pole, the other 
with three, the smaller alternators had a less drop in pressure 
than the larges ones and very bad hunting resulted,—par- 
ticularly when the smaller alternators were used as synchronous 
motors. The speaker advised heavier damping, and the use 
of self-induction in the line, but is not informed whether the 
remedy was successful. 

As Mr. Barnes has said, Boucherot has given a formula for 
the fly-wheel,—perhaps the best there is. Professor Georges, 
of Dresden, has put the mathematical work into simpler form; 
he has done as Rosenberg did, that is, has made vector diagrams, 
and has shown, as Mr. Barnes has done,-that the weight of 
the fly-wheel may be decreased when the prime mover has 
slight uniformity of angular velocity, as in the case of a gas- 
engine. 

H. H. Barnes, Jr.:—Referring to Professor Franklin’s re- 
marks, is the speaker correct in assuming that his explanation 
of the development of the inherent tendency to surge is inde- 
pendent of the angular variation? 

W. S. FranKiIN:—Oh, yes, indeed. 

H. H. Barnes, Jr.:—Thcrefore we do not have to introduce 
the angular variation of the engines to explain cumulative 
surging? Faulty paralleling, or a sudden variation in load, 
or a change in excitation will do as well? 


*Polytechnic High School, Darmstadt. 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 465 


W. S. Franxiin:—Not at all. It merely requires a dis- 
turbance of equilibrium. If you start the oscillations, and 
if the force of restitution is greater while the thing is coming 
back than while it is going outward, it will keep on increasing. 

H. H. Barnes, Jr.:—The speaker believes damping is a 
good thing in every case. He is thinking of it, however, less 
in connection with any effect it may have upon the angular 
variation of the engines than in connection with the inherent 
tendency to surge. Angular variation in the engine is, after 
all, not a serious drawback. But the inherent tendency to 
surge must be neutralized or counteracted in some way, or 
the machines will not hold together. And the best way to 
neutralize it is to provide sufficient electrical damping. As 
regards the various formulas that have been developed for 
the natural period of alternators, it is true that a number of 
others have worked along the same lines since Boucherot pre- 
sented his original paper, foremost among them being Georges 
and Kapp. 

W. S. Franxiin:—The speaker believes that the inherent 
tendency to hunting depends upon the inductance of the cir- 
cuit, inasmuch as the inductance of the circuit is the chief 
factor which determines a delay of the building up of steady- 
current conditions in the circuit. 

CLARENCE P. FELpDMAN:—The speaker has never used a 
damper, but has frequently used steel pole-pieces, which, in 
themselves, act partly as dampers. In the first German alter- 
nating-current station, at Cologne, at first cross-connections 
were used with the exciters, but later each alternator had its 
own exciter; there was, however, no difference shown in the 
results. This: station had at first 400-kw. machines, after- 
wards several 1000-kw. machines were added, and for a time 
the municipal authorities were afraid to operate them in par- 
allel, on account of hunting. The larger alternators had a 
coefficient of angular variation of 1/350, with very heavy 
fly-wheels, and a regulation of 10% on non-inductive load; 
the smaller had a coefficient of 1/220, and a regulation of 18 
per cent. The speaker advised that they could be operated 
in parallel without trouble, because the smaller machine would 
be pulled around by the larger, and this proved to be the case. 
The smaller machine could be used only on non-inductive 
loads; when used with motor-loads, they did not add appre- 
ciably to the output of the station. There was some trouble 
at the station at first; one of four identical sets gave signs of 
hunting; but the trouble was remedied by altering the dash-pot 
on the engine. 

The question of hunting is very complicated; it may be 
started by partly electrical or partly mechanical disturbances. 
The speaker has had no trouble with hunting, having always 
used heavy’ fly-wheels, which, with the damping induced by 
the steel poles or by short-circuited coils on the pole-pieces, 
has prevented trouble of this character. 


466 NOTES ON FLY-WHEELS. [May 17 


H. Y. Haui, Jr.:—Professor Franklin made reference to 
the possible damping effect of the field coils of the alternators. 
The speaker has frequently noted, in connection with the 
alternators of the Manhattan Railway Company, that there 
is a slight continuous oscillation or vibration of the field-ammeter 
needles, which shows that there are induced currents in the 
fields. It has also been noted that whenever a dash-pot sticks 
or a valve-hook of an engine misses this effect is increased 
quite materially and that the increased oscillation is of the 
same frequency as the oscillation of the engine. 

THE PRreEsIDENT:—In other words, the oscillations of the 
needle correspond to the stroke of the dash-pot? 

H. Y. Hayy, Jr.:—Whenever it misses. 

CLARENCE P. FELDMAN:—Boucherot has shown that the 
effect of the armature reaction of an alternator is transferred 
to the armature of the exciter by reason of its effect on the 
field of the alternator. In an old station, the speaker had an 
exciter with the field of sheet-iron, having a very high arma- 
ture reaction; this exciter always sparked when exciting the 
field of the alternator, but did not spark when working on a 
water-load; the oscillating pressure produced in the field could 
be shown by means of a transformer; the difficulty was over- 
come by the use of. a cast-iron field in place of the sheet iron. 
This may account for some of the advantages found by Mr. 
Barnes in connecting one exciter to two alternators, or in 
cross-connecting the exciters; possibly some damping effect 
was produced by putting them together. 

H. H. Barnes, Jr.:—The speaker believes the problem we 
have in this country, or which we have had, of getting alter- 
nators with heavy fly-wheels to operate properly together, has 
been somewhat of a special problem. They have not had the 
same difficulties abroad. They favor somewhat lighter wheels 
as a general thing in Europe, a fact that is partially explained 
by the number of three-crank engines installed as prime movers. 
In Europe, therefore, the question of resonance has been the more 
important one, whereas with us it has been cumulative surging. 
In this country the speaker knows of one plant only in which 
there is actual trouble due to resonance under operating con- 
ditions. He has not visited this plant, and is not able to speak 
from personal experience, but understands it is well nigh im- 
possible to operate the machines in multiple. The natural 
frequency at normal pressure is 92 per minute; and there are 
100 revolutions per minute; therefore we have a ratio of fre- 
quencies of 0.92, which is too close to unity to allow of satis- 
factory running. 


Discussion ON “ THE SINGLE-PHase INDUCTION MoTor.” 

W. 5S. Franxiin:—The speaker regrets very much that Mr. 
Steinmetz is not present, as he had hoped to draw him out in 
the discussion of the paper by referring to what seems to be 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 467 


a serious defect in Mr. Steinmetz’s papers on the single-phase 
induction motor. The speaker does not think that Mr. Steinmetz 
has given us a really fundamental or basic theory of the single- 
phase induction motor. His papers of February, 1898, and 
January, 1900, are no doubt of very considerable value, but 
they are devoted almost wholly to the operation of various 
starting devices. In so far as starting devices change a single- 
phase induction motor into a polyphase induction motor, 
Mr. Steinmetz’s theory and equations are correct; but it can 
hardly be said that he has given any theory at all of the char- 
acteristic activities of the single-phase induction motor, and 
what he has given is incorrect, in the opinion of the speaker. 

Mr. Steinmetz’s method is to approach the theory of the 
single-phase induction motor by making certain modifications 
of the equations of the polyphase induction motor. This 
method seems to complicate the theory unnecessarily, and the 
speaker does not see how Mr. Steinmetz can justify the modi- 
fications of polyphase theory which he makes in adapting it 
to the single-phase machine. 

The theory of the single-phase induction motor given here 
approximates to the actual facts as closely as the so-called 
complete theory of the ordinary transformer and as closely as 
the so-called complete theory of the polyphase induction motor. 
These theories as ordinarily used by engineers for accurate 
calculations take account only of first-order effects of primary 
resistance, magnetic leakage, and core losses, the mutual dis- 
turbing influences of these things being always ignored, except 
only in a single case. 

The speaker has refrained from giving the full algebraic de- 
velopment of the theory, thinking that an outline of the method 
of obtaining numerical results might be more intelligible; for 
the sake of clearness the vector diagram of the transformer 
is used as a basis, which in its application to the induction 
motor is usually called the Heyland diagram. The various 
aspects of the calculations as based on the Heyland diagram 
correspond exactly to the various aspects of the calculations 
as based upon pure algebraic developments. 

The difference between this theory and that of “Ir. Ste.n- 
metz may perhaps be best indicated by comparing the speaker’s 
equation for torque with the corresponding equation of Mr. 
Steinmetz, and it should be kept in mind that this equation 
is a logical result in this theory, while the corresponding equa- 
tion of Mr. Steinmetz is an assumption. Mr. Steinmetz’s papers 
do not contain a theory of the single-phase motor. 

This difference between Mr. Steinmetz and the speaker in 
regard to torque may be stated most clearly for the case in 
which magnetic leakage is assumed to be equal to zero. On 
this assumption Mr. Steinmetz finds torque to be proportional 


tiga? ; ‘ 
to (" =) here 1 is speed and f is primary frequency. The 


i 


468 SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR. [May 17 


correct expression for torque, however, for zero magnetic 
3 
n—n 


leakage, makes it proportional to ee) Both expressions 


give zero torque at standstill and at synchronism, but the correct 
expression gives maximum torque at 1/3 synchronous speed 
while Mr. Steinmetz’s expression gives maximum torque at 1/2 
synchronous speed, magnetic leakage being zero. 

The speaker does not agree at all with Mr. Steinmetz on the 
question of magnetizing current; the statements in the paper 
regarding magnetizing current do not result directly from the 
speaker’s fundamental equations, and therefore any one who 
accepts the derivation of the fundamental equations may think 
as he pleases concerning the magnetizing current. The speaker 
is, however, pretty sure that the cross-magnetizing current in 
the motor represents the flow of energy from kinetic energy ot 
rotor to magnetic energy of cross flux and back again, and 
therefore that this cross magnetizing has no influence upon 
the primary current, if the rotor is heavy, except in so far 
as it is not wattless, and to the extent that it is not wattless 
it creates a back torque which increases the load current in 
the primary exactly as a belt load would. 

The idea of the carrying of the induced rotor currents around 
by the armature, because of their supposed time lag in phase, 
thus enabling them to produce the cross flux, is utterly wrong. 
Properly all phases should be referred to primary current, not 
to primary electromotive force, and if there is no great amount 
of core reluctance we know that the currents induced in the 
rotor windings by the pulsations of the main flux @ are exactly 
in phase both in space and in time with the stator or primary 
current. It is only through the mediation of e.m.f. produced 
by rotation that a current can be produced in the rotor wind- 
ings which is out of phase either in time or space with the pri- 
mary current. 

The speaker wishes to make a further statement in justice to 
Mr. Steinmetz; that Mr. Steinmetz does not pretend that his 
papers on induction motors supply a physical analysis of the 
activities of the single-phase motor proper. Those of you who 
have read these papers, of course, know that more than nine- 
tenths of the discussion and developments apply simply to the 
behavior of the motor with various starting devices, and of 
course, in that case, the motor being really, to a great extent, 
a polyphase motor, the theory of the polyphase motor does 
actually apply, 


[COMMUNICATION AFTER ADJOURNMENT] 

A. S. McALListER:—On page 439 of his paper Professor 
Franklin says: ‘‘ When a two-phase induction motor has one 
of its stator windings detached from the source of supply, thus 
becoming a single-phase motor, the wattless component of the 
magnetizing current in the remaining stator winding is un- 
changed in value and the power component of this magnetizing 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 469 


current is doubled.’’ Experiments show that, under the con- 
ditions assumed, both the power and the wattless components 
of the current in the active primary winding are increased; 
the former being slightly more, and the latter slightly less than 
doubled. Thus, with a certain two-phase induction motor, 
operating without load at full speed, the following observations 
were made: 


PHASE A PHASE B |CALCULATIONS—PHASE A 
—— tigen amare = | | = 
| | | | } 
Tyg one a aga ae | Ww Cos Sin g [Leos GI sin of 
Se ee 
| 
(1) | Heo U7 | sor ree | 117 [ez | 208 | 070) | Bal | 14.4 
(2) | 165 | 21.7 | 930 137 | 0 | © | .250 | .266 | 4.63 |. 20.95 


The active winding of the motor, in any case, forms the pri- 
mary of a stationary transformer of which the exciting current 
must possess sufficient magnetomotive force to maintain the 
value of flux demanded by the impressed e.m.f. While the 
current in the rotor, which produces the flux in exact mechan- 
ical quadrature to the primary magnetism, has truly no com- 
ponent magnetomotive force to affect the primary magnetism, 
and the assumption of no space lag of such current is more or 
less in accord with facts, it is not proper to neglect the fact that 
the counter e.m.f. of rotation of the conductors of the secondary 
of the transformer through the flux produced by the exciting 
current in the rotor is in time-phase with such flux, and that 
the additional current which flows in the rotor conductors due 
to the difference between the transformer e.m.f. and this counter 
e.m.f. has a component of opposing magnetomotive force w..ich 
materially affects the current required to maintain the primary 
field. 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘ WAVE-FORM-VARIATIONS OF A LONG-DISTANCE: 
LIne.” 


THE PRESIDENT:—The Chair would say that it seems to be 
difficult to get any ‘accurate information from these companies. 
operating on the Pacific coast, and as they have had the most. 
general experience, whenever we can get any information from 
them we consider ourselves somewhat fortunate. It seems to 
be their policy, however, to keep their trouhles to themselves, 
which is not a bad policy sometimes. 


; 
md 
— 
‘ 
~~ “ — 
hy ~ 
: 
a 
. 
— 
, 
_ 
a 
‘ 
M ‘ 
ai? 
te 
ae 
w ‘ “ 
» tC . ¥ 
t n 
> v 
WD 
" > t 
J iY 
‘ 
) ‘ 
4) * 5 * 
t 
=~» # dex . 
f 
' . i 
, 
: 
% “3 pis A 
a 
‘ 
Ge 
Ss 
3 . 0 ie 4 
x: We i 1 
ye 
oa Ny t a 
SF y 
= ah Li 1 sey a 


 -» Med ad 


A paper presented at the 188th. Meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Chicago, June 21-22, 1904. 


Copyright 1904 by A. I. E. E. 


PROTECTION OF CABLES FROM ARCS DUE TO THE 
FAILURE OF ADJACENT CABLES. 


BY W. G. CARLTON. 


The matter of the protection of cables depends largely on 
the number of cables and amount of room available. This 
protection is needed in stations and sub-stations, also in man- 
holes on underground work; on inside work there is generally 
available room for separating the cables, and for this reason it 
is easier to take care of them than in underground work. In 
general, similar protection can be used in either place, except 
that in underground work material must be used which will not 
be affected by water, as manholes are liable to be flooded. Pro- 
tection of cables in manholes will be considered particularly. 

In old conduit systems where a large number of ducts have 
been installed and no attempt made at separating them as 
they enter manholes, it is a difficult matter to protect cables. 
If, however, the work has been carefully laid out, plenty of room 
taken in manholes and the ducts spread so that there is a vertical 
space of from 8 to 12 inches between the two halves of the conduit 
line, it is much easier to ensure satisfactory protection. It 
should be borne in mind that a conduit line of a large number 
of ducts is not a desirable thing. Two independent lines will 
cost considerably more than a single line of the same capacity, 
but this extra cost is an insurance against future trouble. 

On account of the large amount of energy carried by high- 
pressure cables their protection is of the utmost importance. 
High-pressure transmission cables operate usually at from 5000 
to 15000 volts and are nearly always three-conductor cables. 
It is to the protection of such cables that this paper refers par- 
ticularly, although it will generally be found. that protection 

471 


472 CARLTON: PROTECTION OF CABLES. [June 21 


is needed more from burn-outs on low-pressure cables than from 
those on high-pressure ones. High-pressure cables are usually 
protected by automatic overload devices and, if these are sat- 
isfactory they will disconnect the cable before any large amount 
of damage is done. On the other hand, low-pressure cables 
may continue to burn without drawing enough current to cause 
them to be cut off. Cables generally break down in manholes 
due to poor work in jointing or to careless handling during in- 
stallation. Various methods are in use for fireproofing and 
isolating them from one another. 

A method employed in a number of places is to wrap the 
cables with asbestos paper or tape about 1/8 in. thick, using 
two layers and binding the asbestos on by means of steel or 
brass tape. The metal tape is wrapped either in an open spiral 
_ leaving an inch or more between turhs, or with the edges touch- 
ing leaving no open space. With the metal tape wrapped close 
there is less danger of the asbestos disintegrating on account 
of water in manholes or of other causes. The asbestos wrapping 
should be carried well into the duct. This protection has been 
found adequate by several large companies. Its life, however, 
is uncertain, particularly on underground work. One disad- 
vantage is that in the case of loaded cables the heat is less 
easily radiated on account of the asbestos covering. Asbestos 
paper soaked in silicate-of soda has been used for wrapping 
cables; this has the advantage of not requiring any metal tape 
for a binder, as the paper treated in this manner is cemented 
to the cable. It is doubtful if the silicate of soda treatment 
will be satisfactory for use in manholes that are likely to be 
flooded, although it should be in dry places. 

A second method of isolating and protecting cables consists 
in providing separate chases or runways for them. Sometimes 
this is done by building special long and thin bricks into the 
wall of the manhole leaving them projecting so as to form a 
shelf. Soapstone slabs are also laid in the wall forming shelves 
‘or boxes for the cables. The cables may be further protected 
with asbestos if desired. It is difficult with this method of 
protection to make a satisfactory job where the cables enter 
the ducts unless there has been a very elaborate spreading of 
the ducts. 

The third method of protection, which is very satisfactory 
when the cables run fairly straight through the manholes, con- 
sists of a covering of vitrified-clay tile. Ordinary single-duct 


1904.] CARLTON: PROTECTION OF CABLES, 473 


clay tile in 18 in. lengths is used, the tile’ being cut nearly 
through before baking so that it is easily broken in halves. 
The tile on the lower layer of cables is supported by means of light 
galvanized angle-irons run longitudinally through the manholes. 
The upper layers are supported on the lower ones. For the 
bends in the cables 45 degree curves with a 12 in. radius are 
used. These curves being laid in reverse similar to the letter ““S”’ 
near the end of the manholes where the cable enters the duct. 
The tiles are laid in cement mortar forming a good mechan- 
ical piece of work and giving practically a conduit line through 
the manhole. One or two of the lower ducts should be left 
open at each end of the manhole for a space of about one-half 
inch so that water will drain from the conduit line. The prin- 
cipal objection to the use of tiling is, that in the case of trouble, 
making it necessary to remove a cable, the tiling must be broken 
out. Iron brackets are avoided by the use of tiling and there 
is no chance for current to flow from the lead sheath of one 
cable to that of another except such leakage as may occur due 
to moisture in the ducts. Personally, the writer is in favor of 
using the split-clay tile covering where possible, and asbestos 
paper and brass tape in other places. 

High-pressure cables should be covered, not only to protect 
them from the failure of adjacent cables but also on acount 
of the dangers which may arise from an unconfined arc. Oscilla- 
tions may be set up which will produce pressures many times in 
excess of that at which the cable is working, and these high- 
pressures are liable to break down the insulation on the cables 
or on the switchboard apparatus, transformers, or generators, 
which may be connected to the cables. For this reason one 
large company in New York has installed on all cables within 
a mile of the power-house, in addition to the regular asbestos 
covering, a sheet-iron armor 1/16 in. thick. This armor being 
rolled and especially prepared to meet curves or bends in the 
cable, each section lapping the next one. This sheet-iron 
is clamped together so as to make a strong mechanical covering. 

A manhole fire causes more trouble at the top of the hole 
than lower down, and for this reason the most important cables 
should be kept towards the bottom of the manhole. In the 
case of large manholes it will often be found desirable to build 
a partition wall longitudinally through the hole, making prac- 
tically two manholes. 

While burn-outs in cables are bound to occur—and for this 


474 CARLTON: PROTECTION OF CABLES. [June 21 


reason, fireproofing cables, particularly important ones, is neces- 
sary—at the same time, the number of burn-outs can be kept 
to a minimum by careful work. Only experienced and careful 
men. should be allowed to train cables. The manhole should 
be built so that it is not necessary, or even possible, to make a 
short bend in the cable in taking it from the duct to the side 
of the hole. The jointing should be done by thoroughly reliable 
men and they should be given to understand that it is not 
speed which is wanted but first-class work. If it is not desir- 
able to do the jointing as soon as the cables are pulled in, the 
ends should be sealed, first cutting them back far enough to 
be positive that there is no moisture present. Tests for 
moisture should be made if there is any reason to suspect its 
presence. 

The experience of one company in Chicago has been that 
nearly all trouble that has occurred on three-conductor high- 
pressure cables has been due to defective joints, to moisture in 
the cables near the joints, or to sharp bends in the cable. Some 
burn-outs have occurred due to the lead sheathing of the cables 
being damaged by electrolysis. This can be prevented by 
grounding the lead of the cables at suitable intervals or by in- 
sulating them if possible. Frequent inspection should be made 
to determine whether the lead sheaths of the cables are carrying 
current, a recording voltmeter having a total range of from three 
to five volts will be found convenient for this work and a chart 
covering the entire day will be found much more valuable than 
a few single readings. 


s 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 475 


Discussion on ‘‘ PROTECTION oF CABLES FROM Arcs DUE TO 
FAILURE OF ADJACENT CaABLEs.”’ 


_ Rap D. Mersuon: In addition to the protection of cables 
in manholes, there is also the question of the protection of 
cables in power-stations. It is not always easy to install cables 
in such a way that they will be protected from each other, es- 
pecially if the power-house has not been laid out with reference to 
them. The question of protecting cables by means of asbestos and 
similar wrappings has for its chief objection that there is no 
chance to get rid of the heat in the cable. For that reason, 
and for the greater one of reliability, the speaker very much 
prefers either tile or brick protection to asbestos. 

Mr. Carlton speaks of using a voltmeter for determining the 
current being carried by the cable sheath. Will Mr. Carlton 
please explain a little more fully the method of using the volt- 
meter, and also the method he prefers for permanent grounding of 
metal sheaths? 

W. F. Weis: Mr. Carlton refers to two independent 
lines of subway as being an insurance against trouble 
on a high-pressure cable system. In New York this practice 
has been carried a little further, and four separate and inde- 
pendent trunk subways have been installed, leading from the 
generating station along four different routes. From these 
trunk subways run branches arranged so as to give each sub- 
station two or more feeders, following entirely different subway 
routes. In case of a manhole caving in, or general trouble on 
any subway line, not more than one quarter of the high-pres- 
sure cable system can be affected. 

Regarding the injury to high-pressure cables by the burning 
out of low-pressure cables; this bas occurred, but burn-outs 
have also originated in the high-pressure cables. Some of these 
troubles were due to defective joints and some to short bends 
in the cable where it leaves the duct. In order to obviate this 
latter cause, the cable is now run straight out of the duct 12 in. 
before bending it over to the side of the manhole, thus pre- 
venting the edge of the duct from cutting into the sheath of the 
cable. 

For the past two or three years the high-pressure cables in 
manholes have been wrapped with asbestos bound on by galvan- 
ized-steel tape, as described by Mr. Carlton, and the results 
' have been very satisfactory. No trouble has been experienced 
from the heating of the cables where covered with this asbestos 
wrapping. In the stations, clay ducts or iron pipes are used 
wherever possible to protect the lead-covered cables, and, 
when there is sufficient space, braided cables are carried on 
insulators through runways of brick 12-in. square. 

H. C. Wirt: Will Mr. Carlton state whether he considers 
an underground line more reliable than overhead line as re- 
gards interruption of service? 

RautpH D. Mersuon: Mr. Carlton speaks of the extra ex- 


476) o> HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 2f 


pense of separating ducts. It seems that in some cases sep- 
aration may not in the end be an extra expense. The capacity 
of the subway is not necessarily proportionate to the number 
of ducts in it. Allow a certain limiting value to the tempera- 
ture of the cable, then the ducts near the center of the conduit 
will not be as effective as those outside, no matter how they 
are arranged; if they are separated, it might be cheaper in the 
end because of the greater capacity the two subways would 
have over the single. So far as the speaker knows there are no 
accurate data in regard to this matter. The speaker has done 
a little work himself in special cases, and some work was done 
at Niagara some time ago. Perhaps Mr. Carlton and Mr. Wells. 
have some information on this subject. 

W. G. Caritton: In regard tothe capacity of the cable 
being lessened in a larger conduit line; the speaker has no 
accurate information on that subject. Where cables are run 
at extremely heavy loads the gas generated inside of the cable 
will puncture the lead sheath, and this is one of the limiting 
features. . The permissible watt consumption per. linear foot 
of cable depends on the number of cables in one conduit line. 
With a single cable 20 watts per foot would probably be safe; 
with a larger number of cables, three or four might be the limit. 

It is a good plan to treat the cablesin the power-house—if 
they are lead-covered ones—practically the same as you would 
for underground construction. A conduit line can either be 
built, or when the cables are in place they can be covered with 
split clay tile. The ends of the cables need special care. Three- 
conductor cables must have some sort of terminal bell which 
allows spreading out the conductors for connection to the single- 
conductor cable, this bell to be filled with an insulating com- 
pound. 

In regard to detecting possible stray currents on the lead 
sheaths of cables; a Bristol recording meter with a five-volt 
scale has been used; this is fairly satisfactory. A meter with 
the zero line in the middle of the chart and giving readings 
each side of this line would be much better. The voltmeter 
is connected between the lead sheath of the cable and a good 
ground. In our stations we connect with the ground plate; 
we have a ground bus-bar in our stations connected to several 
ground plates. In a manhole it would be connected to a water- 
pipe or sometimes to the cast-iron frame of the manhole or to a 
rod driven in the ground. The grounding of the cable sheaths 
is done ordinarily in the power-house, on the brass bell on the 
end of the cable. 

Answering Mr. Wirt’s question in regard to overhead and 
underground lines; in the case of one company operating pos- 
sibly 75 miles of 9000-volt lines, 65 of which is underground, 
possibly 90% of the trouble on the lines is on the 10 miles of 
overhead line. This has been caused generally by boys throw- 
ing wires over the line, or by kite-strings. 


1904.] DISGUSSION AT CHIGAGO, 477 


H. B. Atverson: When the asbestos covering a cable is 
saturated with silicate of soda, the wrapping will harden and 
become nearly as good a conductor of heat as the lead jacket; 
this overcomes the objection that asbestos covering confines the 
heat within the cable. 

W. G. Cariton: How does that stand in a wet manhole? 

H. B. Atverson: We have had no experience of that sort. 

E. M. Lake (by letter): In visiting some of the larger East- 
ern stations, about three years ago, it was observed that very 
little attention had been given at that time to the protection 
of outgoing cables. The bus-bars and immediate connections 
‘were protected by a most elaborate scheme of barriers built up 
of brick and concrete and of soapstone. The outgoing feeder 
lines, however, and in one or two places the main leads from 
the generators, were laid side by side upon cast-iron racks or 
upon thin sheet-steel shelves. 

When this question came up in connection with the design 


ERG ae fa 


of certain Chicago sub-stations severai methods were consid- 
ered for protecting and isolating the whole cable equipment 
so as to reduce to a minimum the liability that a burn-out 
would spread to adjacent cables. The plan of using thin slabs 
of slate or vitrified clay was not found feasible because of the 
difficulty of applying in places where the structural work and 
cables were already in place. Then, too, this plan did not 
afford a simple and ready method of completely enciosing the 
cables where there were several in one run. Steel shelving and 
partitions when used alone were open to the same objections, 
besides being still further objectionable on account of the very 
small resisting power when subjected to the intense heat of an 
electrical burn-out. The proposition then narrowed down to 
some form of vitrified clay conduit because of the convenience 
of form, good mechanical strength, and high arc-resisting 
powers. Since the application must very often be made to 
cables in place, a split or divided form was necessary. There 
were found two forms of split conduit. One was divided in a 
-straight line upon the diameter of the bore (Fig. 1). The other 


478 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


was divided at an angle to the diameter, the two parts not 
being symmetrical (Fig. 2). These conduits were each applicable 
to certain conditions and locations, but a form was desired 
that would adapt itself readily to any and all places where 
protection of this kind was required. The style designed for 
this purpose was divided on lines parallel to the diameter of 
the bore but offset about an inch with reference to the diam- 


PRS Ss at 


Js 
3 Ny ct, Sa SoA sg ole 
A OAT LTE A a So | 


eter (Fig. 3). This gave two symmetrical sections which were 
interchangeable and possessed several distinct advantages over 
the existing forms. 

It will be observed that in this form of conduit the joints 
in two adjacent ducts are not directly opposite. This of course 
insures a much more effective barrier between the cables en- 
closed by the conduit. For horizontal runs in walls the form 


Fu Gpeat 


of the half-section is such that when laid it forms a convenient 
bed for the cable. Then when the cable is in place it does not 
form an obstruction to the laying of the remaining half of the 
conduit. Elbows on.a safe radius for large cables and in an 
arc of 45 degrees were provided. Short straight lengths of 
44 in. and 9 in. were also ordered. With these forms and the 
standard 18-in. lengths it was comparatively easy to follow 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 479 


the curves of any run of cables in a station or manhole, provided 
the cables had not been laid on less than a 12-in. radius. 

A. M. Hunt (by letter): A covering for leaded cables where 
exposed in manholes can be made as follows: mix a stiff mortar 
using calcined magnesite (finely ground) and a saturated solu- 
tion of magnesium chlorid; this combination hardens to stone 
in a few hours, and is heat-resistant and water-proof. Coat 
the lead of cable with oil, and wind it spirally with strips of 
canvas, putting the mortar on the inside of strip as the winding 
progresses. Any thickness*of coating may be built up in this 
way. An outside finish of the mortar should be used. If the 
lead is not oiled, the mortar will adhere to it strongly, and be 
difficult to remove. The materials can be bought at prices 
which do not make the cost of such work heavy, and the cov- 
ering is solid and effective. 

As a protection against electrolytic action on the lead sheath 
of cables in an extensive network, the writer has tried operating 
a direct-current machine of low pressure with the negative ter- 
minal solidly connected to the lead sheathing and the positive 
strongly bonded to rails. The sphere of influence of this ma- 
chine was much more extensive than might be imagined, and 
the application is worthy of consideration in cases where elec- 
trolytic action is severe. In the case noted the energy con- 
sumed was quite small. 

J. W. F. Buiizarp (by letter): The writer suggests wrap- 
ping the cable in manholes with tape or thin asbestos, and then. 
spreading a layer of about one-eighth inch of litharge on the 
cable. This will harden quickly and form a perfect protection 
from arcs, and may with ease be extended into the ducts for 
an inch or two. Ground mica and varnish would probably 
prove equally satisfactory, and cost considerably less. The 
asbestos or tape covering would prevent the compound used 
from adhering to the cable sheath, thus making the cable access- 
ible in case of trouble, by simply breaking the protecting shell. 

In addition to the dangers arising from the unconfined arc 
mentioned by Mr. Carlton, there is the often very serious one 
of gas explosions. No good ventilating system for under- 
ground conduits having yet been devised, this danger is an 
ever present one, and its importance should not be underrated. 


= 
7 ~~, ~~ ~ 
> 
" 
ms! 
' ee 
“ice 
“os. 
, 
S 
. 
nl = 
oe 


- Jl 


bh de allel oy, 
Ryn ent 
7 staal Rates e's 


~ 
r 


A paper presented at the 188th. Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Chicago, June 21-22, 1904. 


Copyright 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


SYNCHRONOUS MOTORS FOR REGULATION OF POWER- 
FACTOR AND LINE PRESSURE. 


BY B. G. LAMME 


GENERAL DISCUSSION. 

It is well known that the synchronous motor, running with- 
out load on an alternating-current circuit, for instance, can 
have its armature current varied by varying its field strength. 
A certain adjustment of field strength will give a minimum 
armature current. Either stronger or weaker fields will give 
increased current. These increased currents are to a great ex- 
tent wattless. If the field is weaker than the normal (t.e. the field 
for minimum armature current), the increased armature cur- 
rent is leading with respect to the e.m.f. waves in the motor 
and lagging with respect to the line e.m.f. The current in the 
motor is therefore corrective in its nature. For stronger than 
the normal field, the current is to a great extent lagging and 
tends to lessen the flux in the motor and the current is leading 
with respect to the line e.m.f. A synchronous motor therefore 
has an inherent tendency to correct conditions set up by im- 
proper adjustment of its field strength. The correcting current 
in the motor is drawn from the supply system and this current 
also has a correcting effect on the supply system, tending. to 
produce equalization between generated pressures in the motor 
and the supply pressure. This characteristic of the synchronous 
motor can readily be utilized for two purposes; namely, for 
varying the amount of leading or lagging current in a system 
for producing changes in the power-factor of the system (in- 
cluding transmission line, transformers, and generators), or a 
synchronous motor can be utilized for pressure regulation in 
a system. ; 


Weg 


481 


482 LAMME: REGULATION OF [June 21 


As the synchronous motor can be made to impress a leading 
current upon the system, and as the amount of this leading 
current will depend upon the field adjustment of the synchronous 
motor, it is evident that this property can be used for neutral- 
izing the effects of lagging current due to other apparatus on 
the system: The resultant leading or lagging current can be 
varied and the power-factor of the system can be controlled overa 
fairly wide range, depending upon the location of the synchronous 
motor or motors and upon the current capacity of the motor, etc. 

_As the wattless current in the motor is primarily a corrective 
current, it is evident that for most effective purposes for ad- 
justing power-factor on the system the corrective action of 
this current on the motor itself should not be too great. When 
used for such purpose the synchronous motor should therefore 
be one which would give a comparatively large current if short- 
circuited as a generator. Also the ‘motor should preferably be 
one in which the magnetic circuit is not highly saturated, for 
in the saturated machine the limits of adjustment in the field 
strength are rather narrow. 

As has been noted above, if the field strength of the motor 
be varied, a leading or lagging current can be made to flow in 
its armature circuit, this current being one which tends to 
adjust the pressure of the armature and that of the supply 
system. It is evident that if the armature pressure is held con- 
stant and the supply pressure varied, a leading or lagging 
current would also flow. If for instance the line pressure were 
dropped below that of the motor, then a lagging current ‘would 
flow in the motor tending to weaken its field, and a leading 
current would flow in the line, tending to raise the pressure on 
theline. Ifthe line pressure should be higher than that generated 
by the synchronous motor, then the current in the motor would 
be leading, tending to raise its pressure; while it would be lag- 
ging with respect to the line, tending to lower its pressure. 
‘The resultant effect would be to equalize the pressures of the 
line and motor, and there would thus be a tendency to regulate 
the line pressure to a more nearly constant value. It is evident 
‘that the less the synchronous motor is affected by the correc- 
tive current and the more sensitive the line is to such corrective 
action, the greater the tendency will be toward constant pres- 
sure on the line. It is therefore evident that the synchronous 
motor which gives the largest current on short circuit as a gen- 
erator would be the one which gives the greatest corrective 
action as regards pressure regulation of the system. 


1904.]- POWER-FACTOR AND LINE PRESSURE. 483 


For such regulation, the synchronous motor which gives a com- 
paratively large leading or lagging current with small change to 
the pressure of the system is the most suitable one. Or, the 
motor which gives the greatest change in the leading or lagging 
current is the one which gives best regulation. Itis the change 
in the amount of wattless current which produces the regulation. 
This current could vary from zero to 100 leading, for example, 
or could change from 50 leading to 50 lagging, or could change 
from 100 lagging to zero lagging. Any of these conditions 
could produce the desired regulating tendency, but all would 
not be equally good as regards the synchronous motor capacity. 
If in addition to the regulating tendency it is desired to correct 
for lower power-factor due to other apparatus on the circuit, 
it would probably be advisable to run a comparatively large 
leading current on the line due to the synchronous motor, and 
the regulating tendency: would be in the variations in the 
amount of leading current, and not from leading to lagging, 
or vice versa. <A larger synchronous motor for the same regu- 
lating range would be required than if the motor were used 
for pressure regulation alone. It is evident that the current 
capacity of a motor regulating from 50 leading to 50 lagging 
need be much less than for current regulating from 100 leading 
to zero. It is evident therefore that if there is to be compensa- 
tion for power-factor as well as regulation of pressure, that 
additional normal current capacity is required. 

REGULATING CHARACTERISTICS AS FIXED BY SPEED, FRE- 
QUENCY, ETc. 

In case such synchronous motors are required for regulation, 
purely, it may be suggested that such machines be operated 
at very high speeds compared with ordinary practice. At first 
glance it would appear that such a synchronous motor could 
be operated at the highest speed that mechanical conditions 
would allow, but there are other conditions than mechanical 
ones which enter into this problem. For instance, it is now 
possible to build machines of relatively large capacity for two 
poles for 60-cycle circuits, and for very large capacities—say 
1500 kilowatts—having four poles. Therefore mechanical con= 
ditions permit the high speeds, and the electrical conditions 
should be looked into carefully to see whether they are suitable 
for such service. As such synchronous motors should give rela- 
tively large currents on short circuit the effect of high speeds 
and a small number of poles on short-circuit current should be 
considered. 


484 LAMME: REGULATION OF [June 21 


In order to give full-load current on short circuit, the field 
ampere-turns of such a machine should be practically equal to 
the armature ampere-turns, taking the distribution of windings 
etc., into account. By armature turns in this case is not meant 
the ampere wires on the armature, but the magnetizing effect 
due to these wires. Therefore to give, for instance, five or six 
times full-load current on short circuit, the field ampere-turns 
should be relatively high compared with the armature. 
This means that the field ampere-turns per pole should be very 
high, or the armature ampere-turns per pole very low. Ex- 
perience shows that for very high speed machines, such as used 
for turbo-generators, there is considerable difficulty in finding 
room for a large number of field ampere-turns, and therefore 
in such machines it is necessary to reduce the armature ampere- 
turns very considerably for good inherent regulating charac- 
teristics. This in turn means rather massive construction, as 
the magnetic circuit in both the armature and field must have 
comparatively large section and the inductions must be rather 
high. This in turn means high iron-losses in a relatively small 
amount of material compared with an ordinary low-speed ma- 
chine, and abnormal designs are required for ventilation, etc., 
and for mechanical strength. 

An increase in the number of poles usually allows increased 
number of field ampere-turns without a proportionate increase 
in the number of armature ampere-turns. This condition is 
true until a large number of poles is obtained, when the leakage 
between poles may become so high that the effective induction 
per pole is decreased so that there is no further gain by increas- 
ing the number of poles, unless the machine is made of abnormal 
dimensions as regards diameter, etc. Experience has indi- 
cated that in the case of very high-speed and very low-speed 
alternators, it is more difficult to obtain a large current on short 
circuit than with machines with an intermediate number of 
poles. For example, it is rather difficult to make a 600 kilovolt- 
ampere, 3600 rev. per min., two-pole machine which will give 
three times full-load current on short circuit. A 4-pole, 1800 
rev. per min. machine can more easily be made to give three 
times full-load current on short circuit and with comparatively 
small additional weight of material. The material in the ro- 
tating part of the four-pole machine, while of greater weight, 
may be of considerably lower cost per pound. The stationary 
part of the four-pole machine may have a somewhat larger in- 
ternal diameter, but the radial depth of sheet-steel will be less 


1904. } POWER-FACTOR AND LINE PRESSURE. 485 


than in a two-pole machine. The total weight of material in 
the armature of a four-pole machine may be practically no 
greater than in a two-pole machine. Therefore a two-pole 
machine of this capacity should cost more than a four-pole 
machine, if designed to give the same current on short circuit. 
A six-pole machine would show possibly a slight gain over the 
one with four poles, but not nearly as much as the four-pole 
machine would over the one with two poles. The real gain of 
the six-pole over the four-pole construction would be in ob- 
taining a machine which would give more than three times 
full-load current on short circuit. It would possibly be as 
easy to obtain four times full load current on short circu:t 
with a six-pole machine as to obtain three times full load cur- 
rent on four-pole machine. An eight-pole machine would be 
in the same way somewhat better than the six-pele machine. 
Therefore if a 600 kilovolt-ampere machine giving six times 
full-load current on short circuit is desired, it would be advan- 
tageous to make the machine with possibly eight to twelve 
poles. The question of which would be the cheaper would de- 
pend upon a number of features in design. 

If very large short-circuit currents are desired, then, as in- 
dicated above, the number of poles for a given capacity should 
be increased, or the normal rating of the high-speed machine 
should be decreased. If, for example, the 600 kilovolt-ampere, 
3600 rev. per min. machine, mentioned above, should be rated 
at 200 kilovolt-amperes, then it could give nine times full-load 
current on short circuit; but such a method of rating is merely 
dodging the question. 

In general, the following approximate limits for speeds and 
short circuit currents for 60-cycle apparatus can be given. 
These limits are necessarily arbitrary, and are intended to rep- 
resent machines which could probably be made without using 
too abnormal dimensions; 

600 kilovolt-amperes, 3600 rev. per min., two to three times 
full-load current on short circuit. . 

1000 kilovolt-amperes, 1800 rev. per min., three to four 
times full-load current on short circuit. 

1500 kilovolt-amperes, 1200 rev. per min., four to five times 
full-load current on short circuit. 

- 2500 kilovolt-amperes, 900 rev. per min., four to five times 
full-load current on short circuit. 

For ‘25 cycles it is more difficult to give limiting conditions, 


486 LAMME: REGULATION OF [June 21 


as the choice of speeds is very narrow. If, for example, a 1500 
kilovolt-ampere, 2-pole, 1500 rev. per min. machine can be 
made to give three times full-load current on short circuit, 
then as machines of smaller rating cannot run at higher speed, 
the limiting condition of such machines must be the amount 
of current which they will give on short circuit. In the same 
way a 4-pole machine running at 750 rev. per min. may be 
made for 5000 kilovolt-amperes for three times full-load current 
as the limiting rating, and there is no choice of speeds for 
ratings between 1500 kilovolt-amperes and 5000 kilovolt-amperes. 

It should be noted that the above speeds are very high com- 
pared with ordinary alternator practice and are up to high- 
speed turbo-generator practice, but machines with the above 
short-circuit ratings and speeds are probably more costly to 
buiid than.machines of corresponding ratings at somewhat 
lower speeds. It will probably be found therefore that for 
the above maximum current on short circuit the cheapest 
synchronous motors for the given ratings will have somewhat 
lower speeds than those indicated above. It is certain that 
the lower-speed machines will .be easier to design and will be 
slightly quieter in operation. Probably best all-round condi- 
tions will be found at about half the above speeds. 

The above limiting conditions are given as only approxi- 
mate and are based upon machines having ventiliation as is 
usually found on rotatinz-Seld generators for high speed. Arti- 
ficial cooling, such as obtained with an air-blast or blowers, 
could modify the above figures somewhat; but in general it 
has been found that high-speed alternators can be worked up 
to the limit imposed by saturation before the limit imposed 
by temperature is attained. Therefore if higher saturation is 
not permissible, then there may be relatively small gain by 
using artificial cooling. 

SyncHRonous Motors on Lone Transmission Lines. 

One of the principal applications of such regulating syn- 
chronous motors would be for controlling or regulating the 
pressure at the end of a long transmission line for maintaining 
constant pressure at the end of the line, independent of fluc- 
tuations of load or change of power-factor. In this case, in- 
creased output of the transmission line may more than con- 
pensate for the cost of the regulating synchronous motor. In 
such a case the synchronous motor not only acts as a regulator 
on the system but costs nothing in the end. In general, the 
more current that such a synchronous motor will give on short- 


1904. | POWER-FACTOR AND LINE PRESSURE. 487 


circuit, the better saited it will be for its purpose at the end 
of a long transmission line. 

Where a number of such synchronous motors are installed - 
in the same station, the field adjustment must be rather care- 
fully made, to avoid cross-currents between machines; and the 
saturation characteristics of the various machines should be 
very similar. The better such machines are for regulating 
purposes, the poorer they are for equalizing each other by 
means of cross-currents. 

As to the use of dampers with such synchronous motors, 
it is difficult to say just what is required. A synchronous 
motor on a line with considerable ohmic drop is liable to hunt 
to some extent, especially if the prime mover driving the gen- 
erator has periodic variations in specd. If the synchronous 
motor gives very large current on short circuit, then its syn- 
chronizing power is high; this will tend to steady the operation 
of the motor and decrease the hunting. The writer believes 
that such motors in practice will be found to operate better 
and have better regulating power for constant pressure if pro- 
vided with rather heavy copper dampers effectively placed on 
the field poles. With such heavy dampers reaction of the 
armature on the field is retarded, and therefore the armature 
may give a larger momentary current than would flow if there 
were no damping effect; in other words, the motor is more 
sluggish than one without dampers. Therefore the addition 
of heavy dampers on such a machine may produce the same 
regulating effect which would be obtained by a machine without 
dampers which gives a larger current on short circuit. Also 
a machine with heavy dampers will usually be the one with 
the least hunting tendency and therefore will have the least 
eect on the transmission line due to hunting currents. 

A SyncHRONOUS MACHINE AS REGULATOR AND MorTor. 

In the above, the synchronous motor has been considered 
oaly as a regulator and not as a motor. It may be worth 
considering what would be the effect if the synchronous motor 
can do useful work at the same time that it regulates the 
system. In this case, with a given rated output, one com- 
ponent of the input will be wattless, and the other part will 
be energy. The ratio of these two components could be varied 
as desired. For example, considering the input as 100, the 
wattless component could be 60 when the energy component 
is 80; or the synchronous motor could carry a load of 80% 
of its rated capacity, this load including its own losses, and could 


2 


488 LAMME: REGULATION OF [June 21 


have ‘a regulating component of 60% of its rated capacity. 
If the motor is used as a regulating machine only, then its 
wattless component can be practically 100. It appears there- 
fore that the machine could be used more economically as both 
motor and regulator than as a regulator alone, but in such case 
it would probably be advisable to run the motor at somewhat 
lower speed than if operated entirely as a regulator. This 
reduction in speed may practically offset the gain in apparent 
capacity by using the machine for a double purpose. Also 
there is comparatively limited use for large synchronous motors 
for power purposes, as better results are usually obtained by 
subdividing the units and locating each unit nearest to its 
load. If a load could be provided which would permit very 
high-speed driving, then it would probably be of advantage 
to utilize the synchronous motor for driving. 
SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS AS REGULATORS. 

As the synchronous converter is one form of synchronous 
motor, the question of utilizing such machines for regulators 
should be mentioned. Upon looking into the question of dis- 
tribution of losses in the converter, it will be noted that the 
losses in the armature winding are not uniform. Investigacions 
show that at 100% power-factor the lowest heating in copper 
is obtained, and that any departure from this power-factor 
shows considerably increased loss in the copper, such loss being 
very high in certain portions of the winding. Next to the 
taps which lead to the collector there are strips of winding 
which at times are worked at a very high loss. Experience 
shows that it is not advantageous to operate converters at a 
low power-factor, and that if so operated continuously, or 
for any considerable periods, the winding should be made much 
heavier than for higher power-factors. Also in the usual de- 
sign of converters the field is not made as strong compared 
with the armature as in alternator practice, and therefore the 
regulating tendency of the converter compared with a generator 
or ordinary synchronous motor, is low. Synchronous con- 
verters can and do act as regulators of pressure for sudden 
changes of the supply pressure, but such correcting or regu- 
lating action should not be continual; that is, the pressure 
supplied to a converter from a line should nominally be that 
required by the converter for best operation as a synchronous 
converter. Unless designed for the purpose, a synchronous 
converter should not be used to correct low reas eae 
due to other apparatus on the circuit. 


¢ 


1904] ° POWER-FACTOR AND LINE PRESSURE. 489 


RELATIVE Costs oF SyNcHRONOUS MorTors As REGULATORS.’ 
- In the above considerations only general reference has been 
made to the cost of synchronous motors for regulating pres- 
sure and power-factors. It is difficult to give even approxi- 
mate figures for relative costs of such apparatus. As inti- 
mated before, there is some mean speed or number of poles 
which will be the most suitable for giving a certain maximum 
current on short circuit. For speeds slightly above or below 
such mean speed, the cost of the synchronous motor should 
vary almost in proportion to the speed, provided the maximum 
short-circuit current can be diminished somewhat at the same 
time. If the speed is further increased or further decreased, 
the cost will tend to approach a constant figure. As the ex- 
treme conditions are approached, the cost will begin to rise. 
The above assumptions are on the basis of continuous opera- 
tion at a given current capacity, this being the same in all cases. 
The above assumption is on the basis of decrease in the max- 
imum short-circuit current, as the machine departs from the 
mean, or best speed. If the same maximum current is re- 
quired, then the lowest cost should be at the mean or best 
speed, while at either side the cost should rise. 

It is evident that it would be difficult to give any figures on 
relative costs of such apparatus. The machine for the best 
or mean condition, should cost practically the same as an alter- 
nating-current generator of the same speed, output, and short- 
circuit characteristics. As this speed would probably be some- 
what highcr than usual generator speeds, the cost of such 
machine would therefore be somewhat lower. This cost would 
be to a considerable extent, a function of the current on short 
circuit for a given rated capacity of machine. As mentioned 
before, in giving a table of limiting speeds and short circuits, 
it is probable that one-half this limiting speed would be near 
the best condition. Such machines would probably cost from 
60% to 80% as much as similar machines for usual commercial 
high-speed conditions, neglecting turbo-generator practice. The 
frequency has considerable effect on this, as, for example, there 
_ ig small choice of speed as regards high-speed 25-cycle machines. 
Taking very general figures only, it is probable that in the 
case of a given capacity of machine for say three or four times 
fll-load current on short circuit the cost cannot be expected 
to be lower than one-half that of machines of similar rating at 
ordinary commercial speeds, turbo-generator practice being ex- 
cluded. ‘The costs in general should approximate more nearly 


490 LAMME: REGULATION OF [June 21 


those of turbo-generators; but again, an exact comparison 

cannot be made because in usual.practice the turbo-generators 

do not give three to four times full-load current on short circuit. 
Some OrHEeR ELEMENTS IN THE GENERAL PROBLEM. 

There are a number of other conditions in this general problem, 
such as the advantage or disadvantage of placing synchronous 
motors in the main power-house, or distributing them in a 
number of sub-stations. Also there is the question of the effect 
of the cost on the generating plant when used with such regu- 
lating synchronous motors. If higher power-factors are main- 
tained on the transmission system and generator, a cheaper 
form of generator can probably be used. The high power- 
factor permits a larger output from the transmission system 
and thus represents a gain. If the synchronous motor can be 
operated at its best speed and also,do work, then there is a 
further gain. If the synchronous motor should be located at 
the center of power distribution, and the power is distributed 
through induction motors, then thereisa possibility of reducing 
the cost of such motors by designing them for a lower power-factor, 
this being compensated for by the synchronous motor deliver- 
ing leading currents. As the cost per horse power of small 
motors will be much greater than the cost per horse power of 
a large regulating motor, there is a possibility of gain from this 
source. If the induction motors are distributed over wide 
territory, this gain would be lessened and might disappear. 

It should be mentioned that the power-factor of a system 
as influenced by difference in wave form has not been con- 
sidered in the preceding discussion. It is obviously impracticable 
to neutralize by a synchronous motor the effect of currents 
in a system due to difference in wave form. Such currents will 
in general be of higher frequency than the fundamental wave 
of the system, and the synchronous motor obviously could not 
correct for them, unless it impressed upon the system opposite 
waves of the same frequency. This would mean a synchronous 
motor with a different wave form from that of the system. 

The power-factor of a system will also be affected by any 
hunting of the apparatus on the system. It is evident that 
the synchronous motor could not correct or neutralize such 
effects, except through exerting a damping effect on the system 
and other apparatus on the system. A synchronous motor 
with heavy dampers can reduce the hunting in a system, but 
such hunting can also be damped by induction motors, with 
low-resistance secondaries, especially if of the cage type. This 


1904.) . POWER-FACTOR AND LINE PRESSURE. 491 


correcting effect should therefore be credited to the damper 
tather than to synchronous-motor action. There are.a number 
of other questions which arise in connection with this regu- 
lating feature of the synchronous motor, but the subject is too 
broad to permit even mention of them. 

SUMMARY. 

The substance of the preceding statements can be summarized 
as follows: 

1. A synchronous motor can be used to establish leading or 
lagging currents in its supply system by suitable field adjust- 
ment, and can thus affect or control power-factor or phase 
relations of the current in the alternating-current system. 

2. A synchronous motor will set up leading or lagging cur- 
Tents in its supply system if its field strength is held constant, 
and the pressure of the supply system is varied above or below 
that generated by the synchronous motor. Such leading or 
lagging currents in the supply system will tend to vary the 
pressure of the system. A synchronous motor can thus act 
as a regulator of the pressure of its supply system. 

3. This regulating action is greatest with synchronous motors 
which have the closest true inherent regulation (as indicated by 
high field magnetomotive force compared with the armature 
magnetomotive force) in distinction from machines which have 
close apparent regulation obtained by saturation of the mag- 
netic circuit. 

4. If the synchronous motor is used both for regulating the 
power-factor for neutralizing the effect of other apparatus on 
the circuit, and for regulating or steadying the pressure of 
the supply system, its normal capacity for regulating will be 
diminished. 

5. The most suitable speeds for best electrical conditions 
will in general be considerably below highest possible speeds 
as limited by mechanical conditions. 

6. Heavy dampers will increase the effectiveness of the reg- 
ulating tendency. 

7. If the synchronous motor can be used for power purposes 
as well as for regulation, its apparent capacity is increased. 
This is due to the fact that the regulation is obtained by means 
of a wattless component and the power from the energy com- 
ponent, and the arithmetical sum of these two is greater than 
their resultant which fixes the current capacity of the machine. 

8. Synchronous converters in general are not suited for reg- 


492 LAMME: REGULATION. [June 2¥. 


ulating the pressure or controlling the power-factor of an alter-- 
nating-current system. 

9. The costs of synchronous motors for regulating purposes - 
will in general be lower than for alternating-current motors. 


or generators of customary speeds, and will approach more- 
nearly to turbo-generator practice. 


rm 
C24 Se mE 
Sm Pane 8 bak 


494 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


Discussion on ‘‘ SynNcHRoNouS Motors FOR THE REGULATION 
oF PowER-FacTor AND LINE VOLTAGE.” 


F. O. BLracKweEt_: In a large plant it is an unnecessary ex- 
travagance. to figure the copper for a low power-factor when 
the power-factor can be made 100% by adding leading current 
to. the lagging current caused by induction motors. Even a 
small lagging power-factor increases the amount of copper 
very greatly for any assumed regulation. 

Rotary condensers are also of great advantage in permitting 
the pressure of a power transmission system to be regulated 
at the centre of distribution. It would be perfectly possible 
to run a power transmission system with rotary condensers 
in the sub-station without any communication between the 
sub-station and the distant power-house. The first case of 
the use of a rotary condenser that the speaker knows of was. 
in a Southern cotton-mill which was equipped with about. 
4000 h.p. of induction motors and 3000 h.p. of generators. 
The pressure and the current at the generators was excessive 
on account of the low power-factor of the load.and something 
had to be done to relieve the apparatus. By installing a 
rotary condenser of 500 apparent kilowatts capacity in the 
mill the pressure at the generator, if the speaker remembers. 
correctly, was cut down about 15% and the current was re- 
duced about 20%. The rotary condenser also greatly improved 
the regulation of the system and avoided the installation of a 
new generator in the power-house, which would have other- 
wise been necessary and would have cost severai times as 
much as the rotary condenser. 

A 6000 h.p. plant in India, which transmitted power 
90 miles, reached the limit of its capacity. The owners de- 
cided to increase its capacity by installing a 1000-kw. rotary 
condenser, and they have been enabled to transmit 50% more: 
power over their existing line, with the same regulation as 
they had originally with the smaller amount of power. If it 
had not been for the rotary condenser they would have had 

‘to construct an entirely new transmission pole-line. 

It is possible not only to maintain 100% power-factor in a 
transmission system, but also a leading current which will 
boost the pressure over the reactance of the line and step-up 
and step-down transformers, so that you can have as high a 
pressure at the sub-station as at the power-house, or even a 
higher pressure. 

Of course, if a synchronous motor can be used to do useful 
work it is more economical than a rotary condenser. The 
most efficient power-factor would be 70% leading, at which 
point the energy and wattless components of the current are 
equal. You would then get 70% of the rated capacity of the 
motor for work and 70% for rotary condenser action. 

As Mr. Lamme has pointed out, the high-speed, steam- 
turbine alternator is not the cheapest machine that can be de- 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO, 495 


signed. A speed of about one half that used in turbo-alter- 
nators avoids all extreme strains which require special mate- 
rials and methods of construction and is therefore more eco- 
nomical in design. 

W.L. Waters: This paper is a suitable sequel to the paper 
which Mr. Lincoln read last year on the “‘ Choice of Frequency 
for Transmission Lines.” Mr. Lincoln showed that if the 
power-factor on a transmission line was low, the amount of 
power which could be transmitted over that line, with reason- 
able regulation, was surprisingly small, and it followed from 
this that the power-factor should be kept as near as possible 
to unity. 

Mr. Lamme is not quite clear when he describes the effect 
on the regulation of an over-excited synchronous motor. The 
beneficial effect of a synchronous motor is entirely due to the 
leading current, which it takes from the line. The amcunt 
of leading current which a motor can take from the line is 
decided by two things: 1. the margin in ampere-turns, which 
we have on the magnets. 2. the current in amperes, which 
the armature can carry. 

Both of these are limited by the heating of the magnets 
and armature, so that, if we are manufacturing a synchronous 
motor for regulating the pressure on the transmission line, 
the correct rating of that machine should be the amperes of 
leading current which it can take when running at a given 
pressure without the temperature rise of the magnets or arma- 
ture exceeding 40° cent. The normal rating of the machine 
and the short-circuit current tell you very little as regards 
the value of the machine for producing leading currents. We 
might have a large motor capable of giving a large short-circuit 
current, which, at the same time, was valueless for pressure 
regulation on account of the fact that we could not over-excite 
the magnets because their temperature rise was already high. 

As the rating of the motor, as above suggested, is entirely 
limited by temperature, the force of Mr. Lamme’s remark 
that turbo-alternators are unsuitable for this work beccmes 
very plain. Those who have had experience with these very 
high-speed machines know that the great difficulty in designing 
them is to obtain low temperature rises, especially on the 
field magnets, The other objection to high-speed machines, 
that they are less reliable in operation, is not of much im- 
portance in the case where these motors are used exclusively. 
for regulation of the power-factor. So considering only the 
question of temperature rise, probably the most economical 
‘machine would be one in which the output was about 250 kw. 
per pole in a 25-cycle machine and about 125 kw. per pole in 
the 60 cycle. 

’ Mr. Lamme calls attention to the inherent regulating power 
of a synchronous motor. This effect certainly exists, but 
under ordinary conditions it is unimportant, and the main 


496 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


use for the synchronous motor as a pressure regulator would 
be as a hand-operated regulator. In this respect, Mr. Lamme’s 
statement that ‘‘ the motor should preferably be one in which 
the magnetic circuit is not highly saturated,’ is incorrect, 
because a motor which had saturated magnets would have a 
much greater inherent regulating capacity than one in which 
the magnets were unsaturated; if the motor were infinitely 
large and perfectly saturated its inherent regulating capacity 
would be perfect. This statement, as regards unsaturated 
field magnets, is also incorrect if we consider the motor as 
being hand regulated, because the effect is one of ampere- 
turns and not of magnetic flux; that is, assuming the magnetic 
leakage is not excessive. 

The effect of copper dampers on the pole pieces is only a 
time effect. They slightly delay the effect of a sudden rush of 
leading or lagging current, but in any case this effect only 
applies to the inherent regulating automatic action of the 
machine, so that for all practical purposes the effect of dampers 
on the pole pieces can be neglectéd, except as regards their 
effect on the hunting of the system. In regard to this hunting, 
Mr. Lamme’s statement that squirrel-cage induction motors 
are more powerful as dampers than motors with coil-wound 
secondaries and collector rings, is not correct. The damping 
effect of an induction motor is greater the lower the resist- 
ance of the secondary. If we consider modern commercial 
induction motors, that is, motors capable of starting under 
full load without taking excessive current, then the resistance 
of a squirrel-cage secondary is about five or six times that 
of a coil-wound secondary with short-circuiting device, and 
in consequence the damping effect of the squirrel-cage arma- 
ture would be proportionately less. 

The question of the use of a synchronous motor running 
light as a pressure regulator is entirely a commercial question, 
and the advisability of its use in any particular case must 
be decided by the question whether the cost of this motor is 
more than compensated for by the increased output obtained 
from the line. 

H. B. Gear: This question has been discussed thus far 
with reference to the compensation of systems where the low 
power-factor was due to lagging current. 

In a system operating at 40000 volts with 200 miles of 
line the conditions may be reversed, the low power-factor 
being due to the component of leading current caused by the 
charging of the line. In such a system the kilovolt-amperes 
required to charge the lines amount to about 1800. It there- 
fore requires a load of 3000 kilovolt-amperes at 80% lagging 
to bring the power-factor of this system up to 100%. 

The use of a synchronous motor in compensating for a low 
power-factor on such a system would therefore be limited 
to the compensation of leading current up to the point where 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 497 7% 


the load of induction motors reached 3000 kilovolt-amperes. 
Under certain conditions it might therefore be possible to in- 
stall a synchronous motor of relatively small capacity, using 
it during the light-load period to compensate for leading cur- 
rent and during the heavy-load period to compensate for lag-, 
ging current. 

W. B. Jackson: All of us must appreciate that this paper 
upon synchronous motors is an excellent and timely one. Al-. 
though the question as to the proper use of synchronous ap- 
paratus has been recognized as quite important for a number 
of years, yet it is assuming much greater importance as the 
great transmission systems are becoming more common. ’ 

One phase of the use of synchronous motors has nct been 
touched upon in the paper. In tne construction of cur power 
transmission plants receiving their power from water, it is not 
unusual for the hydroelectric portion of the plant to be devel- 
oped to a point far beyond the minimum capacity cf the water. 
Consequently an auxiliary steam plant is installed to assist 
during low-water periods. Under such conditions there is 
often an excellent possibility for the plant to be so designed 
that the generators in the steam department may be used for 
balancing motors during the time of heavy load upon the, 
hydraulic plant. It is readily appreciated that at times of 
low water or of serious back-water conditions the transmission 
department of the system will be lightly loaded and that, 
therefore, ample electrical capacity will be at hand to take 
care of a lower power-factor without difficulty so far as the 
transmission department is concerned, and at the same time 
we have the steam auxiliary in operation which will act as the bal-. 
ancing factor upon the system. 

Why should not any such plant be so arranged that the 
engines and generators can be readily disconnected during 
the times when balancing by synchronous motors is desirable? 
In other words, when we have the transmission side of the 
system loaded to its utmost capacity? There is no reason 
why the possibilities of our auxiliary generator as a balancing 
motor should be lost sight of simply because it is normally 
connected to an engine. It is nct at all difficult to arrange 
to disconnect these alternators from the engines and use them 
for balancing machines, thus making a dcuble use of the ap- 
paratus that is installed for the auxiliary plant. . 

The reversible use of alternating-current generators in trans- 
mission plants, either as generators or motors, as the occasion 
may require, is not uncommon, but the reversible use cf the 
thachines as generator or balancing device is quite a different 
question. ‘ Rtete 

Reference is made in the paper to the possibility of so in- 
stalling synchronous motors upon the circuit that they may: be 
caused to hold the pressure at the end of the line as high or, 
even higher than that of the generators. There are several 


498 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


plants where such use has been made of synchronous motors 
for years past; in fact, there are two plants that the speaker 
knows of where it has been customary to operate generators 
at approximately the same pressure as at the distributing end 
of the line, these being plants where a large part of the capacity 
of the plant was supplied to synchronous motors, and where 
it was possible to get into communication with the several 
synchronous motor installations without difficulty from the 
power-house. It would:probably not be difficult to find plants 
where it would be practically impossible to operate at all were 
the synchronous motors now installed replaced by induction 
motors. 

F. A.C. PERRINE: The suggestion Mr. Jackson has just made 
is a very important one, and we all would perhaps be inter- 
ested to learn that it has been quite extensively used in some 
Western plants, and in connection with reserve steam ma- 
chinery for compensating for large leading current on the 
line, and also automatic compounding of the synchronous 
motors. For example, in the steam station of the Oakland 
Transit Company, Oakland, California, supplied by the Old 
Bay Counties system, transmission of 140 miles, they were 
compelled to have a steam reserve, on account of fluctuations 
in pressure. F. H. Baum, one of our members, was called on 
to determine what cculd be done, as on account of the very 
heavy leading current when the load was light the pressure 
went up, and when the load was heavy the pressure went down. 
The fluctuations of the pressure were of a serious nature. 

Mr. Baum compounded the exciter for the synchronous 
motors by the direct current, using an extra winding on the ex- 
citer, and he arranged this compounding so as to maintain 
a constant pressure on the system and almost a constant power- 
factor automatically without any hand regulation cf the ma- 
chine or the synchronous motors. He found, furthermore, by 
examination with an oscillograph, that Mr. Lamme has ap- 
parently not made himself understocd on page 552, as he 
says it is not possible by means of the synchronous motor to 
correct errors in wave form. In the latter part he says: 
“such currents will in general be of higher frequency than the 
fundamental wave of the system, and the synchronous motor 
obviously could not correct for them, unless it impressed upon 
the system opposite waves of the same frequency. This would 
mean a synchronous motor with a different wave form from 
that of the system.” That is exactly what the synchronous 
motor does at the end of a long line; at the end of a long line 
the initial wave form is very seriously distorted, and the syn- 
chronous motor having a: wave form similar to the generator 
corrects for the variation induced at end of the line. 

Again, in some of the mining plants supplied from long- 
distance transmission lines where the charge has been made on 
the basis of the maximum current, they have found it advan- 


1904.] -. DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 499 


tageous to install synchronous condensers fcr maintaining high 
power-factor, the plant being operated by induction motors, 
the synchronous condenser being used as a reserve steam gen- 
erator when, by reason of any accident, the power from the 
transmission line was interrupted. 

As regards small plants where it is necessary to maintain 
a constant power-factor—and the power-factor is already rea- 
sonably high, due to the use of lighting load entirely—the 
synchronous motor as a regulator can be conveniently used, 
especially where a combined railroad and lighting load are 
operated from the same generator, and this again, by com- 
pounding the synchronous motor through its exciter from the 
direct-current end of the system. And again, this is used in 
connection with the steam-driven alternator auxiliary; that is, 
where a large alternating-current generatcr is employed during 
periods of light load, that load can be carried from a separate 
steam-engine of lower capacity driving an alternating-current 
generatcr. When the load rises beyond the capacity of the 
small engine the latter can be cut off and the load carried from 
the large alternator through the synchronous motor, the latter 
being compounded through the direct-current side and thus 
the power-factor maintained. This dces away with the greatest 
objection to the installation of synchronous motors; the use 
of the synchronous motor gives the operator control of the 
whole system. 

The matter of cost as presented by Mr. Lamme is surprising ; 
not because he states there is a certain speed at which we find 
a minimum cost, but due to his statement that the cost of 
the synchronous converter will be freom 60 to 80 per cent. of 
the cost of an ordinary-speed generator. If we take a gen- 
erator having about 100 revolutions per’minute, ccst will be 
about ten dollars a kilowatt, while high-speed machines recently 
sold for four dollars a kilowatt. And this shows, furthermore, 
that the use of the synchronous motor as a condenser is about 
as cheap a, regulating machine as can very well be cbtained. 
It is a question whether in large sizes there can be built any 
hand-regulating induction regulatcrs that will ccst much less 
than four dollars a kilowatt, at which to-day these large high- 
speed machines are actually being sold, and that makes a mini- 
mum cost of a high-speed machine about 40 per cent. of the 
cost of the ordinary-type machine, rather than 60 per cent- 
The general question is an exceedingly important one, taken in. 
conjunction with the fact that it is possible by the use of these 
synchronous condensers, especially when connected with direct- 
current machines, to automatically compound; the same autc- 
matic compound may be prcduced through the exciter by 
means of the Tirrell regulator or some other regulator of 
this form. And when we get away frcm the difficulty and 
the inaccuracy of hand regulation, we have overcome the 
most serious objection that has been raised in any of the dis- 
cussions on the employment of the synchronous condenser. - 


590 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


F. O. BLracKweLt:. In connection with what Dr. Perrine 
has just said, the speaker would say that it is possible to put 
an automatic field regulator on a rotary condenser which will 
make it maintain constant pressure in the sub-station not- 
withstanding variations in speed and pressure in the power-house. 
To carry this idea still further, a fly-wheel can be added to 
the rotary condenser which will steady the plant by absorbing 
and. giving out energy when the load fluctuates. This has 
been done in Germany on a considerable scale where large 
hoists are operated by motor-generator sets with fly-wheels. 
The steam-turbine alternator is well adapted to be used as a 
rotary condenser where steam power.is auxiliary to a long- 
distance transmission water-power. plant. Its fly-wheel ca- 
pacity is large and the friction of a steam-turbine, particularly 
if it is mounted on a vertical shaft, is extremely small. 

RaLtpH D. MersHon: ‘The speaker wishes to take issue 
with Mr. Waters on his statement that Mr. Lamme has over- 
estimated the value of the inherent regulation of the motor. 
Even if the regulation of pressure is,.as Mr. Waters says, a 
matter of hand regulation, still the measure of effectiveness 
of this hand regulation is the extreme regulation possible, 
the regulation from full load to no load. ‘The less the extreme 
variation is, the better the regulation, whether it be manual or 
automatic. Mr. Lamme has brought out the conditions in the 
design of the synchronous motor that are necessary for such 
regulation, and it is the opinion. of the speaker that he has 
not laid any too much stress on it. 

The paper by Mr. Lincoln to which Mr. Waters also refers 
‘stated the limitations and the amount of power that could 
be transmitted over a line at different frequencies with a given 
limitation in the amount of drop. He took the drop at 20 
per cent. Now if you take a given drop as the limitation, then 
Mr. Lamme’s contention is an extremely interesting and im- 
portant one. 

The extreme regulation of any system; that is, its regulation 
from full load to no load, is a measure of its regulation for 
any change of load, since the change of pressure for any change 
of load, large or small, is proportional to the extreme regula- 
tion. Therefore, whether the regulation of a system be auto- 
matic or manual, the extreme regulation is of importance. 
The extreme regulation may or may not be identical with the 
total drop in the system. 

in a circuit feeding its load direct. without the aid of cor- 
rective synchronous motors, the extreme regulation and the total 
drop are identical. Hence the regulation; that is, the variation 
of the delivered pressure varies as the load varies, is meas- 
ured by the total drop. But if synchronous motors be used to 
control the power-factor the total drop is not necessarily the 
same as the extreme regulation and therefore not necessarily 
a measure o. the regulation. Whether or not it is a measure 


1904.} DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 501 


depends upon the characteristics of the mctors used. If the 
motors have in them, when delivering a leading current to 
the system (= a lagging current in the motors themselves) 
a drop equal to that of the transmission, then the extreme 
regulation wilt be just equal to the drop so that the total drop 
is a measure of the regulation. If the drop in the motors 
when delivering leading current is greater than that of the 
transmission, then the extreme regulation of the system will 
be greater than the total drop of the transmission and the 
regulation worse than the total drop would indicate. If the 
drop in the synchronous motors is less than that of the trans- 
mission, then the extreme regulation of the system will be less 
than the total drop in the transmission and the regulation 
better than the total drop would indicate. 

Since, with a given drop, in a long transmission having a 
lagging power-factor, a limit is soon reached in the amount 
of power which can be transmitted, it is desirable in long trans- 
missions to use corrective svnchronous motors. The use of 
such motors is also advisable from the fact that by reducing 
the transmission current they reduce the transmission loss. 
From what has been said it is clear that the regulation of such 
a system will be largely dependent upon the regulating quali- 
ties which the corrective motors have when a lagging current 
is being drawn from them. The subject of the regulation of 
such motors under such conditions is therefore of very con- 
siderable importance, and Mr. Lamme has, in the opinicn of 
the speaker, rightly laid great stress upon it. 

S. B. Storer: Mr. Waters has taken exception to Mr. 
Lamme’s reference to the use of the squirrel-cage induction 
motor. The speaker is more inclined to agree with Mr. Lamme 
than with Mr. Waters, as the resistance of the squirrel-cage 
winding would seem to be considerably less than that indi- 
cated by Mr. Waters’ remarks. Mr. Waters says that in this 
form of secondary there is from six to seven times the resistance 
of that of the armature type of induction motor secondary. 
If that is the case then the squirrel-cage winding would drop. 
below synchronous speed from six to seven times as much 
as the other type of winding. General practice dces not show 
this to be true. 

On a large motor with the squirrel-cage secondary the regu- 
lation in speed is two to four per cent., and if the resistance 
of that secondary were six or seven times the resistance of 
the motor having the regular armature type secondary winding 
then the slip of the latter would be one-sixth as much, or only 
a fraction of one per cent. General practice does not show 
this to be true either. 

Cuas. F. Scott: This subject, involving as it does syn- 
chronous apparatus for adjustment of regulation and power- 
factor, is one which seems more or less confused. In con- 
sidering questions of this kind the speaker has a method of 


502 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


analysis which is quite simple and straightforward. It involves 
a physical rather than a mathematical analysis of these prob- 
lems, and it may be well to give it here. 

In an alternating-current system one may consider that 
two things are being generated; power and electromotive force. 
‘The system receives its power through the shafts of its generators, 
‘either frcm water-wheels or engines (for convenience we shali 
simply refer to engines). The system receives its electro- 
active force through the magnetic field produced by the field 
magnets cf the generator. The greater the field strength the 
greater also is the electromotive force. The field magnets for 
supplying the electromctive force correspond in a way, there- 
fcre, to the engines which supply power. 

A power-hcuse may contain two similar outfits, both driven 
by similar engines and supplying equal power to the system. 
Furthermore, bcth of the generators supply electromotive force 
and have field magnets and equal field magnetizing currents 
and supply equal electromotive forces to the system. If the 
two cutfits are running in parallel and the power be shut off 
frcm one of the engines, then the system will receive power 
from one outfit, but electromotive force from both. The drop 
in electromotive force on change of load will not be deter- 
mined by the joint action of a single machine but of the two 
machines. Therefore the regulation will be much clcser with 
the two generators in multiple and will be essentially the same 
whether power is received frcm cne engine or from two. 

If one of the machines be transferred from the power-house 
to a distant sub-station there remains the same capacity for 
generating the electromotive force as there was when the two 
machines were clcse together. There is a difference, however, 
in that one of the generators is now located at the point of 
distribution so that it is a generator of electromotive force 
close to the point of distribution without interference of line 
Icsses in the circuit from the pewer-house. There is thus seen 
to be a clcse similarity in the action of two generators running 
side by side in parallel and one generator operating a syn- 
chronous motor at a distant point in so far as the generation 
of electromotive force is concerned. 

In Mr. Lamme’s paper it is shown that the better the regu- 
lating characteristics of the machine, or in other words, the 
greater the effectiveness of its field, the more effective it is 
for its purposes. If we follow through the paper and note 
the different characteristics desirable in the machine, and if 
we further consider the various points brought out in the dis- 
cussion we shall find that they may all be comprehended in a 
clear and definite way by simply assuming that we have trans- 
ferred a generator from the power-house to a distant point 
upon the line where the electromotive force is needed and 
where it may be more effectively generated than in the power- 
house. There is nothing mysterious in the fact that a syn- 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 503 


chronous motor is used. If it were not for the line losses it 
would be better to generate all the electromotive force in the 
power-house in the power generator. In general it is cheaper 
and more effective to provide generators with the desired field 
strength and regulating qualities rather than to provide other 
synchronous machines for generating the electromctive fcrce. 
The reason that it is sometimes preferable to use the auxiliary 
synchronous machine lies in the fact that it may be placed 
near the load, and therefore generate the electromotive force 
where it is needed. 

In considering the second division of the paper, namely, 
that relating to the control of the power-factor cf the circuit, 
we may follow the same line of reasoning. In cur electric 
system we may consider that we are generating currents of 
two kinds; one a current in phase with the electromotive force; 
the other a wattless current having a phase relaticn of 90° to 
the former. Ordinarily these two currents are produced in 
the same armature and combine to give a resultant at some 
intermediate angle dependent upon the relative values of the 
two currents, wpon which in turn the power-factor is dependent. 

If, again, we consider that a power-house-has two gener- 
ators, we know that the two could supply equal power and 
equal current at the same power-factor. On the other hand, 
adjustments could be made so that one of the generators will 
supply all of the working current of the circuit at 100% power- 
factor while the other supplies the wattless current. In this 
case the engine of the second generator would do no work 
and it might be disconnected from its generator. In general, 
however, as pointed out in the original paper, this is not a 
good thing to do, because the two kinds of current can be 
generated in one armature more economically than in two 
armatures. For example, if the requirements of the circuit 
are that there be 70 amperes cf each kind of current, then 
each armature must develop 70 amperes. The resultant of 
the current, however, is 100 amperes, so that one machine 
having a capacity of 100 amperes could give the same effective 
output as two machines each of 70 amperes. This shows the 
fallacy of the suggestion sometimes made, that a machine 
running idle should be installed in a power-house for supplying 
wattless current. It i: much more economical to install a 
generator of sufficient size for supplying the necessary current. 
There may of course be exceptional conditions, where the 
generator is already installed, in which the best arrangement 
under the circumstances may be the installation of an auxiliary 
machine. When, however, there is a transmission line, it is 
obviously desirable to carry simply the power current for trans- 
mitting the nécessary energy and not to impose the wattless 
current upon the transmission line. The wattless current is 
objectionable in the line for two reasons; it increases the total 
current to be carried, and it also very considerably increases 


504 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


the drop in pressure in the line. If therefore the wattless 
current could be generated at the point where it is needed; 
that is, at the point of distribution, the transmission line will 
be very greatly relieved and its capacity increased. In a sense 
therefore we are simply relieving the transmission line from 
carrying wattless current and putting the generator for produc- 
ing this current at the sub-station near the load. 

If the various points taken up in the original paper relating 
to the desirable characteristics of the machine and also the 
points brought out in the discussion are considered, we shall 
find that the various requirements are quite rational and that 
the purpose is simply to generate two currents, one a power 
current at the power-house and the other a wattless current 
at the sub-station. 

The synchronous machine at the sub-station can therefore 
accomplish both of the desired results. Namely, by supplying 
electromotive force it can facilitate the pressure regulation, 
and by supplying wattless current it can relieve the trans- 
mission line. ; 

“Many of the objections to synchronous motors for general 

use do not apply to the use of synchronous machines for the 
foregoing purpcses. It is the speaker’s opinion—which he 
thinks is coming to be the general opinion also—that a con- 
siderable number of synchronous motors of various sizes, 
particularly motors of small size, scattered over a system under 
the control of various operators, does not constitute a satis- 
factory working condition. In a theoretical way it may be 
all right and matters may run smoothly for a time, but when 
an accident occurs at one place trouble is very likely to occur 
in many places, resulting in interruption to service. 
- The induction motor is the simple one for the general dis- 
tribution of power. In those cases where the magnetizing or 
wattless current taken by it cannot well be provided by the 
generating and transmission system. as is sometimes the case 
in long-distance lines, this current may be supplied by large 
synchronous machines running in sub-stations. When large ma- 
chines are operated in stations so that the machines them- 
selves are few and the operators are intelligent and skilled 
men, then objections to the synchronous operations are reduced 
to a minimum and the operation is comparable to the ordinary 
synchronous converter sub-station which has demonstrated itself 
to be quite practicable. 

Even this statement does not imply that all large motors 
should be synchronous motors. The large induction motor 
has a relatively high power-factor, and the operating sim- 
plicity of this motor and the characteristics of its speed-torque 
curve make it in many cases much preferable to the synchronous 
motor. 

The use of one machine which may sometimes be driven by an 
engine at the sub-station and at other times as a pressure regu- 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO: » 605 


lator, has been mentioned once or twice in the discussion. A 
case came to the speaker's attention some time ago in which 
such an arrangement seemed to be advisable from the stand- 
point of the customer. The customer was intending to pur- 
chase a considerable amount of power. from a transmission 
system, and his proposed contract was based on power furnished 
at a certain power-factor. If the power-factor was lower the 
tate was to be increased, and if the power-factor was higher 
the rate was to be decreased, and the immediate problem was 
whether the increase of power-factor which could be secured 
through the use of an auxiliary synchronous machine would 
make it worth while to make arrangements so that the ma- 
chine could run part of the time as an idle synchronous motor 
and part of the time as a generator driven by an engine. It 
was proposed to install the engine for a relay in cases of emer- 
gency. The synchronous machine would therefore be so ar- 
ranged that it could be used as a generator of wattless current 
for raising the power-factor under ordinary conditions and as a 
power generator in cases of interruption to the outside service. 

The speaker is inclined to think that this general method of 
operation is applicable to long distances and larger powers, 
and that it will not be found expedient to introduce it in smaller 
plants on account of the extra complications which may more 
than compensate for the advantages and expense involved. 

F. A.C. Perrine: Will Mr. Scott please say if it is a correct 
corollary to the first part of his remarks to state that in case 
of long-distance transmission plant generating at about five 
cents per kilowatt-hour, what is a fair figure for such plants 
transmitting to long distances? Would it be correct to state 
that it were better to use a steam-driven generator for regu- 
lating the pressure—power from the steam-driven generator 
costing about one cent per kilowatt hour—or a synchronous 
motor? 

Cuas. F. Scott: Of course special cases will admit of almost 
anything, but the speaker did not have in mind the supply 
of mechanical energy at the sub-station simply to assist in 
either the regulation of current or pressure. That would not 
be necessary in general, unless the speed were the real factor 
which needs correction and regulation. There may be cases in 
which the fluctuations in load would cause fluctuations of 
speed in a water-wheel that a steam-engine would be a good 
adjunct as a speed regulator. But the speaker has not had in 
mind the introduction of power from a steam-engine simply 
to assist the control of the pressure or the current. 

J. S. Pecx: There is an interesting bit of history connected 
with this system of adjusting power-factor by means of a syn- 
chronous motor. About 1890, Mr. Lamme did a considerable 
amount of experimental work along this line, with a view of 
determining the extent to which the pressure of a generator 
could be varied by changing the field strength of a synchronous 


506 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


motor which was supplied from it. Experiments were carried 
on for a year or two in order to determine definitely what 
could be done, and in 1893 an application was made for a patent 
covering this system of operation. The patent was, however, 
refused by the Patent Examiner, on the ground that a current 
could not lead the pressure. which produced it. About one 
year later, a patent was granted to another engineer covering 
substantially the same arrangement. The matter was called 
to the attention of the Patent Office officials, and after a time 
Mr. Lamme’s original patent application was granted. 

A perusal of this Patent Specification shows that as early 
as 1893 Mr. Lamme had a clear conception of the action of 
synchronous apparatus in controlling the power-factor and 
pressure of an alternating-current system, as well as the reasons 
why the various results were obtained. Although the specifica- 
tion was written more than ten years ago, practically all the 
essential points which have been brought up to-day were covered 
therein. ; 

Dr. Perrine expresses surprise-at’ the fact that Mr. Lamme 
says that the cost of a synchronous motor régulator -will be 
from 60% to 80% of the cost of an alternating-current gener- 
ator of the same capacity and of ordinary speeds. The rela- 
tive costs given by Mr. Lamme are based on equal currents 
on short circuit. Mr. Lamme calls attention to the fact that 
high-speed turbo-generators, of which the cost per kilowatt is 
comparatively low, are usually designed to give less current 
on short circuit than generators operated at the usual speeds. 
Regarding the superior regulating action of the motor sup- 
plied with dampers on the poles, Mr. Lamme refers to mo- 
mentary effects only. 

S.'B. Storer: In connection with the use of synchronous 
regulators, one point has not been referred to; that is, the effect 
in case of a short circuit in a very large system where syn- 
chronous regulators are used for maintaining a very high power- 
factor. The present tendency is to limit the short-circuit of 
all large plants to as small an amount as possible consistent 
with fair regulation. It seems to the speaker that with the 
general use of these synchronous regulators in sub-stations the 
short-circuit current which might be obtained at a given point 
would be so much larger than where induction regulators are 
used, that it will be very difficult to overcome and will prove 
an objection to their use. 

H. W. Bucx (by letter): Mr. Lamme’s paper shows the 
important functions which a synchronous motor can perform 
upon a power transmission system. The writer should be in- 
clined to go further and say that synchronous machinery of 
some kind is a necessity on almost every power system, where 
alternating current is distributed, as a compensator for lagging 
currents. 

If the power is used by a large number of small consumers, 


1904.” DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 5u7 


as is frequently the condition, the majority of these users will 
install induction motors, both on acccunt of the simplicity of 
the type, and also because their conditions of operation require 
frequent stopping and starting and high torque on starting, which 
conditions exclude the use of motors of the synchronous type. 
While it may be argued that latge modern induction motors with 
small air-gaps have high power-factors at full load, many of 
the motors on the average power system may not be very large, 
and they are seldom running at full load. Their power-factors 
at fractional loads will be much less. Over the entire system 
there will be perhaps hundreds of induction motors, some of 
them running light, many of them running at about half load 
or less, and only a few operating at the exact load at which 
the high guaranteed power-factor can be obtained. 

The result of this condition is, in the experience of the writer, 
' that the average power-factor on such circuits at normal loads 
is not over 70%, and frequently it falls as low as 60%. Such 
a condition is, of course, highly objectionable. This increased 
current, which earns no revenue but which simply causes 
heating and excessive “drops ’”’ all along the line, will so en- 
large the investment in generating and transmitting apparatus 
that the profits from the business may be sericusly impaired. 

If the electrostatic capacity of the transmission system is 
high, compared with the amount of power transmitted, as is the 
condition in some very long-distance high-pressure systems, 
the charging current of the line may offset the magnetizing 
currents of the induction motors and no other source of leading 
current is required. Ina distribution such as that from Niagara 
to Buffalo, however, where the transmission pressure is com- 
paratively low, and the induction motor load very large, the 
corrective effect of the line-charging current is negligible, and 
some source of leading current is essential. 

Condensers as now constructed are expensive and bulky, 
and are practically out of the question for commercial fre- 
quencies. Synchronous apparatus, then, is the only possible 
source of the required leading current, and their installation 
should be insisted upon by the distributing company in every 
case where the users’ conditions will permit. Arrangements 
can usually be made with the customer to operate such motors 
with leading current; if not, they can certainly be operated 
at unity power-factor, so at least they will not add any lagging 
current to the system. 

Synchronous converters will of course answer the same pur- 
pose, but their armatures will not allow as much leading current 
as a synchronous motor, on account of heating. It may be 
of interest to note here that if the single-phase railway be- 
comes the standard system of the future, the railway syn- 
chronous converters now so commonly used on power systems 
for phase control, will disappear, and the lagging currents in 
the single-phase motors will be added. Synchronous motors as 
sources of leading current will then be needed all the more. 


508 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


There is a general feeling that a synchronous motor cannot 
be used in any installation where torque is required to bring 
the plant up to speed, and that in general a synchronous motcr 
is a very difficult machine to start. Synchronous motors are 
now designed with a considerable starting torque, and with 
such characteristics that they will come up to synchronism 
very promptly without taking more than 25% in excess cf 
full-load current. A suitable starting device is of course re- 
quired. If very high starting torque is required, friction- 
clutches can be installed between the motor shaft and the 
work, which can be thrown in after the motor is up to speed 
with its field on, when the full torque can be obtained. There 
is a 500 h.p. synchronous motor on the Buffalo system, which 
is started in this way, with a clutch, and the operation is per- 
fectly satisfactory. The clutch surface is well greased and 
thrown in. gradually, and the entire plant, which is a flour- 
mill with all its multiplicity of belts, counter-shafting, grinders 
and other machinery, is brought ,up to full speed in a very 
short time without exceeding full-load current. 

Another important function of synchronous motors on a sys- 
tem (aside from their ability to steady the pressure as men- 
tioned by Mr. Lamme) lies in the fact that they act to steady 
the frequency. Since the synchronous motors are rigidly con- 
nected to the power-house generators by an electromagnetic 
coupling, their fly-wheel effect is added directly to the gen- 
erator fly-wheel effect, and consequently they aid the gener- 
ating units in the maintenance of constant speed. Induction 
motors cannot so operate. Their connection with the gener- 
ators on the system is loose, so to speak, there being a lost © 
motion lying between the positive slip of the motor, operating 
as a motor, and the negative slip which must exist in the motor 
before its fly-wheel effect can react on a falling generator speed. 

The above stated advantages of the synchronous apparatus 
assume that ideal conditions exist on the system for the effective 
use of the characteristics of this type of machine. There are, 
however, circumstances under which the theoretical benefits 
cannot be realized. One is in the case where pulsations are 
impressed upon the system such as almost always result where 
the prime mover is a reciprocating engine. These pulsations, 
however small they may be, under certain conditions seem to 
disturb the balance of the synchronous machine, and it is 
practically impossible to obtain any satisfactory phase control 
by field adjustment, on account of hunting or other cumulative 
action. 

Another troublesome condition is met where a synchronous 
motor is installed on a system of large electrostatic capacity 
when the counter e.m.f. wave of the synchronous machine is 
widely different from that impressed by the generators. Here 
a large current may flow in the motor armature, the frequency 
of which will be that of the harmonic which has distorted the 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 509 


motor’s counter e.m.f. wave. This current will flow back into 
the line as a charging current, and the motor may have more 
than full-load current in its armature, regardless of load and 
field adjustment, and phase control is impracticable. 

T. J. Jounston (by letter): Mr. Lamme’s paper on the use 
of synchronous motors for regulation of power-factor in trans- 
mission lines is most timely. Mr. Lamme does not suggest 
any means of varying the reactive effect of the motor to com- 
pensate for variations on the line; it is manifest that fixed con- 
ditions do not prevail upon a transmission line, where at one 
time numbers of converters are in use, and at other times 
some or all are shut down; or where many induction motors 
are used as a day load and at night the principal service is 
incandescent lighting, or lighting with constant-current trans- 
formers. Under such conditions the power-factor of the line 
as a whole changes, and sometimes quite rapidly, so that manual 
regulation of a resistance in the field-circuit of the motor does 
not entirely fit the situation. The proposal which the writer 
made as long ago as 1901 to solve this difficulty was separately 
to excite the motor and feed the armature of the exciter (which 
should be on the same shaft with the motor armature) with 
alternating current from the main line; a connection being 
made from one armature to the other in such manner that 
the polarities induced in the exciter armature by the main 
alternating current are somewhat in advance of those due to 
its rotation across the field-magnet poles, and of the same 
‘sign. 

With this arrangement when the main line current leads, 
the magnetic maxima in the exciter armature pull apart and 
the resultant magnetization is decreased so that the pressure 
and the exciter current drop, thus lowering the field magnetism 
of the motor; conversely, when the main line current lags, 
or leads to a less extent, the magnetic maxima approach each 
other, and the resultant pressure of the exciter is raised. This 
arrangement gives with a magnetic circuit having a good deal 
of iron a practically incremental regulation of the power-factor. 
Its resemblance to Mr. Rice’s method of regulating the pres- 
‘sure of an alternating generator will of course be observed; 
the difference, however, is that in case of a generator the power- 
factor is not regulated at all, but the inductive reactance is 
compensated by an increase of the terminal pressure of the 
generator, and consequently of its output; whereas in the scheme 
now proposed the pressure differences are substantially un- 
affected. 

It was a surprise to learn that motors of such large output 
were contemplated by Mr. Lamme for regulation alone, and per- 
haps it will be a surprise to many engineers more familiar with 
the problem. The proposed speed of 3600 rev. per min. seems 
prohibitive. An inductor alternator of 3000 rev. per min. 
-within the writer’s knowledge gave enormous trouble in bal- 


510 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


ancing, and when at its best could be heard half a mile; the 
diameter of the inductor was not substantially different from 
that of a synchronous motor of the sizes proposed. 

Not much could be accomplished by the use at only one 
end of the line of the regulation here suggested. Theoretically 
the compensation for inductive or capacity reactance must be 
infinitely distributed; and following the principles laid down 
in Chapter XII. of Dr. Steinmetz’s Alternating Current Phe- 
nomena, it will be necessary to install these regulators at a 
number of points on any long transmission line; of course, under 
such circumstances the sizes contemplated could be reduced. 
For example, in those transmission lines from which branch 
seveial side circuits to different points, a regulator might be 
installed at or near each junction of the main line and a branch, 
to take care of the power-factor regulation. The power-factors 
at different points on a long line often differ appreciably. 

The synchronous converter is not well adapted for this pur- 
pose, not only for the reasons pointed out by Mr. Lamme, 
but because of the danger of reversal with such a machine, 
causing it to operate from the continuous-current side if the 
inductive compensation is carried too far. This would necessi- 
tate special arrangements to prevent the converter racing, and 
render it difficult to operatc in riultiple with others; laying 
aside the question of hunting when the continuous-current load 
changes. 

There ought to be a future for this form of regulator, not 
only on transmission lines as ordinarily understood, but in alter- 
nating-current railway practice. With proper design and output 
proportioned to the work, there seems no reason why these com- 
paratively simple machines might not be installed and require 
only a minimum of attention, 


A paper presented at the 18Sth Meeting of ihe 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Chicago, June 21-22, 1904. 


Copyright, 1904, by A. I. KE. E. 


LONG SPANS FOR TRANSMISSION LINES. 


BY F. 0. BLACKWELL. 

Many cities to-day are dependent for their lighting, trans- 
portation, water supply, and the operation of their industries 
upon electric power transmitted over considerable distances. 

Unfortunately interruptions of the power service do occu1 
not infrequently and when they do happen they so inconven- 
ience the public as to be most conspicuous. The impression 
that long-distance power transmissions are unreliable has some 
basis of fact that seriously interferes with their development. 
Although absolutely continuous service may not be possible, 
many of the troubles now experienced can be either altogether 
eliminated or greatly reduced. Among the principal causes 
of interruption, so far as the line is concerned, may be men- 
tioned: 

Short circuiting of lines by branches of trees, wires, or by 
large birds getting across them. 

Burning of wooden pins, cross-arms, and pole-tops by leakage 
or electrostatic discharges from the conductors. 

Burning of wooden poles at the ground from forest or prairie 
fires. 

Failure of insulators from puncture by the current, or their 
destruction by missiles, discharged maliciously. 

Lightning damaging the apparatus connected to the circuits 
and sometimes destroying poles. 

Accidents due to heavy winds overturning the poles or to 
floods washing them out. 

The deterioration of a line requires its replacement in from 
five to twenty years, depending on climatic conditions and 
the material which is used in its construction. This replace- 

§11 


512 BLACKWELL: LONG SPANS. {June 21 


ment of the poles with new ones can only be done by shutting 
off the current or at the risk of accidental interruptions. 

Let us see what can be gained by substituting a _ steel 
tower construction with long spans for a wooden pole line. 
Short circuits are by far the. most common difficulty, the only 
remedy for which is to put the wires so far apart that they are. 
unlikely to be bridged across. This can readily be done even 
with more than one circuit when a steel cross-arm is employed. 
Burning is of course entirely done away with where metal 
construction is used. 

Failure of insulators from electrical causes can be obviated by 
getting larger and better insulators; this is practicable where 
the spans are long and the number of insulators is small. In- 
sulators on high towers are much poorer targets than when 
they are near the ground and so are less liable to be broken. 

Each metal tower is a lightning-arrester and as they are the 
hizhest points in the line they materially assist in its discharge: 
the tower itself, being a conductor, cannot be injured by light- 
nine. Steel structures can be exactly figured to meet safely 
any strains that can come upon them and can generally be 
located only at safe places where there is no danger of washouts. 
The deterioration of a properly constructed and well-galvanized 
steel tower is very slight, as is proved by marine and windmill 
experience, and is practically negligible so far as the pins and 
cross-arms are concerned. Any part of a steel tower can be 
reedily removed and replaced without interrupting the service. 

By far the greatest gain obtained from long spans is in the 
reduction of the number of parts. If one insulating support 
takes the place of four or five, line troubles will be reduced 
nearly in direct proportion; the inspection and repair of the line 
wii: be much simplified and its cost of maintenance corre- 
spondingly diminished. 

Cost oF Towers. 

The cost of a tower construction as compared with wooden 
poles Cepends on the locality. Where the right kind of tim- 
ber exists, it is of course cheaper; but in tropical countries 
where wooden poles would have to be transported long dis- 
tances the towers are much less expensive. In addition, to 
obtain long life a creosoted wood only could be employed and 
this stili further increases the expense. The fewer insulators 
and pins and the ease of transportation and erection are in 
favor of towers. They can be packed in light bundles suitable 


1904.] FOR TRANSMISSION LINES. 513 


for mule-back transportation and quickly put together even in 
the most inaccessible places. Even where the cost of the 
tower construction is more it is often justified by the greater 
certainty of operation which it insures and the lower cost of 
maintenance. 

STRENGTH OF CONDUCTOR. 

The first and most important consideration for long spans 
is the material of the conductor. Copper, aluminum, and 
iron are availiable for this purpose. Various alloys of copper 
have great strength, but their conductivity is too low and 
their cost too high to compare favorably with the more common 
metals. Copper wire varies widely in its characteristics, de- 
pending on the methods used in its manufacture. The copper 
is received at the wire-mill in the form of cast-wire bars weighing 
300 to 350 lb. It is then rolled into rods and the rods are 
drawn into wire of the required size. The temperature at 
which the metal is rolled, the reduction of area both in rolling 
and drawing, and the amount of annealing which the wire is 
given—all have an important bearing on its characteristics. As 
the size of the original wire bar is limited, the smaller the wire 
the more it is worked and in general the better the result. 

Cable made up of several strands has the advantage of using 
smaller wires than a solid conductor, and also permits of longer 
lengths of conductor without splices. Assuming a 300-lb. wire bar, 
a 19-strand cable,for example, can be made up weighing 5700 lb. 
while if solid wire were used the weight of one piece would be 
300 1b. In other words, there would be 19 times as 
many joints with the solid wire as with the 19-strand 
cable. The smaller the wire and the greater the strength, the 
more brittle it becomes. This is partly compensated for by 
the greater flexibility of a cable and the fact that a strand can 
break without the whole conductor parting. rs 

Each strand should be a continuous wire without joints. 
Joints in the cable should be as few as possible and made by 
means of sleeves, as brazing or soldering anneals the wire and 
much reduces its strength. The permissible tension in the 
cable must not exceed the elastic limit, by which is meant the 
point at which the material will continue to elongate and will 
eventually break, and not the usually accepted meaning of elastic 
limit as that point at which the strain ceases to be proportional 
to the stress. Copper cable recently made for a transmission 
plant with spans of 500 feet had an elastic limit of 40 000 Ib. 


514 BLACKWELL: LONG SPANS. {June 21 


per square inch; similar aluminum cable had an elastic limit 
of 12000 to 14000 Ib. per square inch; galvanized-iron tele- 
graph wire has an elastic limit of 35 000 1b. The ultimate tensile 
strengths of these wires were 60 000 Ib. for copper, 24 000 Ib. for 
aluminum, and 55 000 lb. for iron. 

The advantage of aluminum is that it weighs less than copper 
for the same conductivity, but for long spans its lesser strength, 
greater diameter, and higher coefficient of expansion are against 
it. Steel wire has about nine times and iron wire or cable 
about six times the resistance of copper so that they are more 
expensive as a conductor than copper. In order to avoid 
oxidization it is necessary to galvanize iron or steel wire; which 
partly anneals it and reduces its strength. There are cases. 
where the size of high-pressure line conductors is determined 
not by resistance but by mechanical strength, and in such 
cases iron or steel wire can be used:to advantage. 

ELASTICITY. 

The elasticity of the conductor is of considerable value in 
reducing the sag when the stress is removed, as will be shown 
later. The elongation of the wire under stress is less after it 
has once been stretched. The elasticity of cable 1s greater than 
that of solid wire, but both wire and cable take a set under any 
stress to which they may be subjected. In the following table 
is given the modulus of elasticity of copper, aluminum and iron. 
wire. 


Copper hard-drawn wire.............. 19 500 000 
Aluminum hard-drawn wire...........10 200 000 
Irontelegrapla ‘wire anes eure iene 24 000 000 
Copper hard-drawn cable wire......... 16 300 000 


Each sample was stretched to a point somewhat below its 
_ elastic limit befcre testing. It will be noted that the copper 
cable is considerably more elastic than the solid copper wire, 
the latter being a strand of the cable. The aluminum wire: 
was of nearly the same conductivity as the copper-wire strand 
and presumably would have had a lower modulus of elasticity 
if made up into cable. Aluminum is considerably more eaastic 
and has a decided advantage over copper in this respect. 
COEFFICIENT OF EXPANSION. 
The coefficients of expansion for Fahrenheit degrees are as. 
follows: 
Copper. i. i A BORER eee ee 0.0000096 
Aluminum. 55/2 ee ae ee 0.C000130 
Steels... oe ee 0.0000064 


1904.3 FOR TRANSMISSION LINES. 515 


As the worst condition so far as sag is concerned is reached 
when the conductor is hot, a low temperature expansion is 
most desirable for long spans, and steel is in this respect better 
than either copper or aluminum. 

STRAINS IN CONDUCTORS. 

The strains upon the conductor are those due to its own 
weight and the wind acting upon its surface. In a cold climate 
in addition sleet may form upon the wire, increasing the weight 
and the surface exposed to the wind. On a line carrying any 
considerable amount of power it is improbable that sleet will 
ever form,the formation being prevented by heat due to losses in 
the conductor. In order to be on the safe side, however, itis best 
to assume in the North a coating of ice one inch thick all around 
the conductor. The wind velocity could never exceed 100 miles 
an hour which would give a pressure of 40 lb. per square foot 
on a flat surface, or 20 lb. on a cylindrical surface such as that 
of awire. The weight is of course a vertical stress and the 
wind a horizontal one at right angles to the wire. The greatest 
strain is caused by the resultant of these two. The worst con- 
ceivable condition is sleet on the wire, followed by extreme 
cold weather with high winds. Under such conditions the 
probabilities are that the ice on the conductor would break 
off, but without some data on the subject it is hardly safe 
to assume that this would be the case. In warm climates the 
absence of sleet and the lesser range of temperature make 
permissible longer spans than in cold climates. 

Sac oF WIRE. 

The maximum sag may be due to the conductor being loaded 
with sleet or to heating of the wirein a hot sun. The latter will 
generally be found to give the greater sag. Owing to the con~ 
ductor being elastic it is not necessary to consider the greatest 
deflection from a horizontal line between supports as the ver- 
tical sag of the wire. The wind pressure causes the wire to 
swing to one side and it is elongated by the combined strain of 
wind and weight, but as soon as it is relieved of the wind pressure 
it swings back to a vertical position and contracts to the length 
required to carry its weight alone. The sag due to heating 
of the wire is also somewhat less than it otherwise would be, 
because when expanded the strain is less and the wire contracts. 

The extreme variation of the temperature of the air in cold cli- 
mates is about 150° fahr., while farther south it does not exceed 
100° fahr. To this must be added something for a metal con- 


516 


ductor exposed to a hot sun. 


BLACKWELL: LONG SPANS 


‘(June 21 


There are no data upon this but 


a total variation inthe temperature of the conductor of 175° 
fahr. should be sufficient in any country. 

SPAN AND SaG CuRVES. 
The attached curves of span and sag are based on the fol- 


lowing data: 


Aluminum Copper 
Area G-strand cables. sia, aes 0.21 sq. in 0.132 sq. in. 
Diameter 6-strand cable.......... 0.59 in. O51 ain: 
Wetoht"per footie manent iy aie 0.240 Ib. 0.509 1b. 
Elasticaiinit. 7 02)10) eee eee 12 000 lb. 40 000 Ib. 
i aaa 


Span and Maximum Sag of Copper 


I 


| 
Upper Curve|is based on Maximum Stress of 40000 |lbs. per sq. in. 
Lower 


Curve 1s based on Maximum Stress of 40090, 


lbs. per sq. in. 


in| feet 


Fic. 1 

Stress..ct) 1/2) elastic: imit . yee 1267 Ib. 
Stress atielasticilimit?. a9) 2534 Ib. 
‘Wind pressureiper sq "iti yen eee 40 lb. 
Wind pressure: per ft.ccable, 22. 220798 1b: 
Coefficient of expansion...........0.000013 
Variation 1n temperature..........150° fahr. 
Modulus offelasticity: 20). aaeeeee 8 000 000 


2640 lb. 
5280 lb. 
40 lb. 
0.84 lb. 
0.0000096 
502 fain: 
_16 000 000 


The equations from which the curves were calculated are given 
below and alongside of them is an example of a 1000-ft. copper 


span. 


‘f) 


_ KW 10007 ua 


See Sx 2640 


= 46.4 ft. 


1904.] FOR TRANSMISSION LINES. 517 


In which D = deflection in ft. 


span in ft. 


A 
I 


= resultant of weight and wind in lb. per ft. of cable 
and IT = stress allowed in cable in lb. 


Sy 8x 46.4? 
L=S+—— ae = OOU I ST O00 1000 
In which L = length of cable, cold. 
E 1005.74 
es os Scns aN D0 1004.38 ft. 
vo 16 000 000 


= 1005.74 ft. 


F Upper Tari 1s based on Maxam Sir e388 
ot 6000 lbs, re sd. in, 


Sag in feet 


10! 


In which zt = length of cable without stress 
= lb. per sq. in. permitted in cable 
and E = modulus of elasticity 
Ly = L, 1+C B) = 1004.38 (1+0.000009 x 150). = 1005.81 ft. 


In which L, = iength of cable, hot (150° fahr. rise in temperature) 
C = coefficient of expansion 


and B = maximum degrees F. rise in temperature 
35 3 SL, W 


3x 1000 3x 100° 1005.81 IV 
ee = G16 G00 000% 0.135 


D§ = 2178:7 D = 22323 W 


518 BLAGKWELL: LONG SPANS [June 21 


In which A = area of cable. 


From th's equation any deflection of the cable can be assumed 
and the corresponding weight calculated. For instance, in 
the example if D = 48.8 ft., W= 0.51 lb.; that is, the sag hot 
without wind is 48.8 ft., and this is the maximum vertical de- 
flection under the conditions assumed. ; 

If D = 51.1 ft., W = 0.98 lb. which is the maximum deflec- 
tion with wind bui this is at an angle of 31° from the horizontal 
and the vertical sag is only 26.6 ft. 

Thecurves (Figs. land 2) givethe maximum sag forcopper and 
aluminum cables at different spans with an increase of temperature 
of 150° fahr. above the minimum temperature. The stresses at 
the minimum temperature due to wind and weight are limited 
to half the elastic limit in the upper curves and to the elastic 
limit in the lower curves. The modulus of elasticity of the 
copper cable was obtained by experiment, but that of the 
aluminum cable was assumed by considering its elasticity to 
increase as much as copper cable compared with solid copper 
wire. 

HEIGHT oF TOWERS. 

The height of towers is determined by the vertical sag and 
the clearance required above the ground. If a telephone cir- 
cuit is below the transmission wires the distance between the 
telephone and power wires must be added. For instance, if 
the maximum sag is 12 ft. the telephone 6 ft. below the power 
wire and the clearance above the ground 20 ft., the tower must 
evidently support the wires 38 ft. from the ground. 


INSULATORS AND PINS. 

The insulators and pins must have sufficient mechanical 
strength to bear the strain transmitted to them from the cable. 
For example, in the 1000-ft. span just figured on the strain 
would be 980 lb. per insulator 51° from the horizontal. AL 
properly-designed porcelain insulator will stand any strain that 
the pin will bear without bending. A rigid cast-iron or steel 
pin is therefore essential and can readily be obtained. 

THE Cross-ARMs. 

The cross-arm is of course subjected as a beam to the weight 
and wind strains transferred to it from the cable, but in addition 
there is a torsional strain due to the breaking of a conductor 
that can best be borne by a pipe. The length of the cross-arm 
should be sufficient to space the wires well apart and prevent 


1904.]} FOR TRANSMISSION LINES. 519 


short circuits either from objects thrown over the line: or from 
the wires swinging together. The former isthe more important 
and if a safe distance apart, say six feet, is chosen it will be 
sufficient to guard against the latter,as on short spans with 
relatively less distance between wires they invariably swing 
together and never touch each other. 
CONSTRUCTION OF TOWERS. 
The most economical tower construction is one in which the 


PP 


- 


--8-ft-— -— 


Fic. 3—Single circuit tower used with 448 ft. spans for the Guanajuato 
Power and Electric Co. of Mexico. 


spread of the legs at the ground is about one quarter to one 
third the height of the tower. If a less spread is used, the 


520 BLACKWELL: LONG SPANS. [June 21 


weight of the legs becomes excessive and with a greater spread 
the cross-bracing must be much increased in size. For a single 
circuit the common windmill tower construction in which the 
legs are locked together at the top has the advantage of reducing 
the strains to a simple compression of the legs on one side and 
& Se St eee 


_ Fic. 4—Double circuit tower used with 440 ft. spans for the Guanajuato 
Power and Electric Co. of Mexico. 


tension on the other, the only function of the cross-bracing being 
to prevent the legs buckling when in compression. 

Where there are two or more circuits the length of the cross- 
arm is so great as to require two points of support. The tower 


1904.] FOR TRANSMISSION LINES. 521 


can then be made with a width at the top approximating that 
at the bottom and the cross-bracing has to bear its full share of 
the lateral strains. A truss construction with the fewest num- 
ber of parts and opportunities for slack motion and racking of 
the tower is preferable. Spreading the legs far apart obviates 
the necessity for expensive concrete foundations, as the strains 
can be made well within the limits which earth will stand in 
compression and the weight of earth above the foot of the tower 
is sufficient to prevent its pulling out of the ground. A heavy 
galvanizing coating on the tower appears to be an effective 
protection against rusting and avoids the expense of painting. 

Fig. 3 shows the construction employed in the transmission 
of 101 miles from Zamora to Guanajuato, Mexico, which was 
the first transmission employing steel towers exclusively. The 
towers were spaced 440 ft. apart and are designed for a single 
circuit. 

Fig. 4 shows the tower which will be used for the transmission 
of 90 miles from Necaxa to the City of Mexico, and 170 miles 
from Necaxa to El Oro, Mexico. These towers will be spaced 
500 ft. apart with occasional spans running up to 1000 ft. 

The same tower will be used for the transmission of 90 miles 
from Niagara Falls to Toronto but the distance apart will in the 
latter case be 400 ft. on account of the possibility of sleet ac- 
cumulating on the conduotors. There will be two circuits or six 
wires on each tower and in both the Necaxa and Niagara Falls 
transmissions noted above there will be two lines of towers 
making four parallel circuits altogether. 

This paper has been intentionally confined to the mechanical 
construction of transmission lines which the writer believes is 
more important now than the electrical side. To-day the 
highest pressure employed is 60 000 volts and the longest trans- 
mission 150 miles. There is nothing to prevent the use of 
higher pressures and longer transmissions, provided reliability 
can be obtained by a more permanent, substantial, and simpler 
construction even if the expense is greater. The use of long 
spans and metal construction is a most important step in the 
right direction. 


wile j 
ae a 
inesieoe 
uo ae w # 
tienes: 
a Ph : 


T? wy al hb a 
rit = , va ‘a C7Ssny tales 
“S ; a ’ ; " a 


i 


4904. ] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 523 


Discussion On ‘“ Lonc SpANS FOR TRANSMISSION LINEs.’’ 


Ratpx D. Mersuon: At the bottom of page ‘511 Mr ‘Black- 
well says: “ The deterioration of a line requires its replacement 
in from five to twenty years.’ Presumably-Mr. Blackwell 
refers only to the structure supporting the line. His statement 
would not hold true regarding the conductors. Of course the 
whole line does not deteriorate in any such short length of 
time. On the next page he speaks of the steel tower acting 
as a lightning-arrester. A few days ago the speaker heard of 
one line which had been in operation for some time, the con- 
struction of this line being similar to that described by Mr. 
Blackwell. Iron rods were attached to the tower and bent up 
around the insulator in order to protect it from a stroke by 
lightning. Has Mr. Blackwell ever seen a similar construction? 

Mr. Blackwell also says: ‘If one insulating support takes 
the place of four or five, line troubles will be reduced nearly 
in direct proportion; the inspection and repair of the line will 
be much simplified and its cost of maintenance correspondingly 
diminished.”’ 

The speaker’s experience with line troubles.has been that 
of having less trouble from insulators than from any other 
part of the construction. .Most of the trouble has been caused 
by forest fires burning the poles; trouble has also been caused 
by short-circuits due either to wire thrown over the line ma- 
liciously or by carelessness in the construction work for exten- 
sions, etc. 

When a line is first put up, it is almcst always the case that 
a number of the insulators are broken maliciously; after a little 
while, the insulators are let alone, even in the West. One 
transmission line with which the speaker was associated crcssed 
a cattle ranch; the cowboys used the insulators fcr targets, 
shooting off as many of them as they could. In a short time, 
however, that practice was stopped, for that class of men, if 
you appeal to them in the right way, can be easily approached 
and reasoned with. One of the line inspectors brought the 
matter home to them by saying that the breaking of one of 
the insulators might mean the killing of a man at another 
place, a man who, after touching off a blast, was endeavoring 
to reach the surface by means of an electric hcist. In that 
particular case, where trouble of this kind was the worst that 
the speaker has. ever known, it was stopped almcst entirely. 

On page 513 Mr. Blackwell says: ‘‘ Permissible tension in 
the cable,must not exceed the elastic limit, by which is meant 
the point at which the material will continue to elongate and 
will eventually break, and not the usually accepted meaning of 
elastic limit.”” Now what is the difference between what Mr. 
Blackwell defines there and the ultimate tensile strength which 
he speaks of on the next page? 

There is another matter of importance mentioned by Mr. 
Blackwell; that is, if a line carries a considerable amount of 


524 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21” 


power, sleet is not so likely to form on the wire. This is es- 
pecially true of high-pressure lines. With a given loss, the 
higher the pressure the smaller the conductor and consequently 
the greater the loss per unit of radiating surface of conductecr, 
and, so far as the speaker has been able to observe, a small 
variation in temperature from that at which sleet forms will 
prevent its formation. 

F. O. BLacKwELL: Answering Mr. Mershon’s question; of 
course the detericration on a line is confined to the wooden 
parts. Poles, under unfavorable conditions, may rot out in 
two years. In some places, as in India, ants eat up the pcles. 
In dry ground, with the right kind of wood, the life of a pole 
may be 20 years. Mr. Mershon also refers to some trouble 
experienced at Guanajuato which was attributed to lightning. 
They have had some insulators break there, but, as the speaker - 
understands it, they do not feel certain that the breakage was . 
due to lightning. They are experimenting, however, with an 
extension of the tower to form a hghtning-rod which they will. 
place at exposed points on their transmission system. 

Regarding the elastic limit of materials used for conductors, 
our experiments show that all of them, including copper, alumi- 
num and iron, take a considerable set when subjected to any 
strain, and that the amount of this set depends on the time. 
during which it is subjected to the strain. The cable is a sort 
of spiral spring. It is more elastic than a solid wire and its. 
elasticity depends a great deal on the number of twists in the 
cable, the size cf the hemp centre, and other conditions. We- 


used a hemp centre because we found by experiment that a. 


metallic core took the strain to which the cable was subjected 
before the outer strands and broke first. This made the cable 
with a conducting core weaker than one made with a hemp core. 

Regarding sleet, it is probable that the only time when 
trouble would be experienced on a transmission of any size: 
is when the power is off the line. At other times there will 


be sufficient heat generated in the wire to keep it above freezing - 


point. In the case of this Guanajuata construction the in-. 
sulators were cracked and split open. There was nothing in 
particular to indicate lightning; they were not burned except so. 
far as they would be by short circuit from the line current. 

A. S. Hatcn: Pcssibly the experience of 20 years may be: 
of interest in tower construction. In May, 1884, a windmill 
tower was erected for lighting a section of Detrcit; it was tri- 
angular in crcss-section, 22 feet cn a side at the base and taper- 
ing to a pcint. There are nine 18-ft. gas-pipe sections, the: 
first three being cf 2.5 in., the middle three cf 2 in. and the: 
top three of 1.5 in., making the total height 161 feet. Weak- 
ness has been found to be buckling cf the pipe standards, due- 
principally to wind-strains. The towers have not been gocd 
lightning-arresters since switch-cases have been punctured after- 


a storm. At the base of the towers are switches to control. 


__ 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 525 


the wiring, ‘the cases of which were connected to the tower; 
and after a severe storm, a switch would be found punctured, 
showing ‘the lightning had either left the line, jumping to the 
case of the switch and thence to ground, in case the ground 
is moist, or, as commonly the case, the lightning leaving the 
tower for the grounded line. The most common class of tower 
in use is also triangular but of uniform cross-secticn, and is 
built of 2-in. and 1.5-in. pipe, a section being 8 ft. high and 
6 ft. on a-side. The girts are l-in. pipe and braced with $-in. 
diagonal stay-rcds. The base of the tower is a single pipe 
15 ft. high cn which is a fitting to which both the horizontal 
and brace ‘supports are fastened. The towers are guyed in 
four directions by two sets of guy-ropes consisting of 0.5-in. 
“steel strand fastened to wooden stubs. These towers vary 
‘from 150 to 175 feet high, and on account of being used in a 
‘city are preferable, but the taper tower is better for trans- 
mission purposes on account of avoiding the use of stubs. There 
“is no side-strain except that due to the line-wires fastened to 
‘the tower and sometimes having a span of 250 feet from a pole. 

Cuas. F. Scott: The subject covered by Mr. Blackwell is 
a most timely and important one. It is notable that this 
“paper deals mainly with mechanical problems, and that thcse 
which are particularly electrical in their bearing are minor in 
number. In fact, after the electrical engineer specifies a few 
‘general conditions as to conductivity and gives his attention 
particularly to insulators, the rest consists of matters which 
pertain to mechanical and economical problems. 

Mr. Blackwell has pointed out the principal causes of the 
‘interruption of lines as they are now constructed. The new 
type of construction moreover apparently removes in a large 
“measure all the principal causes of interruption to service in 
present lines; this is a very strong argument for the tower con- 
-struction. 

The discussion in the paper with regard to the character- 
istics of conductors and making comparison between copper, 
aluminum, and iron are of much interest, particularly the data 
upon copper cable. The difference between the elasticity of 
the wire and the cable, the latter being, as Mr. Blackwell ex- 
pressed it, in the nature of a spiral spring, is noteworthy. One 
of the elements in this type of construction is the probable 
-change in length of the conductor due to temperature variation. 
If the conductor could be made a spiral spring or if the twisting 
of the cable could even be carried to a greater extent than 
‘it is in the ordinary cable, then the conductor might be given 
a great elasticity and the limitations which are reached due 
to the variable sag of the cable might, in a measure, be elimi- 
nated. 

Mr. Blackwell did not state specifically the pressure which is 
used on the line to which he refers. The inference is, however, 
“that it is 60 000 volts. 


526 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


N. J. Ngati: Has Mr. Blackwell any data to show the 
value of steel towers as lightning-arresters compared with 
standard lightning-arresters? and does he know of any case 
where steel towers were struck directly by lightning and what 
happened? 

F. O. BLacKwELL: The speaker knows of a number of trans- 
missions using pipe poles. In general it would appear that 
there is less trouble from lightning with an iron than with a 
wooden construction. Should lightning actually strike the line 
it would naturally go down the first pole. It would do no 
damage to a métal pole but would shatter a wooden one. With 
wooden poles there was always evidence left in the burning of 
or splinters from the pole, but with an iron pole you might 
have a stroke of lightning and never know it, except for a 
short circuit on the line, or unless an insulator were broken, 
which is rather improbable. 

N. J. Neauti: Let us assume a case of a 60 000-volt trans- 
mission line in a mountainous country, such, for example, as 
in the far West. How would the ‘cost of steel towers compare 
with the best present wood pole construction? 

F. O. BuacKwELL_: The comparative cost of steel towers 
and wooden poles can hardly be definitely stated, as it varies 
with the locality and the conditions. In this country, a wooden 
construction would almost invariably be cheaper as the tower 
system would be about equivalent to a cost of, say $10.00 per 
wooden pole. The steel tower in the tropics, where wood will 
not last any length of time, is essential; in this country, the 
speaker considers the use of a metal construction preferable on 
account of its more permanent character. The use of steel 
for long-distance transmission will probably supplant wood in 
order to get a more permanent and reliable construction. Where 
there is more than one circuit on a pole the necessary distance 
between conductors—to avoid the danger of short-circuiting— 
requires such a long cross-arm that it is essential to use two 
wooden poles in order properly to support the cross-arm. This, 
of course, doubles the cost of a wooden pole-line but makes 
practically no difference in the cost of a steel-tower construc- 
tion. 

A cable is preferable to a solid wire because it is more reli- 
able and more elastic. The cable is flexible, which makes it 
less liable to damage during construction and from the swinging 
cf the conductor in the wind. Should one strand of a cable 
break the whole conductor will not come down and the broken 
strand can be repaired at any convenient time. With a cable 
we can use a more brittle wire which has a much greater strength 
per square inch than would be possible safely to employ were 
a solid conductor used. 

Regarding telephone circuits, it does not appear to the 
speaker that there is any disadvantage in the use of a metal 
structure; in fact, there is an advantage in that it is impossible 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. \ 527 


for high-pressure current to leak from the tower wires to the 
telephone circuit as it could on a wet wooden pole, which is 
a conductor of high resistance, whereas the tower is always 
grounded. It is most undesirable todo any work on a high- 
pressure circuit when it is alive. Wherever possible, multiple 
circuits should be employed so that one of them can be cut out 
for repairs without interrupting the tower service. 

Wo. Hoopes: A few words may be devoted to the aspect 
of this paper towards the comparison drawn between aluminum 
and copper for work of this character. By inspection of page 
561 of the paper, it would appear that a sag of aluminum of 
53 feet may be expected in a 100-ft. span. 

Two and one-half years ago, the Pittsburg Reduction Com- 
pany erected on a bluff 300 feet high, on the Allegheny River, 
in one of the most exposed situations in Western Pennsylvania, 
four 1000-ft. spans of No. 0000 aluminum wire, for the purpose 
of determining what might be expected from such a span. 

Observations taken on these spans on June 17, with a tem- 
perature of 80° fahr., showed a sag of 22 feet. As the sun 
was shining at the time the observation was taken, the tem- 
perature of the wire should be taken as 105°, using the figure 
assumed in the paper as being correct; 7.e., that the wire would 
be 25° hotter than the air, due to the sunshine. The mini- 
mum temperature since the spans were erected was —14°, making 
a total range of temperature between the minimum and the 
time of observation of 119°. The paper assumes that a further 
rise of temperature of 56° may occur; if it does, the sag of 
the wire will be 27 feet. There is therefore considerable dis- 
crepancy between what actually has happened in such a span 
(which is about representative of what is likely to occur) and 
the 53-ft. sag which the paper says may be expected. 

The reason for this discrepancy is the difference between the 
conditions which have actually occurred and the conditions 
which the paper contemplates as possible. The conditions con- 
templated by the paper are: 

1. That the wind will blow with an actual velocity of 100 
miles per hour. 

2. That such a wind velocity will be coincident with mini- 
mum temperature. 

3. That the direction of the wind will be at right angles to 
the line. 7 

If any section 100 miles square were selected and a pole 
line built across it, by assembling what data is available from 
the U. S. Weather Bureau and applying the theory of proba- 
bilities, we would find that a combination of these conditions 
is not likely to occur oftener than about once in 20 000 years. 

The Government reports give the velocities as actually indi- 
cated by the standard anemometer. These figures require a 
considerable change to convert them to true velocities. One 
hundred miles actual velocity would be reported as 135 miles 


528 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


per hour. Such a velocity is almost unknown in the annals of the 
Weather Bureau. A search of the Bureau reports for six years 
shows for 28 widely scattered stations a maximum indicated 
velocity of 86 miles, or an actual velocity of 68 miles per hour. 
None of the maximum velocities have occurred coincidently 
with low temperatures and it does not seem within the range 
of probability that they will so occur. The maximum velocity 
occurring in Chicago last winter when the thermometer was 
below zero was 38 miles per hour indicated. 

The only wind which actually seems likely to do harm to a 
line of this character is a tornado, and which it is imPossible 
to erect any line to withstand, since the effects of tornadces 
have been observed which must have been due to an actual 
velocity of 300 miles per hour, or a pressure of 360 pounds 
per square foot. Provision against this would involve a cost 
of construction absolutely prohibitory. Aside from the tornado 
the most severe condition a long span line is likely to be called 
upon to withstand, so far as wind strain is concerned, is a 
wind velocity of 40 miles per hour, occurring at from 20 to 30 
degrees above the minimum temperature. 

Although the conditions assumed in the paper seem un- 
likely to occur, it is worth while to consider what would take 
place with a line not designed to meet these conditions but 
to meet those which actually seem probable. Such a line using 
aluminum of the size referred to in the paper would be 
erected to have a sag, at minimum temperature, of 13.25 feet, 
and a tension of 11000 pounds per square inch, the elastic 
limit being 14000 pounds per square inch. If in that condition 
it were subjected to a 100 mile wind, at right angles, the 
effect would be to stretch the wire, not to break it, so that a 
sag of 42 feet would take place, which upon cessation of the 
wind would become 38 feet. 

The effect upon the wire would be permanently to stretch 
it about four feet. It will withstand an elongation of 16 feet 
before rupture, and there really exists, therefore, a factor of 
safety of four, against breakage, even when the improbable 
conditions here chosen are used as the basis of calculation. 

It is to be noted that in the case of spans of wire, the real 
factor of safety is not the ratio between the strength and the 
strain, which is the usual definition, but the ratio between the 
elongation at rupture and the possible elongation. 

With regard to the strains due to sleet, there seems to be 
no limit to the amount of sleet which may gather on wire and 
it is very doubtful if the assumption of a depth of one inch for 
the deposit provides for the probabilities. If it is to be con- 
sidered at all, a greater thickness should be considered as pos- 
sible. However, the opinion of most practical transmission en- 
gineers, based on experience, seems to be, that sleet does not 
form on high-tension wires, and that its consideration does 
not therefore constitute an element of the problem. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 529 


With regard to the necessary strength of supports, and 
therefore their cost, the most severe requirement is most lightly 
touched on in the paper. This condition will be when, for 
any reason, all three conductors part in the same span, leaving 
the unbalanced strain to be taken care of by the supports, 
which supports must be strong enough to withstand this strain, 
as in the event of such an occurrence several miles of the line 
might go down, if they are not so constructed. If the sup- 
ports are made strong enough to meet this condition, they 
will be amply strong enough to meet the wind strains calcu- 
lated, since the side strains due to the wind are less than 
one-fifth the longitudinal strains produced by this condition. 
It also beccmes apparent in this connection that, if a maxi- 
mum strain per conductor of 5000 pounds for copper and 2500 
pounds for aluminum is allowed, the towers will have to be 
twice as strong for copper as for aluminum. If, on the other 
hand, the strain per conductor is to be kept down to 2500 
pounds, the maximum sag of the copper will be about the same 
as that of the aluminum, instead of about one-half as much, 
as shown in the paper. The expediency of allowing the amount 
of sag designated appears very doubtful, since, if the improbable 
conditions assumed do occur, the only effect will be, not to 
break the wires and interrupt service, but to introduce a sag, 
which can be removed at leisure. To allow the amount of sag 
calculated, if not necessary, forfeits considerable advantage, 
because if such a line were constructed on 75-ft. towers, for 
instance, and a sag of 50 feet allowed, the wires at the center 
of the span, being only 25 feet from the ground, could easily 
be short circuited by malicious persons. On the contrary, if a 
sag of 30 feet only be allowed, (which is all that is probably 
necessary), a clearance of 45 feet is obtained, and malicious 
interference becomes very difficult, and, therefore, improbable. 

It would appear to be the best practice on a line of this sort, 
to erect the conductors so that they would reach a maximum 
tension at a minimum temperature of about 80% of their 
elastic limit, without considering the wind as a strain prcducer. 
If this is done, it will be only on very rare occasions that 
the wind or other causes will permanently stretch the wires 
and produce a greater sag than is contemplated, and this, when 
it does happen, will be on short stretches of the line only, making 
repairs a matter to be done at a convenient time and at very 
slight expense. 

One result of following the method of calculation in the 
paper is that the sag to be allowed for every different size of 
wire would be different, although the wire is of the same ma- 
terial. This is because the wind pressure varies directly as the 
diameter of the wire, while the strength to resist the wind 
pressure varies as the square of the diameter. Ifthe calculations 
on which the paper is based had been made for No. 1 copper, 
instead of No. 000 copper, the results would have been entirely 


530 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


different and the maximum sags to be provided for very much 
greater. ; ’ 

F. O. BLacKwELt (by letter): Referring to Mr. Hoopes’ ccm- 
ments, the writer affirms that it was not his intention to lay 
down any rules for the sag employed in long spans but to 
give the data and formulas which can be used in figuring upon 
them. 

he maximum strain in the conductor and the wind pressure 
which should be assumed are matters of engineering judgment. 
A wind pressure of 40 lb. per sq. ft. is that commonly em- 
ployed in making the calculations upon practically all engineer- 
ing structures, and, therefore, the writer wculd nct take any less 
pressure without further data on the subject. . A long-distance 
transmission line may cover a great deal cf territory and if 
there is any high wind it is most likely to be interrupted by 
it. The fact that an isclated span with much less sag has 
been up for two or three years dces-not necessarily prove any- 
thing. The probabilities are that at the particular point at 
which the experimental span was erected no high winds have 
been experienced. 

It does not impress the writer as being good engineering to put 
up a long span and then let it take its own sag by stretching 
the wire as Mr. Hoopes suggests, any more than it would be 
advisable to do the same thing in a suspension bridge. 

The writer does not agree with Mr. Hoopes regarding the 
strains to which towers are subjected lengthwise of the line. The 
ordinary tie-wire which attaches the conductor to the insulator 
will not bear any considerable strain. If a conductor breaks it 
always slips over the insulators for a considerable distance on 
both sides of the break and distributes the strain, due to the 
tension in the conductor, over a number cf insulators and 
towers. As Mr. Hoopes states, the amount of sag to be allowed 
varies with different sizes of wires. Each transmission must 
therefore be calculated separately and no tables or curves can 
be given which will cover all conditions. 

EUGENE CLtark: The speaker is particularly interested in the 
paper by Mr. Blackwell, because he argues for better mechanical 
strength in the pole line, which is generally conceded to be the 
weakest point in an electrical system. The speaker thinks it 
possible, however, that Mr. Blackwell might have left the 
impression that line construction with steel poles would be 
just as cheap as similar construction with wocden poles, and 
if this were true, he wishes to offer a correction to that im- 
pression. The speaker objects to the figure of $10.00 a pole which 
Mr. Blackwell has submitted as the equivalent in wood, of steel 
construction, The speaker knows that steel poles have long been 
in use in many steel plants of the country, not for the purpcse 
of securing longer spans for light wires, but for the purpose of 
securing better mechanical construction for the exceedingly 
heavy lines necessitated by the large amounts of power carried 
at low pressures in such plants. 


1904. ] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. Ful 


That the cost of such poles, which are quite heavy, varies 
from $60.00 to $120.00 each, erected, including crcss-arms, 
concrete foundations, etc. One steel company has recently had 
occasion to cross a navigable river, and to do so found it 
necessary to put up very high steel towers. In this case, the 
total cost of each tower amounted to more than $1500.00. 

The speaker believes thoroughly ,however, in the advisability of 
the superior mechanical construction made pcssible by the use of 
steel poles, calling attenticn to the fact that moving machinery, 
such as cranes and hoists, is commonly designed with factors 
of safety cf from 5 to 8; whereas, the factor of safety on 
pole lines, as frequently constructed, scarcely amounts to 
2 or 3- for ordinary service. The factor of safety shculd 
be at least as high on a pole line as on moving machinery. 

PRESIDENT ARNOLD: The New York Central engineers also 
investigated pretty thoroughly the matter of steel poles. They 
began with steel poles that cost approximately $200 each; 
by dint of much effort they were finally estimated to ccst abcut 
$80 each. The argument in favor of steel poles is strongest 
for the long-distance transmission lines running acrcss country 
where the poles can be spread as far apart as will be justified 
by mechanical consideration. In cities the pcles must be placed 
close together, necessitating the use of a larger number cf steel 
poles per mile of line than wculd obtain in the country; this 
increases materially the cost of the line as obviously steel pcles 
cost more than wooden ones. As Mr. Blackwell says, where 
the wooden poles are expensive, as in Mexico, the transportation 
of wooden poles is likely to make them cost as much or more 
than the steel towers. On the Guanajuato plant the cost was 
much less with five steel poles to the mile than it would have 
been with wooden poles spaced the ordinary distance apart. 
So the question is always one of the relative cost of wood versus 
steel in position. In the speaker’s opinion there is no doubt 
about the desirability of steel poles; the question is rather cne 
of getting sufficient poles to carry the line at a price that will 
justify their use. 5 

The engineers of the New York Central road have decided 
upon overhead transmission for most of the line and for these 
two reasons: first, less first cost; secondly, the likelihocd of 
less trouble with overhead lines than with underground cable— 
all this notwithstanding Mr. Carlton’s statement. His state- 
ment is undoubtedly. correct, but it seems that he refers to a 
specific case. The evidence in the New York Central case 
showed that they might expect less trouble with overhead 
transmission lines running across country than with an under- 
ground cable. For these reasons cable is being installed only 
in New York and its vicinity, where the use cf cables is prac- 
tically compulsory. A pressure of 11000 volts will be used 
on this system. There will be six wires, two circuits, and the 
spans will be made as long as the conditions will admit. There 


532 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


is quite a number of curves in the track which necessitates 
putting the poles closer together than in an ordinary con- 
struction. The bridge engineers of the company are figuring 
the relative cost of poles; the poles are approximately between 
16 and 18 inches at the base and 45 ft. high. 

In further explanation of why the engineers of the New 
York Central adopted the overhead plan it might be said that 
the possibility of trouble on the line was taken into considera- 
tion; for with overhead construction trouble can be located and 
remedied quickly and easily, much more so than would be 
the case with an underground cable. The objection to cable 
seems to be that when anything happens the trouble can be 
neither located nor repaired promptly. 

EuGENE CLark: It does not make so mucn difference about 
the angle-iron, if the rails are good in the first place, but the 
construction of the pole must be rather unusual. The common 
poles that the speaker referred to as costing $60 and $120, 
consist of four irons latticed together, on the other side with 
rounds to form the ladder. The ‘speaker does not see how 
you can get that amount of steel in for $15, if it is steel. 

W.D. Batt: The South Side Suburban Railway Company 
of Chicago has ordered a few poles on trial, and information 
regarding their cost and weight may be of interest. The poles 
in question were 30 ft. high, weighing 616 lb. each, and the 
price f.o.b. cars Chicago or vicinity was a little less than three 
cents a lb. The actual cost of the pole is considerably less 
than any other type on the market, as it weighs less for any 
given strength and the cost per lb. is a trifle less, as tubular 
poles were quoted from three to three and a half cents. The 
construction consists of three U-section steel uprights tied to- 
gether with special malleable castings every two feet or 30 
inches. The poles in question were six inches, at the top and 
thirteen inches at base. 

Ratpu D. Mersuon: There are two matters in connection 
with steel towers which have not been referred to; one of them 
is the amount of torsion that the steel tower shown by Mr. 
Blackwell can resist in case one or more of the conductors 
should break. The speaker knows of one instance where a 
latticed steel pole was erected, where no allowance was made 
for torsional stresses with the result that every time a wire 
broke there was considerable trouble. f 

Another matter in ccnnection with steel supporting struc- 
tures with long spans is the-question of repairs. A span of 
say 150 feet is easier to repair than a much longer span; this 
means that in case of a break in the line the power service 
will be interrupted for only a comparatively short time. In 
comparing this type of construction with other types the first 
cost alone should not be considered; we should consider every- 
thing which goes to make up the total cost; first cost, main- 
tenance, etc. 


1904. DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 533 


It seems to the speaker that there is one point in which the 
steel tower construction falls short of what is claimed for it. 
Although it is true that. the. conductor will, for the greater 
part of its length, be higher than an ordinary pole-line, still 
with the construction described by Mr. Blackwell, the con- 
ductor is only about 25 feet from the ground, making it easy 
to short circuit the line at this point with a bale wire as in the 
case of a shorter span and lower pole. 

N. J. Neatit: The following facts should be borne in mind 
with respect to the development of steel towers; some of the 
more recent wooden pole constructions are very stable; a num- 
ber of lines have been built with a great deal of attention to 
the mechanical features, heavier poles and greater strength 
throughout, and the maintenance of an almost continuous line 
service for a year or more would indicate that the wooden pole 
line has been developed very materially. When you have such 
a construction near the base of supplies, it may require more 
than the arguments brought out to-day to substitute steel 
towers for wood. In the case cited by Mr. Blackwell where 
wood is as difficult to obtain as steel, it is perhaps more eco- 
nomical to make use of the steel tower. In cities and their 
outlying districts still other conditions enter, and it might be 
easily advisable that the tower construction, even though more 
expensive, should be employed. 

In addition to the emphasis given the advantages pointed 
out by Mr. Blackwell for metal towers, it does not appear from 
the discussion that the cost of such a tower construction is, 
broadly speaking, prohibitive. The advantages of the metal 
tower as a lightning-arrester seem to be unduly emphasized. 
The metal tower might be considered as having approximately 
the same discharge value as an overhead grounded wire on a 
wooden pole-line, and it is obvious that in view of the frac- 
tional value of such protection we are in no degree relieved 
from having protective apparatus in the stations. The dis- 
charge value of the metal tower seems only incidental to its. 
other advantages. 

Cuas. F. Scotr: We are getting on the wrong line of dis- 
cussion with reference to Mr. Blackwell’s paper. While the 
cost, the relative cost, of the two different types of construction 
is an important thing to consider, it isnot the only thing. Mr. 
- Blackwell does not begin his paper with the consideration of 
cost or to find something that is cheaper. He begins it: “ Un- 
fortunately interruptions of the power service occur not in- 
frequently and when they do happen they so inconvenience 
the public as to be most conspicuous.”’ 

It is a better kind of service, a different order of construction 
that he is seeking for; he finds out how that construction will 
overcome present difficulties. Sometimes cost is important; 
sometimes it is relatively unimportant. A few years ago an 
engineer who was making a preliminary layout of a trans- 


534 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


mission plant asked the speaker what he thought of the en- 
gineer’s transmission system; it was 20 miles in length, and 
he proposed to use one pole line and two circuits of 30 000 volts. 
The engineer was told that his pressure was very high and 
he was putting a good deal on a one-pole line, and as he wanted 
reliability he would better consider lower pressure and two 
separate pole lines. The cost of the line complete, conductors, 
poles, insulators—the whole cost as the speaker remembers—was 
something like four per cent. of the total investment. Here, 
then, was the element in the system upon which the continuity 
and reliability of service depended—the most vital element in 
the whole system, and he had gotten it down to four per cent. 
of the whole investment. By increasing that element, say 
doubling its ccst, and running two pole lines say of 20000 
volts each, he would increase his total cost only a few per cent. 
and he would increase his coefficient of reliability by a very 
much greater per cent. So in the general question now under 
discussion, we have to consider, first the general engineering 
condition, which would be the best plan and would give the 
most reliable service; and then determine as to the cost. This 
paper should be considered on its general engineering merits, 
and it seems to the speaker that Mr. Blackwell’s points are 
pretty well taken. 

Another thing: we have been comparing a new type of con- 
struction with certain lines and poles now used. We are com- 
ing into a different order of conditions in power transmission— 
the circuits are of greater output, higher pressure, and greater 
importance. Where there are many circuits, with large and 
heavy wire, where continuity of service is of the utmost im- 
portance, where the cost of the line could often be consider- 
ably increased in order to increase the coefficient of reliability, 
then we must consider the problem from an entirely new stand- 
point. In these respects the lines laid down in this paper are 
very promising. 

F. A. C. Perrine: While agreeing entirely with Mr. Black- 
well and Mr. Scott in the statement that reliability is more 
important than cost in long distance transmission, the speaker 
believes that a number of points raised by Mr. Blackwell re- 
quire consideration. 

As regards the limit of transmission with any particular 
size wire it may be noted that up to 40000 volts no wire of 
sufficient strength to be employed in a transmission line is 
small enough to allow discharge through the air, consequently 
allowing the rule that the practice in transmission pressure is 
to employ about 1000 volts per mile. The question of limiting 
size of wire is not of importance until the distance exceeds 30 or 35 
miles. For longer lines where the pressure is between 40 000 
and 60 000 volts no wire smaller than # in. in diameter may be 
used; since Mr. Scott has already shown in the paper referred 
to that at such pressures a wire } in. in diameter will discharge 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 535 


a large amount of energy. This necessity for the use of a 
large wire on long lines is one of the advantages in the use of 
aluminum, an advantage not noticed by Mr. Blackwell in his 
paper. This is particularly an advantage of aluminum, since 
where small amounts of energy must be transmitted over a 
wire of a definite size the lcss is not important, and the alumi- 
num wire is very much cheaper than the copper wire cf the same 
size. These large wires are invariably made stranded, as in 
this form they are more reliable than any solid wire of the 
same area, cn account cf the fact that the smaller wire has a 
high tensile strength and by reason cf the fact that the weak 
places are distributed alcng its length. The writer. believes 
that Mr. Blackwell is in errcr when he states on page 557 strands 
are made cf unjcinted wire. The practice amongst manufac- 
turers being to joint reel after reel in their machine, cutting 
off the completed strand in the required lengths without refer- 
ence to the lengths of wire on the spools of the machine which 
are jointed as required. Experience has shown that the large 
strand which must. be employed in very long lines gives no 
trouble in breaking. 

The speaker knows cf very few instances where strands of 
over 0.5 inch in diameter have been burned off; the few cases 
occurring have been due to a solid short circuit where the 
station fuses did not cperate, but it is generally the case that 
the station fuses operate before the line wire is fused. 

Attention must be called to an additional advantage cf tower 
construction, that it permits the use cf large crcss-arms sup- 
porting the very heavy insulatcrs which must be used in the 
higher pressure constructicn. Insulatcrs at present weighing 
from 30 to 50 pounds are ccmmon, and with electrical pressures 
increasing the present tendency is toward larger insulators weigh- 
ing as much as 100 pounds. Scme insulators now in use cannot 
be installed on a wocden crcss-arm less than 6 by 6 inches, 
which arm cannot be securely supported con a wocden pole 
with a 9-inch top. In consequence the steel tower, whether 
the crcss-arm be cf steel or wood, is probably capable of fur- 
nishing the more reliable type of construction, since in long- 
distance transmission lines we must decrease the number of 
insulatcrs by lengthening the spans and correspondingly in- 
crease the size of the insulator. This can only be accomplished 
by the use of the steel tower. ; 

The value of the steel tower as a lightning-arrester the speaker 
considers very important. He believes that to-day the advan- 
tage from the use of a grounded wire for protecting the long- 
distance transmission lines is unquestioned, though there is de- 
cided difference of opinion concerning its permanence; but with 
the steel-tower construction a sufficient number of grounded 
points are brought clcse to the wire without the use of an extra 
wire. On one transmission line with which the speaker is 
familiar there is a section 37 miles in length where the average 


536 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


span is 300 feet; this section is one-third of the line and extends 
over a series of low hills. Such lines can undoubtedly be made 
more permanent if steel towers are used in place of the wooden 
poles. While not an advocate of the steel-tower construction 
for short lines and low pressures, the speaker strongly believes 
in the steel-tower construction for long lines and high pres- 
sures; first, because of the increased value of insulation by 
reason of a lesser number of insulators; secondly, because. of 
the lightning protection afforded; thirdly, because of the per- 
manence of the towers themselves, and because of the fact 
that they allow the use of a cross-arm which will support a larger 
insulator and a larger wire. 

Finally the speaker would call attention to what he believes 
to be an error in Mr. Blackwell’s Introduction, pages 560 to 
562, where he makes use of the standard coefficient of linear 
expansion in calculating the temperature changes. This is not 
correct unless the modulus of elasticity is introduced into the 
equation, which then becomes too complicated for solution. If 
a fictive coefficient of expansion based on experiments at different 
temperatures with actual spans, then the form can be considered 
correct. 

The equivalent cross-section of a solid wire will have a lower 
tensile strength than a strand, because the wires of a strand 
have been subjected to an increased amount of working and 
are consequently harder. Furthermore the weak places in a 
strand are distributed. In consequence the strength of a strand 
is proportionally more than one would expect from the de- _ 
creased size of the wire. 

RatpH D. MEeRsHoNn: Does Dr. Perrine mean that the ulti- 
mate strength of the cable will be greater than the sum of the 
ultimate strengths of the individual wires? 

F. A. C. PERRINE: Yes; so far as the speaker knows, with 
copper, with soft strands. That is absoultely untrue with steel, 
with metal that will not crush. 

EuGENE CLark: The speaker calls attention, as being of in- 
terest in this connection, to the fact that hoisting ropes used on 
cranes built to handle molten metal have been made with cores 
of soft iron wire, or of asbestos, it being necessary to use a fire- 
proof material. In practice, it is found that the strain on the 
ropes acts to extend the helices formed by the outside strands 
of the rope. In the case of asbestos-cored rope, the core would 
break at various points throughout the length of the rope and 
separate, so that sometimes 18-in. or 24-in. space intervenes 
between the two broken ends of the core. The result would be 
to allow the rope to flatten at that point. In the case of the 
soft iron-cored ropes, the iron core was cut out of the rope at 
each end. When the rope stretched, the iron core was stretched 
enough to pull through and leave the open space at each end 
of the rope, where it caused no damage. In view of these facts, 
the speaker feels convinced that a central straight strand for a 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 537 


transmission cable would certainly receive more strain than the 
outside strands. 

RatpH D. MErRsHon: It seems to the speaker that Dr. 
Perrine overrates the question of lightning protection from 
steel towers. The speaker does not see how a steel tower can 
be the equivalent of a ground-wire, nor how a steel tower can 
ward off electrostatic induction. The tower might take a light- 
ning stroke, but it does not seem that it could be of any pro- 
tection from effects due to electrcstatic induction or from light- 
ning strokes which might get into the line-wire. In the latter 
case the charge will probably jump to a pole, but in doing so 
will probably shatter an insulator. The speaker dces nct recall 
any case where a wooden pole has been shattered by lightning 
where the insulators on that pole have not, one or more cf 
them, been shattered. It isn’t a case of simply flashing-over 
the insulator, nor is it a case of flashing-round or yet a case 
of puncture. In most cases the insulators go all to pieces; 
the speaker knows of one case where a pole on a high-pressure 
line was struck by lightning and an insulator smashed to pieces; 
the French Canadian patrolman who reported upon this occur- 
rence said in his report: ‘‘ I found pieces of her over in the field; 
if she had been hit by a stone she would not have gone so far.”’ 

Dr. Perrine and Mr. Scott have both said the cost is not the 
important question. This the speaker cannot agree with, for 
he believes that cost is the only question; not necessarily first 
cost but the total cost, including interest, depreciation, etc. 
Into this cost must enter and be considered the questicn of 
reliability, a question which cannot easily be evaluated in dollars 
and cents. Its weight and valuation must enter into the cal- 
culation through the medium of the engineer’s judgment. It 
is easy to imagine a situation where, with a type of construction 
subject to mishaps resulting in interruption to service, a plant 
might be a commercial success in spite of occasional interrup- 
tions, but where the cost of absolutely reliable service would 
swamp the enterprise; on the other hand, there are situations 
where anything less than the very best and most reliable con- 
struction would swamp it. It is all a question of cost, and of 
cost proportional to the conditions to be met. 

W. B. Jackson: The speaker fully agrees with the state- 
ments that the iron tower would seem to be excellent as a light- 
ning protection. 

The speaker does not agree with Mr. Mershon that the light- 
ning in jumping around the insulators as a rule breaks them. 
‘For instance, in a 20000-volt transmission line, with which 
the speaker is familiar, the lightning has struck the line a num- 
ber of times and smashed one or more poles at or near the 
point of striking and has then run along the line each way 
jumping around the insulators for several poles consecutively, 
slightly splintering the poles. It was seldom the case that the 
insulators were broken in the discharge of the current over 


538 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION: {June 21 


them. It was usually possible to replace the broken poles by 
setting a new pole immediately alongside cf the broken one 
and transferring the cross-arm and the pcole-top insulator with- 
out further repairs. In the case of the steel towers there would 
apparently. be little tendency toward the destruction cf the 
tower, and should the lightning strike the line it would have 
a tendency to run along the line and relieve itself over the 
insulators at the adjacent towers. 

Referring again to the line mentioned before; it was not 
infrequently struck at points between the lightning-arrester 
stations, and sometimes struck hard without any indication 
whatsoever of the discharge getting as far as the lightning- 
arrester stations, though indications of its leaving the tine over 
the insulators was amply abundant. 

As already indicated it is entirely possible that the lightning 
might strike between vhe supports in the case of iron towers 
and run either way along the line, dissipating itself through 
induction and by discharge to the towers. Of course the exact 
action under these conditions cannot be predicted with any 
certainty, especially as with the steel-tower construction we 
generally associate the higher pressures such as 60 000 to 80 000 
volts, and so must solve the problem according to our best 
judgment considering that we have no operating data to work 
upon—but we must always remember that lightning works 
according to ways other than our own. 

There is another feature in connecticn with the tower con- 
struction that has been brought out a very little this morning, 
that would seem to warrant further-consideration. It has not 
been uncommon on 20 000-volt transmission lines and even 
30 000- and 35 000-volt lines that a wire of the transmission 
circuit has dropped on to the cross-arm carrying wires and no 
one has been the wiser for the fact until the line inspector 
discovered it. In the case of the steel tower, the dropping of 
one of the wires upon the support might be indeed serious, 
owing to the fact that the wire would probably be burned off 
at the point of contact, with disastrous results; thus the prcblem 
of the mechanical strength of the insulator and the attach- 
ment of the cable thereto is of paramount importance. As 
Dr. Perrine has pointed out, there is extremely little chance 
of a properly constructed cable breaking except under abnormal 
conditions, therefore, the absolute certainty of support of the 
cable is of the greatest importance, for if there is danger of 
the insulator breaking, or the attachment of the wire to the 
insulator giving way, the possibility of the wire being burned 
off would be considerable. With the long spans and heavy 
cables that would usually be contemplated in connection with 
steel towers, the breaking of the wire might be a catastrophe 
of real magnitude. ; 

Except in extraordinary situations, the speaker’s feeling is 
that a well-constructed pole line using wooden poles and wooden 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 539 


cross-arms must continue to be the most satisfactory construc- 
tion for transmission lines, so far as general practice is con-. 
cerned in this country. 

A conversation which the speaker had with Mr. Blathy of 
Ganz & Company at Budapest may be interesting: he remarked 
that 1t would be unwise to attempt to employ 35000 or 40 000 
velts in accordance with the usual European practice in trans- 
mission work considering the status of the insulator at that 
time, and asked: “‘ What do you think would be the best to do 
under the circumstances?’’ My reply was, to use the usual iron 
poles but attach wocden cross-arms to them. He replied that 
they wceuld nct permit such unsightly ccnstruction as this would 
necessitate, though he felt that the wooden cross-arm was a 
material advantage. 

H. B. Atverson: In regard to lightning on lines of 11 000 
volts and 22000 vclts, our experience has been that where it 
struck, the insulators would be shattered. Either way from this 
point the insulator wceuld usually be punctured, while slightly 
farther away no damage would be done. At the time when 
the lightning struck the line, the circuit would be short cir- 
cuited, undoubtedly at the point where it struck. In the case 
of a steel tower line this would probably cause the shutting 
off cf current before enough time has elapsed to burn off the 
cables. 

PETER JUNKERSFELD: Mr. Mershon’s statement that cost of 
the transmission line is everything, cannot, it seems, be gen- 
erally accepted without some qualification. If the owners cr 
managers cf the line are interested simply in receiving and 
delivering power without much restriction or responsibility, 
the statement might hold. In that case, however, it is only 
a temporary or perhaps expedient commercial organizaticn, be- 
cause for ultimate and permanent success we must consider 
everything all along the various steps from prime mover to 
the individual consumer. 

“ Reliability of service’’ is a term that must be used rela- 
tively and usually should be the first consideration, the second 
being the securing of such reliability for the lowest permanent 
annual expenditure. This reliability of service is always ex- 
tremely important. In large cities even with the principal 
high-pressure transmission underground, this represents a com- 
paratively small part cf the total investment in the central 
station system, and it would seem unwise even for some con- 
siderable difference in tctal cost of high-pressure transmission 
to take chances with the particular part of the central station 
system which represents perhaps the greatest responsibility and 
least annual expenditure per unit cf output. 

Similarly in the New York Central’s present undertaking, 
the cost of high pressure transmission must be small compared 
to the total when we consider car equipment, track construc- 
tion, power and substations, and so cn. For reliability let us 


540 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 2T 


compare a duplicate overhead line, six wires on the same set 
of poles, with a duplicate underground line both in same group 
of conduit, assuming best construction in each case. In both 
cases the conductors are heavy enough so that loss of one line 
will not interrupt the service. Assume now that probability 
of breakdown in insulation of conductors is nearly equal in 
the overhead and underground construction, the probability 
of external injury of all possible kinds is very much greater 
with the overhead lines. In event of serious short circuit on 
one line, the probability of both lines being disabled, resulting 
in a total shut-down of lines, would seem greater with over- 
head construction, as the two overhead lines on same pole cannot 
be isolated, while the underground lines can. Experience and 
observation would indicate that ordinarily with transmission at 
11 000 volts, good underground construction would be much 
more reliable. 

In the question of overhead and underground transmission 
for the particular case of the New York Central, it is probable 
that there were a number of unusual conditions not generally 
known. The estimated cost of underground being seven or 
eight times that of overhead construction, indicates at least one 
very unusual condition. The annual expenditures, however, 
on account of transmission lines operation and maintenance, 
would not be in the same proportion. 

PRESIDENT ARNOLD: Mr. Benezett Williams has requested 
that the speaker ask this question: 

‘“What would be the effect on the permissible voltage by 
the protection of the insulators and cross-arms from rain, 
snow and sleet; that is, how much above 60 000 volts could the 
pressure be carried? ”’ 

The general question is, what kind of protection should the 
insulators and cross-arms have from rain, snow, and sleet? 

F. A..C. Perrine: The speaker wishes to present a pro- 
posed construction for discussion; this construction is designed 
for a 350-mile, 80 000-volt line. On investigating it was found 
that a 14 by 14 insulator was smal] enough for 60000 volts, 
but it was a question whether any reasonable-sized insulators 
for use out of doors could be made for 80000 volts. Further- 
more, it was found that with a duplicate three-phase line, if 
one line was out of service for repair the regulation of a single 
line would be so bad that the service could not be maintained. 
In other words, in trying to get along with half the copper 
the regulation would be too bad to give any kind of service. 
Consequently a system was proposed involving the erection on 
a tower of a house about ten feet square with four wires on 
insulators in separate compartments each being five feet square 
and ten feet long, the idea being to put the insulators in an 
enclosed house having four wires all told; three wires being in 
service at any one time, the other wire being out of service for 
cleaning insulators and for repair. In that way enough metal 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 541 


‘could be concentrated on three wires to ensure régulation. 
In addition the tower was to be provided every 10 miles with 
‘a switching station, so the service of any one wire could be 
‘switched on any of the four. 

In regard to the covering of insulators, the Kontenric 
Company in British Columbia has built a line with a pent- 
house over each insulator but from this they have not derived 
any very great advantage, for while the pent-house protects 
‘the insulators against rain or snow it does not protect them 
-against dust and fog; the combination of dust and fog makes 
mud, producing the worst possible conditions. In estimating 
this line, 18 000 volts were figured on. 

H. C. Wirt: Will President Arnold say whether the New 
York Central lines are to be operated with the Y connection 
grounded? There seems to be a difference of opinion in refer- 
ence to the advantage of operating in this manner. 

PRESIDENT ARNOLD: No; it is not intended to run it under 
abnormal conditions; provision is made in the power-houses 
and sub-stations for grounding whenever the engineers see fit 
to use the ground wire. 

N. J. Neatyt: Dr. Perrine has brought out very justly the 
advantages shown by Mr. Blckwell’s paper, and moreover 
the discussion has brought out the fact of a cost that is pro- 
hibitive; but it seems that in addition to what has been said 
as to the advantages electrically, it is not out of the question 
from a financial standpoint. One matter seems to have been 
-given undue emphasis; that is, the lightning protection. Last 
year at Niagara we were discussing the advantage the barbed- 
wire or the ground-wire had over the transmission, that it was 
a good thing to take off some of the static discharges. You 
must remember that when you have a climatic disturbance 
you have an electrostatic disturbance, and an electromagnetic 
-disturbance. The steel tower, and for that matter the barbed- 
wire protector, does not in any degree relieve us from having 
protection in the stations. And the electrostatic can be taken 
‘to some extent by the entire line, but only incidentally. The 
‘best protective apparatus to-day provides for the discharge of 
this disturbance as well as the electromagnetic. We cannot con- 
sider the steel tower as having anything more than an inci- 
dental advantage, but they are better than wooden poles be- 
cause they will absorb from the atmosphere some of the static 
disturbance. 

F. O. BuackweELLt: There is another thing in connection 
with steel-tower construction. The towers can generally be 
located on high ground, so that the maximum sag will occur 
over the low ground between towers. A tower would naturally 
be located at the highest point—on every hill which is passed 
over—these are the points which would naturally be struck 
by lightning, and the towers, if especially provided with points 
projecting above the line, will take a lightning charge without 


542 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


affecting the system. Wherever there is a sudden change in 
altitude, or other conditions which cause lightning phenomena 
at certain points, there should be lightning-arresters connected 
to the circuits which will discharge them to ground. 

N. J. Ngati: In consideration of the relatively great .dis- 
tance between cloud and line, the addition of lightning-rods 
to metal towers would probably not be as effective as Mr. 
Blackwell suggests, and hence for any direct strokes the metal 
towers should be able to attract and discharge these disturbances 
as well as if equipped with lightning-rods. 

H. C. Wirt: Reports received from a few plants where 
ground-wires are used indicate that such wires prevent the 
shattering of the wooden poles and they also assist to protect 
the apparatus at stations and sub-stations. If the interruptions 
due to shattering of poles are frequent, it may be necessary 
to use ground-wires. : 

N. J. Neaut: Is the case referred to by Mr. Wirt regarded 
by him as general or special, because there have been plants 
where transmission lines have had their poles shattered and 
the continuity of service not disturbed. Any questions regard- 
ing overhead grounded wires are meant solely to bring out 
their value, not to disparage their use. If lightning has shat- 
tered poles and disturbed the service then any puiotection of 
the pole to eliminate this is indeed valuable. It seems too 
early to decide the worth of overhead grounded wires, and © 
we must certainly wait until those who have had the courage 
to install this system and investigate its behavior report their 
observations; and even then to be of permanent value these 
observations must cover a wide geographical area and have 
lasted for more than one lightning season. So far these ob- 
servations have been special. If we should take up the metal 
tower, then overhead grounded wires would probably not be 
used. 

S. B. StorER: One of the speakers said in referring to the 
use of barbed-wire that he frequently obtained an extra 
high pressure between any two transmission lines. Now if 
a barbed-wire is added to the transmission line it seems to the 
speaker that the trouble is increased about one-third, because 
the same pressure might obtain between the grounded wire 
or between the barbed wire and the transmission wires that 
would obtain between any of the transmission wires. 

H. C. Wirt:—Theory or laboratory tests should not be relied 
upon wholly in the design of lightning-arresters. We will have 
to work with the lines themselves and make extensive trials 
on ary protective device that may be proposed. Recent ex- 
amination of transformers that have burned out has shown 
that a very high pressure has existed from line to line. At- 
tention is called to 'a photograph of a connection board printed 
in the speaker’s paper. The tension necessary to make an arc 
ge across the terminals was 42000 volts, and the working 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 543 


pressure was 2000 volts. Too much attention has been given 
in the design of lightning-arresters to provide an easy path to 
ground and too little to prevent a rise of pressure between line 
and line. 

_ In low-pressure work we started with transformers using 
insulation between primary and secondary that would with- 
stand two or three times the working pressure. We now 
have to insulate our transformers to withstand five times 
the working pressure of 2000 volts. With these modern trans- 
formers we find that the burn-outs due to lightning effects 
are from line to line and rarely from line to ground. With 
high-pressure transmission lines it would seem to be necessary 
to provide a path from line to line as well as from line to grcund 
so as to prevent the lightning current making its own path 
through expensive apparatus. 

In many cases reactivg coils were used for protection. It 
is possible to have an electromagnetic effect in the line wires; 
that is, upon a heavy stroke of lightning passing to ground 
high-pressure currents are created in the transmission system. 

R. F. Haywarp (by letter): Since the commencement of 
transmission work in Utah the writer has maintained the opinion 
that structural strength and stability are the first requisites for 
transmission lines. Every year’s experience has strengthened 
this opinion. There are now 500 miles of transmission pole- 
line in Utah, and experience has abundantly proved that the 
line which is mechanically strongest gives the best service.’ 

Glass insulators are not mechanically strong enough, nor will 
they stand the continued stress of heat and cold. Wocden 
pins should not form part of a strong line. Iron pins have 
been used on all the corners of the Pioneer line between Ogden 
and Salt Lake, and there has been no failure on their account 
in seven vears. Porcelain insulators have stood the test of 
strength thoroughly well. Where properly designed and made, 
they do not check or break except when shot, and then they 
only chip instead of flying to pieces like glass. In only two 
or three instances have short circuits been caused in the Ogden- 
Salt Lake line by insulators broken by a rifle shot, out of thou- 
sands which have been chipped by bullets. , 

On a transmission line, the failure of one pole or one in- 
sulator may cause an interruption of service and therefore the 
factor of safety should be very large. A line designed for 
50 000 volts can be depended upon for 30 000 volts. Ifa trans- 
mission line cannot stand the cost of an expensive porcelain 
insulator there can be no profit in building it. There is little 
excuse for interference from trees, but it is more difficult than 
might be supposed to get rid of trees in settled districts. In 
eight years’ service on the Ogden line the greatest amount cf 
trouble has been caused by burning of poles from brush fires. 
Careful patrolling has kept the interruptions from this cause 
down to a very small amount, but on one occasicn 15 poles 


544 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


were burnt off in a sage-brush fire. In a few cases poles have 
been splintered and insulators shattered by direct lightning 
strokes. Except in these instances no breakdown of the line 
itself can be directly traced to lightning. 

There have been many interruptions caused by wires or 
sticks thrown over the lines; a few by birds, and one by a wild- 
cat. Once only has a pole been blown down, while once the 
whole superstructure of a box car was blown from a train into 
the wires. . 

In the inter-mountain region wooden poles have a life of 
not more than ten years; many last only five years. It has 
been found that salt is the best preservative for the butts of 
poles, but if the butt is made to last ten years the upper part 
of a cedar pole will check and become so brittle that its useful 
life is gone in that time. 

The writer in 1903 constructed a pole-line for the Utah 
Sugar Co. from their power-house on the Bear River to the 
Utah Light and Railway Company’s power-house at Ogden, a 
distance of 45 miles. The line was, designed for 40 000 volts, 
and is operated at 28000. It is located at the base of the 
Wasatch range, just above cultivated ground, but within a 
few hundred yards of a good county road. The location was 
costly as regards pole construction, but was necessary in order 
to avoid trees. The line consists of 40-foot cedar poles with 
crcss-arms. The wires are spaced on a six-foot triangle. The 
upper cross-arm is short and the insulator is placed on alternate 
sides of consecutive poles. This arrangement avoids the bad 
practice of placing a pin on the top of a pole. The lower cross- 
arm is heavily braced and the cross-arms are strengthened and 
. prevented from splitting by #-in. steel plates held together by 
carriage bolts. Poles are spaced 44 to the mile. The line 
wire is No. 0, soft-drawn, solid copper. The insulators are 
three-part Locke brown porcelain. The upper part is 11-in. 
diameter, and was tested to 40000 volts. The middle part 
was tested to 30 000 volts, and the lower to 50 000 volts. The 
pin is of cast iron with a collar 34-in. diameter and a 8-in. steel 
bolt cast into the shank. It is cemented into the insulator 
with neat Portland cement. The pins and insulators complete 
weigh 20 lb. each and cost nearly $2.00 in place on the pole. 
They are heavy and expensive, but they are strong and make 
a splendid insulator for a heavy line. 

In stringing wires half a mile of wire was stretched at a 
time, and the writer has repeatedly seen a single insulator 
stand the whole strain without any trouble. There are three 
long spans on this line, two of 250 feet and one of 450 feet. 
Solid No. 0 was used for these spans, and 15 feet sag allowed. 
The wires were supported by three insulators at each end, set 
in a special iron fixture. The whole strain of the span is taken 
by these insulators. All corner strains are taken by single 
insulators and they are strong enough to stand them. The 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 545 


whole line was built for mechanical strength and so far it has 
given no trouble. Some 30 or 40 of these insulators have been 
in use through.the past winter on outdoor 40 000-volt air- 
switches and have shown no sign of failure. The insulators 
are not expensive to repair, as the upper part when broken can 
be cracked off and a new part cemented in its place; the pin 
and the rest of the insulator are used over again. 

This pole-line cost $2000 per mile, and has probably as much 
steel and iron in its construction as can be used on any wooden 
line. The next important line in Utah will undoubtedly be 
entirely steel supported, for a careful comparison of costs shows 
that the Bear River line, just described, could have been built 
just as cheaply with steel towers as with poles. 

The writer believes that a single line of steel towers set 500 
feet apart carrying two circuits of copper wire, spaced on six- 
foot triangles, will be much cheaper, both in first cost and 
maintenance, and freer from interruption and safer for repair 
work than two separate wooden pole lines. 

It may be argued that if a wire from any cause drops on 
the structure it will make a dead short circuit. It will, but 
the wire will be burnt off in an instant and in a properly laid 
out and operated plant the trouble will be located and the 
section isolated without delay. 

It would be interesting to get figures on the cost of erection 
of the steel towers, assuming labor at $1.50 per day, teams 
at $3.50 per day, and average length of haul four miles. The 
writer is not in favor of using aluminum cable. It is cheaper 
and lighter than copper, but it lacks the strength and may be 
worth very much less per pound in a few years, whereas copper 
is not liable to depreciate much in value. 

A. S. Hatcu (by letter): On page 512 it is assumed that 
the steel towers act as lightning-arresters. The writer cannot 
agree with the statement unless the tower is grounded in per- 
manently moist earth. In testing the street lighting circuits 
for grounds or opens, it is found that the towers are not gen- 
erally grounded in dry weather, being grounded but a few days 
after a storm. As a storm usually follows dry weather, at 
least before the rain has had time to penetrate any distance 
into the ground, the towers may be fairly well insulated by 
the dry earth. There have been several instances where light- 
ning has struck a tower and, following a guy-wire to the wooden 
stub, has splintered it in passing to earth rather than follow 
the tower. In one case, lightning struck a tower and puncturing 
the lamp insulator discharged through the circuit which was 
grounded in the station. This experience, together with the 
statement made during discussion that the steel towers were 
usually located on high points of ground, emphasize the im- 
portance of grounding the towers thoroughly, 


1 
rt 
at He! 
; Ne & 3 

‘Vo os 

>, 
> , 
~ ~ P > 
‘ 
™,, . 
Fa Fed ue Padh < 
VPerer a 


A Pats 
, * 


ae: ie be aan Fe Piano 
Fic © r 
self ioyw . * z Y 
Coes! obg bes a ts oe gle 
4 . = 7 So 


iw pe } a 
WA, cite e een va 


ray F 


A paper presented at the 188th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Chicago, June 21-22, 1904. 


Copyright 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


CONDITIONS FOR CONTINUOUS SERVICE OVER LINES 
OPERATED IN PARALLEL. 


s 
BY M. H. GERRY, JR. 


In order to maintain a continuous service, nearly all of the 
more important transmission systems have installed two or 
more pole lines, each carrying one or more circuits. As a 
rule the circuits are operated in parallel but are so arranged 
that at least one of them may be entirely disconnected without 
interrupting the delivery of energy. 

Two sets of conditions are met with in practice: first, normal 
operating conditions; secondly, accidental conditions. It is pos- 
sible by design to provide for the first, and, in the main, for 
thesecond. The normal operating conditions include inspection, 
repairs, and additions to the circuits. But little work can be 
done on high-pressure circuits while in service, and it follows. 
that adequate switching devices must be provided such that 
any circuit may be disconnected without an interruption of 
the service. 

Both the air-break type of switch and the oil-switch are 
now available for pressures to 60000 volts, and may be in- 
stalled in various ways to obtain the desired results. They 
may be operated either automatically or manually. There are 
in use several systems of switching transmission circuits in 
parallel. Some arrangements provide for connecting only the 
low-pressure side of the transformers; others only the high- 
pressure side, and still others provide for the connecting of both 
the high- and the low-pressure sides in multiple. An arrangement. 
of connections for two transmission circuits in parallel is shown 
in the accompanying diagram. 

547 


1904.1] OVER PARALLEL LINES. 549 


This system may be elaborated by adding group-switches on 
one or both sides of the transformers. If more than two cir- 
cuits, or more than two banks of transformers be employed, 
various devices are resorted to for providing the required flex- 
ibility. Practice in this last connection has taken the direction 
of sectionalized bus-bars, with some form of group switching. 
In addition to the switching devices at either end, it is desirable 
on long lines to install sectionalizing and paralleling switches 
so arranged that a section of a transmission circuit may be en- 
tirely isolated and the remainder continue in parallel with the 
other circuits. The switches for this purpose are usually 
mounted on the poles and are operated manually. It is prob- 
able that the practice of sectionalizing long transmission lines 
will be extended in future and that improved switching appar- 
atus will be employed for this purpose. 

In addition to normal operation, the accidental conditions 

which may arise and affect the continuity of the service should 
be anticipated and provided for. These conditions, whatever 
may be their primary cause, usually result in an open circuit, 
a short circuit, or a grounding of the conductors. Whenever 
one of these occurs it is essential that the entire circuit, or at 
least the defective section, be immediately isolated from the 
other circuits of the system. This may be accomplished either 
by automatic devices or by the attendants. The automatic 
methods, on account of the time-element involved, are undoubt- 
edly superior, but the apparatus should be of thoroughly reliable 
construction and should be tested frequently if the best results 
are to be obtained. The best practice calls for circuit switches 
controlled automatically by means of time-limit overload relays 
at the generating end, and similar switches controlled by time- 
limit reverse-current relays at the receiving end. These de- 
vices properly installed will effectually isolate a transmission 
circuit in case of trouble, but other conditions must also be 
considered if the service is to be uninterrupted. Whenever a 
parallel circuit is disconnected it ‘disturbs the entire system 
and especially affects the electrical pressure. A long trans- 
mission circuit represents a considerable capacity, inductance, 
and resistance, and when this is removed or placed in parallel 
to other circuits, it becomes necessary to readjust the pressure. 
This is usually done by the attendants at the generating station 
but a reliable automatic device would be of value for this pur- 
pose if designed to meet all the requirements of transmission 
service. 


550 GERRY: CONTINUOUS SERVICE. [June 21 


A considerable change in pressure at the receiving end of 
the line may result in an interruption if induction motors or 
synchronous apparatus be operated by the current. The greater 
the number of circuits in parallel, the smaller the amount of 
disturbance produced by removing a single circuit. Many of 
the better high-pressure transmissions depend, however, upon 
two lines of one circuit each, and in case of accidental difficulty 
with one of the circuits the entire load is carried temporarily 
on the other line. By a proper design this may be successfully 
accomplished, and even in the case where one of the circuits is 
suddenly isolated by automatic devices the variation of pres- 
sure may be kept within such limits that there will be no 
interference with the service. 

The reliability of high-pressure and long-distance transmis- 
sion has been thoroughly demonstrated, and it has been shown 
by actual results that a continuous service can be maintained 
for indefinite periods by the use of multiple lines and proper 
appliances, 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 551 


Discussion ON “ CoNDITIONS FOR CONTINUOUS SERVICE OVER 
LINES OPERATED IN PARALLEL.”’ 


Ravpu D. MersHon: There is one point which the speaker 
would like to have taken up, because of its bearing upon a pre- 
vious discussion at Niagara Falls. The speaker refers to re- 
verse-relay devices; they are interesting things to talk about, 
but does anyone know of a reverse-relay device that will work 
under all conditions? 

P. H. Tuomas (by letter): Absolutely continuous service may 
be realized in theory and ultimately will undoubtedly be closely 
approached in practice. At the present time, however, no such 
perfect devices are available. 

The usual arrangement of overload circuit-breakers at the 
generator end of two transmission lines in parallel and reverse- 
current relay circuit-breakers at the other ends does 
not operate properly in all cases when there are gen- 
erators at both ends of the line. A theoretically satisfactory 
arrangement can be constructed, however, which will open the 
right line at both ends in all cases of short circuits by operating 
at all points at which the lines are paralleled, the relays con- 
trolling the circuit-breakers jointly from current transformers 
connected in the two lines. These currents must be so di- 
rected that during an equal division of load between the lines 
(or division in any desired proportion if so desired) the influence 
of one line shall just neutralize the influence of the other line. 
When with this arrangement current is reversed in one of the 
transmission lines, the influence of two lines is in‘the same 
direction in the relay and can be made to open the defective line. 

Another method appears to the writer to have a number of 
advantages. In endeavoring to maintain continuous service 
with apparatus now available, the system having duplicate 
parts all through may be operated as two systems entirely inde- 
pendent electrically, each so arranged as to carry approximately 
one-half load. Each of these systems should of course extend 
into all important sub-stations. In case of trouble to one line 
causing a drop of pressure, half of the load of the system will 
be dropped. Immediately this should be thrown to the other 
system, which must of course be able to carry the double load 
for a short time. If the attendants are properly instructed this 
may be done without special orders from headquarters, thus 
avoiding a very important loss of time. All parts of the dead 
system which are uninjured may then be immediately paralleled 
with the live system, enabling it to carry the full load easily. 


~~ 
hoa . 
‘ 
: So ae 
~~ 
¢ 
~ 
™ 
pee 
¥ . 
_ v 
M 
¥ 
: & — 
aa 
- 
4 y eee 
- 
. 
i> j h ‘ 
a - 
Bs 
iy, == ‘ 
iT) . % o! ey iv, 
wu . Le" ed > 
ay! , : VA Sieh )  - i‘, 
. : hata é et hlekes aie 
. Peele 2 fou wa 
4 a Paw |! 
eal Cnt aan) s 1 


‘pe Be tinal gan ae? Uae a 
Pen ie See fins 5 de 


A taper presented at the 188th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Chicago. June 21-22, 1904. 


Copyright 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


THE USE OF GROUND-SHIELDS IN TRANSFORMERS. 


BY JuSe PECK: 

In any transformer there is a possibility that the high-pres- 
sure winding may become metallically connected to the low- 
pressure winding through failure of the insulation between these 
windings, so that if the low-pressure winding is not connected 
to ground it may be raised to a high potential above the earth. 
Under these conditions a person coming in contact with the 
low-pressure circuit may receive a dangerous shock, while the 
apparatus connected to this circuit is subjected to undue strains. 
If, however, the low-pressure winding is connected to ground, 
the maximum difference of potential which can exist between 
any part of it and ground is that which is established between 
the grounded point and that portion of the winding farthest 
removed, electrically, from the ground. 

The ground-shield is a metallic sheet so placed between the 
high- and low-pressure windings of a transformer that the high 
pressure cannot break through to the low pressure without 
first going to ground. The ground-shield should be made pre-. 
ferably of copper, of a thickness of approximately 1/32 in., 
though it may be of any conducting material, and of practically 
any thickness desired. A convenient arrangement is to connect 
the ground-shield to the core of the transformer, which is 
grounded directly, orthrough the case. It is obvious that since 
the ground-shield surrounds the magnetic circuit it must not 
form a complete turn, and for this reason it is cut through 
in one place and the joint insulated. 

While upon first thought the use of a ground-shield would 
appear to eliminate entirely the possibility of an abnorimal 
pressure existing between low-pressure winding and ground, 

553 “ 


554 PECK: USE OF GROUND SHIELDS. [June 21 


there are, nevertheless, ways in which it may fail im accom- 
plishing its purpose, and there are numerous practical difficul- 
ties in its use, particularly in large high-pressure transformers. 

Some of the objections to the ground-shield are: 

1.. It does not prevent the possibility of an abnormally high 
pressure existing between low-pressure winding and ground, 
due to a connection between high- and low-pressure leads 
inside the case, or in the wiring exterior to the transformer. 

2. The ground-shield must be of thin material. With trans- 
formers of large size where enormous current may flow in case 
of a short circuit, 1t is possible that a portion of the shield may 
be burned away or that the connection between it and the 
ground connection may be burned off, thus leaving the high- 
and low-pressure windings connected, but insulated from ground. 

3. The introduction of the ground-shield into a transformer 
increases its cost, or lowers its efficiency, or both; for the same 
amount of insulation must be placed between the high-pressure 
winding and the ground-shield as is ordinarily placed between — 
high- and low-pressure windings; and in addition the ground- 
shield must be insulated from the low-pressure winding. 

4. In transformers there is a leakage magnetic field between 
high- and low-pressure coils. In that portion of the coils out- 
side the iron this leakage field cuts through the ground-shield, 
producing eddy currents which may greatly increase the trans- 
former losses. This is particularly true on high-pressure trans- 
formers where it is necessary for insulation purposes to make 
a difference in the lengths of the coils. On such transformers 
it is necessary to use very thin sheet-metal for the shield, and 
to slit it at the ends into a number of narrow strips, which are . 
insulated from each other, except at one point. 

Conclustons.—Since the ground-shield does not afford abso- 
lute protection, and as it increases the cost or reduces the effi- 
ciency of the transformer, and on account of the mechanical 
and electrical difficulties involved in its use, it would seem that’ 
for large high-pressure transformers the ground-shield is a 
theoretical, rather than a practical, means of protection. 

It is believed that the grounding of the low-pressure winding - 
at the neutral point is a safer, more practical, and cheaper 
method of protection than is the use of the ground-shield. 


or 
Or 
or 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 


Discussion on “ THE Use or GRouUND-SHIELDS IN TRANS- 
FORMERS.” 


RatpH D. MersHon: Undoubtedly, if grounding the neutral 
of a low-pressure winding does not protect, protection will not 
be obtained by the use of ground-shields. It seems to the 
speaker that it is not safe to install a high-pressure transmission 
system, feeding a city distributing system, without either mak- 
ing use of ground-shields or grounding the neutral of low- 
pressure windings. Aside from the question of a cross between 
the high- and low-pressure circuits, it is possible, with every- _ 
thing in good condition, to have electrostatic effects of high 
pressure on the low-pressure windings, high enough to damage 
insulators and endanger life. It seems therefore that it is 
rather unwise to install transformers feeding distributing sys- 
tems without using one of these means of protection. In some 
cases the expedient of using spark-gaps between the low-pres- 
sure windings and ground is resorted to, and in some cases 
between the neutral and the ground instead of grounding the 
neutral. But these spark-gaps are generally the cause of more 
or less trouble; it is the speaker’s opinion that it is much better 
to ground the neutral permanently. 

H. C. Wirt: Transformers having ground-shields were used 
to a limited extent in this country at a time when the National 
Board of Fire Underwriters would not permit grounding the 
secondary. Now that grounding the secondary is permitted, 
there seems to be no good reason why transformers with ground- 
shields should be used. 

C. E. SKINNER (by letter): In specifying the use of ground- 
shields between the high-pressure and low-pressure windings 
in transformers, engineers seek to prevent any possibility of an 
electrical connection between these windings. The question to 
be considered is, therefore, whether or not this result can be 
accomplished. 

In the writer’s opinion, ground-shields are very undesirable 
from a constructional standpoint; they, do not necessarily ac- 
complish the result for which they are used, and they increase 
the cost of transformers in which they are used. The writer 
agrees that the grounding of the low-pressure winding at the 
neutral point is a safer, more practical, and cheaper method 
of protection than is the use of the ground-shield. This method 
gives alrnost absolute safety, while the use of the ground-shield 
is at best a doubtful expedient. 

P. H. Tuomas (by letter): Mr. Peck has hardly emphasized 
sufficiently the objections to the use of ground-shields in large 
high-pressure transformers. That a very efficient protection 
against the raising of the pressure of the low-pressure winding 
of transformers, due to a certain class of breakdown, is secured, 
cannot be denied, but the incidental difficulties and opportunities 
for trouble introduced through the use of ground-shields far 


556 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 2%. 


outweigh its advantages, when protection can be so simply 
obtained otherwise. 

The writer fully agrees with Mr. Peck’s conclusions, but 
wishes to bring out one point: when the grounding of the neutral 
point of the system is relied upon for protection, there is one 
weak point. From the nature of the case, the connection be- 
tween high pressure and low pressure, when occurring on 
wiring or at the leads of transformers, will be of the nature 
of a static discharge, also the low-pressure winding of the trans- 
former constitutes a choke-coil between the source of the dis- 
turbance and the grounded point; as a result there will be a 
short-circuit strain impressed upon it of a very severe nature, 
which may easily cause a breakdown of insulation. This may 
be avoided by using lightning-arresters as discharge gaps on 
the leads of the low-pressure winding. This method will not 
be effective where the connection between high-pressure and 
low-pressure systems occurs at an intermediate point in the 
winding of the transformer. Since in this case the trans- 
former is already injured, this fact will not be of such serious 
consequence. : 

W. L. Waters (by letter): A ground-shield undoubtedly 
affords some protection, but such protection can be obtained 
in a much simpler and more reliable way by grounding the 
low-pressure side of the transformer, or by means of some auto- 
matic grounding device, such as the Cardew. Considering the 
question from all points, the writer agrees with Mr. Peck, that. 
the doubtful protection afforded by the ground-shield is ob-- 
tained at far too high a cost,and that at the present time a. 
ground-shield would be more suitably placed in a historicak 
museum than in a power transformer. 


AA paper presented af the 188th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engincers, 
Chicago, June 21-22, 1904. 


Copyright 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


‘THE PROTECTION OF HIGH-PRESSURE TRANSMISSION 
LINES FROM STATIC DISCHARGES. 


BY HG. WiRT. 


The various devices for the protection of transmission lines 
from lightning and other static stresses, made by the leading 
electric companies, are constantly modified, and it is apparent 
that improvement in this class of apparatus is needed. The 
best way to develop such devices is to make a careful exam- 
‘ination of the transmission lines and of apparatus that may 
have been damaged by such high-pressure discharges. It is 
to be hoped that the following comments on various devices 
now in use will be of interest, and will bring out discussion of 
their operation. 

Ground-Wtres.—Overhead ground-wires have been used in 
several transmission plants. It is evident that if efficient pro- 
tection can be secured at the power-house and sub-stations, it 
is superfluous to use such an overhead wire. If a ground-wire 
be used, it must be large enough not to break and of material 
that will stand corrosion; a suitable wire will cost almost as 
much as an additional transmission wire. 

A certain power transmission plant, having three power- 
houses and seven sub-stations, operating 90 miles of overhead 
transmission lines at 40000 volts, has protected the greater 
part of its transmission system by No. 4 galvanized iron wire 
placed at the top of the poles, half the length being barbed wire, 
the other half plain wire,—the wire being grounded at every 
fifth pole. This wire was installed about 14 months ago; before 
that time many of the poles had been shattered by lightning, 
but since then no pole has been damaged, but some apparatus 
has suffered from lightning, the arc jumping from the trans- 

557 


558 WIRT: LINE PROTECTION. [June 21 


former lead above the oil, in all cases. If lightning-arresters 
had been placed at all the stations, and no overhead wire used, 
there would probably have been less damage to apparatus, but 
the poles would have been shattered. It is not at present the 
custom to use lightning-arresters on transmission lines, and it is 
not known whether poles can be protected in any other way 
than by an overhead ground-wire. It would be of interest to 
have data upon the frequency of interruption of service of trans- 
mission lines on account of poles being damaged by lightning. 
My opinion at present is that a transmission line can be pro- 
tected from lightning discharges hy suitable apparatus placed 
in the stations, and that it is not necessary to use ground wires; 
but an exception will probably have to be made in cases where 
poles are shattered with great frequency. 

Another installation, operating at 25 000 volts, uses lightning- 
arresters at stations and sub-stations, with reactive coils, con- 
structed to break down at 50 per cent. above the working pres- 
sure, and with a resistance in the ground connection. The 
arresters have a series of gaps, and are equipped with the 
‘“ multiplex connection,” giving a minimum breakdown distance 
between line and line. Prior to the installation of this equip- 
ment, there was frequent loss of apparatus at the stations, but 
since, no apparatus has failed on account of lightning, although 
there have been many severe storms. The management of . 
this plant had begun to equip the transmission lines with a 
ground-wire, but has decided not to proceed with this plan. 

We have in these two cases entirely opposite methods of 
protecting lines. In one case, the management is so well sat- 
isfied with ground-wires that lightning-arresters will not be 
used; in the second case, the management is so well satisfied 
with lightning-arresters that ground-wires will not be used. 
These two plants are in country very similar in its physical 
characteristics, and are only a few hundred miles apart. 

Experience with apparatus damaged by lightning proves that 
it is as important to provide an easy path for the lightning dis- 
charge from line to line as from line to ground. Up to the 
present, the principal idea in designing a lightning-arrester has 
been to provide a good path to ground; they have frequently 
required twice as great a pressure to break down the gap space 
from line to line as from line to ground. Recently a a type 
has been suggested called the “ multiplex connection,” in which 
a shorter pathis provided from line to line, requiring practically 


1904.] WIRT: LINE PROTECTION. 559 


the same breakdown pressure as from line to ground. It is. 
believed that this type will afford additional safety. The 
photograph herewith shows a particular case in which lightning 
passing from line to line, jumped across from one terminal to 
the other of a porcelain primary connection board; to jump 
this space required 42 000 volts. 

Reactive Cotls—Much difference of opinion has existed 
among engineers on the value of reactive coils, in connection 
with lightning-arresters. Some recent tests made with the 
best types of lightning-arresters show that the arresters did 
not protect the apparatus until reactive coils were used; it 
seems now that there can be no question that reactive coils 
are effective, and therefore they should always be used. Al- 
though much has been written upon lightning-arresters, there 


is little available information upon the relative pressure cuit- 
able for the spark-gap; it is difficult to determine just how 
near to the pressure of the generator a spark-gap can be ad- 
justed without danger of flashing over. When apparatus has 
burned out, it is possible either to increase the insulation re- 
sistance or to decrease the spark-gap distance. Many arresters 
are now supplied, adjusted for a breakdown pressure only 50% 
greater than the generator pressure; it can be determined only 
by experience whether it is feasible to set arresters nearer the 
generator pressure than this; generators are in many cases 
insulated to stand only 50% increase above the working pres- 
sure, and in this case there is no difference between the break- 
down pressure of the insulation and the spark-gap; but the 
insulation of the machine stands a one-minute test and the 
static stresses exist only momentarily, which is undoubtedly 


560 WIRT: LINE PROTECTION. [June 21 


the reason that apparatus has not burned out more frequently. 
Present experience indicates that apparatus, to be safe, should 
stand an insulation test of 100% greater than rated pressure 
for one minute; such apparatus may have to be insulated for 
higher pressure than the present INsTiTUTE standard, as it is 
extremely difficult to protect apparatus unless it will stand 
the double-pressure test. 

Experiments have shown that very high pressures exist 
momentarily between the outside turns of the coils of a trans- 
former at the moments when it is switched into or out of 
circuit. Transformers insulated for only 1000 volts per turn 
will withstand these very high pressures momentarily; as the 
best modern construction of transformers provides for re- 
enforcing the insulation in the outside turns, thus providing a 
larger factor of safety, it is a question where the additional 
protection against breakdown of the outside turns should be 
provided; a rise of temperature on switching transformers has 
been noticed in some installations, which is attributed to capa- 
city and reactance, producing resonance, and it has become 
the practice to provide special means to obviate any rise of 
pressure due to these causes; such apparatus is known as a 
“* static-arrester.” It is necessary only to provide a circuit 
having a moderate current capacity in order to relieve the line 
of high pressure, due to these causes. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 561 


Discussion ON “ THE PrRoTeEcTION oF HIGH-PRESSURE TRANS- 
MISSION LINES FROM STATIC DISCHARGES.”’ 


J. S. Pecx: Mr. Wirt says: ‘‘ Many arresters now are 
supplied adjusted for a breakdown pressure only 50% 
greater than the generator pressure.’”? While this adjustment 
is a measure of the breakdown pressure of the arrester at the 
generator frequency, it does not necessarily measure the pres- 
sure at which the arrester will break down under an extremely 
rapid change of potential; that is, static discharge. All high- 
pressure arresters now consist of one or more air-gaps in series 
with a resistance connected between the line-wire and ground. 

Tests have recently been made on a number of these ar- 
resters to determine the pressure at which they would break 
down under two conditions: first, with a current of low fre- 
quency, such as is developed by the ordinary alternating-cur- 
rent generator; and secondly, by suddenly discharging a con- 
denser through the arrester. It was found that in all cases 
the pressure required to break down the arrester under the 
condenser discharge was very much higher than was required 
at the generator frequency. With the condenser discharge 
the pressure was measured by means of a spark-gap shunted 
around the arrester. By placing the spark-gap around dif- 
ferent portions of the arrester, it was found that the greater 
part of the excess pressure required to break down the arrester 
under the condenser discharge, was taken up by the series re- 
sistance. 

It is obvious that if a highly inductive resistance were con- 
nected in series with the air-gap, the discharge of a condenser 
through it would be greatly impeded; and it appears that even 
the straight carbon-rod resistance offers a considerable amount 
of impedance to the discharge of a condenser. For this reason 
the speaker thinks that a statement regarding the breakdown 
pressure of an arrester under generator frequency is of prac- 
tically no value as a measure of its protective power against 
lightning discharges. 

RatpH D. MersHon: It is gratifying indeed to know the 
result of the experiment just cited by Mr. Peck. The writer 
thinks the result was probably due to the fact that the ‘ non- 
inductive resistance ’’ was non-inductive in name only. 

The question of the accurate adjustment of the striking 
pressure of arresters is relatively non-important. We do not 
so much care whether the arresters will discharge at 50 per 
cent. above the generator pressure, or at 100 per cent. above 
it, as we do that when they do discharge they will allow to pass 
sufficient current to keep the pressure of the discharge down 
to a safe figure and still prevent the generator current from 
continuing and holding an arc after the discharge has ceased. 

Another matter often overlooked in the case of metal cylin- 
der lightning-arresters—a matter which sometimes gives con- 
siderable trouble—is the amount of power that they take on 


562 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


discharge. ‘A 2000-volt arrester with a given number of gaps 
will take on discharge a given amount of generator current. 
If on 50000 volts the number of gaps is increased in propor- 
tion to the pressure, the current will be the same on discharge, 
but the power taken will be about 25 times as great; the result 
is that if there is a great amount of load on the system til.ere 
is not enough power left for anything else on the circuit while 
the lightning-arrester is operating. This condition is espe- 
cially bad for the operation of synchronous apparatus. 

N._J. Neat: The speaker wishes to take exception to the 
conclusions drawn by Mr. Wirt—that experience with ap- 
paratus damaged by lightning proves that it is as important 
to. provide an easy path for the lightning discharge from line 
to line as from line to ground. 

If we take into account the great distances between the 
cloud and the line during a lightning disturbance, ana the rela- 
tively small distances between wires, then, relatively, all wires 
of any transmission line receive their disturbances as if they 
were formed of one wire; and it‘is therefore difficult to see 
how any difference of potential from this cause could exist 
between any two wires. It follows that the assumption made— 
of the necessity for a discharge between wires—does not hold 
theoretically. 

The study and development of protective apparatus during 
the last eight years emphasize very strongly that certain phe- 
nomena occur repeatedly and can be overcome. Generally 
speaking, if nothing is destroyed in a station equipped with 
protective ‘apparatus, or if the troubles are comparatively 
few, the protective apparatus is very highly thought of, al- . 
though it might turn out that the arresters were really not 
protecting, and other causes were accountable for relief from 
lightning disturbances. An excellent plan is to have station 
operators or line operators record the action of the protective 
apparatus on their systems, just as they would record the 
operation of their generators or transformers or any other 
apparatus which can be metered. A device for this purpose 
has been suggested, that of using a slip of paper in some of 
the arrester gaps which would be punctured by discharges. 
If these papers are removed frequently and systematically 
doubtless much of the phenomena which we have been study- 
ing wculd have further.evidence to substantiate our theories. 
It is also likely that many troubles would be brought to light 
that are far more injurious to the normal operation of the line 
than are lightning disturbances. 

Another difficulty is the clcsé setting of spark-gaps to any 
given pressure. ‘Those who have worked with spark-gaps and 
spark-gap material know that it is extremely difficult to make 
measurements and repeat them within five per cent. of the 
pressure which can be estimated by the ratio of turns. More- 
over, it does not seem of such importance in lightning-ar- 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 5638 


resters that we shculd set our gaps so closely, because if re-u- 
lar apparatus must stand 50% rise certainly any spark-cap 
can be set to meet such requirement. 

F. O. Brackwe.i: Lightning occurs at irregular intervals 
and tn different forms. The kind of arrester which would 
be best in one lightning storm might be of no value in anot‘:er. 
In general, the best we can do is to have a weak point in the 
system which will allow the lightning to pass through without 
damaging the machinery. The most primitive form of light- 
ning-arrester, which consists of a grounded pail of water and a 
wire from the water to the line, furnishing a constant leak to 
ground, is very effective. 

H. C. Wirt: A type of lightning-arrester used in Switzer- 
land and Italy consists of a jet of water turned on the line, 
so that the line will be discharged through the stream of water. 
Neither the water-stream arrester nor the horn arrester will 
take a sufficiently large discharge to relieve the line properly. 
The principal difference between these arresters and those of 
American design is in the number of gaps employed. The 
water-stream arrester with a single gap could be used but the 
water would have to be of high resistance to prevent an arc 
holding. 

We. have not tried either of these lightning-arresters but 
we intendtodoso. The question of the amount of current that 
an arrester should be designed to take is undetermined. If 
the resistance used in the arrester is low the current that would 
follow after a lightning discharge may be large enough to shut 
down the plant; if the resistance is too high the lines mav be 
only partly relieved and the lightning may then go threugh 
some transformer. We should of course consider the light- 
ning-arrester in theory but we should also have extensive tests 
of arresters under service conditions. The speaker means that 
no one should decide for or against the use of a ground-wire 
unless he has been at places where such wires are in use. 

R. F. Haywarp (by letter): The writer believes that it is 
the apparatus, nct the pole-line which needs protection from 
lightning. If poles get shattered frequently it may, as is 
pointed out, be necessary to use a grounded wire, but steel 
construction would be a. better remedy. 

The transmission lines in Utah, consisting of 300 miles of 
40 000-volt pole-line and 125 miles of 28 000-volt line are situ- 
ated at the base cf the Wasatch range where the thunder- 
storms almost invariably break. These lines are particularly 
liable to be affected by lightning, and every thunder-storm 
manifests itself in some way. It is seldom, however, that 
poles are struck, though there have been several cases of shat- 
tered insulators and splintered poles. With duplicate lines 
the striking of a pole should cause but a short interruption, 
and the damage is easily repaired. But if the transformers 
are damaged a whole station may be temporarily disabled, 


‘ 


564 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


and the damage is costly. When a pole-line is struck a wave 
is set up which finds its vent in a lightning-arrester, breaks 
itself against a transformer coil or breaks down the coil. If 
the insulation of the coil stands the shock and there is no light- 
ning-arrester discharge, an arc may form from terminal to 
case. Experience seems to show that a lightning discharge 
has the greatest effect on the station nearest to it, but that 
the horizontal discharge, occurring between clouds and more 
or less parallel to the lines, produces some of the most severe 
shocks at lightning-arresters or transformers. In the neigh- 
borhood cf Salt Lake City it seems that there is a greater ten- 
dency to horizontal discharges between clouds than to light- 
ning discharges direct to ground. This is doubtless due to 
the abrupt rise of the mountains from the level of the valley. 
There is no doubt that lightning can and does induce very 
high pressure waves between wires, many instances having 
occurred in Utah. Protection should therefore be provided 
against this. : 

The writer is in doubt about the use of reactive coils, as there 
are instances which show their value, and others which do 
not. It seems that a reactive coil to be effective must be 
pretty large. It has occurred in the writer’s experience that 
a pole has been struck with lightning and at the same instant 
a discharge has occurred from transformer terminal to case, 
while there was no discharge over lightning-arresters, although 
a reactive ccil was in circuit. 

Instances showing that a transformer coil or the windings 
of an armature act as a “ breakwater’ to the passage of high- 
frequency waves are too numerous to mention. One instance ~ 
is interesting. One of the 2000-volt circuits supplying Ogden 
City is lead from the power-house through booster transformers. 
A severe storm occurred when the boosters were not in cir- 
c1it and a discharge took place acrcss the collector rings of 
ore of the armatures in the power-house. A few days later 
a similar storm occurred when the bocsters were in circuit 
and one of them was burnt out. 

The writer believes that reactive coils of comparatively 
cheap construction should be put in to satisfy the conscience 
of the engineer, but for real protection the money should be 
spent on the transformer. An 80 000-volt transformer working 
on a 40 000-volt circuit and protected by a 40 000-volt light- 
ning-arrester ought not to break down. The writer’s opinion 
has changed somewhat during the past year in this matter 
and he now believes that any reactance coil of large capacity 
introduces some extra apparatus and additional wiring, whereas 
the same money spent in the transformers themselves ought 
to provide sufficient insulation to stand these shocks. 

The writer believes that lightning-arresters should be ad- 
justed so that they are near the limit of their own safety; plenty 
of spare parts should be provided and an occasional burnout 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO: 565 


cf the lightning-arrester resistance should be accepted as procf 
that the lightning-arrester is giving some protection. Anyone 
can put so many gaps and so much resistance in an arrester 
that it will never burn out, but it does not follow that this 
arrangement affords any protection. 

P. H. Tuomas (by letter): Static discharges in high-pres- 
sure transmission lines arise from two causes: first, abrupt 
changes of potential caused by switching or accidents in the 
transmission system itself; secondly, lightning. 

The best protection against the first class, which are certain 
to be quite numerous, is in providing ample insulation in the 
design of the plant, not so much in the heavy thicknesses of 
the solid insulating material, which is exceptionally strong 
to resist static strain, as in the air distances, oil distances, and 
surface distances between exposed points. in the opinion 
of the writer, it is extremely important that these distances 
be ample. For instance, they should be laid out to stand 
with certainty double the normal pressure of the system, since 
probably in very few cases would static pressures exceed this 
limit, except of course in case of lightning. It is true that 
pressures of startling magnitude are occasionally reported 
from transmission plants, but in few cases have the existence 
of such been clearly proved, and in many cases the reports 
have proved to be unfounded. 

In laying out surface distances and air spaces, it must be 
remembered that the jumping power of high pressures increases 
much more rapidly than the pressure itself. Distances should 
not be doubled for double pressure but a curve of actual tests 
should be used. It must be remembered as well that surface 
distances have their insulation strength much deteriorated 
by a deposit of moisture or of conducting dust, and that some 
kinds of material, notably hard rubber, may have a gradual 
deterioration. It must also be noted that the jumping dis- 
tance over a surface is much affected by the presence near 
that surface of another conductor at a different pressure. For 
example, a wire within a bushing, and the presence of such a 
conductor, in extreme cases may increase by several times 
the jumping distance of a given pressure. Tis fact ts very 
well established and has been given entirely insufficient recognition 
in laying out surface distances for insulation. Still another 
factor weakens the insulation strength of surfaces when sub- 
ject to static discharges; namely, the fact that for an abrupt 
change of pressure a considerable quantity of electricity must 
flow at the time of the application of strain to charge up the 
surface of the insulation near the charged conductor, and this 
flow of current momentarily weakens the total insulation 
strength of the surface. 

It appears to the writer that since a great mass of data with 
regard to the effect of ground-wires or other devices on the 
elimination of troubles due to lightning is required to eliminate 


566 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


the effect of conditions other than those being studied, that 
little can be gained from the consideration cf one or two cases 
of ground-wires, and that all our accurate data furnish an in- 
sufficient basis for conclusions at the present time. It seems 
unlikely that even though the grounded wires may be proved 
to have protective effect, as they undoubtedly do, they will 
ever be of general use, in view of the mechanical and elec- 
trical difficulties and expense involved. As Doctor Perrine has 
stated, there is a tendency where ground-wires are brought 
near to high-pressure conductors, for current.to be set up in 
the ground-wires, causing more or less energy lcss and pcs- 
sibly other difficulties. Furthermore, there is an increase of 
electrostatic capacity, due to the presence of ground-wires in 
the neighborhood of the high-pressure conductors. These 
objections may be much less critical on low pressure, short- 
distance plants. In some such plants ground-wires may turn 
out to be the best ultimate protection. 

Experience shows that direct strokes of lightning must be 
expected on transmission lines in™ most localities. Unless 
grounded guard-wires are used, these strokes must inevitably 
injure pctes. Such injuries, however, often do not cause a 
shutdown of the plant. It is highly désirable for these sever> 
discharges to get to earth as quickly as possible. 

Arresters in the station constitute the mcst approved prac- 
tice and will be relied upon in mcst cases. In very important 
high-pressure plants, however, 1t would seem that where regu- 
lar attendance is feasible a set of arresters at a point from 
one-half a mile to two or three miles from the station would 
be a very desirable precaution. In such cases where constant 
attendance is not feasible, but where there is a suitable loca- 
tion for arresters, the use of fuses, possibly arranged so that 
when one blows another comes into service, would be satis- 
factory. In such cases, should trouble occur at the arresters, 
the line would clear itself immediately. 

Reactive ccils may serve two functions: the prevention 
of short-circuit strains between the turns of windings, for 
which purpose they are especially suited, and to assist the 
discharge of lightning-arresters to ground by delaying the 
rise cf pressure of a transformer terminal at a time of static 
disturbance. In either case the protection derived from the 
reactive coil is a matter of degree, depending upon the rela- 
tive electrical characteristics of the transmission line, the 
windings of apparatus, the arresters, and the pressure of line. 
A given coil may be very effective on one circuit at one pres- 
sure, and entirely inadequate for another circuit on another 
pressure. A freely-discharging arrester on a line of small 
electrical capacity, protecting apparatus itself having a large 
electrostatic capacity near its terminal, would require com- 
paratively the smallest choke-coil for restraining the ultimate 
rise of potential above ground. An arrester with a ground- 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT GHICGAGO: 


ol 
(op) 
“I 


connection on a line cf large electrostatic capacity and high- 
pressure, where the apparatus to be protected has a compara- 
tively small electrostatic capacity near the terminal, would 
require a coil very many times more powerful to obtain the 
same protection to ground than the coil of the first case. 

For the protection against short circuits in windings, the 
choke-coil must be proportioned in its choking power t» the 
number of turns, etc. and the winding itself, at least approxi- 
mately; and to be effective without being unduly large can 
cftentimes be advantageously assisted by the use of a con- 
denser connected between the terminal of transformer and 
ground. It would seem evident from the above that react- 
ive coils should be of a power adapted to the circuits upon 
which they are to be used. 

N. M. Snyp_Er (by letter): On the assumption that the line- 
wires of a transmission line have capacity, it might be said 
that when we use an overhead ground-wire as suggested, the 
nature of the protection afforded seems to be due to the static 
charges surging from the line-wires to the ground-wire, as 
evidenced by the jumping of the arc across the transformer 
leads above the oil. This* shows capacity in the circuit. The 
writer concurs with Mr. Wirt'in saying that we should be able 
to protect stations and apparatus without resorting to the 
use of the ground-wire. If we make the same conditions at 
the station as existed when the grounded line was used, it should 
be of material benefit. If we connect a plate or series of plates, 


Sana ah ae Re ee 
i Cc ; ———— 
f 1 
ae aise eo ae ee ee 
: B Line: Wire : \ 
‘ : 4’ 
3 ' 


equal in capacity to the wire to be protected, at the power- 
house and sub-station and do this with all wires, arranging 
them symmetrically and equidistant from a central or ground- 
plate of equal area, should we not have an ideal static arrester? 
As long as the wire or wires are balanced and current is flowing 
equally in all, no interference should be experienced in re- 
tardation by the ground-plates, nor any serious faults from 
resonance. A static disturbance occurs; it surges from wire 
to wire as through a condenser; the ground-plate is neutral 
to the plates of the wires; so any charge of static on either 
wire will promptly be communicated to the ground-plate and 
relieve the strain. Ofcourse in adjusting the plates care should 
be taken to have them sufficiently separated to exceed 25 
per cent. higher pressure than that of the generator. This 


568 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


will prevent the breaking down of the air-gap, the principle 
being to make a static line balance normally; and when any 
excess of static occurs it is quietly induced to earth in an effi- 
cient manner by making use of the condenser principle. 

JoHN PEARSON (by letter): There is one point in regard to 
the grounded wire with which the writer thoroughly agrees. 
The writer considers that the grounded wire cannot well be 
used: first, on account of cost; secondly, because with this 
wire a short circuit may easily be established; thirdly, because 
it does not afford complete protection to apparatus at gen- 
erating or distributing stations. For more than three years 
the writer has been with a company operating a 4000-h.p. 
power-plant’ (not using the grounded wire) located near Som- 
erset, Wis. This plant transmits current to St. Paul, 28 miles 
distant, at 25 000 volts pressure. During this time only three 
poles were split so that: they had to be removed, but nct so 
badly as to interfere with the operation of the plant. An- 
other plant, only four miles distant, with a pole-line running 
through a hilly country, and not using the grounded wire, has 
not suffered at all from poles being shattered by lightning; 
but it has suffered a great deal from lightning, due to inefh- 
cient lightning-arresters. 

From this and other data, it seems that lightning- and static- 
arresters can be arranged so as to be of more protection than 
the grounded wire. Experience proves it necessary to provide: 
first, an easy path from line to ground, through which the line 
wires may be relieved of high pressure in respect to the ground; 
secondly, to provide choke-coils between arresters and ap- 
paratus to be protected, so as to give the arresters more time 
to discharge; thirdly, to provide the multiplex connection 
which Mr. Wirt suggests on the arrester side of choke-coils so 
as to provide an easy path from line to line; fourthly, to pro- 
vide the high-pressure winding of transformers (or generators) 
with a static by-pass between sections of such windings. This 
is done by bringing out a number of leads, at equidistant points, 
from the high-pressure winding of a transformer or generator 
_ to be protected, to provide metal knobs and series resistance 
between these leads, so that normally this combination is a 
non-conductor, but at say 50% increase in pressure across a 
section this combination becomes a conductor, and relieves the ° 
particular section which it is designed to protect. 

The writer knows that when the lightning-arresters which 
are connected to the line side of choke-coils discharge, great 
differences of pressure are set up between wires on transformer 
or generator side of choke-coils. This difference of pressure 
frequently causes a flash from lead to lead in transformer top, 
and sometimes will break down the insulation between 
layers in transformer coils, especially the layers next 
to line wires. An efficient remedy for this is to provide 
an easy path for the discharge outside of the transformer top, 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 569 


by bringing out leads and joining as suggested above. One * 
feature about connecting a static by-pass over successive sec- 
tions of the winding is that it will take no more pressure to 
break down all the air-gaps across the whole transformer wind- 
ing than it will take to break down the air-gap across a single 
section, owing to the fact that all the gaps are not broken 
down at the same instant. This idea in transformer protec- 
tion has been used for over two years at St. Croix Power Co.’s 


Bice. 


plant, Somerset, Wis., and has also been installed at a new 
plant in New York State. 

Prior to using this form of protection for transformers, the 
St. Croix Power Co. lost four transformers in one season, caused 
by static jumping from lead to lead in transformer top; since 
then there has been no loss from similar causes. In Fig. 1, 
A represents the core of a high-pressure transformer; C the 
low-pressure winding ; C’/—-C’ terminals of this winding. JB rep- 
resents the high-pressure winding; b’—’ represent the ter- 
minals of this winding. Leads L-L are brought out between 


570 - HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


* terminals of this winding, dividing it into three sections in 
regard to static-arrester, and between these leads are pro- 
vided non-inductive resistance, /:, metal knobs, g, with their 
air-gap, also wire (or conductor) d. 

Fig. 2 shows this scheme conneeted to a high pressure gen- 
erator with revolving field. The connection is the same as in 


ihe, Li 


Fig. 1. Referring to Fig. 1, it can easily be seen that there 
exists great strains between B’-B’, due to lightning arresters 
discharging or other causes (this charge being of an oscillatory 
nature); each one of the air-gaps is broken down successively, 
one after the other, and it will take no more strain to break 
down all the air-gaps than it will take to break down a single gap. 


ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS RELATIVE TO HIGH- 
TENSION TRANSMISSION. 


The answers to questions printed in this report have been gathered from 
authoritative sources. These answers indicate present electrical engineering 
practice; but it should be understood that the Institute merely transmits the 
tnformation contained in the answers, and that netther the Institute nor the 
Committee on High-Tension Transmission assumes any responsibility 
as io tts correctness or its reliability as a guide to best engineering practice. 


At a meeting of the Board of Directors of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
EvecrricaL ENGINEERS, held September 26, 1902, it was 

“ RESOLVED, That a Committee on High-Tension Transmission, con- 
sisting of five members, may be appointed for the purpose of collecting 
data respecting present practice in electric transmission at high voltage 
and of presenting a report which will indicate the successful methods 
which are now in operation in such form as to be of immediate value 
to electrical engineers. It is within the scope of the Committee to 
secure data upon line construction, insulators, pins and the like, and 
the conditions of operation at different voltages and under different 
climatic conditions; to investigate methods of testing insulators and to 
indicate the method or methods which in its judgment are superior. 
Also to ascertain the methods employed for voltage regulation, the 
conditions attendant upon the switching of high-tension circuits and to 
collect data respecting lightning and static disturbances and the use 
of grounded protective wires.”’ 


In accordance with this resolution the Transmission Committee pre- 
pared a list of questions, copies of which were sent to those connected 
with and operating transmission plants, with the request that the answers 
to the questions be filled in and the lists returned. Although the num- 
ber of replies received fell far below the number hoped for, a consid- 
erable amount of information was obtained. The following matter pre- 
sents in condensed form the answers received. For convenience in presen- 
tation, the plants have been classified with respect to the voltage of 
transmission. 


Total number of plants that have filled out lists to date, 47. These 
plants’ are classified as follows: 

Class A. Plants transmitting under 12 500 volts. 

Plants transmitting from 12 500 to 19 000 volts. 

Plants transmitting from 20 000 to 24 000 volts. 

Plants transmitting from 25 000 to 29 000 volts. 

Plants transmitting from 30 000 to 39 000 volts. 

Plants transmitting from 40 000 to 60 000 volts 


I, LINE IN GENERAL. 


What is the distance of transmission? 

What is the transmission voltage at the generating end and at the re- 
ceiving points? 

Is the transmission single-phase ,quarter-phase (two-phase) ,or three-phase? 

What is the frequency? ; 

How much power is transmitted? : ; 

What is the average power-jactor at the generating station and at the 
sub-stations? 

14. What ts the distance between conductors? 


(For answers to these uestions see Table A.) 


SR Ses 


haan 


SONS 


57. 


[June 21 


REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON 


572 


Oot 
92 GF 80T OF eae a earl Ie => F = = GL 09 IOI G18 FI GZ‘ 8ze | 009 TE | 0000F | 00009 | ¥ a 
s9 
S6 
TE ¥G OF bon a) Se 4 T 5) = [LE v = ros 69 6c €8 |, G68 8I 0g'922 | OO€ TE | 0000E | OOD FE | F a 
06 
06 j 
¢ 6E 8I 0g whe fei! € ag dy a a oe || as ¥ ar a. oe =|9 9L OF OOF &6 og Lat | 00g ¢z | 000¢e | 000 22 | F da 
08 
06 
€& 9G 8P oe a! “ celal | ie mete G 6 os =. GE Z01 09 666 79 $6E 009 Zz | 00002 | 000 #2 | 6 0) 
08 
26 ‘ 
16 8I OF on sae (fee T =a itsE ( Z ae = &@ L 1é Scr S9 L166 000¢t | Oo¢ FT | OOO 9T | 4 a 
OOT 
61 FI 9& 5e 6 i At oe are G EAiec VAL as I ¢°6 & SB CET TE L1G 000 8 009 F 000 ZI | 61 | V 
F 7 mie 
‘aBe | uinur|-umu | 8 ‘ose =| uinur | ‘winut S » 
STONY, | SEEEIN ||) ECE IN 08 99 | 09 | 0g | S | 08 | Gs JF2ZEL/OML] e18uIS} -t94¥V | TOL | -IXP IN “ase “ummul mecgatecs Es a 
2 ‘syqeMopIy | ‘souy -ray | -rurmm | Xe | @ 
2 ul pet UOTSSTUL 5 
cs) -jIuIsuvI} |-SUeI} JO ar 
Z tamod aseolrur Ss 
SOYOUT UT SIOJONpUoD © |-puosas ted sajoAo *Aouanbaly aseyud “SoyTUI Ut ero 90L ‘9BR5j[OA UOISSTUISURL, Et 
usaMjoq IUEISIG Iz saury jo yysueT sie Ke 
® : 
ct 
° 


J 


A a aa elas ea NR le al For tte ens te 


‘V aldveL 


1904 .] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 


12. 
13. 
15. 
16. 


24. 


25. 
26. 


27. 
28. 
32. 


on 
=) 
(ee) 


How many complete circuits are there on each*pole line? 

What ts the standard distance of the lowest conductors above the ground? 

What length of span is standard? 

What ts the longest span used with standard construction or modifica- 
tion of at? 

What is the greatest deflection of line ordinarily allowed on a single 
angle-pole? 

Do angle-poles have double fixtures? 

Are angle-poles braced or guyed? If guyed, at what point relative to 
the power wires are the guys attached? (A sketch 1s desirable.) 

What ts the normal length of span between angle-poles? 

If guys are used, do you use strain insulators in the guys? 

Are the power wires transposed? If so, how many times and at what 
intervals of distance? 


(For answers to these questions see Table B.) 


TABLE B. 
q 7 O 4 u 
® a 3 [20 |.64 2 PA 
Po © Oo o Ba, H > v 
Oa 1 7) oO ° 34 # 0o.§ S 
rae) ag ‘4 SH a) a Ene 0G <€ awn 
jy | as 3 | og SU Wee ea 2 
& ow io hs © OD; no oie = Oy co 
a) Sa] 5 Ba g.43]/ 28° ite) [=Me) 36 Be 
a poo oo a) Oar o = A, 8a » s 
og B22 wea jets ee ; a 4 ae aa 
oe PO8)] § ie) Bpo| JB Yo av a3 my 
og 53 A (oma) ON] AL as aa eae 2 
eo ea.8] 0 Og | Sarr % soe Og [ag oa 
ue Baa] 2 ne Gg oO] yo a a 3 A.5 ok 
a2 Sed] ay; 2a |guad| oe = S 68 se 
¢ [235/e25| 8 | 22 |eB-] Se] 88 BB | oa) “2 
i a E SNS) | go ~B > 3 
8 Sea) eaqe | ae 5a a Osi 38 o ORG a 
O |ess[mokl as | 48 |S8 |azca}] 2s He .|Zem| = 
18 80 100 10° 15G. 5 
A 9 to to to to ive 2G&B to 11 8 


18. 
iG), 
20. 


Insulators 


PIGS} 


Highway 


FIG, 1 


What heavier construction, tf any, is used on such spans? 


What is the longest span of any kind? 
What ts the distance between wires on this span? 


574 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


‘ 


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF CONSTRUCTION USED IN ExTRA-LONG SPANS. 


Spans to 300 feet: the poles are usually double cross-armed and guyed; 
in some cases double poles are also used. 

Span 626 feet: double poles, double cross-arms guyed two ways, and 
wires were spaced eight feet apart. 

Span 800 feet: double poles and 6 by 6 in. cross-arms, poles guyed with 
steel cable two ways. 

Span 586 feet: six poles, two poles for each wire, a cross-arm bolted 
on top of each pair of poles with four insulators in it; the six poles 
are framed together and braced in all directions. 

Span 1750 feet: two poles set 10 feet apart, 66 feet high, 10-in. tops, %-in. 
steel cable was used on this span, it being constructed to take the place 
of a pole line across a dry river bed in case of washout. Factor of 
safety is only 1.6 on this span and has withstood winds of 90 miles. 
per hour. Itis supported by compression strains on insulators whose 
pins stand radially around the beam; six feet between wires. 

Span 400 feet: four poles set same asa tower and held together, also 
guyed; double cross-arms, wires spaced four feet apart. 


34. Do you consider transposition necessary so far as the power line itself 
as concerned? If so, why? 

35. Do you co.sider the transposition of the power lines necessary for the 
protection of adjacent telephone and telegraph wires? 


REASONS FOR TRANSPOSING POWER LINE. 


One company thinks transposing of power lines is not necessary for 
lines up to 30 miles and voltages under 20 000, but for distances and volt- 
ages in excess of these, thinks it better as power wires are more symmet- 
rically located as regards the earth. 

One company does not think transposing is necessary when syn- 
chronous converters are used at intervals along the line 

One company thinks it is decidedly necessary to transpose power lines, 
their principai reasons are; the lack of interference with telephone and 
telegraph wires running parallel, and the more spiralling, the less apparent 
impedance. 

Another company does not think it necessary to transpose power lines 
when there is only a single line on poles; they think it is advisable if 
not absolutely necessary to transpose power lines’ asa protection to 
adjacent telephone and telegraph lines. 

Out of 23 companies that express opinions on the necessity of trans- 
posing or not transposing the power lines so far as the power line itself 
is concerned, 15 think it is not necessary, and nine of the 20 think it is 
not necessary to transpose power lines as a protection to adjacent tele- 
phone and telegraph lines. 


29. Are braces used on the cross-arms? If so, of what material and how 
constructed? (A sketch 1s desirable.) 

30. How ate ue cross-arms attached to the poles, and how deep are poles 
gained! : 


1904 .] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION . 


or 
~~ 


METHODS OF BRACING AND FasSTENING Cross-ARMS TO POLES. 


Class A. 


Majority of cases, strap-iron braces 1} by } in. are used. 

In one case angle-iron braces are used. 

In three cases strap-iron galvanized braces are used. 

In one case no bracing is done. 

In eleven cases through bolts are used to fasten cross-arm to pole. 
In six cases lag-screws are used to fasten cross-arm to pole. 
Through bolts average from % to ? in. in diameter. 

Poles are gained from 4 in. to 3 in. deep. 


Glass Be 


Strap-iron braces are used in all cases. 

In one case the strap-iron braces were galvanized. 

In four cases through bolts were used to fasten cross-arm to pole. 
In three cases lag-screws were used to fasten cross-arm to pole. 
Gains } in. to 2 in. deep. 


Glass'C; 


} 


In two cases wooden braces are used. 
In three cases strap-iron braces are used. 
In one case strap-iron braces were galvanized. 


-In two cases 12 by 1}? angle-iron braces were used 


In two cases no braces were used. 

In seven cases bolts were used to fasten cross-arms to poles. 
In one case bolts were galvanized. 

In two cases lags were used, average 3 in. to § in. diameter. 
Gains 8 in. to 14 in. deep. 


Glass, D. 


In two cases strap-iron braces were used. 

In one case no braces were used. 

In two cases through bolts were used to fasten cross-arms to poles. 
In one case } in. lag screws were used to fasten cross-arms to poles 
Gains # in. to 1 in. deep. 


Class E. 


In three cases strap-iron braces were used. 

In one case only one brace used on each cross-arm. 
In one case strap braces were galvanized. 

In one case angle-iron brace on one side of cross-arm. 
In three cases ? in. through bolts were used. 

In one case lags screws were used. 

Gains 4 in. to 2 in. deep. 


Glass 


In tnree cases no bracing done. 

In one case white oak 3 in. by 3 in. was used. 

In one case cross-arms were mortised through pole. 
In one case two § in. bolts were used. 

In one case two 8 in. lags screws were used. 
Gains 1} in. deep. 


(See sketches showing various arrangements of conductors on cross- 


rams, p. 691-604 


s 


576 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


37. In crossing other power lines, telegraph or telephone lines, ratlroads 
or highways, are there any special precautions taken against the 
danger of the power lines breaking and falling? If so, what? 


Various MetrHops or CROSSING OTHER POWER LINES, TELEPHONE OR 
TELEGRAPH LINES, AND RAILROADS AND HiGHways. 


Class A. 
1. Extra cross-arms and idle wires. 
2. Double pole fixtures and short spans. 
3. Guard wires underneath power wires. 
4, Extra-high poles. 
5. A ground net of } in. steel cable suspended across railway right 
of way under power wires and six feet below them. 


Class B. 
1. A grounded network of iron wire under power line. 
2. Extra-high poles. 
8. Telegraph lines put under ground. 


Class CG: oo 
1. Guard net under power wires. 
2. Truss bridges built across railway track upon which power wires 
are supported. 
3. Guard wires placed over telegraph wires. 
4. High poles. 
Class D. 
1. Short spans and double fixtures. 
2. High poles placed eight feet apart, telephone line passes between. 
3. Bronze cables used over railway crossing. 
4. Telegraph wires put in cable underneath. 


Class E. 
Guard wires. 
Class F. , 
1. Twelve foot span and high poles. 
2. Guard wires. 
3. A grounded net made of $ in. steel cable suspended between poles 
over railway right-of-way about six feet under power wires. 


40. Are there automatic overload devices arranged for cutting off the indi- 
vidual, sub-stations from the power line? 


The following automatic overload devices are used for cutting off the 
individual sub-stations from the power line: 
Class A. 
Four plants use high-tension fuses. 
One plant uses high-tension fuse-switch operated by hand. 
Two plants use automatic oil-switch. 


Class B. 
One plant uses high-tension fused cut-outs. 
One plant uses fuse-switch. 
One plant uses air-brake circuit-breakers, 


1904.] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 577 


Class C. 
One plant uses fuse circuit-breaker. 
One plant uses oil-switch. 
One plant uses oil circuit-breaker. 
One plant uses automatic circuit-breaker. 
Class D. 
None. 
Class E. 
One plant uses fuses. 
Two plants use fuse-switch. 
Class F. 
Two plants use oil-switch. 
Two plants use fuse. 


41. Are the intermediate sub-stations sources of much trouble? If so, what? 


VARIOUS SOURCES OF TROUBLE AT INTERMEDIATE SUB-STATIONS. 


Class B.—One company had trouble with their rotaries but had cross- 
circuiting rings put between each armature section. O.K. now. 


Class C.—One company had endless trouble with double-current genera- 
tors;armatures burning out. One company has had trouble due 
to defective switching apparatus. 


43. How are the wires carried into the power house and into the sub-sta- 
tions? (A sketch 1s desirable.) 
44. How 1s the support arranged just outside of the building, and just inside 
of the building? (Sketch.) 
(See sketches showing various methods of bringing lines into power 
houses and sub-stations Figs. 2-15.) 


45. Do you have switches located outside to cut the wires entirely clear of 
the sub-stations? 
No. of plants that have switches located outside to cut the wires en- 
tirely clear of sub-stations. 
Class A B Cc D E F 
8 0 3 0 1 1 


II. CONDUCTORS. 


47. Of what material are they made? 
48. Are they solid or stranded? If latter, how many strands or separate 


wires? 
49. If of copper, are they hard drawn, medium drawn, or soft drawn? 


50. Are they bare or insulated? 
KIND OF CONDUCTORS. 
Class A. 
Six plants use solid copper hard drawn. 
Seven. plants use solid copper medium drawn. 
Four plants use solid copper soft drawn. 
One plant uses 19-strand aluminum. 
One plant uses 7-strand aluminum. 
Twelve plants use bare conductors. 
Seven plants use waterproof insulated conductors, 


578 


Voltage 
22000 


REPORT Ol COMMITTEE ON [June.21 


a 


“w” “ ” 
14% x 24 x 24 Marble 
Voltage 


314'x 314 x 30 Oak 42000 


a“ 


2 Hard Rubber Tubes 


Walls ] we ' 


Voltage 
$5000 


Voltage 
22000: 


Voltage - Voltage 
16000 23000 

2x 12 Plate Glass \, 18x 18 Plate Glass 
2'Hole eee Porcelain Tut 


FIG, 6 


, 


1904.] 


579 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 
Y Voltage 


Cet A a 02 
x20 x 2 Marble 


Voltage 
45000 


24000 


\ 


/\ 
x 
\N 
\ 


\N 


WS 


ie 
Lin 
ES—o 
a ' ~ 


< 


wae 


580 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


Support in. Wali | 


Plate Glass 


Pee Ms 0207 


WZ 


FIG, $4 


1904.] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION, 581 


Class B. 
Two plants use solid copper hard drawn. 
Two plants use solid copper medium drawn. 
Two plants use solid copper soft drawn. 
One plant uses stranded aluminum. 
Five plants use bare conductors. 
Two plants use waterproof insulated conductors, 
Glass: G: 
Three plants use solid copper hard drawn. 
Three plants use solid copper medium drawn. 
Three plants use stranded aluminum. 
All plants use bare conductors. 
Class D. 
One plant uses solid copper hard drawn. 
One plant uses solid copper medium drawn. 
One plant uses solid copper soft drawn. 
One plant uses 7-strand aluminum. 
All plants use bare conductors. 
Class E. 
One plant uses 7-strand copper soft drawn. 
One plant uses solid copper medium drawn, 
Two plants use 7-strand aluminum. 
All plants use bare conductors. 
Class F 
Two plants use solid copper medium drawn. 
One plant uses solid copper hard drawn. 
One plant uses solid aluminum. 


51. Have you had any serious amount of corrosion of conductors due ta 
any causes? If so, what are the causes? 

Only two plants have experienced trouble with conductors corroding; 
viz., one cornpany has one sub-station at achloridizing quartz mill; the 
gases corrode the copper and cover the glass line-insulators with a film. 
The other company has its copper lines corroded by chemical fumes. 


52. If the conductors are aluminum, have you found them satisfactory? 
If not, why? 
One company experienced a great deal of trouble with their solid 
aluminum line; cause being that the aluminum crystalized due to the 
continuous vibration, and used to break frequently. 


53. Is high-tension wiring inside of buildings done with bare or insulated 
wire, and tf the latter, what kind ani thickness of insulation? 
54. What kind of insulators are used for thts tntertor wiring? 

The majority of plants use rubber-insulated wire for their interior wire 
(high tension) the thickness of rubber varying from 33; in. to 4 in. 
The balance use bare wire, with the exception of four or five plants which 
use paper or rubber lead-covered cable laid in ducts. The interior wiring 
in classes A and B is held on porcelain cleats and knobs in the majority 
of installations. In classes C, D, E, and F the ordinary line insulator is 
generally used to support the interior high-tension conductors, ‘ 


2 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


Ill. LINE INSULATORS. 


. Are the insulators glass or porcelain? 
. What is name of maker and what 1s the trade name or designation for 


them? 


. Have you any preference as to material and tf so, why? 

. If porcelain, are they tinted, and what color? 

. Are the wires carried upon the top or the side of the insulators? 

. What tests were given the insulators before installing? 

. At what voltage will a flash occur between wire and pin when being 


sprayed with water? 


. At what voltage will they puncture? 
. Have you found your insulators satisfactory, if not what has been the 


trouble and to what has 1t been due? 


TABLE GC: 
Material. Color. Method Tests. 
of Tying. 
ze) \ 
€ 3 1 
Class. : he a 2 
& Ea La Ai Puncture] Spray Makers. 
aS} 3S . ae os i Volts. olts. 
o on oO @ 5 A lib ter. 
{3} n (3) ort bh uu 
5 & 18 c 2 loo }|es 
ey oO |e S| mA las |as 
20 000 
A 6 9 3 7 2 @. (aul to = 
50.000 
40 000 
2 4 1 3 1 4 2 to 25 000 & 
50 000 < 
. . 9° 
50 000 Beles Wee 
a4 (Oa 33 al oie teeage lies to te eee 
75 000 lied aa 
— 259 Aon 
80 000 BITES Gy 
2 2 |— 1 1 2 1 to = 28m, EBLO" 
120 000 EE 2954s 
O Mea do 
60000 | 35000 | £25 shad 
PON ak A Wi ee eal a cow cL to to (Fan 5.3 
90000 | 55000 | Pr ESa ded 


120 000 | 70 000 
saltwater 


to 
r= 
a 
= 
a 
a 
a 


Notes.—Prefer porcelain to glass on account of greater mechanical 


strength; greater dielectric strength; less liability to creeping of 
static over surface. 

Prefer glass to porcelain on account of defects being easier de- 
tected by inspection; less tendency for dirt to hold on. 

Four companies had trouble with tops breaking off glass insulators 
at grooves, due to changes in weather, etc. Two companies had 
trouble with glazed filled insulators, the insulator cracking at the 
joints. : 

One company had trouble with film forneing on glass Gasalee 
from-quartz mill: 


1904.] HIGH-TENSION- TRANSMISSION. 583 


IV. CROSS-ARMS. 


65. What are the dimenstons of the cross-arms? 
66. Of what material are they made? 

Sizes vary from 2} in. by 4} in. to 44 in. by 9 in., the average section 
being 84 in. by 44 in. 

The majority of plants use yellow pine, other woods used are: white 
pine, yellow fir, Oregon pine, spruce, Oregon fir, peroba, and cabreura, 
the last two being Brazilian woods. 

67. Ij of wood, have they been treated in any way? If so, in what way? 

The following are different methods of treating cross-arms: 

(1) Painted with white lead. 

(2) Painted with mineral red in oil. 

(3) Painted two coats. 

(4) Painted coal tar. 

(5) Painted two coats metallic paint. 

(6) Treated with carbolinium. 

(7) Boiled in linseed oil two or three hours. 
(8) Dipped in bitumen paint. 

(9) Dipped in creosote. 


V. POLES. 


68. What kind of poles? Steel or wood? If wood, what kind? 

Majority of plants use cedar poles. Other woods used are: chestnut, 
juniper, cypress, red cedar, tamarack, Idaho cedar, spruce, and white 
cedar. 


71. What are the dimensions of the tops of the different lengths of poles, 
also. the minimum diameter of the butts? 


Poles vary from 


Butts vary from 9 in. to 24 in. in diameter. Oe fel tesds tion 


Tops vary from 5 in. to 8 in. in diameter. 
Average top is 7 in.; average butt is 12 in. 


72. How deep are the different lengths of poles set into the ground? 


Poles are placed in ground from 4 ft. to 8 ft. according to their length 
and condition of soil. 
Poles were treated in the following ways: 


74. Are the poles treated in any way? If so, how? Are they painted? 


(1) Gains painted with metallic paint. 
(2) Butts tarred. 

(3) Poles painted. 

(4) Butts painted. 

(5) Tops painted. 

(6) Butts treated with carbolinium. 
(7) Tops painted with linseed oil. 

(8) Butts burned and tarred. 

(9) Butts painted with asphaltum. 


75. How are the tops finished? 


Majority of plants roof the tops of the poles.’ 
A larze percentage paint tops of the poles. 


584 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


One plant puts cast-iron caps on poles. 

One plant champfers the pole tops to pin that is in end of pole, and 
binds No. 6 galvanized-iron wire around end, and paints top with P. & B. 
paint. . 

76. Is there a pin in the top of the pole, and 17 so, 1s there a metal band 
around the top? 

Four companies that have pin in top of the pole have an iron ring » 
around pole. 

One company uses a composite pole made with a 7-in. iron pipe, socket 
13 ft. long, Australian jarra wood top 7 by 7 in., 17 ft. long, pressed 
into the socket; this pole is placed 6 ft. in the ground. Poles are tarred, 
and a galvanized-iron cap is put on top of pole. A few companies use 
octagonal and square poles. 


Kind of Wood. Location. Life of pole in years. 
Red Cedar Ohio Li 20 
Cedar Oregon 10-15 

" _ California 10-15 
Idaho 15 
:: Montana 6-7 
“s Washington 10-15 
" Minnesota 14-16 
ss Pennsylvania . 9 
aa Canada 15 
Chestnut New York 8-14 
i Pennsylvania 8 
ES Massachusetts 8-12 
“(2d growth) Pennsylvania 12-16 
Juniper ‘ Georgia 15 
Cypress Carolina 8 
Tamarack California 5 
Pine Pennsylvania 8 


69. What ts the length of their life and on what peculiar conditions, if any, 
does this depend? 


78. Give dimension sketches of pole-head, showing cross-arms, pins, and 
insulators, 


See dimension sketches on pages 601-604 


73. Are any of the poles set in concrete or otherwise, giving additional 
solidity in the earth? 
The following methods are used for poles in boggy or swamp land: 
“1. Set in concrete. 
2. Tamped with broken stone. 
3. Protected by rock cribs. 


1904.] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 585. 


Wills, ~ JEONISy, 


79. Of what maierial are the pins made? 
80. 17 of wood, what kind of wood? 
Classes A, B, C, and D. 
In these classes the standard 1} in. locust pin is used in most cases; 
other kinds of pins used are: black locust, oak, eucalyptus, hickory, 
iron with wooden thimbles, porcelain, and iron 3 in. fastened into 
insulators with cement. 
Classes E and F. 
Following kinds of pins are used: 
1. Iron pins held into insulator with Portland cement. 
2. Iron pins, wooden thimble, porcelain base. 
3. Locust and eucalyptus. 
4. Steel pin and cast-iron bushing in cross-arm (see sketch). 


81. Are they treated, and 1} so, how? 


Pins are treated in the following ways: 

1. Boiled in paraffin about 24 hours. 

2. Boiled in linseed oil about two hours. 

3. Painted. 

4. Dipped in elastic bitumen. 

In a great many cases pins were not treated in any way. 

In all cases where wood pins were used they were boiled in paraffin for 

24 hours. 


83. Are the pins fastened in the cross-arm and pole, and if so, how? 


Pins are fastened to cross-arms in the following ways: 
1. Nailed (in most cases). 
2. Nut and washer (when iron pins are used). 
3. Wooden dowel (in one case). 
4. Iron spring (in one case). 
5. Driven into cross-arm tightly. 
The following methods are used to hold pins in cross-arms and poles: 
1. Pins screwed into top of pole. 
2. Nut and washer (iron pins). 
3. Nailed through cross-arm. 
4. 4 in. and } in. oak dowel. 
82. What are the dimensions of the pin? (A sketch is desirable.) 


See sketches showing various size pins, Figs. 16-21 


Vil. TELEPHONE LINE. 


85. Have you telephone lines upon your transmission poles? 


All plants with the exception of four have telephone lines on same poles 
as the power lines. One plant in Class F has its telephone line on 
separate poles 200 feet from the power line. 


’ 87. What kind of pins, insulators, and cross-arms or brackets are used? 


Majority of plants use standard side brackets, cross-arms, pins, and 
glass telephone insulators. 


586 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


Mt 

mR 
2 * = Cemented into Insulator 
Sx 


i 


—236/- 


Ps PE Danio eat Mi WE igo koe  ea eet ae 
m2 Cfees 


2 “Top Pin Cross Arm Pin 
27000 Volt Pin * — * 30000 Volt Iron Pin 
be - Bs 
ay Fears ae 
' ' 
x 30000 Volt 
GP : Insulator and Pin 
| 
’ is 
=I 
R 
| ' 
3 eee co poa/be Oak Bushing 
Steel Pin 
Porcelain Base —; 
22000 Volt 
(Mershon Insulator) 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 587 


1904.] 


oP 
eae 


Ys 
ious WLLL 
i. Ui Z 
i) 
| 


in bolt cutter 


Composite Pin 
f 


: or 
High-Tension Insulator | 


Transmission 


60000 Volt 


0 
“ 


Fig. 18 © 


) 
¢ 


6 
Diameter, 


| 5a 
NGS Be eg 
“ ”“ 


= 
SS 
SSQ00 


SSS 
WSS 


583 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


86. How often are they transposed, and at what intervals of distance? 
The following are methods of transposing telephone lines: 
GlassespA Ber Gaus 
Every 5 poles (approximately 500 feet). 
Every 10 poles (approximately 1000 feet). 
Every 4 poles. 
Between every pole. 
Olassessies fe 
Every 2 poles. 
Every 3 poles. 
Every 1600 feet. 
88. Are the pins, cross-arms, or brackets treated? If so, how? 


Pins, brackets, and cross-arms are treated in the following ways: 
Painted. 
Parattined. 
Creosoted. 
Linseed oil. 
About one-half the plants do not treat pins, brackets, etc. 


* 


89. What kind of conductor is used, and what size? 


The following are the kinds and sizes of telephone conductors: 
No. 10 B. & S. copper hard drawn. 
No. 10 B. & S. copper medium drawn. 
No. 12 B. & S. copper hard drawn. 
No. 10 B. & S. copper waterproof. 
No. 6 galvanized iron. 
No. 8 galvanized iron. 
No. 9 galvanized iron. 
No. 10 galvanized iron. 
No. 12 galvanized iron. 
No. 12 galvanized steel. 
No. 10 B. & S. aluminum. 
The majority of plants use No. 10 galvanized-iron wire. 


90. Is the circuit an all metallic one? 
All telephone circuits are metallic. 


91. Do you have stations for tapping on to your telephone line or do your 
inspectors attach their portable telephone to the line wherever they 
may happen to be? 

In the majority of plants inspectors attach their portable telephones 
to the line wherever they may happen to be. 

In one case stationary telephones are placed in booths every two miles. 

In three cases stationary telephones are placed in boxes on the poles. 


92. If so, what precautions are taken for the safety of the users? 


The majority of plants have insulated platforms for users to stand on, 
these platforms standing on line insulators in most cases. 

One plant makes its inspectors wear rubber gloves when using tele- 
phone ; 


1904.] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 58) 


‘93. What ts the normal distance between the nearest power wires and the 
telephone wtres? 


The following are the maximum ar.d minimum distances of telephone 
line from power lines: 


Class A B 
2 Ttsto Lont.|4 tt. to LOE 


C 
Att. to LO ft: 


D 


Sit, too tt. 


E 


anit tore tt. 


E 


Site vOrebt 


96. What means have you for the protection of the telephones, and thosc 
using them, from lightning and crosses with the power wires? 
The following means are used for protecting telephones and those 

using them from lightning and crosses with the power wires: 

1. Lightning-arresters (in most cases). 

2. Fuses to ground. 

3. Film cut-outs. 

4. Barbed wire. 

5. Rubber hose on receiver cord. 

6. Insulated stools or floors (in most cases). 


97. If you use telegraph instruments instead of telephone, state the reason 
why? 
One company (in Class F) uses a telegraph instrument for signaling, 
Two other plants use telegraph instruments, one of them only when 
telephone is not working. 
98. Show on sketch, position of telephone wires with reference to power 
wires, showing the normal distance apart of the telephone wires? 
See sketch showing position of telephone wires relative to power wires, 
pages 601-604 


99. What ts the e.m.f., induced or other, between your telephone wires and 
the ground? 


Classes A, B, C, D. 
Highest e.m.f. recorded between telephone wire and ground is from 
20 to 130 volts. 
Classes E, F. 
In these classes highest e.m.f. was 3000 volts. A great many plants 
claim there is no e.m.f. between telephone wires and ground, due 
: to: careful transposing; using good insulators and careful wiring; 
a reactive coil in line with middle point grounded. 


+ 
VIII. TRANSFORMERS. 


101. What is the capacity of your transformer untts in the power-house 
and sub-stations? 
Class A. 
Transformer units at power-house range from 125 to 225 kw.; at 
sub-station from 7.5 to 375 kw. ; 
' Class B. 
Transformer units at power-house range from 150 to 500 kw.; at 
sub-station from 75 to 300 kw. 
Class C. 
Transformer units at power-house range from 175 to 1400 kw.; at 
sub-station from 20 to 2250 kw. 


590 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON / [June2L 


Class D. 
Transformer units at power-house range from 225 to 500 kw.; at 
sub-station from 125 to 350 kw. 
Class E. 
Transformer units at power-house range from 289 kw.; at sub-station 
from 150 to 500 kw. 
Class F. 
Transformer units at power-house range from 1000 kw.; at sub-station 
from 333 to 1000 kw. 


102. Are the transformers connected in LX or Y? 


The following are the various methods of connecting transformers: 
1. /\(used in most cases). 
Ae 
A and Y. 
Scott or T, two-phase to three-phase (used in a great many plants). 
Single phase. id 


oe ty 


103. Is the same connection used on both primary and peta sides? 


In the majority of plants the same transformer connections are used 
on both primary and secondary sides. 


104. Is the neutral grounded upon either the high- or low- voltage side? If 
so, why? If not, why not? 


In:the majority of plants the neutral is not grounded at all. 


105. Do you know any marked advantages or disadvantages in grounding 
the neutral? Ij so, state them. 

The advantages of grounding neutral are: 

1. To prevent high-tension from doing damage to low-tension net- 
work, should insulation between primary and secondary break 
down. z 

2. Reduces strain on transformer and line under normal conditions. 

3. Prevents accumulation. 

In one plant neutral is grounded on high-tension side. The reasons for 
it: less expense in transformer construction; greater safety in insulation 
of windings; greater flexibility of general system in case of loss of trans- 
formers, or one wire of the circuit, or anything which cripples any one 
part of the three whigh go to make up the system, we can still operate 
on two until we can change to the other line and repair it, and have 
no interference with service. Greater simplicity in wiring of stations; less 
interference with telephone wires and outside circuits, and we believe, 
less opportunity for resonance and other serious line effects. At least, 
we have never had any of these effects. 

Disadvantages are: 

1. Increases danger of accident to apparatus. 

2. Double-current generator is short circuited if neutral of sec- 
ondary is grounded. 

8. Liable to damage telephone system if power line should become 
grounded or open. “ pth y 

4. Increases liability to side flash from lightning 


1904.] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 591 


106. Is there a spark-gap connection to earth from the centres of either the 
high- or the low-voltage coils? 

About two-thirds of the plants do not have spark-gap connections to 
earth from the centre of either the high- or the low-tension coils. 

107. Have the transformers ground-shtields between the high- and low-tension 
windings? 

Only three plants have ground-shields between the high- and low- 
tension windings of their transformers, but majority of plants have their 
transformer cases grounded thoroughly. 

108. Are the transformers otl-insulated or dry? 


109. Are they atr-blast, water-cooled, or natural-cooled? 
110. What ts the voltage of the low-tension side? 


TABLE D. 
Oil-insulated | Oil-insulated Oil-insulated Dr Range of 


BYs 
Class | natural-cooled | water-cooled |air-blast cooled | air-blast cooled} voltage on low- 
tension side. 


A 11 3 1 5 360 to 2300 


w 
co 
iS) 
a 
° 


350 to 2400 


Cc 6 2 1 1 390 to 2400 
ee 1 3 0 2 2200 to aes 
me 2 1 0 2 750 to 2400 

F 1 4 0 0 1500 to 4000 


111. Is there transformation of phase as well as of voltage? 
Only about 6% of the plants transform the phase of the current. 
112. Have you had any trouble with your transformers? If so, what? 


The following troubles with transformers have been experienced: 
Terminals improperly soldered. : 
Transformer burnt out; cause, not dried out enough before being 
put into service, 
3. Breakdown between primary and secondary coils, bad insulation 
being the cause. 
4. Breakdown from lack of proper circulating ducts between coils 
and from canvas hoods over ends of coils, making dead places 
for oil; oil would heat and burn: Suet 
Burnout from lightning discharges. 
Burnout from overloading. 
. Burnout from defective leads. 
In one plant six .natural-cooled, oil-filled transformers furnished 
with the first contact were failures; had..to be re- 


Se 


IDA 


592 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


designed; since, have been all right. Thirty air-blast trans- 
formers have never caused one dollar for repairs in five years— 
with one exception, which was due to an attendant not noticing 
that a terminal had become unsoldered where two banks were 
operating in parallel, and its mate burned out after carry- 
ing overload of 100% for at least 15 days. 


IX. LIGHTNING PROTECTION. 


113. What devices are used to protect your power lines from lightning? 
Lightning-arresters, grounded wires, or both? 

With the exception of one plant which uses barbed wire, lightning-ar- 
resters are used; four plants use both lightning-arresters and ground-wire. 
115. Are the wires smooth or barbed and of what material? 

117. How are they fastened to poles or cross-arms; on insulators? If on 
insulators, why? 

Barbed wire is generally used in preference to smooth wire. Some 
plants run taps to ground at every pole, some at only every four poles, 
and some at only every half mile. For mechanical reasons this ground- 
wire is generally run on insulators; but in some cases it is fastened to 
pole or cross-arms with staples. 

118. How is the ground made? 
The following are various methods of grounding this ground wire: 
1, Twisting around butt of pole. , 
2. Gas-pipe driven into ground 6 ft. to 10 ft., the wire put into pipe 
and pipe filled with about 4 in. of lead. 
3. Galvanized-iron plates placed in ground. 


119. Do you consider grounded wires as a valuable protection? 


120. Do you consider them more or less desirable than any other means of © 


lightning protection? 


Only nine companies consider grounded wires a valuable protection; 
as a rule they are thought less desirable than other lightning protection. 
121. If lightning-arresters are used, do you consider that they furnish any 

protection against rise of voltage, due to any disturbance upon the 
system, such as the throwing on or off of all or part of the load, etc. 

The majority of plants consider lightning-arresters furnish protection 
against rise of voltage de to any disturbance upon the system’such as 
the throwing on or off of all or part of the load, but a number of plants 
think that for a moderate rise of voltage they furnish no protection. 


122. Do you consider them a complete protection against such rise? 
The majority of plants do not think lightning-arresters are a complete 
protection against such rises. 
123. What kind of lightning-arresters are used? 
The following makes of lightning-arresters are used (in order of the 
quantity) : 
General Elec. Co. (Wirts). 


Westinghouse Elec. Mfg. Co. (low equivalent). 
Stanley Mfg. Co. 


— 


1904.] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 593 


124. Do you have banks of lightning-arresters along your line? If so, at 
what intervals? 
Lightning-arresters are placed in the following ways along the line: 
1, At power-house and sub-stations only. 
2. At each end and middle point of line. 
3. At points dividing line into four equal parts. 
4. At irregular intervals (at cable terminals, etc.). 


125. Are they necessarily at sub-stations? 


The greater number of plants consider it necessary to have lightning- 
arresters at sub-stations. 
127. Is there resistance 1m sertes or in parallel with the arresters? If so, 
what kind of resistance (such as carbon, metal, water, etc.)? 
Lightning-arresters have the following kind of resistances in series 
or parallel, or both: 
Carbon resistance in series. 
Graphite rods in series. 
German silver in series. 
German silver in series and parallel. 


128. Is there capacity or inductance in series or in parallel, with the ar- 
resters or line? 


Majority of plants have choke-coils in series with line. 


129. Do you find that the lightning-arresters do their work satisfactorily? 
Ij not, wherein do they fail? 
Majority of plants consider that lightning-arresters do their work sat- 
isfactorily, but some plants experience the following troubles: 
1. Generator current follows a discharge to ground. 
2. Lightning jumps to water coil on transformers. 
3. Arrester put out of order after each discharge. 
4. When switching high-tension circuits, generator current follows 
discharge to ground. 


130. How are the grounds made for your lightning-arresters? 


The following methods aré used for grounding lightning-arresters: 
1. Copper plate about 30 in. sq. placed below water level in river 
bank; two strands of No. 4 copper wire attached to different 
points of plate by solder, plate is then covered with about 
12 in. of coke or fine charcoal and then rest of hole filled with 
damp earth. In some cases plate is kept wet by means of a 
water-pipe. 

Galvanized-iron pipe driven into ground about 18 feet. 

Coils of copper wire buried in bank of river below water line. 

Connected to steel flumes, steel structure, or feed-water pipe. 

Connected to rails in cases of electric railway. 

Connected to negative bus-bars. 


> rw wo to 


"xX. CABLES. 


131. Have you any cables included i2 your transmission line? 


Only eight plants have cables in their transmission lines. 


594 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


133. Are they lead covered? 
136. Do you prefer rubber or paper insulation, and why? 

All cables used are lead-covered. One plant in Class A has a three- 
phase submarine cable 4300 feet long, steel armored. 

In most cases where cables have been installed recently paper insula- 
tion is used; the advantages claimed for paper-insulated cables are: 

Cheaper and more durable: rubber insuiation deteriorates in short 
time. One plant claims that there is less trouble from moisture with 
rubber. 


137. Give sketch of section of cable, showing arrangement and size of con- 
ductors and arrangement and thickness of insulation and sheath? 


(Sketches of various cables used are shown, see Figs. 22-25.) 
138. Are the conductors solid or stranded? 
Stranded cable is used almost entirely. 


139. Is the sheath lead? or lead and tin? and ts tt tron armored? 
140. If lead and tin, what ts the percentage of the latter? 

Cables in most cases are covered with a composition of lead and 3% 
of tin—the tin lessens corrosion. E 


143. What means do you employ to protect cable sheaths from electrolysis? 


The cable sheaths are grounded to rails, gas-pipes, ete. as a protec- 
tion against electrolysis. 

144. What protective devices have you for theecables, and do they prove 
effective and satisfactory? 

The majority of plants have lightning-arresters as a protection fo 
their cables, also overload circuit-breakers in stations. ; 
145. Do you take any unusual precautions in operating to ensure the safety 

of your transmission cables? 

In most cases no unusual precautions are employed in operating to 
ensure the safety of transmission cables. 

146. What kinds of ducts do you employ for carrying your cables? 

The following are different kinds of ducts used for carrying cables: 

Vitrified clay. 

Cement-lined vitrified clay. 

Creosoted wooden boxes. 

Iron pipes (when cables run under water) 


XI. OPERATION. 


147. Do you do your switching on the high- or the low-tension side of the 
transformers? 


148. Ij the former, do you switch circuits when there is voltage on them 
but no current? 


149. Do you switch high-tension circuits when loaded? 

Sixty-five per cent. of the plants do their switching both on low- 
and high-tension sides. In classes A and B in a great many plants 
switching is done on low-tension side only. In Class A, 50% of the 
plants do their switching on high-tension side only. The majority of 
plants make it a practice to switch their high-tension circuit with volt- 


1904.] 


1 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 


211000 cm. 
(Stranded) 


a fh 
%2 Rubver 


25000 Votts 


595 


596 


REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON 


i 
Ne Paper 


fh 
S\ 442 Paper 


No2B&S 
(7 Strands} 


FIG, 24 


25000 Volts 


SA Rubber 


UUM 
SS, 
— 
=> 
a 
=) 
= 
rs 


== 
SS 


$2000 Volts Submarine 


[June 21 


No,6 B & S (Copper) 
(Solid) 


1904.] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 597 


age on them, but no current. A number of plants, probabiy 40%, 
switch their high-tension circuits when loaded, and about 10% will do 
it only when it is absolutely necessary. 


150. What means for high-tension switching do you have? 


Following are the high-tension switches used in order of the quantity 
in use: 
Oil-switches. 
Fused-switches. 
Air-switches. 
Knife-switches (quick break). 

Ram’s horn: the horn is of 4-in. brass rod, curved and converging to a 
gap of about 10 in. In stations where there is any Jarge amount of syn- 
chronous apparatus, this gap is spanned by a solid }-in. rod set into 
suitable clips on the horns and provided with a suitable operating 
handle. In simple transformer stations the gap is spanned by a J-in. 
porcelain rod having brass contact-pieces with binding screws for ordi- 
nary fuse-wire. These switches have been operated successfully on 
loads as large as 3000 kw. 


151. Is tt satisfactory? If not, why? 
All plants claim their way of switching is satisfactory. 
152. Do yon have high-tenston fuses, and if so, what type? 


The following kinds of high-tension fuses are in use: 
Ball type. 
Pole type. 
Expulsion fuse. 
D. & W. powder fuse. 
Porcelain enclosed. 
Glass enclosed. 
Expulsion aluminum. 
Sach’s Noark. 
154. When you open a loaded high-tension main circuit with an air-break 
switch, do the lightning-arresters discharge? 
155. If tnstead of an atir-break switch an otl-break switch 1s used, does tt 
have the same. effect? 

“In classes A, B, andC when loaded high-tension main circuits are opened 
with air-break switch, the lightning-arresters do not arc, but in classes 
D, E, and F they generally do discharge. But plants using oil-switches 
are not troubled to the same extent with their lightning-arresters dis- 
charging when they open a loaded high-tension main. 


156. Do you operate with grounded neutral? If so, why? If not, why not? 
A very small percentage of the plants operate with neutrals grounded. 


157. Have you ever had any trouble due to operating with grounded neutral 
either in your power circutts or because of trouble with nerghboring 
power, telephone, or telegraph curcurts? 

Yes; a number of plants operating with grounded neutrals affected tele- 
phone and telegraph circuits in the neighborhood. One company says 
if all the power of one of the large power stations be transmitted over 


5u8 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


the whole length of the circuit with one wire of the transmission line 

open the telegraph companies are affected, but as this never occurred 

but for an instant once or twice it is not serious. We. can still talk on 

our own telephone line with the sub-station carrying 500 kw., working 

with two transformers as above mentioned, and affect no neighboring 

power circuits, nor does it affect our own circuit on neighboring poles 

when running separate. f 

158. Have you ever had one power-wire broken or one leg of the circutt 
open under a heavy load when the neutral was grounded? 

159. Did this cause damage or trouble in any of your circutts or tn other 
circuits, near or remote? Jf so, what? 

A few plants have had one power-wire broken or one leg of circuit 
open under a heavy load when the neutral was grounded, but in most 
cases no damage was done. 

160. Have you ever had trouble from the burning or charring of pins, cross- 
arms or poles due to the high-tenston current? 

166. What means have you taken to remedy the trouble and have the means 
proved effective?. 

A great many plants have had trouble with burning of pins, cross- 
arms, or poles. In most cases this was due to continuous discharges, 
caused by: 

1. Pin or insulator breaking; generally remedied by replacing 
pin or insulator. 

2. Spray from falls freezing on insulator; remedied by moving line 
farther from falls discharging across insulator. 

3. Bad insulator starting leaking to ground wire; remedied by 
moving ground wire from face of cross-arm. 

4. Insulator with iron pin cracking and burning arm. 

5. Pins burn, due to rain; remedied by replacing porcelain insu--. 
lator with glass. In some cases discharge appeared to come 
from inner petticoat, in others through the porcelain and burn- 
ing pin 4 in. from top. 

6. Poor porcelain; remedied by replacing untreated oak pins with 
locust pins that have been boiled in paraffin and painted 
with P. & B. paint; also painted thread of insulator. 

7, Gases from quartz mill forming film over surface of insulator. 

38. Soot from passing trains being deposited on insulators; remedied. 
by cleaning insulators and replacing pins. 

In most cases discharge was worse in wet and foggy weather, and 
in many cases discharge took place in wet weather only. 

167. Have you had any trouble from insulators puncturing or current 
flashing around them? 

Only about 6% of the plants have had trouble from insulators punc- 
turing or current flashing round. 


168. If the latter, what was the cause? 
The cause being either insulators damaged by stones or defective 
porcelain or glass, more often the latter. 


169. Do you have many insulators maliciously broken? 
170. If so, what'means have you taken to stop this,.and with what success? 


A great many plants experience’ trouble from having their line insu- 


1904.] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 599 


lators maliciously broken. The following means have been taken to 
stop tis: 
1. By posting warnings. 
2. Offering rewards for evidence that will enable them to locate 
and convict guilty persons. 
38. Having watchmen along line. 
4. Arrest and fining. 
(Not much success with any of above methods.) 
171. Have you had any insulators break from internal strains when on 
the line? 
172. Was thts from actual strains in the glass or from improper ftlacing 
upon the pin? 

Only a few plants have had insulators break from internal strains 
when on the line, the cause in most cases being the improper placing 
of insulator on pins. 

173. Have you ever had arcs start between your line wires? 
175. Are you troubled from short circutts upon your lines? If so, what are 
the most serious causes? 

The following are causes for arcs being started between lines: 

1. A piece of wire maliciously thrown across lines. 
Branches of trees falling across lines. 
High winds blowing wires together. 
Large birds coming in contact with lines. 
Broken insulators and pins. 
Sleet storms. 
Lightning discharges. 
Generators ran away,.due to sudden change in load. 
9. Fields of generators demagnetized owing to armature reaction. 


OID rp 9 ty 


176. Is your telephone system satisfactory? 
178. Is there much more noise with a heavy current in the power-line than 
with a light current? 

Most plants claim that their telephones work satisfactorily; but a 
great number of plants complain that their telephones are more or less 
noisy in wet weather. One or two plants claim that telephones work 
better in wet weather, one of these plants belong to Class F. 

Majority of plants claim that the amount of current in power-line does 
not affect their telephones. One plant says the heavier the load the 
less the noise in the telephones. 

179. Have you ever had any one hurt from the power voltage when ust 1g 
the telephone? If so, how did it happen? 

Only one accident recorded in connection with telephone; superin- 
tendent of power-house was: killed at telephone. They think heavy 
sleet on power-wire made it sag until it touched telephone wire. 

181. Do you do work upon dead circuits when other circuits on the same 
pole-line are alive? If so, what precautions do you take? ° 

182. Are such repairs made only in dry weather and in the daytime, or 
are they made at any time? 

Majority of plants do work upon dead circuits when other circuits 
on the same pole-line are live; the following precautions are taken: 

1. Ground dead circuits. 


600 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


2. Short circuit dead circuits. 
3. Both ground and short circuit dead circuits. 

In classes A and B where circuits are close together on cross-arms all 
circuits on same side of pole as dead circuit are made dead. 

Majority of plants repair their lines at any time, day or night. 

183. How do you have your circuits patrolled and how often? 
184. How much distance is one man able to patrol satisfactorily and over 
what kind of country? 

Lines are patrolled at different intervals of time ranging from once a 
day to five or six times a year, according to the kind of country passed 
through. Lines running by railway are often patrolled by men on a 
hand-car, lines cross-country by men on foot and on horseback. The 
amount of line that a man can patrol in one day varies with the kind of 
country: on level country ten miles; on hilly country from three to six 
miles. A man on horseback can do about 30 miles on level or about 
eight miles in mountainous country. 

One company has a lineman and helper to look after 30 miles of line; 
they patrol line twice a week. : 

Another company has three men on hand-car who patrol 30 miles a day. 

A number of plants do not have their lines patrolled regularly, but 
only when trouble occurs. 

185. What means are taken to compensate for capacity charging current of 
transmission lines? 

No special means are taken to compensate for capacity charging 
current of transmission lines by plants. 

186. Is voltage drop compensated for at receiving stations? If so, how? 


187. Where there 1s more than one receiving station, what means, if any, 
are used for ees gs Ae" regulating the voltage desired by these 


stations? 
The various methods are used for compensating voltage feds at re- 
ceiving stations: 
A number of taps on transformers. 
Regulators on secondary side of transformers. 
Regulating heads on transformers. 
Motor-driven potential regulators 
Synchronous converters over-compounded. 
Synchronous motors. 


1904.] 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 


601 


Voltage. 


16 000 
22 000 
22 000 
27 000 
30 000 
40 000 
50 000 
50 000 
45 000 


Voltage. 


16 000 
22 000 
22 000 
27 000 
30 000 
40 000 
50 000 
50 000 
45 000 


Ground Line 
_— 
[ 
jee, NG | 
! 
pe 
EG F G 
fades 6” — 
24” = 27% 
| 26” ” 157 
42” 12% 35’ 
| 23” he 2o728 
| 84” ae 196” 
52” ie 26'6" 
674" 1 i 23’6" 
36} 8 278 
i K | N O 
107) |p a= | 24” 48” 
= 25 | 3” rae 
17 ae a2 
pees a See 7 “ 
16” — | 10” on 
ous = 24” 60” 
4” = | 5 a leer 40 
or We 25” 96” 


602 REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON [June 21 


Ground Line 


Voltage.| A B (S D E F Gaelyekt iT J K 
12000 | 24” 54” 12" 18” 14” ilge Ra 38” 23” == 3” 
11000 | 20” 54” 72" 20” 12” 16” Se 38” 22” Sf 4” 
11500 | 24” 60” 84” 24” 112” 20%” 9” 9” 24” 5” pe 
23000 | 30” 72” 102” 30” 15” 263” | — 8” 30” 8” 24” 
25000 | 18” 60” 86” 24” —_ = = 8” 22” — _— 
34000 | 254 62” 80” 18” 18” 20” 14” 27” 3” 


30000 | 30” 78” | 108” 30” 18” 22” 9” 6” 33” 8” 4” 


Voltage. L M | N O iB Q R S 0) sy any xX 
12 000 ily 217 +) 3807 6. = 22” \\ 42") 32% + 3h 4 %2" 
11 000 = = 35’ ON 18 fe) == 4” 5” 4 5 96” 
11 500 18” = 24’ CU 6” | 202”) 44” |' 34” | 44 Oa miese 
23 000 23” 23) 30 Gales alae eo SS 43” | 32” 4: 34 | 48” 
25 000 = 30’ | 36’ Ge ta7 Ge | = 5” 4” 4 72” 
34 000 194” | — 35’ OY Ve | 240 Se Dee ‘3 34 | 66” 


30 000 24” 27’ | 36’ 


1904.] HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 


ete as ae ane 


6038 


Fic. C, 

oe 
Voltage ese B C D B Ww aiaG 

12 000 ed 44” 2” 1” e” 14” | 2” 

4 600 9” 4” oe ily ” 14” ee” 

11 500 82” 4” 24" 12 13/16” | 17/16” | 111/16 

12 000 Q’” ; 4” of 1” ag 14” | 9 1” 

16 000 104” 44" Q" 1” in 14” 12” 

20 000 10” 44” 23” 1” #” 19%) ig" 

25 000 12% 4” 24” 12” ite 13” — 

30 000 10” 44” 2” iW 4 1 9/16” 2” 

50 000 183” 4g” Sie 1 LIBYAN) PAG Alors ed ISA 
Voltage. H L i K | ye M N 

12 000 ik 4” 5” Sy Wye 24" Quy 

4 600 14 | — oo 

11 500 1g 42” 53” PLE = 3e” |): 28/16" 

12 000 13 42” 6” 15/16 | 3/16" | 23” =} 

16 000 115/32 4i” 6” eat ah shuts 

20 000 14 4’ 54” 23” | 14" 22” | 23” 

25 000 13 — — = — = ae 

30 000 14 ie yes Q4 =e 34” 4" 

50 000 27/16 9” nO 44” eran” 4g” 33” 


604 


REPORT OF COMMITTEE 


[June 21 


meee ree aye C- 
ii is = 


Ground Line 


Voitaze. A B COA ee DD) E F G H I ie 
12 000 24” | 84” 84’ 24” 7” 12” 163” is 4” 32! 
i2 000 BO ea 96” 29” —— 14” Zie — ae 227 
15 000 30” | 61” 96” 2634” eH 9” 27” eso i Se 
22 000 30” 68” 99” — 30” 15” 24” nib 9” 272 
24 000 36” 96” 132” 36” = 18” 254” == DE ES 

Voltage. | K re M N O 12 O’ Py Q R S 
no St a ee eee Se ee ee 
12 000 39/8” | bat hed SH | 8” 43” | 32” 4} 3% 6’ 16”. | 54” 
12 000 30% i267, = 6” 4a” | 43” 4} 42 5! | — _ 
15 000 40’ | 313") — | 7” | 4a” | 3h" 4k | 34 6’ 16” 10’ 
22 000 | 35’ 307 | — 6% | AO at 4 4 6’ | — _ |120” 
24 000 | Boal. Vous a Stale 52% 52” | 52 5S Ale 6" 30” 


For the Committee on High-Tension Transmission. 


RALPH D. MERSHON, 
Chairman. 


1904] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 603 


Discussion ON HiGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION REPORT. 


J. H. Finney: Is not the spacing between wires given in 
Class E, in error? In the other classes the spacing seems to 
increase in direct ratio, but in Class E, for 31 300 volts, the 
Spacing is only 3l inches. Is not this a mistake? 

Rap D. Mersuon: The figures were examined carefully so 
as to prevent mistakes. There are not very many plants in 
this class, only four; so it depended on the choice of only four 
men to decide the average. 

PETER JUNKERSFELD: Answer 5, Class A, on page 576 of the 
-Committee’s Report refers to the use of a ground-net of 0.25 
inch steel cable suspended across the right of way and under 
power wires. This is of interest as it has been proposed by 
the Underwriters for insertion in the National Electric Code. 
It would be interesting to know the extent to which such ground- 
nets have been used and what degree of protection can safely 
be credited to them. 

PRESIDENT ARNOLD: These nets are installed under high- 
pressure transmission lines in a number of places between 
Chicago and New York on lines parallelling the Lake Shore 
and the New York Central railroads, also between Chicago 
and Denver. They are in much more common use in Europe. 
We have just begun to use them; as a particular instance they 
may be found on the line of the Fonda, Johnstown, & Glovers- 
ville Railway. 

L. ScHULER: Ground-nets are used in Europe to a great 
extent, especially in Germany and Switzerland, as the authori- 
ties require them for a high-pressure line crossing a highway. 
It has been found, however, by experiment that in nearly all 
cases the wire, if broken, will, in consequence of its twist, jump 
over the side of the net. If a high-pressure line crosses a rail- 
road, the authorities usually require a completely closed tunnel 
of iron work through which the line passes. 

RatpH D. MersHon: The speaker has put in one or two 
of these ground-nets himself, but he does not think very much 
of them. They are generally put up as a matter of senti- 
ment, as a protection in the event of lines coming down, es- 
pecially from sleet. If it is feared that the lines will come 
down from sleet, then of course the netting has to be strong 
enough to carry any sleet that might collect on it. A netting 
could be put in strong enough to take care of any probable 
load of ice or snow, but that would mean a rather formidable 
sort of structure. Probably the best method of protecting 
lines liable to be crossed by high-pressure wires is, if possible, 
to put the poles of the crossing line on each side of the line 
crossed; have these poles close together, and so high that if 
the upper line breaks it cannot possibly reach the line crossed. 
Such construction is as near absolute protection to the lower 
line as you can get against anvthing short of the main line 
falling down sideways. : 


_ 606 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


S. B. Storer: The Utica and Mohawk Valley Railroad 
Company have a short section of their line fitted with the 
netting underneath. This netting is made of two iron wires 
on either side of the cross-arm; these wires are twisted and 
at intervals of about six feet there are three-cornered sticks 
from one side to the other that are expected to hold the trans- 
mission line in case it breaks. The iron wires supporting 
these sticks are mounted on insulators of exactly the same 
type as used on the transmission line, so that even if one of 
the two transmission wires should break there is no tendency 
for it to ground. The speaker does not like this kind of con- 
struction, because he thinks the netting or cradle suspension 
should be permanently grounded. An iron cross-piece is prefer- 
able to a wooden cross-piece for the reason that in using syn- 
chronous motors or synchronous converters, one line might 
break and the two ends drop on this netting, and the ma- 
chines would. go on operating just as they were before. If 
this did happen, and the wooden cross-pieces were wet, they 
would carry the current to the irdn span-wire thus completing 
the circuit through the cross-pieces and the iron wire. This 
would quickly burn the cross-pieces and the wires would drop 
down just the same as if no support were there. Perhaps it 
would be much better to have a strong iron netting under- 
neath the transmission line and have the wires of such capa- 
tity as to carry a short circuit without burning off. 

F. A. C. Perrine: At the National Electric Code meeting 
last year this subject was carefully discussed. The Under- 
writers were at first very strongly in favor of a netting, but 
the question just asked by Mr. Storer, whether the netting 
should or should not be grounded in any case, came up at 
once. It seems important that the netting should have at 
least as great carrying capacity as the transmission wire itself, 
otherwise the netting would burn off by reason of the wire 
grounding. 

The second plan proposed by the Underwriters was the 
one mentioned by Mr. Mershon, that of setting the poles close 
enough together and elevating them to such a height that a 
break in the wire could not bring the transmission line in con- 
tact with any wire crossing underneath it. 

There were, if the speaker remembers correctly, three meth- 
ods accepted by the Underwriters: first, guard wires placed 
on the ends of the cross-arm carrying the telephone wires and 
above them so that the transmission line could not come in 
contact with the telephone line by breaking. This was the 
preferred method, and it was left to the discretion of the trans- 
mission company whether it would ground or insulate the 
guard-wires, it being considered that it would make very little 
difference which was done. The grounding of it would have a 
tendency to burn off the transmission line, but in either case the 
transmission line could not come in contact with the telegraoh 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 607 


or telephone wires. The other two methods were admitted as 
permissive. In the second method the transmission line would 
have to be raised the height of the street above the telegraph 
and telephone lines, so that in case of a break it would fall 
out of contact, which means that in a 60-foot street the trans- 
mission line would have to be 60 feet above the telegraph and 
telephone lines. The third method was the use of a grounded 
screen. In that case the screen should have more carrying 
capacity than the transmission line itself, so that in no case 
would the screen be burned through. All of these systems 
were recognized as being deficient, but after discussion lasting 
one day in which the National Electric Light Association, the 
Pacific Coast Transmission Committee, the INsTiTuTE, and the 
Underwriters were involved, that was the best that could be 
gotten out of it. 

The importance of this is very great, for there has been at 
least one instance of a transmission line falling across a long- 
distance telephone line and burning out all the instruments 
within many miles, and burning down a house. But it is 
questionable whether these guard-wires are sufficient protec- 
tion. The speaker thinks there is not yet any very well-es- 
tablished experience. 

EUGENE CLarRK: Dr. Perrine has not mentioned one serious 
fault of any form of netting: the transmission span would gen- 
erally be from 100 to 300 feet long at a crossing, and the netting 
under the line would necessarily be only a few feet wide. Under 
such conditions, a broken transmission line would probably 
curl up and fall off from the netting. - Under such conditions, 
the netting would be useless unless thoroughly grounded. 

S. B. Storer: The speaker understands that in Switzer- 
land they make use of a ring projecting from the cross-arm 
through which each transmission wire passes; these rings are 
on both sides of the insulator so that if the wire breaks it will 
strike the ring before the ends touch the ground. These rings 
are grounded. Has any one here seen that construction, and 
does it afford protection? 

W. B. Jackson: It is used upon the Valtellina Road in 
Italy, where the high-pressure wires are equipped in this manner 
at each road crossing. Although the rings operate very satis- 
factorily in case of a break in the line, they sometimes give 
trouble when the lines do not break, and the engineers conse- 
quently found it desirable to have them cut out. 

PRESIDENT ARNOLD: Why should the ring operate without 
the wire breaking? tah: a 

W. B. Jackson: They found that to 'give a sure grounding 
when the line broke they had to make the ring quite small or 
had to carry it a considerable distance out from the cross- 
arm, otherwise the wire might drop and not ground; but if 
they got it too small or too great a distance from the cross- 
arm there was danger of its becoming slightly displaced and 
thus causing a ground when such was not desired. 


608 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION, [June 21 


N. J. Neaty: On page 594, rubber insulation is said to de- 
teriorate in a short time. What is the relative depreciation 
in rubber cable? 

James Lyman: Several cases have come to the speaker’s 
notice of lead-covered, rubber-insulated, single-conductor 
cable, used for station .wiring, where the rubber has 
deteriorated very rapidly, and broken down after only a few 
months’ service. It is probable that in these cases a high 
static pressure was induced. The rubber seemed to be cut, 
and acted upon as if ozone had been present. In one case 
the cable was used on 13 200 volts pressure, 25 cycles; it was 
made to stand a working pressure of 30 000 volts, and break- 
down pressure of 50000 volts. After operation of about two 
months it went to pieces at different times, under normal 
operating conditions. There was no question regarding the 
good quality of the rubber insulation. ‘There were six of eight 
different breakdowns at different times, thus indicating that 
they were not due to any defect in the cable itself. Another 
case came to the speaker’s knowledge of a single, lead-covered, 
rubber-insulated cable, used on 13 200-volt, 60-cycle cur- 
rent, good for perhaps 20 000 volts—that broke down in the 
same way. For these reasons the speaker does not recom- 
mend the use of single-conductor, lead-covered cable, either 
on 25- or 60-cycle work, for station or outside wiring, where 
the pressure is above 5000 or 6000 volts; below that there is 
not much danger of the static dischage. The speaker knows 
of a number of cases where single-conductor, lead-covered 
cable is used on 6000 volts, and no trouble has been experienced. 


1904.] DISCUSSION. AT CHICAGO. 609 


GENERAL DISCUSSION ON HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION MATTERS. 


W. G. Cartton: Regarding the comparative reliability. of 
overhead and underground lines, President Arnold and Mr. 
Wirt have both pronounced in favor of the overhead line. 
The speaker would like to hear something of the conditions 
under which President Arnold was considering this question; 
it seems that there are not very many cases where overhead 
lines can be the more reliable. 

PRESIDENT ARNOLD: Of course it is not advisable to make 
a general statement that the overhead line is the more reli- 
able and is always the line to install, because it is well known 
that in city work the use of underground or conduit is prac- 
tically compulsory; in these circumstances it is unquestionably 
the more reliable because it is not subject to malicious inter- 
ference, at least not to any such extent as an overhead line 
might be. When considering transmission lines, extending 
across country or through a region more or less settled—es- 
pecially on private right of way—the speaker’s conclusions 
are the same as those of his associates, that the overhead 
construction is preferable. It is preferable for two reasons: 
first, much less in first cost, and presumably in maintenance; 
secondly, it is much more accessible to repair in case of acci- 
dent, because the trouble may be easily located and quickly 
repaired. These advantages do not obtain in the case of under- 
ground or conduit work. Any one that is installing electrical 
plants will admit that it is cheaper to construct overhead 
lines, and where these lines are permitted they are usually 
installed. 

Cuarues F. Scott: President Arnold has said that under- 
ground wires are considerably more expensive to install than 
overhead wires. About what per cent. of the plant invest- 
ment is represented by the transmission construction? 

PRESIDENT ARNOLD:—Our case is one which would make the 
underground construction cost more in proportion to the over- 
head than in ordinary cases, for the reason that there are so 
few wires to carry, the maximum number being six and part 
of the way only three wires. In building this line we are run- 
ning through rock almost all the way and will have to blast a 
large part of it. It is a case of digging and blasting a trench 
57 miles long, so our preference for an overhead system is 
obvious. 

PETER JUNKERSFELD: In replying to Mr. Scott’s question, 
a comparison might be made with the high-pressure 25-cycle 
transmission systems in large cities, many of which represent 
from four to seven.per cent. of the investment in the entire 
central station system. In the case in question the per- 
centage would not be much higher, and probably is lower be- 
cause of the heavy investment in car equipment, track con- 
struction, power-houses, and so on. 


610 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


PresIDENT ARNOLD: Perhaps it will be lower than that. 
The speaker cannot give an exact figure. 

RatpH D. Mersuon: A plant with which the speaker has 
been associated has a transmission line of about 17 miles in 
length. The pressure at the terminal station is 22 500 volts. 
The last 3600 feet of this line consists of four three-phase cables 
each 3600 feet long. This line has been in operation for about 
three years. During that time, so far as the speaker knows, 
there has not been any trouble with the cable, except once 
when a defective joint was at fault, due to bad workmanship 
when the cable was installed. This cable is protected by 
choke-coils and lightning-arresters at the terminal house where 
the overhead line enters it; and although there are on this 
transmission system two grounded wires for protection against 
lightning, yet lightning occasionally comes across the arresters. 
Some short pieces of the cable are used for wiring at the gen- 
erating station, and have at times a pressure of 25 000 volts. 
The neutral point is grounded at the generating station only. 
In this installation the cable-bells. are made of hard rubber, 
with leads brought up through hard-rubber tubes, the bells 
being filled with paraffin. 

N. J.-Neat_: The allowance for depreciation of poles is, 
to-day, an important item in the fixed charges for a trans- 
mission line. It would therefore be interesting to know 
whether this statement as to life of various kinds of poles 
represents the depreciation as estimated by the various com- 
panies answering these questions, or the years they have used 
the different kinds of woods, or their opinion as to the rela- 
tive values of different woods expressed in depreciation. 

PRESIDENT ARNOLD: We can say offhand that very few 
maintain that a wooden pole will last for 15 years or even 
for 10 years. It is likely that the figures given in the report 
represent the life of a pole from a theoretical viewpoint. A 
pole may last for 10 or even for 15 years—subjected as it is 
to continuous attacks from the elements—but 15 years is 
assuredly the maximum limit. 

RatpH D. Mersuon: In his Introduction Mr. Carlton 
barely touched upon the question of the possibility of high- 
frequency pressure effects due to an unconfined arc from a 
defective cable. Will Mr. Carlton please refer to this matter 
now? 

W. G. Caritton: Only one case of that kind has come to 
the speaker’s attention. It happened in New York, and did 
considerable damage. In our experience in Chicago nothing 
of that kind has happened, but there is always a possibility of it 
happening. ; 

CuHaRLes F. Scotr: There is a station in New York, the 
Kingsbridge station, which has been operating for a year or 
two with open-air switches. It operates at 6600 volts, some- 
times in parallel with the other power-houses. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO. 611 


W. G. Cartton: This possibility of a rise in pressure in 
opening a high-pressure circuit in the air is generally con- 
ceded. A number of tests made here by Mr. Eastman have 
demonstrated it, and the results are decisive. 

G. N. Eastman: The tests were made on a_three-mile 
length of 2/0 three-conductor, paper-insulated, lead-cov- 
ered cable with only the charging current of the cable. A 
static voltmeter was connected between one conductor of the 
cable and ground and an oil-switch and air-switch connected 
in series with the cable, so that they could be opened alter- 
nately. The oil-switch was so arranged that one break or a 
number of breaks in series could be made. The air-switch 
had but one break. By opening the air-switch very gradually, 
drawing out the arc, the rise in pressure was 40 to 50% above 
the normal. With the oil-switch no rise in pressure could be 
detected when the switch was opened having several breaks in 
series; with one break only a slight rise was detected when the 
switch was opened very slowly. These tests were duplicated, 
using the spark-gap instead of the static voltmeter, and the 
Same indications were obtained. When the air-switch was 
opened, the charging current increased as the length of arc 
increased. By carefully drawing out the arc, a charging cur- 
rent seven times its original value could be obtained. 

Ratpx D. MersHon: In his introduction Mr. Carlton seems 
to intimate that if a fire-proof cover were installed around a 
cable, thus confining the arc, there would be no oscillation; if 
the arc were not confined there probably would be oscillation. 
Has Mr. Carlton made any experiments that would justify this 
intimation? 

G. N. Eastman: No; but the same conditions would prevail 
in the case of a short circuit as would obtain in the switch 
when opening under certain load conditions. From the results 
of experiments made by Dr. Steinmetz the speaker believes that 
he recommends the wrapping of cablesin order to confine the arc, 

Ratpu D. MersHon: Granting that a rupture of short cir- 
cuit by oil might give very different results from an arc in air, 
it doesn’t necessarily follow that you get in a confined arc the 
same results you would in oil. Has there been, so far as you * 
know, any definite experiment tending to show pretty con- 
clusively that cables protected in this way if they burn out are 
less likely to produce dangerous oscillatory effect than if they 
burn out in the air without this cover? : 

G. N. Eastman: So far as personal knowledge goes, no 
experiments have been made along this line, but the har- 
monic which is evidently obtained appears to depend upon 
the length of the arc. For instance, in all of the tests which 
were made in interrupting the charging current of the line, a 
certain length of arc would give a definite charging current, 
and an increase in the length of arc would give an increase 
in current. 


612 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


H. B. Atverson: The speaker has witnessed tests of oil- 
switches with an ordinary steam-gauge put on the break- 
ing chamber, the amounts of oil being varied from nothing up. 
In opening under oil the pressure varied from 50 lb. to 300 Ib. 
depending on the point on the curve where it was broken, and 
an oscillograph in the circuit showed no pressure rise. With 
air only in the chamber, the air pressure would be from 10 lb. 
to 15 lb., while the oscillograph would give variations in which 
the pressure rise would go as high as twice normal pressure, 
the results being similar to opening arcs in air. 

RaupH D. MERSHON: One would think that in a three-phase 
cable a short circuit would result in a definite length of arc 
determined by the distance between the conductors, and that 
there would not be much variation in the length of this arc. 
It seems to the speaker that unless definitive experiments are 
made with actual reference to the short-circuiting of cables— 
closed or open arcs—one could not draw satisfactory conclu- 
sions. 55 

G. N. Eastman: We have had some short, circuits happen 
between the conductor and ground, and the circuit-breaker 
at the station opened before the short-circuit had sufficient time 
to destroy the insulation between conductors. In one case where 
this occurred, the conductor on which the short-circuit was estab- 
lished was burned in two, but the insulation remained suffi- 
ciently high on the other two conductors of the cable to allow 
their being operated at the normal system pressure. This 
occurred on the 9000-volt system of the Chicago Edison Com- 
pany in which the neutral was grounded, and the ground which 
occurred was a direct short circuit on one phase of the gener- 
ators. 

F. WoopMANnsEE: The speaker was interested in making 
a test at Kalamazoo, a few years ago, to determine the effect 
on line due to the rupturing cf the circuit by means 
of oil- and air-break switches. In that test it was found, in 
breaking a loaded circuit with an air-break switch, that surging 
occurred at instant of breaking the arc, but when rupturing 
the circuit by means of oil-switches there was practically no 
surging at all. These results were verified by spark-gaps con- 
nected across the line, as well as by means of an oscillograph. 

The breaking of the circuit by means of allowing the arc to 
rise and break from what is known as a “ goat-horn’’ was 
tried. On two occasions the light breeze extended the arc until 
it was about 33 feet long. At that instant it short circuited 
the load and reactance-coil, making a dead short-circuit on the 
system. On opening the switch there was a pressure rise on line — 
of at least three or four times that of the operating pressure. 
This was verified by the spark-gaps. These tests demon- 
strated that the rupturing of high-pressure heavily-loaded or 
short circuits by means of air-break switches was dangerous 
while they could be opened with safety by means of oil-switches 
without any very great rise in pressure. . 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT. CHICAGO. 613 


RatpH D. Mersnon: Have any experiments been made 
with definite arc length? In opening an air-brake switch the 
practice. is to start from zero arc and increase gradually until 
the maximum arc of this switch is reached; in doing this the 
length of arc may be struck that will give surprising results, 
results that might not be obtained with short arcs. 

It seems to the speaker that Mr. Carlton’s Introduction con- 
tains a timely reference to the very important subject of pro- 
tecting cables from one another when one of them happens 
to fail. Now if the idea is simply to protect these cables from 
the heat of adjacent arcs it might be done by the scheme out- 
lined by Mr. Carlton—the use of tile or brick—but if in ad- 
dition we can, by asbestos wrapping, protect to a more or less 
extent against abnormally high pressure due to oscillatory 
effects, then it would seem that the protection by such wrap- 
ping were much to be preferred. Up to the present time, 
this discussion has failed to elicit any definite data as to the 
effects resulting from the burn-out of a cable,—the question 
naturally arises, will there necessarily be a higher pressure 
with the open air than with the enclosed arc? 

F. WoopMANSEE: Regarding the first point raised by Mr. 
Mershon, an instrument was used to determine the length that 
the arc was drawn out. ‘This instrument was used with both the 
air-break and oil-switches. The shorter the length of arc the 
less pronounced the surzing effect. 

Wo Ge CARLTON? “Referring to Mr) Wirt’s remarks, the 
asbestos wrapping would protect the cable from arcs due to 
adjoining cables; but in the case mentioned, the sheet-steel 
covering was used to confine the arc. If a high-pressure, three- 
conductor cable burns cut and the circuit-breaker does not 
open the line, there will nct be any cable or asbestos left where 
the arc is; in some cases three or four feet, or even more, of the 
cable has been entirely destroyed. 

RatpH D. MersHon: Of course if cables are laid on tile 
shelves and not wrapped or covered with the iron sheathes 
mentioned by Mr. Carlton, there would not be any confining 
of the arc. Now in order to avoid any dangerous effects from 
the arc—if the effects can be avoided by confining the: arc— 
the arc would have to be confined in such a way as to develop 
a fair amount of pressure. If this were done, some precautions 
would have to be taken as to the strength of the encircling 
protection. In the case of asbestos-wrapped cable and a burn- 
out the speaker would like to know if any of the wrapping has 
been blown to pieces. Under some conditions there might be 
a considerable amount of pressure developed in asbestcs- 
wrapped cable, enough, perhaps, to destroy tlhe wrapping. 

F. WoopMaNnsEE: In Mr. Wirt’s paper no mention is made 
of the protection of underground cables by means of static 
dischargers. The protection referred to being from static accu- 
toulations on cables. It is a mooted question whether these 
static dischargers are useful or not; some engineers are of the 


614 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [June 21 


opinion that this kind of apparatus produces more trouble 
than it prevents. ; 

PETER JUNKERSFELD: For several years we have believed 
that under our conditions in Chicago static dischargers are, 
as Mr. Woodmansee intimates, liable to be more troublesome 
than useful; for this reason we have never installed them. 
Formerly the pressure was 4500 volts, but during the last two 
years it has been 9000 volts on our transmission system. 

G. N. Eastman: The Edison Company is operating a ground- 
ed system and the static arresters would have no effect on the 
system except in case cf certain current effects; in that case 
the energy which the static arresters would be capable of taking 
care of would be so small that their value would be questionable. 

F. WoopmansEE: Are they not in use on the Manhattan 
system? Perhaps some one from New York could tell us 
how they are operating. In the West there are two places 
where they have been in service only a short time—in Kansas 
City and Minneapolis. There ig some difference of opinion 
as to whether they are of any value, or whether they are really in- 
troducing a number of weak points in the system which would 
have more serious effects than the static pressure. 

PETER JUNKERSFELD: The New York Edison Company, 
it seems, does not use static dischargers on their 6600-volt, 
25-cycle system which is a higher pressure than our old 
4500-volt transmission, nor do they ground the neutral. In 
Chicago, since raising the pressure to 9000 volts, we have 
grounded the neutral. 

H. B. Atvprson: Referring to static dischargers, we have 
a system of between 40 and 50 miles of 11 000-volt cables— 
and have no static dischargers. In about eight years’ 
experience there have been .but two instances where static 
dischargers might have been a possible benefit; that is, more 
than one cable giving out at the same time for the same cause. 

CHARLES F Scotr: Mr. Buck, of the Niagara Power Com- 
pany, has said that he did not use static dischargers on the 
Niagara system and did not think it worth while; that he thought 
best to leave out as many of the safety devices as possible, 
as a safety device was apt to give more trouble than it prevented. 

G. R. Rapiey: In Milwaukee static dischargers are used 
because the ozone had apparently formed an acid at certain 
places in the rubber cable, and at the hard-rubber bush- 
ings in several switches. Since installing them this effect has 
not been noticed, but since the neutral of the generators was 
grounded about the same time it may not be fair to give the 
credit entirely to the dischargers. 

G. N. Eastman: On a system which is operated without a 
ground static arresters may be of some value. In one case 
with which thespeaker is familiar, five miles of rubber-insulated, 
lead-covered cable was used, and many cases of trouble occurred. 
Lightning-arresters were installed and no benefit was noticed, 
but when the neutral was grounded the trouble disappeared. 


A paper presented at the 189th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
St. Louis, Mo., Sept. 14, 1904. 


Copyright 1904 by A. I, E. E. 


PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS. 


BY BION J. ARNOLD. 


Eleven years ago this summer it was our privilege to meet 
under the auspices of a great Exposition, located upon the 
shores of Lake Michigan, organized not only to commemorate 
the 400th anniversary of the discovery of this country, but. 
also to direct attention to the advancement made in the various 
fields of the world’s activities, and especially in those arts in 
which we, as workers, were most interested. : 

To-day we meet under the auspices of another great Ex- 
position, brought into being to commemorate the 100th anni- 
versary of the peaceful acquirement by the Government of the 
United States of a large portion of the territory now contained 
within its borders, to have our attention directed to the de- 
velopment of the various industries of this and other countries 
that have taken place during the intervening years. 

For a few years preceding the former Exposition, engineers: 
and other engaged in electrical pursuits had had their energies 
absorbed in attempting to show the owners of street railways 
that operation by electricity was cheaper and better than by 
means of the horse or the cable. We, at that time, had seen 
the horse practically disappear from street railway service and 
the cable supplanted in some instances. 

The more ambitious engineers were then advocating the use 
of electricity on elevated railways, and making figures to prove 
to the owners of such railways that electricity was cheaper 
in operation and more desirable for such conditions than steam 
locomotives, then universally used for such work. ; 

At that Exposition was placed in operation an elevated elec- 
tric road, known as the Columbian Intramural Railway, which 
though the Central London Underground, a road of light equip- 
ment, was started some time before, and the Liverpool Overhead 


Road soon after, was the first practical commercial application 
eee 


616 PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS. [Sept. 14 


on a large scale of electricity for the propulsion of heavy rail- 
way trains. The success of these roads gave the electric rail- 
way industry an impetus which has since resulted in the aban- 
donment cf steam and the adoption of electricity on every 
elevated railway now in operation, and practically on all of the 
underground roads, thus effectually proving the soundness of 
the theories of those engineers who pinned their faith to the 
correctness of the conclusions which their figures showed, and 
who staked their reputations upon the future to prove them true. 

The interval between these Expositions has also been one 
of great activity and development in the field of interurban 
railways, which has brought into being the extensive use of 
the alternating current, rotary converter sub-station system 
of operating direct-current roads, resulting in the interlinking 
of thousands of cities with each other and intervening points, 
thus not only affording a new field for the investment of capital 
but bringing to mcst of the inhabitants of the territory through 
which these roads pass greater facilities for the prcsecution of 
business and the widening of their social life. 

With the introduction of the suburban railway came an in- 
creased volume of passenger travel, induced by the increased 
facilities, which may well be noted by the managers cf great 
steam railway properties as an example of what may be expected 
in increased revenue when frequent and pleasant service is avail- 
able to the public. 

The energies of those engaged in electrical industries have 
thus far been absorbed in fields which now seem to have been 
naturally theirs, and their success has been such that they ncw 
aspire to enter the field occupied by the steam locomotive as a 
legitimate field of conquest. 

The question now is whether this field is one in which the 
advantages of electricity will be sufficient to overcome the 
obstacles which seem almost unsurmountable, and enable it to 
win as it has in the cases cited. 

thcse who have given the subject little thought or who are 
unable to analyze it carefully cn acccunt cf the lack of the 
technical knowledge necessary to apreciate the difficulties to 
be overcome, are mcst apt to predict the early supremacy of 
the electrically driven train over the steam locomotive. 

That the fields referred to have been apparently formidable 
yet quickly overcome is not necessarily proof, or even gocd 
evidence, that the legitimate field of the steam locomotive 
can be entered and successfuily achieved. 


1904.] PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS. 617 


Those most familiar with the subject are now prepared to 
admit that our great steam railway terminals, where many 
switching locomctives are shunting back and ferth continu- 
ously, and thcse porticns of the steam roads entering our great. 
cities, where suburban trains are numerous, frequent and com- 
paratively light, can be mcre economically operated by elec- 
tricity than by steam. This is evident to most of those en- 
gaged in the work, for the reason that it simply means dupli- 
cating, on a large scale, the systems which have proven success- 
ful in our street railways, operating, as they do, numerous 
units running at frequent intervals. 

Proof that this field is recognized as a legitimate one for 
electricity is furnished in the examples of steam railway ter- 
minals that are now being equipped electrically, such as the 
lines cf the New York Central and Pennsylvania Railrcad Com- 
panies in the vicinity cf New Ycrk, involving an expenditure 
of something over $70,000,000, where not only suburban service 
will be operated electrically, but where in the case of the New 
York Central, the main line trains will be brought into the 
city from points 30 to 40 miles distant. 

While these are great examples of electrical operation on 
steam railroads, and heroic instances of faith on the part of 
the railway managers in the ability of electricity to success- 
fully meet the conditions of steam railroad work, where the 
trains are sufficiently frequent, they are by no means con- 
clusive evidence that electrically propelled trains can be made 
to successfully meet the conditions of trunk line passengers 
and freight service, the field now so successfully held by the 
steam locomotive. 

The best conditions for electrical success are a great number 
of units moving at a practically uniform schedule, at equal 
intervals, within a limited distance. 

The legitimate field of the steam locomotive is now cne in 
which there are few but heavy units moving at uneven speeds 
over long distances at unequal intervals and at high maximum 
speeds. 

The amount of energy transmitted to any great distance and 
used by electric cars that have been put in use until recently 
has been small when compared with the amount of energy 
that it takes to propel a steam railroad train of five or six hun- 
dred tons weight at the speeds ordinarily made by such trains. 

It may be taken as axiometic that when investment is taken 


618 PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS. [Sept. 14 


into consideration, power cannot be produced in a steam central 
station, under conditions that exist to-day, and transmitted 
any great distance to a single electrically propelled train, re- 
quiring from 1000 to 2000 h.p. to keep it in motion, as cheaply 
as a steam locomotive, hitched directly in front of the train 
will produce the power necessary for its propulsion. Therefore, 
there must be other reasons than the expected economy in 
power production to warrant the adoption of electricity on a 
‘trunk line railway unless it can be shown that the trains are 
frequent enough to make the saving in the cost of producing 
power greater than the increased fixed charges made necessary 
by the increased investment due to the adoption of electricity. 

There are undoubtedly in existence to-day conditions where 
water power in abundance is available along the right of way 
of existing roads, in which the substitution of electricity for 
steam could be made a paying one, with apparatus now avail- 
able, evel on roads having a comparatively infrequent service, 
but these are special cases and only tend to prove the correct- 
ness of the position, for in these special cases the cost of power 
would be but little over half the present cost of producing it 
by means of a central steam-driven station. 

The ideal conditions for any trunk line railroad having a 
traffic heavy enough to warrant the investment in a sufficient 
number of tracks to properly handle this traffic in such a manner 
as to get the most efficient service out of its rolling stock, would 
be to have four or more tracks between terminal points, upon 
which, in pairs, could be run the different classes of service 
at uniform rates of speed. Thus, if six tracks were used, the 
through line, passenger, and express service would be run on 
one pair of tracks; the local passenger, local express, and local 
freight service upon another pair of tracks; while the through 
freight service would be run upon a third pair of tracks, and 
all the trains upon any pair of tracks would run at the same 
average speed and stop practically at the same places. 

If these conditions could prevail and the traffic were sufficient 
to warrant this investment in tracks, such a service could be 
operated more economically and more satisfactorily electrically 
than by steam. 

The difficulty is that few roads in existence have sufficient 
traffic to warrant such an investment in permanent way, and 
the result is that all of their traffic must be handled over one 
or two tracks, thus necessitating trains of all weights and all 


1904.] PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS. 619 


speeds running upon the same rails. This results in a ten- 
dency to bunch the cars into as few trains as practicable, in 
order not only to reduce the cost of train service to a minimum 
but to give the fast-running trains greater headway to allow 
them to make their time safely. Such an arrangement of 
trains necessitates the concentration of large amounts of power 
in single units, which is leading away from the ideal conditions 
for the application of electricity to the propulsion of trains; 
and it is this element, combined with the fact that the traffic 
on most roads is not great enough to warrant the investment 
necessary in electrical machinery to produce and.transmit the 
power to the distances necessary to keep a few heavy trains 
in motion, that makes the trunk line railway problem so diffi- 
cult, as it is more economical to propel these heavy trains by 
steam-driven locomotives, which are practically portable power- 
houses. 

It being admitted that electricity becomes mcst economical 
when a sufficient number of trains are available, and that the 
steam locomotive is most economical when the trains have 
become few and heavy, the problem then resolves itself into one 
of the density of traffic and the question then is: where is 
the dividing line? 

It was my intention to attempt such an analysis of this 
subject as to be able to formulate some general law which 
could be readily applied to any given case, and thus enable 
one to decide whether electrical operation would be more econom- 
ical than steam in any concrete case. 

After carefully analyzing the subject I have become con- 
vinced that no general law or formula can be laid down which 
will apply to all cases, for the reason that the elements entering 
into different cases vary so greatly that any formula would 
contain too many variables, dependent upon local conditions, 
to admit of a general application. 

I shall, therefore, only attempt to point out a way in which 
the dividing line between steam and electricity can be deter- 
mined after the elements of each case are known. 

It will readily be seen that with steam locomotive opera- 
‘tion the fixed charges, and cost of fuel and engine labor increase 
almost directly proportional as the train miles increase, for in 
this case an additional locomotive means simply a given amount 
of increased investment; a given amount of increased fuel and 
labor, and this total investment is least when the number of 


locornotives is small. 


620 PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS. [Sept. 14- 


On the other hand, with electricity it is necessary to invest: 
at once a large amount of capital in the power houses and trans- 
mission systems, which amount must be great enough to pro- 
vide for handling the maximum number cf trains required 
upen the line, and unless this number cf trains is great enough 
so that the economy effected in the different methcd cf pro- 
ducing and applying the power is sufficient to offset the in- 
creased fixed charges, due to the additicnal invested capital, 
it will not pay to equip and cperate electrically. 

Any prcblem, therefore, must be analyzed for the relative 
cost in operation. In case this dces not show a saving the 
advisability of equipping electrically will depend entirely upon 
the probable increased traffic to be derived from the adoption 
and cperation of electrically propelled trains. 

That electricity will be generally used on cur main railway 
terminals, and ultimately on our main through lines for pas- 
senger and freight service, I az. convinced, but~I do not an- 
ticipate that it will always be adopted on the grounds of economy 
in operation; neither do I anticipate that it will come rapidly 
or thrcugh the voluntary acts of the owners of steam railrcads, 
except in special instances. 

At first the terminals will be equipped for special reascns, 
due either to the voluntary act on the part of the terminal 
companies to effect eccncmy in operation, or to public pressure 
brought to bear upon the owners through an increased demand 
on the part cf the public for better service, on the grounds 
that the use of the steam locomotive is objectionable in cur 
great cities. 

These roads which run through populous countries will either 
build new roads, or acquire, for their own protection, thcse 
electric railroads already built and operating in competiticn 
with them, and utilize them as feeders to their through line 
steam trains. Thus the steam railroad companies will gradually 
become interested in electric railways and eventually become 
practically the real owners of them. With these rcads oper- 
ating as feeders to the main line system and with the term‘nals 
thus equipped and the public educated to the advantages cf 
riding in electrically equipped cars, the next step will logically 
be the electrical equipment cf the trunk lines between the 
cities already having electrical terminals. 

Thus some favorably lccated trunk line having a sufficient. 
density of populaticn will feel warranted in equipping elec- 


1904.1 PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS. 621 


trically, and when this is once done the other roads running 
between the same competing points must, sooner or later, 
follow in order to hold their passenger traffic. 

This may result in temporarily relegating some roads to 
freight service, so long as they operate exclusively by steam, 
but with the increased demand on the part of the public for 
better and cleaner service will come a corresponding increase 
in passenger revenue to the roads equipped for handling it 
until one road after another finds it advantageous to furnish 
an electric passenger service. 

With the terminals and main lines equipped electrically, 
and the desire on the part of the public for more prompt and 
effective freight service resembling that which is given by the 
steam roads in England and on the Continent, due to the great 
density cf population, there will be developed a great high 
class freight service conducted in light, swiftly moving electric 
trains which can be quickly divided and distributed over the 
surface tracks of our smaller cities, or through underground 
systems similar to that which is now being built in Chicago. 
Such a system would soon prove indispensable to the public 
and a source of great profit to the roads as it is now getting 
to be to many suburban railways. 

This class of freight service would socn prove so large a 
part of the freight traffic of°a road that the operation of the 
through freight traffic by steam locomotives, though at present 
cheaper, would in time, as the cost of coal increases, grow less, 
until those roads operating an electric passenger service would 
ultimately use electricity exclusively. 

It has not seemed advisable to me in an address of this char- 
acter to attempt to furnish detailed figures to support my 
theories for the subject is of such general interest that many 
able men are presenting papers upon it at the International 
Electrical Congress now in session here, in which papers will 
be found information of much value to those interested, and 
from which I believe the correctness of some of my assump- 
tions can be proved. 

The principal problem before the electric railway engineer 
to-day is how to make the most effective use of the high-pres- 
sure transmission, and high-tension working conductor and 
maintain safety of operation. 

Experiments conducted during the past year by engineers 
in this country and abroad have made this problem simpler 


622 PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS. [Sept. 14 


than it seemed before and to-day we seem reasonably certain 
of the solution. 

Until recently the cost of electrically equipping a trunk line 
under the standard direct-current, rotary converter system, 
has been such as to practically prohibit its adoption, but recent. 
developments in the single-phase alternating-current motor 
field have made it possible to eliminate a large part of the 
investment heretofore necessary and the prospects for the ap- 
plication of electricity to long-distance running are better than 
ever before. 

When it is recalled that the rotary converter, which was 
the means of reducing the cost of long-distance roads, was. 
introduced in 1898, and that within the six years from the 
time of its adoption through the development of the single- 
phase motor it has been practically rendered obsolete for heavy 
railroad work, it will be seen that the dividing line between 
the steam locomotive and the electrically propelled train has 
moved several points in favor of the latter, due to the reduction 
which can now be made in first cost and the saving in operating 
expenses. 

With the single-phase motor and the steam-turbine a reality, 
the transmission problem almost solved, and with the rapid 
development of the internal combustive engine now taking 
place, are we, as engineers, not warranted in believing that we 
can so combine them into a system which will ultimately sup- 
plant the steam locomotive in trunk line, passenger and freight 
service? 

I do not anticipate that all roads will soon adopt electricity, 
for the steam locomotive will hold its field in this country for 
many years to come, but I do expect, judging somewhat from 
“positive knowledge,” a remarkable development to soon 
begin in the electrical equipment of favorably located steam 
roads. 

From Richmond, where the first commercial electric road 
was built, to the present is but 17 years, yet within that time 
the horse has been relegated to the past as a serious factor in 
transportation, the cable has served its usefulness and awaits 
its end, and the suburban railway has been developed and is 
now rapidly encroaching upon the field of the steam railway. 

With the terminals of the two greatest roads in the United 
States now being equipped electrically and with an investment 
of something more than $4 000 000 000 in electrical industries. 


1904.] PRESIDENT'’S ADDRESS. 623 


made within a quarter of a century, we have reason to feel 
satisfied with the past. 

With several of the leading roads in this country, of Eng- 
land, of Sweden, of Switzerland, of Italy, and Australia elec- 
trically equipping branch lines and seriously considering chang- 
ing large portions of their present systems from steam to elec- 
tricity, we, as personal factors in this great industrial advance- 
ment, have every reason to be hopeful for the future. . 


624 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS. [Sept. 14 


D.scussION ON ‘‘ DIFFERENT METHODS AND SYSTEMS OF USING 
ALTERNATING CURRENT IN ELEcTRIC Raitway Morors.’’ 


Mr. STEINMETZ: The problem which we have before us here for 
discussion—the problem of the direct application of alternating 
currents to electric railways—is not a new one, but it has become 
of primaryimportance and interestin the last few years. The early 
pioneers in electric railroading, 10 or 15 years ago, started 
the development of the alternating-current railway motor, and 
prominently among them may be mentioned Mr. R. Eickemeyer 
and Mr. Vandepoele, who designed alternating motors for rail- 
way purposes and investigated their characteristics. However, 
very little progress was made in this field for many years, for 
a number of reasons; one being that in those early days fre- 
quencies of 125 to 1380 cycles were customary, far higher than 
we are using now, and the difficulties of the problem were thereby 
increased so formidably that advance was necessarily very slow. 
In addition, the very rapid development of the direct-current 
railway motor fully occupied the attention of all electrical en- 
gineers, and therefore the less urgent field of the alternating- 
current motor was necessarily somewhat sidetracked. Then the 
alternating-current polyphase induction motor came into the 
foreground, showed its superiority over other types of motors 
for stationary work, and impressed the engineers to such an 
extent that for a long time it overshadowed the work done by 
the early investigators on the variable-speed alternating-current 
motor; that is, on motors with series characteristic. Attempts 
then were made to introduce this very successful polyphase 
induction motor into electric railway work, attempts which 
have not been successful to any great extent. In the mean- 
time,in the United States the synchronousconverter wasdeveloped 
and became a standard piece of apparatus familiar to every- 
body—standard as much as the direct-current generator and 
the alternating-current generator; and experience with such 
synchronous converters shows thatforelectricrailway work, forthe 
violently fluctuating loads on the railway system, the synchronous 
converter is superior even to the direct-current generator: the 
absence of armature reaction, the phase control of pressure 
feasible in the converter, and corresponding close pressure regu- 
lation, make it specially able to withstand and take care of 
very violent fluctuations of load and to carry overloads which 
no direct-current generator can carry. This apparatus became 
standard, and with its introduction the field of the direct-current 
railway motor could—the distances which could be covered by the 
direct-current railway—was extended practically without limit, 
and a field opened which has been exploited in the last years, 
which was the field dreamed of by the early pioneers; the 
difficulties, however, being overcome, not by the development 
of the alternating-current motor, but by the development of 
methods of transmitting alternating currents and transforming 


1904. } DISGUSSION SAT Sim LOU TS. 625 


them into direct currents along the routes, in synchronous con- 
verter sub-stations. 

Now, however, in the last year or two, with the still further 
development of the electric railroad, we have approached and 
in many instances reached the limits of applicability of this syn- 
chronous converter. The synchronous converter is a piece of mach- 
inery which requires sub-stations, requires some attendance, and 
as a necessary result has a high economical efficiency only where 
the traffic is sufficiently condensed to warrant the maintenance 
of sub-stations within relatively short distances frcm each 
other. Where the number of trains is less or the power per 
train greater than can be supplied at 500 volts from sub-stations, 
without excessive expenditure in line conductors, and too ex- 
cessive fluctuations of load, pressures are required higher than 
can be utilized efficiently in direct-current motors, and there 
we strike the limit of the synchronous converter, and the alter- 
nating-current motor has to come in. 

Personally the speaker does not believe that the alternating- 
current motor will make very serious inroads in the field now 
occupied by the direct-current railway motor. Nor does he 
believe that direct-current railway systems will be changed into 
alternating-current railway systems; but what he expects of the 
alternating-current railway motor is that it will find a field of 
its own, a new field: just as when the alternating-current method 
of distribution was developed in this country, it did not displace 
the direct-current method of distribution which occupied the 
centers of our large cities, but it found a field of its own, a 
field which has gradually developed so as to be equal in im- 
portance if not superior to the field occupied by the direct 
current. Hence, to conclude these remarks, what the speaker 
expects of the alternating-current railway motor is that it will 
find and develop a field of its own, that field which the direct- 
current railway motor cannot reach—suburban and interurban 
service, long-distance service, secondary railway service. 

When considering the technical aspect of the subject before 
us for discussion to-day, the relative advantages and disad- 
vanteges of the direct- and alternating-current railway motors, 
we have to consider, first, the character of the problem we 
have to meet in electric propulsion; secondly, the character of 
the apparatus which we have available to solve these problems; 
thirdly, the additional features imposed upon the problem, or 
conditions more or less outside of the problem, as, f-r instance, 
the condition of the electrical industry at present, the existing 
investment in direct current and in steam railroads, which 
have to be taken into consideration when discussing any new 
system of railway propulsion. 

Regarding the characteristics of the different types of motors 
—the direct-current series motor now in universal use for rail- 
road work, the polyphase induction motor proposed, and, to a 
certain extent tried in the ‘ast years for railway work, a 


626 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS. [Sept. 14 


motor eminently successful in stationary work—and the alter- 
nating-current single-phase railwey motor with commutator, the 
speaker has, ina paper before the International Electrical Con- 
gress, given theresultsofa theoretical investigation and discussion 
of these different motors and shown the speed-torque curves, 
or characteristic curves of these motors in relation to each 
other. In Fig. 1 is given a comparison of the typical speed- 
torque curves of the different types of motors. 

In general, the characteristic of the polyphase induction 
motor is essentially that of a constant-speed motor, with shunt- 
motor characteristics; that is, it can efficiently operate over a 
certain limited range of speed only, cannot exceed the synchron- 
ous speed, and when operating below its normal speed, it operates. 
less efficiently ; that is, when operating at a lower speed than 
normal, or approximately synchronous, as can be done by a 
rheostat in the secondary circuit, the polyphase induction motor 
merely wastes that part of the power corresponding to the 
difference between its actual speed and synchronous speed. Or 
in other words, at low speed the. induction motor consumes 
the same power which it consumes with the same torque at 
full speed, though its power output is reduced in proportion 
to the speed, and its efficiency correspondingly. 

In the direct-current series motor the torque developed by 
the motor decreases with increase of speed, and inversely with 
increasing load the speed of the motor decreases. The maxi+ 
mum torque of such a motor occurs in starting. All variable- 
speed commutator motors, alternating and direct, more or less 
differ from each other in the rate at which the torque varies 
with the speed, and that brings us to a consideration of th 
requirements of electric propulsion. ; 

Important classes of work to which an electric motor may 
be put in locomotion are: first, city railway or tram-car work; 
secondly, rapid transit service as on elevated and underground 
roads; thirdly, suburban and interurban service; fourthly, trunk 
line passenger service; fifthly, long-distance freight service, and 
sixthly, elevator service. 

Now, discussing these briefly in succession. The city tram- 
car service is characterized by frequent stops of irregular 
duration, at irregular intervals. To maintain good average 
speed it is therefore essential that the motor should get under 
way after the stop as rapidly as possible; that is, have a very 
high starting torque and accelerating torque, and carry this 
high torque up to a considerable speed. Beyond this speed, 
then, the torque of the motor should decrease fairly rapidly 
down to the torque required to run on a level track, which we 
may assume roughly to be at twice the speed to which the 
high torque of acceleration should be maintained. In addition 
thereto, it is necessary that the motor should accelerate effi- 
ciently and that it should be able to operate efficiently at.low 
speeds in those city districts where the general traffic is dense 


} 


a 


1904.] DISCUSSION. .AT ST. LOUIS. 


and where it is not possible to run at high speeds. 


characteristics of this type of motor are preeminently given 
by the direct-current series motor. 


627 


The 


If we assume the torque 


required to run on a level track as 1, probably the starting or 


wc) | | 
= T = 
yw I 
¢ ee 
is} oo 
? a 
; % e Speed Torque 
3 le Characteristics 
a & of nek 
i P Railway Motors opque 
ee --— aan ee 
E z 
is 
-10 
2 1 L 
ix} 
oQ 
Q 
oe 
G ——— § 
iS 
3 
oO 
a 
pn 
ee |o Sf | I 
= Be Sy r | i 8 
o \S 
3 
E fe te 
io) 
cP F 
\2 
ia) 
Ls. 
g if 
ie 
g | Acceleration 
a ea : +—6 
¢ ‘orqu 
~— as 4 | | =5 
Pale eA MAS eee eg NUNN a oe Ie al 
4 i 
| LENG re 
eo 
% 
| ie 
% : | 
Ss 
<S “Ee 
o\d 2 
Se \=a = %s i\ 
cS ‘E 16 “e 54} 
ONG NG AS 
BNS, iste | CoN : 2 
“s S %% oO, 
gy 3 Cy Y 
Ox e Te 
Qe ls N21, - | 
NS 28/6) 
: Level track 
a T = dee 
EF 
See rm —_ ea 
a3 
Speed 200 400 600 800 1600. 1200 1du) 1600 
IDC al 


accelerating torque may be something like six times as high. 


At that torque we start and run up to considerable speed, and 
then strike what is called the motor curve, and after cutting 


out all regulating devices, aecelerate with decreasing velocity 


628 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS. [Sept. 14 


up to the free-running speed. Such a curve, that of a typical 
direct-current railway motor, is given in Fig. 1, marked “ direct- 
current parallel’? and ‘direct-current series.” The induction 
motor, although it may accelerate with a high torque, at the end 
of acceleration, the speed is limited. It accelerates up to or near 
synchronous speed, and there the torque falls off to zero; and 
hence that part of the torque curve which is so essential to city 
tramway work, the curve of running with decreasing torque, from 
the limit of acceleration to the free running speed, does not 
exist in the induction motor. We can indeed reach the free- 
running speed of a direct-current motor with a polyphase in- 
duction motor by gearing it to twice the speed, making syn- 
chronism the free-running speed, but this means that the avail- 
able torque of acceleration, and therefore the rate of getting 
under way, is reduced by one-half or if we make it the same, 
the motor capacity is twice as great, requiring a motor twice 
as large. Considering that in this service < very considerable 
part of the running time is occupied running on. approximately 
level track with torque very small compared with the accelerat- 
ing torque, we see that the highest possible efficiency of the 
motor at light load is essential. Here, however, is the place 
where the induction motor falls down. A polyphase induction 
motor running at,say, onetenth of its maximum output runs very 
uneconomically and with very poor power-factor. So in the 
polyphase induction motor, when used for railway service, 
you cannot combine very high acceleration with high efficiency 
in free running, and with the ability or running efficiently at 
low speeds, as you can in the direct-current series motor with 
series-parallel control. Therefore, the induction motor is not 
suitable to the class of work which we call city service or tram- 
car work. 

The alternating-current commutator motor of which two sets of 
curves are shown in Fig.1, marked ‘‘ alternating-current parallel ”’ 
and ‘‘ alternating-current series ’’ has characteristics very closely 
similar to the direct-current railway motor, except that possibly 
the variation of torque with the speed is less. That means, with 
the same decrease of speed the torque does not increase et the | 
same rate.as with the direct-current motor; if we assume again 
the same free running torque as 1, and the torque of acceleration 
six times the free-running torque, the direct-current series motor 
will carry the acceleration torque up to half speed; the alter- 
nating-current motor not quite as high. This means with the 
same maximum acceleration you will strike the motor curve 
at a lower speed, accelerating on the motor curve, you get 
under way, then, slightly slower, or to get the same average 
acceleration you have to start with a higher maximum accelera- 
tion. Now, this is an advantage in some cases in so far as you 
run for a longer period of time and over a wider range of speed 
on the motor curve, that is without controlling devices, hence 
in the most efficient manner pqssible, and thereby make up 


1904.) DISGUSSION VAT (Sie OUTS: 629 


to a considerable extent for that power which the alternating- 
current motor inherently loses by its slightly lower efficiency 
due to the alternating character of the magnetic field, and the 
losses by magnetic hysteresis in the motor field of the alter- 
nating-current motor which do not exist in the direct-current 
motor. This difference in the speed-torque curve of the alter- 
nating-current series motor, compared with the direct-current 
series motor, is due to the lower magnetic density used in the 
alternating-motor field, and, at low speeds, also to the e.m.f. 
of self-induction. .The first phenomenon, therefore, also occurs 
in an unsaturated direct-current series motor (Fig. 1), and 
such a direct current series motor therefore has at high and 
medium speeds the same characteristic as the alternating-current 
motor. It is undoubtedly true that alternating-current motors 
can be designed to give very closely the same characteristics 
as the standard direct-current series motor. However, the 
motor as it is before us at present reaches the motor curve at 
a lower speed, therefore with the same maximum acceleration, 
gives a lower average acceleration up to full speed, or with the 
same average acceleration requires slightly higher maximum 
acceleration. 

Coming now to the second class of.service, rapid transit. 
service, here the problem and the conditions of operation are 
almost identically the same as in city service, except that the 
units are larger, the speeds are higher, the stops not as frequent, 
absolutely, but about just as frequent relatively in comparison 
to the maximum speed of the motor, so that we can directly 
apply our considerations to rapid transit service—regarding a 
comparison of polyphase induction motors of alternating-current 
commutator motors, and of direct-current motors. 

In interurban and suburban work, that is, in railroads run- 
ning out from the cities far across the country into the suburbs 
orinto other cities, we havea much lesser frequency of stops. That 
means that rapidity of acceleration is of lesser importance, and 
we can well get along with a lesser average torque of accelera- 
tion, but we must have the same surplus torque as on city 
service work, or rather a greater surplus torque, because, while 
in city service and in rapid transit service where the distances 
are relatively short, we can count on maintaining fairly constant 
pressure in the supply system, wecannot to the same extent 
count in this on interurban and suburban service where we 
are far away across the country, except by investing much 
greater sums in line conductors and feeders than is commonly 
economically desirable or feasible. Hence, in this service the 

‘motor should have a greater surplus torque than in city service, 
so as to get a sufficient margin to start the train or the car 
under the most severe conditions on an up-grade or an over- 
load, even if the pressure in the system is low. The motor 
which is most sensitive to pressure variation is the polyphase 
induction motor. The maximum torque which this motor can 


630 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS. [Sept. 14 


give necessarily cannot very much exceed the acceleration 
torque without badly spoiling the characteristics of the motor 
either electrically or mechanically; but the maximum torque 
varies with the square of the pressure and hence rapidly de- 
creases if the pressure of the system is low. In the motors with 
series characteristics, however, like the single-phase commutator 
motor, the direct-current series motor, the torque does not 
depend on the pressure; or rather, while the maximum torque 
so depends, the theoretical-maximum torque which you get 
from the motor when standing still is so far in excess of the 
torque of self-destruction, or rather of slipping the car whecls, 
that it is not reached, and the effect of variation in the supply 
pressure is merely a variation in the motor speed. That is, if 
the pressure is low in the system, the direct-current motor and 
the alternating-current commutator motor runs at lower speeds, 
but still is able to give the same torque, while the polyphase 
induction motor runs at the same speed, but is not able to 
give the same margin of torque, and at a certain load falls 
down or does not start. That means that in designing a system 
of transmission and distribution for alternating-current com- 
mutator motors or direct-current motors we are permitted to 
design the system for the average drop of pressurein the system 
while in designing it for induction motor service, we have to 
take into consideration the maximum drop of pressure in the 
system which is very much greater than the average. 

For, interurban and suburban service we require an excess 
overload in torque, but do not require an acceleration up to 
high speed. The alternating-current commutator motor appears 
to be preeminently satisfactory in this work, and there is where 
the speaker believes it will be used extensively, and where the 
advantage of a high-pressure trolley and of the absence of sub- 
stations is specially important. 

In trunk line passenger service the rate of acceleration as 
given at present by the steam locomotive is very much less 
than every-day practice in electric railroad service. So here 
we do not need this excess acceleration torque sustained up to 
high speeds. Here, again, we find a field where we may apply 
the alternating-current commutator motors. The polyphase 
induction motors could be used if the question of pressure supply 
did not come in, as discussed above, and if furthermore the 
limit in speed of the induction motor was not so objectional 
in passenger trunk service, where, more than anywhere else, 
we desire to get the full benefit of the track by running at 
the highest safe speeds wherever the track is level. This the 
induction motor with its limited speed cannot do. 

In trunk line freight service, the same considerations come 
in, except there the speeds are relatively low, the train weights 
great; and it is more than anywhere essential to have a very 
large surplus torque available to get under way or to hold the 
train on a grade. You must, therefore, in this class of service, 


1904. } DISCUSSION AT ST. LOUIS. 631 


just as in supurban and interurban service, have a motor run- 
ning efficiently at light load, but being able to give very high 
torque, although it does not need to carry this torque up to 
high speeds. On the contrary, it is not desirable in freight 
service that the motor should sustain a high torque up to high 
speeds, because that would mean the consumption of very large 
power. In freight service the highest possible economy is 
especially necessary, and the highest possible economy means 
the least fluctuations of power consumption; that means on 
up-grades you would desire to go slow and reduce the power 
consumption and get the high speeds on the level track. 

In mountain railways and such classes of work, the running 
torque is of the same magnitude as the starting torque, and so 
the load on the motor is more nearly constant than in any 
other class of railway work, and on the down-grade the motor 
is preferably used for braking, by returning power into the 
line. Here then the polyphase induction motor appears well 
suited, and is indeed being used successfully. Such service, 
however, is in its character more nearly akin to elevator service 
than to railway service. 

In the discussion so far we have considered the requirements 
of the different classes of railway service, irrespective of ex- 
traneous conditions. When considering the alternating-current 
motor and the direct-current motor, we have to take in view 
what exists at the present time in this country and abroad. 
There exists the enormous network of steam railroad and of 
direct-current electric railways. The steam locomotive is a 
unit of very high efficiency, but a very large unit. It therefore 
for efficient operation requires the massing of traffic in heavy 
trains, and results in less frequent but large trains. This has 
practically rearranged and reorganized the whole system of 
locomotion by collecting it into a small number of very large 
units. That is not the most efficient manner of operating elec- 
trically-propelled vehicles, but rather the contrary. Further- 
more, you have to consider that every city and almost every 
village has a direct-current railway system. Now, the main 
and most important features by which the electric railway 
motor and electric propulsion has gained and is gaining rapidly in 
competition with the steam locomotive, appears to the speaker 
to be the frequency of headway and the absence of passenger 
stations, not the speed, which frequently in electric lines is 
lower than that on steam railways paralleled by them. The 
electric railway picks up its passengers anywhere in the city 
and deposits them anywhere and it does not require them to 
consult time tables, but runs its cars so frequently that the 
passenger can always find a car within a few minutes at any 
point; on the other hand, the steam locomotive requires you 
to consult a time table and go to a depot. As soon as the 
electric railroad gives up this advantage which has just 
been mentioned, one of the main advantages of the electric 


632 ' ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS. [Sept. 14 


railroad over the steam railroad will be lost, and this, therefore, 
is the feature which has to be kept in view. It means that 
whatever type of motor may be adopted in interurban or 
suburban service, etc., it must be able to carry the passengers 
through the cities over existing railways. 

The existing railways are direct-current railways, and prob- 
ably will remain so. That means that the long-distance motor, 
at least the suburban and interurban motor, must be able to 
run over the direct-current system. Hence, it must be a type 
of motor equally applicable and capable of operation on a high- 
pressure alternating-current or on the 500 volt direct-current 
system. 

Taking this for granted the methods of control must also be 
as simple as possible, that is, the same control for alternating 
as for direct current. Even if the motor could be used on 
direct current and altcrnating current, if we would have to 
carry a double system of control, one for city service and direct 
current, the other for long-distdnce service and alternating 
current, this would be a very serious handicap... It means that 
really to solve the problem before us, or extending the electric 
railroad into interurban and suburban service, and into the 
field now occupied by the steam railroad systems, and into new 
fields not yet developed, to a large extent not even dreamed 
of, that we must have a motor which with the same controlling 
appliances and the same characteristics, can run either on the 
high-pressure alternating circuits or on the existing direct-cur- 
rent circuits. 

Furthermore, the enormous investment in electric railway - 
systems existing at present has all been made, in the large sys- 
tems, on 25-cycle, three-phase apparatus. That means that we 
' shall have to continue to operate at 25 cycles. It may be 
preferable, possibly, to run at lower frequencies, or it may be 
preferable to run at higher frequency in this instance or that 
instance, but regardless of whether it is preferable or not, if 
it can be done on 25 cycles, it will have to be done on 25 cycles, 
and if another frequency had to be used, it would be a very severe 
handicap to the new system. The speaker is glad to say that 
there is no doubt that 25 cycles is the frequency best suited to 
the alternating-current single-phase railway motor. 

PRESIDENT Gray: Dr. Steinmetz’s remarks have been so 
clearly stated and so closely reasoned out that they do not 
cive us much chance for discussion, but the speakeris glad to 
refer to an English colleague, Professor John Perry, upon whom 
he calls to take part in this discussion. 

PROFESSOR PERRY: The speaker has to confess that he is 
not prepared to take part in the discussion. We have had 
the address of President Arnold and this excellent address of 
Professor Steinmetz, and two such addresses in one morning 
we have never had before. Clearly, they are men who have 
thoroughly studied the subject of traction, and it seems to the 


1904.) DISCUSSION VAT ST. LOUIS. 633 


speaker that they have both come to the conclusion that the 
electrification of steam railroads in the next ten vears depends 
on the success of the single-phase alternating-current motor. 
Of the progress that has been made by the General Electric 
Company and the Westinghouse Company, in getting such 
motors to work well, the speakcr had heard a great dea! before 
leaving the other side, and it is one of the things that he 
promised himself to learn something about during his visit here. 
He has not yet been able to do much in the way of getting 
accurate knowledge on the subject. He has been on a tram-car 
at Schenectady, the motor of which was driven by direct cur- 
rent and the car ran well; and then he would get on another 
car, and was told that the motor was driven by alternating 
current, and it seemed to run just as well. He had no means 
of experimenting or ascertaining what the efficiencies of the 
various arrangements were. Some 10 or 12 years ago he was 
greatly interested in the single-phase alternating-current motor, 
perhaps for a selfish interest, as he had invented a system of 
traction which required the use of that system. That interest 
is increasing. ‘The speaker wanted to go to the section in which 
Mr. Steinmetz was giving an account of the work yesterday, 
but was told it was his duty to attend a discussion upon the 
subject of electromagnetic units in another section, and as a 
man cannot be in two places at once, the doing of his duty 
robbed him of a great pleasure. In these circumstances, he 
can only say that he should like to hear the discussion of this 
subject proceed further before he shall feel able to take any 
part in it. 

B. G. Lamme: Away back in the dark ages of electric 
traction, about 15 years ago, there was great confusion 
in the types of apparatus used. There were all kinds of 
motors and all kinds of apparatus on the car. They 
only had one property in common—they were all direct cur- 
rent. After putting a number of these systems into commercial 
use it was discovered that certain types of apparatus were su- 
perior to others, and those particularly interested in the manu- 
facture of such apparatus followed up this matter to ascertain 
what properties were of the greatest value. It was gradually 
discovered that one type of motor was taking precedence of 
all others, namely, the series motor. Practically all develop- 
ment for a certain time was in the direction of the direct-cur- 
rent series motor. 

The reasons which led to this were partly based on theory 
and partly on practice. The series motor gave the effect of a 
cushion on a car. The motor is inherently a variable-speed 
machine and automatically varies its speed with the condition 
of the load. That was discovered to be a matter of first im- 
portance in the smooth operation of electric cars. Also the 
motor automatically increases its torque in a greater proportion 
than the current, which is of great importance in regard to 


634 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS. [Sept. 14 


starting and acceleration. These points were possibly not as 
well understood at that time as at present, but experience 
showed that certain equipments were superior to others and 
development was along that line. 

After a few years, when the motors had reached standard 
proportions and practically but one type was used, a second 
limitation was discovered; namely, in the transmission condi- 
tions. It was found that in the extension of the railway sys- 
tem, the ordinary 550- or 600-volt direct-current system was 
becoming cumbersome, and it was evident that some method 
of transmitting power at higher pressure and transforming to 
lower pressure for utilization would be necessary. The most 
evident method was naturally to transmit by alternating cur- 
rent and convert to direct current, in order to use existing 
car equipment. This led to the use of motor-generators, and 
later to synchronous converters. 

The motor-generator was found to fit the existing alter- 
nating system fairly well, but in the development of the synch- 
ronous converter the manufacturers discovered a great difficulty 
in existing systems. The frequencies of 125 and 133, which were 
the standards for many plants, were entirely unsuited for 
synchronous converters and also not well adapted for synchronous 
motors. Another frequency, coming into general use, namely, 
60 cycles, was found to be possible for use with synchronous con- 
verters, but the difficulties of design were very great in that case, 
and the synchronous converters were rather heavy and cum- 
bersome. 

At that time there was fortunately a new frequency ad pted 
which was of prime importance in the development of the — 
synchronous converter, namely, 25 cycles. So far as the speaker 
knows, the origin of that on a large scale, was as follows: inthe 
Niagara Falls power plant, when it was first laid out, the engineers 
for the power company had arranged for a frequency of 2000 
alternations per minute, or 163 cycles per second. They wished 
to use 8-pole machines, running at 250 revolutions. The com- 
pany which thespeaker represents, which wasone ofthe prominent 
bidders onthecontract, objected seriously to the proposed frequen- 
cy,asit was considered entirely uncommercial and also not suited 
for the best design of machine. The engineers of this company 
recommended 4000 alternations per minute or 334 cycles per 
second. That was considered extremely low compared with 
anything then in use. As we could not come to any agreement 
to use that frequency, we finally compromised on 3000 alterna- 
tions per minute, or 25 cycles per second, and the first Niagara 
machines were built in that way. There were various reasons 
for the adoption of a low frequency, one of which was that 
commutator type of motors might possibly come into use. An- 
other reason was that it was better adapted to synchronous con- 
verters, but it was admitted that 334 cycles would also be 
satisfactory. 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT ST. LOUIS. 635 


After the Niagara Falls plant was installed, there was then 
a precedent for the adoption of this frequency for large units, 
and the manufacturers began to build apparatus of this fre- 
quency for the Niagara Falls plant and also adopted it for other 
plants. This opened quite a field for the synchronous converter 
and it soon began to be extensively used for railway work, as it 
was recognized that this was the link needed for extending the 
direct-current system. Even at the early date of 1893 and 1894 
it was believed by many engineers that the synchronous converter 
was simply a machine to meet an emergency condition, that it 
would not last, that the time would come when synchronous con- 
verters would be dropped from the railway service, but as the 
most convenient and apparently the best solution of the prob- 
lem, it was adopted extensively. About that time electric rail- 
way service began to be greatly extended and synchronous con- 
verters have thus come into very general use. By the use of synch- 
ronous converters, the advantages of the alternating-current sys- 
tem in transmission are obtained and the advantages of the direct- 
current system with the series motor were retained. Distances 
could be extended indefinitely by increasing the number of 
synchronous converter stations and raising the pressure of the 
alternating-current lines. 

Shortly after this system came into general use it was recog- 
nized that a purely alternating-current system, in which purely 
alternating current was supplied to the motors, would be ad- 
vantageous and considerable work was done along that line. 
The polyphase motor apparently had the field, and naturally 
the manufacturing companies took up the question of the appli- 
cation of the polyphase motor to traction work. The company 
which I represent, the Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing 
Company, took up this question in an active way about 1895, 
and built two motors cf 75 h.p. each for traction work. 
These motors were equipped with collector rings and rheostatic 
control and tests were made in regard to performance, both with 
straight rheostatic control and with the now well known “ tan- 
dem ’”’ control, in which the secondary of one motor is con- 
nected to the primary of the other to obtain half-speed con- 
ditions. Even with this latter arrangement it was found that 
the motors would not compare at all favorably with the direct- 
current motor or the system with the direct-current system using 
synchronous converters, and this work was abandoned. It was 
recognized that the polyphase motor did not pcssess the proper 
series characteristics which long experience had shown to be so 
necessary for railway work. Other experiments along this line 
were made, using polyphase motors wound for two or more 
speeds, and two 100 h.p. motors were built which were wound 
for several speeds. While this was better.than the other ar- 
rangements, it still appeared that this was not a solution of 
the problem. Previous to this time the company had done 
some work in the direction of using single phase, but not as a 
solution of the problem which presented itself in 1895 and later. 


636 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS. [Sept. 14 


In 1892 the question of the use of the commutator type alter- 
nating-current motor for railway work was taken up. Two 
motors of nominally 10 h.p. each were designed and built. 
These were built for a frequency of 2000 alternations per minute, 
or 16% cycles per second. They were mounted on a car and 
were operated for a while, but the system was not a success. 
In the first place the pressure used—400 volts as compared 
with 550 in the direct-current motor—was rather low. It was 
considered that as 550 volts was the limit in the direct-current 
motor, 400 volts would be the limit with alternating current. 
The motors were tested on a track of iron,rails with practically 
no bonding. The track drops were excessive and the pressure 
fluctuations were great. The generator used—of about 20 kw. 
capacity—was entirely too small for this work and it was not 
adapted tc handle the inductive loads which were found with 
alternating-current motors. A series of tests was run and it was 
finally decided that for city work, for which the system was 
then laid out, the motor could not compete with the direct- 
current motor. It was decided, however, that such a type of 
motor would probably turnish the solution of the heavy railroad 
problem, but as there was no such heavy railroad problem at 
that time, the work was dropped for a while. But in 1897 the 
question of the use of the commutator type of alternating-cur- 
rent motor was again taken up—this time on a somewhat larger 
scale. Motors of 50 h.p. were built for variable-speed work, 
and given a long series of tests. Then after sufficient experience 
had been obtained, the work was gradually carried to the larger 
Sizes. 

In 1900 and 1901, when the question of the polyphase traction 
in Europe was so extensively advertised, it became evident that 
there was actually a demand for an alternating-current railway 
system. It was therefore decided to continue the previous work 
with large motors of the commutator type, and two motors of 
100 h.p. were designed and built. For these also, the frequency 
adopted was 2000 alternations per. minute, or 16% cycles per 
second. This fractional figure was primarily adopted on ac- 
count of certain steam-engine conditions. It was recognized 
that an even frequency of 16 or 18 would have been practically 
as good. 

In the earlier work, with the 10 h.p. motors at the low fre- 
quency, it was recognized that it would be absurd to put such 
a system on the market, as at that time even 25 cycles had not 
been adopted. The frequencies in common use were 50 or 60 
and a drop to 16 cycles was considered prohibitive. In the latter 
work, as 25 cycles had come into general use, and 15 or 20 cycles 
had been talked of and proposed by certain companies, it was 
considered that in view of their advantages for railway work 
such frequencies should be adopted. The motors were hence 
built for the above frequency. The results obtained with these 
large motors were so satisfactory that a contract was taken for 


1904.] DISCUSSION A ties EG LOUIS: 637 


a rather large road and the apparatus prepared. Knowing that 
news of this would soon be abroad, it was decided that the 
matter should be brought before the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, and a paper was presented on the 26th 
of September—two years ago—which thespeaker believes was 
the first announcement of the application of the single-phase 
alternating current to railway motors. There was considerable 
discussion—mostly criticism—and it was generally considered 
by the engineering public that the weak point of thesvstem 
was the commutation. At the present time, however, the speak- 
er believes this is no longer considered as a serious point. 

Previous to building the 100 h.p. motors considerable 
experience was had with the commutation of such motors. 
Besides a long series of tests, we had run 40 h.p. motors at — 
practically full load on a 60-cycle system for nine months, day 
and night. At the end of the nine months the commutators 
were in practically as good condition as in the beginning, showing 
that the commutator on such machines could be made to have 
a long life. The conditions of the 60-cycle machines were much 
worse than on the lower frequency, and the nine months of 
operation under the condition of steady service probably equalled 
two or three years of traction service; but the commutator 
stood up so well that we decided definitely that there was no 
difficulty on that point. 

The principal reasons which led to the adoption of the single- 
phase motor were stated in the paper above referred to, and 
were that but one trolley wire would be required and that the 
motors had the series characteristics. It was considered that 
no motor, except one of the commutator type, would give suit- 
able characteristics for the service, and it was stated that there 
were several types of motors, with commutators, which had the 
proper characteristics. All of these may be classed as series 
motors, although some of them are combined with transformers 
and may be considered as transformer series motors, or, under 
another name, as repulsion motors, and others are pure series 
motors. The pure series motor is one which can operate on 
direct current as well as alternating current. The repulsion 
motor can be modified so as to operate on direct current, but 
as ordinarily arranged it is not as well adapted for this as the 
other type. It was recognized in the first undertakings with 
this system that the motor would probably be required to operate 
on direct current at times, and the fact that the pure series 
motor was primarily a direct-current motor of a first-class design 
was one of the reasons which led us toward the adoption of 
that type. As both theory and experience indicated that such 
motors would probably bé wound for 200 or 250 volts, it was 
recognized that the motors would probably have to be operated 
in series for direct current, and either in series or in parallel | 
for alternating current, as might be desired. The arrangement 
tequired for permitting operation on direct current as well as on 


638 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS. [Sept. 14 


alternating are rather complicated, due to the fact that it is 
neceassry to switch from one system to the other in passing 
from the alternating to the direct current. We did not suppose 
that the electrical public would consent to sich a combination, 
but since that time we have tound that in some instances they 
do not object seriously to the increased complication. 

At the time that the alternating-current system was brought 
out it was ‘considered that the principal field would be in heavy 
railroad work, because this motor furnished what was considered 
a general solution of the railway problem; as the railroads would 
have their own terminals and their own rights of way, the sys- 
tem would be an alternating-current system throughout. At 
the present time, however, roads are being installed which oper- 
ate primarily on alternating current, but at the terminals and 
where they pass through intervening towns they operate on 
direct current. 

The direct-current motor has never been considered as en- 
tirely suitable for the heavy railroad problem, as usually but 
two speeds, and at most but three speeds can be obtained with 
four motors, the third speed increasing the complication con- 
siderably. With the alternating-current motor of the commu- 
tator type any speed can be obtained for locomotive work, be- 
cause any pressure can be applied to the terminals of the motor. 
As soon as alternating current is used for motors, we at once 
have a ready means of pressire transformation. As on loco- 
motives for large capacity the difficulty of handling the current 
is considered a very prominent one. it was considered that some 
form of pressure control which varied the pressure without 
opening the circuit would probably be the best>one. One form 
of pressure control permissible is what is called the induction 
regulator. This regulator varies the pressure without opening 
the circuit. The relation of the primary and secondary wind- 
ings with respect to each other is varied. This gives a means 
of varying the pressure to the motors and varying the speed of 
very large motors with no tendency to sparking at the con- 
troller. The only time the circuit is opened is at the end of 
the operation when cutting it off. Therefore it was considered 
as an important feature in the solution of the general railway 
problem. 

The single-phase system is the one means presented at the 
present time as the solution of the heavy railway problem. 
It has all the advantages of the direct-current motor in the 
variable-speed characteristic, and has also the advantage pos- 
sessed by alternating current in the ability to use any line 
pressure desired, and to vary the pressure applied to the motor 
and thus vary the speed over any range desired. It also has 
the advantage of permitting a system of control that can be 
obtained without sparking. 

In the adaptation of the alternating-current motor to direct- 
current service, two 250-volt motors can be connected in series 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT ST. LOUIS. 639 


for 500 volts; also in operating on alternating current the motors 
can-be connected in series, if desired, or in parallel. There is a 
possibility of danger in operating two motors in series in this 
way on alternating current, or even on ordinary direct current. 
In ordinary direct-current practice the use of two motors in 
series for part of the service is common practice, but there is 
this difference between the direct-current equipment and the 
alternating-current equipment. In the direct current we have 
motors wound normally for 500 or 600 volts. When operating 
in series the motors are connected, two in series, each one re- 
ceiving 250 volts. Therefore, if one motor should slip its 
wheels and take the full pressure of the pair, it would still be 
operating atits normal pressure. But with two 250-volt motors 
connected across a 500-volt circuit, we have a different condition. 
In case one motor should take the entire pressure, we should 
have 500 volts across a 250-volt motor. That condition was 
considered early, and in the Washington, Baltimore, Annapolis 
project, a description of which was given in the AMERICAN INsTI- 
TUTE paper read two years ago, we showed an arrangement by 
which this could be avoided: Balancing transformers were 
connected across the two motors in series. The balancing trans- 
former was across the outside terminals, and a tap from the 
middle of the transformer was connected between the two 
motors. In this way equal pressure was supplied to the two 
motors in series, and the danger of a runaway was thus avoided. 
It is not yet determined how important thisis, but the speaker 
believes that something like this will be found advisable for the 
operation of motors in series, esepecially where high-power motors 
are used on medium weight cars for high-speed service. Possibly 
with comparatively low speed, and with very heavy cars, there 
may not be the same tendency to slip. On the direct-current 
part of the road, of course, the balancing transformer could 
not have any effect; but as the direct current is usually a very 
small part of the service, this danger would be lessened, due to 
the proportionate time in service. 

In the application of the motor to use on both alternating 
and direct current, we have found some special conditions which 
affect the arrangement of control. Take, for instance, a large 
road being installed between Cincinnati and Indianapolis, 
where it is intended to run on direct current at the terminals 
and alternating current on the rest of the line. The normal 
speed on the alternating current part of the line is so great 
that it would be prohibited in the towns, and it is found that 
to get the speed down to the desired rate in the city service 
on the direct-current portion of the road, it is necessary to con- 
nect the four motors all in series, and thus no series-parallel 
arrangement can be used. Pure rheostatic control is therefore 
necessary in the city. On the suburban part, a switch is used 
to throw the current from direct to alternating, simply throwing 
the four motors in parallel, and taps are used on the lowering 


640 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS. (Sept. 14 


transformers to get a number of pressures. In that way we 
get the effect of series-parallel control and even better, by 
having more than two steps. On a long line it is possibly of no 
great advantage to have many steps, but as a rule the more 
steps there are, the easier is the service on the controlling ap- 
paratus, and the more running speeds are available. 

With regard to the application of the system to locomotives, 
on the steam roads where the systems are not tied up with 
existing electric plants, it is probable that in time the rail- 
roads will adopt their own pressures, and possibly their own 
frequency. This may not be 25 cycles but may be somewhat 
lower. Thespeaker believes that the electrification of the steam 
road may beacontrolling factorinthe change from direct to alter- 
nating currentin cityservice. Ifthe large railroads with theirown 
large power plants adopt alternating current throughout, then 
the towns lying along the roads willin time prabably adopt the 
same power system, and even the large cities will sooner or later 
adopt the same system. At the present time the railroads, as 
far as they have gone, have adopted direct current because the 
cities through which they pass or enter are using direct current. 
When the railroads make the big end of the project, however, 
then the cities will adopt what the railroads are using. When 
this comes about the direct-current railway systems in the 
cities will be superseded by the alternating. 

C. V. DryspaLE: At this late hour in the discussion, the 
speaker does not propose to take up your time very much, 
especially as he is afraid that very few of us over in England have 
had much experience concerning this important subject. The 


speaker should like, in the first place, to take this opportunity of | 


congratulating you on this side of the water on having carried 
this important problem to such an extremely successful issue 
as has been recently shown in Ballston and in other places. 
This subject has been worked on in several countries, but 


to America belongs the honor of having constructed the first © 
line of any considerable length working on the single-phase © 


system. The way in which it has been done is admirable, 
when we remember that the result has been achieved by 
getting over the great difficulties that were first encountered with 
the series motor, and that in so doing it has been found prac- 
ticable to use the same motive plants on direct- and alternating- 
current lines. That, in itself, is an enormous advantage over 
and above that of being able to use the single-phase alternating 
current. 

It would be impossible to criticize any of the statements 
that have been made this morning, because they come from 
gentlemen who have had such exceedingly minute experience 
in the special branch of the subject, that their remarks must 
be taken as gospel, at any rate for the present. , 

The speaker’s object in taking part in the discussion is rather to 
bring the matter back to first principles. This subject has been 


—_— ae 


1904.] DIS COSTSSLON Ae Se eOULS: 641 


worked upon in many different ways and although the laminated 
series motor seems to have been the first to give us results 
and will probably survive as a practical solution of the problem, 
yet there are some interesting questions as to whether there 
are any other ways of fulfilling the requirements which may 
have other advantages. There is one thing that does not seem 
always to be sufficiently kept in view in traction matters, in 
relation to the starting of the cars, and that is the very simple 
matter that in the starting of the car you do not require power, 
you require force. If you wish to get anything into motion, 
what you require in the first instance is purely force, and until 
the body moves it does not require power at all. One of th 
great advantages which the steam-engine has over any electrical 
system up to the present time, is the fact that when steam 
is first admitted into the cylinder you get the pressure on the 
back of the piston and get the starting force without taking any 
power from the steam. If it were not for the other disad- 
vantages of the locomotive, there is no question that this one 
feature would give it a superiority over anything we have of 
an electrical nature, because if we turn to the ordinary direct- 
current motor, we find that we have to use half, or with one 
motor, the whole, of the full-load power merely to secure full- 
load torque. This has several objections. Not only is this 
uneconomical and wasteful of power, but it throws a sudden 
strain on the generating plant, and furthermore the unneces- 
sary power has to be wasted in resistances, and these resistances 
sometimes attain a considerable magnitude. With alternating- 
current motors these evils are worse although less power is 
taken, as we then have low power-factors and consequently 
difficulties in regulation. 

The time is too short to refer to many other systems, but 
the speaker will mention one, that known as the Ward Leonard 
system, which at first sight appears to be an unpromising one. 
In the Ward Leonard system, as the speaker understands it, 
the system is to use a single-phase motor coupled to a direct- 
current generator which supplies direct current to the car 
motor. Of course, the indirectness of the method seems to put 
it at fault, but on the continent that method has been de- 
veloped with considerable hope of success, in fact with 
considerable practical success; and it has this great advantage 
that by the use of this arrangement you can get your 
starting effort with very small power taken from your station. 
In this system—it is too well known to be described here— 
you have your single-phase motor continuously running, and 
you can do the whole of the regulation of your speed, etc., 
by merely regulating the excitation of the generator. The result 
is that it is possible to get the full starting effort with only 
something like one-third or one-quarter of the full-load current 
on the motors. That is so important a matter, especially in 
view of the huge trains liable to be thrown on the plant in the 


642 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS [Sept. 14 


large schemes which we are hoping to see realized in the future, 
that we should give that method the consideration which it 
deserves, although it at first sight appears to be roundabout. 
In addition to that, we have the magnificent system devised 
by your President, Mr. Arnold, and the speaker hopes we shall 
hear more of that inthe future. The speaker’s chief object in 
rising was to ask that we should hear as much about these sys- 
tems as possible. 

PRESIDENT ARNOLD:—The speaker is pleased to be put down 
as one of the speakers on this subject, but Messrs. Steinmetz and 
Lamme have so thoroughly covered the subject, and Dr. Drys- 
dale has so kindly referred to the other systems known to most 
of you, that it is not necessary to say much more, particularly 
as the time is growing short. 

One statement by Mr. Lamme, rather puts the speaker on 
the defensive. The speaker understood him to state that 
his announcement of the single-phase motor made in September 
1902 was the first announcement of a single-phase system. In 
the month of June preceding, the speaker read a paper on a 
single-phase railway, known as the Lansing, St. Johns & St. 
Louis Railway, which was built at that time and which has 
since been put in operation. The speaker does not think it is 
just for the statement to be placed on record just in the manner 
in which it was made. Perhaps Mr. Lamme meant to say that. 
his paper was the first formal paper on the subject, but the 
speaker’s road was built and almost ready to operate at the 
time that he made his announcement. 

F. J. Spracue: The subject on the card is how best to use 
the alternating current in railway motors. It is largely a. 
technical question. The alternating current motor is like a 
somewhat brilliant boy, who being. exposed to various diseases 
has contracted a number of them; he has had a moderate, 
experience in mumps and measles, and a touch of typhoid. . 
fever, and the various doctors, many able ones here and else- 
where, have administered, sometimes in homeopathic but. 
oftentimes in allopathic doses, large measures of quinin and, 
other drugs. Whether, as the child grows—and we are all. 
hopeful of that child—and he is subjected to the various, 
climatic conditions of commercial introduction and use, those, 
undercurrents of disease common to all fevers will recur, or. 
whether the child will outlive them and become strong and 
robust is a matter which must be left to future developments. 

Thereisalarger problem. It is perhaps a more popular one, 
but of vital interest to us as engineers who are called upon to: 
advise managers and others as to their financial expenditures, . 
and that is: will electricity be used on trunk lines? Our 
worthy President, with whom the speaker has the honor to, 
be associated on some important work in that line, is very 
hopeful, and so is the speaker. But what are the reasons, 
which may dictate the adoption of electricity on trunk lines?, 


1904.] DESGUS STON PA Te Sis EO UES: 643 


Will it be because an economical service cannot be gotten by 
steam? No. Will it be because there cannot be obtained 
to-day an efficient service? Again, no. Will it be because 
of aesthetic reasons? Distinctly not. If electricity be adopted 
on any trunk line service it will be because of the hard 
and fast rule of financial necessity, not because we engineers 
urge it. It will be because the men who raise the money, run 
the road and have to provide dividends find that it is the best 
way to do it, and the reasons which will apply to one road 
are not necessarily those which will apply to another. It is 
the speaker’s belief that some of the largest expenditures, 
and those most fruitful of return to those who own the steam 
railroads of the country to-day will be for the purchase and 
control of competing electric railways which, having in the 
past acquired franchises of undoubted value which cannot be 
duplicated, have built up a profitable business which they can 
hold and which will increase. Many a steam railway will be 
better off financially and get bigger returns if it gathers in 
these franchises and systems, and operates its whole property 
with proper regard to the needs and capacities of each division 
than by electrification of its main lines, at least for a long time 
to come. 

Evinu TuHomson: It is certainly a pleasure to listen to a 
discussion of this kind in a joint meeting of the Institution of 
Electrical Engineers of Great Britain and the AMERICAN INSTI- 
TUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, and the members of the 
Congress taking part. It is gratifying to find that there is so 
little dissent from the statements which have been made as to 
the future of alternating-current traction. Many of you will 
recall, no doubt, that at one time the electrical profession 
might have been said to have been divided into two camps, the 
alternating-current camp and the direct-current camp. The 
gentleman who preceded me was probably at that time more to 
be found in the direct-current camp than any other. The other 
gentlemen who have preceded me were to be found in the 
alternating-current camp. It is a fact, however, and those 
who have visited the power stations on the circular tour have 
noticed that the direct-current men have called in the alter- 
nating current to help them out, and combine, therefore, the 
virtues of the alternating current with the virtues of the direct 
current. 

In the early days the speaker was connected and is still con- 
nected, with an organization which had not many prejudices of 
one kind or another. We had direct current, we had constant 
current series arc lights, constant-potential direct-current 
systems, and when the alternating current came we were ready 
to take that up without prejudice, and find out what there 
was in it. 

In 1886 we put out our original alternating-current apparatus, 
and finding that the necessity might perhaps arise for motors 


644 ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS.  {Sept. 14 


on the system, it was at that time the speaker undertook to 
get a motor for that system, a self-starting alternating-current 
motor, and the first motor of the repulsion type was made in 
1886 and finished in the fall of that year. It was a little affair 
and was found not to operate very well on the higher frequen- 
cies, but by connecting it to a machine, which the speaker was 
using for electric welding, giving 30 cycles, the speaker found 
it operated very well and satisfied him as to the general 
features of the machine. That machine, unfortunately, was 
sent. to an exposition and lost. The Paris Exposition of 1889 
had a couple of examples of machines on a little different basis. 
One of them, the speaker believes, is in England, at the 
Royal Institution, and another we have at Lynn. It was a 
machine which was started as aseries alternating-current 
motor, and as soon as it reached a certain speed the commu- 
tator was short-circuited and it became an induction motor. 
It combined, therefore, the elements of both, but the design of 
such machines in those days was,poor. We did not have even 
the distributed winding; we did not have the arrangements 
and the proportioning which we have to-day; nevertheless those 
little motors would give a half horse power for a moderate 
sized motor on 125 cycles, which was the highest frequency used. 
The speaker merely mentions these items as matters of 
history touching on the discussion. They have nothing to do 
with the discussion as to the different methods and systems 
cf using alternating current in electric railway motors, but the 
speaker is a strong believer in the field being open for such 
work. He believes that not only will the direct-current motor 
maintain its place, but that certain lines of service which the 
direct-current motor cannot easily take will undoubtedly be 
taken by the alternating-current motor for railway service, and 
the exhibition of a system, which you have been able to see 
in use, and which adapts itself to the use of both currents, is 
certainly a very instructive one. 

PREsIDENT ARNOLD: It occurs to the speaker that he may 
not have put his explanation in regard to Mr. Lamme’s state- 
ment in just the way it should be put. The speaker thinks 
what he meant was that his announcement was the first of a 
purely single-phase commutator motor system. The speaker 
thinks with this correction Mr. Lamme will accept his state- 
ment. He has not sent the speaker any word, but this ad- 
ditional statement is due him. The speaker thinks his work 
was first, but Mr. Lamme got in with his announcement in 
September regarding the single-phase commutator motor. 


A paper presented at the 190th Meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
New York, Oct. 28, 1904. 


Copyright 1904 by A. I. E. E. 


THE TELAUTOGRAPH. 


BY JAMES DIXON. 

Electrical transmission of handwriting has engaged a certain 
amount of attention ever since telegraphic transmission of 
printed characters was successfully carried out. 

As early as 1886 Cowper and Robertson brought the writing 
telegraph’ into a fairly operative form. This instrument was 
adapted to operate several receivers in series in “‘ reporting ”’ 
service, where the regular news ticker service was unobtainable 
or too expensive. The system was put to some use, chiefly 
in Pittsburg and vicinity. 

The writing was received on a paper tape, advanced at con- 
stant speed by clockwork. No pen-lifting device was provided 
and the words were connected together by a mark of the pen, 
making figure work poor. As the characters were formed by 
the combination of the pen motion and the tape motion, a 
certain amount of practice and skill was required to produce 
a legible message. 

The electrical features were as follows: two independent 
variable currents were obtained from the transmitter; these 
passed over lines to the receiver where they traversed two 
electromagnets set at right angles to each other, and so in- 
fluenced their effect upon a common armature as to cause 
the receiver-pen rod to reproduce the motion of the trans- 
-mitter pencil. 

It will be noted that this principle is nearly identical with 
that of Grtthu’s Telechipograph,’ recently described in the tech- 
nical press, the main differences being that the telechipograph 


1. Wm. Maver, Jr., American Telegraphy. 


2. Scientific American, August, 1903. 
645 


646 DIXON: THE TELAUTOGRAPH. [Oct. 28 


writes upon a larger field and uses a beam of light, and photo- 
graphic record instead of a pen with ink record. 

Following the writing telegraph, Professor Elisha Gray con- 
structed, at his Chicago laboratory, an instrument which wrote 
upon stationary paper, and which he called a telautograph. 
It required four line wires and operated as follows:.by means 
of cords and drums the motions of the transmitting stylus 
were resolved into two component rotary motions which were 
used to operate two mechanical interrupters in the primary 
circuits of two induction coils. The relations of the parts were 
such that a motion of the transmitting stylus amounting to 
one-fortieth of an inch caused a complete make-and-break at 
one or both of the interrupters. 

The line currents were the impulses produced in the sec- 
ondary circuits of the induction coils. These impulses passed 
over lines to two electromechanical escapements in the re- 
ceiver. By means of cords and drums their motions were com- 
bined and caused to act upon the receiver pen. By the use 
of relays and condensers and a local battery at each receiver, 
the paper was advanced when necessary and the pen lifted 
from and lowered to the paper. The mechanical difficulties met 
with in perfecting this instrument were very great, and in the 
apparatus exhibited at the World’s Fair in Chicago in 1893 
the escapement mechanism was brought to a perfection thought 
impossible of attainment only a short time before. The writing 
showed a saw-tooth or step-by-step character due to the action 
of the escapements. The instrument was abandoned on account 
of the number of line wires required, limited speed, numerous 
fine adjustments, and cost and difficulty of manufacture. 

In 1893, while still working at the escapement device, Pro- 
fessor Gray patented a variable-current instrument,’ using two 
line wires, which worked, in a general way, like the present 
telautograph. The motions of the transmitter pencil were re- 
solved into two components which were used to vary two line 
currents, the variable resistances being carbon rods dipping 
into tubes of mercury.. The receiver contained two D’Arsonval 
movements, to the moving elements of which the. pen-arms 
were attached. Professor Gray never developed this instrument 
much beyond the laboratory stage, probably on account of 
his firm belief in the escapement type. 

Foster Ritchie, at that time an assistant to Professor Gray, 


1. U.S. patent 494,962, April 4, 1903. 


1904.] DIXON: THE TELAUTOGRAPH. 647 


gave considerable attention to this patent and perfected an, 
instrument based on it. He obtained a patent for improve- 
ments! and has produced an instrument that operates in a 
fairly satisfactory manneré under certain favorable conditions. 

The telautograph has been brought to its present state chiefly 
through experimental work done by, or under the personal 
direction of, Mr. George S. Tiffany, to whom several patents® for 
improvements have been granted. Mr. Tiffany’s instrument 
operates upon the variable-current principle and includes a 
number of interesting features, among them what may be called 
a straight-line D’Arsonval movement, which is used to operate 
the receiver. 

The operation may be briefly described thus: at the trans- 
mitter a pencil is attached by rods to two lever-arms which 
carry contact-rollers at their ends. These rollers bear against 
the surfaces of two current-carrying rheostats, connected to a 
constant-pressure source of direct current. The writing cur- 
rents pass from the rheostats to the rollers and from them to 
the line wires. When the pencil is moved, as in writing, the 
positions of the rollers upon the rheostats are changed and 
currents of varying strength go out upon the line wires. At the 
receiver these currents pass through two vertically movable 
coils, suspended by springs in magnetic fields, and the coils 
move up or down according to the strengths of the line currents. 
The motions of the coils are communicated to levers similar 
to those at the transmitter, and on these levers is mounted 
the receiver pen, which, by the motions of the coils, is caused 
to duplicate the motions of the sending pencil. Fig. 1 shows 
the circuits of the instrument. 

Many of the principles and devices in the instruments are 
of considerable interest. The method by which the variable 
currents are obtained is the laboratory arrangement for securing 
a variable pressure from a direct-current, constant pressure 
circuit; that is, the line circuit (of constant resistance) is con- 
nected as a shunt around that part of the rheostat between the 
moving roller and the ground or return. Motion of the roller 
varies the amount of resistance in series with the line and also 
the amount in parallel with it and fine gradations are easily 
obtained, giving smooth motion of the receiver pen. In this 

1. U.S. Pat. 656,828, Aug. 28, 1900. 


2. Elec. World and Engineer, Dec. 8, 1900, Vol. XX XVI., No. 28. 
_ 8. U.S. patents 668,889 to 668,895 inclusive, Feb. 26, 1901, 


648 DIXON: THE TELAUTOGRAPH. [Oct. 28 


way a variable pressure is impressed on the line circuit, giving 
a variable current. In all the other variable-current instru- 
ments, a constant pressure was impressed on line and a resist- 
ance in series with the line varied to give the desired variations 
in current. One result of the shunting method is a better form 
of rheostat, more easy of construction and handling, in which, 
also, the heating is better distributed. 

The rheostats are wound upon castings of I cross-section, 
with the turns of wire lying close together on the inner or 
contact-face. After winding, the insulation on this face is 
saturated with glue, which is allowed to harden and is then 


RECEIVER 


TRANSMITTER 


< 
cont 
Sy WalNall 
“Bp Sa 8 
7 
4 Fretd Magnet 
Ls eee 


LJ tock 


TELAUTOGRAPH 
Diagram of Operating Circuits, etc, 


Fic. 1. 
scraped off, taking the insulation with it, and giving a surface 
where contact is possible on every turn of the wire. This gives 
a rheostat of a large number of small steps, of good mechanical 
construction, and of low cost. 

The receiver operates with what may be called a straight- 
line d’Arsonval movement. The moving element or coil is 
wound upon a copper shell for damping effect. The magnetic 
circuit is so arranged that one pole surrounds the other, forming 


an annular air-gap of short length and large cross-section in 
which the direction of the flux is radial. The field is electro- 


1904.] DIXON: THE TELAUTOGRAPH. 649 


magnetic and is highly excited, to secure uniformity. The 
coil, suspended in the annular space, moves up or down with 
little friction, as it touches the sides of the space of the core 
very lightly if at all. The principle is the well-known one 
that a current-carrying coil, in a magnetic field, tends to place 
itself with respect to the field so that the flux enclosed by the 
coil shall be a maximum. 

The current for operating is taken from the ordinary lighting 
mains, preferably at about 115 volts. Satisfactory operation 
has resulted with pressures from 80 up to 250. At 115 volts, 
receiver and transmitter each require about one ampere while 
in operation. Fairly steady pressure is necessary as the receiver, 
being in effect a voltmeter, is rather sensitive to sudden changes, 
the effect being slight distortion of the message. 

A master-switch at the transmitter is provided to do all neces- 
sary switching of line and power circuits, to make needed 
changes in connections and to cut off current when not writing. 
A relay in one of the lines closes the power circuit of the re- 
ceiver whenever the transmitter at the distant station is switched 
on, and serves to prevent waste of current when not in operation. 

Attached to the master-switch is a mechanical device which 
shifts the transmitter paper the space of one line of ordinary 
writing for each stroke of the switch. The relay mentioned 
controls the electrical receiver paper shifter and, as each stroke 
of the switch causes a stroke of the relay, the receiver paper 
is shifted an amount equal to that at the transmitter. The 
writing space is about two inches long and five inches wide, 
allowing for three or four lines of writing. When filled by 
messages a few strokes of the switch serve to bring fresh paper 
into position at both receiver and transmitter. 

To prevent switching on of the transmitter while its home 
receiver is receiving a message from the distant station, an 
electromagnetic lock is connected in the receiver power circuit, 
controlled by the relay, and locks the home transmitter in the 
“off? position until the distant transmitter is switched off. 
If both transmitters were switched on at once neither station 
would receive any message; the lock is provided to render this 
condition impossible. 

The ink supply is most important and is arranged for as 
follows: at the left of the receiver platen is a bottle with a 
hole in the front near the bottom. When filled with ink and 
tightly corked the ink does not run out of this hole because 


659 DIXON? THE (TELAGTOGRAPE: fOct. 28 


of the pressure of the atmosphere. The ink is accessible for 
the pen at the hole and the surface of ink exposed to evapora- 
tion is small. 

The pen is made of a piece of german’silver bent double, 
after the manner of a ruling pen, and makes a uniform line 
in any direction over the paper. It takes up its supply by 
capillary attraction, from the hole in the front of the bottle. 
When the receiver is switched off, retractile springs draw the 
pen-arms to stops so arranged as to bring the pen exactly in 
front of the hole in the bottle, and when the pen-lifter armature 
is released the pen is caused to insert its tip in the opening. 
Thus a fresh filling of ink is obtained each time the paper is 
shifted. When not in use the pen rests in the ink, always ready 
to write. 

For the prevention of mechanical shocks to the necessarily 
light moving system of the receiver, it has been necessary to 
supply means to prevent the switching on or off of the trans- 
mitter, and by that action of the receiver, when the trans- 
mitter pencil is ‘‘ out in the field’’; that is, at a position other 
than that corresponding to the opening in the receiver ink- 
bottle; as in that case the receiver pen would instantly jump 
to a similar position. This position is called the “ unison point,” 
a term having its origin in the days of the “self-propellor”’ 
escapement telautograph. By placing a catch, released at only ~ 
by pressure of the pencil-point upon it, at the transmitter unison 
point the desired result is accomplished and the transmitter 
master-switch can not be switched either “ off’ or “on ’”’ unless 
the pencil be placed at the unison point and held there until the 
stroke of the switch is completed. In this case, as everywhere, 
the apparatus is made strong enough to stand any possible 
shocks, and then every precaution is taken to prevent their 
occurrence. Aside from shock to the moving system these 
jumps might shake the ink supply out of the pen and prevent 
the recording of the message. 

The pen-lifter is a magnet placed back of the receiver writing 
platen, and carrying upon its armature a rod adapted to engage 
with the pen-arm rods and raise the pen clear of the paper 
when the magnet is energized. This magnet is controlled from 
the transmitter as follows: beneath the transmitter platen is a 
spring-contact, opened by pressure of the pencil upon the 
paper, and closed by a spring when the pencil is raised. An 
induction coil having an interrupter in its primary circuit is so 


1904.] DIXON: THE THELAUTOGRAPH. 651 


connected to this spring-contact that when the pencil is raised 
the primary winding is short circuited. The induction coil 
has two independent secondary windings through which the 
two variable line currents pass before leaving the transmitter. 
The effect of the induction coil and its interrupted primary 
current is to induce in the two line currents superimposed 
vibrations or “ripples’’ when the pencil is pressed down on 
the paper and the spring-contact is open. When the contact 
is closed, by its spring, and the primary winding is cut out, 
no vibrations are produced in the line currents. In one of the 
line wires, at the receiver, is placed a relay upon whose sheet- 
iron diaphragm armature is mounted a loose contact, consisting 
of two platinum-silver contacts in series, sealed in a glass tube, 
to prevent oxidation. A local circuit contains the winding 
of the pen-lifter magnet and this loose contact. 

When the vibrations are present in the line current, due to 
the pressure of the pencil upon the paper and consequent opening 
of short circuit of the primary of the induction coil, the diaphragm 
of the relay is shaken, the loose contact opened and the 
pen-lifter de-energized, its armature is drawn back by a spring 
and the pen is allowed to rest against the paper. When there are 
no vibrations in the line currents due to the raising of the 
pencil from the paper, the relay diaphragm is at rest and the 
pen-lifter is energized and the pen is lifted clear of the paper. 

The superimposed vibrations used for operating the pen-lifter 
have another minor effect. The suspended coils, and through 
them the entire moving system of the receiver, are kept in a 
state of very slight mechanical vibration while the pen is on 
the paper. This aids the flow of ink from the pen-point, assists 
the pen in passing over any roughness or irregularity in the 
surface of the paper, and materially reduces friction in the 
joints and pivots of the moving system, and results in better 
writing. In some of the later instruments the two relays, that 
for pen-lifting and that for paper-shifting and power switching, 
are combined in a single piece of apparatus. 

For signalling, a push-button is placed upon the transmitter 
and a call-bell or buzzer is mounted on the receiver. This 
circuit is disconnected by the master-switch while a message 
is being written. Spring reels are attached when needed to roll 
up the received messages for preservation and future reference. 

The ordinary arrangements for operation are as follows: 
the instruments may be operated singly, upon a private line 


652 DIXON: THE TELAUTOGRAPH. (Oct. 28 


having an instrument at each end, or on an exchange system 
where a switchboard provides for connection. Working in 
this way, satisfactory writing has been obtained with a re- 
sistance in each line wire of 1600 ohms and an operating pressure 
of 110. Multiple operation can be carried out to a limited extent, 
three receivers being at present the maximum number that can 
be operated at once, in multiple, using 110 volts. This allows. 
of placing a supervisory machine upon a line. 

When no response to messages beyond a bell signal, is re- 
quired, and the same message is to be sent to a number of 
stations, a series arrangement of receivers is used. With a. 
transmitting pressure of 110 volts a maximum of seven re-- 
ceivers can be operated from a single pair of transmitting 
rheostats and rollers. This number may be increased by in-- 
creasing the pressure or by adding additional rheostats and. 
rollers, operated by the same pencil. Using both these methods 
a maximum of 50 or more receivers may be operated at once. 

Instances in actual commercial use of the arrangements of © 
instruments mentioned are: private lines; the transmission of 
mail and other orders from office to factory or yards; investiga- 
tion cf checks over lines between paving tellers and bookkeepers. 
in banking concerns, and transmission of messages, usually in 
cipher, between brokerage firms and cable or telegraph offices. 
A few moments’ thought will bring to mind many places where 
a telautograph private line could be used to save time and 
trouble, especially where accurate transmission of figures is 
essential. 

Multiple operation may be resorted to when a third station 
upon a line desires a record accessible at any time, of what 
is being sent, as, for instance, when one of the officers of a 
bank desires to know what passes between his bookkeepers and 
paying tellers. On such a line the third station receives all 
messages and can write to either or both of the other stations, 
should the necessity arise. 

Series operation may be used when several stations are to 
receive the same message and no response except a bell signal 
is required, as in sending orders in a hotel or club from dining 
room to kitchen, pantry and wine room; in “ reporting ”’ or 
news service, or for bulletin work, such as the announcement 
of arrival and departure of trains to a number of stations in 
a large railway station or freight depot. Fig. 2 shows the stan- 
dard commercial instrument. 


1904.] DIXON; THE TELAUTOGRAPH. 653 


One of the most important uses for series systems has been 
found in the U. S. Coast Defence Service, in sending ballistic 
data, such as range and azimuth of target, or character of 
projectile, from position-finding stations to the gunners. This 
is called “ fire-control communication ” and is installed in the 
forts by the U. S. Signal Corps. In a paper presented by 
Col. Samuel Reber on “ Electricity in the Signal Corps,’”* will 
be found a description of the position-finding systems and the 
desired characteristics of a system of communication for 
sending this data to the guns are stated as follows: “ The system 
that will successfully solve this problem must be simple in con- 
struction, mechanically strong so as not to be affected by the 


SES 


Ere 2: 


blast, as the receivers are placed close to the guns, rapid in 
operation, and give a character of record that can be read 
without liability of error.” Since that paper was prepared it 
has been decided that the receivers must be mounted directly 
on the gun-carriage and can have no shelter other than that 
afforded by their own cases. Add to these requirements the 
facts that the instruments must be cared for by post elec- 
tricians, and operated by enlisted artillerymen, messages must 
be visible at night; and the operation must be independent of 
rain, salt mists, cold, heat, or tropical insects, and it is apparent 
that no easy problem is presented. 

A special type of telautograph has been designed for this 


1. Transactions, A. 1. E. E., Vol. XIX., pp. 723 and 724. 


654 DIXON: THE TELAUTOGRAPH. [Oct. 28 


service and has been adopted by the U. S. Signal Corps! for 
fire-control communication. 

In this “service telautograph’’ the pen-lifter controlling 
relay is eliminated and the receiver pen-lifters are operated 
over a third line wire by the transmitter platen switch directly. 

Each gun receiver is enclosed in a water-tight brass case, 
suspended by springs from the gun carriage directly - front of 
the gunner. The parts are as far as possible made “ brutally 


Fic, 3 


? 


strong,” and the construction is as simple as possible. 


The desired rapidity of operation is inherent to the telauto- 
graph, and accuracy of record is ensured by careful writing and 
by the use of a “‘ home” receiver, mounted at the transmitter, 
where the operator can see it plainly, which is connected in 


series with the gun receivers and records the messages as actually 
sent over the line. 


1. Transactions, A. I. E. E., Vol. XIX., p. 673. 


1904.] DIXON: THE TELAUTOGRAPH. 655 


Freezing of ink is prevented by the addition of alcohol; and 
rain, mists, and insects, as well as the effects of the blast, are 
shut out. by the metal case. A heavy glass window is placed 
in the case so that messages can be read without opening the 
case. 

A small incandescent lamp inside the case lights automatically 
when the receiver is writing and may be lighted by pressing a 
button at other times, thus providing for visibility at night. 
Fig. 3 shows the army type of receiver mounting. 

On warships there is a somewhat similar service to be ren- 
dered and the performance of this should fall to the army type 
of telautograph. 

Commercial service has given opportunity for the installation 
of a considerable number of private line telautographs in actual 
use, and at least three of each of the other typical installa- 
tions are in operation at the present time. 

Much of the improvement in details of construction and 
reliability in operation has resulted from experience gained in 
efforts to perfect the service of these commercial plants. The 
experience leading up to the special army type of telautograph 
has extended over a period of about five years and in the present 
instrument all the requirements, unusually severe as they are, 
have been successfully fulfilled. 


656 THE TELAUTOGRAPH. (Oct. 28 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘ THE TELAUTOGRAPH.” 


F. C. Bates: Possibly Mr. Dixon will give us a practical 
demonstration of the working of the telautograph. 

(Mr. Dixon gave the demonstration.) 

C.O. Matttoux: Whatis the longest distance which has been 
attained and what are the prospects of longer distances? 

James Dixon: The distance is apparently purely a matter 
of resistance. The highest worked through so far is 1600 ohms 
in each writing line. The longest line at present in actual opera- 
tion ig seven miles in length, submarine cable, in the service 
of the U. S. Signal Corps. 

The army instruments are of special construction, to permit 
working out of doors without protection from the weather, 
hence they are mounted in weather-proof brass cases. The 
messages must be visible at night and a lamp is therefore placed 
in the case. This lamp lights when the instrument is in opera- 
tion. 

E. B. Faunestock: How does'a variation in the insulation 
of a line affect the work? 

James Dixon: It affects the shape of the fields to some 
extent. If it is uniform in both lines it can be compensated 
for by a line resistance adjuster at the transmitter. In all army 
work a receiver is mounted before the eyes of the sender and 
he can see the form in which the message is going to line. If 
he finds that the field is out of shape he can adjust the line re- 
sistance and correct it. In commercial work this difficulty has 
not yet been met as all the lines in service are of high insulation. 

F.C. Bates: Will Mr. Dixon tell us if it is possible to send a . 
message to several different stations at the same time? 

James Dixon: The two army series receivers exhibited are 
part of a set of seven, all of which operate in series and record 
the same message. Seven receivers can be operated at once 
by a standard transmitter containing only one pair of rheostats. 
To operate more than seven receivers,one or more pairs of 
rheostats and rollers are added, making a double or triple 
transmitter, in which all the rollers are moved by one pencil. 
Each pair of rheostats operates seven receivers; that is, a 
triple transmitter can write to three branches of seven re- 
ceivers or 21 receivers in all. Multiple operation is possible 
within certain limits, by using high resistance in the suspended 
coils and connecting the instruments to the line in multiple. 
The resistance of copper wire that can be wound on the coils 
without exceeding a reasonable weight is limited and places a 
limit on multiple operation. 

A. C. Crenore: Is it an error in the paper stating that one 
ampere is required? 

James Dixon: That value is correct. In the transmitter 
the rheostats each carry about one-quarter of an ampere, the 
induction coil primary circuit about one-eighth, and each of 


1904. | DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 657 


the line currents may be as much as two-tenths, making about 
one ampere which is supplied to the transmitter from the power 
circuit. In the receiver the field-magnet winding, excited from 
the power circuit, takes about six-tenths of an ampere, the 
paper-shifter about one-fourth, and the pen-lifter one-tenth, 
making.a total of about one ampere supplied to the receiver. 
The line currents are of course variable and range between a 
maximum of three-tenths and a minimum of nearly zero. 
TownsEND Wotcotr: These army instruments were de- 
signed especially for the Signal Corps and, as Mr. Dixon has 
said, one of the principal requirements was that they should 
be able to withstand the concussion of the guns. There was, 
at first, some doubt whether the instruments could endure the 
strain; but so far they have come through unscathed. To be 
sure, there has been no real warfare in which the telautographs 
were used, but in the maneuvers at Portland, Maine, a year 
ago last summer, telautographs were successfully used in a 
mortar pit, where the suction from the simultaneous discharge 
of all the mortars was so great that one day it pulled the clap- 
boards off the front cf an adjacent building. All this did not 
prevent the telautographs from working. The ink used to be 
spattered, in the old type of instruments, but this has been 
overcome in the present type. The use of the telautograph in 
the army is to convey information from the range-finder to the 
uns. 
é James Dixon: In reference to the effect of shock or con- 
cussion from the guns, these particular instruments, (the in- 
struments used in the demonstration), were installed and in use 
on the battleship Alabama for some time and were subjected to se- 
vere tests. One was placed near the trunnions of a 13-inch gun, and 
about four feet from the gun axis, the gun being trained parallel 
to the instrument. Repeated shots with full service charges did 
not develop any faults in the construction or operation of the 
instrument. These receivers are in the condition in which the 
test left them, and their operation shows them to be uninjured. 
The army type springs (indicating springs) have been substi- 
tuted for the navy suspension springs which are slightly differ- 
ent. In army work an anchorage is to be added to the bottom 
in the form of a third spring, to prevent the receiver from being 
pushed out of the vertical position, as for instance, by a person 
leaning against the case. The question of withstanding the 
shock is of great importance and the instruments as shown 
meet all the requirements. 


‘oe 
tf bog? 

r 
sa 8: 


Rts} 
ayera kD 
* 


sOyPy ie 
VE hae eee! 


A paper presented at ine 190th Meeting of the 
. American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, Oct. 28, 1904. 

Copyright 1904, by A I. E. E. 


THE TRANSPOSITION OF ELECTRICAL CONDUCTORS. 
BY FRANK F. FOWLE. 


The transmission of electromagnetic energy through the 
ether, by means of conducting wires’ whose function is that 
of directing and concentrating the energy flow, is accompanied 
by mutual interferences between transmission systems which 
employ in common any considerable portion of the ether. The 
extent to which the ether is energized, in a direction transverse 
to the direction of energy flow, is controlled by the design of 
the transmission circuit and the rate of energy flow. The 
energy storage-capacity of a transmission circuit is very small 
in comparison with the transmitted energy, but the great 
velocity of transmission renders possible the transmission of 
large energies. The conformations of the electric and the mag- 
netic fields about a line circuit depend, in alternating-current 
systems, on the number of phases and on the number, size, 
and separation of the wires. The field at a given point due 
to a single-phase circuit is constant in direction but variable 
in intensity, from instant to instant throughout a cycle; the 
field due to a polyphase circuit varies both in direction and 
intensity. 

Alternating-current transmission systems resolve themselves 
into two great classes, one for the transmission of power and 
the other for the transmission of intelligence. Power systems 
are characterized by: high pressure; large currents; low or 
moderate frequencies; only one fundamental frequency; rela- 
tively great reaction of terminal apparatus compared with line 
reactions; magnitude of inductive disturbances in the line 
usually small and important only as affecting regulation; line 
length less than a wave length. and the flow of energy usually 


659 


660 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. Oct. 28 


in a given direction. Telephonic systems are characterized 
by; low pressure; small currents; high frequencies, variable 
over a wide range; relatively small reaction of terminal ap- 
paratus compared with line reactions; magnitude of inductive 
disturbances in the line usually large and rarely negligible; 
line lengths usually greater than the wave lengths and often 
equal tc many wave lengths, and the flow of energy alter- 
nating in direction and source. 

The general character of the fields set up about the line 
is the same, whatever the system, and a consideration of 


iGaele 


this will lead to the theory of transposition. Fig. 1 shows 
the magnetic field set up about a two-wire circuit; Fig. 2 shows 
the electric field. These two fields at all points of intersection 
are at right angles to each other; that is, the electric and the 
magnetic forces at any given point are perpendicular with re- 
spect to each other. Also, the electric pressure is constant in 
magnitude at all points on any magnetic flux line; or every 
magnetic flux line is a line of constant electric pressure. The 
flux density and the intensity of the electric pressure both 
diminish rapidly as the distance from the wires increases. An 
instance of this is shown in Fig. 3, which gives, in rectangular 


1904] FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 661 


coérdinates, the flux density along the X axis of Fig. 1; Fig. 4 
shows similarly the electric pressure along the X axis in Fig. 2. 

For a ‘single wire having an earth return, the solution above 
may be applied by considering the surface of the earth coin- 
cident with the Y axis’ the wire beneath the earth’s surface 


2 


a 


ETGH 2: 


will be the electrical image of the real wire above. It will 
be seen that the fields due to a ground-return circuit in prac- 
tice extend through a far greater volume of dielectric than in 
the case of a metallic circuit. 

The theory upon which the above curves are based is as 
follows: Consider a single straight wire in free space, of radius 7, 


662 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


conveying a current /. The work done in carrying a unit 
magnetic pole circumferentially around the wire, at a radial 
distance a from it is ; 


W, = 4 af = oe (1) 


pi 


where F is the magnetic force at a. The force F acts through 
the point a perpendicularly to the plane containing the wire 
and the point a. 


1904.] FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 663 


Therefore 


Fee ee 

eine (2) 
where H is the intensity of the magnetic field. In a unit length 
of wire the total number of flux lines encircling the wire, mul- 


tiplied by the current is 


where x is the radial distance from the wire and yu the magnetic 
permeability of the medium. 

Assuming a uniform distribution of the current J throughout | 
the cross-section of the wire, we have for the field intensity 
at a point radially distant b from the centre of the wire, 


Oey a 8 21b 
ecole ea 6 
and this intensity is due to the current enclosed within the 


circumference 2b. The product of the current into the flux, 
integrated between the limits b = o and b = ris 


9 2 43 § 
N= Nee pe (5) 


re) 


where p, is the magnetic permeability of the wire. The total 
number of linkages of the flux with the current, multiplied 
by the current, is 


te oo 


2 2 [? 
Nea WetNa= (2822 a (22? dx (6) 


Oo Tr 


The inductance* is therefore 


F | 
1 2 ¥ 
b= gnt [thas | (7) 


3 SS SSS Se ee en ee ETE a 
* This demonstration is due to Jackson; Alternating Currents and Alter- 
nating Current Machinery, p. 140. 


604 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


If there is a parallel wire within the field of the first wire, 
distant r,, from it, the portion of the total flux which is linked 


Dy 
Yee Wel ee 
M { 2 aa (8) 
T19 


and this is the mutual inductance of the two circuits. 
For a two-wire metallic circuit the inductance will be double 
the difference between expressions (7) and (8), or 


with it, is 


= +4 plog 2 (9) 
For a single wire at height above the axth, the inductance is 
[= aes 2 log =" (10) 

These expressions in henries per mile are respectively 
L= (0.1609 + 1.482 log, = )10- (11) 


(ys - (0. 08047 +0.7411 logy = 2") 10-8 (12) 


where u and yp, are unity. 
The field of force without a two-wire metallic circuit is, 


from (2) 
F=21 (7~-—-) (13) 


Via Vox 


where the point x is perpendicularly distant r,, from one wire 
and r,, from the other. From this, the field intensity along 
the X axis in Fig. 1 is proportional to 


1 1 
a+-% - @—& 


y= (14) 


1904.) FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 665 


for points without the wires and 


2G 
y Pee eg (15) 


i 
for points within the wire. Fig. 3 is plotted from (14) and (15). 
Considering the case of two two-wire metallic circuits, as 
shown in cross-section in Fig. 5, 
the expression for their mutual inductance follows at once from 
expression (8): 


114 Y24 


9 
IM ta ee i dx (16) 
x 26 


113 723 


Fic. 5. 
M = Zp log Vy4 V3 V3 (17) 
T1124 
In henries per mile this is 
Ma (0.7411 log io “as "s) 10-3 (18) 
13 724 


The foregoing expressions for self and mutual inductance 
may be established from the standpoint of the kinetic energy 
of an electromagnetic system, as shown by Maxwell* and 
Heaviside.t 

The introduction of another circuit within the field of a 
given circuit does not alter the expression for the self-inductance 


* Maxwell; vol. I1., art. 685: E 
+ Heaviside; Elec. Papers, Nifell dene 100. 


666 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


of either circuit. The mutual inductance between the circuits 
is taken care of in the general equations for the energy of the ~ 
whole system. 

The capacity constants are not quite so simple, because the 
addition of a circuit within the field of a given circuit changes 
the constant for the given circuit by itself; and when a third 
circuit is concidered the constants for the two previous circuits 
are again altered and their mutual constant is also altered and 
so on, for each circuit added to the group. 

Take a system of m conductors with respective charges q,, 
Gox'Ts. = + < Iny ADE, PIESSHTES BUD. ben eee eo eee 
of each conductor is a homogeneous linear function of the n 
charges and the total energy of the system is half the sum 
of the products of the pressure of each conductor into its charge. 

W 3 My QP + Mor V1 Pa Mar M1 Ist 
+E U2 Qo? +Ug292Ist - 
+dUs3dg t+ .. . (19) 

Differentiating W with respect to the charge on any con- 
ductor we get the pressure of that conductor, for the pressure 
is the work done in increasing W by adding a unit charge. 
This gives equations of the form. 


Vy = Uy Gat os Jat Mar Ia + oo Sean Ce 
Va = Uy. Vs +22 Jat Use Ist. - : +Uno In (20) - 


Vn = Un V1 +U2en I2+Ugn Igt ge <i Una On 


The coefficient u,, expresses the pressure of the conductor 
x when its charge is unity and that of all other conductors 
zero. The coefficient u,, expresses the pressure of the con- 
ductor y when the charge on x is unity, the charges on the 
other conductors being zero, and uz = uy,. Solving (20) for’ the 
charges, 


ai=Cy Vita, Vor Cay Varhine one es 
dg = Cy2V,+C2, Vig AG ys eaplioek Cau lon (21) 


Qn Cae Gan VitCon VetCon Vet . . +Cnn Va 


where Cz, is a coefficient of capacity and C,, is a coeffiicent 
of induction or mutual capacity. The coefficients C are func- 


tions of the coefficients wu. Maxwell* shows that the coefficients 
of pressure are all positive, but none of the coefficients Uxy are 


* Maxwell; vol. I., chap. III. 


1904.] FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 667 


greater than u,,; none of the coefficients of induction (mutual 
capacity) are positive and the sum of all those belonging to 
one conductor is not numerically greater than the coefficient of 
capacity of that conductor, the latter being always positive; 
when there is only one conductor in the field, its coefficient of 
pressure with respect to itself is the reciprocal of its capacity ; 
if a new conductor is brought into the field, the coefficient of 
pressure of any other conductor with respect to itself is dimin- 
ished, the coefficients of capacity are increased and the co- 
efficients of induction (mutual capacity) are diminished. To 
find the expression for the coefficients u, consider a single wire 
in free space, with a charge q per unit length. 


1diKe, Moy, 


and the force normal to the wire (the longitudinal component 
vanishes when the whole wire is considered) is 


Me Ce 23 

OSs (x? + 77)$ (23) 
' +o 

qr eee 30) 4 

F -{ (+r)t od r ce 


—% 


668 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


But the force is the negative of the partial derivative of the 
pressure with respect to the distance, or 


yey 


(25) 


whence V = 2 q log = (26) 


a being a constant. 

In practice there is always the return conductor of opposite 
pressure to consider; or if the earth be the return the electrical 
image must be considered. The pressure at the point P, distant 
r’ from a second parallel wire, with a charge — q per unit length is 


a’ 
Vi = —2q log oat (27) 
The total pressure is 
A 


Vi = 2¢ log = (28) 


At an infinite distance r and r’ approach unity as a ratio and 
since log 1 = 0, the constants a and a” must be equal. 


Considering a two-wire metallic circuit whose wires have a sep- | 


aration d and radius 7, 


d 
Via ene Gog (29) 
d 
Vg arg a Oe (30) 
a? d 
Vi-V, = 2q log = 4¢ log — (81) 
1 
C=7 -—_ (32) 
ed: 4 log = 


The pressure coefficient in the above case is . 


’ 


= 2log — (33) 


vv an 


1904)" FOUGZE: TRANSPOSITION OF GONDUCTORS 669 


The pressure of the electric field along the X axis in Fig. 2 
is proportional to 


a+ x 


A= "% 


y = log 


co 


(34) 


for points without the wires, and is constant within them. 
The curve in Fig. 4 is plotted from (34). 

If the wires are insulated the capacity is slightly increased 
by the greater specific inductive capacity of the insulation. If 
the wires are of radius r, and the insulating coverings of radius 
if hoa) becomes 

1 es 
Co= Pea ae F (39) 
Vee er 


2 1 


where k is the specific inductive capacity of the insulation. 
This increase in capacity may amount to several per cent. 
‘The above equations are general and apply to a system of any 
number of wires; a discussion of the subject is given by Heavi- 
‘side,* with examples worked out for ground-return circuits. 


The case of two two-wire metallic circuits in Fig. 5 may be 
derived as follows: 


Vy = My QT May Jot M31 Wat Mar Ws 
Ug = Myo Ty Uy2 Jat Ugo Wg t M42 Va (36) 
Us = Uy3 1+ Mog Jot Ugg Ig t M43 Va 
Ug = Uy Tp Uog Jot Ugg V3 Uae V4 


‘The circuit conditions are: 


Vural 

VarMatsn. Ve (36a) 
if . or -- QoS 0) 
Gy. + Gs = 0 


A coefficient of the form u,, equals the coefficient u,,. Then 
we have 


Va = (Uy, — 2 Hy2+ M9) 1+ 3 — Ya — Ugg + Uy) 1s! 
Vy = (t13 — U3 — Uygt Ua) Ia + (U3 — 2 Usp +Uy,) Ys 


* Heaviside; Elec. Papers, vol. I., p. 42, p 140; vol. II., p 203, p. 329. 


670 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


But 
(1, —2 Uy +Ug,) = 4 log = 
(ttigg 12 thyg ty = 4 log oe | (38) 
Ty, 1 
(tg — Uyg — Ugg t+ Ug) = 2 log ae 
iS 24 
0 ae GE VatCoa a 9 
5 Canals (39) 
From which it follows that 
r 
4 tog 4 
Ca= | 0m a. Ae 
ae Y Y 14 Toa\? (40) 
16 log —¥. log 4 — (210 ru Tes) | 
| 8 Ta 8 Tp oa To4 
4 log “8 
ve r yee 
2 log wat ae 
= Gian aN sas 7 (42) 
r Yr PF \" 
16 log —2?. log —# — (210 7s) 
[ 2 Ya : Y ee Yo4 | 


The above formulas for capacity may be expressed in farads 
per mile by multiplying by 0.07768 x 10~°. 

The first important conclusion from the expressions for 
mutual inductance (17) and mutual capacity (42) is that these 
two constants vanish simultaneously when 


T14 723 = 113 124 (43) 


Let 


= Hee (44) 


Let the codrdinates of one circuit be fixed, and be (+a, 0) 
and (—a, 0), asin Figs. 3 and 4. If the two wires of the other 


1904] FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 671 


circuit are on the locus of the point (x,y), for any particular 
value of. p, (43) will be satisfied. The conversion of (44) to 
rectangular coérdinates is 


P ((x+a)’+y] = [x — a)? +97] (45) 
or 
tue te el a ae (ot Ae NT 
Been + y =(0F, = i) a (46) 


This is a system of eccentric circles, there being one circle 
for each value of p. The plot of this system of circles, from 
(46), gives the magnetic field of Fig. 1. That is, the mutual 


: | 
L \ 
\ \ 
4 +— 
| \ 
' 1 ! 
' | 
! 1 
| 
1 
\ 


<—0,293 d—>! 
1 


| 
Le > 


! 
| 
Saat Tia! 
1— 2=CIRCUIT 
38-4= fe 
Fic. 7. 


interferences vanish when the wires of one circuit are on a 
single flux line of the field of the other circuit, and therefore 
enclose none of the magnetic flux of that circuit and are at 
points of equal electric pressure due to that circuit. 

It is seldom in practice that the conditions permit the use 
of the relations given in (43) and (46). A particular solution 
is applicable to two two-wire circuits, as independent circuits 
or as the respective phases of a four-wire, two-phase line. This 
is shown in Fig. 7. ; 

To show how the constants of mutual inductance and capa- 
city depend on the relative wire positions, the curves in Figs. 
8 and 9 have been plotted from 


M _ log [122 
2. T1371 24 


(47) 


6/2 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


If the circuit 3-4 always maintains a horizontal position, in 
Fig. 8, and the codrdinates of P are (x, y), P being constrained 
to move in a circle, (47) becomes 


M _1,., (a+b)? +e? —[2 (a+) 
2 2° [(@—b)?+e]—[2 (@—b) af 


(48) 


Scare, Log /0= 30” 
Fic. 8. 


where C is given by the locus of P, 
IC Ag ee (49) 
If the circuit 3-4 maintains a vertical position, in Fig. 9, and 
the locus of P is again the circle of equation (49), 


log Bat ta)? +d) + (a)? (yb)? + OAV} 
(a)? + (wa)? (y +b) + @ Fay? (yb)? + GF —)F 


(50) 


1904.) FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 673 


The curves in Figs. 8 and 9 are polar diagrams, giving the 
relative mutual disturbances as P describes a circle. There are 
four points in a revolution at which M is zero. It is possible to 
introduce a third circuit and so locate it that M is zero for 
any two, and hence for all. 


a=AZ. C=4a., 
Scare, Log, /0= 30, 


Iteg Oh 


When the number exceeds three it becomes, in a practical 
sense, impossible to prevent mutual interferences. It is evi- 
dent from expressions (17) and (42) for the mutual inductance 
and the mutual capacity that the interchange of wires 1 and 2 
or wires 3 and 4 will change the signs of these formulas without 
changing their magnitude. It is evident also that interchanging 
both wires 1 and 2 and wires 3 and 4 will not alter the formulas 
in any way; that is the transposition of one’ of two parallel 


674 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


circuits will reverse the signs of the mutually induced currents 
and pressures. 

Consider the circuits in Fig. 10. 

The additional conditions which are necessary for the dis- 
turbances to vanish are as follows. The current in the dis- 
turbing circuit must be constant in magnitude and in phase 
throughout the distance J, and the pressure must likewise be 
constant in magnitude andin phase. That is, 1 must be so short 
a portion of the wave length in the disturbing circuit that 
these conditions are sensibly fulfilled. At low frequencies the 
wave length is not the primary consideration, but rather the 
drop in line pressure and the decrease of the line current, due 
respectively to wire impedance and to the leakage and the static 
charge. 


Fie. 10. 


As shown by Mr. J. J. Carty, in a paper before the InstITUTE, 
on “ Inductive Disturbances in Telephone Circuits,” in April, 
1891, the induced currents due to electric induction cannot 
be made to vanish entirely, as can those due to magnetic in- 
duction. 

The treatment of induction between telephone circuits has 
been by empirical rule rather than theory. It has been deter- 
mined by experiment, with receivers of a given sensitiveness and 
transmitters of a given power, how frequently two adjacent 
circuits should be transposed in order to eliminate the cross- 
talk. Using two-mile sections, transposed at the centre, the 
cross-talk is distinguishable with transmission sufficiently power- 
ful for 1000-mile service. Half- or quarter-mile sections, trans- 
posed at the centre, are satisfactory; this results in a minimum 
transposition spacing of one-quarter mile. The existence of 
cable at each end of the line, in any considerable length, will 


1904.) FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 675 


reduce the cross-talk. It is necessary to devise different types 
of transposed circuits, no two transposed alike, in order to treat 
the cases occurring in practice. ‘lhe manner of doing this is 
shown in Fig. 11. 

The ‘‘ exposure,”’ as it is termed, of circuit 1 to circuit 2 is 
-4; of 1 to 3 is 4; of 2 to 3 is 4; because a transposition at the 
junction of two sections, each transposed at its centre, has 
almost no beneficial effect. The eons of 1 to 5is 4; of 2 to 6 
and 3 to 7, $; of 2 to 8 and 2to 9, #;; andsoon. The tabulated 
exposures are given in Fig 12, in terms of the length / of a 


i 
Ged Sa oe aa ne IES P 
‘<ar ae ae Rey Coane ee Soe 
Dina is EE NET as Vag hme 
canes gisnays aw a) ere ae eo 
oe Gos Coa ea ees aes eset, a 
(cs 2S Se Sa CAO TD RD CEES Cac Cah poe 
ios aa a Oy CRS ANCES CLES GE 
5 Dies aE Cee ae, 6) Ce CE oe ee 
(OS 9 Core om ta Ceens Wears Tnmy ao en eames Oe 
US ees ear os oemen ON ar) Gk em Meee eRg ieee: 
‘yao 00m Garag Go GO ven SS ee er aRU cca ear et 
ly ei eae Gy os Cm ey os ew Cuan ew on Grae 
(ED SD Ce Sp CD Se) So Cae @S 2 CD Es ay cay GH 7-3: 
Ea eo 9 as) ee a os om woo 
1 


| 1 | 

Ar ' ‘ 

Lets Let pl gt | f l 1 
1 

| 


K Z 


¥------1 


transposition section. The derivation of the types is simple; the 
first three are obvious. The fourth is obtained by doubling 
the number of divisions of the transposition section from two 
to four. The fifth is obtained by superposing the first type 
on the fourth type, the sixth by superposing the second on 
the fourth, etc. The composition of the complicated types is 
shown in Fig. 11. So far as the writer is aware this synthetical 
system of deriving types of dissimilarly transposed circuits is 
due to Mr. John A. Barrett. The method may be extended as 
far as desired, but 15 types are usually sufficient. 


676 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF (CONDUCTORS. (Oct.23 


The choice of a convenient length for / is an important mat- 
ter. An eight-mile section has been extensively used, but is 
probably too cumbersome. A much more convenient section 
would be one four miles in length. 

If there are only a few circuits, a two-mile section may be 


| | EXPOSURE OF Type No. 


Tol 1 | 26) 3°41 SOC 127 tS aS Bp Osa been naa 
2/4 

aja | 4 a 
afala|a : 

sfafalals 

ofa lala faye 


9] a | | a] | a] a] a] 3 
10 |} ae | | oe | te | te | | | 4 | 4 

11 || te | | te] | of ae] oe] 4] t | 4 

12 tl te|tlialalelialis | 41 t 1 F 

13] || || lw l( ole [a |e la |e 

14 16 16 16 16 16 is 16 $ $ $ $ 2 + 

15| tela |alwl[alm| als] i|a]a lela] 


Jae, 1D 


used. A case of this sort is a ten-wire line, on a single-cross- 
arm, as shown in Fig. 13. 

The following table gives the theoretically permissible ex- 
posure between any two circuits. The basis on which this 


table is computed is as follows; calculate x from (47) for 


1904 j 


FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 


677 


each combination of two circuits; if the standard of exposure 
between two adjacent circuits is, say, one-fourth of a mile, 
then the exposure between any other two circuits will be in- 


; M 
versely proportional to the calculated ee for the two latter 


circuits. 


a ah ne 
Fic. 13. 
Circuit No. 
To 1 2 3 4 5 
if ry 
2 0.25 ae 
3 0,90} 0.21 
4 2.85 1.31 0.21 
5 AO? Sone On O0 mie On2eo 


The tabular values are in miles.* 


_—$—$———— 
* See Electrical World and Engineer for Nov. 21, 1903, an article by 
the author on this subject, from which the table is taken. 


678 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. (Oct. 28 


The procedure in applying the sections to a long line is as 
follows: beginning at the first pole, of the open-wire line, apply 
the sections consecutively until the last section is approached. 
It is seldom the line length is a multiple of the section length, 
so the remainder should be a special section by itself, if over 
half the length of a standard section, or should be added 
to the last section, making a special section longer than the 
standard. The distances between transposition poles will be 
shortened or lengthened sufficiently to apply the standard 
section. 

When there are several cross-arms it will simplify the con- 
struction if the transposition types are so chosen, in laying 
out a standard section, that there will be as few different types 
of transposition poles as possible. The junction of two lines 
which separate, or become joint, is a point which should be made 


4 1 
{3° 2 
2 3 
1 i4 
i 
: 


Fic. 14. 


the junction of the transposition sections, as well. The 15 
types shown in Fig. 11 will be sufficient for a 40-wire line, 
because there will be certain diagonal exposures requiring trans- 
position only at long intervals, and these extra transpositions 
may be located at the junction poles between sections. 
Single-wire grounded lines cannot be transposed, and for this 
reason are not extensively used. They may be operated for 
short lengths of a mile or so, without interference from cross- 
talk, if very low-power receivers are used. For greater lengths, 
there will be serious cross-talk; the low-power receiver is still 
necessary to remove extraneous inductive disturbances. 
Phantom circuits, built up from metallic circuits, are not in 
extensive use. The ordinary transposition is of no effect, and 
unless specially transposed such circuits will cross-talk and will 
be subject to extraneous induction. The transposition of a 
phantom may be done in several ways. Fig. 14 shows a trans- 
position in which the phantom is transposed, and its two com- 


1904.) EFOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 679 


ponent circuits, while not transposed with respect to each 
other, are transposed with respect to any other parallel circuits 
but are, also moved in position, thereby partly offsetting the 
latter transposition. 

A second method is shown in Fig. 15, where the two com- 
ponent circuits are not transposed with respect to each other, 
or to any additional parallel circuits. 

Another method, in which the component circuits are trans- 
pcesed with respect to each other, is shown in Fig. 16. 

If the regular transposition sections are not too long, the 


3 
4 


phantom transposition may be placed at a pole forming 
the junction between two sections, where it will have no effect 
on the regular sectional system. If it is placed within a section 
it will upset the tabular exposures shown in Fig. 12. If mary 
phantcms are employed, it will be best to lay out a section 
with only the phantom transpositions and then to superpose 


3; 1 
4! 2 
2 3 
1; ; ‘Snake ei 
| 41 | 
—_____—_—. —- 
: 5) Se | 
< aa aa EE SESE EEE af 
, 

Fic. 16. 


on it the additional simp!e transpositions to eliminate the cross- 
talk between the metallic circuits themselves. 

When telephone lines are paralleled by power lines the trans- 
position problem becomes more complicated. It is necessary 
to recognize the manner in which the disturbing circuits alter 
the magnitude of their influence, by reason of abrupt changes 
in line pressure or line current, and changes in the wire spacings. 
If circuit 1-2, in Fig. 10, is the power circuit and 3-4 is the 
telephone circuit, there will be no mutual interferences if the 


680 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


distance / is not great. That is, the percentage pressure drop 
in 1-2 must be small enough so that the total induced charges 
on the portion ab are sensibly equal and opposite to those on 
bc; likewise, the percentage current loss in 1-2 must be so small 
that the magnetically induced pressure in the portion ab is 
equal and opposite to that in bc. The question as to whether 
electric or magnetic induction is the greatest is complicated by 
the radical differences between the systems. In long telephone 
lines the electric induction may predominate; the impedance of 
an indefinitely long line is usually several hundred or a thousand 
ohms, and therefore the pressure is very much greater in mag- 
nitude than the current. In power circuits this ratio is de- 
pendent largely on the load, in any given case, but there are 
many instances where the ratio of pressure to current is small. 
The magnetic induction is usually predominant to a large de- 
gree, in the latter cases. There have been instances of ex- 
posure to circuits giving 24-hour service, from which the induc- 
tion was heavy only during the period of load. 

If the circuit 1-2, in Fig. 10, has connected to it a trans- 
former or a branch circuit within ac, the effect of the trans- 
position is no longer to neutralize the induction. If the trans- 
former is at b the transposition will have the least effect. If 
1-2 is a constant-current circuit and an arc lamp is cut in, the 
effect will be the same, as regards the efficiency of the trans- 
position, A change in the spacing of the wires 1-2 will also 
decrease the effect of the transposition. 

Therefore that portion of the disturbing line within which 
the conditions, affecting the phase or the magnitude of the 
induced currents and pressures, are constant should be treated 
as a section and all the telephone circuits should be transposed 
opposite its centre. The regular cross-talk transpositions should 
be removed from the section. If the total external exposure 
to the power line involves several consecutive sections, the 
cross-talk transpositions should be opposite the junction of 
two sections, at the point where the disturbing current and 
pressure change in magnitude or phase. 

An illustration of this is shown in Fig. 17 and 18, which shows 
the case in which the writer first tried this method, in 1902, on’a 
telephone line paralleling two three-phase circuits. Fig. 17 
shows the initial situation, which caused service complaints. 
Fig. 18 shows the remedy, which eliminated the interferences 
entirely. 


1904.) FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 681 


A more general case is shown in Fig. 19; this is hypothetical 
but illustrates various conditions. This method works well 
until the character of the exposure becomes complicated, and 
then the transpositions become so frequent as to be imprac- 


3 Phase Lines 


B and C are cross-talk transpositions, } mile apart, 
Only one telephone circuit is shown for simplicity, 


IDeA ALi 


@ r B Ul 


All telephone circuits are transposed at T, 


Fic. 18. 


ticable and, further, they frequently cannot be properly situated 
because of physical limitations. If the electric light and power 
system is developing rapidly the exposures are changed fre- 
quently by new construction. Again the telephone line may 


, ah 
| 
| 


1-2 = Constant potential circuit. 
3-4 = Constant current circuit. 
5-6 = Telephone circuit. 

T = Induction transpositions. 

T’ = Cross-talk transpositions, 


Fic, 19. 


be separated from the power line by the width of a street; here 
the induction, while not excessive, is yet troublesome; and the 
theoretical transposition system to meet the conditions of ex- 


682 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


posure is just as elaborate as though one line were beneath 
the other. Twisted pairs or cable will meet this condition, 
although either remedy impairs the telephonic line efficiency. 
A prior consideration is whether the power wires are not sep- 
arated, with respect to each other, farther than is necessary 
with the pressure employed and whether the separations are 
uniform. Fig. 20 shows a case in point, where the change in 
the separation of the wires ab from several feet to less than 
two feet so reduces the field of the power circuit that the cross- 
talk transpositions in the telephone line practically take care 
of the induction. 


e 9 9 efile 2 7? 2 


_ Wireva"was 
«formerly here 
> 


! { 


Fic. 20. 


Where telephone lines have paralleled transmission lines along 
highways, separated by 15 or 20 feet, or by the width of the high- 
way, the following practice has beenemployed. Allthe telephone 
circuits are transposed at every tenth pole—40 poles per mile—the 
cross-talk transpositions occurring midway, so that transpo- 
sition poles are five spans apart, the cross-talk and the induction 
transposition poles alternating. This practice, while it is some- 
what uncertain of producing the best results, is probably best 
suited to certain requirements,—where the method of sections 
would not produce any better results because of the physical 
unevenness and crookedness of the right-of-way. 


1904.1 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 683 


Not infrequently high-pressure systems are transposed for 
their internal protection. When telephone circuits are on such 
pole lines, the transpositions in the power circuit may be availed 
of to reduce induction in the telephone circuits, but in the case 
of separate telephone circuits, on a parallel pole line of separate 
ownership, it seems wiser to treat such transpositions as neutral 
points—to be opposite the junction of two transposition sec- 
tions of the telephone line. The question of where to locate 
telephone wires on high-pressure lines and how to protect them 
contains material for a paper by itself. In general the induction 
from a three-phase line is slightly greater than from a single- 
phase line having the same wire spacing and current per wire 
and a pressure equal to the A pressure. The separation be- 
tween the wires should be as small as consistent with the length 
of span and their plane suitably arranged with respect to the 
plane or planes of the power circuits. 


A three-wire, three-phase line will have two transpositions 
within a section, as in Fig. 21; two complete sections are shown. 

It seems to be fairly general practice to transpose high- 
pressure systems, but it has been the writer’s observation that 
the length of a section, / in Fig. 21, is usually three miles at 
least. On that account it is difficult to avail of the power 
line transpositions in transposing the telephone line, and it is 
usually necessary to treat them as the junction points between 
adjacent sections. 

On account of the very low frequency and the high ratio of 
pressure to current customary in high-pressure practice, there 
are usually no inductive interferences if the power and the 
telephone lines are separated by the width of a highway or 30 
to 40 feet, because the regular cross-talk transpositions are 
sufficient. - 

In the case of a single telephone circuit paralleling a power 
circuit, the frequency of transpositions is a problem requiring 
calculation in any given case, because of the lack of standard 


034 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. “[Qet. 28 


practice in regard to wire spacing and circuit location. The 
writer made a series of listening tests with a bipolar receiver 
of 70 ohms resistance to determine the permissible current 
at low frequencies which would not interfere with telephenic 
transmission over the longest lines—1000 miles and upwards. 
The circuit is shown in Fig. 22. 


HIONSDEC: 


TO BOOTH 


RECEIVER: 


PiGy2. 


The method was that of deriving a very small known pressure 
from a non-inductive resistance and inserting a very large 
non-inductive resistance R (1000 to 20000 ohms) in series 
with the shunt circuit containing the receiver. The listening 
tests were made by four observers, who adjusted R to the mini- 
mum permissible value, in their estimation. The average 
results are plotted in Fig. 23. 


1904.) KFOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 685 


Naturally these results, based on ear measurements, are not 
highly precise, but they represent very small disturbances and 
are safe practice. In the case of short telephone circuits on 
power lines, used for private purpcses, the receiver power may 
be much reduced and the permissible terminal current greatly 
increased. The method is shown in Fig. 24; the condenser is 
not wholly essential, but it increases the selective action. 

The general theory of mutual disturbances in parallel cir- 


MILLIONTHS (10 ®)OF AN AMPERE 


0 25 SO 75 100 200 300 
CYCLES PER SECOND 


Brey 23. 


cuits, in complete form, is too elaborate to introduce here. It 
may be found in Vol. I. of Heaviside’s Electrical Papers.* 

The question of leakage is a consideration prior to that of 
_ transposition, for the theory of transposition rests en the hypo- 
thesis of electrically balanced circuits. The ordinary pony glass 
insulator seems to be sufficient where there are no high pressures 
on the same pole line. In cases of joint lines and of telephone 
circuits on high-pressure lines additional insulation, in the way 
of heavier insulators, often seems to be necessary. An elabo- 


*Electrical Papers, vol. I, on ‘Induction Between Parallel Wires.” 


686 FOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


rate discussion of what constitutes good insulation is not in 
place here, but the best construction in this respect is the first 


essential to successful transposition. 
There are two types of construction in use, in making trans- 


Fic, 24. 


positions. One of these, the old-fashioned square transposition 
made by dead-ending both wires, each way, on two-piece in- 
sulators, and cross-connecting, is familiar to all. The other 
method is shown in Fig. 25; it requires two spans in which to 


Fic. 25. 


complete the entire transposition. It is known as the “ Mur- 
phy ” and the “ single-pin ” transposition, and is coming into 
general use. 

It has the comparative advantages of less first cost and 


1904.) HFOWLE: TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. 6387 


simpler construction. It can be cut in at any time, cut out, 
or moved several poles, at less cost and with much less work 
than in the case of a square transposition. If transpositions 
occur frequently, every 4 or 4 mile, the line capacity is in- 
creased a few per cent. and the line inductance diminished, 
with a consequent slight increase in attenuation. The square 
transposition has the advantage of concentrating the entire 
transposition within a very short length and of not altering 
the plane or the separation of the wires. While the single-pin 
transposition changes the plane of the circuit, the wire separation 
is greatly reduced and this is an advantage. Since it requires 
two spans in which to make this transposition, it is possible to 
transpose only at every other pole, as a maximum, in case of 
excessive induction, against "every pole for the square trans- 
position. For regular cross-talk transpositions the single-pin 
type is now preferred. 

_In conclusion, it seems evident that the recommendation of 
standards, in the matter of wire separations, standard cross- 
arms, and standard systems of transposition, would greatly 
facilitate the removal of inductive interferences and materially 
assist the builders of telephone circuits throughout the country. 
This matter is suggested for the consideration of the INSTITUTE. 


* 


688 TRANSPOSITION OF CONDUCTORS. [Oct. 28 


DIscussION ON ‘‘ THE TRANSPOSITION OF ELECTRICAL CoN- 
DUCTORS.”’ 


W. S. Frankiin: The speaker’s objection to these estab- 
lished methods is that in both cases the fundamental equations 
are based upon ideal conditions; which even as ideal conditions 
are impossible and meaningless. Precisely the place where the 
mathematics is hitched on to the physics, there is no physics 
at all, nothing in fact but an unconstrained fiction. Now, the 
speaker knows of no case in which physically significant math- 
ematics cannot be established on the basis of real conditions. 
It is physically meaningless to consider a long straight wire as a 
circuit, and the idea of inductance of such a wire is absurd. 
It is also physically meaningless, in all strictness, to consider a 
lone electrical charge; and the capacity of an isolated sphere, so 
universally discussed in treatises on physics, is very nice and 
simple, but the student who is drilled in that idea never can 
quite understand a condenser. The real ideas are inductance 
of circuits, capacities of condensers; that is, of two bodies in 
the simplest cases, and mutual inductance of circuits and co- 
efficients of mutual capacity of condensers. Of course, the 
speaker does not mean to say that Maxwell’s theory of a system 
of charged bodies is essentially wrong, but he does mean to say 
that it is not as intelligible, not as thinkable, if you please, as 
it would be if it did not involve the highly fictitious idea of the 
electrical pressure coefficient of a body with respect to itself. 
and of the capacity coefficient of a body with respect to itself, 
The speaker cannot think of such a thing, and he is sure that a 
careful analysis of the ideas of anyone who thinks he thinks of - 
the pressure coefficient of a body with respect to itself or of the 
capacity of a sphere, would reveal the fact that the ideas of 
that person really refer to mathematical expressions or to words, 
not to physical things at all. 

Mr. Fowle says that cable ends on a long telephone line serve 
to reduce cross-talk, to increase the effectiveness of the transpo- 
sition on the middle portions of the line. Does he mean to say 
that it is because of the attenuation which takes place in the 
cable ends? or because of the very complete transposition which 
is accomplished in a twisted cable? 

F. F. Fowie: The decrease in cross-talk, which occurs when 
there is a terminal cable, is due, in the opinion of the speaker, to 
the attenuation in the cable, which diminishes the power of 
the cross-talk currents coming from the distant open-wire line. 

W. J. Lanstey: What does Mr. Fowle regard as the per- 
missible distance, the ordinary minimum distance between tele- 
phone circuits and single phase 2000 volt power circuits? 

F. F, Fowire: Does Mr. Lansley mean from the standpoint 
of the hazard to the circuit or the standpoint of induction? 

W. J. Lanstey: Standpoint of induction. 

F. F. Fowre: It depends not only on the pressure of the 
circuit, but on the load and on the distance between the wires 
of the power circuit and the distance between the wires of the 


1904] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 689 


telephone circuit. In the opinion of the speaker it is not pos- 
sible to answer Mr. Lansley’s question generally. Perhaps a 
specific case could be answered approximately. 

W. J. Lanstey: Take the pin distance between the wire. 
Suppose the 2000 volt wires are eight inches apart, and your 
telephone wires are the same distance apart, how far away 
should the telephone wire be from the power wire, presumably 
on the same pole line? 

F. F. Fowie: The speaker’s opinion, in this case, is that the 
circuits should be separated at least two or three feet and that 
the telephone circuit should be transposed every ten poles, or 
every quarter mile. The size of the wires, the load on the 
alternating current circuit and the frequency are factors in deter- 
mining the distance between transpositions. If the two circuits 
are on the same cross-arm, there is likely to be more leakage than 
there would be if they were on separate cross-arms. The use 
of extra heavy insulators on the telephone circuit is advisable. 

W. S. Franxiin: The speaker understands the difficulty 
from leakage is partly balanced by transposition. Mr. Fowle 
do you depend on transposition at all for obviating bad insula- 
tion? Do you find it practicable? 

F. F. Fowie: The speaker is not aware that transpositions 
have been depended on in such cases. In telephone work it 
is essential to make frequent insulation tests; the insulation 
should be the same between each wire and earth and should be 
high. The speaker recalls an insulation measurement on a line 
nearly 1000 miles long which gave between 40 and 50 megohms 
per mile, on a dry, clear, cold day. An insulation resistance 
of 50 megohms per mile in good weather indicates first 
class construction, with the pony glass in ordinary use. In 
wet weather the insulation may fall to one megohm per mile, 
or less; but at one megohm per mile the attenuation is not in- 
creased to a noticeable extent and the distortion is diminished. 

F. F. Fow te (by letter): Certain of Professor Franklin’s re- 
marks do not seem to the writer to be fully justified. 

The connection between the physical and the mathematical 
sides of any question is seldom obvious, in the step by step 
development, without careful study. This study is obviously 
the occupation of the student, but the engineer is after results 
by the shortest paths; and his education and experience enable 
him to conduct his researches without a too laborious attention 
to the physical interpretation of each step. The object of the 
mathematical investigation of inductance and capacity of aerial 
wires is obvious in Figs. 1 to 4, 8, and 9, and in the application 
of its results to the choice of types from Fig. 11 in treating a 
real situation, as exemplified in Fig. 13. 

The writer has never seen elsewhere the deduction of equa- 
tions (40), (41),and (42). The fact that the investigation is 
an extension of Heaviside’s method and is based on Maxwell’s 
fundamental equations, seems an advantage rather than other- 
wise. If the results are inaccurate or if there are more rational 
modern methods the writer will gladly learn of it. 


vs 


"te I ; 
{ 
ih be 
: ’ 
A - 
J . 
a . + 
a.t 
a : 
° i" . . d * 
a 4 ; Pe ie , 
io "4 1 : >= bei 4 
x i yt y od 
oye : \ 4 ¥Aae ie < 
ae el Lad 
. +. 


-..# 
ee 
scu~ Oe ay 


See ‘ 


A paper presented at the 10:st Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers. 
New York, November 25, 1904. 

Copyright 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


PROBLEMS OF HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. 


BY O. S. LYFORD, JR., AND W. N. SMITH. 


A study of the general subject of electric traction for the 
suburban lines of present steam roads discloses some inter- 
esting features which do not necessarily arise as important 
factors in the selection of equipment for rapid transit lines in 
cities or the usual interurban lines. Furthermore, the many 
variables that enter into the problem lead to a serious questicn 
as to the necessity of the elaborate methods cf determining 
train and motor characteristics which have been put forth in 
the recent literature on heavy electric traction. The advantace 
of simpler and shorter methods becomes very apparent. 

Work now in progress for the Long Island Railroad Company 
may be taken as typical of projects of this character. It is 
the purpose of this paper to place before the INsTITUTE some 
of the questions brought out in the engineering of this work 
and to describe more particularly some of the simple things 
that were done to facilitate decision regarding motor equip- 
ments for cars. 

The Long Island Railroad system has at present two passenger 
terminals in the City of New York, one at Atlantic Avenue 
and Flatbush Avenue in the Borough of Brooklyn and one at 
the Thirty-fourth Street Ferry in Long Island City, Borough of 
Queens. When the tunnels of the Pennsylvania, New York, 
‘and Long Island Railroad Company are completed there 
will be a third terminal for the Long Island Railroad passenger 
traffic in the Borough of Manhattan. From the present ter- 
minals there branches out an extensive system of through and 
suburban lines, over which is maintained a train service, both 
express and local,reaching all parts of the Island. In addition 


691 


6u2 LYFORD AND SMITH [Nov. 25 


to the suburban service into these terminals there is an inter- 
change of traffic with the Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company at 
two points, and a connection is to be established between the 
subway system of the Long Island Railroad in Atlantic Avenue 
and the extension of the Rapid Transit Subway now being 
constructed between Brooklyn and the south end of Manhattan. 
The accompanying map shows the location of the western lines 
of the Long Island Railroad and the new connections which are © 
to be made. 

Extensive plans for the electrification of the suburban service 
of this road have been under consideration for some years. 
These plans provide for the immediate adoption of electric 
traction on the lines emanating from Flatbush Avenue and for 
a progressive extension of electric traction over all of the strictly 
suburban routes, as rapidly as the conditions shall justify. On 
some of these routes the traffic is of a purely suburban nature, 
providing facilities for out-of-town residents to reach Manhattan 
and Brooklyn. On other sections the important traffic is an 
excursion movement to and from New York’s great playgrounds 
at the beaches. For the convenience of the suburban residents, 
a frequent service in comparatively short trains is to be provided, 
but for the excursion service comparatively long trains are 
necessary. As a result, the number of cars per train in this 
system will vary from one to eight or possibly ten. The initial 
service, limited to a maximum of six cars per train, results in 
52 types of runs varying in number of cars per train and dis- 
tance between stops. On some sections the lines are fairly free 
from grades and curves, but on others the grades and curves are 
heavier than would be supposed from a general knowledge of 
the contour of Long Island. These few statements will indicate 
in a general way the complex nature of the problem involved 
in the selection of a suitable electrical system for such a ser- 
vice and in the determination of types and sizes of apparatus to be 
used. In the working out of large enterprises important details are 
frequently settled by quite simple processes of reasoning. Even 
in a complex problem like the one under consideration, some 
main points may be decided in this way. 

(a) The number of cars per train varies from one to six, as 
stated. Eight- or ten-car trains may be desirable at times. 
Such variations in train length cannot be provided for econom- 
ically with electrical locomotives. Motor-cars must, therefore, 
be used, and for all except trains of one or two cars, more than 


\ P 
a 
7 


eort_ ¥ 
WASHINGTON 2 
Zr, 
Sag TERMINAL 
>. 
>, 


—— 
ee 
waooside 


GLENDALE 


JUNCTION 


may 


SOUTH 
GREENFIELO 


KINGS | 
HIGHWAY 


“SNECK ROAD 
my MR ACK TRACK # 
dD \, rm 


Map or THE PENNSYLVANIA TERMINAL RAILROAD AND WESTERN 
Lines OF THE LonGc IsLanp Rat_roap.—Portion to be first con- 
verted to electricity shown by heavy lines. Connection of Atlantic 
Avenue line with Interborough Railway System also shown. 


h 


Syme Pare 


Ah ESBS 


ka death) 9G? Ox GEE aii be ip ign 
TM, if. ARCELOR Rs RE Ng! 


fe Diet cian Fis Ke airs 
hit 3 ; 


Ke 


c's 
wa) 
* 


1904.] HEAVY “BLECT RIG DRRACTION: 693 


one motor car per train is necessary. The multiple-unit system 
of motor-car operation is, therefore, best suited to this service. 

(b) The greatest flexibility for make-up of trains is obtained 
by making all cars motor-cars. 

(c) On the other hand the first cost of equipment and the 
cost of maintenance and inspection is least if the motor selected 
is of the largest size practicable, and the number of equipments 
required is thus made a minimum. 

(d) For a miscellaneous service of the character contem- 
plated all trains, both local and express, should preferably be 
provided with equipment having the same speed characteristics, 
so that all motor cars are available for all classes of service. 
(Trains may operate as express in one direction and as local 
in the other.) 

(e) For express runs of this suburban service, averaging not 
over five miles between stops, a moderately high speed, say 50 
to 55 miles per hour, is found by experience in steam practice 
to be most suitable. For these runs, therefore, it is essential 
that the electric trains shall be able to approximate these 
speeds. 

(f) Future development of the service, such as increase in 
number of stops and decrease in running time, will mean heavier 
work for the motors. Therefore, reasonable reserve must be 
provided in the equipment, and consideration must be given to 
equipment which will make possible a convenient increase in 
number of motors per train. 


S1zE oF Morors: 


The largest motor in general use for motor-car trains is of 
200 h.p. nominal rating, two of these being about the limit 
of motor capacity that can be placed on a truck with 33- or 36- 
inch wheels and a reasonably short wheel-base. On the basis 
of condition (c), this should be the motor adopted, pro- 
vided the train combinations can be effected satisfactorily with 
motors of this size. Condition (f) is also complied with by 
selecting the largest motor practicable, as the number of motors 
per train in the initial service will then be a minimum. 


GEAR Ratio: 


To meet condition (e), a gear ratio must be selected which 
permits the operation of trains at high speeds without damage 
to the equipment. On the other hand, the*best starting con- 
ditions and least heating effect are obtained with high gear 


694 IESG RONRIO) PW NID) SVWIOLIN Tel [Nov. 25 


tatio. The gear ratio should, therefore, be as high as prac- 
ticable and still permit of the maximum train speeds necessary 
for the express schedules.” Provision must. also be made for 
extra speeds which may occur on down grades. From observa- 
tion of the existing service it was concluded that it is safe to 
assume 60 miles per hour as a maximum. 


TRAIN WEIGHTS: 


The motor cars of the service are to be new steel cars similar 
to those adopted for the Rapid Transit Subway. For the de- . 
termination of motor characteristics, trailer cars were assumed 
to have the same size and weight of bodies. The weights 
assumed were as follows: 

Motor Car. Trailer. 
Seated Loads aac) aceasta 81000 lb. 60 400 lb. 
Standing, oad ee ee eee 88 000 lb. 66 000 lb. 

These assumed weights are in practical agreement with the 
actual weights of the subway equipment 

The 200-h.p. motor was found to be the proper size for the 
service of the subway; but the schedule conditions are so dif- 
ferent that this in itself does not signify that the same motors 
are suitable for the Long Island Railroad conditions where the 
distance between stops for most of the local runs is greater 
than that of the express runs of the subway, and the express 
runs are longer in proportion. More or less of the usual cal- - 
culating must, therefore, be done to reach a decision as to whether 
the characteristics of the standard motor of this size are suitable 
for this service or whether a smaller size could be used to ad- 
vantage. 

In Volume 19 of the Transactions of the A. I. E. E. and in 
the technical press of the last two or three years, there are a 
number of interesting papers giving theoretical and practical 
information regarding electric motors for railway service. Of 
these papers that of Messrs. Arnold and Potter on Acceleration 
Tests gives some very interesting results of actual records of 
speed-time tests of steam and electric trains of different weights, 
illustrated by diagrams which admit of close comparison be- 
tween theoretical and practical results. The scholarly and 
somewhat bewildering papers by Mr. Mailloux and by Dr. 
Hutchinson are of interest as representing the academic side of 
some of the problems involved; and Mr. Gotshall contributes 
some very interesting illustrations of theoretical speed-time 
curves derived for a specific case. The subjects of train resis- 


1904.] HEAVY BLECTRIO. TRACTION. 695 


tance, acceleration rates, and rating of motors have been re- 
ported on at length and each investigator has viewed them 
from a different standpoint. The effect of the inertia of rotat- 
ing parts of a train, previously neglected, has also been given 
its full share cf importance. With all this information at 
hand, however, there are still some very pertinent questions 
which arise in the mind of an engineer approaching the 
solution of such a problem: 

Who ts right? 

How much of this tedious calculating is necessary? 

Whether used to overcome mechanical friction, head resistance, 
gravity, or inertia, how much power must be delivered to the motor 
cars to move a train from one terminus to the other? 

How close will practice work out to theory? 

What allowance must be made for local limitations on the possible 
speed of train equipments? 

Some of the things that were done to obtain satisfactory 
answers to these questions may be of interest to the members 
of the INSTITUTE. 


I. PLottED aND Test Runs CoMPARED: 

The power required to overcome inertia and gravity may be 
calculated with exactness. Train resistance, however, made up 
of head resistance, mechanical friction, and skin friction, may 
be estimated only by empirical formulas, based on practical 
tests. Such formulas have been derived and published by 
various engineers. Owing to differences in character of equip- 
ment and road-bed, nature of the train service, design of car 
bodies and trucks, methods of test, etc., there are material 
differences in the conclusions reached. For ordinary electric 
car service on urban and suburban lines, where the number of 
stops is frequent and the maximum speed is low, the train re- 
sistance is relatively unimportant as compared with the effect 
of inertia and grades, but as the speed increases the train re- 
sistance becomes a more important matter. The lack of agree- 
‘ment of these formulas when applied to the conditions of the 
Dale oe Re warem ilisctrated tine Fig > eo The Davis. Yand ithe 
Baldwin Locomotive Works’ formulas are extremes and they 
therefore afford a sufficient illustration of the divergence of 
authorities on this subject.. These formulas are expressed as 


follows: 


Baldwin Locomotive Works, R= 3 + x 


696 LYFORD .AND SMITH. [Nov. 25 


| 004 A V? 
W. J. Davis, R = 4+0.13 y+ eee [(1+0.1 (n— 1)] 


R = Train resistance in lb. per ton of 2000 lb. 
V = Velocity in miles per hour. 
A = Cross sectional area of car in sq. ft. 
T = Weight of train in tons of 2000 Ib. 

n = Number of cars per train. 

The formula marked ‘‘ Smith” is one suggested by one of 
the authors and has been found to give results close to actual 
practice as will be explained in the following paragraphs. This 


formula has the following expression : 


R = 3+0.167 V +0.0025 Ve 


CoMPARATIVE TRAIN PERFORMANCES COMPUTED WITH DIFFERENT 
ace aia «ResistaANCE FoRMULAS. 
| 2-car train; weight, 70.6 tons; 2 Westinghouse No. 86 motors; 
rT oa 19:63 gear; 36-in. wheel; run, 1.67 miles, level; 540 volts. 


800 Time Seconds. | Per cent. |Speed W att-hr. 
Formula, —____—_———-|_ Time _ |miles |kw-hr| per ton 
Total |Power on|Power on|per hr Mile. 


Davis..,.....| 210] 187 89 28.6 | 7.51| 63.6 
sig be gmith Le sbbe an eio 136 65 98.6| 576] 488 


Baldwin Loco- 
arin motive Works.| 210 103 49 28.6 | 4.66 39.5 


400 Pe if | | = ' | } 
o | j 
| BALDWIN| LOCOMOTIVE WORKS | ae aly — 


S AMPERE: 


=} 
ry 
J 


ry 
SHOUR 


200 1 


PER 


100 = 


— 
— 

Bale 
MILES S 


0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 190 180 200 
TIME SECONDS 


Iie. il. 


The speed-time curves in Fig. 1 are derived for a two-car 
train with cars of weight and dimensions similar to those of the 
Rapid Transit Railway in Manhattan. The length of run is an 
average for the total Long Island suburban service. It will be 
noted that the power consumption (watt-hours per ton mile) 
varies from 39.5 to 63.6, the figure according to Davis’ formula 
being 61 per cent. greater than the Baldwin figure. Moreover 
if the conditions were such that the average speed of 28.6 miles 
an hour between stations had to be maintained, the speed-time 
curve of Davis would be impracticable because of no allowance 


1904. ] HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. 697 
TABLE 1. 
AVERAGE SPEED AND WATT-HOURS PER TON MILE 
COMPARISON OF THEORETICAL RFSULTS WITH ACTUAL TESTS. 
G. R. G. WH. & M. RY: 
(Schedule speed the same.) 
Two Westinghouse No. 50-C Motors. Weight of train 29.5 tons. 
Davis Smith Test 
Test No Miles Watt-hours Miles Watt-hours Miles Watt-hours 
: per hour | per ton mile | per hour } per ton mile | per hour | per ton mile 
i 27.9 98. 27.9 79.2 27.9 88.2 
2 32.7 99.2 Bry é 81.6 32.7 81 
3 30.4 85.7 30.4 75.0 30.4 86.2 
4 30.4 pnNaveae 30.6 MGT) 30.6 110. 
DE MaRS Ie Ain ISS 
(Schedule speed the same.) 
Four Westinghouse No. 76 Motors. Weight of train 32 tons. 
Davis Smith Test 
Test No. Miles Watt-hours Miles Watt-hours Miles Watt-hours 
per hour | per ton mile | per hour | per ton mile | per hour | per ton mile 
5 28.3 99. 28.3 94. 28.3 99. 
6 Slee 102. 3L.5 96, 31.5 105. 
7 33.4 95 33.4 89 33.4 97. 


ARNOLD & POTTER TESTS. 
(Power to be cut off at same distance from start, if possible. Schedule speed not the same.) 
8 G. E. No. 55 Motors. 


Weight Davis Smith Test 
Test No. Train 
Tons Miles | Watt-hours| Miles | Watt-hours] Miles Watt-hours 
per hour|per ton mile] per hour|per ton mile] per hour|/per ton mule 
8 228.5 26.6 87. PEAS 72 27.1 79.4 
9 201.5 27.7 98.5 28.4 84.5 28.4 82. 
10 U7 Aay 3) 29.2 102. 30.9 84. 29.9 86.9 
11 148.5 29.6 aglat. 30.6 89.5 30.6 93.4 


698 LYFORD AND SMITH: [Nov. 25 


in coasting to provide for possible delays, etc. Therefore, 
whereas the Baldwin formula indicates a satisfactory equipment 
working with very low power consumption, the Davis formula 
for the same equipment shows relatively a very high power 
consumption and an impracticable equipment. The necessity 
of careful investigation of this matter in connection with our 
problem is apparent. 


600 
PRESSURE CURVE 1 
5550 
Se es aa S 
500 
TEST 
se THEORETICAL ae? 
: | 
Be cra ee aes 7 
Co | 
1 
| 
dt liste! (atte ! 
/' 
/ 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 
SECONDS 
Fie. 2. 
Test No. 2—G. R. G. H & M. Ry. 
Results. Single car; weight 29.5 
Plotted. Test. tons; 2 Westinghouse No. 
“ame Secondss seme 144 144 50 C. Motors. 
Distance miles a. pee 1.31 1.31 Davis formula used in plot- 
Schedule speed miles per hr 32.7 382.7 ting run. 
Kilowatt-hours../. 9.4 .2s 3.83 3.13 Note— Theoretical speed 
Watt-hr. per ton mile...... 9952) Si curves are corrected for va- 
riations in grade and pres- 
sure, 


APPLICATION OF FORMULAS: 

The essential points which we wish to determine are the 
schedule speeds which can be obtained with given equipments, 
the power that will be required to obtain these speeds, and 
the heating effect on the motors. The value of train resistance 
is best determined at full speed, or while coasting; but except 


1904.] HEAVY “ELECTRIC DRACTION. 699 


in the case of long runs most of the power is consumed in accel- 
erating. By comparing actual test runs with plotted runs from 
start to stop, we get some check on the train resistance formulas, 
but, what is of more immediate importance, we get a verification 
of the accuracy of all the elements entering into our calculations. 

To effect a comparison of theoretical results with actual tests, 


PRESSURE CURVE 


THEORETICAL 


= =—— 


0 20 40 €0 80 100 120 140 
Fic, 3. 

Test No. 2—G. R. G. H. & M. Ry. 
Results. Single car; weight 29.5 
Plotted. Test. tons; 2 Westinghouse No. 

hime, SECONASian. ao arsine 144 144 50 C. motors. 

Wistamce, mawlesirr. ere aibel 1.31 1.31 Smith formula used in plot- 

Schedule speed miles perhr. 32.7 32.7 ting run. 
Kilowatt-hours).. 1-20. «1 - 3.16 3.13 Note— Theoretical speed 
Watt hr. per ton mile...... Sl . Bil curves are corrected for va- 


riations in grade and pres- 
sure. 


some special tests were made on the Grand Rapids, Grand 
Haven and Muskegon Railway, and on the Detroit, Ypsilanti, 
Ann Arbor & Jackson Railway in Michigan. These tests were 
necessarily confined to trains of one car each. The tests re- 
ported by Messrs. Arnold and Potter, made at Schenectady, 
were on trains of greater lengths. To supplement the single-car 


700 LEXA HOMO) ZUNID) SiO ial >. [Nov. 25 


data, theoretical runs of trains of identical composition and equip- 
ment were plotted for comparison with some of these Schen- 
ectady tests. The various comparisons made are summarized 
in Table 1, which, therefore, shows the comparison of theo- 
retical and actual results for trains of from one to eight cars 
per train. 

On the G. R. G. H. & M. road the equipment consists of two 


THEORETICAL aa 
IN 


THEORETICAL DAVI 


0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 
SECONDS 
Fic. 4. 
Test No. 5—D. Y. A. A. & J. Ry. 
Results. Single car; weight 32 tons; 4 
Davis. Test. Smith. Westinghouse No. 76 motors. 
Time, seconds... ..140 140 140 Davis and Smith formulas used 
Distance, miles. 5 le eee eee ORiaetits: 
Schedule speed Note—Power cut off at same dis- 
miles per hr..... 28.3 28.3 28.3 tancefromstart. Average speed 
Kilowatt-hours.... 3.49 3.49 3.33. between stops maintained con- 
Watt-hr. per ton stant by varying braking rate. 
TILE: Jv seag-sep aie ena 99 99 94 Theoretical speed curves are 


corrected for variations in grade 
and pressure, 


150-h.p. motors mounted on a heavy Baldwin truck with Gibbs 
suspension. The unequipped truck is also of the Baldwin 
make and the entire equipment is of the highest standard. On 
the D. Y. A. A. & J. road the equipment consists of four 75-h.p. 
motors mounted on rather light trucks. Both roads have first- 
class roadbeds, well ballasted, and laid with 70-lb. rails of standard 
A.S.C. E. section. The tests were made on sections of track 


1904.] HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. 701 


practically straight and level. A chronograph was used to de- 
termine the speed at every revolution of the wheels, and the 
current and pressure were read by observers simultaneously at 
five-second intervals. From these tests speed-time and current- 
time curves were plotted. In making these tests the instruc- 
tions were to accelerate and brake at as high a rate as practicable; 
therefore, the curves obtained may be considered as represent- 
ing the limit obtainable in practice with the existing conditions. 

For comparison with these actual results, theoretical runs 
were plotted in which the length of run was made the same, 
the average speed was made the same where possible, and the 
average rate of braking was assumed to be the same as in the 
actual experiments. The curves were corrected for pressure 
and grade so as to conform as closely as possible to the condi- 
tions prevailing during the test. The observed current read- 
ings were plotted and also the assumed theoretical values of 
the current corresponding to calculated speeds. The watt-hours 
per ton-mile were calculated from the observed tests either from 
wattmeter readings or by multiplying together the s-multa- 
neous voltmeter and ammeter readings. In the case of cal- 
culated runs, the value was obtained by integration, proper 
allowance being made for variation in pressure. The results 
of all the various tests are shown in Table 1. 

The characteristics of the test curves and the comparison 
with plotted runs on the G. R. G. H. & M. Ry. are illustrated 
by Figs. 2and 3. The differences resulting from the use of the 
Davis or the Smith formula are also indicated. 

The, D, Y..A, A. & J. Ry. tests are also summarized in 
Table 1. The character of the results obtained is illustrated 
in Fig. 4. In these tests there was no coasting and 
the conditions were such as to cause a considerable drop in 
pressure during the first part of acceleration. This may have 
caused sufficient error in the readings to account for the lack 
of agreement between tests and the calculations based on the 
Smith formula. The power curves were plotted and the watt- 
hours per ton-mile were computed therefrom as in the other 
cases, but the current curves have not been reproduced in this 
Fig. on account of the difficulty of plotting them all without 
confusion. 

The comparison between actual results and theoretical runs 
in the case of the Arnold and Potter tests was effected in 
the same manner as for the single car tests. See Table 1 and 


702 LV PORID MAINO SWI Terie [Nov. 25 


Figs. 5, 6, 7, and 8. It is at once evident from the com- 
parative curves and the table of results that either of tue 
two formulas for train resistance is reasonably close to the 
actual conditions. The exhibits when analyzed lead to the fol- 
lowing conclusions as to the relative applicability of the two 
formulas: 

The acceleration curve from the Davis formula conforms more 


| 


—TRT Sealed 
a THEORETICAS 


_-|THEOR_TICAL 


a 


0 20 40 GO cseyos 20 700 120 140 
Jae, by 
Test No. 8—Arnold & Potter. Run No. 1. 
Results. 8 cars; weight 228.5 tons: 8 G.E. 

} Plotted. Test. No. 55. ? 
Time, seconds..... 138 135.5 Davis formula used in plotting run. 
Distance, miles.... 1.02 1.02 Head wind, 15 miles per hr. 
Schedule speed 

miles per hr..... 26.6 27.1 Average pressure, 570 volts. 
Kilowatt-hours.... 20.3 18.5 Starting current, 300 amperes per 
Watt-hr. per ton motor. ° 

UNS oopocoeoosd my 79.4 by wattmeter. 


closely to the tests for the D. Y. A. A. & J. car, but for the 
G. R. G. H. & M. car and for the Arnold and Potter trains it 
falls below the actual curve, in some cases to such an extent 
that the theoretical schedule speed is below the actual even 
with coasting eliminated. The Smith formula gives accelera- 
tions practically coincident with the G. R. G. H. & M. tests 


1904.] PEAVY “HEECR RIC ERAGTION, 703 
and somewhat higher than the actual for the other tests, the 
difference in any case not being sufficient to be misleading in 
the results as to schedule speed. This difference may easily be 
accounted for by difference in pressure or inaccuracies in ob- 
servation of instruments. In the case of the D. Y. A. A. & J. 
car, the type of trucks or the drops in pressure may either of 


{ 
| 
ett dial eoAiiminehchea. (SS 
Peal 
ee 
! ' 
ah 
50 }2000 i t 
ees 
S12 | 
aloe ei | 
| \ 
40}1600-} \ 
! \ THEORETICAL | 
alt gale . Sa bars 
= me 7 = iz SS = N 
1 \ Ze STEST 
J 2 \ 
30 1200-+— og 1 
D YN \ 
3 & 7 ~ ‘ > 
= a Y ie \ 
= = <— , 
[Pol THEORETICAL K 
201800 fra sesh ay ) [ \ 
a | ae \ 
{ \ 
t \ 
| \ 
Y | 
10 40077 7 
\ I \ 
jf F { i | \ 
li + 
h N 
\ 
(¢) 20 40 €0 ay ae co 100 120 140 


aie, Ge 
Test No. 8—Arnold & Potter. Run No. 1. 


Results. 8 cars; weight 228.5 tons; 8 G.E. 
Plotted. Test. No..55. 

Time, seconds..... 133 135.5 Smith formula used in plotting run. 
Distance, miles.... 1.02 1.02 Head wind, 15 miles per hr. 
Schedule speed Average pressure, 570 volts. 

miles per hr..... 27.6 27.1 Starting current, 8300 amperes per 
Kilowatt-hours.... 16.7 18.5 motor, 
Watt-hr. per ton 

ssaet eye eam Sener ChOIRE 72 79.4 by wattmeter. 


them have caused the reduced acceleration. In the case of the 
Arnold and Potter tests the most decisive point in the com- 
parison is the fact that whereas the use of the Smith formula 
permitted of cutting off the power at the same distance from 
the start as in the test, the Davis formula resulted in the theor- 
etical runs in which the schedule speeds were lower than the 


704 LYFORD AND SMITH: [Nov. 25 


tests even when the power was applied up to the point where 
braking began. In other words, if the Davis formula be 
correct the trains could not have made the runs in: the time 
that they actually did make without an excessive braking rate. 
The conclusion, therefore, is that the Smith formula most 
nearly represents the actual train resistance for all of these 
tests. 


ieee — 


6 Lo : De all [ THEORETICAL 
a 


\ 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 
SECONDS 
Fic. 7. 
Test No. 11—Arnold & Potter. Run No. 7. 
Results. 5 cars; weight 148.5 tons; 8 G.E. 
Plotted. Test. No. 55 motors. 
Aime Seconds rer 124 120 Davts formula used in plotting run. 
Distance) miles... 202; 1.02 Head wind, 15 miles per hr. 
Schedule speed Average pressure, 570 volts. 
Tiles pet ta es 29.6 30.6 Starting current, 300 amperes per 
Kilowatt-hours .. 16.7 14.3 motor. 
Watt-hr. per ton 
dol LO crararhenclerser. IU 93.4 by wattmeter. 


With reference to power required, the actual results appear 
to fall between the results obtained with either of the two for- 
mulas. The calculations based on the Smith formula are closer 
to the actual results in most cases. For the G. R. G. H. & M. 
car, where the acceleration curves agree, the watt-hours per 


1904.] HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. 2005 


ton mile are also very close, and in the Arnold and Potter tests 
even with a reduced schedule speed the watt-hours per ton-mile 
are considerably greater for the Davis formula than for the 
observed tests. The conclusion reached is that the Smith for- 
mula affords a better basis for calculating the average speeds, 


> 
°o 
= 
[oz] 
8. 
Besa piers 


THEORETICAL 


PER 


| 
| 
is 
' 
! 
| 
6 


AMPERES iB 


ie) 20 40 60 80 100 120 
SECONDS 
Fic. 8. 
Test No. 11—Arnold & Potter. Run No. 7. 
Results. 5 cars; weight 148.5 tons; 8 G.E. 
Plotted. Test. No. 55. t 
Time, seconds..... 120 120 = Smith formula used in plotting run. 
Distance, miles.... 1.02 1.02 Head wind, 15 miles per hr. 
Schedule speed Average pressure, 570 volts. 
miles per hr..... 30.6 30.6 Starting current, 300 amperes per 


Kilowatt-hours.... 13.5 14.3 motor. 


Watt-hr. per ton 
anu gORO Ge CeO 89.5 93.4 by wattmeter. 


and is sufficiently close for the determination of power re 
quired. Furthermore the comparative results with these vari- 
ous train weights and types of motor, give us a confidence in 
all the assumptions made and in the customary use of the motor 
curves and other data furnished by the manufacturers. 


706 LYFORD AND SMITH: [Nov. 25 


Test OF EQUIPMENT SIMILAR TO THAT PROPOSED FOR THE 
Lonc ISLAND RAILROAD. 
Through the courtesy of the Interborough Rapid Transit 
Company and Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Ccm- 
pany it is possible to present the record of a special test which 


7E0 


@ 
fo} 
So 


ci AMPERES 


=— 
o 
— 
oO 


MILES 


40 
SECONDS 


Fic. 9. 
COMPARISON OF TEST AND THEORETICAL TRAIN CURVE USING ACTUAL - 
BRAKING CURVE. 
Test made on 9th avenue line of Manhattan Ry. Co., Jan. 30, 1903. 
Pressure 580 volts; 1 motor car; 1 trailer; weight 62.5 tons; distance 
2065 ft., 93d Street to 104th Street; 2 Westinghouse No. 86 motors; 
gear 19:63; 33-in. wheels. 


Results. 
Test. Theoreticat. 

Average speed without Stops emierenit pete 20.9 20.9 
Schedileispeediwith lousec Stop ace teeeeientent: yf Os) 17.05 
Kalowatt-houmrs sper 1ttne serene ee iene einer ees 1.93 2.138 
Kilowatt-hoursiper car miilesae serie mieten 2.475 2.72 
Watt-hoursiper tonimail clase ra aan ree eee 79.3 87.2 
Average walowabts) pena rain) ett saat ar 84.3 92.9 
Sq. root mean sq. current per motor for 85 sec.... 149.0 157.5 
Startingicurrentsperiin OLOl le ent tree 294. 325. 


Smith formula used in plotting run. 


has a direct bearing on this subject, because the type of motor 
equipment used in the test is the same electrically as that 
recommended for the L. I. R.R. project. On January 30, 1903, 
« test was made on the Ninth Avenue line of the Manhattan 
Elevated Railway, of the sample motors submitted by the 
Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Company as represent- 


1904.] HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. 707 


ing the motors which that company was to furnish to the 
Interborough Rapid Transit Company. In these tests the train 
weight corresponded closely with the weight per motor of the 
equipment proposed for the L. I. R.R. and the motors were 
of the same size and general characteristics. The length of the 
test run was too short to permit the cars to reach maximum 


’ 
I 
\ 
SS 


| 


ole eee 


e 
am 
eo} 
= 
iv 
w 
a 
2) 
w 
= 
= 


> 
ai 
oO 
wo 
fo} 


~~ > 


+= 
THEORETICAL 


8 


ov AMPERES 


fo} 


= 


0 10 20 80 40 50 60 70 80 
SECONDS 


le WOR 
COMPARISON OF TEST AND THEORETICAL TRAIN CuRVE UsiInG ACTUAL 
BRAKING CURVE. 
Test made on 9th avenue line of Manhattan Ry. Co., Jan. 30, 1903. 
Pressure 580 volts; 1 motor car; 1 trailer; weight 62.5 tons; distance 


2090 ft., 104th Street to 93d Street; 2 Westinghouse No. 86 motors; 
gear 19:63; 33-1n. wheel. 


Results. 
Test. Theoretical. 
Avetace speedswatnoutistOps .. a0. saan «bviailde + 19.32 19.32 
Schedule speed with 15 sec. stop..............-. 16.10 16.10 
eilowyetrenOUrsnpe Cli neta mete casters sien steals IE hl 2.06 
Kalowati-noursepermcaremile ma... santas aaeis stn sn 2.415 2.65 
Wiatb-nours per tom Tile weis Gh nin cists roca costo oe CMW 83.0 
AVerace KWOWAtuS Per UhAlMnam. 5 cate celetes =a Chas 82.5 
Sq. root mean sq. current per motor for 85 sec.... 145.2 157.0 
Shisirnnle, CULAR ay OLN AMCs. can gannaouoooaOo0Nc 300.0 825.0 


Smith formula used in plotting run. 


speed; as the value of train resistance is best determined 
at maximum speed, this test cannot by itself be considered 
an absolute check on calculated curves. 

When viewed in the light of tests of other equipment on 
longer runs, however, it affords a good indication as to how 
close this specific equipment will conform to the theoretical 


708 LYFORD AND SMITH: ‘ [Nov. 25 


basis of our determinations. The results of this test are given 
in Figs. 9 and 10. Fig. 9 gives the results of a north-bound 
tun between 93d Street and 104th Street, and Fig. 10 
gives results for a south-bound run on the same section of 
road. Actual results are indicated by the solid lines, 
and for comparison there are given on the same Figs., 
theoretical curves calculated for the corresponding conditions, 
the train resistance formula and the methods used in the 
cilculations being the same as for the other exhibits hereof 
and for all L. I. R.R. determinations. In these tests the brak- 
ing rate was not constant but increased as the speed decreased, 
and for comparison the same braking curve was assumed for 
the theoretical as for the test runs. 

The results in these comparative curves are tabulated under 
the respective Figs. The theoretical run was plotted to ob- 
tain the same average speed as the test. This involved as- 
suming the power applied for a longer period than the test in 
one case and a shorter period in the other. In both cases, 
however, it will be noted that the power requirements (watt- 
hours per ton-mile) and the square root of mean square current 
are greater for the theoretical run than for the test. Further- 
more, it will be noted that the average starting current per 
motor was lessin the test than in the theoretical run. The 
conclusions derived from this exhibit are as follows: 


(a) The motor control did not permit of the rapid application | 


of power assumed in the calculations, time being lost in going 
from series to parallel. This, however, did not affect the results 
adversely. 

(b) At the maximum speed when current was on, namely, 26 
to 28 miles per hour, the theoretical curve shows practically 
the same energy consumption as the test. This indicates that 
the train resistance was practically as calculated. For corre- 
spording speed on the motor curve, the power required ac- 
cording to theory is in both cases slightly higher than the 
power required according to test; this indicates that the Smith 
formula gives a train resistance which is slightly higher than 


the actual resistance for this equipment. The Davis formula, ~ 


giving higher values than Smith would give results still further 
from the actual conditions. 
(c) The calculations for energy consumption and square root 
of mean square current give results slightly higher than the test. 
(d) The theoretical methods, therefore, give values which are 
slightly on the safe side for short runs. 


a 


1904.] HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. 709 


(e) The tests do not afford direct evidence of the accuracy 
of the theoretical methods when applied to longer runs with 
higher speeds, but the indications are that for such runs the 
theoretical values will also be on the safe side and close enough 
for all practical purposes. 


II. Use or TypicaL Run CurvEs: 

As previously stated, the proposed electrical schedule for 
the Long Island Railroad provides for a large raimber of com- 
binations of weights of trains and lengths of run. It is ob- 
vious that a very great amount of time would be consumed 


42 Oar | ee a et ema ra ra me a | 
40/2104 a pee, eee eee 
eC : # 
38 }200-\~ <3 { 
4 lw ADs | 
36}190—\¢, 4 9 : - 
E By x 
a & > 
= 344180 4 ey ye? an ere 
> Le SS 
° o S & os) 
= w aN 3 AY 
&. 
& 3211708 ry 
2 BS 5 & 
z 30}160 cy stilt 
So, 
28 |}150— 2 
WO 
Win 5 
261140 — 0-5 
ST op 
24 }130 se 
20 


‘Ome t.Ou 1.52.0) (215) 018:0) (615° 4,0)-455.. 16.0 
DISTANCE IN MILES 


Picariie 
GENERAL PERFORMANCE CURVE. 


3-car train for L. I. R.R.; two 44-ton motor cars; one. 33-ton trailer 
car; total weight 121 tons; four No. 86 Westinghouse motors; 23:59 gear 
ratio; 36-in. wheel; 540 volts; 1.5 miles per hr. per sec. braking; no 
coasting. 


if an attempt were made to plot each of these runs and to 
make the determinations of schedule speed, power consumption, 
and heating effect for the various types and sizes of motors 
which might be used. To avoid this expenditure of time it 
was necessary to adopt certain approximate methods, and one 
method which was used after verification by a practical com- 
parison, is what may be calied the “ Typical Run Curve.” 
Disregarding grades and curves, a single run for a distance 
equal to the average length between stops will represent the 


710 


LYFORD AND SMITH: 


TABLE 2. 


ROCKAWAY PARK DIVISION. 
77-ton Train. Two Westinghouse No. 86 Motors. 


30-second stop. 


[Nov. 25 


No Coasting 


Square root of mean square currez:t. 


Run. Length 
of Run | Plotted | Plotted | Average | Typical 
Run Run Plotted Run. 
East West |Both Ways 

Lonselsland: Cityegccenie ar cere 
Bushwick Junction pects eens 3.92 154.5 USTs 145.9 147.9 
Fresh Pond PGACn. >. See .46 223.9 227.0 225.4 226.8 
Glendale junction Asccws.sean oon ae Ok 178.2 179.0 178.6 179.3 
Brooklyn allsm- terete eeatene .65 241.7 22075) 231.1 215.0 
Woodhaven! Junction 1. sldenllevele es -97 186.5 207 .0 196.7 200.2 
Ozone; Parke otenaasoreeie eed cicadesiarys She ee .30 227.0 274.0 250.5 240.0 
Aqueduct 2. iis ek tiecce ec skecioses sete oe 176.0 192.0 184.0 186.8 
Ramblersville i 4c )-sionsanviege sue cco mart wie 201.5 ZLOSD 206.0 210.0 
Toward sic tikes cassdcianieveiora cheer shrianeren .76 209.5 207 .0 208.2 209.3 
Goose) Creelew nina .cypencss se tamper 93 PAO SY, 200.5 2021 201.8 
The Raunt). od... 5. d>c0 denned eOOue ee s00. a. Wane. Sitar aie ae 200.6 
Broad Channel, a) ace susvanae meen .83 205.7 203.5 203.1 205.7 
Beach /Chammneliz,ceevsi oc) tenet ate 74 210.5 208.5 209.5 209.9 
Marmimel 3, oaenaectecane centre ere 47 225.0 231.0 228.0 226.0 
Holland’. iach tai crcespercee ee eer +39 229.5 210.5 220.0 232.0 
Seaside: (hater pesca a eee eet .49 227.5. 224.5 226.0 229.4 
RockawayaPanlcc: spac annie ce Galea ere tS 209.5 209.6 209.5 209.6 
Average for cound tiripis) sree aeanneinine 948 199.0 201.9 200.45 201.2 

TABLE 3. 
NORTH SIDE DIVISION 
77-Ton Train. Two Westinghouse Nu. 86 Motors. 30-second stops. No Coasting. 


Length 
Run. Semen 

Long Island City.. Santa feet ye ROKR 
Wicodsidess .\ct). cece wo clea sete neeeet marae 
Wanfiel diss d te.ratacsme slob acne ayer re | eee OO) 
Blimburst Shs iciae wis.staves state iene ae 81 
{ Bios (ovat: Gh ra rE rai SA Actin: oi .92 
Whitestone Junction 2. .5.5--14, 422 eao) 
Flushing, Main Street?) 0.4.95 0eeecl os 
Murray lavlvey cians anc nee .80 
Broadway saens cots ks Aas eee 54 
Puaburndale: west e scrlvar oe eee 78 
Bayside) lines - nse 97 
Doumlastot yon vee cen see tices eee |e 
Dattler Nec lens oi: cieicict.« stave er teens vonen .55 
GreateNeckt aap 2 fa casio en eee | eee 
Manhasseti vnc. ses fein hee foie Ree OS 
Port Washinton ca: seca sleceine een eOO) 
Average sq. root mean sq. for whole run| 1.20 


Average for round trip... 


Square root of mean square current. 


Plotted |’ Plotted | Average 
Run 
West 


Run 
East 


165. 
194. 
210. 
215. 
179). 
209. 
237. 
223. 
224. 
208. 
174. 
233 
199. 
202, 
168. 
198. 

24 


150. 
202. 
202. 
210. 
195. 
195. 
195. 
218. 


226 


202. 


186 


225. 
165. 
202. 
158. 


191 
24 


ONOONOOCOCOCOONCWOONH 


Plotted 


Both Ways 


157. 
198. 
206. 
212. 
187. 
202. 
216. 
220. 
225 
205. 
180. 
229) 
182. 
202 
163. 
195. 

24.55 


SCOPROONOUNRAUNWH 


Typical 
Run. 


1904.] HEAVY ELECTRICeTRACTION. 711 


conditions pertaining to a through run; by plotting results 
for such average runs of different lengths, curves are obtained 
which will give exact results for the actual conditions assumed, 
and approximate results for the varying distances between stops 
and on aa#succession of light grades and curves. Fig. 11 
illustrates the character of the curves obtained in this way. 

The principal question involved as to the propriety of such a 
typical run curve is whether the result so obtained (by con- 
sidering the track straight and level and the distance between 
all stops the same) will agree closely enough with the average 
of results obtained from plotting the time-speed curves of an 
entire round trip, taking the grades and curves into account 
and placing the stops exactly. It would seem reasonable that 
the effects of grades in one direction should balance those in 
the opposite direction when calculating the general results of a 
run plotted for a round trip, when the time of a single run is 
not greater than one hour, as in this case. If the results of 
train runs plotted complete be compared with typical run curve 
results, and if this comparison is generally favorable under 
varying conditions of grade and length of run, it is safe to assume 
that typical run curves can be used in place of plotted runs 
for purposes of general estimate and comparison of different 
types of equipment when operated under similar conditions. 
The comparisons liave, therefore, been made for a given equip- 
ment by making plotted runs in opposite directions over the 
same grades on certain routes ot the Long Island R.R. both 
on the comparatively level runs of the Manhattan Beach and 
Rockaway Beach divisions and on the more hilly runs from 
Long Island City to Port Washington. Tables of two of these 
runs are appended hereto (Tables 2 and 3), which give values 
for the square root of mean square current for individual runs 
between stops and tie average for round trips. It is to be 
noted in passing that these particular tables represent motor 
performances that proved too heavy for the motors and had 
to be abandoned. They, however, illustrate the point under 
discussion. : 

It is possible to make similar comparisons for kilowatt-hours 
per car-mile and watt-hours per ton-mile, but it is safe to assume 
that a check made on the comparative determinations for square 
root of mean square current will indicate the correctness of the 
assumptions for the determination of the other requirements. 

In general it will be noted that the differences between typical 
run results and the plotted runs, even in the case of the North 


uf 


712 LYFORD AND SMITH. [Nov. 25 


Side Division, on which conditions of grade are most severe, 
do not exceed five per cent. for the square root of mean square cur- 
rent and about four per cent. forspeed. This would seem to be 
sufficiently close for practical purposes in making estimates for 
given equipment operated over runs of varying lengths where 
grades are so comparatively light as in the case of the Long 
Island R.R. 

A verification of the accuracy of this method for power 
determinations in service on an interurban road of the normal 


40 }400- 


HOUR 


wo 
Oo 

PER & TRAIN 
ome 


PER 


to 
o 
to 
° 
jo. 

ra 


© MILES 


= 


0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 
Time 


jae, eh ‘ 


AVERAGE PERFORMANCE IN SERVICE, OF G. R. G. H. & M. Ry. Car. 
Two Westinghouse 50 C. motors; 20:51 gear ratio; 0.55 miles per hr. per 
sec. initial acc.; 525 volts; 140 amperes per motor starting current; weight 
29.5 tons; average grade, level. 
Results. 
Theoretical. Observed average. 
G. R. G. H. & M. Ry. 


Distancesmiless2 seu a ne © | hee eee 1.54 1.54 
Timeyseconds....4.:1.440 1 tera acter eke eee 188 188 
Schedulelspeed aniles! per ar enya eee 291.5 29.5 
cdlowatt-hourss taser een eee eee ea 3.84 3.65 
Watt-hiper ton miles.) eee 84.5 80.3 
Root mean sq. current, amperes........... 95.6 


Smith Formula, 


amount of curvature in a comparatively level country is ob- 
tained by plotting an average run for the G. R. G. H. & M. road, 
Fig. 12 shows a run plotted for the same distance, time, 
initial acceleration, and percentage of time coasting and braking 
as averaged on a round trip service run of a single car of the 
G. R. G. H. & M. Ry. outside of terminal cities. The tabulated 
data under this Fig. shows that the watt-hours per ton-mile were 
within six per cent. of the same value for the theoretical average 
as for the observed average of an actual test. 


1904.] HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. 713 


The foregoing examples demonstrate that for preliminary 
determinations of motor characteristics, reasonably close results 
are obtained by assuming a typical run, except possibly where 
very unusual conditions exist. No claim is made that the 
method is new; in fact it is quite generally used. The data 
given simply show that under ordinary circumstances it is 
reasonable to use this short method and thus dispense with a 
large amount of tedious calculating. 


III. ScHEDULE SPEED REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS: 


50———_——_- _—__— |_— Lt eee 
i | EEN ee ae {--4B 
= ee ae 
ie = : 
80-2 se D 
2 ae q « 
i 


id 
Ge 
| 


| 
| 
' 


0 20 40 60 80 10@ 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 
SECONDS 


igi, ale 


TIME-SPEED CURVE OF 38-CAR STEAM TRAIN. 

A.—From best locomotive performance reduced to level. Weight of 
train, including locomotive No. 59, 171.9 tons disregarding light live load. 
Weight of locomotive, including tender, 88.5 tons. Weight on drivers, 
37.5 tons. 

TiME-SPEED CURVE oF 5-CaR STEAM TRAIN. 

B.—From best locomotive performance reduced to level. Weight of 

train, including locomotive No. 64, 232.6 tons disregarding light live load. 


TIME-SPEED CuRVE OF 3-CAR STEAM TRAIN. 
C.—From actual run made on a level. Weight of train, including 
locomotive No. 72, 175.1 tons, disregarding light live load. 


TimME-SPEED CuRVE OF 5-CAR STEAM TRAIN. 
D.—From actual run made on a level. Weight of train, including 
locomotive, No. 64, 232.6 tons disregarding light live load. 


The operating conditions of a large steam railroad introduce 
limitations which cut down the possible speed of the motive 
power equipment. Many of these are conditions which do 
not relate to the nature of the equipment and over which the 
locomotive engineer has no ccntrol; for instance, curves, road 
crossings, junction points, yard limitations, meeting points on 
single track lines, time to handle baggage and express matter, 
etc. There are delays at stations and delays during runs, 
some of which occur regularly, but many of which are inter- 
mittent. Because of the complicated service these delays are 


714 DPYVEORD ego eS \ lela [Nov. 25 


TABLE 4 
LONG ISLAND RAILROAD. 
Lone IsLanp City TO VALLEY STREAM VIA Far RocKAWAY. EASTBOUND. 
Length of Run, 22.97 miles. 


Train Number. 1287 1303 1321 Average 
Locomotive mtdmber. s .i.\ sie es elekeelel ales 72 34 
TWocomotive weighticce cise ste emis stele sila OOO 154,500 
Number of cars. ae siovede (al acsaeletels 3 4 5 4 
Total weight of aia eanahas atone Woe. 186.55 
Schedule time of run. sep syecoveiiw te areas seeasee 56 :00 55 :00 58 :00 56 :00 
Actiaal time Of Tin © wee cise reste in oe oe 52 :30 74 :20 59 .00 62 :00 
Schedule number of stops............... 9 10 12 10 
Actual mumber of Stopagi.ck overs <a ceisler 10 11 12 11 
Maximum) accelerations asec clei eni -6 a .65 .65 
Grade oni which made. cision ets sent -1.00 -0.08 —0.08 -0.38 
Maximum retardation mae + cicteisrseleueiision 1.6 1.8 1.9 1.76) 
Grade oni wihichiameadetiye « .emleeisteteronsis tae Level Level Level Level 
Average accelerations 2)... </..\s s16 ss) a= ak leie 47 -46 .385 .426 
Average retardation ya cctsstaiemusiesimsiedstensire 1.04 1.06 1.22 PoLe 
Maximium-speedt sac cs sci ietsiees oer neeneen 56.5 52.5 50. 53. 
Average length of tum yeccicaideeniiee ae 2.08 1.91 (De THES 1.92 
AVeragel time son mute | saci eistciedrenemelenereiens 4:03 4:48 .4:10 4 20 
Average maximum speed..............- 39.9 34.8 33.5 36.1 
Length of longestimumiin. ate sentences Veer ig 
"Time ‘ot longest, FUM |... once aneelste ea oe 1) :20 
Avetage time OE Stops: sci esy oreweteeie tee lions 0 :49 1355 0:25 0 :63 
Average speed between stops ........... 30.8 23.9 25.5 26. 
Possible average speed from curve....... 34.5 33.7 32.7 33.7 
Ratio average to possible average speed. . 89.4% TLS 76.% 79.6% 

TABLE 5. 


LONG ISLAND RAILROAD. 
WHITESTONE DIVISION. WESTBOUND. 
Length of run, 11.75 miles. 


Train Number. 346 360 318 Average 
WMocomotive mim Wer) sale tenets ts ieee 59 | 35 20 
Mocomotive weigh tre iivsaie oleilelelelatenetieiens ee aii OO) 154,500 139,500 
Number of cars. sie Mosplorestoletsteneai sehen 3 3 5 4 
Weight of train (isan oy av abenace: MOEN RL Cee) 162.85 217.85 184.2 
Schedule time of run. ORCC Bo 28 :00 28 :00 31 :00 29 :00 
Actual time of run. Scevehaleyershats Ge otters 28 :34 27 :34 35 :15 30 °27 
Schedule number of Bi eae, sins Alekewolete re vf 17, 7 
Actual numberof Stops. <. ci. +e aa eereioiiene 7 a Z 7 
Maximum acccleritionts in aeeee 9 .95 75 .78 
Gradejonwihich madeieu|soieuieieeieeee —0.65 —0.65 -0.75 —0.68 
Maximum retardation) .\. ac sce 2 elsteremiete 1.8 2.0 1.9 1.9 
Gradeion;which made'e...aasn entertain 1.07 0.69 1.28 1.01 
Avetage acceleration asus. se «eens cee 44 .39 29 .36 
Average retardation’. <.'ssicvss ele esl esi 1.43 1.5 1.2 1.38 
Maxamumirspeediaraanissstuetscneetete ae 52 50 44.5 438 
Average length) of tins. csc mee 1.47 1.47 1.47 1.47 
Average time of run “. oc sie) eles 3.08 8:14 44395) 3 :26 
Average maximum speed............... 41 38.3 33.5 37.6 
Mengthiloneest rune: pasate eiaciens nent Moko 
‘Mimenloneest tithe oscrenastcie crettmete ieneee 3:47 
Average time at stops. «.uieine saecebn eee 0 :29 0:15 0 :33 0 :26 
Average speed between stops............ 28.1 27.3 22.5 25.9 
Possible average speed from curve....... 30.8 30.8 30.8 30.8 


Ratio actual to possible average speed... . 91.38% 88.6% 73% 84.2% 


1904.] HBA Y ERLE CRRICG PRACTION. 715 


greater on the suburban lines of a steam road than usually 
occur in interurban or elevated electric service. It is, therefore, 
evident that in the electrical operation of such suburban service 
the loading of the motors will differ materially from the load- 
ing in an ideal run which might be made with the conditions 
removed. ; 

After considering various methods of providing for these 
conditions it was decided to make a series of tests of the 
present steam equipment to determine the speed time character- 
istics of the steam trains and the degree to which these char- 
acteristics are affected by the local conditions. To this end a 
test car was equipped with a speed-recording device and runs 
were made over various routes with this car attached to regular 
trains. Complete records were obtained of the movement 
of each train throughout a round trip, and observations made 
of local condition$’ which affect speed. These records were 
carefully analyzed and the results tabulated. In some instances 
the engineers were requested to make the best time possible; 
in other cases they were not advised that a test was in progress. 

In summarizing these test runs comparisons were made be- 
tween the average speed between stops as actually attained 
and the possible average speed if best acceleration had been 
made for each run. The character of record obtained is illus- 
trated in Tables 4 and 5. It was found that thle ratio of the 
actual speed to the possible speed without local limitations is 
‘from 71 to 91.3 per cent. Even when the engineers were re- 
quested to do their best they were able in only one or two in- 
stances to exceed 90 per cent. of the speed which appeared 
from the test to be possible. On runs 335 and 346 of the White- 
stone Division in which locomotive No. 59 made the best single 
record, the average speed for the run was also nearest to the 
maximum limit. 

From these records were selected the four best single accel- 
erations. Fig. 13 shows the speed-time characteristics of 
these accelerations. Curve D illustrates the general char- 
acter of- record made by the instrument in these tests. This 
run, having been made on a level, conforms exactly with the 
record obtained. Curves A and B were obtained on grades, 
and the actual record has been corrected to illustrate the per- 
formance of these trains when reduced to a level. In each case 
the average acceleration over the run was less than the charac- 
teristic shows, but these curves illustrate the maximum that 


716 LYFORD AND SMITH: [Nov. 25% 


the steam equipment was able to do. The composition. of 
trains and their estimated weights are indicated under 
Fig. The live load on these runs was’ so ‘light that. it 
was disregarded. On Fig. 14 will be found two curves 
(E and F) of actual runs on grades,,compared with run A of 
the Fig. 13. According to curve E, a five-car train on a 
down' grade was accelerated at a rate far below the best per- 
formance and even the three-car train with locomotive No. 35 
(curve F) was not accelerated on a down grade with a rate any 
better than the best single performance on a level. 

It will be noted that the curve A was made by a locomotive 


« 
=) 
+O 
x 
Pa 
Ww 
-O. 
7) 
w 
2 
oe 


0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 320 340 
SECONDS 


Rie. 14) 


TIME-SPEED CuRVE OF 3-CAR STEAM TRAIN. 
A.—Taken from curve sheet No. 13. 


TIME-SPEED CURVE OF 5-CAR STEAM TRAIN. : 

E.—From College Point to Whitestone, made by 5-car steam* train. 

Weight, including locomotive No. 18, 276.1 tons disregarding small live 
load. Acceleration made on average grade of —-0.78 per cent. 


TIME-SPEED CuRVE OF 3-CaAR STEAM TRAIN. 
F.—From Whitestone to College Point, made by 3-car steam train. 
Weight, including locomotive No. 35, 162.85 tons, disregarding small live- 
load. Acceleration made on average grade of —0.74 per cent. 


whose weight was 51.5 per cent. of the total weight of train. 
The officials ‘of the railroad were of the opinion that service: 
equivalent to that which could be performed by this loco- 
motive, No. 59, with only three cars would be sufficient for the 
electric equipment. The best performance of this locomotive 
was, therefore, taken as the criterion by which to work in de-. 
termining the proper characteristics for the electric equipment.. 
The condition laid down was that the electrical equipment,. 
operating a train with standing load in the cars, should be able to 
make the same average specd between stops as this particular 
steam equipment. 


‘ 


GL 


HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION 


"1904. 


¥ 28 0°SE 0°¢8 81s 1°96 89'€ 19°T 0°6 €T FCS ¢$°09 GS°SG “UeAITS AITTeA 
“Ushq? 2TH 
68 GCE 1°26 o 1S 0°66 ee TOET Ons 4] UG 0°83 £9°6 “eorewe [° 
0°08 0°0F €°oL SOP 0°GE 0°6 Is? OT {t ~ ¥ 08 0°61 “ysnq yep yy 
3° S8 0°86 ¢°88 0°96 0°&% FG £6°0 gZ'9 91 8°61 0° 8F 
$48 G°86 9°88 G°96 $°&% €S°G 66°0 g9 ST Z 06 0° LP 88° ST “yreg Aemeyooy 
9°62 0°08 O78 |. GY 8z 6&6 90°€ oo T SLrg. ai 6°06 SaSy, “ysnqgzely 
G LL OTe 6 18 $° 6% 6°&%G Té'§ Ge T o's Il G'Ié SLOP 
gol 0° FE GOL O'rE 0°96 Oia. 86°T O'F ZL GG S°6E 
g°68 € TE g°98 8°62 8° GG GL'€ ver G9 IT 0°26 Oe 44 
(om 74 G°9€ G&L ¢ Le ¥ 16 L48°G 89'S 7 g GPS 0° OF Es90 “Yorog uezyeyuLp 
9°GL GLE 8°69 0°6€ Sf LE tL GG ES GS F y SS 0°8& “AYO purysy duo-y 
0°82 0°6E G69 OTF g° 86 cas £0°% Ove & 1°96 0° 28 
£82 L&& ¥ BL L°8& F 9G a 161 GL It T'&% ¢’6¢ 16° GG “weaI}S AeA 
“AYIQ pues] Suo’T 
8°18 0°66 0°88 0°16 L°&% 91° 60°T Gg FI 8° 0G 0° LF 
L°08 0 Te £°&8 0°08 0°Sé L6°€ 9E T Sas II £°SS GL ey 
L°8L 8'1é 618 8° 0€ 0°S¢ Coa 8F'T OF OL 8°36 0° &F ie GU! “yreg Aemeyooy 
¢ 62 Ges 8°82 Q'S€ ORG 80°F I8'T i 4 8 8° &% OIF “AYID pursy Buoy 
8°82 0 FE 8°82 O'FE 8°96 Lo°9 $0 S°s Z PPG 0° OF 
T'92 gos om 74 0 9€ 0°26 8I'¢ £8°G G13 9 ISG 0°6€ 
G&L G 9S GIL G Ls 1°96 o1'9 CLG GS ie) 69% GZ 6E 
¢°08 8° 1e Z'&8 8° 0€ 9°SG Aan Ly ge ZL 8°36 Ore SLIT “SuIpUeT 9u04seqTy 
“AUD purysy su07 
¢'t8 O'FE ¥'F8 O'FE 1°86 Go'F 0'G O'S 8 v'GS O54 8I°8t “uo WUTYseM 110g 
6 8 gos 6°18 0°98 g° 66 69'F L6°% Gr. 4 €°96 SULy. “AYO PURIST Bu0T 
‘ory BI Ives 2 
6¢:&% ry id sapruijsy id sayrur “diy ‘unl 
*OLIy 091A urely “ulea4s ure} sdojs *soqnurut *so] tut *sdoys aed 9itjue 
; Q1}o0e]9 I uee4s usaMjyeq uny uny IOF sdojs Peeds |soqnutu | ‘sayrut 
we poods = ysaq paeds aBvIIAe jo yno jo°ON J 2Npoyos} out | aoueqsiq “un y 
Vs adevIIAe V poods ‘Av | asvI0Ay jo yysue’T SUT, | o}yeIpour} yooys 
O1}BY Quy jo OT]B YT qruvy sully, asV1IAW -Id}Uy ule 
eo) ‘ad ‘Vv 


“SSHT SI SOLS LV ANIL LNG NIFAAH SV ANVS SI SdOLS AC UAAWOAN AXAHM SNNUA ONILLING 
Wa IT SNONUY Nvaunans AoOd VLIVG 


‘9 HIAVL 


718 LYFORD AND SMITH: [Nov. 25 


Taking curve A as a basis, determinations were made of 
what may be termed the “speed-limit” for steam trains. 
This is a curve indicating the average speed in miles per hour 
between stops with the rate of acceleration corresponding to 
curve A, without coasting, and with a braking rate of 1.5 
miles per hour per second. On Fig. 15 there will be found 
a characteristic speed-time curve of this steam train making 
runs of from one mile to three miles. . From this curve the 
speed-limit curve No. 16 was plotted. Table No. 6 shows how 
this speed-limit of steam trains compares with the average 
speed between stops required to make various typical runs of 
the proposed suburban service. It will be noted that the 
average speed of the schedule runs is from 71.2 to 92 per cent. 


ELECTRIC TRAIN goi60 Gear 


=FLEOTRICTRAIN 19:63 GEAR 


0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 
: SECONDS aay 


Jess se 


TIME-SPEED CURVE OF STEAM TRAIN. 
Curve A of sheet No. 13. 


TIME-SPEED CuRVES OF PRoposEeD ELEctTRIc TRAINS. 
Best possible performance on level grade. 
Weight of train, 121 tons, with standing load. 
(All 3-car trains.) 


of the speed limit, with about 80 per cent. as 4 mean figure. 


SCHEDULE ConpiITIONS OF PRoposED ELEcTRIC SERVICE: 


Obviously, to make the same time, the speed characteristics 
of the electric equipment selected for this service must be such 
that the schedule can be maintained with similar speed reserve, 
unless the limiting conditions are removed. Some of these con- 
ditions are being removed and others probably will be. Elim- 
ination of grade crossings at roads and junction points, hand- 


ling of baggage and express mattcr by special trains, improve- — 


ment of yard facilities, etc., will make it possible to operate 
trains at speeds closer to the limit of the equipment. On the 
other hand, as the population along the road increases the ten- 


ES 


1904.] WPAV YE LEC RRICN TRAC DION: 719 


dency will be to increase the number of stops with as little in- 
crease as possible in the running time; therefore, it was decided 
not to make any material allowance for improved conditions in 
the initial service. The probability of such improvement, how- 
ever, suggests another precaution to be. taken in the selection 
of equipment; namely, the provision of a suitable reserve in 
capacity of motors to carry the greater loads which will result 
from running at speeds closer to the limit. 

On Fig. 15 are time-speed curves of a three-car electric 
train with two motor cars and one trailer, with standing 
load in the cars, which curves may be compared with the cor- 
responding curve of the steam train on the same Fig. It 


STEAM TRAIN __| 


ELECTRIC TRAIN 23:59G 


— ELECTRIC, 
eet eas ee 


+ 


AVERAGE SPEED-BETWEEN STORS 


= 


MILES PER. HOUR 


MILES BETWEEN STOPS 


Pie. 6: 


SPEED Limit Curves For 3-Car TRAINS. 
Showing best possible speed between stops over various lengths of run, 
without coasting. 
Steam train based on curve A for acceleration. 
Electric train-with standing load weighs 121 tons. 


will be noted that the electric equipment with the lower gear 
“ratio has a maximum speed on straight level track of approx- 
imately 45 miles per hour, and with the higher gear ratio, 39 
miles per hour; whereas the limit of the steam train on the 
level is 52 miles per hour. For a run of one mile or less be- 
tween stops, however, the electric train with either gear ratio 
makes better time than the steam train. For a 1.5-mile run 
the electric train with higher gear ratio falls behind the steam 
train, and at slightly over two miles the electric train with the 
lower gear ratio falls behind. 


720 £YHORD AND SMITH: [Nov. 25 


The comparative speeds of these trains are still better illus- 
trated on the speed-limit curves of Fig. 16. The general 
average length of run between stops for the suburban 
service is about 13 miles. It is evident from the speed-limit 
curves on curve sheet 16 that a three-car electric train with 
two motor cars and gear ratio 23:59 will average slightly better 
as to speed than the three-car steam train, but that the same 
equipment with higher gear ratio falls considerably below the 
speed-limit of the steam train. From this exhibit it is ob- 


50 


40 


23:59 GEA 
——<—<—<—<———— 


30 


AVERAGE SPEED BETWEEN STOPS 


20 


‘MILES PER HOUR 


MILES BETWEEN STOPS 


Dey. I 


SPEED Limit CurvES For Motor Car aND TRAILER. 
Compared with steam train. 
Electric train weighs 70.6 tons, seated load. 
Electric train weighs 77 tons, standing load. 
Steam train based on curve A for acceleration, 


-vious that schedule requirements dictate that no gear ratio 
higher than 23:59 should be adopted. 

It is also evident from these speed-limit curves that if 23:59 
is the lowest gear ratio practicable as determined by lim- 
itations, the three-car train unit will have to be made up of 
two motor cars and one trailer, in order that the requisite 
speeds may be reached. The weight per motor for this equip- 
ment is 30.3 tons, which on this basis of speed requirements is 
obviously close to the limit. This is also made evident by 
the speed-limit curves of Fig. 17. In this case a two-car 
-train is made up of one motor car and one trailer. It will be 


1904.] HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. 721 


noted that such an electric train, with standing load, falls below 
the speed-limit of the steam train at slightly over one mile 
between stops. As regards speed requirements, therefore, the 
two-car train with motor car and trailer has not sufficient motor 
capacity, and except in cases where speed limitations are slight, 
two-car trains will have to be made up of two motor cars in 
order to make the schedule. On this Fig. 17, the correspond- 
ing curve for train with seated load has been plotted to 
indicate the difference in schedule speed possible during the 
light traffic hours of the day, as compared with the hour of 
heavy load morning and evening. It will be noted that in 
the case of heavy equipment of this character the changes 
in weight of live load do not materially affect the speed 
characteristics of the equipment. 

Attention was called to the column of Table 6 which 
shows the ratio between the average speed of steam train 
between stops on different runs according to schedule, and the 
speed-limit possible with the best steam train in each case. 
Another column of this table gives the ratio of average speed 
to the speed-limit of the three-car electric train for the same 
runs. It will be noted that the reserve speed in the electrical 
equipment corresponds closely with the reserve in the steam 
equipment throughout the list. It, therefore, seems evident 
that this three-car train unit fulfils the requirements laid down 
as to speed, and can be depended upon to make the required 
schedule with standing load in the cars, allowing for all the delays 
contemplated in the present schedule for steam equipment. 

It is obvious that trains made up into combinations of motor- 
cars and trailers that give less weight per motor will be able to 
make better speeds than indicated for this three-car train. 
Furthermore, as the number of cars per train increases, the 
relative effect of head resistance decreases. For these longer 
trains it is, therefore, possible that a greater proportion of 
trailer cars may be used in some instances without reducing the 
speed-limit to such an extent as to prevent the train from 
making schedule time. 


CoNCLUSION. 

It is not the purpose of this paper to follow out all the tech- 
nical processes by which final conclusions were deduced as to 
size and characteristics of motor equipments for the project re- 
ferred to. Sufficient illustrations have been given to show: 

First, that a study of the operating conditions of even a 


722 LYFORD AND SMITH: [Nov. 25 


complex project quickly narrows the selection of motors down 
to one or two sizes, and that these conditions also largely de- 
termine the speed characteristics of the equipment; secondly, 
methods of computation are now developed to a point of 
sufficient accuracy to be considered reliable for purposes of 
selecting equipment; thirdly, short methods may be used with 
discrimination, at least for preliminary determinations. 

With reference to the use of short methods, a remark may 
be made in closing regarding the advantage to be gained by 
deriving a set of general formulas, applicable to all sizes of 
motors. On first consideration, such a problem as herein 
described makes such data seem almost indispensable. When 
we find that only one or two sizes of motor need be considered, 
however, the advantage of so general a method becomes less 
apparent. On the other hand, with a little ingenuity, graphical 
or mechanical methods may be devised for plotting characteristic 
curves, which make it possible to determine the values of speed, 
current, etc., throughout a complete run with surprising rapid- 
ity. At the present state of development, therefore, it appears 
that the most satisfactory results may be obtained by em- 
ploying the characteristics of a specific equipment rather than 
by spending time in deriving a set cf hypothetical characteristics 
in which many important variables are neglected. 


1904.] | DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 723 


Discussion ON ‘‘ PROBLEMS OF HEAvy ELeEctTrRic. TRACTION’. 


L. B. StittweLi: Probably no subject among the many 
which members of the InstiruTE are called upon to consider 
is of greater practical interest at the present moment than 
that which is discussed in some of its phases in the interesting 
paper presented by Messrs. Lyford and Smith. Many points 
of view are possible, and the interdependence of questions in- 
volved in the selection of electric equipment to replace steam 
equipment in heavy electric traction service is such as to call 
for the exercise of great care and well-balanced judgment in 
deciding the important questions which require decision. 

It is especially important that at a time when engineers 
whose experience in the field of traction is chiefly or wholly 
in that particular department which deals with tramway ser- 
vice, are for the first time called upon to advise in the broader 
field of heavy traction, they should at every step verify their 
theory by practical demonstration in order to make sure that 
nothing essential to a correct solution of the new problems 
is overlooked. The speaker feels, therefore, that the paper 
which Messrs. Lyford and Smith have presented is one of con- 
siderable practical value. He will not undertake to discuss it 
in detail, but has selected from the many interesting points 
discussed or touched upon in the paper a few which seem es- 
pecially to suggest comment. 

He desires to state at the outstart that the data set forth 
in Figs. 9 and 10 of the paper do not represent in respect to 
performance of the rheostatic control during acceleration the 
actual performance of the equipment used in the Subway. It 
is to be noted by inspection of the curves in Figs. 9 and 10 
that the increments of current which follow the cutting out 
of successive rheostatic steps are very far from equal in amount, 
while not less than one second is lost in passing from series to 
parallel connection. Ideal performance would imply a uniform 
rate of increase of the current input from starting to the instant 
when the last resistance is cut out. Obviously, the curves 
shown are far from realizing this condition, and apparently 
they were constructed from runs made before the rheostats were 
properly adjusted. It is possible also that the irregularity of 
input increments is exaggerated by the fact that the measure- 
ments in these particular tests were made by simultaneous 
readings of non-recording ammeters and voltmeters. In the 
majority of tests which have been carried out by the engineers 
of the Interborough Company they were able to use, thanks 
to the courtesy of the General Electric Company, a most satis- 
factory outfit of automatic recording instruments which re- 
corded simultaneously and continuously the current and pres- 
sure input; they also automatically constructed the time-velocity - 
and time-distance curves; but these curves are not so satis- 
factory owing to the fact that their ordinates were determined 


724 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov. 25 


by a Boyer speed recorder which, as has been pointed out fre- 
quently, is not an entirely satisfactory instrument, particularly 
at low speeds. 

The theoretical acceleration up to the point where all rheo- 
stats were cut out of circuit, as shown in Figs. 9 and 10, is 
apparently about 1.33 miles per hour per second, while the actual 
acceleration fell to 1.2 miles per hour per second. The theoret- 
ical acceleration for which the equipment of the Subway now in 
operation was adjusted was 1.50 miles per hour per second in 
the case of cars carrying no load, 1.30 miles per hour per second 
with a load of 9800 pounds per car, and 1.22 miles per hour 
per second with a load of 15 000 pounds per car. 

The engineers of the Interborough Company have con- 
structed many time-velocity curves, both actual and theo- 
retical. They have considered various formulas, notably those 
used by the Baldwin Locomotive Works, the formula proposed 
by Mr. W. J. Davis, Wellington’s formula, and a formula sug- 
gested by Mr. John Lundie. They have also made use of a 
curve suggested by the speaker’s assistant, Mr. H. N. Latey, 
which is based upon consideration of the several formulas re- 
ferred to and also upon numerous results of tests made by the 
writer and some of his assistants at various times during the 
last seven years. In the opinion of the speaker, all of the 
formulas referred to give for speeds under about 25 miles an 
hour values of train resistances too low for electric trains hav- 
ing from one-half to all axles equipped with geared motors. 
The fact that the Baldwin formula gives for all speeds values 
much lower than those derived by using the Davis formula is 
probably accounted for by the fact that the former is based 
upon tests of trail-cars only. Every one who has attempted 
to derive train friction from actual tests knows the difficulty 
of repeating, even once, the conditions obtained in an initial 
test. There are so many varying factors which enter into the 
train resistance that even at any given speed it is difficult to 
make a series of tests and obtain results which will check with 
any satisfactory degree of approximation. In the case of ser- 
vice like that of the local trains in the Subway, where the 
larger part of the power is used in local runs averaging about 
1700 feet in length south of 96th Street and a little over 2000 
feet north of that point, and where consequently fully two- 
thirds of the total energy delivered to trains is dissipated in 
braking, a considerable difference between the assumed and 
the actual train friction does not involve a corresponding dif- 
ference in the resulting calculations of the power required. In 
the case of longer runs, it is obviously more important to have 
accurate quantitative knowledge of train friction. 

For preliminary calculations under conditions of speed, 
length of run, and proportion of motor-equipped axles such as 
exist in the case of the Subway, the speaker believes that the 
assumption of an average of 13 lb. per net toa was reasonable 


725 


DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 


1904.] 


Lac eae see Ls na oNa2 
al | eal SGNOO3S = laa 
Ss OST OFT Og O6L OL OT 06 08 02 09 0g OF 0g 0% ys 0 
“Is 4398 [> ie += 
We 5 ie ee 
: 
— 
5 i GOIOW [Uad) S3yay 5 bet ie a 
i=) | let 
| a tT 
s 
S = 
San ed Bis 008 
—+——+ — \\ ‘a 
ae c CI EC eet 2 
cr ees DAN 
=m ae a T HF i 008 
me ie ys SSS Ef im Lie 
a = 
= a 6 
= ji 3Wri-aaads c 00F 
| . con | 
sitet ae i 
mci Bee ciate aaa - 
CCE ists oe = RRB EHHE 2 pe 
lft cid CI Sag 
eee ne =| 
3 | 
i=} = 
Ss Ee “SNIVUL SSAUdXA SO LHDISM AO % OL IVNDA Nivdl 1S3L SLTOR oe 
for 1 bee Sh - LO3443 VASHM-AI4 | ke 
_ 5, 912 OF -YVO TIVEL | = 
2 ‘a1 Ge 82 -SHOLOW Z-YVO YOLOW I-NIVUL LSAL a 
Spx “AAUND G3LVINOTVO *43NI1 N3NOUs [ mi m 
bid 'GaLVINOIVO ONINVYd GNV ONILSVOO ‘1S3L IVALOV :ANIT 71N4 
{i= | > 
cP sss | “ANNSAV GYIHL inl z 
Se y AYNLONULS GALVAS1a NVLLVHNVN fe tn 
a "bO6L ‘bo TIHdV LSH1 Gvou S 
Gia . Saag eal ae ea altel 
NOY SSAYdX3 WOldAL 5 
|_| ‘SSAUND GALVINOIVO GNV IWNLOV JO NOSIUVdWOO @ 


= 


S 
= 


YNOH Yad SATIN 


726 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov. 25 


and as satisfactory as the use of any of the formulas which 
have been considered. By way of supplementing the paper 
of Messrs. Lyford and Smith, Fig. 1 representing what might 
be called the typical express run of the Subway, has been 
plotted. Upon this figure, the theoretical run is shown, also 
the actual test run; the theoretical run having been based 
upon an assumed train friction of 13 lb. per net ton, with proper 
correction for grade and for variation in applied pressure. It 
is to be noted that the agreement shown between theory and 
test is close. From the fact that the assumed train friction in 
this instance appears to be sufficiently accurate for practical 
purposes, it is not to be inferred that the same train friction 
would show equally satisfactory results for speeds materially 


ra 3 le WEIGHT MOTOR CAR-. 71 350 LB. ACCELERATION DETAILS 
zZ ae * TRAIL CAR _-..52'800 LB. ROAD TEST—AVERAGE LOAD 
> +> JAN. 16, 1903. RUN 474. 
al 2lF «© ON MOTOR TRUCK__46 150 Le. AUTOMATIGICONTHOE 
Z| 5/2 | FLY= WHEBL EFFECT.__..-_.12 905 LB, teat Se eC RING 
o (ecmitss 
Ww ui | 
x BEES Se a 
Ww n1|Z s 
c wy T Pi - 
= oa|o PER CENT COEFFICIENT, 
=| =\e  |rractive/EPRORT PER|MOTOR ; 
0) = 20 te: 1 
27 
Z 
18 
| G be eke 
400}—46 7 ko 
* if Nt 
a is Co 
Eile SAIN 7S a 
(ORM PERES RER mr ReNS H \ : ae ae 
300/412 a ian Vi is SN 
| aie LG 10 
10 7 i Koes 
1 | il Bie 
| awa <a ve 
206-—8 < Dalam WH 
| eo / ce) Wi 
JI! S| ! ‘aS Wal 
f RH 59) WA 
I OYE | 
100;—4—_——- So H— 
| a | 
Go 
| Le 
Re 
ps 
eae SS 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 IQ, 24 1 
| aeadene 


Fre.e2! 


lower or materially higher than the speed illustrated in the 
diagram of the typical run. It is interesting to note that the 
formulas of Davis, Lundie, and Smith all indicate a train fric- 
tion of from 12 to 13 lb. per ton at a speed of from 40 to 45 
miles per hour. The speaker believes, however, that within 
the limits of speeds considered by Messrs. Lyford and Smith, 
the assumption of 13 lb. per ton would give results substan- 
tially as satisfactory as those derived from any of the formulas 
which have been considered. 

The speaker calls attention to the fact that while the time- 
velocity curves shown in the paper which has been presented 
are so drawn as to indicate a fairly uniform rate of acceleration 
during the period of rheostatic control, yet this rate is in reality 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 727 


by no means uniform. To illustrate this, he calls attention 
to Fig. 2, which has been plotted upon a larger scale in order 
to show clearly the increments of current, the total loss of 
current for a period approximating a second in passing from 
series to parallel, and the resultant relations of the actual speed- 
time curve and the theoretical speed-time curve. The actual 
speed-time curve as drawn has been derived from the current 
and pressure readings, and by calculation from the speed and 
torque curves of the motors. The speed-time curve as deter- 
mined by the Boyer speed recorder is also shown. It is to be 
noted that for an average acceleration of 1.24 miles per hour 
per second the actual acceleration during a part of the period 
was as high as 1.62 miles per hour per second. Subsequent to 
the tests from which the results shown in Fig. 2 have been 
plotted, marked improvements have been effected by changes 
in the rheostatic connections; as a result of these changes the 
loss of current and consequently of acceleration while passing 
from series to parallel connections can now be avoided. 

It is to be noted that the current input and consequently 
the acceleration can be made more uniform by increasing the - 
number of steps of the rheostatic control, but to do this would 
involve additional complication of apparatus. Incidentally it 
might be notel that the ideal rheostat would be something of 
the nature of a liquid rheostat. 

Another point to which the speaker would call attention is 
the fact that the time-velocity curve during braking is never a 
straight line, owing to the fact that unless braking pressure be 
decreased as the speed decreases, its effect in checking speed 
will increase from the point of brake application to the end of 
the run. He has found that the relation of the average rate 
of braking to the maximum rate of braking in cases where 
brakes were applied at speeds of from 25 to 30 miles an hour 
was approximately three to four; e.g., the average rate of brak- 
ing will be 1.5 miles per hour per second when the maximum 
is two miles per hour per second. Recently one of the air- 
‘brake companies has produced a graduated release which oper- 
ates to decrease the brake pressure as the speed of the train 
decreases, thus obtaining more nearly uniform rate of braking 
during the entire period of brake application. 

Another point to which the speaker believes attention has 
not been called is the fact that the weight available for ad- 
hesion upon the forward and rear axles of a truck equipped 
with two motors is not equal. This results from the fact that 
the tractive effort due to the motors is exerted on a line passing 
through the centers of the two axles, while the resistance due to 
inertia of the car body is applied to the truck through the king- 
bolt at a point which in the case of the trucks adopted for the 
Subway is nearly 12 inches above the horizontal line through 
the axle centers. Figs. 3 and 4 show diagramatically the rela- 
tions of the forces involved. It is to be noted upon examina- 


~I 


28 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov. 25 


ACCELERATION LIMITATIONS 
ROAD TEST—APRIL, 24, 04+ 
AVERAGE PASSENGER LOAD 
ACCELERATION 1.52 MILES PER HR, PER SEC. 
\~ EXPRESS TRAIN 
By . RESISTANCE 


BOLSTER 


A cENTER 
RACTIVE ye ee 
EFFORT WHEEL=BASE, 80 INCHES HH 

fi 
B 
Ike Sin 
\ 
hese 


AB =A;3,—=TE =0.142T E 


“2x 40 


Data. 2-Car Test Train. 2 Motors. 


Weight of Motor Car, 39.16 tons. 
ue oy raly Cart, ane OA See 
ee est Train, 59.30 “ 
“on Motor Truck, 48 885 lb. 


Fly-Wheel Effect per Motor, * 83 tons. 
Theoretical Acceleration T E 20.5% 
Maximum JT E 12 5501b.— 25.7% 
Corrected Fig. 3. 
Weight on Rear Axle, 26 226 lb. — T E 239% 
«  “ Front Axle, 22 658 lb. — T E 27.7% 
Additional Correction Fig. 4. 


Weight on Rear Axle, 25 649 lb. — T E 24.4% 
“ Front Axle, 23 235 Ib. —TE 570%, 


RiGee 


‘ ICSE 16.625 S200 
Vi iE ] f ba t iC = x AU} E 
ertical force a 5 33.8 x 33.8 0.239 T 


0.2389 T EB X 14.25 


30 = 01046 7 £ 


Vertical force at A, = 


1904.] ’ DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG. 729 


tion of the figures referred to that the resulting tendency to 
tip the truck, reducing weight effective for adhesion in the 
case of the front wheels and increasing it in the case of the 
rear wheels, is quantitatively of considerable importance. It is 
interesting to note also that this tendency to tip the truck is 
opposed to, and to some extent neutralized by, the fact that 
the force with which the motor fields revolve in the same direc- 
tion as their armatures tends to tip the transom, and conse- 
quently the truck, in the opposite direction. Taking both of 
these tendencies into account, it appears that in a certain 
case for which calculations have been carefully made the weight 
upon the rear axle effective for adhesion exceeds the effective 
weight upon the front axle by more than 10 per cent. 

It is apparent in the paper of Messrs. Lyford and Smith that 
in making their plans they have kept in mind the power supply 
with due regard to the fact that high accelerations cause great 
fluctuation of power demand on sub-stations and power plant. 
Probably that is one reason why they have been content to. 
limit the acceleration to a little more than one mile per hour 
per second. Obviously, this could be increased at a future 
time by increasing the motive power equipment and by rein- 
forcing the power supply. It seems to the speaker that the 
time will come when such increase would be desirable, because 
one of the things which should not be forgotten is the fact that 
the more important side of the account in a railway project 
of this kind is the earning power of the property and this is 
obviously increased rapidly by higher speed in service. 

C. O. Marttoux: When he first looked the paper over, 
the speaker was led to expect important new disclosures of 
simple methods of predetermination in handling electric traction 
problems. In that respect, his expectations were not fully 
realized. So far as methods of procedure are concerned, he 
found little, if anything, that is not already known to and 
practiced by every engineer who has had to deal with similar 
problems. He experienced a sensation of relief, however, when 
he discovered that the most valuable lesson taught by this 
paper, was that the theoretical methods, which the authors 
apparently disparage, even though they still have to use them, 
are capable of giving results which differ from those obtained 
in actual tests by only a few percent. This appeared to him 
to be all the more remarkable when the theoretical method was 
presumably handicapped to some extent by simplifications, made 
to save tedious calculation. 

In reference to the discrepancy between theory and practice, 
Mr. A. H. Armstrong had told the speaker more than three 
years ago that the predeterminations of the energy consump- 
tion, in watt-hours per ton-mile, when made by reference 
to hypothetical ‘‘typical’’ service runs, assuming the line 
to be level and to have no curves, came close enough to the 
results found in actual working to be considered sufficiently 


720 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. - [Nov. 25 


reliable and satisfactory for first approximations, except in 
special unusual cases. The authors themselves, he observed, 
are careful to make an exception of the cases presenting 
unusual conditions. 

Some of these unusual cases are apt to occurin any prob- 
lem, and this method is then absolutely unsafe and unreliable. 
As an illustration he mentioned the case where the run includes 
several acceleration cycles, or where there are curves of such 
sharp radius between the stops that it is necessary to apply the 
brakes, and to take off the current, and to accelerate again 
after the curve has been passed. In such cases it will be 
found that the watt-hours per ton-mile, calculated from a 
‘typical’? service run, are very much lower than what actual 
practice will show. There is also another case, perhaps of the 
contrary kind, where there is a down grade and an up grade, 
forming a “‘ hollow,’’ on the middle of the run. In that case 
one might possibly find just the contrary result, because the 
momentum acquired while running on the down grade will be 
partly utilized in running on ~he up grade, and the time 
during which current has to: be applied may be shorter; and 
the energy consumption will then be a tittle lower per ton 
mile than the theoretical run would show. ‘ 

The confirmation of theory by practice, which is shown in 
the paper must be gratifying to every consulting engineer. 
Having had and still having the feeling that our theoretical 
methods are really crude and incomplete and are in great need 
of development and correction, he felt grateful to the authors 
for their having taken pains to gather and to present the very 
interesting additional data contained in their paper which cor- 
roborate theory so satisfactorily, even in its present incomplete 
and imperfect state. 

The most novel feature of the paper was the new formula for 
train resistance proposed under the name of the ‘ Smith” 
formula. On page 157 of Mr. W. C. Gottshall’s “ Raue 
way Economics,’”’ reference is made to a so-called “ tentative 
or provisional formula,” suggested by the speaker. As stated 
in that book, this formula resembles, in mathematical form, 
the formulas of Davis and of Wellington, although it gives 
results which are quite different. it is, like these formulas, 
and also like that of Mr. Smith, of the general form 
7 =A+BV+CV*. The third term in such formulas which, 
as we note, expresses the portion of the train resistance that is 
due to air-friction, is, in the case of his formula, based wholly 
on the celebrated laboratory experiments of Professor W. F. M. 
Goss, made at Purdue University, some years ago, with small 
car models enclosed in a conduit and subjected to the action 
of a rapidly moving current of air. Moreover, the first term 
in this formula, instead of being constant, varies with the 
weight per axle and with the condition of the track. The 
formula takes the general form 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 


“I 
Ww 
a 


(0.02 N+ 0.25) 


A ’ 
j= (= +2) +0.15 V4 NW 


VW 
in which, 

A =a constant depending upon and varying with the diam- 
eter of car wheels and journals, its value ranging between 6 and 9. 

g = a constant depending upon the condition of the track. 
Its value varies between 2 and 5 for first-class track. 

W = the total weight per car in tons of 2000 pounds. 

N = number of cars per train. 

The reason why the first term was made more complex was 
that he was trying to find a formula having a greater range of 
usefulness which would apply to city lines and interurban lines, 
especially lines with poor track or with grooved rails, or dirty 
rails. He found there was a certain more or less constant ele- 
ment in such cases or an increase in the resistance, due to the 
rail itself. This fact had already been noted by others. par-. 
ticularly Doctor P. H. Dudley, the celebrated specialist in 
track construction. With this formula, by applying suitable 
values to the constant g (which may be taken at any value be- 
tween 2 and 15 if necessary), one may get a very high value 
for the train resistance even for the lowest speeds. In fact, one 
may, with this formula thus applied, at speeds of a few miles 
per hour, obtain values of 8, 10, or 15, or even more, lb. per ton 
for single light cars, which we know is much more nearly what 
is obtained on cars running on grooved rails, especially when 
the grooves are filled with dust. His “ proposed ”’ formula has, 
in that respect, a certain advantage over all others. 

He quoted from page 157 of the work just mentioned: ‘‘ For 
approximate calculations corresponding to average conditions, 
in the case of eight-wheel cars, the formula could take the fol- 
lowing simplified form: 


(02 £0.25) 
ee 


The formula referred to was mace public in lectures at 
Lehigh University in April and May, 1903. 

Being naturally curious to know how this formula compared 
with the Smith formula, he took one of the curve sheets, used 
at these lectures, on which several train resistance curves are 
plotted according to various formulas, including his “ ten- 
tative’? formula; the example illustrated on this sheet being the 
case of a train of five 45-ton cars. The results were so inter- 
esting as to induce him to present them. On plotting on this 
sheet, in dotted lines, the curve obtained by the Smith for- 
mula, taking A= 110 sq. ft. as is done by Mr. Davis, for cars of 
45 tons, he found that the curve obtained with his own formula 
which is marked ‘‘ proposed’ on the curve sheet, comes very 
close to the Smith curve. ; 

In the case of 45-ton cars, of rapid-transit type, his formula, 
after clearing fractions, takes the form 2.7+0.15 V+0.00156 V? 
for a train of five cars. 


Vy? 


732 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov. 25 


COMPARISON OF TRAIN-RESISTANCE FORMULAS. 


Value of Train Resistance by 
: Smith Goss-Mailloux 
Speed miles Formula Formula : 
per hour Te Te a a a Difference 
(8+.167 V+0.001223 V2){ (2.7+-.15 V+0.00156 V2) 
10 4.79 4.36 +0.43 
20 6.83 6.32 +0.51 
30 9.11 8.60 +0.51 
40 11.64 11.12 +0.44 
50 14.41 14.10 +0.31 
60 17.43 17.31 +0.12 
70 20.€9 20.84 —OM5 
80 24.20 24.68 —0.46 
90 27 .$6 28 .83 Ole 
00 aio 33.31 pet 


A comparison of the curves and of the calculated values shows 
in the case of a five-car train, that the two curves come very 
close (Fig.5.) The Smith formula gives results which are slightly 


‘ 
70 + = sr 
60 i 
z 
6 ms 
= 
= 
50}ta | «$5 
iB DOTTED LINE=“SMITH” CURVE, Sy 
= } he YS ae 
z oy 
40/0 —— + 
i 
uw ———— we 
2 ~~ 
BO < a E> ESE 
o ZONE 
a ay) 
R0 vas 2 ere S 
< ae mal 
Te ; | COMPARISON OF 
10 == |__| TRAIN RESISTANCE 
a FORMULAS 
. (FIVE 45-TON CARS.) 
L.W. B= = 
J 
AO et os eee 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 88 90 


SPEED —MILES PER HOUR, 


EYG eno. 


higher at low speeds, which are coincident at about 70 miles. 
per hour, and which are slightly lower at higher speeds. The 
approach of the two curves to each other, in this case, is re- 
markable. In the case of a single car of light weight (25 tons) 
which represents an extreme condition, the discrepancy be- 
tween the two formulas is somewhat greater. The Smith for- 
mula then gives results which are much lower at higher speeds, 
so that for higher speeds, the ‘‘ proposed ”’ curve, based on his. 
formula, would pass about midway between the Smith and 
Davis curves. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 733 


The speaker believed that a formula built as his was, 
“from the ground up,” entirely on hypotheses and as- 
sumptions, is, to some extent, vindicated and possibly justified 
when we find that it comes so near to ‘‘one which gives results 
close to actual practice’ as the authors say of the Smith for- 
mula. Nevertheless, he preferred to retain the same conservative 
attitude which he had had from the beginning in regard to his 
own formula, and to continue to characterize it as merely “ ten- 
tative or provisional,’ as being suitable and convenient, per- 
haps, for approximative calculations, possibly quite accurate 
in certain specific cases, but undoubtedly subject to revision 
and rejection, ultimately. He had made a somewhat close and 
careful study of the subject of train resistance, more espe- 
cially during the last two years, in preparing lectures 
‘delivered at various times and places on that subject; and the 
more he studied it, the more skeptical he become in regard to 
‘the reliability or value of any formula offered as a universal 
‘solution, covering all cases. 

Mr. J. A. F. Aspinall, in his celebrated paper on train re- 
sistance, which is in many respects the most complete presenta- 
tion of the subject, read and discussed before the Institute of 
Civil Engineers in November, 1901, gives a list of 55 train-re- 
sistance formulas, including five of his own. Since read- 
ing this paper, the speaker had come across dozens of 
other formulas which are not in hislist. Itmay besaid of many of 
them that they “ give results close to actual practice ’”’ in some 
specific case, at some particular speed, with a certain kind or 
length of train, or under other peculiar conditions; but not one 
of them, so far as he knew, fits all cases, even approximately, as 
becomes painfully evident when one sees the way in which the 
curves wander over the curve sheet when plotted to- 
gether on the same sheet and according to the same scale. In 
his opinion, train resistance is one of the details of electric rail- 
road engineering of which we have the least knowledge, and, 
unfortunately, one on which we need the most light. He ex- 
pressed this opinion strongly in a letter written last April to 
Professor H. H. Norris, Supt. of Tests for the Railway Test 
Commission at the St. Louis Exposition. He-quoted from this 
letter a portion which he considered almost as pertinent to the 
discussion of this paper as if it had been written for this special 
‘purpose: 

‘The more perfect the apparatus that can be devised for making 
graphicai records of all kinds, the more complete and the more 
valuable will be the results of the tests made; for, these results 
if published, can be made available in such manner as to be of 
the greatest utility, later on, to others engaged in studying 
various details of the theory and practice of electric train move- 
‘vent... . . | ~ one of the most important problems 
now before the railroad engineers is that of finding a formula, 
either rational or empirical, for train resistance. eats an. 

if the Railway Test Commission did absolutely nothing 


734 HBHAV Y ELECT RIG RRAGTIONS [Nov. 25. 


more than to solve this mystery, it would well nigh immortalize 
itself; failing to do this, if it could render us the important 
service of eliminating say 50 or 60 per cent. of 200 or more 
train resistance formulas now disseminated in the railroad en- 
gineering literature, it would still have done good and valuable 
work. Knowledge, in this case, consists just as much in elimi- 
nating and blotting out what is obsolete, useless and mis- 
leading, as in discovering and adding something new and un- 
known. . . The ideal thing, of course, is to do both.” 

He was glad to learn from Professor Norris, recently, that his 
suggestions have borne fruit and that special tests are in pro- 
gress at the present time, with the special object of throwing 
additional light upon that still obscure point—atmospheric re- 
sistance—which is the bete noire of all train resistance for- 
mulas, though it is not by any means the only point on which 
we need to be further enlightened. The most “ popular’’ 
formulas, we must not forget, still ignore “ starting friction ”’ 
as if it did not exist. We know,, however, from the results of 
actual tests as well as from theoretical considerations of the 
laws of friction, that it does exist, and that train resistance is 
relatively high at very low speeds, or at the instant when the 
train begins to move, and that it then decreases quickly to a 
minimum value which occurs at a certain relatively low speed, 
after which it increases again more slowly. The discrepances 
which are observed in the early portions of the acceleration 
curves, between the so-called theoretical curves, and the curves 
derived from tests, are partly due, and perhaps in some cases 


largely if not wholly due, to the existence of starting friction, 


which is absolutely ignored in making the theoretical curves. 
This means that the curve of train resistance, plotted as a 
function of the speed, is really a “‘ two-branch ”’ curve; this fact 
is admitted and shown graphically by certain authors, including 
Wellington, Aspinall, and Dennis; yet all ‘“‘our”’ formulas, as 
well as theirs, neglect entirely the first branch, showing the 
starting friction. That is why he could not help regarding 
them all, including Mr. Smith’s and his own, as mere make- 
shifts. He desired to point out that it would be necessary 
to do something more than merely to devise and introduce 
a new set of constants in a Maclaurin series of the form 
Y=A+BX+C X*+etc. in order to accomplish something 
representing a material advance in our methods of dealing with 
train resistance in railroad engineering. We already have too 
many formulas of that kind. Moreover, it was not difficult to 
foresee that. the physicist and the mathematician will probably 
contribute at least as much as—and perhaps much more than— 


the engineer, to the solution of the problem of finding a general | 


formula for train resistance—if one be ever found. There is 
valuable work to be done by the engineer in obtaining data for 
theoretical analysis and in making tests for the purpose of 
proving or disproving theory. 


EE ———— = 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 735 


A very interesting, and perhaps the most amusing thing to 
him,in this paper, was the cynical commentary of the authors on 
his own paper of June, 1902, which is characterized as being 
“scholarly and somewhat bewildering,’ with the hint added 
that its value is principally,if not wholly, “‘academic.’”’ He was 
sure that he did not deserve the implied compliment in the words 
“scholarly ’’ or ‘“‘ academic’ with which the rest of the com- 
ment is sugar-coated. There was some humor there and he did not 
think that the joke was altogetheron him. At the time the paper 
was presented, certain ‘‘ academicians ”’ thought it altogether too 
“elementary,” and, indeed, considered it anything but “ aca- 
demic.’ It is some consolation to know, under the circum- 
stances, that requests are still coming from all sides and 
from many countries, for copies of the reprint of this paper. 
although no copies are available. He found gratifying evidence 
in Europe this summer, that this same paper, so far from 
being regarded either as bewildering or academic, was used as 
a practical hand-book. He found equally gratifying evidence 
that the work was also appreciated in this country, in the 
scores of letters received from American engineers during the 
last two years. He read extracts from some of these letters. 

One of these letters, dated December 3, 1902, was from an 
electrical engineer who stated that he had “ found this paper 
exceedingly interesting,” and particularly so, because he had 
‘“recently carried out a similar series of calculations for the 
Manhattan Elevated Co.’”’ He added: ‘‘ Had your paper been 
in ‘my possession at that time, it would have been of great value 
to me in this work, and I am sure that this paper will become 
a hand-book of great value to all who are engaged in work of 
this nature.’’ Another letter, received from ‘‘ 8 Bridge Street,” 
New York, under date of December 29, 1902, contained.a re- 
quest for two more copies of the reprint of the paper on “‘ Speed- 
Time Curves’”’ stating that the first copy was practically worn 
out from having been used ‘‘a very great deal.’’ The third 
letter, acknowledging receipt of the two letters in question, 
said: 

‘As I wrote you the other day, I have already had occasion 
to make use of these and have found them of great service to 
me in various railway problems. I most heartily concur with 
the expressions that I have heard from many engineers that 
this presentation of the subject is the most exhaustive and thor- 
ough that has ever been attempted.” 

The speaker thought that further evidence on this point was 
unnecessary. 

His paper was intended to cover only one detail of the art of 
predetermination in electric traction problems—the plotting of 
speed-time curves. It merely sought to present means whereby 
an approximative calculation or even a “‘ guess,” in regard to 
the equipment required for a given electric railroad service, 
could be tested or analyzed, with more or less precision, ac- 


736 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov. 25 


cording to the importance of the case. He did not, at that 


time, and did not, at the present time, take the position that 
either this method or any other theoretical method known to 
him can be followed with confidence or safety, without the exer- 
cise of some judgment. It was very natural, therefore, that 
he should concur fully with the authors in the opinion 
expressed on page 692 that “important details are fre- 
quently settled by quite simple processes of reasoning.’ The 
paragraphs (a to f) on pp. 692 and 693 might, almost 
be characterized as ‘‘axioms,’’ for they are so _ self- 
evident as to require no demonstration or argument. Every 
engineer using a little common sense, would, he thought, do 
these things naturally, as a matter of course. He could not 
believe that any engineer having had even a little experience 
in any kind of work, would reglect to canvass the situation 
thoroughly at the outset, so as to ascertain the require- 
ments of the case, or that he would fail to consider the 
possibilities as well as the limitations created by them and also 
to appreciate the extent to which they influence the character 
of the equipment, in a given case. In all the cases that have 
come to his knowledge the process recommended by the authors 
was substantially that followed. In almost every case he had 
found certain features or requirements which decide and settle 
some point in a peremptory manner, rendering discussion or 
analysis not only useless but even ridiculous. It usually needs 
but very little study, and very little calculation, if any, to ascer- 
tain the limits between which the choice of motors must be made, 
and even to narrow these limits until one knows that the choice 
lies between two or three sizes only. 

Answering one of the questions propounded on page 695; 
viz., how much of this tedious calculating is necessary? He 
should say, simply, ‘‘ just what and only what cannot be avoided.” 
His experience showed that the “ amount”’ of calculating and 
its “‘ tediousness ’’ both depend greatly on the man who is 
doing the calculating. 

To take one extreme case, a person who is totally inexperi- 
enced, even though competent technically, might have to make 
the “ tedious calculations ” an almost endless number of times, 
for innumerable hypothetical cases, based on as many kinds of 
equipment, and yet he might not be able to avoid making a 
serious mistake. To take another extreme case, an engineer 
having had wide experience with very similar or perhaps almost 
identical cases, and having good judgment, might see and might 
be able to give “ offhand’ without any calculating whatever, 
the best solution of the problem. He may have, from expe- 
rience, from data, and from statistics in his possession, his in- 
telligence, etc., that ability to grasp and “ size up ”’ the situation 
which make the case both clear and simple to him and enables 
him to do by intuition, let us say “ guess,” if we prefer, what 
others could not accomplish even with the most comprehensive 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 737 


calculations. Between these two extremes, there are almost as 
many cases as theré are kinds of men; but, after all, they all 
proceed by substantially the same process, within their limita- 
tions of intellectual equipment, knowledge, and experience. 
That process is essentially empirical, when it can not be rational; 
and in this case,it can not become rational until the theory has 
been further developed, no matter by what means. To put it 
in simple plain language, that process is simply this: ‘‘ look the 
case over carefully; take up what you ‘ figure out,’ what you ‘ guess,’ 
or what you ‘hope’ or presume (either from your knowledge or 
experience, or that of others), wll best suit it; and then use the 
best means at your command to ascertain how nearly or how badly 
at fits; and 1}, at first, you don’t succeed, ‘try, try again.’’’ If 
he understood the authors, this description also covered their 
method of procedure fairly well. He had had to do this re- 
peatedly in cases where the path was unbeaten and uncertain, 
as it is in analyzing problems in electric traction. So have, 
doubtless, many others. But he had, each time, done it from 
necessity, from want of a better way, more than from choice. 
He realized that there ought to be a more direct way, a more 
rational way; and when once that rational way was accessible, 
he followed it. 

He had no greater fondness for tedious calculation than the 
average engineer. At the same time,he did not believe that it 
should be shirked so long as it can accomplish a useful pur- 
pose. The “limit,” in this case, depends largely on the 
thoroughness with which the engineer is accustomed to do his 
calculating and the degree of precision with which he can content 
himself. He knew a few engineers who are, perhaps, open to 
criticism for excess of precision in their work; but he also knew 
many, indeed very many, who are too much open to criticism 
for exactly the opposite reason. 

He greatly favored and gladly welcomed any new develop- 
ments in methods of predetermination, whereby the work 
is simplified. He probably disagreed with most of the others, 
however, in stating that he anticipated more progress in methods 
from the theoretical than from the practical side. He said this, 
bearing in mind the great value of the statistical method in 
furnishing clues and short cuts whereby a desired result can 
be obtained, or whereby the possibilities can be ascertained in 
a much more simple and direct manner. The very excellent 
paper by Mr. A. H. Armstrong, on the “heating of railway 
motors,”’ read before the INsTITUTE, was a magnificent example 
of the manner in which statistics furnish clues to newer and 
simpler methods; but such papers and presentations of stat- 
istics or the conclusions based upon them, do so merely to the 
extent that they simplify, develop, perfect or correct theory. 

In conclusion, he recalled some remarks made by him 
at the Niagara Falls convention, in the discussion of Mr. F. 
W. Carter’s paper on predeterminations in railroad work, which 


738 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov. 25 


show that he did not believe specially in plotting speed-time curves 
for a pastime, even though he were the author ofan ‘‘ academic” 
paper on that subject. He quoted, emphasizing a few words: 
‘Consequently, it is not enough to have a means of readily 
plotting speed-time curves. We want more than a means of 
readily plotting the subsidiary curves,—we want means of ob- 
viating the plotting of them, and of obtaining, nevertheless, the 
results which they would give us, and which we now have to ob- 
tain by plotting them and laboriously integrating them by 
mechanical methods.’ The thought in his mind, at the time 
he said this, was that these curves, including the speed-time 
curve itself, though desirable for graphically picturing the re- 
sults, are not necessarily indispensable as instruments or means 
for obtaining these results in the first place. He already had this 
thought even at the time his paper was read, as the discussion 
shows. 

He believed this now just as fully as he did two vears ago. In- 
deed, he believed this now even more fully than he did when he said 
it, because he had since that time made some progress of a 
satisfactory character in that direction, the results of which will 
be made public in due time. 

H. Warp Leonarp: The title of the paper of the evening is 
“Heavy Electric Traction.”’ The speaker’s remarks will bear 
more on what might be termed Heaviest Electric Traction. As 
the title of the paper seems to make it proper, the speaker 
would like to touch upon the subject of operation of the heaviest 
electric traction, and bring out some figures which have been 
obtained from various sources, and should prove of interest. 

One of the points upon which electrical engineers would like 
information in considering the possibilities of trunk line electric 
traction, is the power required. The speaker has arrived at 
an approximate average figure for this of about 125 h.p. per mile 
of line. This has been obtained by taking the total maximum 
horse power of the steam locomotives and the total mileage of 
the railroad. systems. 

In the case of the Pennsylvania road, the figure is in the 
neighborhood of 550 h.p. per mile of line, and in the case of a 
few roads which have very heavy freight service, such as the 
Pittsburg & Lake Erie, and the Bessemer & Lake Erie, rough 
estimates show as high as 1000 h.p. per mile. 

The steam locomotive of the latest type and largest power 
costs with its tender about 5c. per lb., but when the weight 
upon the drivers only is considered, the cost figures 9c. per lb 
Now with the price per lb., which has been reached in electric 
generators, as a basis of calculation, it is reasonable to suppose 
in the case of the heaviest electric locomotives, where the 
horse power will be relatively low compared with the weight, 
that they can be made to sell for less than 9c. per lb. on drivers. 
when they have been brought to standard types. 

The speaker thinks that the question of the application of 


1304.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 739 


the electric locomotive is one which is largely dependent on 
the horse power per mile of steam service which it can replace, 
and that in cases where 250 h.p. per mile of line is employed, 
“the electric locomotive can replace the steam locomotive with 
a very decided economy. In this connection it will be of 
interest to state that in the case of the many modern types 
of freight locomotives, the cost of maintenance per mile run 
is as much as the cost of the fuel per mile run. This, at first 
sight, seems almost impossible, but it is a fact that $3500 per 
annum is the cost of fuel, and $3500 per annum is the cost of 
maintenance for locomotives of the heaviest type, such as the 
2-10-2 type of the Santa Fé locomotives. 

Referring to some of the comments which have been made 
about short and ready methods of reaching approximate re- 
sults, the speaker uses one which perhaps may be useful in 
calculating the horse power at the draw-bar: Multiply the miles 
per hour at which the train is moving by the pull in pounds 
at the draw-bar and double that product; this will equal the 
watts. This is correct within a very small fraction. Striking 
off the three right-hand figures gives the kilowatts; and by 
increasing the last result by one-third, the horse power is given. 
For example, a locomotive of 30 000-lb. draw-bar pull running 
at 20 miles an hour, gives 1200 kw. or 1600 h.p. at the draw-bar. 

The speaker wishes to draw attention to the fact that this 
paper, and the comments which have been made upon it, illus- 
trate the importance of having for heavy electric traction and 
especially for the heaviest electric traction, such methods as 
will secure the maximum possible draw-bar pull from certain 
definite horse power and weight on drivers. 

It is a fact which most people do not appreciate that a freight 
locomotive of the most modern type, which will develop 1400 
h.p. going at 20 miles an hour on a level, when it comes to the 
heaviest grade, and its speed falls to six miles an hour, will 
then be producing in the neighborhood of only 700 h.p. 
That is just the time when, instead of producing half the 
horse power that is produced on the level, there is needed a 
locomotive that will produce three to six times the horse power 
ordinarily required on the level. In this regard the electric 
locomotive has important characteristics that a steam locomotive 
lacks. It has the ability, for the short time required to cover 
grades a few miles in length, to respond to a very great demand 
for overload capacity or overload currents without the heating 
eitects accumulating sufficiently to harm it. In the case of 
heavy grades of 2 and 2.5 per cent. the horse power of the 
locomotive, necessary to maintain the speed of the train 
and prevent traffic congestion, is from three to four times 
the horse power on the level. Three steam locomotives, ap- 
plied to atrain on grades of this character, do not produce 
more tham one and one-half times the horse power that is pro- 
duced by one of these locomotives on the level. And yet the 
demand for power is, of course, greatest on grades. 


740 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov. 25 


Heretofore in discussing the possible application of electric 
locomotives to trunk line use, the question has been narrowed 
down to the consideration as to whether or not fuel can be 
saved—whether power can be generated at a distant station 
and transmitted more cheaply to the locomotive than by 
having independent sources of power in each locomotive. The 
point has also been much discussed whether or not some labor 
cost may not be saved in driving the electric locomotive. 
These points are trivial in connection with this problem. As- 
suming $100 of receipts for a railway, the fuel cost represented 
in the earning of that $100 is between seven and eight per cent. 
The total cost of everything which can be charged up against 
the power, including the shops and everything of that kind, 
will not run as high as 20 per cent. Given a road where the 
movement of freight is pressing, and the road is demanding 
more locomotives to haul the traffic, it is evident that if there 
can be applied to the train twice the horse power now ob- 
tained from steam locomotives the receipts can, in a given 
length of time, be doubled and at a comparatively slight ad- 
ditional expense. 

W.S. Franxiin: It seems to the speaker that in a matter 
like this—of the relation between train speed and train fric- 
tion—in which there is the element of chance, that one of the 
most important things to be found out in tests is what one 
might call the probable variation (analogous to probable error 
of a measurement, only here it is not an error but an actual 
variation of the thing measured). 

To make the thing more definite, the speaker thinks that 
there is an important element of reality in what many of you 
are pleased to call the discrepancy among these various curves 
of train friction. There is no theoretical relationship between 
friction and speed; and there can be no ultimate theoretical 
solution of this problem. There is too great an element of 
chance involved. Strictly speaking, it is a matter which de- 
pends upon the conjunction of an infinite number of fortuitous 
elements, and such a problem cannot be rigorously formulated. 

The speaker suggests that one of the most important practical 
results from a set of tests would be the establishment of the 
probable variation of friction in different runs, so that the de- 
signer of a car equipment would know the factor of safety to 
allow in choosing the motor to be used in order to make pro- 
vision for the probable discrepancy between the calculated 
amount of power—the actual mean amount of power observed 
during the many runs of the test—and the actual amount of 
power likely to be consumed in a series of runs in service. 

In a test involving many individual runs, not only should 
the mean be taken and used as an engineering datum, but 
also due attention should be paid to the discrepancies, and 
these discrepancies should be formulated by the laws of prob- 
abilities and the result used as an important engineering datum. 


4 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 741 


The discrepancy among different friction speed curves, in so 
far as these curves do not go beyond the limits of the observa- 
tions upon which the curves are based, must beg ascribed to 
chance except in so far as the different conditions are specifiable 
under which the observations are made. The speaker doubts 
very much whether any full specification of this kind could be 
made. He is inclined to look upon the discrepancies of these 
curves as largely fortuitous. You will note indeed that these 
discrepancies are slight in the observed parts of the curves. 
The exterpolated parts of the curves are absolutely meaningless. 

A. H. Armstronc: In looking over this paper it is noted 
that two thirds of it is devoted to discussing two train formulas, 
one devised by one of the authors and the other by Mr. Davis. 
It is not the intention in taking up the discussion to determine 
whether the formula devised by Mr. Davis or by Mr. Smith, 
or the indiscretion perpetrated by Mr. Mailloux two years ago 
and admitted by him a few minutes since, is correct. But an 
attempt will be made to prove that given any formula of reason- 
able accuracy, holding true for speeds up to 40 miles an hour, 
it would be impossible with careful and accurate calculations 
to arrive at the results noted in this paper. 

Turning first to page 704, there is given in Figs. 7 and 8, 
in full lines, a reproduction of some speed-time curves taken at 
Schenectady, and in dotted lines the calculated results of the 
Davis and Smith formulas. Referring to Fig. 8, two things 
are noted, one of which is that the 670 amperes does not agree 
with the 42 miles an hour with the equipment cited when run- 
ning at 570 volts. The actual speed given with this current, 
according to the speed-torque curves of the motor is 38.8 miles, 
or, in other words, it practically duplicates the Davis curve 
given on the previous page. To get a speed of 42 miles at 
570 volts requires a minimum input of 600 amperes, or 70 
amperes less than that given in the curve. Any calculations 
given here are open to some criticism, as they were made while 
coming down from Schenectady on a train running at 60 miles 
an hour; and those who have worked a slide rule under like 
conditions know the difficulty of ‘arriving at accurate results. 
Referring to Fig. 7, the minimum current is given as about 
720 amperes, and corresponds very closely to the actual speed ; 
but it must be pointed out that the better showing of the Smith 
formula, on curve Fig. 8, is not due to the somewhat lower fric- 
tion of 2.5 lb. per ton at 40 miles an hour, but to the incon- 
sistent method of calculating the two curves. For instance, in 
Fig. 7, the current represents a constant rate of 720 amperes, 
while the time-speed curve still shows an increasing speed for 
at least 40 seconds during the latter part of the time the power 
is applied, and gives results which are somewhat inconsistent. 

In dealing with the speed-time curves given in this paper, 
two or three sources of inaccuracy are present which perhaps 
have not been fully taken account of by the authors. The 


742 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov 25 


first three sets of curves are stated to be plotted from readiags 
taken every five seconds by the observers watching a more or 
less dead-beat ammeter. The Arnold-Potter tests were taken 
with two-second readings, with one man reading, another jotting 
down the results, and a second group of observers reading 
maximum and minimum current values and time at which 
they occurred in order to arrive at the rheostatic peaks. Even 
with the precautions taken in the Arnold-Potter tests, watt- 
meter readings show that the product of volts and amperes was 
from 5 to 10 per cent. below the carefully calibrated wattmeter 
results. What the results would have been with five-second 
instead of two-second readings is open to a good deal of com- 
ment, and the curves in Figs. 2 and 3 cannot be looked upon 
as forming a very accurate basis with which to compare cal- 
culated results. Referring to Fig. 4 it is noted that three re- 
sults are compared, one tested and two calculated, with very 
different braking rates. No obvious reason is given for the 
rates being different, and the effect of the more rapid braking 
rate is equally apparent as a more rapid accelerating rate, so 
that the theoretical value of the Smith formula plotted to the 
maximum braking rate would give a somewhat lower energy 
input. The 94 watt-hours per ton-mile given would drop 
below that figure and show a still greater discrepancy with 
the test value of 99 watt-hours if the more rapid braking were 
used for all three curves. 

Referring to Fig. 5, it is not apparent why the authors should 
have allowed the calculated run in dotted lines to fall so far 
below the actual acceleration observed in the test run, while 
on the next page in comparing the Smith formula the actually 
observed acceleration rate is closely followed. The effect of 
using a lower rate of acceleration with the Davis curve is to 
cut out any coasting and thereby to increase considerably the 
watt-hours per ton-mile, not on account of the small increased 
pounds per ton friction, but due to the absence of coasting. 
On Fig. 6 it is found that the Smith formula enables the run to 
be made in some five seconds less than the actual test run, 
giving a calculated value of 72 watt-hours as compared with 
79.4 by wattmeter in the test. If the time had been increased 
to the 136 odd seconds of the test run, the 72 watt-hours would 
still further be’ reduced by the introduction of more coasting. 
so that as an estimate the comparison would be for 66 or 68 
watt-hours calculated against 79.4 by wattmeter, a result which 
is not very close even for an approximation. 

On Fig. 9, page 706, it is noted that the theoretical calculated 
energy consumption of the train is some 10 per cent. higher 
than the test results, although the dotted line shown is at a 
lower friction rate than the test value; in other words, the 
formula used gave a lower friction value than was obtained in 
the test, but the calculated watt-hours per ton-mile were greater. 
which is inconsistent. On the next page, Fig. 10, the dotted 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 743 


line and full line show practically the same coasting curve, fol- 
lowing very closely, and yet the calculated energy consumption 
is 83 watt-hours per ton-mile, against 77 in the test; and this 
obtains also with the higher average acceleration rate of the 
calculated curve. We should naturally expect that with the 
same friction rate, which is the only undetermined factor enter- 
ing into the calculation of the speed-time curve, that the result 
would have been much closer than that given. 

Passing on to page 711, it says, ‘“‘ It is safe to assume that a 
check made on the comparative determinations for square 
root of mean square current will indicate the correctness of 
the assumptions for the determination of the other require- 
ments.”’ The impression obtained by reading this page and 
others following is that the chief object in developing a series 
of speed-time curves was to obtain the square root of the mean 
square current, and that this current value was the controlling 
factor entering into the selection of the proper motor for the 
work. The details of the old controversy of the proper method 
of obtaining the capacity of railway motors will not be entered 
into here other than to state that the square root of the mean 
square current is ordinarily used in calculating the copper 
losses only of the motor. It ignores entirely the core losses of 
the armature and field and is not applicable to any other type 
of motor than the direct-current motor. It can not be used 

-with the single-phase alternating-current motor, and further- 
more excludes the brush-friction losses, the bearing losses, and 
all internal losses of the motor other than those depending on 
the current itself. Furthermore, the core losses and other inci- 
dental losses are not a direct function of the current employed; 
that is, with a given cycle, a certain relation may exist between 
the total losses and the square root of mean square current, 
and in that way the square root of mean square current may be 
used as a basis of the motor heating. In another cycle an en- 
tirely different ratio may exist; and any motor-heating pre- 
determinations baséd solely upon the square root of the mean 
square current would fall through as being inaccurate and 
misleading if applied to general railway problems. 

In connection with this a new factor may be mentioned 
which enters into the determination of motor capacity, which 
has been brought into prominence by the introduction of the 
single-phase railway motor. In direct-current motors it was 
thought when the copper, core, and brush-contact losses had 
been obtained that approximately all the internal losses of the 
motor had been noted; so it was put down that the total losses 
in the motor were those losses enumerated, plus a certain value 
for brush friction. Jn developing the single-phase motor with 
the 150 volts or so on the commutator which is incidental to 
such motors, the experiments encountered a brush friction fully 
three times as great as in the 600-volt direct-current motor, 
there being something like 1500 watts total loss in the motor 


744 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION: [Nov. 25. 


tested which had never been counted on. The first motor that 
was built, in which no especial attention was paid to the brush- 
friction loss when mounted on a car and hauled as a trailer with 
no current whatever in the armature, would heat unduly due 
to the brush friction alone. That test was followed up by a 
series of experiments and improvements looking to a consid- 
erable reduction of this brush-friction loss until now it is within 
reasonable limits. This instance is cited to point out that the 
square root of mean square current is not a true criterion of 
the motor heating in service and that all the losses—not only 
the actual losses, but their subdivision and relation to each 
other—must be carefully determined before a proper motor can 
be selected for a given piece of work. 

The authors have indicated their desire for some short-cut 
method that will avoid the laborious calculations involved in 
the preparation of speed-time ‘curves in detail, but the approxi- 
mate methods used indicate a lack of accuracy in the results 
obtained, making it an open question whether the careful pre- 
paration of speed-time curves is not necessary. No one ap- 
preciates the tedious nature of such calculations more than 
the speaker; but no rational method has yet been proposed 
which will do away with the necessity of such calculations for 
final results in the selection of train schedules and motor equip- 
ments. Not only is it necessary to calculate speed-time curves 
under the conditions imposed, but also to plot other curves 
with a modification of some of the conditions in order to deter- 
mine the amount of leeway a given equipment possesses on 
either side of the limitations imposed by the specific problem 
in hand. General curves worked out throughout the range of 
limitations of rate of acceleration and braking and train friction 
will give reasonably accurate approximations to serve as a basis 
for detailed calculations, which must be gone through with in 
detail in order to get accurate results. Such accurate results 
are required, as it is folly to presume that less care should be 
exercised in the selection of the rolling stock of a road when its 
value exceeds that of the entire generating station and feeding 
system. 

C. T. Hutcninson: The speaker has published two papers 
on the subject of predetermination of the operation of electric © 
motors in railway service, both of which were based upon the 
assumption that certain average results could be depended upon 
for the ordinary type of railway motor in use, and that the re- 
sults deduced from such averages would be found to correspond 
substantially with practical results. The principal object of the 
method proposed was to eliminate the tedious plotting of speed- 
time curves, and to outline a general method applicable to any 
motor to predetermine the temperature rise of a particular 
motor under service conditions. The paper this evening gives 
the speaker an opportunity to apply his method to some of | 
the results given. The motor on which these results are based 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 745 © 


is the Westinghouse No. 86 motor, which has been tested more 
elaborately by Mr. Stillwell and his assistants in the Inter- 
borough Company. Through the kindness of Mr. Stillwell the 
speaker has had access to the results of these tests. The method 
proposed by the speaker, substituting the constants of this 
particular motor, is the basis of the statements that follow. 

The speed-torque curves of this motor were first compared 
with the average speed-torque curves assumed in the papers 
referred to, and were found to be in practical agreement. The 
method proposed was then applied to the run shown on Fig. 1, 
using the Smith formula. The energy per ton-mile, as calcu- 
lated by this method, came out 46 watt-hours; the result given 
by the authors of the Smith formula is 48.8 watt-hours,—a 
practical agreement. This result was obtained by a calculation 
taking probably five minutes, and should be compared with the 
time necessary to plot and integrate the speed-time curves 
shown in Fig. 1. 

The method was then applied to a comparison of predicted 
and observed results in the typical local run of the Interborough 
service. This is the run shown in Figs. 9 and 10 of the paper. 
The energy per ton-mile calculated by this method was 75 
watt-hours; the test results show an average of about 78; this 
agreement is as close as could be expected. 

The most important matter to predetermine is, however, not 
the energy requirement, but the temperature elevation of the 
motor for any given run. This can be only predicted when the 
temperature that the motor attains, under approximately simi- 
lar conditions, for a given energy loss is, known,—that is, when 
the radiation coefficient of the motor is known. The only way 
to determine this coefficient is by test. The speaker’s method 
assumes that such test has been made, and that the value of 
this coefficient under different conditions is known. The tem- 
perature elevation of the motor will then be determined by the 
heat loss in the motor during the run. Hence if the average 
heat loss in the motor, as calculated, agrees with that shown 
by test, the temperature elevation will also agree. Applying 
this method, then, to the data of the typical local run of the 
Interborough system, and using the test records kindly fur- 
nished by Mr. Stillwell, the calculated core loss is 3360 watts; 
the test results give an average loss of 3460; the agreement is 
substantially exact, and therefore the temperature elevation 
predicted by the ‘method in question would have been prac- 
tically exact, assuming the radiation coefficient to have been 
properly determined by tests under the conditions of this run. 

The greatest value of a method of this kind lies in calculating 
the results of a variety of runs, such as given in Tables 2 and 3. 
Using the method of the authors, the calculation of the results 
given in Table 2 alone would probably require the work of at 
least one man for the better part of a week. The speaker has 
applied his method to the same series of runs, and in less than 


746 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov. 25 


an hour has obtained results of the character shown in the tables 
in question, together with other results giving, as he believes, 
data of far greater value. These results are, briefly, as follows: 

Table 2 gives 17 separate runs and a summary for the round 
trip. For each trip it gives further the square root of mean 
square current, both for the actual run and for the typical 
run; that is, the average of all the separate runs. These figures 
are given to show that the use of a typical run in place of the 
separate runs is a justifiable assumption. This, by the way, is 
also.the assumption made by the speaker in the papers referred 
to. These 17 runs, using curve-sheets already published by the 
speaker, gave an energy loss per ton-mile for the different runs 
varying from 60 to 87 watt-hours; multiplying the length of 
each run by the energy consumption per ton-mile, and taking 
the weight average, there results a figure of 66 watt-hours per 
ton-mile as the average of these separate runs. The quantity 
required for the typical run calculated in the same way is also 
66 watt-hours per ton-mile. This result corroborates the result 
given by the authors, and is a sufficient demonstration that a 
typical run can be substituted for the individual runs in a case 
of this kind, with a high degree of accuracy as far as the energy 
consumption is concerned. 

A more important matter is, however, the temperature ele- 
vation of the motor. The authors assume the same motor, to 
be used with the same gearing, etc., for these various runs, and 
assume the temperatures to which the motor will attain to be 
practically determined by the value of the square root of the 
mean square current. Applying the method of the speaker, 
and choosing an initial acceleration so that the temperature © 
elevation for the type run shall be 75° cent., the temperature 
elevations for the individual runs will vary from 107° to 71°; 
the temperature elevation for a composite run, made up as in- 
dicated in Table 2, would be slightly greater than 90°. In other 
words, the substitution of a typical run for the separate runs 
is sufficiently accurate for the determination of the energy 
used, but is not satisfactory for the determination of the tem- 
perature elevation of motors, and therefore not satisfactory for 
the determination of the motor capacity, which is, of course, 
directly dependent upon the temperature elevation. 

Speaking generally of the subject, it is the opinion of the 
speaker that the relative importance of the various phases that 
have been discussed this evening are somewhat as follows:Train 
resistance and plotting of speed-time curves of least importance; 
the determination of energy requirement of next greater im- 
portance, but still of slight importance compared to the third 
point,—that is, the predetermination of temperature elevation 
and of motor capacity. The third and most important point 
is practically left out of consideration by the authors of the 
paper. 

W.N. Situ: Referring to the interesting point brought out 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 747 


by Mr. Stillwell in regard to adhesion during acceleration, which 
hitherto seems to have been overlooked, the speaker would 
recall to the attention of the INsTITUTE the interesting paper 
on braking contributed about two years ago by Mr. R. A. 
Parke, which shows how the converse of Mr. Stillwell’s propo- 
sition holds true in a car truck when the brakes are applied. 

As to the discussion of theory versus practice, this paper is 
not intended to be a statement that theory is of no account 
and that practice is the only rule to follow. It is not a question 
of theory versus practice; the paper shows that one bears out 
the other. 

One of the points the authors wish to emphasize is the proper 
interpretation of theory in presenting a question of this kind to 
busy, hard-headed steam railroad men who have spent their 
lives in the railroad business and have neither time nor patience 
to listen to mathematical explanations of the points involved. 

Concerning the train resistance formula, the authors do not 
claim any more for it than Mr. Mailloux or any one else ca 
claim for any formula. It is by no means the last word on 
train resistance formulas; but the paper shows that it is based 
on results which are practical, and it certainly compares very 
favorably with others for the particular conditions of train 
weight and equipment. 

As to the effect of sharp curves and grades, the particular 
problem here considered has very few curves to deal with which 
a train could not run around at practically maximum speed. 
Where they did exist, however, particularly in the case of the 
North Side Division, their influence on the train runs was 
carefully examined, as is shown in Part II. of the paper, with 
the result that the general typical run was found to compare 
sufficiently well with the actual plotted runs for all practical 
purposes. 

Increased friction at the instant of starting may make a 
difference, but it is not in evidence in any of the practical 
test curves exhibited in the paper, nor is it shown in the curves 
presented by Mr. Stillwell. 

Mr. Armstrong’s criticism of Fig. 4 is covered by a note 
which says, ‘“‘ Power cut off at same distance from start. Av- 
erage speed maintained constant by varying braking rate.” 
Some of his criticisms in regard to the current curves are partly 
to be explained by the fact that some of the curves have been 
reproduced half a dozen times since originally made and are a 
little exaggerated, and in one or two cases are not quite exact. 
The curves made use of were originally made for the Arnold 
and Potter paper, and were taken from the TRANSACTIONS, 
and in this way it is likely that some inaccuracies have arisen 
which may explain some of the criticisms of Mr. Armstrong. 

The authors are disposed to view such problems from the 
standpoint of the consulting engineer, and in the interest of 
the customer. Large enterprises of this character are likely to 


748 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov. 25> 


be handled by consulting engineers rather than designing en- 


gineers. It is hardly necessary to say that the consulting»en- 


gineer cannot be expected to view the merits of any apparatus. 


solely from the standpoint of the designer, because the minutiz 
of design do not necessarily appeal to him. The consulting 
engineer is the interpreter to the customer, of the apparatus 
and methods advocated by the designing engineer. Whether 
or not the consulting engineer is interested in all the various 
intricacies of design which are of particular importance to the 
designing engineer, he must be able to present general results 
to his client in a clear, convincing, practical manner which will 


enable the client to follow the consulting engineer’s reasoning” 


and be governed by his conclusions. 
Applying this principle to the question of the rating of motors, 


some of the gentlemen who have discussed the subject have- 
brought into it a large number of the quantities which are’ 


taken into their calculations in the design of motors. They 
expect consulting engineers to follow through the various losses 
in the motor for various cycles of work, experimentally deter- 
mining the degrees rise per watt loss, and finally the exact 
temperature rise for certain duty. While they admit that this 
process is cumbersome, they do not yet seem to have put for- 
ward any simple method of general application which it is 
reasonable to ask a consulting engineer or his client to follow 
in detail. Such.experiments may be necessary for designing 
engineers and manufacturers, who must make the completest 
possible study of their apparatus and its possibilities; but when 
it comes to interpreting the results of such experiments, it is 
too much to expect that either the consulting engineer or his 
customer should be obliged to follow out the fine points of a 
separate laboratory test for every possible condition. 

In contradistinction to such methods of arriving at results, 
satisfactory though they may be to some manufacturers and 
engineers, there has been developed a simple method of ex- 
pressing the capacity of railway motors by means of determin- 
ations of the root of mean square current and the “‘ equivalent 
volts’ which appertain to any cycle of operation, representing 
an equivalent continuous load which a motor may safely carry 
in service without regard to the particular number of degrees 
temperature rise which may result from it. 

It is found in practice that the exact temperature rise of 
motors in service is appreciably affected by such a slightly 
different condition as the position of the motor in the car truck. 
The motor which gets the greatest fanning effect by virtue of 
its position in the truck may be cooler than one not so favorably 
situated, by 10 degrees or more. Such results are likely to 
diminish considerably the value of tests for the exact deter- 
mination of temperature rise. 

Great exactness cannot be claimed for any of the assumptions 


made in electric railway predeterminations. All the variables. 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 749 


are likely to be several per cent. out of the way; and tem- 
perature rise can certainly not be calculated with any greater 
degree of accuracy than pertains to the initial assumptions. 

The method of using the root of mean square current for 
‘determining the sizes of electric railway motors, as proposed and 
demonstrated by Mr. Storer and Mr. Renshaw, has not only 
proved to be most valuable as a working basis by virtue of 
its simplicity, but has also proved out in practice remarkably 
well. 

Referring to one of the last speakers, who showed the way 
in which his theoretical method of deriving results is corrob- 
-orated, to a great extent, by the presentation in our paper: it 
seems to the speaker that his theory is now worth considerably 
more to a practical man than it was before this demonstration 
was made. His theory is undoubtedly a good one for its pur- 
pose, but the one thing to bear in mind is the relative ease with 
which its correctness can be demonstrated. 

Methods that are largely graphical have an additional value 
in that they are very easily checked, and that arithmetical 
errors, if made, are found more readily than they would be if 
such a problem were worked out on the basis of a mathematical 
analysis requiring sheets of algebraic equations. A train 
schedule once settled on, and sub-stations, transmission line, 
and power-house located, a comparatively few days’ work will 
enable a few skilled men to calculate and tabulate in permanent 
form the rapidly varying loads involved in such a problem, from 
which the determinations for lines and apparatus can be made 
at leisure. 

E. E. Ries: On referring to curve 17, page 720, it will be 
seen that the changes in weight of the live load of this par- 
ticular equipment do not materially affect the speed charac- 
teristics of the equipment; in other words, the electric train 
weighs 70.6 tons with seated load, and 77 tons with the standing 
load, a little over six tons more. This shows a very large 
disproportion between the dead weight of the train, and the 
live load or the passengers carried. 

As the standing capacity of the subway cars emp.oyed in 
this test is greater than the seating load, it may be assumed 
that the total passenger weight in the two-car train referred to 
was not over 12tons. This would make the dead weight itself 65 
tons, or more than five times in excess of the maximum live 
or paying load. In other words, it required only one-sixth of 
the total power to transport the full passenger load, whereas 
five-sixths of the power is expended in moving the empty train. 
We have been accustomed to the waste which has taken place 
in the steam-engine, and to lay a great deal of stress upon 
the question of fuel consumption when discussing electric trac- 
tion problems; now it would seem as if a strenuous endeavor 
should be made to lighten the excessive weight of the train 
itself as compared with that of its passengers. 


750 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Nov, 25 


O.S. LyrorpJr.: The paper was not intended to cover all the 
phases of the engineering necessary in selecting motors for such 
a project as referred to. Simply a few illustrations are given 
bearing upon the general points made. There is no desire to 
disparage the admirable work which has been done along purely 
theoretical lines, for all such work is of value in helping to reach 
the last analysis. It was desired simply to correct some im- 
pressions which have been given. There is no particular claim 
made to originality. The literature, as a whole, is lacking in 
evidence of the character given in the paper. No doubt other 
members have such data as given, which would be of great 
interest to the INsTITUTE. Recent proceedings of the INSTITUTE 
have brought out much practical information regarding trans- 
mission line construction, lightning protection, etc.; it is sug- 
gested that much information of a similar character regarding 
experience in electric traction could be furnished and would be 
of great value. The plans of the Railway Test Commission, if 
carried out, will add materially to the literature on the subject. 

It is gratifying to know that Mr. Mailloux agrees with the 
authors of the paper that the amount of elaborate calculating 
to be done should be only that which cannot be safely omitted. 
It is a question whether we wish to obviate the necessity of 
plotting speed-time curves. A study of the actual character- 
istics of these curves is often very instructive. Moreover, the 
problem is not finished when the motors are selected. The 
current-time curves have to be studied very carefully in the 
consideration of sub-station and power-station loads. 

With reference to Mr. Armstrong’s comments, they are those 
common to the fine-toothed examination of each other’s data 
frequently indulged in by the manufacturing companies. Irre- 
spective of his adverse analysis the general facts are as given 
in the paper. The Arnold and Potter tests were made by the 
General Electric Company and can be analyzed more closely by 
the General Electric engineers than by the authors. It would 
be of interest to the InstTiTuTE to have a similar comparison of 
theory and test by those best acquainted with the test data and 
the motors used. As-to Mr. Armstrong’s remarks concerning 
the use of square root of the mean square current in the deter- 
mination of heating of motors, it may simply be said that this 
is a method which works fairly well. 

Wm. McCLeLran (by letter): The engineering work in con- 
nection with railroad projects is for the purpose of settling 
three questions: the power-house equipment, the transmission 
line equipment, and the car equipment. These are in every 
way complex. For the first we need a daily time-power curve 
for the whole system; for the second a similar curve for each sec- 
tion of the road, the size of the sections depending on local con- 
ditions; and for the third we must consider the sections de- 
manding greatest accelerations and prolonged heavy current 
supply. As a rule, no type-run will be sufficient to answer 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 751 


these questions. It is true, that there are some locations 
(chiefly between the Ohio and Mississippi) where the only 
variable is the distance between stations, in which type-curves 
“might be serviceable. But in most cases, where the country is 
more or less rolling, such as we have in the vicinity of Phila- 
delphia, with all kinds of combinations of curves and grades, 
the type-run would be of little avail. 

The question, ‘‘ How much tedious work is necessary? ’’ pre- 
sents itself to everyone, and the writer believes that tedious as 
most of us find it, the theoretical methods will prove the fittest 
by survival. Certainly the problems set by the electrical en- 
gineer are as complex as any set by the civil engineer, with his 
grades and alignment, and yet every one knows the amount of 
tedious work he is willing to devote. What we need now is data 
of all kinds. The engineers of the New York Central found this 
out soon after they started, and they had to get what they needed. 
A general method assumes the knowledge of enough data to 
make such generality possible; and it is for the lack of this data 
that frequently the theoretical method shows to poor advantage. 

In this connection the writer would be interested to know upon 
what data the derivation of the Smith formula is based. The 
writer would also be interested in knowing why motor cars alone 
are absolutely necessary, as 1s intimated in the early part of the 
paper. It would seem entirely possible that some locomotives 
might be used advantageously. Many steam railroad men are 
now advocating a proper division of the work between motor cars 
and locomotives. In considering the great advantage of motor 
trains for much of our railroad work the peculiar field of the 
locomotive should not be forgotten. 


752 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Dec. 5 


Discussion ON ‘“‘ PROBLEMS OF HrEAvy ELEcTRIC TRACTION,” 
AT PitrsBurG, Pa., DECEMBER 5, 1904. 


N. W. Storer: It is not the purpose of this discussion to 
give an exhaustive treatise on the subject announced, but merely 
to bring forward one or two points that have come up in work- 
ing over electric railway projects. 

The question of an efficient means for regulating the speed 
of electric motor-driven cars has always been a serious one. 
The direct-current motor is limited to two running points on 
the controller—full series and full multiple. On these two 
points the cars are obliged to meet all the contingencies that 
arise. The motors must always be geared so as to meet the 
maximum speed conditions required to maintain the schedule. 
This necessitates in most equipments used for interurban ser- 
vice, as well as for locomotives, very inefficient operation at the 
low speeds in the cities and wherever frequent stops are made. 
There have been various schemes proposed to remedy this, the 
first being used in the original Sprague motor, where the field 
was wound with several coils which were successively connected 
in different combinations which varied the field strength and 
consequently the speed at which certain torques were developed. 
This worked successfully on the small motor and was attempted 
to a certain degree in other double-reduction motors designed 
by the Thomson-Houston and the Westinghouse Companies. It 
was followed later by the General Electric motors which were 
provided with a resistance for shunting the field coils to obtain 
high speeds. It was found to be unsatisfactory, however, and 
as far as we know is not now used to any extent on modern . 
‘motors. The problem still remains, and how great a one it is 
can hardly be appreciated by one who has not studied it by 
means of the speed-time-current curves. 

It is well known that gearing a motor for 20 miles per hour 
with a certain tractive effort will take 25 per cent. more power 
to accelerate at a given rate than if it were geared for 16 miles 
per hour, and that the motors may easily be overloaded and 
burned out in performing a certain work, and that the consump- 
tion of power is much too great if the gear reduction is too small. 
This is an evidence of the necessity for a more efficient speed 
-control which should be grasped at once by everybody. 

The steam locomotive, it is claimed, has the advantage of the 
electric railway motor in that it can develop its maximum out- 
put over a wide range of speed while the electric motor operating 
at a certain pressure develops its maximum output at only one 
‘speed, and the output decreases rapidly as the speed increases. 
This renders it practically impossible for the electric motor to 
-make up lost time unless it is geared for a higher speed than is 
-ordinarily required. This again points to the necessity of an 
-efficient means for speed regulation. 

Unfortumately there seems to be no means for avoidirtg the 
-difficulty with 2-motor equipnrents. With 4-motor equipments, 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT PLL PSBURG. 753 


which are now used a great deal for interurban service, the ineffi- 
cient starting may be overcome to a certain extent by throwing 
all motors in series at start. This gives one more running point. 
It, however, complicates the control apparatus so much that it 
is seldom used. 

The following plan is submitted as one which, while involving 
some complications, avoids others and will result in a much 
more efficient and flexible speed control than any at present in 


00;—5 
460'—40 a | = ot satel) 
} pte? \ 
2 \ 
ex 1 
oc aN \ 
=) P \ 
120;-9-30 
eft 
ec A 
Sane & | 
alk Cp 
S80} 21-20 
= oe lt 
40 10 
0 40 — 80 120 160 O 240 
| SECONDS 
Fic. 1. 
Motaleweroht Olea loaded——tONS m,n mia sierra te 39.5 
Weng thy Ol mun Messe cya eee ei ee ots yates hee = 2.2 
Schedule speed—miles per hr..... Fn hsite teen ae 28.6 
Beneth of stop—seconds. weciie. Wik sian ete ss 2s 20 
Acceleration—miles per hr. per sec..........--.+--- ORG 
Braking rate—miles per hr. per sec...............-. 1.5 
EQUIPMENT. 
IW SY ROR cs os Stick Und G5, BAIS pec ERE Ose RO cum citar 4—75h.p 
Sq. root mean sq. amperes per motor............... 41 
Sq. root mean sq. kilowatts per car..............++- 81 
Average kilowatts per Car.....--5...--4- sees ee eeees 62 
Presoureuatiea teenie meee werertees aie suse ease 550 


use. It is adapted for use only on cars having at least four 
axles on which motors may be placed. Briefly,it consists in 
having two large motors wound for the line pressure and two 
smaller motors wound for some lower pressure, say 25 per cent. 
of the line pressure. The smaller motors will be used only in 
series with the larger ones and will develop a torque in propor- 
tion to the pressure for which they are wound. They will be 
controlled simply as so much resistance and will complicate 


754 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION, (Dec. 5 


the control very little. With these two small motors operated 
only as motors, the car speeds obtained without resistance in 
series will correspond to pressures applied to the large motors 
of 200, 225, 250, 400, and 500, the last being the line pressure. 
If it is desired to go still further and add some small complica- 
tion, the small motors may be used part of the time as boosters; 
that is, they could be reversed and driven by the other motors 
as generators for raising the pressure applied to the large motors. 
This method would add to the other equivalent speeds, the 
pressures of approximately of 280, 320, and 640. The whole 
range of speed could thus be covered by pressure control. The 
use of the small motors as boosters is mentioned merely to show 
the possibilities of the case but is not recommended for ordinary 
service. 

Now, the question arises as to what is to be gained by this 
method of control and what equipment would be recommended. 
Take, for example, the case of a car ordinarily requiring an 
equipment of four 50-h.p. motors. In place of that equipment 
there would be two 75-h.p. and two 25-h.p. motors, the former 
being standard railway motors and the latter being standard 
type but wound for 125 volts. The advantages gained would 
be in accelerating with about 20 per cent. less current, in reduc- 
ing the peaks on power-house load, in having five efficient 
speeds instead of two, and in substituting two 125-volt motors 
for two 500-volt motors which would decrease the cost of main- 
tenance. 

Another example would be found in the elevated railways 
where two-motor equipments are used. It would pay to add 
two small motors to each motor-car to reduce the load on the 
power-house or to increase the rate of acceleration or loads 
carried. 

The disadvantages are few. It means two sizes of motors 
instead of one; but, as stated above, the small motors are wound 
for low pressure and will have a very low cost of maintenance, 
as the windings will in all cases. be of comparatively heavy 
copper which is susceptible of the highest insulation. The 
commutators will take care of themselves. 

Another disadvantage might be that if the wheels driven by 
the small motor should slip, the motor might have several times 
its normal pressure applied to it and would be injured thereby. 
Such a contingency is extremely remote, however, because the 
wheels have nearly as much weight on them as those driven by 
ah large motors and only one-fourth of the torque applied to 
them. 

One more objection is that the car is carrying motors around 
that are used only a part of the time. This is true, but they 
are used practically all the time except when the car is running 
with light loads; and the capacities of the motors can be arranged 
so that there will be no excess capacity carried. 

Before leaving the question of speed regulation, it is well to 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG. 755 


point out the fact that the foregoing applies only to direct-cur- 
rent motors and is entirely unnecessary with the single-phase 
motors where any pressure within the capacity of the motor 
may be easily and efficiently applied to it by means of the in- 
duction regulator or by the auto-transformer with a number 
of loops brought out. This system thus possesses the advantage 
which it is impossible to attain entirely with the direct-current 
system. 


200;— 59 

460;—40 
a 

1201-330 

Po |, 

E a: Zi 

< Lu Oy! 

= a Ary 

a a 

=-80'4120 
= 

ae 
40 80 50 
Fic. 2. z 
Total weight of car loaded—tons.>. 2.00200. eee 39.5 
[Weraksqulal Giantess niles Abi dente So ec Gombe ad Ue 528 
Schedule speed—-miles| per hrs. .2 2)... “2 ch cea eves pee 
emorh Or estOp——SCCOMGS) relay laws vie wy Sieyehe l= siecle cal-= 20 
Aeceleration— miles per hr per. sec). .......-..--.-- 1S 
Braking rate—miles per hr. per sec........:-...7.-- 1.5 
EQUIPMENT. 

Motors ei rert ar ere tee erin sere toketions 4 sta 4—75h.p. 
Sq. root mean sq, amperes per motor............... 41 
Sq. root mean sq. kilowatts per car.................79 
Average kilowatts per car. ... 230.65 see ee hae ee ee! 60.5 
PressurerateCatie eis om ae on a herons Seemed ley ersleenen : 550 


Besides. the lack of efficient speed regulation, the interurban 
railways are great sufferers from the tremendous fluctuations 
of load on their power stations and sub-stations. Since most of 
such roads operate with a small number of cars, frequently 
only one on a sub-station at one time, the capacity of the sta- 
tion is fixed entirely by the maximum load on it and not at all 
by the average load. It is thus of the greatest importance to 
limit the fluctuations of load to the minimum allowable to meet 


resistance in the line, which is not particularly efficient. Auto- 
matic acceleration is therefore desirable, which will take the 
matter out of the hands of the motorman. 

In most places the acceleration is made at a constant rate 
until full pressure is reached. This means that the sameav- .— 
erage current per motor is used in series and in multiple, which 
gives twice as much current per car in multiple as in series. We 
now recommend accelerating with a constant average current 
per car until full pressure is reached. To get the same average 
acceleration this necessitates accelerating much faster in series 
and slower in multiple. This is easily possible where 4-motor 
equipments are used, since they will always have plenty of weight 
on the drivers. In case the slipping point is reached, however, 
the current in series should be the maximum allowable, and in 
multiple just enough more to give the required average. Where 
the same line current is used for both series and multiple, the 
maximum current is 20 to 25 per cent. less than where a constant — 
current per motor is-used. The power consumption and the 
heating effect on the motors will be practically the same. ‘The 
effect on the motors will be good because the motor has ample 
capacity to commutate heavy currents at low pressures, and 
reducing the current at high pressures will be a distinct im- 
provement. 

Such an acceleration can be easily and automatically obtained 
by the multiple-unit system. _Mr. W. Cooper in developing 
this control system for the speaker found that it was perfectly 
feasible by the addition of suitable limit-switches and arrange- 
ment of resistances, to control the current so as to keep it at 
any desired amount in series and at any amount in multiple. 

The use of a different line current in series from that in mul-’ — 
tiple renders the scheme applicable to any class of service with 
good results, though of course its advantages are greatest in 
interurban service where a reduction of 25 per cent. in the maxi- : 

) 


756 HEAVY ELECTRIC TRACTION. [Dec. 5 
the conditions of schedule. . With the ordinary hand-control it 
is impossible to keep down the fluctuations except by putting 

: 


mum ctrrent required per car means not only a reduction of 
the same amount in capacity of the sub-station but a substantial 
decrease in the amount of copper in the line. 

A similar scheme may be applied to the single phase where 
the insertion of a single limit-switch in the trolley circuit will 
keep a constant apparent kilowatt on the line and a variable 
rate of acceleration having its maximum at the start and grad- 
ually diminishing until full pressure is reached. 

Figs. 1 and 2 show respectively the standard method of accele- 
rating with a constant current per motor and the proposed 
method for accelerating with a constant current per car. It will 
be noted that the schedule speed is the same in both cases. The — 
average power consumption and the equivalent heating current 
per motor are practically the same, while the acceleration in the 
first case is at the rate of 0.7 miles per hr. per sec. at the maxi- 


1904.] DISCUSSION VAIS PID LS BURG: 750 


mum, and in the second case is 1.3 miles per hr. per sec. The 
important point is that the maximum kilowatt in the one case 
is 176 while in the second case it is only 132, a reduction of just 
25 per cent. 

It is probable that the before-mentioned system of speed 
regulation combined with this scheme of acceleration will give 
the best operation of which the direct-current system is capable, 
It will give the greatest economy in power consumption, station 


capacity, and line copper, and with practically no additional 
complication or expense. 


A paper presented at the 192d Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
New York, Dec. 23, 1904. 


Copyright, 1904, by A. I. E. E. 


THE MAXIMUM DISTANCE TO WHICH POWER CAN BE 
ECONOMICALLY TRANSMITTED. 


BY RALPH D. MERSHON. 


As transmission voltages, actual or proposed, become higher 
and higher and transmission distances reach out farther and 
farther, it is interesting and profitable to inquire into the prob- 
able maximum distance to which power will be commercially 
transmitted. As with most engineering enterprises, the limita- 
tions will come through economic conditions, and the greatest 
distance to which power will ever be commercially transmitted 
is the greatest distance to which it can ever be economically 
(using the word in its broad sense) transmitted. 

In endeavoring to make such a forecast,as will be here at- 
tempted, it should be borne in mind that each additional limi- 
tation consequent upon the assumptions necessary in order to 
obtain definite representative figures adds to the chance of: 
the forecast proving erroneous. For instance, the first asump- 
tion which must be made is that in the future power will be 
transmitted in the same way as now. This may not hold. 
There may be devised some other and better way not involv- 
ing the use of transmission lines. Such, however, does not 
appear probable. Other assumptions as to methods of con- 
struction being the same as, or similar to, those at present 
in use may be eventually so modified by skill and experience 
as to change very materially any conclusions arrived at now. 
This is less improbable. Conditions, industrial and finan- 
cial, may so change that the constants now assumed as 
fixing costs, interest, etc., will be materially modified. This is 
probable. Finally, it is certain that with the course of 

759 


760 MERSHON: MAXIMUM DISTANCE [Dec. 23 


time the value of power will increase, and this will materially 
alter any figures at which we may now arrive. The present 
conditions of practice and possibility are sufficiently definite, 
however, to warrant a forecast with the expectation that it will 
be applicable, approximately at least, for some considerable 
time to come. At any rate, the mode of treatment of the 
subject herein adopted will apply so long as present methods 
of power transmission obtain, and, with suitable changes in the 
values of the constants involved, afford at any time a means of 
obtaining a comprehensive view of the possibilites of long-dis- 
tance transmission. 

The elements which, in the broadest sense, limit the distance 
to which power can be economically transmitted, are two; the 
cost of power at the generating station, and the price which 
can be obtained for the delivered power. The difference be- 
tween these two elements must cover the cost of transmission, 
the interest on the investment, and the profit. The cost of trans- 
mission comprises the loss of power n transmission, the cost 
of operating, and the cost of maintenance and repair. The value 
of the sum total of the interest which must be paid upon the 
investment, and the minimum profit which is considered sat- 
isfactory, will have much weight in determining the limiting 
distance of transmission. The less this sum is the farther 
power can be transmitted; a low interest rate and a low rate 


of dividend will, therefore, be conducive to long transmissions. - 


Let us consider in a general way the manner in which the 
investment in a transmission plant and the annual charges and 
expenses in connection with the plant vary with different out- 
puts, voltages, and distances of transmission. For a given 
voltage, drop, and*distance of transmission, the cost of all the 
apparatus and equipment, except the line conductors, will in- 
crease more slowly than the output of the plant. That is, the 
greater the output of the plant the less the cost per kilowatt 


of all the equipment, except the line conductors. This: will - 


be true of the operating expenses also. Therefore, since the 
interest charges and the charges for depreciation and repair 
are dependent upon the investment, the greater the output of 
the plant the less will be the quantities going to make up the 
annual cost per kilowatt of transmitting power, except those 
depending upon the line conductors. Since the weight of the 
line conductors, under the conditions assumed, will vary directly 
as the amount of power transmitted, those elements of the 
annual cost per kilowatt depending upon the line conductors 


1904.] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. 761 


will be practically constant for all amounts of power trans- 
mitted and cannot be materially reduced by increasing the 
amount of power transmitted. With the same voltage, eco- 
nomic drop, and output, the elements of annual cost per kilo- 
watt due to the line structure (pole line) and to its extent 
(patrolling, etc.), will increase directly as the distance. But, as 
outlined above, any increase of cost in line structure due to 
increase in distance can be offset by increase of output. On 
the other hand, the weight of the line conductors increases as 
the distance (for the same economic drop) and the elements 
of annual cost per kilowatt due to the weight of the line conduc- 
tors will, therefore, increase as the distance, no matter what the 
output. 

It appears, therefore, that all the elements in the annual 
cost per kilowatt for transmitting power, except those depend- 
ent upon the line conductors, may be continually reduced by 
increasing the amount of power to be transmitted. The annual 
cost per kilowatt due to the line conductors cannot be so re- 
duced. It can be diminished only by such other means as 
will reduce the first cost of the conductors. As the first cost 
of the line conductors can be reduced only by increasing the 
voltage of transmission and as there is a limit to which such 
increase can be carried, it follows that the limiting distance to 
which power can be economically transmitted will depend, finally, 
upon the cost of the line conductors and upon this alone. 

The limit of voltage referred to is not necessarily that due to 
physical considerations, such.as difficulties of construction, air 
losses between conductors, etc.; for, leaving such matters out 
of consideration, it is easy to imagine the voltage carried to 
such a high value as will reduce the line conductors to the 
point where the increased cost of transformers and insulators, 
due to a further increase of voltage, will overbalance the saving 
in the line conductors, due to such further increase. 

It will somewhat simplify the treatment of the subject if 
the interest charge be included as a part of the cost of trans- 
mission, and profits be represented by a percentage on the in- 
vestment. This course will, therefore, be pursued. That is, it 
will be assumed that in the cost of transmission is included 
the interest on the investment (bond interest) and that over 
and above this cost there must be earned a certain percentage, 
which percentage will represent profits (stock dividends). In 
addition the following assumptions will be made: : 


762 MERSHON: MAXIMUM DISTANCE [Dec. 23 


Power purchased at low-tension bus-bars of step-up trans- 
formers and sold at outgoing bus-bars of the step-down station. 

Frequency of transmission not less than 25 cycles nor more 
than 30 cycles as being the limiting frequencies which, while 
favorable to the transmission of power, are yet suitable for 
almost all purposes to which power can be applied. 

Idle synchronous motors at step-down station to correct for 
power-factor, the average power-factor of the line being held 
as near unity as possible. In the plants of large output dealt 
with below, the possible approximation to unity power-factor 
will, in spite of the line-charging current, be sufficiently close, 
for practical purposes, to justify the assumption of unity power- 
factor. 

That no matter what the capacity of the plant, there will 
be three transmission circuits, each upon its own pole line, and 
each capable of carrying one third the load. 

That the power-factor of the load supplied will be 0.8. 

That no matter what the size of the plant the number of trans- 
forming units at each end'of the line be 18, each transformer 
being normally worked at § of its rated capacity, so that 
one bank of three may be cut out, if need be. 

That no matter what the size of the plant the number of 
corrective synchronous motors will be six, each being worked 
at $ of its rated capacity. The kilovolt-ampere capacity of 
these synchronous motors must, for aload power-factor of 0.8, 
be equal to $ cf the kilowatt ae of the load carried by 
the plant. 

It is evident that the number ‘of units must be considered 
as the same for plants of all capacities in order to take full 
advantage of the decrease of cost per kilowatt, due to increase 
of capacity. 

The pole lines will be assumed as constructed with 12 steel 
towers to the mile. 

ideal conditions will be assumed throughout consistent with 
delivering reliable and cheap power. Since the object is to 
determine the maximum distance, the factors fixing commercial 
costs of apparatus will be taken at the lowest values likely to 
obtain. 

Later on in this paper general equations are derived ex- 
pressing the relations between the distance of transmission and 
the quantities which govern it. By making assumptions, in 
addition to those mentioned above, as to the values of the 


1904.] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. 763 


various coefficients in the general equations and as to the pur- 
chase price and selling price of power, the curves of Figs. 
1, 2,3, 4,5, and 6 have been obtained which are given and dis- 
cussed here instead of at the end of the paper. 

Fig. 1 shows the relation between the distances of tranmission, 
D, and the economical voltage, E, for different kilowatt outputs, 
W ; that is, it shows the veltage which it is most economical to use 


—. ae ———| | 


| 
| 


= 
(o2) (7) 
S So 


a 
3 
DOWN TRANSFORMERS. 


— 
for] 
=) 


H 
ou 
o 


a 
hs 
140 
S 
130}——] 
Wi 
a 
120;>—F 
5 
i 
110}2 w-=150-000 eel 
os 
: eabioaae PCa] ae 
100 e 
or 
90}3— 
i 
ee CURVES SHOWING ECONOMICAL. VOLTAGE 
POWER PURCHASED AT $10.90 PER KILOWATT PER ANNUM. 
i 
105 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
D=DISTANCE IN MILES. 
Ererale 


for any given output and distance of transmission. 

Fig. 2 shows, in a corresponding manner, the economical 
drop. - 

Fig. 3 shows the diameter of the conductors corresponding to 
the conditions of Figs. 1 and 2. 

Fig. 4 shows the relation between D, the distance of trans- 
mission, and p, the percentage net profit on the investment for 


764 MERSHON: MAXIMUM DISTANCE [Dec. 23° 


different values of output W and for selling Bi: of $34 per 
kilowatt per annum. 

Fig. 5 is similar to Fig. 4 but applies to a selling price of $20) 
per kilowatt per annum. 

Fig. 6 shows for different-selling prices the relation between 


20 
a) re | 
18 i 
b 
16 i { 
ui 
gq eee Cee | i 
= j 
—4 
iS) | 
14} > as S 
a Ss j 
cc 33) 
s #/—s + 
> = IS 
a wa) RS 
12}4 = S 
S i 
Ww S | 
fo) es) WZ s 
E Ss 
S SY SS / 
10-2. LS © ! 
ined RNY & ‘ 
wl Vs 
fe w 
Zz 
5 te | 
18 
T Be aiken < 
—— 
6 ae 
ES ae elite 
¢ ‘ CURVES SHOWING ECONOMICAL DROP. 
POWER PURCHASED AT $10.90 PER KILOWATT PER ANNUM, 
*9 . 100 200 300 400 500 6 100 
D=DISTANCE IN MILES, 
Fic. 2 


the distance of transmission and the output for a net profit of 
12%. The lower curve of Fig. 6 is derived from Fig. 4 by plot- 
ting the distances and outputs of Fig. 4 corresponding to a net 
profit of 12%. In a similar manner the upper curve of Fig. 6 
is obtained from Fig. 5. The other curves of Fig. 6 were ob- 


1904.] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. 765 


tained from other sets of curves (not included herein), similar 
to those of Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, and applying to the other prices 
of power to which Fig. 6 applies. 

In obtaining these curves the constants have all been given 


1.80 


W=800 000 


Sa 


0.80 —W=200-000 


CURVES SHOWING DIAMETERS OF CONDUCTORS. 
POWER PURCHASED AT $10.90 PER KILOWATT PER ANNUM. 


D 
Wi 
aI ES 
12) 
Zz 
= 
load 
ie) 
lo 
(2) 
2 
a 
Zz 
fe) 
Oo 
i 
(2) 
[ong 
Ww 
= 
ul 
= 
= 


0.60 


0.40 


Ferrier cl 


0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
D=DISTANCE IN MILES, 
Fic, 3. 
values favorable to long transmission distances. The costs 


have been taken lower than those ordinarily current in the 
endeavor to anticipate somewhat possible future prices. Also, 
the cost of power purchased at the step-up station has been fixed 


766 MERSHON: MAXIMUM DISTANCE [Dec.-23 


at the very low figure of $10.90 per kilowatt per annum. These 
facts should be carefully borne in mind in considering the curves, 
which will all be more or less modified by changes in the quan- 
tities mentioned. 


ut a 
iu | ean | 


CURVES SHOWING NET PROFIT FOR DIFFERENT 


90 DISTANCES OF TRANSMISSION. 
POWER PURCHASED AT $10.90 PER KILOWATT 
PER ANNUM. al 
POWER SOLD AT $34.00 PER KILOWATT 
PER ANNUM. ES 
80 —_—— 


4 


60 


50 


NET PROFIT IN PER CENT. 
| 


a; 
al x mes 
Ss 
a. Lp 
Ly 
30 aa xn ia 
CO) 
Ne 
Gy; a 
20 NE 
ma SS i 
< 
EI 
10 Sa ie 
% 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
D==DISTANCE IN MILES. 
Fic. 4. 


On comparing the diameters of conductors given by Fig. 3 
and the vcltages to which they correspond with the values of 
diameter and critical voltage given by Professor Harris J. Ryan 
in his splendid paper on that subject,* it appears that the 
diameters of Fig. 3 areconsiderably above thcse ofthe paper men- 


*See paper read by Professor Ryan before AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, February 26, 1904. 


1904.] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. 767 


tioned. The values of Fig. 3 are affected by the price paid for 
power at the step-up transformers, but if this be taken even as high 
as $20 per kilowatt per annum instead of $10.90, the diameters 
of the conductors remain below those for the critical voltages. It 
appears, therefore, in the light of present knowledge, that the 
limit of voltage will come through economic conditions and 
not through conditions depending upon atmospheric losses. 

It is difficult to fix upon a figure for the selling price of the 
delivered power which shall be representative. Power prices are 
so dependent upon conditions, especially those arising from the 
location and magnitude of the market and of the supply, that 
any figure chosen will be objected to by some as too high and 


40 


CURVES SHOWING NET PROFIT FOR DIFFERENT 
DISTANCES OF TRANSMISSION 
POWER PURCHASED AT $10.90 PER KILOWATT 
PER ANNUM. 
POWER SOLD AT $20.00 PER KILOWATT 
PER ANNUM, 


30 


20 


E 
Pa 
mia) 
[o) 
fami 
uw 
a> 
z= 
Eb 
es 
fe) 
ac 


P=NET P 


_ “ ————— 
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
D=DISTANCE IN MILES, 


Fic. 5. 


by others as too low. The same statement applies to the price 
assumed as that paid for power at the step-up station, but ina 
lesser degree. The selling prices of $34 and $20 have been 
chosen as the upper and lower limits for the price of power 
in such large amounts as are under consideration.* While it is 
unquestionably true that in some parts of the country power 
is worth, and will bring, much more than $34, the markets 
where such prices are obtainable are not very large; in the 
East, where large markets are possible, much more than $34 
cannot be expected for very large amounts of power. 

* The paper as originally presented contained curves applying to the 
selling price of $34.00 only. 


768 MERSHON: MAXIMUM DISTANCE [Dec. 23 


On the other hand, $20 is believed to be as low as will obtain 
under any other than the most exceptionable circumstances. 
Fig. 6 covers this range of prices, giving curves for intermediate 
prices as well as the limiting prices mentioned. 

The voltages to which the curves apply are much higher 
than those now in use commercially, but they are not beyond 
the range of future possibility. Manufacturers will now under- 
take commercial transformers for voltages as high as 150 000 


ma CURVES SHOWING DISTANCES OF TRANSMISSION 
Syed FOR DIFFERENT OUTPUTS AND DIFFERENT VALUES 
E OF S=SELLING PRICE PER KILOWATT PER ANNUM. 
Fe) POWER. PURCHASED AT $10.90 PER KILOWATT 
al PER ANNUM. 
sty NET PROFIT==12 PER CENT. 
500 000}=1-6-4 - 
cE 
ab 
az 
400 0008 
a? 
ot — 
Ok 
7) 
300 000-4 —~— & 
she § 
Qc a S 
<a Wy | & R 
Zo 
200 000}=S fy 
[oommss) yj 9 
ul § 
= ) gy 
& RY 
ge 
100 000-> 4 Za 5 
5= Re 
°F 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
D=DISTANCE IN MILES. 
RiGcS 6: 


volts, and there is little question that when the demand shall 
come for units of the large capacities contemplated herein, the 
voltage requirements will be met. Such transformers will be 
structures of sufficient size to permit of being gotten at and 
worked upon from the inside as well as the outside and this, in 
connection with the fact that more space may be utilized for 
insulation, will render construction for high voltages much less 
difficult than at present. 


1904.] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. 769 


The maximum amount of power dealt with herein, 500 000 
kilowatts, is probably too high to be seriously considered at 
this time, but from 200000 to 300000 kilowatts is believed 
to be within the range of immediate future possibility. In a 
plant of this size it is probable that a net profit of 12% would 
be required, not alone for the purpose of dividends, but also as 
a protection to the bonds. A price of $26 per kilowatt per 
annum is probably a fair price to assume for the delivered 
power in such large quantities as are contemplated. Under 
these conditions Fig. 5 shows the distance of transmission to 
vary from 463 miles for 200 000 kilowatts to 552 miles for 300 000 
kilowatts. For the present outlook, therefore, the limiting dis- 
tance may be taken as about 500 miles. 

It appears from the preceding matter that under the con- 
ditions assumed, the limiting distance of transmission will, for 
some time at least, be in the neighborhood of 500 miles. 

It also appears that voltage limits will be fixed, not by con- 
ditions depending upon atmospheric losses, but by economic 
conditions. 

The latter conclusion, while recognized as a possibility when 
this paper was begun, was unexpected. It is, perhaps, of greater 
present importance than the original object of the paper as 


conveyed in the title. 
* * * * * * * * * * 


The analysis on which depends the general equations from 
which the preceding curves were obtained will now be taken up. 
Let E = voltage, in kilovolts, delivered to step-down trans- 

formers. 

D = distance of transmission in miles. 

x = percentage of power lost in the line in terms of deli- 
vered power. 

eé = efficiency of the whole system. 

e, = combined efficiency of step-up and step-down trans- 
formers and synchronous motors. 

d = diameter of line conductors in inches. 

W = power, in kilowatts, delivered at low-voltage bus-bars 
of step-down station. 

¢ = cost, in dollars per kilowatt per annum of power 
purchased at the low-voltage bus-bars of the step-up 
transformers. ; 

Let s = price, in dollars, received for power per kilowatt per 

annum at the low-voltage bus-bars of the step-down 
station. 


770 MERSHON: MAXIMUM DISTANCE [Dec. 23 


h = a quantity which, multiplied by c, will give the cost 

at the high-voltage terminals of step-up transformers. 

R = total interest maintenance and depreciation charge per 
annum. 

L = cost of labor for operating transformer stations and for 
executive and clerical services. 

M = total investment. 

C = total cost per annum of power delivered, inclusive cf 
interest. 

p = a percentage covering profit. 


is the efficiency of the line. 


Pug re u 
hag? 1+ 


WwW C Wc (14+) 


é or 


total amount expended per annum for 


power purchased. 
W s = total amount received per annum for power. 


C= CT TT 
We _We (1+*) 
Y ey Ramee a AS = 
Ws—c Ws ree a ae z ER 
. wt tir M 3 M 


M 
| (1) 
Now M is made up of 

(1) Cost of transformers. : 

(2) Cost of transformer switchboard apparatus, cables, light- 

ning protection, etc. 

(3) Cost of building and real estate. 

(4) Cost of insulators. 

(5) Cost of pole-line material and construction. 

(6) Cost of right of way. 

(7) Cost of corrective synchronous motors and exciters. 

(8) Cost of switchboard apparatus, cables, etc., for syn- 

chronous motors. 

(9) Cost of line conductors. 

Cost of transformers will depend upon voltage and output 

f, (E,W) 

Cost of transformer cables and controlling apparatus will 
depend upon same quantities as transformers, but in a different 
way; 

ty (E,W) 


1904.] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. 771 


Cest of building will depend upon output; 
is (W) 

Cost of insulators will depend upon voltage, diameter of 
conductors and number required; 2.e., voltage, diameter of con- 
ductor, and distance of transmission; 

f, (E, d, D) 

Cest of pole-line construction will depend upon diameter of 
the conductors and the distance. But the diameter of the con- 
ductors depends upon voltage, drop, output, and distance; hence, 

jf; (@, D) = f, (E, W, x, D) 
Cost of right of way will depend upon distance only; 
7, (D) 

Cest of synchronous motors will depend upon output only, 

since all other elements affecting cost will be fixed; 
i, (W) 

Cost of switchboards and cables for synchronous motors will 

depend upon output only; 
fs (W) 

Cest of line conductors will depend upon voltage, output, 

line loss allcwed, and distance of transmission; 
PES TD) 

The sum of these nine functions constitutes M, the total 
investment. 

Now &, the total interest and depreciation charge, depends 
upon all of the several quantities making up M. 

In what follows the numerical values of the constants are 
those taken for the specific problem treated herein. 

Let p,= 0.125, being the percentage of- transformer cost for in- 

terest, depreciation, and repairs. 

p,= 0.125, being the percentage of transformer switchboards 
cost for interest, depreciation, and repairs. 

p3= 0.075, being the percentageof buildings cost for interest, 
depreciation, and repairs. 

p, = 9.10, being the percentage of insulator cost for interest, 
depreciation, and repairs. 

p, = 0.125, being the percentage of pole line cost for interest, 
depreciation, and repairs. 

p, = 0.05, being the percentage of cost of rignt of way, for 
interest only. 

p, = 0.125, being the percentage of synchronous motor cost 
of interest, depreciation, and repairs. 

p, = 0.125 being the percentage of cost of synchronousmotor, 


“TI 
~I 
L 


switchboard, etc., for interest, depreciation, and 
repairs. 

Pp, = 0.05, being the percentage of ccst of conductors, for 
interest. 

R = the sum of these percentages multiplied respectively 
into the several quantities to which they refer 

L depends upon output only 

Tio (W) 

The numerical values given for the percentages p,, pp», etc., 
are those which will be used in the specific problem herein 
treated. The rate of interest has in all cases been taken as 
0.05,so that by subtracting this from the above values the de- 
preciation assumed in each case may be determined. 

If there be substituted in equation (1) the values of M, L, 
and R, as expressed by the above symbols, there will result an 
equation expressing in the most genera] terms the relations 
between the distance of transmission and the quantities which 
govern it. This substitution results in rather an unwieldy ex- 
pression and will be omitted. 

Before proceeding with the determination of the forms of 
the several functions indicated it will be necessary to enter into 
a discussion of the relations existing between voltage and line 
loss, and the quantities governing them respectively. 

Let g = that portion of the cost per kilowatt at the low-ten- 
sion bus-bars of the step-down station, which is due to line loss 
and to interest on the value of the conductors; then, anticipating 
in part the matter of a few pages further on 

2 
Doriice Hea Wx 
asin, W 


5 : END : 
in which p, K, ex's the interest on the conductors and hc Wx 


the cost of the power lost in the line. 
Setting the first derivative of this with respect to x equal to 
zero, in order to determine the value of x corresponding to the 


minimum value of g, we find the well known expression for eco- 
nomic drop 


I 


4% 
xm (Po) z =n 


he 


aD 
0.038 = (2) 


RS 


MERSHON: MAXIMUM DISTANCE [Dec. 23 _ 


1904. ] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. 773 


From this equation for x we may obtain the equation 


2 


D 
PK y Fain = hex 


But the first member of this equation is the interest on the 
line conductors per kilowatt delivered, and the second member 
is the annual cost of the line loss per kilowatt delivered. That is, 
for the most economical conditions the line loss per kilowatt de- 
livered must be equalin value tothe interest on the conduc- 
tors per kilowatt delivered—a relation already well known. 

As has already been suggested, there will be a limit to which 
the voltage can be carried, due to the fact that, although in- 
crease of voltage will diminish the annual cost of lost power 
and of conductors, it will increase. the annual cost of certain 
other important factors. The elements of annual cost which 
are affected by change of voltage are the interest and depre- 
ciation of the transformers, the interest on the line conductors, 
the line lcss, and the interest and depreciation of the insulators. 
The first and last items will increase with the voltage, because 
of the increased first ccst, due to the increase of voltage; the 
other two will diminish. 

Let g, = that portion of the annual cost per kilowatt of de- 
livered power due to the line loss, conductors, insulators, and 
transformers. It has just been shown that for best economy 
the line loss and annual conductor cost must be equal, so that 
twice the line loss, 2 tc Wx, may be taken as representing the 
sum of the annual cost due to line loss and to the conductors. 
As will be shown later, the cost of the insulators will vary as 
the distance of transmission, and as the cube of the voltage and 
the cost of the transformers may be represented by 


K,! (E+K,") Wt 


Hence remembering that p, and p, are the interest and depre- 
ciation of transformers and insulators, respectively, 


pce Wet ee DP Bi! (E+K,")W+ 
Bic W 


= 
ie 
—— 
tole 
mS 


or, putting in the value of x = (2 


2hnWDE+p,K,E(+nDE") D+p.K, (E+ K,)Wt 
C= W « 


774 MERSHON: MAXIMUM DISTANCE [Dec. 23 


Now if the first derivative of g, with respect to E be set 
equal to zero to determine the best value of E, there results a 
quartic equation more interesting than valuable, so far as the 
present purpose is concerned. It will greatly simplify matters 
if instead of substituting the value of x in (1+ )* we substitute 
for x, x,, a fixed drop of such value as will correspond to the 
average cost of insulator between the two extreme values of % 
which will be met with in practice; as will be shown later, the 
error due to such a course will be small. Hence 


7, = Zin WD E+ KB te) D+, Ky! E+ KW 
Same W ‘ 


Setting the first derivative of this equation equal to zero, 


K.\? 
solving and substituting the value 1 = (222) there results 


ne ( —pK ,'Wt /_ p2K,?Ww 2 (hepaK SW)? 
6p.K,(1+%,)*D' V 36p2K 2 +%,)D* | 3p,K,0 +2) 

= Wikowondes Wiles: )? 3. 

-(- 806675 +,/ 9400356 5; + 3438.5 W 3) 


This shows that the voltage may be increased with increase of 
output, which was to be expected since those costs which limit the 
voltage will diminish in their amount per kilowatt as the output 
increases. The value of x, used in the above equation was 
determined upon as follows: The minimum percentage drop which 
is ever likely to obtain is, say, 2.2; the maximum is, say, 11.5. 
The reason for selecting these values will be apparent on consider- 
ing the values of E calculated from the above equation, and given 
below, in connection with the values of W to which they corre- 
spond, and the respective distances to which in each case the 
various amounts of power would probably be transmitted. 
The intermediate value of drop which will give the average 
insulator cost is 6.45%, and this value of x, is taken. With 
this value of x, the maximum error in insulator cost, between 
the limits assigned, will have place when x = 2.2 and x = 11.5. 
The percentage error at either of these limits is about 13%. But, 
as appears in the solution of the first derivative, at the point 
of minimum of the variables affected by the voltage the com- 


1904.] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. 775 


bined values of the annual cost due to the conductors, the annual 
cost of the line loss, and that portion of the annual transformer 
cost due to voltage, is more than three times that due to the 
insulators. The total variable quantity involved, therefore, is 
more than four times the annual cost due to insulators, and 
the error as a percentage of the total of values of the variables 


Evelvedusbiccsathan 2 ES ioomiacten decease avilhhe 


seen on examining the manner in which x, enters the equation 
for E, the maximum error in E will be less than 3%, also which 
will to a like extent affect the values of x. This error is negli- 
gible so far as the main problem is concerned, and indeed so far 
as the question of voltage itself is concerned. 

In Fig. 1 are shown curves plotted from equation (3). These 
curves show the kilovolts E& for different distances D, and dif- 
ferent outputs W. Fig. 2 gives curves plotted from equation 
(2), using the values obtained from the curves of Fig. 1. The 
curves of Fig. 2 show the percentage drop x for different distances 
D, and different outputs W. In Fig. 3 are curves showing the 
diameters of the conductors for the conditions of Figs. 1 and 2. 
These diameters were calculated from the formula 


, (WD LW DE, e's (W\* _ W 

d= k's (5 =\ =k, (Fe 2) ==! (=) = 0.0219 (= xc 
which gives the diameter d, in inches, of a solid conductor. 
These diameters were in this case calculated for a solid con- 
ductor instead of a stranded one because we have at present 
available data as to the critical point in the atmospheric loss 
curve for solid conductors only, and while perhaps this critical 
point will come at a higher voltage in the case of the stranded 
conductor with its greater diameter, there are no definite data 
at present on the subject. On comparing the diameters of con- 
ductors given by Fig. 3 and the voltages to which they corre- 
spond with the values of diameter and critical voltage given 
by Professor Ryan* we see that the diameters of Fig. 3 are con- 
siderably above thcse of Prof. Ryan’s paper. It appears, there- 
fore, from the present knowledge available, that the limit of 
voltage will come through economic conditions, and not through 
limitations connected with atmospheric losses. 


*See foot note, page 766. 


776 MERSHON: MAXIMUM DISTANCE [Dec. 23 


In the determination of both x and E& the quantity h has 
been employed. This quantity is a factor which, when multi- 
plied into the cost of power at the low-tension bus-bars of the 
step-up transformers, will give the cost of power at the high- 
tension terminals of the transformers. That is to say, h takes 
account of all charges which should be made against this power, 
including interest and depreciation of the step-up station, trans- 
formers, etc., and labor for operating the station, also the lIcss 
in the transformers. Now, strictly, there should be substituted 
for h, the proper functions of the quantities on which it de- 
pends, but to do so would seriously complicate the equations 
and would be of little utility, since h can be approximated 
with sufficient accuracy in any particular case, and the manner 
in which it occurs in beth x and EF is such as to make the error 
in the quantities due to an error in # much smaller than the 
errorinhitself. Inthespecific problem herein the value c = 10.9 
is taken as being the lowest which will probably ever obtain, 
where large amounts of power are available within transmission 
distance of a desirable market. The value taken for h in the 
determination of & and «is kh = 1.1, so that hc = 12. 

The next step is the determination of the forms of the several 
functions indicated. In what follows the constants have been 
evaluated for the specific problem herein. The costs resulting 
from the use of these constants will be found to be, in general, 
considerably less than present commercial costs. The con- 
’ stants were purposely based on prices less than can be now 
obtained, in the endeavor to anticipate, somewhat, possible 
future prices. 

From a careful consideration of transformer prices, it has 
been determined that, for transformers of,1500 kw. and over, 
the cost, installed, very closely follows the law, 


f, (E,W) = K,! (E+K,") W% = 13. (E+K,’) W*, 
2,7, (E,W) = pK,’ (E+K,") W% = 1.625 (E+ K,”) W% 
in which K,’ is a constant and K,” a “‘ variable constant,” a 


quantity which varies slowly with the output in accordance 
with the law, 


K,” = k, +k,” W = 55+0.000227 W 


Theoretically the transformer cost would vary with the 
drop %,, since the step-up transformers would have an output 
and voltage greater than the step-down transformers. Prac- 


1904.] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. ean 


tically, however, step-up and step-down transformers are built 
so nearly in the same lines that the drop would make little dif- 
ference.. Such difference as would exist can be taken care of 
approximately by adjustment of the constants, which has been 
done. 

While the apparatus for the control of the high-tension side 
of the transformers would theoretically vary with the voltage, 
such variation for 50 000 volts and over will be small, since 
in most modern plants the high-tension switching apparatus 
is simple; and higher voltages are likely to cause it to remain 
so. The lightning protection for the high-voltage lines might 
vary with the voltage, but it is probable that for high voltages 
there will soon be a reversion to much simpler and inexpensive 
apparatus than we use now, so that the variation, if any, due 
to higher voltages, will be negligible. The switchboard for the 
lower voltage side of the transformers will vary only with the 
output, since we assume the lower voltage to be the same in 
all cases, say 6000 volts or thereabouts. The apparatus for 
the control of transformers may, therefore, be considered as. 
depending only upon output. Under this assumption a con- 
sideration of costs of transformer controlling apparatus and 
cables, shows that we may assume, with a close degree of accu- 
racy, that 

jz, @,W) = K,’+K,' W = 21000+0.9 W 
~. Pole (E,W) =p, K,’+7,K,” W = 2625+0.1125 W 


The cost of buildings and the rea] estate for them will increase 
very slowly with the output. The variation of this item due 
to variation of output can be expressed closely enough by 

7; (W) = K,’/+K,”" Wt = 125000+125 Wt 
“. Pals (W)=p,K,'+p,K,” W*% = 93754 9.375 W% 

The cost of an insulator will, theoretically, vary withthe 
diameter of the conductor and the voltage. Practically, how- 
ever, the diameter of the conductor will have nothing to do 
with the cost. A consideration of insulator prices shows that 
the cost of an insulator will vary as the sum of a small constant 
plus the product of a constant into the cube of the voltage. 
With high voltages the small constant is negligible, so that we 
may write 
| (E,d,D) = K, E® (14%,)? D = 0.000732 (1.0645)? E? D = 

0.000883 E* D. 
-. Pf, (E, 4, D) =p, K, E (14+x,)* D = 0.0000883 E* D 


778 MERSHON: MAXiMUM DISTANCE [Dec. 23 


The cost of the pole-line material and construction will depend 
somewhat upon the diameter of the conductors, since, as the 
diameter of the conductors increases, the wind and sleet stresses 
will increase. The increase of cost with :ncrease in diameter of 
conductors will be slow. The law followed will be that of a con- 
stant plus a function of the diameter of conductors, since, no 
matter how small the diameter of conductor, there will be a 
certain cost representing the minimum sized pole which would 
be employed. We may, with a fair degree of accuracy, write 


f, d, D) = (K,’+K," d) D = f, (E, W, x, D) 


DN Raa Fee (F-) D 


x 


or, putting in the value of x = ne 


[- (2, We Dy) = 


E 


ee 
(Ee E 


)b= 3000 D+37.2(5-). r 


Kk, (W\t 
“ PeflEW,#,D)=poKe! D+p, =" (E) 


W 
(375 7 LaaGs HEY D 


which answers for a stranded conductor. 
Cost of right of way will be directly proportional to distance, 
hence 


ji; (D) = K,D = 1000D 
. De i (D) =P. KD = 50D 
A consideration of synchronous motor prices shows that the 
cost of synchronous motors may be written, 
i; (W) = K,'+K,"W = 120004+5.4W 
'. Pil, (W) = pK,’ +p, K," W = 1500+0.675 W 


The switchboards and cables for the motors will follow the 
same law as those for the transformers, hence 


fe (W) = Ky’ + Ky” W = 8400+ 0.17W 
"Pets (W) = Ps ee ae Ps Kel W = 1050 ae 0.02125.W 


From the well known relations between the cost of con- 


1904.] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. 779 


ductors, and the voltage, distance, output, and drop, we may write 


gs pats WIP WD 
[ota an DP) =, Fig? = 0.346 Ex 
alte D 
or, putting in the value of x = n E 
ene GD) sig VED a: W D 
a ad) aia babsitiiy lis <n oe nope. 
WD W D 
a Pky ie (E, W, Nin D) => Po 1a Te = 0.455 os 


The cost cf labor, for the operation of the step-up and step- 
down transformer stations, and for executive and clerical pur- 
poses, would probably not vary at all. We have, in’each case, 
the same number of units to be looked after, and the size of 
these units would make little, if any, difference in the cost of 
attendance upon them. Similarly, the output will make little 
difference in executive and clerical costs. We should probably 
be justified in making 7,) (W) a constant. In order, however, 
to cover such small increase in labor and salaries as there might 
be with increase of output we will write 

Tio (W) = Kyo’ + Ky)” Wt = 32 000+ 26 W? 

It is to be noted that the labor in connection with the line 
is taken care of in the depreciation and repair percentages 
applicable to the supporting structure and insulators respect- 
ively. 

The efficiency of the whole system is fae 


Putting in the value of x = n = 


E 
2 ey iy 0.925 
1+n 2 1+ 0.0382 
W (1+ n z) C > 
ecpomet sew Oa AE ey 4 oda ee 
e e, es Cs E E 


The various .1unctions above arrived at may now be utilized 
N 
_ in obtaining N and M of equation (1), p= i: 


Remembering that R is the sum of the products of the 
various functions by the corresponding percentages representing 
interest, depreciation, and repair; that L = fy) (W), and repre- 
senting the various resulting collections of constants as follows 


780 MERSHON: MAXIMUM DISTANCE [Dec 23- 
a= p,K" +p, Ki +p.Ke" =" 0.78 
b= Ky’ +p. Ko’ +b, Ko! +b, Ky’ +p, Ks,’ = 46 550 
= Ky)" + p3,K5" = 35.38 
eae = <A 
17 es 
ena Wee vee Sirs are 
1 
=(s—— na) Fe (7° + 2 — mW? — ~,K,/(E+K,")W* 
1 


Cy 


” A\ 4 
—p,K,(1+%,)9 E D—rD ae (=) D6. 


Representing constants as follows 


Oris” alee : eon 
Br Peer ates = 166 460 
+= K,'+K, SACD 
M=aWw-+ Ae atk, "Wt +K,'(E+K,") W? 
$ 
+K,1++,)? B D+y peta (5) D+8. 


These values of N and M, if substituted in equation (1) will 
give, in its final form, the equation connecting distance, output, 


voltage, and profit, or,in connection with equation (8), for volt-. 


age, the relation between distance, output, and profit. Such 
substitution results in a cumbersome equation and will not be 
made here. If the various numerical values, already deter- 
mined for the specific problem herein treated, be substituted 
in N and M, there results, 


= (s — 12.57) W — 0.903 a 38 Wi 1.625 (E+K,)W 
W\3 
— 0.0000883 E? D — 425 D — 4.65 i) D—46 550 


W D 


M= 6.47 W+9.1 ——+125W4+13(E+K ,”)W% +0.000883 E8D’ 


i 


W 


+4000 D+ 37.2 ( 


)’ D +166 400. 


1904.] OF POWER TRANSMISSION. 781 


Putting in this equation the various values of s and calculat- 
ing the value of # for different outputs, W, and different distances 
D, the curves of Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 (and the other sets of similar 
curves for other prices of power) have been obtained. These 
curves show, for different values of W, the relation between 
pand D. Assuming that the minimum acceptable profit is 
12 per cent. and taking from Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 and the other 
sets of similar curves (not included herein) the values of D and 
W corresponding to this percentage profit, there has been 
plotted the final curve, Fig. 6, which shows the relation be- 
tween distance and output for the percentage profit assumed. 

In considering these curves, the assumption made in con- 
nection with them should be carefully borne in mind. A small 
change in the purchase price or selling price of power will make 
a great difference in the result. Smaller amounts of power will 
in general be purchased at a higher price per kilowatt, but 
on the other hand they would probably be transmitted to points 
where the power would bring a higher price, since in general, the 
larger the market the cheaper can power be produced by steam; 
this fact compensates somewhat for the error in assuming the 
same purchase price for large and small amounts of power. 

It would be interesting to let s—c’e, equal to zero and de- 
termine ~ which would then be the cost, including interest, of 
operating the plant. If curves showing the percentage of the 
investment for operation were thus determined, also the total 
cost of the plant, both tor various outputs, the results would 
be valuable in preliminary estimates. The writer hopes to work 
up such data, later. 

It will be noticed on referring to the curves that some of 
them reach to distances which cause the drop to exceed the 
value taken for the upper limit of drop in connection with insu- 
lator cost. The error due to 1 or 2% excess will not greatly 
affect the final result. It would have been somewhat better 
however to have chosen the limits of drop as 5% and 15% re- 
spectively instead of those taken. 


7&2 MAXIMUM POWER TKANSMISSION. [Dec. 23 


Discussion on ‘“‘ THE Maximum DISTANCE TO WHICH POWER 
CAN BE ECONOMICALLY TRANSMITTED.” 


PRESIDENT LiEB: It is gratifying to have had another pio- 
neer paper from Mr. Mershon, presenting data for the solution 
of problems in the transmission of electrical energy, an im- 
portant branch of electrical industry. Large parts of our 
western territory are vitally interested in the solution of these 
problems of transmission, notably the Pacific coast territory 
and vast tracts of land in need of irrigation. 

The bringing of cheap industrial power into the mining cen- 
tres is doing much toward lessening the cost of handling ores, 
making it possible to develop the poorer grades of ore. In the 
South also the economic conditions have been vastly improved 
by the utilization of the natural sources of power. 

In Switzerland and Italy, for instance, it is hardly too much 
to say that the future prosperity of those countries is intimately 
bound up with the util'zation of the vast sources of natural 
power, the ‘‘ white coal”’ of the Alps. 

While the speaker has no data at hand as to the extent to 
which the coal consumption is affected by the utilization of the 
water courses, the effect must be important, as industrial centres 
like the plain of Lombardy (Italy) are no longer operating their 
cotton mills and silk mils by steam power, but are now de- 
pendent upon electric power from transmission plants. When 
it is considered that almost all of the coal consumed in Italy is 
brought in bottoms from England, it is evident what an eco- 
nomic: evolution such a change’ represents. 

H. G. Storr: ‘ This paper is a most interesting one, not only 
to the engineer, but to the capitalist; for the modern trend of 
events shows that at no distant time the steam railroads in this 
country will in all probability be operated electrically. That in 
itself brings up the question of the maximum distance to which 
power can be economically transmitted ; and the suggestion occurs 
at once whether we can transmit our power any more 
cheaply over wires than we can in the shape of coal in cars, and 
also which is the more reliable way of doing it. After all, every 
transmission scheme gets down to the question of reliability. 
An electrical transmission line, as we well know, is a sensitive 
piece of apparatus, subject to atmospheric disturbance, subject 
to the small boy with the kite, and with the piece of wire which 
he can throw over the line at any time. The freight-car is a 
pretty hardy piece of apparatus and not only hardy, but it has 
the possibility of a storage of power in the shape of coal at the 
point where the power is to be generated. The question of re- 
liability is difficult to define, as to just what we want in 
the shape of reliability; power would not be considered reliable 
if the total interruptions per year exceed one hour. That 
criterion in some cases may be too exacting and in other cases 
not exacting enough. In large lighting plants, such as there 
are in New York, an interruption of one hour, unless taken care 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 783 


of by storage-batteries, would be so serious a menace to the 
interests of the company and so annoying to the public that it 
would not be considered for a moment as permissible. 

This paper deals with figures of 200 000 or 300 000 kw., and 
with distances of 550 miles. The transmission of power from 
Niagara Falls to New York would come well within the limits 
defined by the author, as the distance is approximately 450 miles 
and the amount of powei used by the large plants in this city 
approximates 175 000 kilowatts. 

The author makes the recommendation: ‘“‘ Frequency of trans- 
mission not less than 25 cycles nor more than 30 cycles as being 
the limiting frequencies,’ and in the paragraph immediately 
following is the statement: ‘“‘ Idle synchronous motors at step- 
down station to correct for power-factor, the average power- 
factor of the line being held as near unity as possible.” By in- 
creasing the frequency we increase the capacity current of the 
line, and in that way can compensate for quite a large lagging 
power-factor. If there were not so many established plants 
using 25 cycles, the speaker thinks it would be profitable to 
discuss the question of using this frequency, whether 25 
cycles is not too low. In the west, where 60 cycles is used 
almost exclusively, the power-factor is nearly always leading. 
That has another bearing on the cost of copper, and also elimi- 
nates the idle synchronous motors, which may be a source of 
much trouble in the case of disturbances, such as short circuits, 
on the line. 

The principal criticism to be made is that the cost has been 
worked out without consideration of the load-factor, when it 
can not be expected that the load-factor will be greater than 
50%, and this in turn affects the entire copper calculations. 
Examination of the mathematical analysis upon which the 
curves in this paper are based shows that load-factor has been 
entirely ignored and that vhe assumption has been made that 
power can be sold at a uniform price per kilowatt independent 
of the load-factor. Many attempts have been made to sell 
power upon this basis, but the speaker’s experience is that they 
have ended in a mutual recognition by the producer and the 
consumer that it was not fair to the latter. $34.00 per kilowatt 
would mean that the cost per kilowatt-hour (on one-hour peak 
load lasting 309 days per annum) would be over 11 cents, or more 
than double the cost of steam power under the same load-factor. 
As a general proposition, it may be safely stated that no distant 
water power transmission plant can compete with a steam plant 
located near the point at which power is to be delivered, if the 
load-factor is less than 40% and coal less than $3.25 per ton. 

In regard to the figure given of $10.90 per annum per kilowatt 
for power at the source of supply, there are few if any water- 
power plants developed for less than $100 per kilowatt, and 
some have gone as high as $190 per kilowatt, so that if we allow 
12.5% for interest, depreciation, etc., as in the author’s paper, 
the minimum cost per kilowatt would vary from $12.50 to $23.75. 


784 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. [Dec. 23 


Puitie Torcuio: Mr. Stott said he looked at this paper 
from the point of view of transmitting power from Niagara 
Falls to New York, or to similar large centres where there is a 
great market for power. This discussion will be somewhat from 
the same point of view, and not from the point of view of terri- 
tories, such as exist in the West, where the cost of coal may be 
a great factor in the development of long-distance power trans- 
mission. 

The general problem treated by the author involves the 
study of the two main factors which enter into the 
problem of power transmission, t.e., the transmission pres- 
sure and the cross-section of the conductors. The elements 
which are affected by the pressure are the cost of transformers 
and insulators, which increase with the pressure, and the cost 
of line conductors and line losses, which decrease with the 
pressure. All the other elements are practically not influenced 
by the change in pressure. The author has treated the subject 
in detail, and has given a formula for the determination of the 
most economical transmission pressure. In this formula there 
enters the cost of line losses and interest and depreciation on 
conductors, both of which are dependent upon the most econom- 
ical cross-section of conductors; therefore the dominating factor 
in a study of this character is the determination of the cross- 
section of conductors for the fixed conditions of each problem. 

The author has adopted the Kelvin law for the determination 
of the cross-section of conductors, and he has obtained the re- 
sults shown in Fig. 8, giving: ‘‘ The diameter of the conductors 
for power purchased at $10.90 per kilowatt per annum.”’ 

The speaker has, during the last ten years, done considerable 
work on problems of transmission of power for a gréat variety 
of conditions; in all these studies he has made frequent use of 
the Kelvin law, which has been of great service to him. Its 
importance, however, is not generally recognized among engi- 
neers, perhaps for the reason of the great care which must be 
used in the selection of the factors entering into the formula, 
and also on account of the mistaken interpretation of the mean- 
ing of the formula which is often expected to give a general 
solution of any specific problem without regard to other require- 
ments not taken into consideration by the Kelvin law. This 
law gives with accuracy the most economical cross-section of 
the conductors of a circuit in which we want a certain current 
to circulate. Other requirements, such as the safe carrying 
capacity of wires, the regulation, the brush discharges of high- 
pressure lines, etc., may substantially modify the conclusions 
arrived at from the consideration of the theoretical conditions 
of efficiency alone, and these modifying influences must be given 
due weight. 

The speaker wishes. to make a criticism in connection with 
the author’s assumption of $10.90 per kilowatt per annum, for 
the line losses, this being the same amount as paid for the main 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 785 


bulk of current. The author, in this instance, failed to apply 
the very same principle which is one of the prominent features 
of the treatment of his paper, z.e., ‘‘ That the greater the out- 
put of a plant, the less is the cost per kilowatt of all the equip- 
ment.” Now if there is a case where this general principle is 
unquestionably correct, it is the case of the increment cost of 
station equipment for amounts not exceeding say 5% or 10% 
of the total equipment; that is,if a plant of 100000 kw. 
will cost, say $10 000 000 or $100 per kilowatt, we must certainly 
be able to increase the capacity of the apparatus say 10% at 
an increment cost considerably less than the average of $100 
per kilowatt. The fact that in the paper the power is assumed 
to be purchased at a fixed rate per kilowatt will not alter con- 
ditions, as the saving derived from this increment cost of gen- 
erating equipment will be felt either directly or indirectly by 
the transmitting company, either by lower fixed charges for 
the operation of the generating plant, or lower price of power 
charged by the generating company. If the transmitting 
company owns and operates the generating plant as well, nobody 
will question the above reasoning. The speaker does not see 
any reason why the same should not hold for the two enterprises 
operated independently; at least in this theoretical discussion 
such assumption should be made. If this had been done, per 
haps the increment cost of power for line losses and other losses 
would have been $5.45 instead of $10.90 per kilowatt, while 
the cost of power delivered would have been slightly increased 
by the necessary amount so that the average of all power would 
still amount to $10.90 per kilowatt as before. This change in 
cost of power for line losses would have considerably changed 
the final results. The cross-sections of conductors given in 
Table 3, all of which are based on approximately 2500 circular 
mils per ampere, would have been changed to the basis of 1750 
circular mils per ampere, thereby reducing the total cost of con- 
ductors about 30%. The economical voltages of Fig. 1 would 
have been somewhat changed, while the curves of economical 
energy drop of Fig. 2 would have been raised about 42%. By 
referring to Fig. 2 we see that such increase in energy drop 
would be permissible for all cases up to about 200 miles; this at 
least for the curves of larger outputs. For longer distances we 
should meet serious objections, especially for the curves of 
smaller outputs. These limitations are dependent upon the 
character of apparatus supplied at the receiving end of the line. 
In general the presence of different types of apparatus will limit 
the maximum energy drop to the following amounts: 


Synchronous converters, about......... 10% 
Synchronous motors, about..........-: 15% 
hiduction motors abouty. ci 5 ke nae: 20% 


This brings into play a new factor which is not taken into 
account by the formulas. Any conclusions that might be de- 
rived from the analytical treatment must be ultimately revised 


786 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. [Dec. 23 


to meet the above requirements of maximum energy drop. In 
the case of very long transmission lines, necessarily involving 
large amounts of power, synchronous converters will usually 
be found present under existing American conditions. This fact 
not only would prevent us from reducing the cross-section of 
conductors as given in the author’s paper, but it would also 
necessitate a further increase of cross-section for reducing the 
maximum energy drop, and therefore cause a reduction in the 
limiting distance of the present outlook for power transmission 
as given in the concluding paragraphs of the paper, where the 
limiting distance is given as approximately 550 miles. 

In making further criticism, the speaker has in mind that 
this paper is of a pioneer character, and therefore should only 
be discussed upon broad lines. We must assume ideal condi- 
tions and we must even allow something that may appear prob- 
lematical at the present time. The author has correlated a 
great amount of knowledge and information in the ten formulas 
giving the elements of cost of the transmitting systems. The 
speaker would like to question some of the items and assump- 
tions, for instance; the use of a single pole line and single 
route; the arrangement and number of transformers for the 
different outputs; the 5% rate of interest for capital invested 
in an enterprise of this character; and other items. But he be- 
lieves it would not be fair nor profitable to open a discussion 
upon these points. He believes, however, that exception could 
be taken to some of the fundamental assumptions. 

On page 760, first line, the author says; ‘‘ It is certain that 
with the course of time the value of power will increase.’’ If 
this statement is applied to a definite period of time covering - 
say 25 or even 50 years from now, we are entitled to question 
its plausibility. The cost of power derived from coal will, for 
-centuries to come, apparently govern the cost of power through- 
out the greater part of the North American continent. If other 
sources of power be used, they must compete favorably with the 
power from coal. The coal deposits of the United States and 
Canada are so large that coal-trade experts have not yet made 
an inventory of the probable supply. There are now immense 
coal fields entirely untouched. At present the rate of con- 
sumption of coal in the United States is exactly 1 000 000 tons 
a day. Of this amount probably less than 5% is consumed 
for generating electricity for all purposes. From the U. S. 
Census Reports for the year ending June 30, 1902, we gather 
the following approximate total current output and total station 


Dynamo Capacity Total Yearly Out-| Estimated 
Installed horse power |put Kilowatt-hours| Load-Factor 


Electric Light Station. .| 1 624 980 2 453 502 652) 23% 
Electric Railway Station] 1 159 002 2 261 484 397| 30% 


AWoy ei ae Wee cee teh | 2 783 982 4714 987 049] 26% ° 
2 075 000 kw. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 787 


capacity of all electric light and electric railway stations. (The 
load-factors shown are obtained on the assumption that the 
maximum load was equal to the dynamo capacity installed.) 

If all electric current had been generated by steam, the total 
coal consumption would have been less than 20 000 000 tons at 
the most (on a consumption of five pounds per kilowatt hour 
the total would have been less than 12000000 tons). This 
amount is insignificant compared with the 1000000 daily 
consumption for all purposes. Now if we consider the great 
available supply of coal and the extent of its industrial and 
domestic uses, and the fact that cheap coal will be one of the 
fundamental factors enhancing the industrial supremacy of this 
country, it is hardly probable that the cost of coal will be ab- 
normally raised from the present level, except for the gradual 
increase of cost of mining and the increase in wages that might 
follow a general raising of prices for all labor and supplies and 
an abnormal rate of increase of production of gold tending to 
depreciate the money value. On the other hand, while we may 
not expect to obtain coal at a lower price than at present, and 
may probably have to pay more for it in future, it is also quite 
probable that though the new rotary steam-engine, per se, will 
not revolutionize the cost of power production, it will eventually 
lead us to the development of the rotary-gas-engine, which will 
make it feasible to realize enormous savings. in the production of 
power. Therefore, while we may have momentary fluctuations 
of values of power, we are quite justified in expecting still fur- 
ther reductions for many years, before the curve of values of 
power shall have reversed its present lowering course and begun 
to climb. 

This preamble was necessary to bring on the proper plane 
the discussion of the price of power assumed by the author. 
He puts this value at $34.00 per kilowatt per year. Let us as- 
sume that the equivalent of the total loads of all United States 
electric light and railway stations operated during the year 
ending June 1902 were grouped within a radius of 10 or 15 miles 
of the ends of four 518 750-kw. transmitting lines 500 miles long. 
On the basis of $34.00 per kilowatt per year the total power cosy 
would have been 2 075 000 X34 = $70 550 000. This does not 
include the cost of distributing the power to the several con- 
sumers within the 10- or 15-mile radius. 

Furthermore, the great bulk of the 25-cycle current would 
have to be converted to some other form before being used for 
the respective requirements, with attendant losses. Therefore 
the above cost would have to be increased by 10 to 20% for 
losses in transmission to and conversion of the 25-cycle curren 
‘at the customers’ sub-stations, plus interest, depreciation, re- 
pairs and taxes on lines, cables and subways, sub-station real 
estate and buildings, and sub-station transforming and convert- 
ing apparatus, plus the labor and operating charges for the opera- 
tion of the sub-stations. The aggregate of these items would 


788 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. . [Dec. 23 


probably amount to about $22 500 000. For the sake of sim- 
plicity let us assume that this amount would offset the capital 
charges on real estate and buildings plus the labor production 
charges for the present steam generating stations. Then we 
should have left for direct comparison on one side the total cost 
of water power of $70 550000 and on the other side the cost 
of fuel plus the interest and depreciation on the generating 
equipment, excluding real estate and buildings. It is estimated 
from the figures given in the Census Report that the electric 
stations paid for all kinds of fuel to generate their total output 
about 0.45 cents per kilowatt-hour, or $21 200 000 total. 

The first cost of steam generating equipment in large stations, 
exclusive of real estate and buildings, making allowance for 
future reduction of cost of apparatus, can be safely estimated 
not to exceed $100.00 per kilowatt. The total cost of generating 
equipment for 2075000 kw. would amount to $207 500 000, 
and at the rate of 12.5% interest and depreciation, the 
capital charges ner year would be $25 937 500. This added to 
the cost of fuel would make the total $47 137 500, to be com- 
pared with the $70 550 000 cost of water power. We therefore 
see that the $34.00 per kilowatt per year is excessive, and that 
on the basis of the operation of all the electric light and railway 
stations of the United States for the year ending June 30, 1902, 
47 137 500 : 
=0 550 000 xX 34= $22.72. 
An approximately identical conclusion can be arrived at by figur- 
ing the different elements of power cost from an ideal steam plant 
and comparing them with the corresponding costs of water- 
power; but it is not necessary to go into further discussion on this- 
point. Therefore the price of $22.72 per kilowatt per annum for 
water-power transmitted 500 miles under the conditions given in 
the author’s paper, the speaker considers an outside limit, as 
it would not give any financial inducement to the consumers to 
sacrifice the safety and reliability of control of the local steam 
plants in favor of long-distance transmission power with the 
attendant dangers of breakdowns met in the operation of such 
an extensive system of water-power generation and transmission 
—all depending upon the safety of a single pole-line exposed 
to all the dangers of weather, defective materials, or malicious 
acts of men. It is only necessary to mention these drawbacks, 
as persons familiar with the requirements of continuity of service 
in large svstems will at once draw the proper conclusions. 

If water power will ever be transmitted to large markets like 
New York, Chicago, etc., it will be necessary to keep at these 
centres an equivalent reserve steam generating capacity; first, 
for tying over shutdowns of the transmission power; and second- 
ly, for taking care of a great proportion of the power required 
during the periods of heavy loads, thereby utilizing the water 
power for the 24 hours of each day with a load-factor of say 
60% or over, and operating the steam plants at a very low load- 


the price should have been reduced to 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 789 


factor so as to save fuel. On account of the uncertain duration 
of shutdowns, storage-batteries could only be used to take care 
of the loads during the period of starting up the steam-generating 
plants. 

P. G. GossterR: Mr. Torchio says that he considers the 
author’s statement of power sold at $34.00 per kilowatt to be 
the outside limit; that he considers it necessary to sell power 
at about $22.00 per kilowatt or $17.00 per horse power to com- 
pete with the cost of steam. The speaker understands the 
author’s price, $34.00 is for the sale of the power at the time 
of peak load. If Mr. Torchio’s $22.00 per kilowatt is based 
on the average Joad-factor of 23%, as he gives it, and the power 
can be sold at about $97.00 per horse power, then the author 
is well within the limit. If the $17.00 per horse power is for 
the maximum the speaker fears that most of the water power 
companies would be forced into the hands of receivers if that 
price were maintained. 

Puitip TorcHio: $22.72 was per kilowatt maximum and 
not per kilowatt average. That was arrived at by taking the 
dynamo capacity installed of all the lighting companies and 
railway companies of the United States to be equivalent to 
their maximum load. 

P. G. Gosster: It is hardly fair to let the impression go 
out that the average price of power per horse power is $17.00. 
The speaker does not think it is based upon facts, the facts 
upon which commercial business is usually conducted. 

Puitip Torcuio: The $17.00 per horse power referred to 
in the speaker’s remarks is not the retail selling price of power 
delivered to the consumer. It only includes the interest and 
depreciation of machinery, exclusive of real estate and build- 
ings, plus the cost of coal, which items the speaker assumed 
to represent the wholesale value of water power delivered at 
the purchaser’s switchboard under the specific conditions of 
load factor, etc., given in those remarks. Nothing else is in- 
cluded in that figure. On the other hand, the selling price 
charged by a company retailing power will be dependent upon 
the use and the load-factor; and furthermore, in that price 
must be included a number of other items, as the production 
labor cost, the interest and depreciation, and taxes on real 
estate and buildings, and also on the distributing lines and 
subways; also the cost of distribution labor and repairs, and 
if it is a lighting company, the cost of supplies and maintenance 
of the customers’ lamps; also it will include all the items of 
general expense that make up the total cost of power deliv- 
-ered to the customer, including management, accounting, 
canvassing, insurance, legal, medical, and damages, etc., and 
finally the charge for profit to the company. i 

J. E. Wattace: Assuming that the mathematics underlying 
the curves given in Fig. 1 are correct, the speaker considers that 
a grave error in engineering judgment would be committed by 


790 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. [Dec. 23 


following them. To substantiate this statement, the speaker 
calls attention to a short press article written by him and pub- 
lished in a recent issue of the Electrical World and Engineer.* 

One of the curves used to illustrate this article shows how the 
cost per kilowatt of energy delivered decreases with increased 
pressure. Beyond a pressure of 60 000 volts, in this particular 
case, the drop in the curve is hardly worth considering. The 
increased cost of insulators and transformers, due to increased 
pressure, is neglected in the curve; if included, it would ulti- 
mately overcome the slight drop beyond 60,000 volts and the 
curve would take an upward turn, locating economic pressure. 
Considering a factor for more reliable operation at lower 
pressures, the slight advantages gained in costs of delivered 
energy, as economic pressure is approached, do not warrant the 
very considerable increase in pressure. 

With increase of output the cost of transformers is de- 
creased to some extent, and the pole construction item de- 
creases by a ratio that practically varies inversely as the output; 
possible failure of a line, however,‘ should impose a limitation 
which would not allow the process to go on to an almost in- 
definite point. With a given increase in output the effect is to 
make economic pressure higher, as found by the author. Engi- 
neers agree that practical conditions govern theory, and it is 
held by the speaker that in deciding on the transmitting pressure 
to be employed, the advantages to be gained by increased pressure 
should again be compared with the factor for more reliable 
operation at a lower pressure, which factor naturally would 
increase with increased load for which a given pole line is 
responsible. 

The conditions on which the curves in Figs. 4 and 5 of the 
author’s paper are based are somewhat special; the total invest- 
ment does not include the principal item of cost in a transmission 
scheme—the cost of the generating plant. Large profits could 
easily be figured under such conditions. The market price of 
delivered energy, and load-factor on both generating plant and 
transmission line, af well as cost of energy delivered to the line, 
are factors that have an influence on profitable efficiencies. 

At the outset this paper claimed to be in the nature of a fore- 
cast of what might be done in the future. The author has said 
that a 12% profit is necessary to guarantee the bonds; it is 
presumed that the full issue of the common stock will be rep- 
resented in the construction costs. The author does not give 
the proportion of stock to bonds, so we shall assume the usual 
proportion, 50% of each. Five per cent. for interest, and seven 
and a half per cent. for maintenance and depreciation are the 
figures given; they will be allowed for the generating plant. 
This means that one-half of the construction costs must earn 
12.5% and the other half 19.5%, or an average of 16% on the 
whole; $10.90 is given as the amount that the generating plant 
will receive per kilowatt. Assumed that it does not cost more 


*Electrical World and Engineer, Nov. 5, 1904. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 791 


than 90c. per kilowatt for attendance; we then have $10.00 rep- 
senting 16% of the construction costs per kilowatt of the plant. 
$62.50 is an exceedingly small figure with which to pay for 
water rights, hydraulic developments, water-wheels, generating 
apparatus and the various other accessories necessary to a gen- 
erating plant. 

Watt-losses are considered in terms of a delivered kilowatt. 
It is apparent that if a line has 90% efficiency, there is a loss of 
10% of the generated energy. Considering line resistance, it is 
also apparent that the annual conductor charges vary inversely 
as the per cent. loss; therefore the conductor charges are repre- 
constant 
E* (1-7) 
where f equals line efficiency. At the other end of the 
line the relation of conductor charges per generated kilowatt 
to conductor charges per delivered kilowatt, is the same ex- 
constant 
Ey 

In other words, the conductor charges in terms of a delivered 
kilowatt vary inversely as the per cent. loss multiplied by the 
efficiency of the line. If one considers conductor losses in the 
per cent. of a delivered kilowatt, and neglects to consider that 
the delivered kilowatt is a function of the efficiency of the line, 
one is led into error. This error evidently led the author to 
Kelvin’s law. With all due reverence to Lord Kelvin, the 
speaker contends that Kelvin’s law does not deliver the cheapest 
kilowatt. At any practical pressure the error in Kelvin’s law 
is, in the matter of a delivered kilowatt, rather inconsiderable; 
but the error multiplies and soon becomes formidable when it is 
carried into efficiencies for percentage returns. Anyone who cares 
to look up the subject will discover the truth of this statement. 
M. H. Gerry, Jk: A mathematical analysis of a subject of 
this kind has always seemed to the speaker to be of doubtful 
utility, not necessarily because of any defect in the process of 
reasoning, but because there are so many variables entering 
into the expressions. In order to apply such an analysis where 
the conditions are so far in advance of current practice, it is 
necessary to make arbitrary assumptions based on the judgment 
of the individual engineer; and the final deductions are so much 
affected by the assumed values as to render them little more 
than an individual opinion instead of being facts founded on 
mathematical reasoning. 
Taking the author’s expressions and modifying his assump- 
tions, it can be shown that the economical limit of distance of 
_ power transmission in a given case may be either 100 miles or 
1000 miles, and this being the case the mathematical develop- 
ment is of little value from an engineering standpoint as a means - 
of predicting ultimate commercial results. This paper is, how- 
ever, of considerable interest from its theoretical side. The 
mathematical expressions are in good form, and will prove of 
value in the future when more is known of the physical and 


sented as a constant divided by the per cent. loss, thus 


pression divided by the efficiency of the line; this gives 


792 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. (Dec. 23 


commercial conditions surrounding the transmission of energy 
at the excessively high pressures and great distances referred to. 
At the present time the information before us regarding press- 
ures above 100 000 volts is so limited as to make substitutions 
in the various mathematical expressions of very doubtful value; 
it is certainly not wise to attempt to show in this way the 
limitations of distance for future electrical transmissions. Such 
statements are misleading and should not appear unchallenged 
in the ProcEEDINGS of the INSTITUTE, 

A. E. KENNELLY: We are indebted to the author of this 
paper for a careful analysis of the problem of the commercial 
limits of electric power transmission under clearly specified 
conditions. There is no pretence that these conditions are 
immediately available for general estimates. The pressures are 
much in excess of those in commercial use to-day, and the 
power assumed is also much greater than the power ordinarily 
transmitted. Nevertheless, the solution of the economic prob- 
lem for definitely assumed pressures and kilowatts is perfectly 
proper matter for discussion, as an abstract proposition, quite 
independently of the question as to when such pressures and 
powers will be practically available in the future. 

The history of electric power transmission in the past shows 
that it is unsafe to prophecy the commercial limiting distance 
of transmission. In the early days of the development of the 
incandescent lamp it was demonstrated mathematically that it 
would be commercially impracticable to transmit electric power 
to such lamps more than a few hundred feet. The proposition 
was valid at the time, but only for the conditions then existing. 
The three-wire system and the 100-volt lamp upset both the 
assumptions and the conclusions. The practical men carried — 
power to lamps distant several thousand feet from the generator. 
Then the transformer became known and it was demonstrated 
that it would be commercially impossible to transmit power 
more than a few miles. But improvements in construction in- | 
validated the assumptions of this proposition also, and the prac- 
tical men have now succeeded in carrying power commercially 
to a distance of 230 miles in California at a pressure of about 
60 kilovolts. The conclusion of the author’s paper is that under 
the conditions he has assumed, power may be carried about 500 
miles and pay a profit, if the block of power is large, say 200 
megawatts. This conclusion is interesting, because it would 
place both New York and Chicago within the sphere of influence 
of Niagara Falls. But a yet more important deduction in the 
paper is that when power is transmitted in such bulk as is con- 
sidered in the paper, it pays to use copper wires so large that 
even at 170 kilovolts between them, there will be no dissipation 
of power by brush discharge. !n”other words, aluminum wires 
will not be rendered necessary for long distance transmission of 
large blocks of power, since the copper wires would have suffi- 
cient diameter to keep the electric gradient in the air down to 
the safe working value and below the smashing point. 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 793 


Curiously enough, the distance the author arrives at (500 
to 600 miles) is about the same as that to which telegraphers 
generally carry their small amounts of power over wires for 
transmitting messages. For distances exceeding 500 or 600 
miles they usually insert a repeater. 

CuHarRLeEs F. Scott: The author’s paper is the outcome of 
several years of study of the problem of long-distance transmis- 
sion in which he has dealt with it in various ways. Several 
years ago he did some excellent work in determining ex- 
perimentally in Colorado, on a circuit of the Telluride Power 
Transmission Company, the loss through the air between wires 
at low pressure. The curve representing this loss shows that 
it is extremely small under the conditions which the author 
employed until approximately 60 000 volts was reached, when 
the curve took an upward turn and a slight increase in pressure 
caused a very great increase in loss. It was evident that a 
pressure much above 60000 would cause a loss so great as to 
be prohibitive. The wires which the author used were small 
in diameter. The critical point at which loss begins occurs at 
a higher pressure when the wires are of greater diameter. This 
matter was admirably set forth in Professor Ryan’s paper before 
the INsTITUTE about a year ago. 

The author now considers the general problem of power trans- 
mission from the commercial rather than from the scientific side, 
and one may readily imagine that the problem was one which 
grew larger and larger as he worked upon it, for the paper shows 
the result of painstaking labor. Nearly all of the papers which 
are written upon transmission deal with certain specific elements 
and do not take up the subject in a broad way. At the In- 
ternational Electrical Congress, for example, there were many 
papers in the Transmission Section, but these papers dealt with 
specific or with local matters such as details of construction, 
types of insulators, characteristics of conductors, methods of 
operation and the like. There was no broad géneral paper, 
except one which was read by title. That paper was prepared 
by an official representative to the Congress from the INsTiTuTE 
and it is the paper which has been presented to us this evening. 

Some objection has been raised to the use of specific figures 
by the author. The particular value of the paper is found in 
its treatment of a general engineering problem and in the 
bringing together and showing the relation between the various 
elements which enter into commercial power transmission, 
The paper, however, would lose much in interest and in value 
if it presented simply the formula showing the relation between 
various variables and constants without assigning definite com- 
mercial values. These values_are of course liable to change, 
but the whole matter assumes a much more definite, and satis- 
factory condition, if in addition to the abstract relationships 
there are given also the concrete values which result when cer- 
tain reasonable values are given to the different quantities 


794 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. [Deer 23 


involved. It is, for example, a satisfaction to know that 
under conditions which are fairly commercial the distance 
from Niagara Falls to New York City is not beyond the limits 
of commercial possibility. 

This paper deals with something outside of the range of elec- 
trical operation with which we are familiar. If we were 
to refer to the wire tables of 15 years ago we would find 
that the units then used were 16 c-p. lights and that the dis- 
tance ran up into a few hundred or a few thousand feet. Elec- 
trical work at the present time is on a much larger scale, and 
the present paper goes far beyond our present needs. The curves 
give little attention to units less than 50000 kw., which is 
about the output of the largest stations which are now in op- 
eration. Many of the conditions set forth in the present paper 
do not apply to less than 200 000 } p., which is probably about 
the amount of electrical power used in New York City. The 
field of power transmission which is considered in the present 
paper is therefore one which does lie in the present, but which 
we may encounter a decade hence. It gives us a vision of 
the electrical future. 

An interesting point may be noted relatively to the per- 
centage of loss in transmission. Most of us would probably 
estimate the desirable loss in transmission over considerable 
distances at 10 or 15%. The curves in the present paper 
show that for 100 miles the economic drop does not exceed 
more than about 5% and that for less than 100 miles the loss 
would be considerably smaller. Up to even 200 miles the 
losses on the curves representing all the conditions considered 
do not exceed nine per cent. ; 

High pressures have usually involved the idea of a small 
wire, and in some of the earlier transmission systems the limit 
of the size of wire was fixed not by its conductivity but by its 
mechanical strength—electrically the conductor could be made 
smaller than was made necessary by the requirements of me- 
chanical strength. The present paper shows that we have 
gotten into a new order .of things in power transmission on a 
large scale, as the size of wire for economic transmission for 
large power at high pressure is so great as to bring about the 
surprising result that the atmospheric losses which have been 
assumed to be the determining element in high pressure trans- 
mission no longer determine the maximum pressure; the size 
of wire required at a given pressure to insure economic trans- 
mission is so great that the atmospheric losses are avoided. 

C. L. bE Murat: In the author’s paper the fact stands out 
prominently that it is in all probability the economical side of 
the problem and not the technical side, which determines the 
distance to which energy may be transmitted electrically. Let 
us therefore look more closely at the economical variable of his 
equations. 


The author has taken the price of $34.00 per kilowatt per year 


1904.) _ DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 795 


as a selling price for the transmitted energy. In Switzerland, 
which may be called the power transmission country par excel- 
lence, electric energy is sold in most cases at about $20 per horse 
power per year, or approximately $30 per kilowatt per year. 
But you know that coal is very high in Switzerland—it is here 
about $2 per ton, and there $6 or $8—if therefore in Switzer- 
land competition of coal has to be met by selling the kilowatt 
per year at $30, it would seem difficult to obtain $34 in this 
part of the world where fuel is so much cheaper. The author’s 
curves, notably Fig. 5, show very nicely how the maximum 
distance, over which energy can be economically transmitted, 
may be increased by increasing either the amount of energy 
transmitted or the pressure of transmission, or both. But if in 
his curves the selling price is reduced to what it will have to be 
to compete with coal, then the distance of transmission will in 
a great many cases be materially decreased, no matter how 
large the amount of transmitted energy or how high the pressure 
of transmission. If, for example, conditions are taken as they 
are now around New York it would seem doubtful if this dis- 
tance would be more than half of that shown in Figs. 4 and 5. 
This is the point the speaker wishes to bring out. 

RatpH D. MersHon: The difference of opinion which has 
developed here to-night is no greater than was to be expected. 
Probably there never were two engineers who estimated in 
exactly the same way on everything, or whose estimates on 
a proposition, if examined in detail, would agree exactly; one 
man would be higher on one item and lower on another, al- 
though the total estimates made by them might agree very 
closely. Moreover, in making estimates, it is not an uncom- 
mon experience to have the figures on some details higher 
and on others lower than the figures actually obtained in the 
construction for which the estimate was made; the result 
_ being an equalization of the positive and negative errors, and 
the total estimate comparing very closely with the cost of 
the completed work. Such a condition of affairs does not 
argue any lack of skill in estimating, especially on work along 
new and untried lines, and the engineer is legitimately entitled 
to such equalizing chances as those mentioned. 

This paper, in so far as the numerical values are concerned 
at least, represents simply a piece of estimating. In consid- 
ering the numerical values of the paper, therefore, too much 
stress should not be laid upon details. The principal con- 
sideration should be given to the work as a whole. 

On the different items of the paper there will be differences 
of opinion among engineers, both as to assumptions and numer- 
ical values; but the average opinion, if one could get at it, 
would probably come very close to the figures given in the 
paper. ' 

Suppose, however, that there were errors in the paper suffi- 
ciently great to cause an error in the limiting distances de- 


796 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. [Dec. 23: 


duced, as great as 20%. Even with that error’ the value 
of the paper, as giving a general view of the subject, would. 
not be diminished to any considerable extent. 

As Mr. Scott has said, such a paper as this is more inter- 
esting with some definite figures than if it gave simply an an- 
alysis, and hence the numerical values were introduced. No 
exceptions worthy of notice have been taken to the method 
of analysis employed. 

The two extremes that Mr. Gerry mentioned, namely, 200: 
miles and 2000 miles, between which the limiting distance of 
transmission might fall, are pretty far apart. Probably the 
idea that Mr. Gerry means to convey is that the conditions 
under which a transmission might be undertaken might 
vary so widely in different locations, especially as to the cost 
and selling price of power, as to render very uncertain the 
limiting distance when treated as a general question. But, 
as the paper shows, the limiting distance of transmission will, 
among other things, depend very,greatly upon the total output 
of the plant, the distance being greater for greater outputs. 
Now the assumption of a large market and a large source of 
power to supply it narrows the location of the transmission 
very considerably, and this in turn fixes the values of cost 
between narrower limits than those which Mr. Gerry probably 
has in mind. 

In this paper there is done, in a general way, just what Mr. 
Gerry does when he estimates on a particular plant. He 
takes a specific case and makes an estimate. The speaker has 
tried to make the estimate in a general way; that is, instead of 
considering various plants separately and undertaking to work. 
out something for each one, by means of formulas the problem 
is put in such shape that by working out a comparatively 
few values, results can be obtained for plants whose outputs 
cover a considerable range, thus enabling one to get a much 
clearer idea of the trend of results as the various quantities 
are varied. 

Mr. Stott brought out a number of interesting points, one 
of them the question of the sale of power on a flat rate; 
another, the consideration of the load-factor. But in this 
problem there is no need to consider the load-factor, or any 
charge except the flat rate, for the reason that no matter what 
the load-factor or what the price we may sell the power for, 
there is always a certain peak and certain income; divide the 
income by the peak, and you have a certain flat rate. That 
is the figure which must be considered in a problem of this 
kind, for the reason that in the water power plant-—which 
we are necessarily considering—there is practically no variable 
factor. In the steam plant there is a variable factor, the cost 
of fuel. In a water-power plant it costs practically the same 
per kilowatt whether you deliver one-quarter of the output 
or the whole. It makes little difference what proportion of the: 


1904.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. (97 


full capacity is carried; some, perhaps, but not enough worth 
considering in a paper of this sort. Mr. Stott also spoke 
of the question of carrying the peak load. The problem does 
not necessarily assume that the peak load will be carried. Take 
‘the case of bringing power to New York City. There are 
‘pretty large steam plants here. It would be cheaper, in gen- 
eral practice, to carry the peaks on these steam plants and 
get a more uniform load on the water-power plant, which 
would enable the purchaser to pay a higher price per kilowatt 
per year than otherwise. 

As to the cost of the generating plant, as represented in he 
‘price assumed in the figure for cost of power, it is low; but 
not impossibly low. There are some water powers throughout 
the country where the cost of the plant, and therefore of 
‘the power, is very low, because of advantageous physical con- 
ditions. But aside from that, supposing the development to be 
‘similar to that at Niagara Falls; in the case of blocks of power 
as large as those considered and as more power plants are in- 
stalled, and more skill and experience is brought to bear 
upon them, the cost of power from such developments will 
be very considerably diminished from what it is now. Mr. 
Stott brought up the question of higher frequency in order to 
get better power-factors, but there are a good many arguments 
against that. If the load were very well distributed, along 
the transmission line, higher frequency is a matter which 
might be worthy of consideration; but generally the load is 
bunched at the end of the line, and in such cases the lower 
frequency would undoubtedly be preferable. 

Mr. Torchio’s contribution is a very interesting one, but 
there is so much in it that one can not follow it closely enough, 
hearing it for the first time, to reply to it. After reading it 
more carefully, the speaker may perhaps reply with a written 
communication. The cost Mr. Torchio has taken for power 
is remarkably low, certainly lower than any that the speaker 
has investigated. The criticism which Mr. Torchio made in 
regard to assuming one cost for the power produced is, from 
some standpoints, a legitimate one, although if he will 
‘turn to page 781, in the middle of the page he will see a para- 
graph which deals with this question and calls attention to a 
compensating factor. The reason for taking one cost of 
power was simplicity. The aim was to determine the maxi- 
mum distance to which power could be transmitted, and with 
‘that in view perhaps the curves of small output should have been 
-omitted. But they are of interest in connection with the com- 
pensating advantage, mentioned on page 781, which will have 
-some effect. The power cost assumed, therefore, is that which 
would best apply to very large outputs, to those large out- 
puts determining the maximum distance of transmission. As 
Mr. Torchio can see, it would complicate the equations still 
-more to introduce a variable factor in the cost of power. 


798 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. (Dec. 23 


Strictly, the proper method of applying the equations is to 
start with a certain cost of power, and a certain sale price 
of power, and determine how far it could be transmitted. In 
that case there might. be a different cost of power and dif- 
ferent selling price for each size of plant. ; : 

Replying to Mr. de Muralt, in regard to power prices in 
Switzerland: he should bear in mind that as a general thing 
apparatus, labor, and money are cheaper in Switzerland than 
in this country. 

In regard to the question of bonds mentioned, 5% interest 
was assumed on the actual investment, and 12% of the in- 
vestment taken as profit. That does not mean necessarily 
that the bonds should be rated at 5%, or issued on the 
basis of returning 5%. It means that the return has 
been divided into two amounts, one 5% and the other 
12%. The total return is 17%, and you can divide it be- 
tween dividends and-bonds as you please. 

As regards Mr. Wallace, his quarrel seems to be with Lord 
Kelvin, in which case no ,reply is necessary. Mr. Torchio will 
find, if he carefully examines the equations, that the Kelvin 
law has been given full weight and has been modified only 
by those elements of cost of transmission affected by chang 
of pressure. 

RatpH D. MErsHON (by letter, after adjournment): Mr. 
Torchio has criticised the assumption of the same cost of power 
for plants of all capacities; to this the writer has already re- 
plied. But in addition, Mr. Torchio discusses the question of 
squeezing a little more power out of a generating plant to make 
up for the line loss, and the possibility of obtaining this incre- 
ment of power at a lower cost than the bull: of the power pro- 
duced by the station. The writer cannot agree with his argu- 
ment, even if it be made on the assumption that the same com- 
pany owns both the transmitting plant and the generating plant. 
In the case of a generating plant of a given capacity, the cost 
of power produced by that plant would be computed; and for 
any increased output, no matter how great, there would be com- 
puted the corresponding cost in accordance with the law gov- 
erning the variation of such cost with output. Why the law 
of variation should be any different for large or small incre- 
ments is not quite clear to the writer. The fallacy of Mr. Tor- 
chio’s argument can be shown by carrying it a little further. 
After having obtained 10% more by the’ method he advocates, 
why not obtain another 10% by the same squeezing process, 
and so on to any amount of power required? 

Touching the drop limitations mentioned by Mr. Torchio as 
imposed by the various kinds of apparatus, the writer believes 
that the limitations in this direction, due to synchronous ap- 
paratus, will be removed in the near future. The assumption 
that large numbers of synchronous converters must of necessity 
be used is not in any case in accord with the writer’s ideas on 


ag ale ta tiie _ 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 799 


the subject. He believes the time will come when there will 
be little use for synchronous converters, alternating currents 
being used for almost all industrial purposes. 

There is a point in regard to the transmission line which 
Mr. Torchio has overlooked; namely, that the paper assumes 
three transmission lines. Perhaps it is not so clearly stated as 
should be that these three are distinct and separate and on 
separate structures, but such is the assumption. 

The writer has not at hand the data for entering into a dis- 
cussion on the probability of an increase of fuel costs. The 
statement that the value of power will increase was based partly, 
but not wholly, upon this consideration. The writer believes 
it is generally deduced by statisticians that it will not be very 
long before the price of fuel will increase to a point where it 
will be seriously felt; this of course being due, not only to the 
diminution of the source of supply, but also to increase of 
population and its increased demands for fuel and the materials 
whose production involves its consumption. But there is an- 
other reason why the value of electric power will increase, and 
that is that as the delivery of such power becomes more and 
more reliable, the price will be regulated, not, as now, by the 
consideration of supplying power to a customer who has a dupli- 
cate steam plant, the fixed charges on which must be carried, 
but on the basis of supplying a customer who has no steam 
plant except such as is necessary for carrying his peak. Carry- 
ing the peak by steam will make it possible for the purchaser 
to pay a higher price for water-power than he otherwise would, 
and yet result in a lower total cost of power to him than though 
he carried the whole load by steam. This question of a com- 
bination plant would, if considered by Mr. Torchio, compel 
him very materially to modify the figures of his general and 
very interesting discussion as to the selling price of power. 

The writer questions very strongly the statement made by 
Mr. Torchio, that it is necessary to carry ‘“‘ equivalent reserve 
steam generating capacity’ in the case of transmitting power 
to Chicago or New York. A certain amount of reserve may 
have to be carried to provide for extreme emergencies, but the 
writer thinks that in time the amount of such reserve will be 
more and more reduced. This has been the experience with 
transmission on a smaller scale, and the writer sees no reason 
why, as the art advances, it should not be the case even in a 
greater degree with larger enterprises. 

Referring to Mr. Wallace’s statement, as based upon some 
figures he has made for a specific case, if he had selected a plant 
of an output or distance of transmission differing from that 
assumed by him and had applied the same criterion as he has 
applied to the question of economical pressure, he would have 
arrived at a different pressure for each output and distance; 
in other words, he would have obtained results resembling 


those in the writer’s paper. 


q 


800 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. [Dec. 23 — 


Regarding the question of the figure assumed for the cost 
of power ($10.90 per kilowatt at the step-up transformers), 
the assumption made is a possible one, commercially. The 
best proof of this statement is that power has been and is being 
produced for less than the price named. Some of the members 
present at the meeting at which the writer’s paper was dis- 
cussed could, if they had felt at liberty to do so, told of power 
being produced at a considerably less figure. It is well known 
that, in a city not very far from New York, power is sold at 
$15 per horse power, this price to fall to $14 when the total 
load shall exceed 10000 h.p. This power is transmitted from 
a water-power 85 miles away, and is sold at a profit. One can, 
if he chooses, figure back and determine roughly what the power 
must cost at the terminals of the step-up transformers. 

If any one desires to purchase power at the point of gen- 
eration for $10.90 per kilowatt per annum, he can perhaps 
be accommodated up to 200 000 h.p. 

In view of the discussion which has taken place in regard 
to the selling price of delivered power, the writer purposes to 
plot another set ox curves which will apply.to a lower selling 
price than that assumed in the paper, and shall include them 
in the paper with the curves applying to the selling price of 
$34 per kilowatt already assumed. 

In the numerical calculations of the paper, which are 
long and somewhat involved, there crept in an error in the 
cost of synchronous motors, although extreme pains were taken 
to have all figures carefully checked by two or more persons. 
In the final printing of this paper in the Transactions of the 
INSTITUTE, this error will be corrected. The correction will 
modify the distance curves, Figs. 4 and 5 already given, by 
increasing the profitable distance of transmission under the con- 
ditions assumed; it will not change the other curves. 


——— 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG. 801 


Discussion oN ‘“ THE Maximum Distance To WuHIcH POWER 
Can Be EcoNoMICALLY TRANSMITTED,” AT PittsBurRG, PA., 
JANUARY 9, 1905. 


S. M. Kintner: The author has given us a paper that is 
exceedingly broad in its scope, so broad that few, if any, are ina 
position to check it. The author has probably got more good 
out of the paper than any one else, in the very thorough inves- 
tigation that was necessary for its preparation. In saying 
this it is not intended to detract from its value, for it is the 
belief of the speaker that this paper will prove of great value 
to more of us when we learn more about the constants involved 
and when higher pressures and larger powers are used com- 
mercially. The author has committed himself to but few en- 
gineering points, but some of these involve quantities of such 
magnitude that one is astonished in considering them, yet that 
is no reason for condemning the paper. 

Such high pressures, which are now looked upon as abnormal 
commercially, and such large sized plants, also far beyond 
anything known in present practice, may bring about changes 
in design that will readily take care of present anticipated 
troubles. There is always great uncertainty in drawing con- 
clusions from curves extended far beyond the observed values, 
for the curve is just as liable to go down as up. The author’s 
range of constants will provide considerable latitude. 

Though there may be many points of detail upon which one 
may not agree with the author, yet it is the opinion of the speaker 
that a thorough study of the paper will repay one and give a 
broad view of all the most important elements considered, a 
view so broad that corrections can readily be made from time 
to time, as experience dictates. 

P. M. Lincoin: It seems to the speaker that the author’s 
deductions are open to considerable criticism. He has devel- 
oped a number of laws for costs of the various elements which 
go to make up a transmission line, and these laws are expected 
to hold true for an amount of power up to at least 500 000 kw. 
and pressures up to at least 200000 volts. These limits are 
far beyond anything which is in existence to-day. The speaker 
does not believe that the author, or anyone else, can say what 
will be the law of variation of costs for these elements at the 
pressures and outputs with which he deals. For instance, the 
author assumes the variation of cost of insulators to be as a cube 
of the pressure; this assumption may hold with the pressures in 
use at present, but how does the author know that it will hold 
when pressures are increased to 150 000 or 200 000 volts? The 
law of variation of sizes of cost of transformers is also given: 
how can he tell that it is going to hold for the large powers 
and high pressures? 

The author has figured upon using synchronous apparatus 
at various points of the line for the purpose of maintaining 
unity power-factor; the desirability of using such devices as 


802 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. [Jan. 9 


this is as yet a mooted question, nevertheless they are incor- 
porated in the general scheme when considering the subject 
of cost of long-distance transmission. 

The right of way is taken as simply proportional to the dis- 
tance of transmission. Evidently a factor depending upon the 
amount of power should also be included, as well as something 
to determine the densitv of the territory which is to be served. 
This later is a very considerable element. 

It has been remarked that the author has paid no attention 
to the matter of load factor. His assumption of buying power 
at a-fixed figure eliminates the question of cost of generating 
plant, and in dealing with the transmission problem only the 
load factor of course may theoretically be neglected. The com- 
plete problem should, however, take into consideration the cost 
of generation of power as well as its transmission and distribu- 
tion, for in the cost of generation the load factor is one of the 
most important factors. Strictly speaking, the author is 
dealing simply with a transmission problem and therefore the 
matter of load factor may be omitted. 

Mr. SKINNER: On the author’s assumptions of number of 
units and ultimate output of station, the size of transformer 
unit required would be 30000 kw. at 200000 volts. A single 
transformer of this capacity would have power approxi- 
mately equal to that of the first Niagara station. The 
largest size of transformer with which the speaker has had 
anything to do is of 3000 kw. capacity. In the manufacture of 
large transformers one of the most important things to be con- 
sidered is the mechanical construction of the high-pressure 


coils. In ordering insulating material for the 3000-kw. trans- ~ 


former, the manufacturers were asked to install larger machin- 
ery, as they had no machines of suitable size to manufacture 
the insulating material required for this size of transformer; size of 
coils and insulation are not insurmountable obstacles in the way 
of making larger units, however, as it is possible to piece the 
various parts that enter into this construction. The speaker 
admits that at the present time he is unable to imagine the 
construction of a 30 000-kw. transformer for 200 000 volts. A 
different general design of transformer must be perfected before 
the larger sizes can be built successfully. 

Another interesting phase of the author’s paper is that re- 
ferring to line insulation. In the opinion of the speaker, the 
line construction is one of the simplest parts of the problem; 
‘this part of the problem can finally be solved by the introduc- 
tion of steel towers and as few insulators as possible. 

H. W. FisHer: Unquestionably this paper is an excellent 
one and shows much thought and careful mathematical de- 
duction. Without attempting to consider the mathematical 
side of it, the speaker is of the opinion that the price charged 
per kilowatt per annum, namely, $34.00, may be higher than 
that which large users of power would be willing to pay. 


eS 


1904.] DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG. 803 


In connection with the author’s paper, comes very naturally 
the question: what will be the limiting maximum pressures 
which can be operated on underground electric cables? The 
speaker has designed and made short lengths of cable which 
have withstood 150 000 volts; this also has been accomplished 
abroad. The lasting qualities, however, of very high-pressure 
cables can only be determined by operating them under prac- 
tical conditions for long periods of time. On account of the 
much greater stress on the insulation near the surface of the 
conductor, the greatest care has to be used in the design of 
cables for high pressures. The speaker has made a calculation 
that will illustrate this point. Suppose there are two cables 
consisting of No. 6 and 0000 B. & S. gauge solid conductor, 
homogeneously insulated with 0.1875 in. of good insulating 
material. If these cables are subjected to 10000 volts, the 
stress on the insulation near the conductor will be: 


1608 volts per 1/64 for the No. 6. 
LASSaee: i re NO OOOOE 
The stresses on the insulation near the lead will be: 
485 volts per 1/64 for the No. 6. 
Gui os * “No. 0000. 


Here we see that the insulation of the No. 6 is subjected to a 
much greater stress than that of the 0000, and practice demon- 
strates that it is more difficult to make small conductor than 
large conductor cables for high pressures. It will also be noted 
that the insulation of the No. 6 near the conductor is subjected 
to more than three times the stress on the insulation near the 
lead. Theory also shows us that if 7.73/64 in. of insulation be 
applied to the 0000 cable, the insulation near the conductor 
will be subjected to the same stress as that of the No. 6 above; 
namely, 1608 volts per 1/64. It would appear, therefore, that 
a No. 0000 cable insulated with 8/64 in. would be stronger than 
a No. 6 with 12/64 in. Referring to the first mentioned cable, 
14 120 volts on the 0000 cable would produce the same dielectric 
stress near the conductor as 10 000 volts on the No. 6 cable. 
For stranded conductors, the stresses near the conductor may 
be from 20 to 30% greater than those for solid conductors of 
the same area. 

To compensate for this unfortunate condition, two things may 
be done: first, place near the conductor insulating materials of 
great dielectric strength; secondly, use insulating material the 
specific inductive capacity of which will be greatest at the con- 
ductor and which will decrease toward the lead cover at the 
tight rate to make the dielectric stress the same all over the 
insulation. The speaker mentions these few points because they 
are of the utmost importance in the correct design of high- 
pressure cables. It is scarcely probable that underground 
cables will ever be needed to withstand as great pressures as 
conductors placed on the best insulators. Transmission over 
long distances will generally be done by the latter plan, but if 


804 MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. [Jan. 9 


the pressures are very high, cables operating from the secondary 
of step-down transformers will no doubt be used in city limits. 
Connecting long lengths of aerial conductors to long lengths of 
cables is not desirable because of danger to the cables from light- 
ning and resonance. 

N.J.Neaty: A value should have been inserted in the equa- 
tions having for its base the probable loss due to interruption of 
service; uninterrupted service will undoubtedly be more and 
more demanded, and the proportional cost of interruption of 
service by lightning-arresters will become greater. 

If one were to think of a 500-mile line running, say, from 
Buffalo to New York, such advanced line construction might 
be conceived of as to enable one to estimate the cost of main- 
tenance confined to general wear and tear only, but lightning 
disturbances would certainly be more numerous per line, al- 
though possibly not much greater per length of line. Even 
with simpler lightning-arresters there seems no reason to aban- 
don our theories concerning their functions. For this reason 
we should consider the recommendations made by Mr. A. J. 
Wurts—that a line should fairly bristle with discharge-points. 
This for a high-pressure, high-power line would perhaps mean 
the employment of section-houses where lightning-arresters 
could be installed and where section-foremen could live and 
have apparatus for keeping the line intact. The telephone 
for such a plant must receive careful installation; it might 
perhaps prove inadequate and would have to be supplanted by 
wireless telegraphy. These factors seem worthy of considera- 
tion in such a discussion and their bearing on the cost of trans- 


mission might assume a value which would materially change ~ 


the figures given by the author. 


1904.] MAXIMUM POWER TRANSMISSION. 805 


Discussion on ‘‘ THE Maximum DistaNCE TO WHICH POWER 
Can BE EcoNoMICALLY TRANSMITTED,” AT PHILADELPHIA, 
Pa., JANUARY 9, 1905. 


Wn. McCietian: The chief value of the author’s paper 
is its exposition of the methods used. So far as results are 
concerned, there will be widely differing opinions. The speaker 
believes that the author has been very liberal except in what 
might be called the factor of safety. Apparently, three cir- 
cuits have been provided, each with one-third load capacity. 
If one of these nine wires should fail only two-thirds of the 
rated load could be carried. We have, however, plenty of 
reserve in the converters, etc. In a line projected some time 
ago there was one extra wire provided for emergencies. The 
provision in this respect does not seem quite consistent. On 
the other hand, one must remember that these conductors are 
of solid copper, one inch and a half in diameter, and not likely 
to get in trouble except in the land of cyclones. 

One should naturally ask, does the paper settle anything 
definitively? It does tell us definitely that when we have 
our wire large enough to suit our economic conditions, it will 
be plenty large enough to suit our electrical conditions. When 
we heard of Professor Ryan’s paper last February, we thought 
that we might have to increase our wires above economic 
diameters in order to prevent coronal loss, but we are sure now 
~that we shall not have to do so. 

At present there are so few cases where we shall have to 
transmit such large blocks of power over such distances that 
the speaker does not believe that the problem is of great in- 
terest to many men. A more interesting problem, and one 
that is becoming more and more prominent, is the combination 
and development of the many small water-powers in various 
localities. In many cases these are separately worth little, 
but taken together, and properly developed, they become divi- 
dend earners. Some time ago a commission was examining all 
the water-powers of New England for this very purpose. It 
seems almost certain that a great deal of our future transmission 
work will move in this direction; it will become a part of our 
future railroad development. 

A.B. SritzER: The speaker knows of one company installing 
some high-pressure apparatus where there are two cables to 
each station. Either cable is large enough to carry the sta- 
tion’s full load, so that if one cable breaks down the load can 
still be carried with less than eight per cent. drop; the two wires 
working together will give one half this drop. 

Most of the speaker’s experience has been with underground 
transmission work; 13 200 volts is high enough for underground 
transmission. The insulation is 0.0219-in. paper around each con- 
ductor and 0.0219-in. paper overall. In the power house we use 
0.375-in. rubber. We were using 0.3125-in. rubber but that 
is hardly sufficient. The paper is treated with compound; it 


806 DISCUSSION AT PHILADELPHIA. ‘[Jan. 9 


is three-conductor cable with 0.09375 inches of lead on the out- 
side. 

Cart Herinc: The author bases his figures on the present 
cost of steam power in cities, but it seems to the speaker that 
there are prospects of reducing the cost of power from coal quite 
appreciably. Take the case of steam turbines, for instance. 
A few years ago very little was known about them; with con- 
tinued improvements the steam turbine has progressed won- 
derfully. If further improvements are made in the future, 
electrical transmission of energy may not be as able to com- 
pete then as it is now. It seems to the speaker that there 
are so few cases where power would be transmitted to such 
enormous distances as 500 miles that each case must be figured 
out by itself, and that any such general laws are of little use. 

H. A. Foster: The speaker believes he is correct in saying 
that the best steam turbine has not reduced the cost of steam 
power below the cost at full load of the best of reciprocating 
engines. Below full Joad the steam turbine has somewhat 
reduced the cost of steam power} but at any time a slight in- 
crease in the cost of coal will effect all the economies produced 
by such methods. 

Most of us who have had to deal with electric light stations 
or railway power plants have the matter of the load factor 
before us all the time. With large water powers the speaker 
thinks the load-factor of little moment, because there are 
other loads that come on during: the day, many of them that 
make the load factor nearly 90. A few years ago, at Niagara 


Falls, theloadlinecouldbe drawn with a ruler. At that time. 


the lighting load was hardly noticeable. 


APPENDIX. 


REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


For THE Fiscat Year Enpinc Apri 30, 1904. 


The Board of Directors presents herewith for the information of the 
Institute a report of its work during the past year, also of the financial 
standing of the organization. 

The Annual Convention for 1903 was held at Niagara Falls, June 29- 
July 3 and was notable for the importance of the papers presented, the 
thorough discussion, and the attendance of nearly 500 members and 
guests, practically double that of 1902. 

The phenomenal growth in membership has continued, and the total has 
now passed 3000. The accessions continue by reason of the increasing 
appreciation of the work of the Institute, through the efforts of 
the Committee on Increase of Membership, supported by the co-operation 
of those already upon the roll in making known the advantages of being 
identified with the Institute. Through the establishment of Branches 
in many important cities, electrical engineers throughout the country 
have been brought into closer relations with the work of the Institute, 
and the Committee on Local Organizations points out the beneficial 
results of this practice. Most of the committees have presented reports 
of their year’s work, and brief abstracts of these show the general 
progress made. > 

Commuttee on Papers.—Seven meetings have been held for which ar- 
rangements have been made by this committee, although with two ex- 
ceptions the number of papers has by request been limited to two in 
order to allow more time for discussion. Of the 17 papers, four were 
voluntarily submitted by the authors, while 13 were prepared at the 
request of the committee. Papers are more readily obtained when a 
specific subject is suggested, and the diverse interests of the personnel 
of the committee have facilitated more intelligent work in this direction. 
This has also led to the organization of the discussions which have been 
more spirited and valuable. The holding of Branch meetings has also 
led to the accumulation of additional material which in many cases is 
of great importance, due to the practical experience of members working 
under varied conditions in different parts of the country. 

The Editing Committee.—The duties of this committee have been 
largely increased by the great increase of matter from Branch meetings. 
It has also brought about the printing of papers in the monthly editions 


808 I< AONSID (ONE ICIS, [May 17 


sufficiently in advance of meetings to enable members to prepare them- 
selves to discuss them intelligently, and also permit those who are ata 
distance to send in contributions to discussions so that they may be 
read, or incorporated in the printed record. 

Finances.—An important change in the care of funds has been made 
by this committee. As will be seen by the Financial Report, separate 
bank accounts have been established representing certain funds which 
are drawn upon only for the specified purpose of said funds. In order 
to carry out this plan it was necessary to convert into cash seven $1000 
U.S. bonds held by the Institute from which $7,409.37 was realized. These 
funds as well as the current bank account of the Institute are now de- 
posited with the Mercantile Trust Co., and Farmer’s Loan and Trust Co., 
with the exception of $8000 in U. S. bonds which remain in a safe-deposit 
compartment of the Colonial Trust Co. The existing condition of the 
Institute’s finances appears elsewhere in this report. The form of this 
statement having now been standardized it has become practicable to 
ptint opposite nearly every item, the corresponding figures of the pre- 
vious year for the purpose of comparison. The Secretary has had this 
innovation in view for some years past, but was unable to introduce it 
until now, on account of certain chan'ges in the form of the statement. 

The ordinary receipts of the Institute during the.year ending April 
20th, 1904, were $40,986.78. This amount was made up of $32,724.12 
from members, including entrance fees from Associates and transfer fees 
from Members; $1203 in students’ dues, and $7,059.66 from advertising 


and miscellaneous sources. The ordinary operating expenses of the 


Institute were $36,394.20, leaving a balance of ordinary receipts over 
expenses of $4,592.58. 

Owing to the fact that for the year ending April 30th, 1903, disburse- 
ments properly chargeable to the Carnegie Fund were paid out of ordin- 


ary current receipts to the amount of $1,312.20 the balance for that year 


should properly stand at $1,933.78 instead of $621.58. It should also 
be noted that the sum of $541.62 paid out of ordinary receipts for the year 
ending April 30, 1904, for the expenses of the Land, Building and Endow- 


ment Fund Committee, should properly be charged to that fund, making 


the true balance stand at $5,134.20 instead of $4,592.58. On the other 
hand the Life membership receipts for 1903 were $600, and for 1904 


were $200, neither of which sums should appear in this column except 


as a matter of bookkeeping. The true relative difference in the bal- 
ances of operating receipts and disbursements to April 30th for the years 
1903 and 1904 respectively should be $1,333.78 instead of $621.58 and 
$4,934.20 instead of $4,592.58 as corrected by this explanation. Adding 
to $3,600.42, which is the difference between these balances, a gain in ac- 
counts receivable of $1,485.78 for the year ending April 30, 1904, makes 
the total net gain for 1904 over 1903 $5,086.20. 

The bank balance available for current expenditures on April 30th, 
1904, was $7,861.44. Adding this sum to $8,875.63, the market value of 


the United States bonds owned by the Institute makes a total of 
$16,737.07 in cash or its equivalent. Subtracting from this amount 
$4,400, as due to the Life Membership Fund, gives a net balance of 


$12,337.07 in cash or its equivalent immediately available for any ordin- 
ary or extraordinary expenditure of the Institute. 


———————— Ol CU 


1904] BOARD OF DIRECTORS. £09 


The accounts payable on April 30th, 1904, were $246.44 against: 
which were accounts receivable amounting to $9,893.42, consisting 
almost entirely of arrears in dues, but not including any debts owed by 
members suspended or dropped for non-payment of annual dues. Dur- 
ing the year the plant of the Institute was increased by the purchase 
of Transactions, library books and fixtures, and office furniture to the 
extent of $3,523.19 all of which was charged to current revenue. 

The inventory valuation of the Library has been increased over the 
amount reported last year by $12,300.38 for the reason that statistics 
were not available at that time to show its actual value. It has since 
‘been appraised by a special committee and the amount of $21,737.13 
accepted as satisfactory. 

The Board of Examiners.—All applications for transfer from the grade 
of Associate to Member, for election as Associates, or for enrolment as 
Students, are considered by the Board of Examiners. Ten meetings 
have been held, and a grand total of 1042 applications have been re 
ported to the Board of Directors as follows: 


Recommended. Not recommended. 
NOI EATISTOI: cc. cure Soe © Ayers Pe ich Nhe Wade 26 
Momiblectiomas Associates son 049%. ee accu e dees candies Of 
Romp orotmentastobudentsaacitos . tes ocies ccc - esse ©. 4 


Committee on Increase of Membership.—The record of an increase of 
membership by the election of 798 Associates is a sufficient indication 
of the work of this committee in the past, but it is still engaged in its 
efforts to reach the very large number of eligible electrical engine rs 
who will no doubt appreciate the benefits of membership when the 
matter is properly presented to them. It believes a systematic canvass 
may yet be made through the branch organizations which will be of 
great service to the Institute. 

Local Organizations.—The Institute Branches have been increasing in 
number and in interest. There are at present, 29, of which 15 are in 
cities, and 14 are student meetingsin technical schools. The average 
aggregate attendance at these meetings is 1250 (about 400 being 
students.) The Branch meetings are reaching our members and the 
young men who are to be the future electrical engineers of the country, 
in a way which enormously increases our activity and our influeace. 

The Report of the Committee on Local Organization, based upon 
reports from the branches, is appended to this report. It shows a re- 
markable development, a sustained interest, and encouraging prospects 
for the future. 

International Electrical Congress.—While the actual organization of the 
Congress has been carried on independently of the Institute, there has 
been continued and harmonious co-operation, which it is believed will 
lead to the best possible results. The Institution of Electrical Engineers 
will be the official guest ot the Institute, while all foreign delegates 
and members of various foreign electrical organizations will participate 
in the circular tour, arranged by the International Electrical Congress 
General Reception Committee and the Committee on Transportaticn: 
and Arrangements. The itinerary as planned provides for brief tech- 
nical visits on the way to St. Louis by the Northern route, including Bos- 
ton, New York, Schenectady, Montreal,-Niagara Falls, and Chicago, also 


810 REPORT OF THE [May 17 


Pittsburg, Washington and Philadelphia upon returning. The stay at 
St. Louis will cover the week of the Congress, September 12-17, during 
which the Institution of Electrical Engineers will hold a joint meeting 
with the Institute. The Congress subscribers now number about 1300. 
and 150 papers have been promised which are to be published in three 
volumes. 

Cadmium Cell.—In accordance with a resolution adopted at the Niagara 
Falls Convention, a committee appointed to report upon the adoption 
of a standard cell has prepared specifications, and suggests that it be 
given the name ‘‘ Weston Normal Cell.’’ It is understood that this 
matter wili be submitted to the International Electrical Congress, and 
that the cell will become a universally recognized standard. 

Union Engineering Ruilding—This project which was brought before 
the Board of Directors and the Annual Meeting a year ago, has assumed 
a different form owing to the declination on the part of one of the 
national engineering societies to enter intoit. This made it necessary 
to obtain from Mr. Carnegie his assent to a renewal of his offer to the 
other societies, which he did, increasing his gift by 50% as shown in the 
following letter: 


GENTLEMEN OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS, 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF MINING ENGINEERS, AMERICAN INSTITUTE 
or ELEcTRICAL ENGINEERS, AND THE ENGINEERS’ CLUB oF NEW 
YORK: 

‘Tt will give me great pleasure to devote, say, one and a half million 
dollars for the erection of a suitable home for you ail in New York City. 
With best wishes, Truly yours, 

ANDREW CARNEGIE.”’ 

The land has been purchased in behalf of the societies, by Mr. Carnegie 

who has advanced $502,000 for the purpose, for which he is to be event- 


ually reimbursed. The United Engineering Society, which is to hold the 


property, has been provided for under the laws of New York State, - 


each of the three engineering societies named in Mr. Carnegie’s letter 
being represented upon its board of trustees. 

An architectural competition has been arranged in which six architec- 
tural firms have entered, and designs are to be submitted to the joint 
committee on June 20th, 1904. It is expected that the demolition of 
the buildings on the property will begin July 1st, 1904, and that this, and 
the construction of the new building will proceed continuously there- 
after. 

Building Fund Committee—Four announcements have been issued 
by this committee, which reports that $41,000 has been pledged toward 
the amount of $200,000, the estimated requirement for the purchase 
of land, upon which Mr. Andrew Carnegie will erect the Union Engineering 
Building. The committee has received cordial and enthusiastic letters 
from Branches indicating that a strong regard for the Institute has been 
developed, which should encourage a liberal policy toward them on 
the part of the Institute as a whole. 

Transmission Committee—During the past year this committee 
arranged for papers and discussions at one day’s session of the Conven- 
tion at Niagara Falls, and a meeting in New York March 25. It is now 
making preparations for a special meeting at Chicago June 21 and 22, 
1904, to be devoted exclusively to transmission subjects. A report of 
the’committee at this meeting will embody the returns received from 


1904.] BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 811 


the list of questions distributed last year. The success attained in 
gathering information in this field has led to a suggested plan by the 
chairman, that similar committees composed of engineers of experience, 
in the more important branches of electrical work, could by a system- 
atic campaign take up the discussion of important problems at certain 
meetings of the Institute. ; 

Engineering Data.—The chairman of this committee has made an 
earnest effort to gather information which could be utilized for the benefit 
of the membership. Nothing could be accomplished without co-opera- 
tion, and having received practically no support, no progress has been 
made. 

By-Laws.—During the past two years a committee has been engaged 
in framing by-laws, in order that the business and professional affairs 
of the Institute might be systematized. At the meeting of the Board 
of Directors, April 22, the by-laws reported by this committee were 
adopted, and are now in force. They have been printed in the April 
issue of the Transactions, and will subsequently be issued separately or 
in conjunction with the Constitution. -If the membership will consult 
these by-laws the Secretary’s office should be relieved of much corre- 
spondence, as many inquiries regarding the administration of Institute 
affairs will then be unnecessary. 

Membership.—The total membership at the close of last year’s report 
was 2,229, classified as follows: 


[tomore mye let ensr arnt Heeler ie panels orsitst -Pelleve lens is phedapeiere de to\s 2 
IMESNAEN BESTS Ach sect BRE CRE nea CCL CE RCE AE PE OREO cari A417 
INS SOCIALES RES EM Aree Ete oth orton muaktier de Shae o Sethe oes 1,810 
MotalyNiays le OOS vaa-eccadke aoe oni eee eis ola bmn nee 2,229 
Elected prior to May 1, 1908, and since qualified.......... Lai 
Elected May 1, 19038, to April 30, 1904, and qualified....... 729 
TRS Orere) wey WisanlloySsasl buoy 4 on oS aD GeAden dose be Hobloeg saa 1 
3,126 

Adee IM GRVEIE, oS oer Gold GIS ab Bid ROL OCOI CES 03,5. 13 

PlhotalresiomatlOns vw pew cl slanstshelshs eres ietes Sones te 12 

iDyayojarea! As) GlewnGbeMiS. 5566 6 boondcooam do ccoG sos 84 
109 
Granditobale ntl SOs GOA sree rehere lyst aire eis tes Coie 23027 

The membership April 30, 1903, was classified as follows: 

BiGimermekary Wiesel Sas n ache bho ee GEO 4 Seed Oo oe Cer eOn atom: 2 
IW WlPesaall feng Seer antes ce oocar, A ch GO Si DIELS GCI MRR cea Tac ea Aicenieerios 0 459 
INSISOISIONESS 5... 0b 0 clo oa o 0 WDLCINE OD GIG BADPRCIGISIE 0, 1 OIC ISG ak 2,566 
AWOKE ng os, cues Bpgun' 5 ox. Dune Chtien ERC aEe LISSA ic A CNOIAE aces 3,027 


The gain in membership during the year was 798, an increase of 35 per 
cent. As there are now applications pending and associates elected but 
not yet qualified to the number of 165, there is an immediate prospective 
total of about 3,300 members. 

Associates Elected—The Associates elected during the year, May 1, 
1903, to April 30, 1904, and their present status is as follows: 


812 


Qualified and now Associates 
Elections cancelled 


Total elections 


REPORT OF THE 


ob a fe 0) en) o) ale ue) a) © /eusiiellel a ive ieiersie 


ee) |e) ee 0:0 6 0 6 6 © 6m alles wel wie ino) (ee) 6) ai elelia 


819 


Resignations.—The following Members and Associates have resigned 
in good standing during the year: 
Members.—Clayton C. Hall. 


Associates.—W. J. Morrison, Jr., 


H. N. Ramsay, C. H. Thordarson, 
V.H. Yarnall, F. A. Cosby, T. H. Foote, Bo J Lamb Vyas Lindseys 
C. J. Marsh, J. C. Finney, Henry Schroeder. 
Deaths —There have been the following deaths during the year: 
Members.—Frankland Jannus, T. E. Theberath. 
Associates.—E. T. Gilliland, Benjamin Brown, J. J. Crawshaw, C. D. 
Crandall, W. O. Garrison, Francis Forbes, G.S. Johnson, J. L. Kebler, 
J. B. O'Hara, W. H. Simpson, F. E. Perry. 


FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR APRIL 30, 1904 
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES. 


ASSETS LIABILITIES 
1903. 1904, 1903. 1904, 
$2,006.75 Cash.. -$21,144. 47 $787.93 General Library Fund $369.67 
U.S: Bonds, ‘market 4,643.60 Carnegie Fund...... . 38 
16,285.00 _value.. .. 8.875.63 Land, Building and 
Library Volumes and 1,100.00 ead Purndir sere 7,609.93 
9,436.75 — Fixtutes: vere: 21.737.13 Life Membership 
2.957.50 Transactions....... 4.624.50 4'200;5 00 (Bunciaccen eee 4,400.00 
Office Furniture and Mailloux Fund..... 1,000.30 

495.30 Fittings.. 632.63 10,556.68 Reserve Fund (Cash) 12. 5 eae 

154.50 Badges.. Saris 138.00 19,311.48 Surplus(Property etc )87,5.7.43 

231525 Congress Books..... 201.00 

8,407.64 Accounts Receivable 9,893.42 } 
500.00 Sec’y’s Daten cash 500.00 
125.00 Type, etc. 
$40, 599.69 $67,746.78 | $40,599.69 $67,746.78 
RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS. 
ORDINARY RECEIPTS. OrDINARY DISBURSEMENTS. 
1903. 1904. 1903. 1904. 
$3,305.00 Entrance Fees...... $4,463.00 Stenography & Type 
17,583.95 Current Dues....... 25,219.50 $697.00 writing. . $547.44 
1,168.47 Past Dues.. = Eb eS TS Stationery & “Print. 
740.59 Advance Dues...... 1,025.50 2148.15. ing. eee 3,058 .36 
© 600.90 Life Membership Bere 200.00 L543. 50) Postaze ds. .ee ene 1,947 .52 
1,752.24 Transactions Sales. 1,249.83 346.54 Express 813.83. 
463 .63 eres” Subs. . 543.40 619.93 Badges 1,059.74 
64.63 Binding.. 49.35 667.95 General Expenses. . 742.96 
1,685.51 Advertising. . 5 185.87 93.90 Certificates. 22... 36.50 
23.67 Electros and Cuts... 23.79 239.60 Office Furniture. 359.72 
783.50 Badges. . eset 1,164.50 5,350.41 Salaries. 6,027.88 
220.00 Transfer Fees... .. 493.00 1,778.93 Cuts and Electros. . 1,909.67 
16.10 Congress Books..... 9.00 Panne Transac- 

496.36 Interest... .. 2.0.4.4 544.13 7,254.16 _ tions.. -». 9,067.47 
Students’ Dues..... 1,203.00 1,688.04 Rent.. 2,370.04 
Exchange. gn soe 12.79 804.88 AdvertisingCom’ s'ns 232.50: 
Branch Meetings. . 77.00 577.71 Binding Volumes. . 576.18 

1,028.23 Library Donations. . Binding Pamphlets. 876.83 
242.80 Library yonne 1,208.43 Meeting (ene C2250) 
5.00 Meeting Refund: 40.65 Branch Meetings. . 1,184.34 
1.57 Postage. . Ete 154.27 Office Expenses..... 107.58 
Library Rent..... 1,505.04 
3,994.62 4 Library Salaries. . 828.00 
Library Miscel. . 393.21 
Library Volumes & 
330.00 Hiscturesmee een 1,417.97 
21.00 Students’ Expenses. 17.25 
Bees Land, Bld. 
ndowment Fd. ©6541. 
© 621.58 Balance..... ® 4,502.58 
$30,181.25 $40,986.78 $30,181.25 $40,986.78, 


Se Se |  - - - 


1904. ] 


BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 


$13 


SPECIAL RECEIPTS AND DONATIONS AND SPECIAL EXPENDITURES 
{Not Embraced in Above Statement.) 


SPECIAL RECEIPTS AND DONATIONS. 


SPECIAL EXPENDITURES. 


904. 1904, 
Land Building and Endowment General Library Fund, 
Fund, Donations.......... $6,509.93 Expenditures... . $53.37 
General Library Fund, Mailloux Special Fund. é 29.20 
Donations. 208.05 )» Carnegie Fund, Disbursements 
Mailloux Fund, Donation. . 1,000.00 by, Warrant. : 492.39 
Mailloux Fund, Interest. an 29.50 | Carnegie Fund, Disbursements | 
Sale of U.S. Bonds............ 7,409.37 from Petty pa 3 Bia 705) 
Balance. : ewele eee) LAGOS 2 LA 
\Total............ $15,156.85 $15,156.85 
The total receipts for ‘04, exclusive of donations, were in 
excess of 1903. .$11,833.76 
The total Disbursements for the - year 1904 were in excess of 
1903. . mee 0 Sa4550 
Due from Members account of entrance fees and dues...... 9,281.78 
Due on Miscellaneous accounts. Raton sta, tpchovc ors Saat oie 611.64 
Unpaid bills, May 1, 1904, Amount borer ete a ee 246.44 
Total Cash Receipts from ordinary sources. ; .... 40,986.78 
Total Cash Disbursements, account ordinary expenses. ... 36,394.20 
————— $4,592.58 © 
Property on hand according to estoy Deed 1, 1904: 
ffice Furniture and Fittings. . eek Ooo Gd 
Badges. . Meee he Marte Secret oyenera eaceaunte Meee mie cee ater manaTens 138.00 
Fania LOLS ee Ne ee en ine nee, (2624250 
Congress Books. . SRS oh ahah a odotee aoe vale SoS 201.00 
Library, Volumes and Fixtures. é Dye aces 21,7 1 


ite 37.13 
Sa OSS AO! © 
TOTAL NET ASSETS. 


Cash: — 
Mercantile Trust Co., deposit. . . $7,861.44 
Farmers Loan & Trust GCo., Gen'l Library Fund. 369.67 
Farmers Loan & Trust Co., Building Fund. gmode aaa? 
Farmers Lean & Trust Co., Carnegie Encl eaem ee 4,303. 43 
Certificate of Deposit, Mailloux Fund............... 1,000.00 
$21.144.47 
SCEC EAL VIS LeU tye CASIUE teunieeist ots ete) ote} elieiis) slielsl cleus (eueietiers! ore ares 500.00 
We Sb ondssumianice evalitieny. ciate aeleie)ei sls eieuere oleleue stisveusrate 8,875.63 
Hise RIO loonanosuacsno odode dn pododpicous obo Dehetre) 
——— $01,809.00 
MotalNeteAccetsilastwycatiesceledercisiclen Aeeancisaie scien: stele elec oael 02.05: 
TMC rease ame eae rn tarie arreaiie ececrat nica encase sn ero OO Leak 


PROPERTY PURCHASED DURING THE YEAR, 


(Reported as directed by the Constitution.) 


Office Furniture and Fixtures. $359.72 
Library Fixtures.. 370.00 
Library Books and Binding... EASA. Urchin atta ones nel Po eo ouaee a Osc Oe 
Transactions. . as BS ee. Croke cicctn berries elie ote ears sate aes Lakai oO 

$3,525.19 


Respectfully submitted for the Board of Directors, 
RALPH W. POPE, 


Secretary. 


@See explanation regarding comparative balances, third paragraph in text under head 
of Finances. 


814 REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS. [May 17 


TREASURER'S REPORT, 
From Apriv 30, 1903, To May 1, 1904. 


Dr. 

Balance from May 1, 1903.. - $2,006.75 
Received from Secretary, May ily 1903, to May 1 i 1904... . 

on account of General Fund.. wee. 42,814.84 

on account of Carnegie Fund. pce ME etecokeacnah=dativetemee 4:795 82 

on account of Library Fund. . POPS hic 6, 423.04 

on account of L. B. and Endowment : Fund, oie aveie ete 1,009) 05 

on account of Mailloux Fund.. js ahead eee eneecetee UODLOO 

= ————_— 758,150.38 


Cr. 
Disbursements on warrants from Secretary, Nos. 1833 to 2143, inclusive 


against General Pond .8 20... cere selene $36,460.15 

Warrants No. 1 to a pasar Carnegie Fund. Jib spanaete tees 492.39 

Inclusive against Library Fund. Pee a5 0 53.37 
Balances to New Acct, General Fund.......5...7 $7,861.44 
Carnegie Fund. . Saukepau 41000. 4 
“ Library Fund.. saaeiens 369. 67 
“0. B.& End. Fund..... 07; 7,609.93 
“ Mailloux Fund. . Sed gore: 112000200) 

———— $21,144. 47 

$58,150.38 


Respectfully submitted, 
GEORGE A. HAMILTON, 
Treasurer 


REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS. 


To THE Boarp or DIRECTORS OF THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRI- 
CAL ENGINEERS : 

At its September meeting in 1902 the Board of Directors appointed a 
Committee on Local Organizations for promoting the organization of 
local meetings. The primary purpose of these meetings was stated to 
be the presentation of the papers and discussions of the regular meetings 
of the INstiruTE and for the discussions of them, to be supplemented, 
however, by new papers, especially on subjects of local interest. The 
Committee was further given the general direction of a new line of work 
in connection with technical schools and universities by which local 
INSTITUTE meetings should be held among the students. 

The present system of local meetings has been organized under the 
general auspices of the Committee; the local organizations, however, 
have been comparatively free to adopt such methods as seemed best. 
In the light of the experience thus gained the Board of Directors has 
recently adopted by-laws relating to the organizations and conduct of 
local meetings. Local meetings are now organized in 29 places which 
include many of our principal cities and technical schools. Branches are 
formed in each of the four cities ranking next to New York in popu. 
lation. 

STATISTICS. 

The accompanying statistics have been prepared from the monthly 
reports and other data in the Secretary’s Office, checked in most cases 
by the local secretaries. 

Several striking features in connection with the statistics are the 
following: 

1. Attendance-—The monthly aggregate attendance at the Branch 
meetings is over 1300; the average attendance at the New York meet- 
ings does not exceed 200. It follows therefore that the number of men 
who come in personal contact with the InstiruTEr through Branch 
meetings is six times as great as through the New York meetings. 

Discarding the meetings in technical schools the aggregate membership 
in 10 cities in which branch meetings are held is 888 and the aggregate 
average attendance at these meetings is 729. The attendance including 
visitors is 83% of this membership, The Institute membership within 
commuting distance of New York is 794 and the attendance at the New 
York meetings is, say 200, or 25% of this membership. It follows there- 
fore that the attendance at the branches is proportionately greater than 
that at the general meetings in New York City. 


816 REPORT OF COMMITTEE [May 17 


Statistics OF BRANCHES, May, 1904. 
Original 


Mem- 
Jun. 1 | bership In- |A.I.E.E.|Meetings|Average | Papers 


Branches - 
2 . 20 e |Students| Since | Attend-]| Since 
Ree! tee. B04 ps Oct. 1902] ance. | Oct. '02 
BL Chicates meas: (Goro ees 76 39 12 115 6 
1893 
2 ee gedaet Uae ta tee 9 12) 3 5 16 20 1 
aerate : 
3 piece, Pay ects 44 128 84 15 ile 113 6 | 
Oct. 13, '02 
4 Cornell University. 5 14 9 19 20 58 2 
Oct 15 ‘02 : 
5 Lehigh Universit 3 3 4 1 1 15 35 3 
Oct. 1 3 
6 Univ. # Wisconsin 6 19 13 12 66 25 2 
Oct. 15, ’02 
7 Univ. of Illinois. . . 2 5 3 6 12 45 0 ; 
Nov. 25, '02 
8 Doaver io: toss 6 32 26 _— 6 40 4 
Dec. 8, '02 
9 Cincinnati........ 15 47 32 2 8 55 3 
Dec. 17, '02 
10 Ohio Ste Univ. 2 2 0 13 17 28 1 ' 
Dec. 20, '02 5 x 
11 Penna, SiateCollee 1 1 0 11 38 32 2 
ec 2 
12 Univ. of Missouri... 1 il 40 5 12 22 0 
an. 10, 
13 st Louis. . 14 60 46 = 13 24 4 
an. 14, 03 - 
14 Purdue University. 5 5 0 48 14 24 2 
an. 
15 aoe cady ae nae 49 113 64 17 11 110 3 
Jan. 26, '03 
16 Philadelphia Fea cae 55 92 37 1 13 98 6 
Feb. 18, '03 ' 
177 Bostont-o eee 120 195 70 | 2 10 127 if 
Feb. 13, '03 
18 lowa State woleee- 1 4 21 14 58 8 
Apr. 15, 
19 Washington, Dac 28 44 16 i 10 58 13 
pr. 9 b 
20 Toronto.......... 4 24 20 4 7 15 2 
Sept. 30, 03 : 
21 Columbus. . 4 33 29 i 8 14 
Dec. 20, '03 
22 Seattle. . 11 17 6 — 3 15 —_ 
Jan. 19, ‘04 
23 Atlanta. wn ctecleters 4 19 iN 5 1 8 — 
Jan. 19, ‘04 
24 Armour astiiuter 1 1 —_— 31 3 25 2 
Feb. 2 
25 Washington Univ. if 1 —_ 6 a 5 _ 
Feb. 26, * 
26 Univ. of Michigan 3 3 0 17 sl 25 —— 
Mar. 25, 
27 Univ. of Arkansas. 1 2 2 4 22 1 
Mar. 25 
28 Worcester Poly- 
technic | Institute. 5 10 5 4 21 35 1 
Mar. 25, '04 
29 Pittsfield......... 13 27 14 — 2 65 = 
Mar. 25, '04 
494 1068 574 273 375 1316 80 


Again, the total attendance at the New York meetings is equal to 
6 per cent. of our membership while the total attendance at the New 
York and the Branch meetings is nearly 50% of our membership. 

It may be noted that the attendance at branch meetings includes a 
much larger proportion of non-members than the New York meetings. 
This indicates a wider influence through the branch meetings than there 
is in New York. The room in which the New York meetings have been 
held has been too small to accommodate those who would be glad to 


J 


1904.] ON LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS. 817 


attend so that the invitations to outsiders have been restricted. This 
limitation may be removed when the new Engineering Building is 
completed. 


2.—Branches in Cittes.—The successful organization of branches in the 
larger and older cities which are already supplied with engineering 
societies and technical meetings is notable. Some of the strongest and 
best supported of the branches are in such cities. Electrical workers 
distributed through manufacturing and operating companies and other 
interests in these cities have not been brought together through engi- 
neering societies, nor has the InstiTuTE itself appealed to many of them. 
The INsTITUTE meeting has a distinct value from the engineering stand- 
point and the advantage of acquaintance and association, and has in fact 
opened a new field which has not been clearly recognized. Branches 
have been formed in fifteen cities. 


3. Student Meetings.—The general interest taken in INSTITUTE meet- 
ings by students is significant. Professors of electrical engineering 
recognize the value to their students of the work of the InstTiruTE and 
a study of its papers reflecting as they do the present tendencies of 
electrical engineering and the latest achievement in electrical work. In 
some institutions electrical engineering societies which were languishing 
have taken on new life asin InstiruTE branches. Meetings are held 
in fourteen institutions. The average attendance is over 400. This 
attendance of students does not include those who attend the Branch 
meetings in cities. 

4. Papers and Discussions —The Branch meetings are supplied with 
the papers presented at the New York meeting and the stenographer’s 
report of the discussion upon them. The discussion at the Branch 
mecting is not infrequently by members who are better qualified to dis- 
cuss the subjects in hand than those in attendance at New York. The 
Branches contribute materially to the value of our transactions, both by 
the discussion of papers and by the occasional presentation of new mate- 
rial. . 

BrancH REporvs. 

As a basis for the preparation of this report a circular letter was sent 
to the officers of the several branches from which the following is an 
extract: 

“In addition to statistics showing the number of branches, member- 
ship ard the like, it is desired to indicate the ways in which the work 
done in branches and in Student meetings is contributing to the welfare 
of the InstiruTE and of its members, both collectively and individually. 

“The rapid development of local organizations during the past year 
and a half has been one of the most notable features of our INSTITUTE 
activity. What results are being accomplished? What changes are 
being effected in the scope and effectivencss of our work? Is the local 
meeting simply an affair of passing interest, based on the enthusiasm 
of the moment, or has it a substantial basis? What do the conditions 
which are found and the results already attained indicate ‘as to the per- 
manency and the ultimate scope and value of this work? 

“It is desired to have from those intimately identified with the work 


818 REPORT OF COMMITTEE [May 17 


of the branches, statements or reports upon which a general report may 
be based which will give a fair estimate of the success of this movement 
to broaden and nationalize the active work of the INSTITUTE. 

‘‘ T would be pleased to have a letter from you giving your observations 
and views. It is suggested that the branch work be considered from the 
following points of view: [The six headings are given later in connection 
with the reports].” 

Replies were received from all but two or three of the branches. In 
many cases both Chairman and Secretary replied and in Boston and St. 
Louis the letter of inquiry was transmitted to several members and a num- 
ber.of independent views were obtained. In all reports have come from 
45 members of 27 of the 29 local centers. The mere fact that so many 
men—most of them busy men—have taken this interest in the matter is 
significant. 

The striking feature in the reports is the unanimity of sentiment. 
There are none that do not show satisfaction with the results in the past 
or confidence in the future. Some propose new methods, but none even 
suggest discontinuing their work. 

It is no easy matter to bring into brief compass the contents of so 
many reports. A general summary will be given and extracts will be 
made from some of the letters, although much that is intrinsically 
worthy cannot be given in the space available. 


1. The value of the Institute to its members as affected by Branch meetings. 


The replies are unanimous that the InstiTuTE is of much greater 
usefulness to its members. Following are some of the expressions: 


‘“ Until the establishment of the Branches the value of the INstiTUTE 
to its members outside of New York, was largely of a sentimental 
nature.” (Sanville, Philadelphia.) 


“Hence from the educational view point I would conclude that the 
benefits derived from the local meetings are equal, if not superior to those 
derived from the regular meetings. In addition to the educational fac- 
tor, there is the social element which «constitutes a feature no less 
(ae than the educational one just referred to.’’ (Freeman, Chi- 
cago. 


““ Branch meetings give members something tangible in return for the?- 
money. We get as much benefit from the InstiruTE as those members 
who live near New York City.’”’ (Humphrey, St. Louis.) 


“I find that our meetings have quickened my interest and forced me 
to go thoroughly into each paper.’’ (Shaw, University of Missouri.) 


‘The advantages gained both by the members and the InstTiTUTE 
fully justify maintaining and continuing the branches.’’ (Ayer, Boston.) 


“The Branch meetings increase the value of the InstrruTE to mem- 
bers of the local branch at least 100%.’’ (Damon, Chicago.) 


‘““The Branch meetings have more than doubled the value of the In- 
STITUTE to the local members.’’ (Lanphear, lowa State College.) 


6 

2. The effect of Branch meetings on the attitude of members toward the 
Institute. 

The replies show that there is closer personal intercst and wider 
activity. 


1904.] ON LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS. 819 


““ Members feel now that they have a direct personal interest in all 
that the InstiruTe does.’’ (Humphrey, St. Louis.) 


_ “The Branch meetings are of value in giving a personal element that 
is altogether lacking when membership means only paying dues and 
eae the printed transactions.’ (Langsdorf, Washington Univer- 
sity. 

“Personally I am of the opinion that the organization of the Boston 
Branch has prevented the Boston members from losing interest in the 
Institute. At various times during the past five years I have made 
efforts to get friends of mine in Boston to join the INsTITUTE but have 
always been met with a very decided feeling that it was not worth while; 
that the INsTITUTE was operated as a New York Club and was of no pos- 
sible interest to any one outside of that city. How much truth there has 
been in this I cannot say but the starting of the Branch last year revived 
interest very decidedly and I think it has been a wonderful success.”’ 
(Edgar, Boston.) 


“The Branch meetings in the western towns serve to bring the mem- 
bers in closer touch with the InstiruTE for the reason that very few are 
ever able to attend the New York meetings or the conventions.”’ (Shaad, 
University of Wisconsin.) 

“The Branch makes it possible to give a large number of men actual 
work to do for the INsTITUTE, which always results in a feeling of closer 
relationship than the occasional attendance at a meeting in New York 
gives. We accomplish this in Philadelphia by forming special commit- 
tees and distributing the Branch work as widely as possible.’”’ (Sanville, 
Philadelphia.) 

“« A number of members who formerly took comparatively little interest 
in the affairs of the INstiTUTE are taking an active interest in the Branch 
meetings,”’ (Eglin, Philadelphia.) 


> 


3. The effect of Branch meetings upon the attitude of non-members, par- 
ticularly young men, to the Institute. 

The general tenor of the replies is indicated by the following extracts 
from the reports received: ; 

“The attitude of non-members particularly young men to the INsTI- 
TUTE has been shown by the large influx of such men to the ranks of the 
Institute.” (Bogen, Cincinnati.) 

“The standing of the Instirure locally is considerably increased. 
This was seen in our meeting last year when Mr. Arnold read a paper 
on, ‘ The Transportation Facilities of Chicago,’ and when we had several 
members of the City Council with us who entered into the discussion.” 
(Swope, St. Louis.) 

“T certainly would never have joined the Institute had not this 
Branch been formed.’ (Caldwell, Boston.) 

‘“‘T am satisfied that practically all of the members that have joined 
since we started the Branch meetings, have done so as a result of their 
interest in these meetings.” (Hewitt, Philadelphia.) 

‘“‘ The Branches have a tendency to bring into the InstiruTE a larger 
number of men, who have no professional standing, than would otherwise 
have come in. These men, however, are frequently the men who are 
doing the actual, new engineering work for the various corporations and 
industries. They are therefore a valuable acquisition to the INSTITUTE.” 
(Sanville, Philadelphia.) 

“ Pully two-thirds of the attendance at our local meetings has been 
young men who have not yet become members of the INsTITUTE, It is 


820 REPORT OF COMMITTEE | [May 17 


hard to say how any better plan than that of local meetings could be 
adopted to educate future members to the posribilities of the INsTITUTE 
work.’’ (Damon, Chicago.) 


‘The conditions with the Pittsburg Branch are somewhat unique in 
that it meets in the hall of the Electric Club and is affiliated with the 
Electric Club [composed of engineers “nd apprentices of the Westing- 
house Electric & Mfg. Company] to the extent that all of its members 
are invited to participate in the meetings. This circumstance perhaps 
gives the local branch an unusual opportunity for interesting those who 
are very apt to take advantage of membership in the AMERICAN INsTI- 
TUTE, and probably accounts to some extent at least, for the rapid growth 
of local membership which has nearly tripled in less than two years.” 
(Lineoln and Peck, Pittsburg.) 


4. The value of Institute work to students. 


In some cities students attend the local branch meetings. (Student 
meetings in technical schools will be considered later.) In Chicago, St. 
Louis and Columbus meetings have been held both by the branch 
and by the Students in technical schools. 


The relation of some of the Branches in cities to students is indicated 
by the following extracts: : 


“We not only have got a lot of new members, but what is still better 
we have interested all the electrical students of this section.of the country 
in the InstituTE#, so that the majority of them, I think, rather look for- 
ward to joining when they get out of college.”” (Edgar, Boston.) 


‘““Branch meetings must be of especial benefit to younger members, 
and that these young men take a deep interest in the meetings, I can 
vouch for, as a number from these works attend every one of our meet- 
ings in Boston. There have also been enroled thirty-six young men in 
the grade of Student. I am not familiar with the work of the college 
branches, but the interest taken by the students—so-called—of the Gen- 
eral Electric Company [Lynn Works] indicates that the general interest 
of these young men is more than superficial.’’ (Fleming, Boston.) 


‘‘ The local meetings have been of great help to those who have at- 
tended. Our senior electrical engineering students attend the meetings 
almost toaman,”’ (Shepardson, University of Minnesota.) 


5. Do the Branches aid the Institute in its fundamental purpose,—‘‘in the 
advancement of the theory and practice of Electrical Engineering * * * and 
the maintenance of a high professional standing among its members.”’ 


The general tenor of the reports is to the effect that the Branches con- 
duce to the substantial advancement of Electrical Engineering. In other 
words, the meetings do more than simply impart information and con- 
tribute to agreeable friendships. A few of the expressions are as 
lollows: 


The substantial advancement of the INsTITUTE is effected through 
Branch meetings “‘ (a) by greatly increasing the number who come 
under the influence of the INsTITUTE; 

‘“ (b) by bringing to a much larger audience the papers presented; 

“(c) By making a much larger number acquainted with the work and 
personality of the greatest engineers of the country; 


By bringing out material for papers that would not otherwise be 
presented.’ (Caldwell, Columbus.) 


‘‘ The Toronto Branch has aided in the advancement of the theory and 
practice of electrical engineering by the discussion which takes place 


~~ SS 


1904.] ON LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS. 821 


and which soon indicates who have the highest attainments, and in con- 
sequence a professional pride is developed which would not pe present 
were it not for the meetings of the Branch of the InstirutTE.” (Kam- 
merer, Toronto.) 


“ The Branch is undoubtedly aiding in the proper preparation of men 
for the profession, and as a result it must in a secondary way be tending 
toward the future advancement of the profession.”’ (Jackson, Pennsyl- 
vania State College.) 


“The bringing about, rather than ‘ the maintenance of a high profes- 
sional standing among its members ’ will naturally take place by bringing 
the young men into personal relation with the full members, providing 
always that the qualifications for entrance to the higher ranks are made 
high.”” (Bogen, Cincinnati.) 


“It is believed that the influence of this Branch will be felt over a 
large part of the Southeastern States and will tend to place the ethics of 
the profession on a higher plane.’’ (Shoen, Atlanta.) 


6.—Is there a sustained interest in Branch meetings? 


It was anticipated that many branches would spring up in which in- 
terest would wane when the initial enthusiasm had spent itself. Local 
meetings have organized in 30 places. There has been but one sus- 
pension, that being in connection with a minor college in which there 
was a change of professors. Of the*29 remaining, one is in a state of 
suspended animation (a number of the leaders have left the city), but the 
others seem to be in a healthy condition. It is gratifying to note in re- 
viewing the reports, the practically universal assurance that there is a 
sustained interest and that the prospects for the future are encouraging. 
A number of the branches have been started recently so that there is 
little experience upon which to base conclusions, There is a sugges- 
tion in the reports from two of the larger cities, in which there appear 
to be strong local engineering societies, namely Chicago and St. Louis, 
to the effect that it may not be best to hold meetings as frequently as 
once amonth. A few of the reports, principally from the older branches 
are as follows: 

“There is certainly a sustained interest in the branch.” (Burch, 
Minneapolis.) 

‘‘ There is a pronounced interest in our local branch. The prospects 


for the future are very bright. Wehaveaconstantly growing membership 
among a good class of men.” (MacKeen, Toronto.) 


“The interest in the branch meetings has increased since its organiza- 
tion and the future prospects are bright.” (Eglin, Philadelphia.) 


‘“‘ With regard to the St. Louis Branch I fear that it will be difficult to 
maintain interest under present conditions. Two meetings per month of 
the Engineers’ Club, with one of the InstiTuTE, is too much of a drain 
on one’s time for regular attendance at all of them. We should, I think 
push the matter of arranging a compromise system with the Engineers 
Club, as outlined over a year ago.” (Langsdorf, St. Louis. Layman 
expresses a like view.) 

“There continues to be much interest in the Boston Branch and its 
prospects for the future are good.” (Kennelly, Boston.) 


“There is every indication that we shall not only maintain this in- 
terest, but increase the membership in this locality.’ (Bogen, Cin- 
cinnati.) 


822 REPORT OF COMMITTEE [May 17 


"We are glad to say that the interest in the meetings is well sustained 


and the prospects for the future are bright. In order to keep up a gen- 
eral interest we have had to introduce new subjects and we feel that our 
proceedings in this respect is accountable for the sustained interest in the 
meetings.” (Betts, Washington, D. C.) 

‘‘ I think we can safely say there is a substantial interest in the Chicago 
Branch and I further believe that its prospects for the future are very 
good.”’ (Junkersfield, Chicago.) 


StuDENT MEETINGS. 

The introduction of INsTITUTE meetings in technical schools has 
brought results which are remarkable and significant. The instructors 
have taken up the matter with much interest and the students have 
taken hold in a substantial and enthusiastic way. 


The manner of organizing and of conducting the meetings differs in 
different institutions. At one extreme the study of the INsTITUTE papers 
is taken up in a Seminary method under the direction of the professor 
as a part of the regular course. Weekly meetings are held and credit is 
given. On the other hand, an electrical engineering society among the 
students has merged into an INSTITUTE meeting with suitable by-laws 
and officers. Between these extremes various methods are pursued as 
may be best adapted to the local conditions. In general, however, the 
methods are the same in that the current INSTITUTE papers with their 
discussions are presented by students to whom they have been assigned. 
The subjects are then open for further comment and discussion. Current 
papers are often supplemented by past papers; the transactions of the 
INSTITUTE being in fact one of the best libraries of electrical engineering 
information. 


The reports from the Student, meetings are practically unanimous in 
showing active interest and substantial results. It is impracticable to 
give in full the reports received. The few extracts which are given, how- 
ever, will serve to cover the ground and several are given rather fully to 
indicate typical methods by which the work is conducted. 


‘““ My opinion of the value of the InstiTuTE work has grown steadily 
as I have had a chance to observe its effects on students and graduates. 
They have grown under it and take a larger, broader view of the profession. 
They take pride init. It calls for the exercise of sound judgment, and, 
as it were, stretches their minds to consider the larger problems of strictly 
engineering character. They are unanimous in their appreciation of the 
privileges they enjoy. 

‘“‘ Prospects for the future are bright. I expect to have a meeting a 
week during the next school year.’’ (Shaw, University of Missouri.) 

“A certain number of the senior class, together with the graduate 
students in Electrical Engineering, elect our course known as a Graduate 
Conference or Seminary and such students are invited to become affiliated 
with the InstiruTE as Student Members or to join as associates, though 
this is not made a requirement of the course. 

“ Meetings of this Seminary are held weekly and different subjects are 
taken up and discussed, such subjects being furnished largely by papers 
presented at previous meetings of the InstitutE. A list of other refer- 
ences is prepared by the student who is to abstract the paper and the 
references. A written discussion to serve as the opening of a general 
ee is eel ee ae a different student. 

‘One meeting of each month serves as the regular meeting of th 
Madison Branch. These monthly sessions are Hele at orate oe 
mostly, and are open to any person who may be interested. These meet- 


let lad 


1904.] ON LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS. 823 


ings have been very successful this year. They are very informal, much 
in the nature of a ‘“‘ smoker,’’ and have been well attended.’ (Shaad, 
University of Wisconsin.) 


““T believe that a very decided reaction upon the work in the Depart- 
ment is felt in that in certain directions a practical turn is given to our 
Instruction work and in this way the local branch meetings are aiding 
in the advancement of the theory and practice of Electrical Engineering. 
The interest in the local Branch is sustained and increasing. We have 
recently sent in over thirty applications for Student membership and 
some additional applications for Associate membership, in the parent 
society,’’ (Spinney, lowa State College.) 


“Four men who became Associates while here have left Ames which 

- accounts for their not appearing in the list of local membership. During 

the past month four other men have made application. These applica- 

tions are a direct result of the influence of the local branch.” (Lan- 
phear, Iowa State College.) 


“This Branch consists of some thirty-one student members who are 
actively interested in the work of their branch, and at the same time are 
frequent visitors to the Chicago Branch meetings, as well as the local 
branch of the Western Society of this city. These young men discuss 
papers of their own that are the result of their experiences in the class 
room and the laboratory, as well as those of the INstiTruTE that come 
within their range.’’ (Freeman, Armour Inst. of Technology.) 


“The local branch is causing our students to become thoroughly ac- 
quainted with the Instirutr and to hold its aims and objectsin high 
regard. This attitude is not confined merely to the local student mem- 
bership but is true of the entire two hundred odd students pursuing 
Electrical Engineering.’’ (Jackson, Pennsylvania State College.) 


““During the past ten years there has existed among our students a 
vigorous organization known as the Cornell Electrical Society, This 
Society holds usually about 15 meetings a year for the purpose of hearing 
lectures or engaging in discussions. * * * This is one great reason why 
we have in the past held most of our branch meetings at an hour that 
would otherwise be given up to regularly required work foi our seniors 
in Electrical Engineering. Another reason for doing this is that we want 
to require that every one of our electrical engineering graduates shall 
possess knowledge of the InstiruT#, the benefits to be derived therefrom 
to have a start in the study and understanding of the transactions, and 
finally to know something of the men who have been or who are now 
prominent in its management or in the contribution to its transactions. 
We have <emodeled the schedule of our senior courses somewhat for the 
express purpose of devoting one hour of required work per week to the 
InstTITUTE and its transactions.’ (Ryan, Cornell.) 


“ The work of the organization at this place has exceeded my expecta- 

ns. 
et The weakness of the isolated student organization which existed 
before the Branch was installed, was that it relied almost wholly upon 
local talent for the papers; the students themselves taking little or no 
part in the discussion of the same. Most of the work devolved upon the 
members of the engineering faculty. ; 

“Tt has been our policy to leave the work of the Branch largely in 
the hands of the students, we acting only in an advisory capacity and 
the results have been very gratifying. ; 
' “The increased number of calls for the transactions of the InsTITUTE 
in our library shows that the students have learned to appreciate the 
proceedings of the INSTITUTE as a source of reliable information”. (Ester- 
line, Purdue.) 


“The students learn to know the leaders in InstiruTE discussions, 
learn what are vital topics, and in general to believe that electrical en- 
gineering is something more than a matter of text-book knowledge. The 


old REPORT OF COMMITTEE [May 17 


students appreciate the opportunity, and many have told me they would 
join as soon as able to pay the fees. The western state university is filled 
with a lot of eager but impecunious students, who are often actually 
unable to pay $3 for student membership, on account of class assessments, 
especially in their senior year. : 

‘“ At the moment, judging from our experience I should say that the 
InsTITUTE is giving more than it is receiving, doing a glorious work. If 
the Branch privileges were removed I am sure we would feel the loss 
severely. 

“ The interest is sustained. We would like to get more advance papers, 
owing to our increased attendance, but I am ashamed to ask for them, 
unless the INsTITUTE makes arrangements to have at least the postage re- 
funded.” (Brooks, University of Illinois.) 


“ After the organization of the St. Louis Branch I encouraged my 
students to enroll as Student Members and to attend the regular monthly 
meetings. The response, however, was not encouraging, and inquiry de- 
veloped the fact that the discussions were often too far in advance of 
the instruction (at the time of the meeting) to be intelligible to the stu- 
dents. For this reason it was decided to form an independent branch, 
so that discussions might be more free; incidentally, this permitted the 
reading and discussion of earlier INSTITUTE papers bearing on the subject 
studied in the class-room, in case the current ones should be ahead of the 
schedule of studies.” (Langsdorf, Washington University.) 


“Our first meeting was attended by some 65 students and visitors. 
Our branch is, I believe, a permanent organization in the University.” 
(Gladson, University of Arkansas.) 


‘The prospects for next year seem very promising, the men being in- 
terested in the work of the branch, and anxious to see it succeed.”’ (Sar- 
gent, Worcester Polytechnic Institute.) 


By-Laws. 


The By-Laws which have been recently adopted by the Board of Di- 
rectors regarding branches formulate the general policy under which 


branches have been conducted during the past year and a half. There. 


is a definite general relationship with the InstiruTE and the important 
matters pertaining to the branch are subject to the approval of the 
Board of Directors. The branch, however, is allowed a wide latitude in 
the adoption of its methods and its rules and regulations. Conditions 
vary in different places and the branch is permitted to adopt methods 
which are: best suited to the local requirements. 

In the By-Laws a distinction is drawn between Branches (which re- 
quire at least ten Members or Associates) and Student meetings. The 
Student meeting is responsible to the InstiruTE through one of the 
members of the InstiruTE who is a professor in the technical school. 
He is at liberty to follow such plans as may be found best. In those in- 
stitutions in which there are ten or more Students of the InstiruTE the 
Student meetings may be termed Branches. The organization, however, 
is virtually a meeting held under the direction of the professor in so far 
as official relations with the InstiruTE are concerned, unless there be ten 
Members or Associates, in which case a Branch may be formed. 

The privileges and the status of Students of the InstiTuTE are set 
forth in the By-Laws and ittis expected that there will be a material in- 
crease in the number of Students during the coming year. 


AFFILIATION WITH: LOcAL SOCIETIES. 


In several instances it has been found convenient or expedient to have 
the branch work in close relations with a local engineers’ club or engineer- 


1904.] ON LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS. 825 


ing society. Relations of this kind have been fostered. It has been the 
general policy to minimize the organization and management of the branch 
and to have it primarily devoted to meetings for the reading and discussion 
of papers. A preferred arrangement is that in which a local society will 
extend the use of its assembly hall for the InstrrurE meeting, there being 
a general privilege and invitation to the members of the local society to 
attend and take part in the meetings. In this manner the benefit has 
been mutual. The INstiruTE meeting may be regarded in one sense as 
a section meeting of the local society. On the other hand, the branch 
preserves its identity and there is no interference with the individualities 
of the two organizations. 
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS. 


The new place in modern affairs which has been taken by engineering, 
the great developments which have come through the application of 
electricity, the growth of the A. I. E. E. from its organization 20 years 
ago this month to the position which it now holds; the development of a 
new profession, the importance of the responsibilities devolving upon it— 
all open a new field for national engineering societies and for our InstI- 
TUTE. The field and the requirements in engineering are different from 
those of 25 years ago. The field and the requirements in our own InstTI- 
TUTE are different from those of ten or even five years ago. 

In most professions a man who was a competent engineer ten years 
ago might take up work now even though he had been out of touch with 
his profession in the meantime, but an electrical engineer who has not 
kept abreast of the changes in the past ten years would be quite out of 
date. The majority of the men in the profession are young men and 
hundreds of others are coming from the technical schools each year. 

“Tt is the function of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELEcTRICAL En- 
GINEERS to bring individual workers into a common unity, to join them 
in a community of interest—a fraternity which is called the electrical 
engineering profession. 

“It is the function of the InstiruTE to bring together continually 
the diversified achievements of many workers which taken altogether 
constitute a single total of accomplishments—a total which is called 
progress.” (President’s address, October, 1902.) 

In meeting these new demands and fulfilling the new conditions there 
must be a broadening of our activities. One of the most effective ways 
of nationalizing our InstiruTE and of increasing its effectiveness is 
through the local organization. The Electrical Engineering profession 
therefore presents to our InstiTuTE a field for Branch meetings which is 
unique, and which is quite different from that possessed by our sister 
societies. We are confronted by new conditions; we must devise new 
methods. The results so far achieved and the, indications now presented 
justify the belief that the formation of our branches is not merely a 
matter of present enthusiasm but that a new department of our work is 
begun which promises to be permanent and far-reaching in its influence.. 

For the Committee on Local Organization, 
Cuas. F. Scort, 
Chairman. 


REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON THE CADMIUM CELL. 


To THE BoarD oF DIRECTORS OF THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELEC- 
TRICAL ENGINEERS: 

The committee appointed by you to report on the preparation of 
materials and the construction of the cadmium or Weston cell has made 
very substantial progress, and begs leave to make the following prelim- 
inary report, with the request that the Committee be continued. 

The most serious variations in the electromotive force of both Clark 
and Weston standard cells have been traced to the influence of the mer- 
curous sulphate. (See Zeitschrift fiir Instrumentenkunde, February, 
1901, and the Report of the National Physical Laboratory of England, 
for 1903.) The problem of ascertaining the cause of these variations 
and the development of a standard method of preparing the mercurous 
sulphate was accordingly taken up by the Chairman of this Committee in 
conjunction with Dr. George A. Hulett of the department of chemistry 
in the University of Michigan. 

The method of preparation in use by the European manufacturers of 
mercurous sulphate consists in its precipitation by bringing together a 
solution of mercurous nitrate and sodium sulphate or sulphuric acid. 
This method has been repeated with a number of variations; and the vari- 
ous preparations give variable results when used in the cadmium cell, 
and all of them higher electromotive force than the mercurous sulphate 
prepared electrolytically, as described below. These results suggest that 
perhaps mercurous sulphate might carry isomorphously a small quantity 
of mercurous nitrate, since both of these salts crystallize in the monoclinic 
system. In fact Dr. Hulett has detected the nitrate in commercial pre- 
parations and in some of those made by himself. A cell set up with 
mercurous sulphate of the standard preparation, to which a trace of mer- 
curous nitrate had been added, showed an increased electromotive force 
due to the nitrate. Not only does the presence of the nitrate raise the 
electromotive force of the cell, but the relative amount of the nitrate 
present appears not to be invariable. 

In view of these facts, a new and standard method of making mercurous 
sulphate from pure mercury and dilute sulphuric acid appeared to be 
highly desirable. Such a method has been devised by Dr. Hulett; also 
independently by Dr. Wolff of the Bureau of Standards. (See paper by 
Henry S. Carhart and George A. Hulett in the Transactions of the 
American Electrochemical Society, Vol. V; also one by F. A. Wolff, same 


volume.) 


828°) aa REPORT OF COMMITTEE [May 17 


A new electrolytic method of preparing the cadmium amalgam, and 
one for washing the mercurous sulphate to remove the acid without the 
use of pure water were also devised. (See specifications below.) The 
results are highly satisfactory, and cells made in accordance with the 
specifications appended to this report show remarkable agreement and 
constancy. Your Committee is well satisfied that the principal difficul- 
ties in making Weston cells have now been removed. 

The two curves in Fig. 1 show the behavior of two cells for forty days: 
after they were placed in a constant temperature bath, at21.1°cent. Cell 
D6 was made with mercurous sulphate prepared in the old way by pre- 
cipitation; cell D1 was made with the same materials, except that the 
electrolytic mercurous sulphate was used. Comment is unnecessary. 
The electromotive forces given are relative and not absolute. 

The table exhibits measurements made on cells D1 to D4, and F1 to F10! 
all of them set up with the electrolytic mercurous sulphate. The figures: 
were obtained by comparison with an old cell, B7, by means of a Wolff’s. 
potentiometer and a type H d’Arsonval galvanometer made by Leeds & 


cy 


1.02000 


1.01909 - 


Northrup. The fifth decimal place could be read with the greatest ease. 

In determining the effect produced by changing a single feature in the 
preparation of the materials, about 100 cells of the H-form have been 
made and tested. These are still under observation. All of them, except 
the first ten, have been hermetically sealed. The sealing is readily ef- 
fected by making the glass containing cell of a special form, and sealing 
with two blast lamps. 

The Committee offers the following Specifications, which are to be 
considered as provisional only, for the preparation of the cadmium cell 
with saturated solution and excess of crystals of cadmium sulphate.. 
For the cell so prepared the Committee would suggest the name, ‘‘ Weston 
Normal Cell.” 

1. MERcuRY. 
Mercury free from grease should be first shaken with a nitric acid solu- 


tion of mercurous nitrate;* and, after drying, it should be distilled ina - 


vacuum at least twice. 


WAN eA MW ACI es Exp ML IL 


80 80 80 80 +80 80 80 $20 20 ol 13 8 +20 20 ¢90 990 o0' TS “LT 
G 


cr0) 80 80 40 £80 +80 ¢80 S80 80 00 1G ‘9T 40 40 +L) 19 ol 1G ST 
+80 80 +80 80 60 80 e830 80 80 o0' 1S ‘6 +20 10 40 20 ol 1 ‘21 
80 80 80 GLO 80 80 80 80 ¢L0 ol 13 ‘¢ 80 GLO 10 40 o6 16S 
+80 80 80 ¢20 80 80 80 +20 20 06 16 ‘G “Ady 80 ¢L0 L0 10 ol 13 ‘T JEW 
80 80 GLO GLO 80 ¢80 80 80 GLO 00' 1S ‘8% 60 ¢80 +80 10 06 1% ‘GS 
is —80 GLO 20 NK) L0 GLO —80 GLO 40 of 1S ‘ES 60 60 +80 10 06 1G ‘GG 
80 —80 +20 +20 20 +20 GLO 80 +20 10 of 1G ‘1G +80 80 10 10 ols PORSE 
80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 GLO of 1 ‘LT 80 80 80 40 ol TZ ‘91 
60 G80 G80 80 80 +80 60 60 G80 80 ol 13 ‘ST 680 80 80 40 olathe: SL 
80 80 GLO 80 80 80 +80 80 80 GLO 00° 1G ‘ZT G20 0 GOK ¢90 ol 1B ‘T “Fd 
-- 80 80 80 80 80 80 +80 +80 +80 80 06 1G ‘PF 10 20 90 90 ol 1G ‘SZ 
80 +80 80 80 80 80 +80 80 80 80 ol TG ‘1 “2PW || +20 20 c90 90 ol 1G ‘GE 
80 60 80 80 G80 S80 80 80 80 80 o0' 1S “SZ SLO yi 90 10 ol 1G ‘FT 
80 +80 SH 80 80 80 80 80 80 G20 BOG CG 80 10 10 +240 SLES PEL 
G20 80 40 GLO 80 80 80 GLO +20 20 ol TZ ‘03 80 80 80 10 ol 1G ‘6 
20 20 GLO GLO 90 29 +20 40 40 40 ol 1S ‘LT 60 G80 80 80 ol 1S ‘2 
G90 20 20 90 90 10 80 20 90 ¢90 ol 1G ‘9T 60 60 60 80 ols 9 


L0610°T| O6LO°T} 806101} Z0610'T] S90610°T] 806101} 80610°T} Z06TO°T) Z20610'T LO610* Tol 1G “ST “42a OI610°T] OT6IO'T] OL61O'T] 606TO'T] OTe ‘G Uef- 


Or 6 “8 4 9 g ¥ & a I v € her T 


“33eq 


‘STTHO A : ‘STTHO d 


! 


830 REPORT OF COMMITTEE [May 17 


2. CADMIUM SULPHATE SOLUTION. 

The best pure commercial salt is dissolved at room temperature in its 
own weight of distilled water, with the aid of a motor-driven stirrer. 
The solution must be filtered until perfectly clear; it may then be placed 
in a large crystallizing dish in a small room, free of dust; it is of advantage 
to remove the water vapor by appropriate drying agents. The slow 
ensuing crystallization should yield perfectly transparent crystals. After 
about two-thirds of the water has evaporated, the mother liquor is poured 
off and only the clear crystals are taken; those that are white are redissolved 
and added to the mother liquor. The whole is then filtered and left to 
crystallize again. The selected clear crystals are rinsed with distilled water, 
drained, and left to dry. 

To make a solution of cadmium sulphate for setting up cells, the pure 
crystals are put into an Erlenmeyer flask and covered with two-thirds 
their weight of distilled water. A suitable stirrer (Schultz stirrer, 
Ber. d. d. Chem. Ges., 1896, 2883) is driven by a motor, for the purpose 
of causing the water to circulate over the crystals, for at least half a day, 
preferably in a bath at 25° cent., controlled by a thermostat. The super- 
natant liquid should be clear and should remain so indefinitely. It 
should be left standing over the crystals. and when it is used it should 
be saturated at a temperature as high as 25° cent. The saturation of the 
solution is of great importance in order that the cells may quickly reach 
electrical equilibrium. 


3. CADMIUM AMALGAM. 

To prepare a 12.5 per cent. cadmium amalgam, free from zinc, a large 
crystallizing dish is nearly filled with a saturated solution of cadmium 
sulphate slightly acidulated with sulphuric acid. In a small, low erystal- 
lizing dish is placed a weighed quantity of pure mercury, and the whole 
is immersed in the cadmium sulphate solution. The pure cadmium of 
commerce is melted down into a large button with a stick of cadmium 
attached for electrical connection; or, several of the cadmium rods, bound 
together, are placed in a vertical position with their lower ends in the 
solution and beneath them:a small, low crystallizing dish. If the cad- 
mium disk or button is used, it is placed in the second low crystallizing 
dish, which retains the finely divided dross or powder. The metallic 
cadmium is then made the anode and the mercury the cathode, connec- 
tion with the latter being made by means of a platinum wire sealed, except 
at its end, in a glass tube. The fall of potential from the anode to the 
cathode should not exceed 0.3 volt. An ammeter should be used to keep 
account of the quantity of electricity flowing through the cell, until some- 
thing more than the necessary weight of cadmium has been deposited on 
the mercury cathode. The small crystallizing dish, containing the cad- 
mium amalgam and some of the solution, is then removed‘and warmed 
over a bath till the amalgam melts under the cadmium sulphate solution. 
When cool it forms a crystalline disk. This method yields an amalgam 
free from zinc, and there is no oxide or dross formed, as there is when the 
amalgam is made by the method of heating. The solid amalgam should 
next be washed, dried on filter paper, and weighed. The necessary weight 
of mercury to make a 12.5 per cent. amalgam is finally added. The 
amalgam should be kept under a pure cadmium sulphate solution, and it 


——E 


1904.] ON THE CADMIUM CELL. 831 


must be melted on a water bath to insure homogeneity before it is uscd 
in making a cell. 
4. MERCUROUS SULPHATE. 

In a flat-bottomed glass vessel or deep crystallizing dish place pure 
redistilled mercury two centimetres or more deep. Cover with dilute 
sulphuric acid (one of acid to six of water) to a depth of 8 or 10 cm. 
Make electrical connection with the mercury as the anode by means of a 
platinum wire covered, except at its end, by a glass tube. For a cathode 
use a piece of sheet platinum so as to expose to the acid solution a surface 
of about 50 sq. cm. A current density of 0.5 ampere per 100 sq. cin. 
surface of mercury may be used. A crystalline mercurous sulphate 
forms soon after the current begins to flow from the mercury to the acid 
solution. A stirrer, consisting of a glass rod bent at right angles at the 
bottom, must be used to keep the mercury surface exposed. The foot of 
the stirrer must pass close to the mercury, and the stirrer must be driven 
rapidly by a motor to keep the mercury agitated. 

A little over four grammes an hour can be prepared in this way with a 
current of half an ampere. The mercurous sulphate formed should be 
protected from the light, since mercurous sulphate darkened by exposure 
to light gives too high an electromotive force. The sulphate will be 
white or gray, according to the amount of finely divided mercury mixed 
with it. The presence of this mercury in a state of fine division is a 
distinct advantage. If the stirring is continued after the circuit is 
broken, the crystals of mercurous sulphate grow in size, become whiter, 
and subsequent treatment is easier. 

The mercurous sulphate may be removed from the mercury by a sep- 
aratory funnel. It should be kept under the acid solution, one to six, in 
contact with mercury and in the dark. 


5. THe PASTE. 

When ready to fill a cell, the mercurous sulphate, which has been kept 
in contact with mercury under dilute sulphuric acid, is brought into a 
Gooch crucible of about 25 c.c. capacity (about three-fourths), avoid- 
ing much free mercury, which interferes with the filtering. A tiny 
filter paper covers the perforations in the bottom of the crucible, and the 
whole is mounted on a Bunsen filter flask and attached to a filter pump. 

The mercurous sulphate is first washed a couple of times with dilute 
sulphuric acid (15 c.c. concentrated acid to a litre of water), and then 
with the saturated cadmium sulphate solution. The washing with the 
cadmium sulphate solution should be repeated five or six times to remove 
all the acid; only a few c.c. of the solution are needed for a single washing; 
after each washing the cadmium sulphate solution is to be removed as 
completely as possible by the filter pump. The last washing leaves the 
salt ready to be made into a paste. The top layer after the last wash- 
ing should be verified. 

The paste is then made in a clean agate mortar by grinding together 
‘crystals of the pure cadmium sulphate and a little mercury, and then 
mixing in about three volumes of the mercurous sulphate; finally add 
enough saturated cadmium sulphate solution to make a thin paste. 

6. CONSTRUCTION OF THE CELL. 

The H-form of cell is the most convenient to fill. Fig. 2 shows the 

glass cell half actual size, ready to be filled. The tubing is drawn out 


832 REPORT ON THE CADMIUM CELE. [May 17 


and contracted at a so as to leave the diameter about 6 cm. and with 
thin walls at this point. The amalgam is melted over a water bath and 
is introduced by means of a small tube, slightly contracted at the end, 
and of a diameter that will allow it to pass freely through the neck a, 
The warmed tube is used as a pipette, and permits the rapid introduction 
of the amalgam without splashing. It,.should always be wiped with a 
filter paper or clean cloth before it is introduced into the cell. 

The mercury, the thin paste, and the concentrated cadmium sulphate 
solution may be introduced in the same manner. An alternative method 
is to fill the cell through little funnels, made out of small test tubes. They 
must pass through the neck at a, and reach well down toward the bottom. 
After the mercury and the paste have been introduced, both legs of the 
cell are filled with clean, dry crystals of cadmium sulphate. Enough of 
the saturated cadmium sulphate solution is finally added to fill the cell 
to the top of the cross connecting tube. 


a 


FIG.2 


The sealing off is readily done by means of two small horizontal blast 
‘flames, 5 cm. long, directed in a line toward each other and just meeting. 
The narrow part at a is brought between the impinging flames, the glass 
quickly softens, and the top part is drawn off. A cell sealed in this way 
‘contains nothing but the necessary materials of the voltaic combination. 
It can not leak, and can be immersed in a kerosene bath without danger 
that the oil will penetrate into the inside, as it does with sealing wax and 
paraffin. 

After soldering copper wires to the platinum terminals of the cell, it 
is desirable to tie them securely with thread to the legs of the cell, as a 
precaution to avoid the breaking off of the platinum wire at the point 
where it enters the glass. 


The Committee is indebted to Dr. Hulett for many suggestions in the 
preparation of these Specifications. 


Henry S. Carwart, Chairman, 
Epwarp B. Rosa, 

CLayton H. Suarp, 

Georce A. Hamitton, 


Committee. 


ee 


REPORT OF LIBRARY COMMITTEE. 


We beg to submit herewith a report of the present state of 
the Library of the INsTITUTE, and the state of the several 
funds under the cognizance of this Committee. 

During the past year no accessions by gift to the funds of the - 
Library have been received, and a much smaller number of 
books have been added to the Library through donations than 
in the previous two years. This does not, however, signify any 
decrease of interest in the Library on the part cf members, but 
follows from the fact that in view of the great sum of money to 
be raised by the InstituTeE to fulfil the obligations assumed in 
connection with the Union Engineering Building, your Com- 
mittee has refrained during the year from pressing upon the 
membership the claims of the Library to their support. 

During the past year about $1000 was expended in the pur- 
chase of books in the English, German and French languages, 
the several lists prepared for this purpose having been carefully 
compiled to include the titles of the more authoritative works 
published during the past twenty years. The preparation of 
further lists of modern books required to meet ordinary needs 
has been deferred until some definite conclusions shall have 
been arrived at concerning the scope and organization of the 
proposed library for which quarters are to be provided in the 
Union Engineering Building, and of which the Institute col- 
lection will probably form part. 

A catalogue of the periodical publications in the Library, in- 
cluding the Transactions of professional and scientific bodies, 
has been prepared and is now in press. In this the entries of 


834 LIBRATN CREE O Rae [May 17 


the periodicals which the Library does not possess in complete 
state will be followed by a note pointing out the portions lacking; 
and as a copy of the catalogue will be sent to each member of 
the INSTITUTE, it is hoped that this indication will lead to mem- 
bers giving their aid in filling out incomplete sets. 

The Library has received from the C. & C. Electric Company, 
the Crocker-Wheeler Company, the General Electric Company, 
the Stanley Electric Mfg. Company, and the Westinghouse Elec- 
tric & Mfg. Company, sets as complete as could be made at the 
present day, of the trade and engineering publications issued by 
these several companies. It is hoped that similar collections 
may be obtained from other electrical manufacturing companies; 
literature of this class will be valuable for future historical pur- 
poses, and the Library of the INsTITUTE would appear to furnish 
an excellent means for its preservation. 

Sets as complete as could be provided have been obtained of 
the publications of the Underwriters’ Electrical Association, the 
National Board of Fire Underwriters, the International Associa- 
tion of Municipal Electricians, the Massachusetts Board of Gas 
& Electric Light Commissioners, the League of American Munici- 
palities and of the Municipal Electrica! Departments of Philadel- 
phia, Chicago, Detroit and South Norwalk, Conn. In the letter 
to be sent out with the catalogue of periodicals an appeal will 
be made to the membership to assist in building up the collection 
of this class of literature. 

The compilation of the Wheeler Bibliography is now ap- 
proaching completion and the MS. will probably be ready to 
place with the printer the latter part of the present year. 


1904.] 


LIBRARY REPORT. 


835 


During the year gifts of books were received from the fol- 


lowing: 
ARNOLD, BION J. 
BOWLER, F. T. 
BRILLOUIN, M, 


MEAD, MORRIS W. 
MARTIN, T. C. 
MORISON, J. 


CHEMICAL PUBLISHING COMPANY MULLIN, E. H 
CALDWELL, EDWARD. ROEBER, E. F 
DODGE, F. M. SAGER fiji". 
EDISON, THOMAS A. SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION. 
BLLICOTT: BiB. SPANG, H. Ww. 
GODDARD, C. M. SYNDICAT DES FORCES HYDRAU- 
GAUTHIER-VILLARS. LIQUES. 
HANCHETT, GEORGE T. TISCHENDORFER, F. 
HAMMER, W. J. UNDERWRITERS NATIONAL ELEC- 
HOPPING, G. W. TRICAL ASSOCIATION. 
HUTCHINSON, R. W., JR. U. S. CENSUS OFFICE. 
LINDERS, O. D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY. 
MCGRAW PUBLISHING COMPANY. VARLEY, S. 
MACVICAR, J. WEAVER, W. D. 
MASSACHUSETTS BOARD OF GAS’ WILEY, J. & SONS. 

& ELEC. LIGHT COMMIS- WINCHESTER, A. E. 

SIONERS. WOLCOTT, TOWNSEND. 


As stated in the report last year, the gift of Mr. B. J. Arnold 
comprises a complete set of ‘“‘ Annalen der Physik ’’ from 1790 
to date. Mr. Arnold also defrayed the cost of binding or re- 
binding a number of volumes of the set, which is now in excel- 
lent condition. 

Mr. Thomas A. Edison donated a complete set to date of 
the “‘ Nuovo Cimento.”’ Part of the set came from the library 
of Mr. Edison, who purchased abroad the volumes necessary 
to complete the set, and defrayed the cost of binding all the 
volumes uniformly in half-morocco. 

The donation of Mr. Edward .Caldwell consists of a set of 
** Popular Science Monthly,” complete to 1900, in new half- 
morocco binding. 

Mr. Edward D. Adams has requested your committee to com- 
plete to date at hiscost the several sets of Royal Society 
publications which he presented last year to the Library. Mr. 
Adams has also very generously offered to subscribe in the name 
of the Library for the annual issues of the ‘‘ International Cat- 
alogue of Scientific Literature’’ covering the branches of math- 


836 LIBRARY REPORT. [May 17 


ematics, mechanics, physics and chemistry, and numbering in 
these branches about six volumes yearly—the term of a subscrip- 
tion being fixed by the publishing committee at five years. 
This valuable publication, which supercedes the Royal Society 
Catalogue, is compiled under the auspices of a principal learned 
body in each of the leading countries of the world, the Smith- 
sonian Institution representing the United States. 

Following are the statistics of the Library brought up to 
May 1, 1904: 


STATISTICS OF LIBRARY. 


Vol- | Pam- | Valuation. 


Source. Titles. | umes. |phlets 
Report of May 1, 1903.............. 6377 | 8139 $16,870.78 
PURCHASES: 
Carnecie: Fund sree ein 14 128 283.17 
Donations Nun dans eyaerasdese tr eee 114 120 258 .62 
Maillouxthund Sainte ete 9 29.20 
Institute Appropriation...........| 299 366 22 785.19 
Miscellaneous Pamphlets.......... 92 23 .00 
Periodicals Bounds pace. nee eae eee 59 92 184.00 
GIFTS: 
Be.) cAnOld: yaa t rateceter kare i 332 1,304.72 
BadwardiCaldwellensaenree in 1 57 70 .00 
‘Thomas As disonsaei.s ere 1 47 200 .00° 
Miscellaneous Gifts (33 donors). . 58 130 128.00 
Total, May 1, 1904...........| 6924 | 9420 114 | $20,136.68 
Digplicatest aici eee 187 424 671.02 


6737 | 8996 114 | $19,465.66 
Duplicate Periodical Titles 64 : 


6673 | 8996 114 | $19,465.66 


Following is the total valuation of the Library including per- 
manent library fixtures: 


TOTAL VALUATION. 


BOOKS hii: ssa Safeoave Oh See eel ae Tn ee $20,136.68 
Book Stacks .c. Ua eg a ae ee 1,470.25 


Furniture, Catalogue Cases, etc............... 130.20 


$21,737.13 


ee 


1904.] LIBRARY REPORT. 837 


Following are tabulations giving the present state oi the 
several funds of which the Library Committee has cognizance: 


CARNEGIE FunD. 


Dr. Cr. 
Balance May 1, 1908....$4,864.10 BROOKS raw note Soe er: $283 .17 
Interest to May 1,1904.. 135.70 Wheeler Bibliography.... 284.25 
lUnexpended irr ernricrnian 4,432 .38 


$4,999.80 $4,999 .80 


MaILLtoux ENDOWMENT Funpb. ($1,000.) 


Dr. Cr. 
Imterest: Accrued. o...1.. $29.50 Subscriptions............. $20 . 20 
Continuation of Sets....... 9.00 
Unexpendedire ry.cniier .30 
$29.50 $29.50 

DONATIONS. 

Dr. Cr. 
Balance May 1, 1903..... $635.04 Purchase of Books....... $265.37 
Unexpendedseen-mecierras 369 .67 
$635.04 $635.04 


The table below gives an account of funds appropriated by 
the InstTi1TUTE for library purposes: 


INSTITUTE APPROPRIATIONS. 
Ee 


Dr. Cr. 

Balance May 1, 1903.... $785.45 Books taaucuceineieis ep COOLS 
Appropriation for Main- Rentiee on has eran seers 1,505.04 
Wetanceaececicile ocei' 3,000 .00 insurancegaera rarer 54.77 
Special Appropriation Salary, Librarian bio ios bs 780..33 
for book stacks...... 370.00 Extra Assistance....... 50.00 
Jeno Goons sooop ones 254. 20 

Boolaptacks yarn aricestemtats 370.00 

Library supplies........ 65.36 

SUbseri ptlOnsa allen 20.00 

Miscellaneous.......... 19.05 

Unexpended tereremerite ©) 251/751 


$4,155.45 $4,155.45 


338 LIBRARY REPORT. ; [May 17 


ANNUAL APPROPRIATION, 1904-1905. 


The annual appropriation asked of the Institute for Library 
purposes is limited to the sum required solely for the mainten- 
ance of the Library. It includes no provision for the purchase 
of books or Library fixtures, nor for any other than routine 
expenses and binding. The requirements for the fiscal year 
May 1, 1904, to May 1, 1905, will be as follows, the item for 
binding including provision for rebinding the Library set of 
Patent Specifications, which is complete to June 30, 1891, and 
numbers 97 volumes: 


Rent) nets ieee eee eee $1,505.04 
Tmsuran C@wtaeie.c ca ee eee 65.00 
Salary, Librariahtic..c = agate seer 780.00 
HxtrayAssistances. se ace LOSE ch Sia 50.00 
Binding ene ee cee eee hie Seem eee 450.00 
Library Supplies. 2, . sae eee ee 100.00 
Subscriptions ssi nna. ae eet ee 25.00 
Express, Postage, Miscellaneous........ 24.96 

$3,000 .00 


Following is an itemized statement of disbursements from 
the annual appropriation of last year: 


Rent¢ vas: ikaete pal eee $1,505.04 
IMSUTANCE . , Acc itudes Gee eee ee 54.77 
Salary, Librarians cc) gee 780.33 
Extra Assistancestc..n, =e eee 50.00 
Binding, Periodicals and Books........ 254 . 20 
Library Supplies =. moe eee 65 536 
SubseriptiOns facie. ois cere eee 20.00 
Express, Postage, Miscellaneous........ 19.05 
Unexpended? (05 sie ay a 251.25 

$3,000.00 


For the Library Committee, 


W. D. Weaver, Chairman. 


SE —— —— 


INDEX. 


BUSINESS OF THE INSTITUTE. 


Address, President Bion J. Arnold, at St. Louis, Mo., September 


12, CS 8 Bate, atch eee eee ne eed wipe EE ne Ae eI 615 
Annual Convention, St. Louis, Mo., September 14, 1904.......... 615 
Arnold, Bion J., President of the InstirurE 1903-4, Portrait of, 

Frontispiece 
Pee MEIGS OM COLA SC CLOLAIY (Sion sarc ogee ie ogslays, Sanat cece. waht eee ore oie 812 
BOO inechOrs. WeEpOIl OL... age sop toi. 4 eee Seiad a sta oak 807 
CadmiumiCell} Report of Committee on the..,.......2...ss0-- 827 
Cmeaconpranch: Meeting, April 26, 1904) .4..... ..,40. 008+. eee 168 
@hicaso Branch, Meetins, March 29,1904.....5..43.5.-+.02 005+: 236 
hica so. Braneh,,Meeting, June 21-22) 1904.2. nc. ween ene 471 
Cincinnati Branch, Meeting, February 15, 1904.................. 83 
Committee on High-Tension Transmission, Report of..,.......... 571 
Convention, Annual, St. Louis, Mo., September 14, 1904.......... 615 
Screw Schima Sac MemVe at. Hae wh delayas isa esp oes Ga ayer 3 ua bua eepewe sera arse 812 
Dinecetorcmle pont tls OATCCOLs: frtags- ns css scare aes foot take @usuee eles 807 
ID Sjowarseian erate Cua WNCCee Os. Bop Ocoee chee te aco peed fe eco on ono ed ol. 812 
General Meeting, Twenty-first, St. Louis, Mo., September 14, 1904.. 615 
High-Tension Transmission Committee, Report of..............-. g/l 
Sein Ee IN eCOCiptSranc wDISbtUTSeMents.j:omsk 2d eetie) srs ee 812 
Piramye Coramittee  NepOre OL ssa ss, oytend wei © oom alc agellthere <y0o aile ee 833 
Local Organizations, Report of Committee on...... RAT eee 815 
MectinomUiicago Branch april 26, 190A Wo. scans. anise tigers teres 168 
Meetines Chicago Branch, March 29, 1904... 5.0... 0.905. .2 ease 236 
Meectinos Chicaso Branch, June 21-22; 1904. oo. a we 471 
Meeting, Cincinnati Branch, February 15, 1904................-- 83 ° 
MechineaNewavork January 29, 19042... 20.6. 2..42. snes eee 1 
Meeting, New York, February 26, 1904..................---505- 101 
Meeting, New York, March 25, 1904...........0.020+2e2se eens 171 
Meetinea New York, April 22, 1904... ...5.0..- ees ees seg eee 253 
MectmemNew, Vouk, Mayolvy—18, 190480 Ces fag. ee ee ee 353 
Meeting, New York, October 28, 1904..............--2-+++-++5; 645 
Meeting, New York, November 25, 1904.............,.++.4+---:- 691 
Meeting, New York, December 28, 1904.............-...--++++-5 759 
Meeting, Philadelphia Branch, May 9, 1904................+-+--- 249 
Meeting, Philadelphia Branch, January 9, 1905............-..+-- 805 
Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, February 2, 1904...............++0-- 78 
Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, March 10, 1904......-...........145, 166 
Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, April 7, 1904..........-......8+-+55 246 
Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, May 5, 1904..............5-e5 esses 337 
Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, December 5, 1904..........---+++++- oe 
Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, January 9, 1905........-.-..-++4s55- 801 
Meeting, Seattle Branch, April 14, 1904..................--+ ees 345 
Membership, Resumé of...2. 0. 0. ee eee ee eg te ees 811 
New York Meeting, January 29, 1904.............-+-.eseeeeeees 1 
New York Meeting, February 26, 1904...........--+.-+-+-s- eee 101 


839 


840 INDEX. 


New York Meeting,;March 255 W004. 2220 crite sn islet neta yak 
New York Meeting, April 2271904) is ia 5 era ote caterer (ee eelemnnenea 253 
New York Meeting, "May 178) LOO. reco ieisele tip storie ne nenen nein ete 353 
New York Meeting, ‘October 28, LOO 4 yee gets) et eho 645 
New York Meeting, November 25, 1904.7. 00... 0 se oe ee 
New York Meeting, December 28, 1904..................0+-.--- 759 
Philadelphia Branch Meeting, May 9, 1904...................9.. 249 
Philadelphia Branch Meeting, January 9; 1905................... 805 
Pittsburg Branch Meeting, Bebruary2, 1904. am aetna neers 78 
Pittsbure Branch Meetings, MarchilO; O04 ieee eee 145, 166 
Pittsburg Branch Meeting, April 7; 1904.25 ree tere 246 
Pittsburg Branch Meeting; May 5, 19042224. ae) eee 337 
Pittsburg Branch, Meeting December 5, 1904..°...........,..... 752 
Pittsburg Branch Meeting, January.9) 1905... rete €01 

Portrait of Bion J. Arnold, President of the InstiruTEe 1903-4, 
Frontispiece 

President Bion J. Arnold’s Address, at St. Louis, Mo., September 
ee ct Seen ae Mae omic Gs as os ba 46 615 
Receiptsiand’ Disbtrsements..)..0. sete ee eee eee 812 
Report, Annual; of Board of Directorsases seen eee eee eee 807 
Report, Annual, of Committee on Local Organizations........... 815 
Report of High-Tension Transmission Committee................ 571 
Report of Library Committee....... A PSR HN Oakey ier Odd. 6-4" 833 
Report of Committee on the Cadmium Cell-. 272-2 ..... 2.0222 oe 827 
Seattle) Branch Meeting, April 141 904) ane 345 
Secretary's Balance’ Sheet a) ya. su, ~ cine sse ole an ee ee 812 
Twenty-first General Meeting, St. Louis, Mo., September 14, 1904.. 615 
Treasurer's Reportitesip:.,. 2 ieagesd een ene 814 


PAPERS AND DISCUSSIONS. 


Pern atine Currents Genera tOrssss.si.s tcievoaae lt ee ote ete es 
Alternating-Current Railway Motor, The. (Illustrated.) (Charles 

ERECT MLCT vs Wess Gh sa, ata ahs oit he, AE ee 
Alternator, Data and Tests on a 10 000 Cycle per Second. (Illus- 


IE teUGE CLs) Wraretee Sheree serra coe ta iceman ialch at dhant catered Me hte Sick aaa ne oe 
Alternators, Contribution to the Theory of the Regulation of. (Il- 
strated sien ot ceil) matin ts he ee ete ec ee Ot ce ee 
Alternators, Revolving Field, Mechanical Construction of.  (Illus- 
SRE He Te | ng pated Hee ae Ae ee RRs Preah Sita hak eee ato Racylc 


Atmosphere, Conductivity of, at High Voltages. (Illustrated.)... 
Batteries Line, On the Calculations of. (Illustrated.)........... 
Bushings and Terminals for High-Pressure Transformers......... 
Calculation of Line Batteries. (Illustrated.) (W. E. Winship.).. 
Conditions for Continuous Service over Lines Operated in Parallel. 
Gilltustrated: yee (VISE “Gerry. -frinade sek oe o wae olde ote: 
Conductivity of the Atmosphere at High Voltages. (Illustrated.) 
CENGH TTS. GIS RG WCH LED See CNC eter CCA eh Chon ea coy We Bacio: oI Oc 
Conductors, Electrical, Transposition of. (Illustrated.).......... 
Construction and Operation of High-Pressure Transmission Lines 
and Insulators, European Practice in the. (Illustrated.).... 
Contribution to the Theory of the Regulation of Alternators. Illus- 
iraved=) aCe Habart and Hi WeUngds). ana + cei lene 
Converters, Synchronous, Operation of............6- ese ne eee eee 
Data and Tests on a 10000 Cycle-per-Second Alternator. (Illus- 
itraceds\i Cbs G7 Lane. )otm ns «ees aoe aastegs mye pels sens aioe 
Different Methods and Systems of Using Alternating Current in 
Electric Railway Motors. Discussion at St. Louis, Mo., Sept. 
2 SS Ce ee gh A eee Dewi tae ‘ 
Discussion on Alternating-Current Generators, at New York, April 
EOC IEP te COONEY Sues Sheth S cee 323, 
Discussion on Alternating-Current Generators, at Pittsburg, May 5, 


AEC iriiaicl es nelle avcelis 14 tel eiecte: (6) ieia) ofa" (e,.6) 16] | wie) lol iSj.e) 16) fete, 9) net * nel enisias, oi 6) .bh se .ee Oke 


sanitary 205 1904s ate rae eerie eyes oop ters as se 
Discussion on Alternating Current Railway Motors, at Pittsburg, 
ebruamyye, MOOS Wc Arras wets ce sarccl deci eitaiis SOL Tk 
Discussion on Different Methods and Systems of Using Alternat- 
ing Current in Electric Railway Motors, at St. Louis, Mo., 


Senta lOO4 tance teers ° PAL TO EE OR Tee Roc 
Daecon on Heavy Electric Traction, at New York, November 
om Oe Peer waieiccas te ae eee ar ister le dd Miele hetatobd mat enverete 
Discussion on Heavy Electric Traction, at Pittsburg, Pa., Decem- 
Be ie TNO Ri es case ace oie Ae nes @tStD tices, Gate. Guo Cic aN Sora 


Discussion on High-Pressure Lines at Chicago, April 26, 190427) ce 
Discussion on High-Pressure Lines at New York, February 26, 1904. 
Discussion on High-Pressure Lines at Pittsburg, March 10,1904. . 
Dscussion on High-Pressure Transmission, at Chicago, March 29, 


WOO cco) Sako orton OnE aeanICIOR GI J dda B peries nats Aa a eee 
Discussion on High-Pressure Transmission, at New York, March 
SSIS. FIG WE. roa tie 08 Llomagriees ue Un Sun OM Ae sae 175, 204, 217, 
Discussion on High-Pressure Transmission, at Philadelphia, May 9, 

THO{O Ye oe ON c.f cuhor Lae ELE OnC Diemer Ore Sf dticrsh tte ws Reid art palettes jad 
Discussion on High-Pressure Transmission, at Pittsburg, April 7, 

CGD Tih GEES Oe nr cere PO Ra Gr a hoon Urea kite ae 


236 
231 
249 
246 


qaome a INDEX. 


Discussion on High-Tension Transmission, at Chicago, June 21—22, 


190 ae ese Renae uence see 475, 494, 514, 551, 555, 561, 605, 609 
Discussion on Papers Presented at the Annual Meeting, New York, 

May 1718); 1904 5 vein th ote a2 hon ee kee ne i 443 
Discussion on The Conductivity of the Atmosphere at High-Voltages, 

atwNew. York, February. 26, O04 066 cree tctane 22-1 olin eee 135 
Discussion on The Conductivity of the Atmosphere at High-Volt- 

ages, at Pittsburg, March: LO 19047 ere cee reac eee nets 145 
Discussion on Transmission Problems, at New York, December 23, 

ik? 0) See e eer marries Ess oo ecm hoo adc ano” - 782 
Discussion on Transmission Problems, at Philadelphia, Pa., January ; 

oan Ao | 0s iin rere K ns Sh ge oe Meee eee cc sks ae 805 
Discussion on Transmission Problems, at Pittsburg, Pa., January 9, sh 

i219 Pee Cerner eran apy cern NL FG A bce o> O1 
Distance, Maximum, to which Power Can be Economically Trans- 

mitted. (IMustrated ii. atc oc seeeeie = ye Se ee ee 759 © 
Effect of Self-Induction on Railway Motor Commutation.  (Illus- 

trated.) GE. ER Andersons yin. crag oe te ee nen ne 379 
Electric Traction, Problems of Heavy. (lllustrated.).. 691 


European Practice in the Construction and Operation of High- Pres- 
sure Transmission Lines and Insulators. (Illustrated.) (Guido 


SCMCIM BA)! 5 Sali ins ted aR Bia sho 8 epee PL eo cass <A Bo) = eee ae 147 
Fire Risk of Oil and Air-Blast Transformers, The Relative........ Lt 
Bly=Wheels,, Notes:on. ), (illustrated \yaeeys ee ene ee ee 353 
Generators, Altematins-Currenty yao ree ae ee 253 
Ground Shields in) Dransiormers,” The Use tof... pee eee 553 
Group-Switches, The Use of, in Large Power Plants............. 199 
Heavy- Electric/ Traction): 4: «yct--ig tie ene bar eae 
High-Pressure; Lanes: 2 .3..\\a.Agrueke suas rath cuenn a treet a ieee 101 
High-Pressures Pransmssionanyenih cach mena tee enue ae Wal 
High-Pressure Transmission Lines and Insulators, European Prac- 

tice in the Construction and Operation of. (Illustrated.).... 147 
aoe ‘Tension ‘Transmission’.s2e) chou) aoe arene 471 

High Voltages, Conductivity of the Atmosphere at. (lIllustrated.). 101 
Induction Motor, single-Phase.) «(illustrated <clelae eee e 
Intelligence, Transmission Of, wns; saiite- «0 Poe oe Oe 645. 
Line Batteries, On the, Calculation of.) Gllustrated:) meee 393 


Line, Long Distance, Wave Form Variations of a. _(Illustrated.).. 403 
Long Spans for Transmission Lines. (Mllustrated.) (fF. O. Black- 


WELL.) a stag Baltes Land MS BS, conte po RRO Te cas ee oly Ric het a ae 511 
Maximum Distance to which Power Can be Economically Trans- 

mitted, (Illustrated) (KelpheD) Mershow)) =. 2.6 6. eee 759 
Mechanical Construction of Revolving-Field Alternators. Pee 

trated.) (David B. Rushmore.).. Spy eae 208 
Motor, Single-Phase Induction. (Iilustrated.).. 429 


Motors, Electric Railway, Different Methods and Systems ‘of Using 
Alternating Current in, Discussion at St. Louis, Mo., Sept. 14, 


ih! PP rae Pecan rdd or 4 A otis ao be sos soo us 624 
Motors, Railway, Alternating-Current. 2)... 2.0 2s. ets oe il 
Motors, Synchronous, for Regulation of Power Factor and Line 

Pressure. « «is «2. unteiles.;ce, oie igual eae iene are 481 
Notes on, Fly-Wheels. (Illustrated.) (H. H. Barnes, Jr.)....... 353 
Oil-Switches for High Pressures. (EF. M. Hewlett.) «oie Gi canon 215 
Operation of Synchronous Converters: (Sai G4e2111d59)/9) aan 345 
Parallel, Lines Operated in, Conditions for Continuous Service. 

(Illustrated. ere orires Gite OG d aden ce sce ye 547 
Power Factor and Line Pressure, Synchronous Motors for Regula- 

THOME OF 5006 sun + eratare ceskyerel dee caeioy ele enta I ee 481 
Predetermination of Sparking in Direct-Current Machines.  (Il- 

lustrated.) (Ww. To, W Gtr $:) ss sin Hie eeion ep hie ee ee 365 


INDEX. 


URSINORN Is Beane cents 7 ee Ok Ree A een aR omeern Ue arr tae ters vee: Fe 
Self-Induction, Effect of, on Railway Motor Commutation. (Il- 
lags Grate cls) ce uct sagen ep MAY cao Reeth BeCgena EL UNE ty Re COR 


Single-Phase Induction Motor. (Illustrated:) (Wm. S. Franklin.). 
Single-Phase Railways. (Illustrated.) (W.A. Blanck.).......... 
Single-Phase Repulsion Motor, Speed-Torque Characteristics of the. 

(QUIIRCIS ei at EvG Ny So 3 we DU tr ee re eT go oe ent fo 
"eaters eS Direct Current Machines, Predetermination of. TIllus- 

MEUES Chey) Korn ru tNemineeMey Releccke Te etcus ih Motes vette Meh Sette ee ae 
Speed-Torque Characteristics of the Single-Phase Repulsion Motor, 

(iiltistrahed sian (Walters Slicnier\\s05. cuts aio ee ee 
Static Discharges, The Protection of High-Pressure Transmission 

Lanessircomiea (llustrated:))ncase sc oe 25 aE oe 
mccnes MOlle Rtomellaot: Pressures. vata...08 dee eee. ke ened ee 
Switches, The Use of Group-, in Large Power Plants............. 
yn ehronOus: Converters, Operations Of... 40> o12 6 ak wee eit. 
Synchronous Motors for Regulation of Power Factor and Line Pres- 

SSA Ose wh (651s een LE LILIES) cee even eie) one Cio eels CA eo Ne 
Telautograph, The. (Illustrated.) (lames Dixon.).............. 
Terminals and Bushings for High-Pressure Transformers. (Walter 


SAECO ee re ae Ree ee ELE. Sees | © ete fea 
Tests, Data and, on a 10 000 Cycle-per-Second Alternator. (Illus- 
Ala) a! alate Sed. ho ican Pn ec OEE OLE mE oman Uke Ce Rg 
Theory of the Regulation of Alternators, Contribution to the. (II- 
RSI UD sat, ate anvs taecd at ee eR each VOM Ramer at Patch Ear ARN OMS 


Piece iOnMll Ga vey PLCCUIAC Py ws syste cutcsmche te aoe: Sr mente UNM ue tae aes 
Traction Problemsiof Heavy Electric: “(Wlustrated:))..5..52.9..% 
Transformers, High Pressure, Terminals and Bushinys for... . 
Transformers, The Relative Fire-Risk of Oil and Air-Blast........ 
Mratcionmers, bnesUselot Ground Shieldswn.....¢50.000eh essa 
ePratt SIMGST OM, wd Toe TESSUGe nue) ais oka) ds 4», chs wins namtidee [pate Bicdorsmomane 
Mera STMtsSIOi wm biiohmel ENSIGHR i anes te Ahi es cei Slats t i snag elie oh « 
Transmission, High-Tension, Answer to Questions Relative to. 
(Report of Committee on High-Tension Transmission.)...... 
Transmission Lines, High-Pressure, The Protection of from Static 
Bischarceswem (ilastratedsiteuc. « crises cheeks aii ee ik eon hed eeae eee 


Transmission Lines, Long Spans for. (Illustrated.).............. 
abpamomase1on OF lntellacenCes ais, s a vers) omvaia.s sere cote eae ssevu ee la curse sae aie 
ERT SHISS1 OM eet OO IANS Mer yeaah ve coche ite reniahe etereiagt <t saahenote nae phere oe tone 
Transposition of Electrical Conductors. (Illustrated.) (Frank F. 


JEG Se © ST AE8 *oy dsoh s tnces FORE RR REL REELS LE rT ert ROE oT Te nee 
Use of CaaS inwinanctormers: | (een LeeChs) atts tars 
Use of Group Switches in Large Power Plants. (L. B. Stillwell.).. 
Variations, Wave Form, of a Long Distance Line. (Illustrated.).. 
Wave Form Variations of a Long Distance Line. (Illustrated.) 

(Eee, TENS IRMOLLIEN Sao Brea ORD oO oe ORS ET Paced Ce Te 


843 


INDEX OF AUTHORS. 


Adams,:Comfort Az)Jc:, Discussionia)-)se ae ore 63, 3238, 328 
iverson, ob. 183, DISCUSSION: .nyein sane e enh ten nen 477, 539, 612, 613 
Anderson, E. H., Paper; 379 Discussion. . Be ae 

Armstrong, AY H., DisCusSiOMys so.05/cihe a) eipmaed alee a ete eee age 


Arnold, Bion J., ‘President’s Address 615; Discussion 40, 44, 45, 
164, 459, 466, 469, 531, 540, 541, 605, 607, 609, 610, 642, 
Ball, W. D., Discussion. .... <a... ohucac. Oe eee 
Barnes, H. H. , Jr., Paper 353; Discussion ....461, 463, 464, 465, 
Bayne, Howard) Discussion). 1:10.) oe 
Behrend, B.As,, Discussion. s.)9).r acer ae ae ieee eee 49, 325 
Blackwell, F. O., Paper 511; Discussion 494, 500, 524, 526, 530, 


54 

Blanck, Wi. Av, Paper 83) Discussion sein eee 168, 237, 241 
Blizard, J i Discussion 
Bond, A Be Discussion... 11.4. . wacon «othe 
Brooke, ihe joe Discussion ¢ «as 9... 2 wadsaon okie acl eee 
Buck. Hi; W..,. Discussions anew... cin 2. ee en ee 
Carlton, W. G., Paper 471; Discussion 238, 241, 242, 243, 244, 476, 

477, 609, 610, 611, 


Chesney; C. Ci Discussions s. .iinune «e Aonee Oca Ree ee 
Clark, Eugene, Discussionite. « «.cenr ee ae eee 580, oo2sDous 
Crocker, F. B., Discussion 
Dix, W. S., Discussion 
Dixon, James, Paper cc). ss: s2¥o.d.olicioea chon See eee 
Douglass; BE... Rs, Discussion... a... eae ee eee 
Dow: Alex, Discussionis. s.r. 0s Sato San Eee oe 204, 
Drysdale, C. V., Discussion 
Dunn, Gano S., Discussion 


a) 0:0 Borie. 6) io Jes 8) 6 ee) ee 60) © 8 (8 ol wells [ole \w) Ship eicel el ieice 


Oe Mme Oe ONC CRON Cac 8) oy ON Sot cy) 


Farley, J. W., Discussion 


Feldman, Clarence. 2... Discussiona. jue] ae eee 455, 464, 465, 
Finney,..J: H.,. Discussion. 22/4) c cceen ia einen ne eee 
Pusher, H. W-> Discussion.. 2 Jens on aan eee eee 145, 740 


Franklin, W. S., Paper 429; Discussion. ....55, 454, 463, 464, 465, 
Freeman, C. E., Discussion 
Foster, H. A., Discussion 
Fowle, Frank F., Paper 
Gear, H. B.; Discussions 154.0 2.4 toda ye ee 
Gerry, M. H., Jr., Paper 547; Discussion 
Gossler, P. G,,, Discussion s:,. . :% 3.:.tasle ch eee 
Gray; R. Kayes, Discussion: .iac «acts ein Cee nee eee 
Hall, H. V., JraeDiscussionss0s: jos ee eee 
Hanchett, G-T:,, Discussion. 22... 2. a eee 
Hatch, A. S.;:Discussion). 2) oe oe ee 524, 
Hazard, Wm. J., Discussion 
Hering, Carl, Discussion 
Hewlett, E. M., Paper Me aE oe tl ge ea ue 

Haywatd Rw Ee, DISCUSsiom sina ene nen en eae ic da eee 543, 
Hobart, H. M., Paper 291; Discussion 
Hoopes, Wm., Discussion 
Hunt, A. M., Discussion 


Oo e Hee © wih 6 6) 5 ele sie: 6 pe om vile 6/6) surrey Sel canniteneES 


INDEX, 


em DE Cees cussion ssn ee erie eee 

ackson, W. B. Pseussion Ate aad aca no yee ee 2 206, ‘4 07, 537. 
Johnston, T. be Piscussion 00 ee eae cee ae Bar, 
Junkersfeld, P., Discussion 237, 239 243, 244, 245, 539, 605, 
eer aPecot «V5 TNSGUSSIOMa 5 fs os wide Sobcicn he pO Le Ce 78, 


Kelsch, R. §., Discussion 


Kennelly, A. E. REDISCUISGION cs Ahan Te ee, dA Ae eae ae ee 

Kintner, S. M. , Discussion Rn tN AE ATU 1 44 
ae E. ay gD iseussion Phd eG cha LIAL Th SUDA ae Re re as : 

amme, apers 417, 481; Discussion......... 2 

Lardner, H. A. See RET Ar geern tic RMA aoaphey Tae SAGA a . ay oe i & : 
Leonard, let, Ward, Discussion yt chee 2: eres a eee eee 456, 
Wieby ji. We, Jr, piserssion: 1! en. wn key aeememonet 164, 165, 
Lincoin, ie M., Discussion ae bh ate onan ee 42. 140, 185, 


Lindsay, S. C., Paper 345; Discussion 
Lukes, G. H., Discussion 


yfords| O29). \c-, Paper 691 Discussion.:..2)..2.. eA ml ou 
“Lyman, Jas., PEC USStOR Ne ohick. WN aha dan Cy he ea "236, 242, 
Ly yndon, Lamar, WSCESSION) I casing cure ee aa tee a ae oe 


WicComm@okn Dradie ly, DISCUSSION. tna... pideetrn eee renee eee 
Micro cexet nC) gIDISEUSSION. aca ombccton aici cl neLy acted us Seine eee 
Mershon, Ralph D., Paper 759; Discussion 48, 143, 182, 204, 222, 

231, 475, 500, 523, 5382, 536, 5387, 551, 555, 561, 605, 610, 611, 


612, 613, 794, 795, 
Meomdvzm allen on ueaper 225 DISCUSSION «0. uses 4 der osawe pee 
Muralt, C. L. de, Discustion: tec. kien a ea eee oe 186, 
Neall, N. J. Discussion 166, 246, 526, 533, 541, 542, 562, 608, 610 
Newbury, PCD Discussion: a Stee el | eee eee ahaa 
Nisan) P. Ni, Discussion AS ee RAR ry Shue satu hay cer a ane ae a 185, 
Parshall, H. B DISCUSStOn aemes th eaters iy tances 193, 214, 
Pearson, John, Rscusvion Sts. coe Ge ee eee 
Peck, J. S., Paper 553; Discussion. alrite eta Os), 
Perrine, F. A. C., Discussion Tos 221, "330, 498, 505, 584, 586, 540, 
Perry, Es lige Disciasionhr sre al cl aan to en ted Ea 
Perry, Peete ory USCussiOne ie a icc bod bie aa aa ae 
cab een LW ISCUSSION:G ort i an wend ees s biden icm te, nie uae mosey 191, 
Punga, ie Paper OOM DISCUSSION. chee erry rainy ta ees eae eae ee 
Radley, Gok: Biceucsionis rc ec, ge ee oe ee oe pene 
Reid, Thorburn, DISCUSSION AR Me he crn oer ne ee CR ae 450, 
IRS, TDi Aaa dried Bech oXer eh hn Py Gea. g eich ae Pay Ow cete Seppo omipte Sate Abe 
Ries, BE, "5 cia Ceo ete 8 Oe il eerie ilar Nid ted we REE A) ed han EN. | hate 
RO DCL See Pee DISCUSSION. Sa tela wafer a sae ole. 5 «sie srotuenoss wit eidarces 
Roper, DERI Scrisclon Bucuate erica Ginenioc eee eee ae 
Row, Geo. H., Paper... +... esse tence cee eee e eee ene ees 
Rowe, Bae IRE et 1 Ue nee eoene ea ay iret aber ca tx 5 
Rushmore, David B., Baper-258; Discussions ii. sm. crores 329, 
Ryan, Harris J., Paper VOU DiscussiOnt ier eae tare 138, 139, 
Sanville, H. F., HM TeeaselOme Wt Lesh el alee de ome cetera ee 
Schildhauer, Edw., DISCUSSION: peta ie ee ore th eee ee 
Schuler, L., eG aiGi te es Se es ee ie ee eee 
Schuchardt, etre DcctissiOtien es cc ns otter apiaebe ce te miata el 
pcott, C.F. Discussion 48, 135, 165, 222, 501, 505, 525, 533, 609, 
610, 613, 
Semenza, Guido, Paper 5 ARE RS res Gani trea a: Me ohe: 5 eApotn 
Sessions, E. O.; Discussion. ....... 5-22.00 esse eee eee eee eens 248, 
Sheldon, Be Gel Discussions c-sucee baie ett ae = sae cee eran 
Skinner, C. E., Discussion... ......+-.seesree cere: 18355231, 555, 
Slichter, Walter I., Paper 1; Discussion.......-.---.0++++ sees 42, 


846 INDEX. 


Smith) Harold Bry Discussion) .ce.2 =o erennenn ene een 
Simuth. Wi Nelson; Paper 6917 Discussion=s err ae eee 
Snyder,.N. M., Discussion: 5. cee es en eee 
Sprague! BP. Jz, Discussion. 00s «cre aan oe teen eee ee 
Stemmetz, Cr Ps Paper 9 Discussion. asin renee eee onaee Oe 
Stillwell 7B.) Paper 199 Discussion ee eee 205, 
Stitzer,A: B.; Discussion’. iin.aeu etree 
Storer N : Wc Discussion... 5 nk acca ee ee eee eee 
Storemes, s.2 DISCUSSION esi cee eee 501, 506, 542, 606, 
Stott i: Gs DiStussion 7A ces 6 eee 184, 205, 
Pay lOieciV i & Ae DISCUSSION cere tale een 190, 209, 
Taylor, )noO..B.) DiscussiOtis ns) aceteten) oe ee eee 
aMomlasi le Elen, DISCUSSION «eae 138, 139, 140) 243, 551, bdo: 
Thomson, Hib, Discussion. ie srs asieee aie eee eee nee 142, 
Tobey; 1. W .;. DiScussi0n 2 sar, apres eee eee 
Townley, Galvére, Discussion: <2 eae oe eee eee ee 
Torchio, Philips Discussion ae eee 784, 
DPGAat., Reo 13;, DISCUSSION afer sy oe secck ea noes cetera net ed ean ee 
Wasner. H.-A. Discussion: 55 222s ets ene 
Wallace,.. Hi, .Discussioni yc ences ee eee 


Waters, W. L., Paper 365; Discussion ....189, 326, 448, 449, 495, 
Wells; W... Fs Discussion. ga4a.dnnt nite see eo ee ee ene 
Whites byoli Diseticcsion esis ieee IPR eine OR FD ee no 
Wilcox: Norman L.,. Discussion-me-s no eee ciate ee 
Winship; W.(E., Paper.393) Discussion= yy. .mee ee oe eee 
Wart, H.C Paper 55 1ee Discussion an ers ieee 475, 541, 542, 555, 
Woodmansée, Fe eDiseussiotinis sce es cee nee ener 612, 613, 
Wright; (Gilbert: Discussion. mestnetn a tre eaetente ai reiterate ene ee 


