UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS — 
AT Gr. 2AGO 
8038 S MORGAN 
CHICAGO. It 60607 


“os TRANSACTIONS 


OF THE 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE 


OF 


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, 


JANUARY TO DECEMBER, 1905. 


a 


VG GY Ce =o... Oi lave 


PUBLISHED BY 
Tur AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
95 LIBERTY STREET, 
NE WieY ORIGIN Yu. Ui) 5.5 
1906. 


_ Copyright 1905 5 + 
~ by the cat al oe 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELectRICAL Exoiveers. jet 


a Le = _ ~ - 
‘ ms n't: , — - r 
. "4 a 5 a A 4 
“Shall i ‘ ei 
> vv Ng bs ' : a 4 ty oe 
iP 4 + ~ 


i he 8 ae ALY 


OFFICERS AND BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 


1904-1905. 


PRESIDENT. 


JOHN W. LIEB, Jr. 
Term expires 1905. 


JUNIOR PAST-PRESIDENTS. 


CHARLES F. SCOTT. BION J. ARNOLD. 
VICE-PRESIDENTS. 
Terms expire 1905. Terms expire 1906. 
W. S. BARSTOW. Weed | CARY. 
RALPH D. MERSHON. W. E. GOLDSBOROUGH. 
CALVIN W. RICE. SAMUEL REBER. 
MANAGERS. 

Terms expire 1905. Terms expire 1906. Terms expire 1907. 
CHARLES A. TERRY. SAMUEL SHELDON. SCHUYLER S. WHEELER. 
TOWNSEND WOLCOTT. W. C. L. EGLIN. J. G. WHITE. 

GANO S. DUNN. GEORGE F. SEVER. HENRY G. STOTT. 
CHAS. L. CLARKE. A. H. ARMSTRONG. LOUIS A. FERGUSON. 
TREASURER. SECRETARY. 

Terms expire 1905. 
GEORGE A. HAMILTON, RALPH W. POPE, 
463 West Street, New York. 95 Liberty Street, New York. 


PAST-PRESIDENTS. 


NORVIN GREEN, 1884-5-6. EDWIN J. HOUSTON, 1893-4-5. 
FRANKLIN L. POPE, 1886-7. LOUIS DUNCAN, 1895-6-7. 

T. COMMERFORD MARTIN, 1887-8. FRANCIS B. CROCKER, 1897-8. 
EDWARD WESTON, 1888-9. A. E. KENNELLY, 1898-1900. 
ELIHU THOMSON, 1889-90. CARL HERING, 1900-1901. 

Ww. A. ANTHONY, 1890-91. CHARLES P. STEINMETZ, 1901-2. 
ALEX. GRAHAM BELL, 1891-2. CHARLES F. SCOTT, 1902-3. 


FRANK J. SPRAGUE, 1892-3. BION J. ARNOLD, 1903-4. 


STANDING COMMITTEES AND LOCAL SECRETARIES. 


1904-1905. 


Executive Committee. 


JOHN W. LIEB, Jr., Chairman. : 
RALPH W. POPE. 
CALVIN W. RICE. 


Ja CARDYs 
GANO S. DUNN. 


GEO. A. HAMILTON. 


Library Committee. 
WM. D. WEAVER, 


Chairman. 


GANO S. DUNN. 


WILLIAM J. JENKS. 


F. A. PATTISON. 
F. W. ROLLER. 


Editing Committee. 


CARY,;T. HUTCHINSON, 
Chairman. 

GEORGE F. SEVER. 

HENRY A. LARDNER. 


CHAS. A. TERRY. 


_ Board of Examiners. 
WM. MAVER, Jpe., 


Chairman. 


F. W. ROLLER. 


HENRY A. LARDNER. 


CECIL P. POOLE. 
TOWNSEND WOLCOTT. 


Committee on Papers. 


S. SHELDON, Chairman. 
F. W. JONES. 

F. A. C. PERRINE. 

PE Grw rotons 
CALVERT TOWNLEY. 


Committee on Financ?. 


JOHN J. CARTY, 
Chairman. 

W. S. BARSTOW. 

GANO S. DUNN. 


Local Honorary Secretaries. 
ROBERT B. OWENS, 


JAMES_S. FITZMAURICE, 


210 George St., Sydney, N. S. W. 


H. F. PARSHALL, 


SalisburyZHouse, London Wall, 


McGill University, Montreal, P. Q. 


CLARE F. BEAMES, 


E.C., London. 


City of Mexico. 


W. G. T. GOODMAN, Dunedin, New Zealand. 


E: P. BURCH, 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
W. EXDUDLEY, 
University of Missouri, 
Columbia, Mo. 
L. E. BOGEN, 
Cincinnati, O. 
GERARD SWOPE, 
St. Louis, Mo. 
S. M. KINTNER, 
Pittsburg, Pa. 
G._H. STICKNEY, 
Boston, Mass. 
R._T. MacKEEN, 
Toronto, Ont. 
M,. C. HULL, 
Columbus, O. 
GEORGE C. SHAAD, 
University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, Wis. 
H. F. SANVILLE, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 


Local Secretaries. 


M. P. CLEGHORN, 
Iowa State College, 


Ames, Iowa. 
PETER JUNKERSFELD, 
Chicago. 


H. L. FREDERICK, 


Pennsylvania State College, 
State College, Pa. 


GEO. S. MACOMBER, 
Cornell University, 


Ithaca, N. Y. 


WILLIAM ESTY, 
Lehigh University, 


Bethlehem, Pa. 


F. C. CALDWELL, 
Ohio State University, 


Columbus, O. 


J. W. ESTERLINE, 
Purdue University, 


Lafayette, Ind. 


EUGENE Y. SAYER, 
Denver, Colo. 
MORGAN BROOKS, 
University of Illinois, 
Urbana, Ill. 


R. NEIL WILLIAMS, 
Schenectady, N. Y. 
PHILANDER BETTS, 
Washington, D.C. 
W. R. COLLIER, 
Atlanta, Ga. 
W. V. SULLIVAN, Jr., 
Seattle; Wash. 
C. E. FREEMAN, 
Armour Inst. of Technology, 
Chicago, Ill. 
C. H. GILBERT, 
Worcester Polytechnic Inst., 
Worcester, Mass. 
A. S. LANGSDORF, 
Washington University, 
St. Louis, Mo. 
W. A. TREADWAY, 
University of Arkansas, 
Fayetteville, Ark. 
GEO. W. PATTERSON, Jr 
University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, Mich. . 
D. B. RUSHMORE, 
Pittsfield, Mass.. 


CONTENTS. 


Frontisptece—Portrait of John W. Lieb, Jr., President of the Instr- 

SOUS one O.aP KG 2 Bm ome phe outta gion an CF 
MEETING AT NEW YORK, JANUARY 27, 1905. 

. Acyclic (Homopolar) Dynamos.—By J. E. Noeggerath. (J/lustrated) 

Discussion by F. B. Crocker, A. E. Kennelly, C. Cartwright, 

Pry miicecnaw eed NoOcorerathi. \.c. 5 acy be oa ee an wae « 

MEETING AT BOSTON, FEBRUARY 1, 1905. 

Discussion on ‘‘ Acyclic (Homopolar) Dynamos,” by A. E. 

Kennelly, J. E. Noeggerath, H. E. Heath, W. H. Pratt, G. 

Pipe cicknevee Om Mea Gr cenr arim mretiri ha. Genin tle ee oc, 
MEETING AT NEW YORK, JANUARY 27, 1905. 

Modern Central Station Design as Exemplified by the New Turbo- 

Generator Station of the Edison Electric Illuminating Company 

OLEBOston sD lelaMoultrop pris <8 gerne acer s and ied. 

Discussion by President Lieb, H. G. Stott, F. C. Bates, 

Philip Torchio, J. H. Hallberg,.C. O. Mailloux, W. F. White, 

Hee Vou eropmeb en lmkersield ress ts anes aan ee eo 
MEETING AT CHICAGO, FEBRUARY 28, 1905. 

Cement in Central Station Design.—By Eugene B. Clark.......... 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, FEBRUARY 24, 1805. 


Two-Motor Versus Four-Motor Equipments.—By N. McD. Crawford. 

(CELLOS POG Va WB Ocoee PO Ee 

Discussion by N. McD. Crawford, A. H. Armstrong, S. T. 

IDaroicls \Carlineiriee lien iced ben arsenic ne iat aie a ore ren Smee 

One lrack Bonding.._By C2 W. Ricker. cas sa. 2 cabs sac geenm ican eae 

Discussion by C. W. Ricker, H. A. Lardner, A. A. Knudson, 

Wi. Pestell, Calvert Townley, Ralph D. Mershon........... 
MEETING AT NEW YORK, MARCH 24, 1905. 

Line Construction for High-Pressure Electric Railroads.—By George 

AN, IDyesaveials ~ (CURT ono) pacestenr Gee tea retreat c Curse ee are ee weer 

High Pressure Line Construction for Alternating-Current Railways.— 

Semin OCOTemN eT ie amen LHL) SIMIC) rouse alten en fis vee tet oe ae 

Discussion on High Pressure Line Construction, by President 

_Lieb, F. N. Waterman, Calvert Townley, A. H. Armstrong, 

A. H. Babcock, C. O. Mailloux, Theodore Varney, George F. 

SENET acd oo Oe CU ee ee same ee reese 
MEETING AT NEW YORK, APRIL 28, 1905. 

Some Notes on Polyphase Metering.—By J. D. Nies. (//lustrated.).. 

Notes on the Use of Instruments on Switchboards.—By F. P. Cox.. 

The Oscillograph and Its Uses.—By Lewis T. Robinson. (J/lus- 

ROMO No oe Ele carci 2. a GREE DCEO aR ent ee PCAC PTO tr i a 


Maintenance of Meters.—By W. J. Mowbray.......... feat at 
Discussion on Measuring Instruments, by President Lieb. 


Caryl D. Haskins, Edw. B. Rosa, Clayton Hp Sharpe ave ik, 
Everest, W. H. Pratt, G. C. Van Buren, A. H. Ackerman.... 
MEETING AT PHILADELPHIA, MAY 8, 1905. 
Discussion on Measuring Instruments, by President Lieb, 
Ralph W. Pope, C. W. Pike, J. F. Stevens, Wm. McClellan, 
(Clb. TUS IAT 25 ai 6 a5 bolt A sk seer ee Rea nr artes ar irs oA 
MEETING AT PITTSBURG, MAY 8, 1905. 
Discussion on Measuring Instruments, by Wm. Bradshaw, 
Siatsyolavsial (Q), TRIES eG. Gl bee caer ae 


231 


vi 


MEETING AT SAN FRANCISCO, MAY 9, 1905. 
Discussion on Measuring Instruments, by C. W. Hutton, 


J. W: Swaren, R. F. Monges, C. L. Cory, F. E. Smith........ 240 
MEETING AT NEW YORK, MAY 16, 1905. 
Time Limit Relays.——By George F. Chellis. (J/lustrated.)........ 247 
Duplication of Electrical Apparatus to Secure Reliability of Service.— 
Bye He WiButek seis fates tr tapes caylee eee iene tote re 261 


Discussion on “‘ Time Limit Relays”? ard ‘‘ Duplication of 
Electrical Apparatus to Secure Reliability of Service,” by 
H. G. Stott, Philip Torchio, C. O. Mailloux, S. D. Sprong, W. F. : 
Wells; G: F.. Chellisy Hz W. Buck, 22) cee ei eee 269 


MEETING AT PITTSBURG, JUNE 5, 1905. 


Discussion on ‘‘ Time Limit Relays’’ and ‘‘ Duplication of 
Electrical Apparatus to Secure Reliability of Service,’’ by 
Hy Re Stuart.) P.M income Chas.3h sCOuge seer ree 281 


ANNUAL CONVENTION AT ASHEVILLE, N. C., JUNE 19-23, 1905. 
The Organization and Administration of National Engineering So- 


cieties. (President’s Address.)—By John W. Lieb, Jr......... 283 
High Power Surges in Electric Distribution Systems of Great Mag- 
nitude.—By Charles Proteus Steinmetz. (J/lustrated.)........ 297 


An Experimental Study of the Rise of Potential on Commercial 
Transmission Lines Due to Static Disturbances Caused by 
Switching, Grounding, etc.—By Percy H. Thomas. (Jllus- 
UL ite Rah Pe ae ener Wii na eae mio ah hte uy oS 317 

Discussion on ‘‘ High Power Surges in Electric Distribution 
Systems of Great Magnitude,’”’ and ‘‘ An Experimental Study 
of the Rise of Potential on Commercial Transmission Lines, 
Due to Static Disturbances Such as Switching, Grourding, 
etc.,”’ by H. G. Stott, P. N. Nunn, S. M. Kintner; F. A.C. Per- 
rine, H. W. Fisher, President Lieb, Samuel Sheldon, Chas. P. 


Steinmetzy -P: A Thomas... jase oan 6 eee oe Yat) 
Constant Current Mercury Arc Rectifier—By Charles Proteus 

Steinmetz., \Cllustrated.)'s .terwion oe lee een) eee 371 
Discussion by President Lieb, John W. Howell, P. H. Thomas, 

F. A. C. Perrine, E. F. Northrup, Charles P. Steinmetz...... 394 
Data Relating to Electric Conductors and Cables—By H. W. 

Fisher. °y Zilustrated..)c33.\iec ees eae at ee ee 397 
Discussion by H. G. Stott, C. W. Rice, C. O. Mailloux, Charles 

P; Steinmetz) H: W.-Rishersnaneeiee eee ee eee 415 
Methods of Measurement of High Electrical Pressures.—By S. M. 

Kintner:” (illustvated ic... aoe oe en pia eee 421 


Discussion by Charles P. Steinmetz, Samuel Sheldon, C. O. 
Mailloux, H. G. Stott, H. W. Fisher, E. F. Northrup, Charles 

A. Perkins, S. M.Kintner 20 af Bene « bite aiieke dee 445 
Comments on Remarks Made by Col. R. E. B. Crompton Before the 
International Electrical Congress at St. Louis.—By John W. 


Howell. °\([ilusirated.). S00 atid + ees a 453 
Discussion by President Lieb, C. P. Steinmetz, J. W. Howell. 463 
Three-phase-Traction.—By F. N. Waterman. (Iilustrated.)....... 465 


Discussion by F. N. Waterman, W. N. Smith, Charles P. 
Steinmetz, C. O. Mailloux, S. M. Kintner, H. G. Stott, C. L. 


Ge: Miaralit ss... edie ea his Rotieeh re ake eee eee 510 
Heavy Traction Problems in Electrical Engineering.—By Carl L. de 

Mitral; 0:0 atiyaje de alievegeicuics, msn, cual SoU a nea nena eal 525 
Discussion by C. O. Mailloux, S. T. Dodd, F. N. Waterman, 

C:-P. Steinmetz, Co L. de Muralt:) sae eee 553 


Choice of Motors in Steam and Electric Practice.—By William 
McClellan. ([ilustrated:).ss..< sud sete eee Wi es SEN: 561 


Vil 


Discussion by W. E. Goldsborough, C. O. Mailloux, Charles 
ORG TOS le 158s ee ae rn inl 

AO et Sad of Block Signaling.—By L. H. Thullen. (J/lus- 
trated. 


Weight Distribution of Electric Locomotives, as Affected by Motor 
Suspension and Draw-bar Pull.—by S. ‘1. Dodd. (J llustrated.) 
Discussion by C. O. Mailloux, F. N. Waterman, S. T. Dodd.. 
Limits of Injurious Sparking in Direct-Current Commutation.—By 
Thorburn Reid. (J/lustrated.) z 


The Design of Induction Motors, with Special Reference to Magnetic 
Leakage.—By Comfort A. Adams. (Jllustrated.)............ 
Discussion by W. L. Waters, C. P. Steinmetz, Comfort A. 
EXCEL Shea 5 eee ne fare aces oss Sead ae ay AR ce te oes 
Limitations of Direct-Current Machine Design.—By Sebastiaan Sen- 
SEILIS a CLLLESET ALCO ea ena ee ee ee eeghck ede cor ee 
Discussion by Gano S. Dunn, W. L. Waters, Charles P. 
De TMimMeL Za OC DA Sta ae SeNStIUSs su. nockilc cme tee ak ost 
Synchronous Converters and Motor Generators.—By W. L. Waters. 
(UD UST AUTOR co: 20 CC, SATO LOE Ohta eh ea Bee Ee oe ere 
Discussion by Gano S. Dunn, F. G. Proutt, Charles P. 
Steinmetz, L. C. Marburg, H. G. Stott, Morgan Brooks, Presi- 
Lewin ma VicMP ben VIALE LSI N ay acc.) suis os ibe Ghats lv vote aoe elend’s le Sk wg 
A New Instrument for the Measurement of Alternating Currents.— 
BS eel ee NOL UU Psmsn(LILUSTrOLed.) matenimeieni ecenre fe teen a ale 
Discussion by E. F. Northrup, H. G. Stott, F. N. Waterman, 
1Eis MWe Gish Aon ot Orta coe ee eT re panacea te ee eee 
Eddy Currents in Large, Slot-wound Conductors.—By A. B. Field. 
CLT ESERCHEC OM) Meee TR cette ie cic cretn athens ete ee eecce i  e tee oes 
Water Powers of the Southeastern Appalachian Region.—By Fred- 
SriCw Ate OM berrine se ere ims thik oie are Cee ok eee tier ere ae 
Discussion by Ralph W. Pope, C. E. Waddell, L. S. Ran- 
dolph, A. M. Schoen, F. A. C. Perrine, Carl Hering, President 
iba oy AC rekaiay Si) ID Khoislys oath otreeie tac eLearn re 
The. Development of the Ontario Power Co.—By P. N. Nunn. 
GULLASHNALCAS eter eet es ee eto ele des sete oh es 
Discussion by Gano S. Dunn, W. E. Goldsborough, H. G. 
Stott, P. H. Thomas, C. A. Greenidge, P. N. Nunn, Philip P. 
IBEW ABSA. ony 0 ayene ches eo Sab CHOC Dae ee out CME Nea cE coms oP grit ar cue mr 
A New Carbon Filament.—By John W. Howell. (dllustrated.).... 
Discussion by H. N. Potter, John -W. Howell............. 
Alternate-Current Machinery.—Induction Alternators.—By William 
Stanley, assisted by G. Faccioli. (J/lustrated.)....... esac se 
Discussion by Charles P. Steinmetz, Comfort A. Adams, 
Moreani Brooks, Wot: Goldsborough. 7.26.06. s-.had. os. 
Note on a Simple Device for Finding the Slip of an Induction Motor. 
Sey iC Migics A POURING. song cme mr ett Kee ee See ke a nee 
Notes on the Power-Factor of the Alternating-Current Arc.—By 
George D. Shepardson: (Illustrated.)..........6.. 02.0 eeeee 
The Preservation of the Southern Appalachian Streams.—A Forest 
Problem.—By Charles Edward Waddell................+.... 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, SEPTEMBER 22, 1905. 


Standardization of Enclosed Fuses.—By H. O. Lacount. (Jilus- 


AOLON) che eR ees 0, OF ERIS re ee Se olga etn Gai Py OO 4 
Discussion by H. O. Lacount, President Wheeler, L. W. 


Downes, A. i. Pikler, Wel, Patter, H.G. Stott............ 


viii 


Air-Gap Flux in Induction Motors.—By A. S.-Langsdorf. (/lus- 


trated: 2% sis scar oetbeas, if oasetnlle Bote emanege ate a oie ROME oa (eet alice tae ae 919 
Discussion by B. A. Behrend, Fitzhugh Townsend, sotaal ce 
Pikler? A: S.<Lanesdorts ct aeeg ce castes eetcuaes became ak ea ee 932 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, OCTOBER 27, 1905. 
Some Experiences with Lightning Protective Apparatus.—By 


Julian (Ce Smith? (linstrated.) 07. apuces om eet eee one ee ae 935 
Notes on Lightning Arresters on Italian High-Tension Transmission 

Lines.— By Philip Torchio. (Illustrated.).............-.+..-- 945 
Performance of Lightning Arresters on Transmission Lines.—By 

NeOJG Nealls s(iliestrated..) sm. 2orn eat ae yee ae 951 


Discussion on Lightning, and Lightning Protective Appar- 
atus, by President Wheeler, P. H. Thomas, Charles F. Scott, 
W.. S. Franklin, J. H. Hallberg, H. C. Wirt, H. A. Pikler, H. G. 
Stott, Philip Torchio, N. J. Neall, Charles P. Steinmetz, J. B. 
Ta ylOr sce tae otis clas his cota ty Oe cna ate eter tee Ne sradee IC 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, NOVEMBER 24, 1905. 
The National Bureau of Standards.—By S. W. Stratton and E. B. 


Rosanne (Lblsestr ated cy oes siesa oe nol aad ont a ek a ee rae ee 999 
A Testing Laboratory in Practical Operation.—By Clayton H. Sharp, 
(Tllustr ated.) 2 Sy co. se eae oe eee 1051 


Discussion on ‘‘ The National Bureau of Standards,’ and 
‘“A. Testing Laboratory in Practical Operation,’’ by F. B. 
Crocker, W. E. Goldsborough, C. O. Mailloux, George F. 
Sever, C. A. Doremus, William McClellan, S. W. Stratton, 


John, We Lieb;, .Jr3) Tie BoROSa 285. eke aniston tere een eae 1061 
MEETING AT CHICAGO, MAY 23, 1905. 
Light Electric Railways.—By James R. Cravath. (Jllustrated.).... 1067 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, DECEMBER 5, 1905. 
The Relation of Railway Sub-station Design to its Operation.—By 


Sydney Wi. Ashee p Clustrated 0. a/c cis ser ets yea eee 1079 
Some Considerations Determining the Location of Electric Railway 
Sub-stations.—By C. W. Ricker. (Illustrated.).............. 1097 


Discussion on ‘‘ The Relation of Railway Sub-station Design 
to its Operation,’’ and ‘‘ Some Considerations Determining the 
Location of Electric Railway Sub-stations,’’ by H. A. Lardner, 
W. I. Slichter, John B. Taylor, H. G. Stott, E. M. Hewlett, 
D. B. Rushmore, R. B. Owens, William McClellan, C. P. 


NUEIMMICED cis src se wvsne tea Uitee New wanlelank > Dual apERL ool Pa ame neste ates eee ane 1107 
APPENDIX. 
Report of the Board of Directors for the Fiscal Year Ending April 30, 

LOO Gas rratok i fit, See Pray eyo eee TNE NO MEE cee ee ee 1120 
Report ‘or the Committeeion Hinancewn 0)... o ae eee een 1128 
Report of General Reception Committee, in Connection with the 

International Electrical Congress, and Circular Tour, 1904.... 1129 
Annual Report of Library Committee.......... AP i. cheetaen rs 1133 
Annual Report of Board of Examiners... some ee 1138 
Annual Report of Committee on Papersiy,.... mais eee 1140 
Annual Report of the Edison Medal Committee.................. 1141 
Annual Report of the Committee on National Electrical Code...... 1142 
Annual Report of Representatives on Joint Committee, Engineering 

Building 5, 25-05: sis.d ey gen ern re ae a aes RRO ea a re 1144 
Statement Regarding United Engineering Society................ 1145 
Annual Report of Local Organization Committee................. 1147 
Annual Report of Standardization Committee. .... Sill ek eee ol eee 


Annual Report of the Land and Building Fund Committee........ 1150 


‘1 paper presented at the 193d Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, Jan. 27, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


ACYCLIC (HOMOPOLAR) DYNAMOS. 


BY J. E. NOEGGERATH. 


Except for very low pressures, the so-called homopolar 
dynamo has so far been a failure from a commercial point of 
view. This failure is principally due to two conditions: first, 
the uncertainty as to the magnetic and electrical conditions 
prevailing in this type of generator; secondly, the difficulties 
encountered in collecting large currents from a generator run- 
ning at a high rate of speed. These conditions will be dis-~ 
cussed in this paper, and in order that their import may be 
grasped there will be described in outline the design 
of, and some results obtained with, a 300-kw. 500-volt turbine- 
driven acyclic (homopolar) generator built in the shops of one 
of the large electrical manufacturing companies. The question 
dealt with is a broad one, too broad to be discussed at length 
in this paper; the main points only will be taken up and a 
more thorough discussion left for a later date. 

Classifying acyclic generators according to the position of 
the armature conductors, we find two prevailing types: 

1. The radial type; single disc, Fig. 1; double disc, Fig. 2. 

2. The axial type; single cylinder, Fig. 3; double cylinder, 
Fig. 5. 

(The cylinders being solid or hollow—Fig. 4). Combinations 
of these types are, of course, also practicable. 

The armature of the cylinder-type acyclic dynamo here 
under consideration, Fig. 5, consists chiefly of a solid cast-steel 
cylinder carrying a small number of straight conductors on its 
surface; these conductors are connected at both ends to séts 
of collector rings. aes 

1 


2 NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. {Jan. 27 


The field, Fig. 5, consists chiefly of a cast-steel structure ex- 
tending towards the shaft in three polar projections that enclose 
the armature in complete cylinders. Field coils, F1 and F2, 
are wound concentrically around the shaft. 

There are also mounted two sets of brushes and a number 
of stationary conductors (frame conductors). Eight openings 
give access to the brushes and field spools. 

The field spools set up two primary fluxes shown in F ig. 5 
as dotted lines, and in Fig. 6 as dotted lines diverging 
radially. 


e Papas 2 N 
NIK YY 


As the armature revolves in this uniform field, electro- 
motive forces are generated in the armature conductors; Figs. 
5'and 6C’; these electromotive torces are constant as os mag- 
nitude and direction. Single conductors or groups are con- 
nected in seriés by means of collector rings of commutator 
segments and the frame conductors. 


1905.) : NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS 3 


dN n 108 


The induced electromotive force = 60 


= 1.66 d N n 10-10 
Where ¢ = Total flux 
N = Revolutions per minute 
n = Armature conductors in series. 
Fig. 7 shows diagramatically the simplest form of an electric 


circuit in a cylinder type of generator, C and R representing 
armature and frame conductors, C r and B representing 


ee 
oe] 
¢,0. 
60 
S50] 


? 
$e 
o 
ene 
es 
<5 


* "re" 


i) 


LLL 2 TLL LZ) 


= 


%, 


° 


os 


BS 
XO 


oe 
oO 
s4 
x 


Fic. 2. 


collector rings, and brushes respectively. The currents passing 
through this system set up secondary fields which: affect the 
primary flux. Of these, the ones created by the currents flow- 
ing in the collector rings (ring reactions) are of great interest 
from a practical point of view. 

For a given time the connection point between armature con- 
ductors and collector ring passes through P,. At this moment 
currents flow from P, to B, through both sections of the ring, 
the currents being inversely proportional to the ohmic re- 


+4 NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. [Jan..27 


sistance of the ring-sections. The currents set up fields in the 
magnetic material in which they are completely embedded.: 

As the armature revolves, the connection point P; moves on, 
changing magnitude and direction of the magnetomotive force. 
These periodical changes of magnetization create hysteresis and 
eddy losses in the solid material. ‘They also weaken the 
primary flux, since, due to saturation, the increase in density 
is considerably smaller than the decrease. This means bad 


regulation. 
There are various means of counteracting ring reactions. 


One consists of placing brushes all around the ring, prac- 
tically covering its surface. For commercial pressures this 


method is out of consideration because of the great number of 
collector rings. It would be impracticable to adjust and watch 
the very large number of brushes required in this case. The 
question of friction losses also limits the number of contacts 

Satisfactory results were obtained with a method which is 
diagramatically shown in Fig. 8. R,, R., etc., By, Bs, etc., 
and P,, P., etc., represent rings, brushes, and connection points 
of the collecting system on one side of the armature of one 
collector. The connection points form a spiral of one com- 
plete turn, while the contact points of the brushes form one or 


1905.) NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS’ 5 


more turns of a spiral running in the opposite direction. The 
brushes are arranged in groups that can be inspected from the 
Openings in the frame. In this case ¥ magnetomotive force = 0 
for each section of the collector periphery and for:any position 
ofthe armature. . 

As to the armature reaction, reference is made to Figs. d'and 6. 
The currents flowing in the armature conductors C set up 
secondary fluxes as indicated by the curved lines. These sec- 
ondary fluxes cut the frame as the armature revolves, causing 
hysteresis and eddy losses. They also increase the primary 


KKK 


BOM CLL LLL 4 RO 
C$ $9 


\\ 


re 4 


flux,.at a and decrease it at #. On account of saturation, the 
weakening effect will again. be considerably augmented, affect- 
ing the regulation. When the conductors are placed close to- 
gether, that is, in approaching the equation 

TSU pT 

dl 
where i = amperes, / = unit length of armature periphery. 


Sopp aes 


The radial components of these secondary fluxes at a and 8 


6 NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. {Jan. 27 


are neutralized. Similar considerations are valid for the sta- 
tionary conductors. 

The most efficient means of conforming to this equation 
consists of using flat conductors mounted close together. They 
may be assembled inside of the armature body or on its surface, 
Fig. 6b. The remaining components of all the local fluxes 
form one circular field that intersects at right angles with the 


primary flux, Fig. 6. Considering the influence of these mag- 
netizations upon each other, two conditions are of importance. 

1. The medium between armature and frame conductors 
consists of non-magnetic material, air; that is, the con- 
ductors are mounted on the surface of armature and frame 
respectively, Fig. 9A. 

If in Fig. 10, M1 and B1 represent magnetomotive force and 
density of the primary, M, B, the magnetomotive force and 


Ri sh NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. [Jan. 27 


density of the secondary flux produced by the armature turns, 
then M,B, will designate the resulting flux, provided the reluct- 
ance is the same in all directions: It is evident that the com- 
ponent of the flux in direction of the primary magnetization 
remains unchanged. - 

In aw air-gap the length of the path of the resulting flux will 
actually be somewhat greater than that of the p-imary flux. 
But-on account of the very high reluctance in the path of the 
armature reaction, the secondary flux is so small that direction 


Fic. 8. : 


and magnitude of the resulting field does not differ appreciably 
fromthe primary. . 

2. ‘The magnetic medium between the stationary and re- 
volving parts of the winding consists of iron Fig. 9 B, C; Fig. 11 
Principally due to saturation, the density of the resulting flux 
will be considerably smaller than / B?+ B?,, and its component 
in direction of the primary magnetization appreciably weaker 
than B,. But to restore the flux to its original value only so 


1995.1 NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. o 


many ampere-turns have to be addéd as are required for the 
increase in density along that part of its path that is affected 
by the secondary magnetization: The influence of a given ar- 
mature reaction on regulation is therefore determined by the 
relation between the reluctance of the primary magnetic circuit 
in that area and the total primary reluctance. It can be kept 
very low. 

While for the circuits B and C, Fig. 9, the main secondary 
magnetizations are practically of the same order, the local fluxes 


CPLLLLL LEED, 


B LIQ QQ N 


Lz 


Fic. 9 


produced by the part of circuit C that runs parallel to the 
shaft are much smaller than in B, because of the high reluctance. 
They are, in fact, negligible. The neutralization of the ring 
and armature reactions as discussed above is very complete. 

Tests on the 300-kw. generator show that the difference in 
pressure between full load and no load is only slightly higher 
than the drop, due to the total resistance of the armature cir- 
cuit; that is, regulation is good. 


10 NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. (Jan. 27 


While the armature windings of acyclic dynamos will not be 
discussed in detail, yet the points that have to be considered in 
laying out these windings would better be indicated here; they 
are: 

. Neutralization of ring reactions. 

Magnetizing effect of end connections. 

Minimum pressure between rings. 

. Assembling of brushes in groups for accessibility. 
. Equal resistance of armature circuits. 

. Minimum pressure between adjoining conductors. 

Point 5 is to be considered if it is desired to run the machines 
at different pressures, Fig. 16. 


Oop whe 


Bz LaF 


Accumulative or differential compounding of acyclic motors 
or generators can be effected either by means of a series coil, 
or by giving an angular displacement either between the con- 
tacts and the frame conductors or between the connection 
points and the armature conductors, Fig. 13. For instance, 
Fig. 12, the currents flowing in the leads that connect the 
frame conductors and brushes partly or totally enclose the 
armature. The circular component of , the magnetomotive 
force of these currents acts in the same or opposite directions 
as the magnetomotive force of the field-coils. By shifting the 


12 NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. [Jan. 27 


brushes it is possible to adjust the compounding. By moving 
them against the direction of rotation accumulative com- 
pounding is effected in generators; for motors, the result is 
the reverse. 

It is obvious that series generators and motors can be built 
without field coils. In'such generators the intensity and direc- 
tion of magnetization can be changed by shifting the brushes. 
and, consequently, the electromotive force of generators as to 
direction and magnitude can be influenced as well as the speed, 
torque, and direction of rotation of motors. Acyclic genera- 
tors are self-exciting. 


Fic. 16. 


The considerations of the electrical and. magnetic quantities. 
discussed above for an axial-type acyclic generator hold good 
also for the radial type, with the exception of a modification in 
regard to the armature reactions. The currents flowing in the 
armature of the radial type set up fields that enclose the con- 
ductors. These secondary magnetizations disturb the primary 
flux in a way similar to that discussed for the axial type, result- 
ing in core lors and affecting’ regulation. By placing the 


1905.}. NOHGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. 13 


conductors close together, that is, in conforming with the 
equation, 


the components at a and # are neutralized, leaving a resultant 
magnetization which may consist of two circular fluxes, F2 
Figs. 14, 15. . 
_ In this case « = Current, /' = Unit length of a circular section 
taken concentrically around the axis. 

The secondary flux f2 intersects at right angles with the 
primary. Their influence upon each other can be modified as 
was discussed for the axial type. 


Gn 
GWA 


VAs 
TH. 


Fic. 17. Fic. 18. 


SG 


SS 


The efficiency of a high-speed acyclic generator about equals 
that of a turbine-driven commutator generator, but the dis- 
tribution of the losses is very different. As windage and bearing 
friction depend on the mechanical design only and not on the 
type, they can be made to have the same value for both ma- 
chines. 

The I? R field loss is somewhat smaller in acyclic machines 
principally because the length of the air-gap is limited by 
mechanical requirements and not by the armature reaction. 

The J?.R armature loss is almost negligible on account of ° 
the small number of turns. In the generator under considera- 
tion there are 12 armature conductors and 12 frame conductors 


in series. 


14 NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. [Jan. 27 


It is obvious that in a field of uniform and constant density 
there should be no hysteretic loss. As to eddy currents, refer- 
ence is made to Fig. 17 where uniform distribution without stray 
fields is assumed. No electromotive forces are induced in the 
field. The arrows represent value and direction of the electro- 
motive forces induced in the armature body. It is evident that 
S electromotive force = 0 for any closed circuit inside the 
armature, as well as in any circuit including armature, bear- 
ings, and field. From Fig. 18 it will be seen that this is 
true even if there is a stray field, provided it is uniform. 

In general, the distribution of the flux in acyclic dynamos 
that eliminates core loss is expressed by the Decca! =C 


dL 


COPPER BRUSHES CAST-STEEL RING 


gar OSs A OSSES. 


400 
40 


600 
60 
DEGREES CENTIGRADE. 


RISE_IN TEMP. OF RING 


FEET PER MINUTE 


0 5 0u0 10 000 15 000 20600 22000 


200 
20 


Where L = unit length of any circle concentric with the axis; 
that is, the flux must have a constant specific linear distribu- _ 
tion in the direction of rotation. 

The variation of the air-gap length and of permeability, the 
openings in frame and armature, as well as the secondary fields, 
disturb this ideal condition. In other words, the flux densities 
in symmetrical points are not actually equal. 

One-half of this difference in density Bdrepresents the B 
in the hysteresis and eddy current formulas. Its value depends, 
except on the magnitude of the disturbing elements. mentioned 
above, on the relation of the reluctance in and close to the air- 


1905.] . NOEGGERATH:-ACYCLIG DYNAMOS. 15 


gap to the total reluctance. It is possible to keep this Bd and, . 
consequently, the core loss very low. The main losses are 
encountered in the brush contacts. 


COPPER BRUSHES CAST-STEEL RING 


1.0 


0.8 


0.6 


0.4 


0.2 


From a series of investigations the following conclusions a“e 
drawn: 

1. As to speed. Fig. 19. 

There is a steady but small increase of pressure drop at the 


EFFICIENCY 


NT EFFICIENCY 


RPSy ise se S 
1) 


0 75 150 225 300 35 
Tira ke 


brtsh-contacts with increasing speed. The friction loss, declin- 
ing somewhat, practically remains constant for high velocity. 
The total losses also remain practically constant above these 
speeds. The improved ventilation inherent to greater velocity 


16 NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. [Jan. 27 


allows a higher current capacity to be used in the collecting 
system. 

2. Current density. 

While the relation between current and pressure drop in 
stationary contacts of metal brushes and metal rings is similar 
to that in a solid resistance, the conditions in moving contacts 
are of the character of those prevailing in an electric arc, the 
apparent resistance falling off rapidly with increasing densities 
Fig. 20. The similarity is furthermore illustrated by the 
fact that in frequent instances, pressures 10 to 20 times higher 
than normal were required to start the flow of current. 

3. Brush pressure. 

The increase of brush pressure does not decrease the drop 


considerably, but the sparking tendency at high speeds and 
densities necessitates high pressures. 

In the 300-kw. 500-volt turbo-generator, the full-load losses 
equalled 28 kw. without windage and bearing friction. The 
efficiency curve, Fig. 21, is flat, due to the small core and brush- 
friction loss. Regulation = 6 to 12 per cent. 

Considering now the mechanical design, as mentioned above, 
the generator consists chiefly of a cast-steel armature and a cast- 
steel'frame. On the smooth armature surface 24 conductors 
are mounted, flat sheets bent on the radius of the periphery. 
The torque is taken up by lugs projecting axially from the arma- 
ture body and the centrifugal stress by means of steel binding 
wire. 

The 12 collector rings on either side of the armature are assem- 
bled close together and mounted on a shell. Eight large-size 


1905.] NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. 17 


openings in the frame give access to three brushes each, making 
a total of 24 contacts. The main objection raised against a 
large number of rings in series is based on the assumption that, 
consequently, many brushes are required, rendering inspection 
difficult. It seems that 24 contacts would be a moderate figure 


even for a commutator machine of that rating. The stationary 
circuit consists of 12 cables. Without interfering with other 
parts, the armature or the stationary winding and either set of 
collector rings may be removed. 

In comparing commutator and acyclic direct-current machines 
as to inherent conditions from a commercial point of view, the 


18 NOEGGERATH: ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. [Jan. 27 


latter is essentially a high-speed machine, its field being limited 
in general to large turbo-generators, high-speed motors, direct 
connected to rotary pumps and blowers, and motor-generators. 
While the total weights of both types are about equal, even for 
moderate turbine speeds, the very low copper weight, simple 
construction—less labor and smaller total cost—combined 
with the elimination of commutating ppOblen should aoe 
favorably for the new types : et ; 


1905] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 1y 


DiIscUSSION ON Acyciic (HomopoLtar) DyNamos. 


F. B. Crocker: At the Philadelphia meeting of the Insrti- 
TUTE in May, 1894; the speaker read a paper entitled ‘‘ Unipolar 
Dynamos for Electric Light and Power.” It received little 
encouragement then and there has been very little since that time. 
The present paper is therefore welcome, as it is the first ray of 
hope in 11 years for the successful development of a machine 
of this type. This paper gives evidence of real progress; the 
machine is not experimental—not a one-kilowatt machine 
generating one volt, but one that gives 300 kilowatts at 500 volts. 

As a matter of fact it is the original Faraday type. Faraday 
also proposed to multiply the pressure by connecting discs in 
series; he suggested the revolving of discs in opposite directions 
in the same field and connecting their peripheries by brushes 
or mercury, thus causing the current to flow outward in one 
disc and inward in the other, the current being taken from the 
two shafts. There are still other methods of multiplying the 
pressure besides the one which the author uses. One way is 
to have concentric cylinders revolving in the same field, the 
current entering one end of the first cylinder, passing out at 
the other end, then passing through the second cylinder in the 
same direction, and so on—a series connection threading through 
the field repeatedly in the same general way as in the machine 
described by the author, the inductors however being con- 
centric cylinders instead of elements of a cylinder. 

The author has adopted a plan of splitting the cylinders 
‘longitudinally into strips, like the staves of a barrel, and then 
connecting these strips in series. The speaker understands that 
there are 12 of these strips and 24 brushes, one brush at each end 
of each of these elements of the cylinder. This type of machine 
is one in which the inductor, whether an element or the whole 
cylinder, revolves in an annular space, in which the field is 
always in one direction and, as nearly as possible, of uniform 
strength throughout. Therefore, the electromotive force is 
simply the number of lines of force cut per second. divided by 
108. A conductor one foot long moving 12000 feet per 
minute or 200 feet per second in a field of 90 000 lines per 
square inch, would generate 26 volts. 

The fact that the armature reaction in the air-gap does not 
materially affect the flux is interesting, but is what we might 
expect from the fact that cross ampere-turns do not materially 
reduce the flux in ordinary dynamos. It is the back ampere- 
turns that have that effect. In the present case there are cross 
ampere-turns but.no back ampere-turns. On the other hand 7m the 
iron, as shown in Figs. 10 and 11, because it becomes partly satu- 
rated, the resultant flux due to two magnetomotive forc?s 
acting at right angles, is not equal to the square root of the 
sum of the squares, because that implies that the reluctivity 
is constant, whereas we know it increases with the density, 
consequently in that case the flux is not so great. Nevertheless 


20 . ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. (Jan. 27 


Mr. Noeggerath says at the bottom of page 9, that the regulation 
is good, and that the difference between full-load and no-load 
pressure is only slightly higher than the drop; in other words, 
armature reaction is not excessive, only slightly greater than 
the resistance drop. He said, during the presentation of his 
paper, that it was only 6 or 8%. It is very interesting to see, 
in one of the diagrams given, that by merely moving the brushes 
forward or backward, the conductors connecting these brushes 
with the circuit had the effect of compound winding or differ- 
ential winding; and that you might even have a series machine, 
without any field winding, because the current going into the 
armature, and out again, as it were, had the effect of a field 
coil. 

The limitation of this machine is of course the speed at 
which the current can be taken off. At the speeds adopted by 
the author, one element which might be a plain cylinder of the 
old-fashioned unipolar type generates 1/12 of 500 volts, a 
commendable pressure for a unipolar machine. Though he 
uses the term, the speaker thinks that “unipolar” is not a 
happy expression. There are, in fact, two poles, the flux passing 
across the air-gap from one pole to the other. The term “ uni- 
polar” is therefore not appropriate, though it has been in use 
for a very long time. Acyclic or non-cyclic is much more ap- 
propriate. 

Regarding eddy currents in the armature: if there is a blow- 
hole in the casting there is practically no electromotive force 
generated in the area covered by the blow-hole; the current 
therefore tends to flow backward in that area, being supplied 
from the adjoining portions of the inductor. It is evident 
that a casting which is not uniform or a mechanical construction 
which is not uniform will involve eddy currents, because the . 
current can flow back whenever the electromotive force is less 
in one part than in other parts of the armature. 

A. E. KENNELLY: An interesting point brought out by this 
paper is that the direct-current machine shows distinct advan- 
tages over the alternating-current machine. The ordinary 
direct-current machine is in reality an alternating-current ma- 
chine with the alternating current rectified for external use by 
a commutator. <A telephone will sing when connected to the 
terminals of the ordinary direct-current generator, whereas we 
may expect it to remain mute when connected to the terminals 
of a true direct-current generator, the homopolar generator. 

Electrical engineers have always regretted not being able to 
get a magnetic material that could be cast, a material that would 
conduct magnetically but not electrically. Heretofore it has 
usually been necessary to laminate the iron in order to destroy 
eddy currents in the body of the revolving armature of a high- 
pressure direct-current generator; this laminating is quite ex- 
pensive. But in an arrangement of this kind we can obtain a 
revolving solid mass, in which there will be no sensible pro- 
duction of eddy currents or hysteresis. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. oY 


The secret of the success arrived at in a machine of the type 
described by the author is the relatively enormous speed ob- 
tainable in comparison with machinery that existed before the 
introduction of steam-turbine; and it is by reason of this enor- 
mous speed that the high electromotive forces of 30 volts per 
foot can be obtained. The result ought to be a great reduction 
in the weight of the active parts, after the weight of the mate- 
rial which is purely structural has been deducted. Owing to 
this electromotive force produced per foot of active conductor, 
accounting of course for the small ohmic drop in the active 
conductors themselves, we arrive at a type of machine in which 
the surface of the collector, which takes the part of the commu- 
tator, is nearly double the surface of the armature core. This 
is shown clearly on the diagram on page 16. 

It is worthy of note that the designer has been able to reduce 
the brush frictions as low as they appear to be. Even though 
the main losses in the machine seem to be frictional losses, 
hysteresis losses, and eddy-current losses, still one would sup- 
pose that the friction losses of the brushes would have been 
the limiting losses which might have interfered with the success 
of the machine. The fact that they are reduced to so low a 
quantity is surely a matter for congratulation. 

C. Cartwricut: The advantage of this type of machine 
over the ordinary direct-current commutator type should, it 
seems to the speaker, be emphasized; this advantage is most 
apparent in comparing machines designed for railway purposes. 
The insulation of this machine is of a mechanical rather than 
of an electrical nature, and there is an absence of commutator 
troubles due to overloading—these conditions, it would seem, | 
combine to make this type of machine especially desirable. 
Other most desirable features are its simplicity of design and 
cheapness of construction. It is constructed so that only the 
simplest machining is required such as can be done on a lathe 
or boring-mill. Also, there are no complicated parts, and the 
machine can be easily assembled. 

F.V.Hensuaw: Any designer who has tried to solve the prob- 
lem of building a direct-current generator for connection to a 
steam-turbine is greatly interested in the development of this 
unipolar type of machine. It seems to the speaker that the re- 
duction of the surface speed of contact rings is of much import- 
ance. Of course, in a machine of this kind, there being no 
commutation, the bad effects of this high speed are chiefly due 
to mechanical causes. The large size of the collector rings im- 
presses one, and Fig. 20 shows clearly the effect of high speed on 
the contact drop. 

Another feature is the location of the brushes. If the brushes 
could be placed outside of the frame it would be most desirable. 
The speaker presumes that these details have been carefully 
considered; possibly inherent conditions have caused the de- 
signers not to attempt to place the contact rings outside of the 


frame. 


ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. [Jan..27 


bo 
bo 


J. E. Nozcceratu: A few words explaining why the speaker 
used the terms ‘axial’ and ‘‘radial’’ types. Classification 
into cylinder type and disk type relates solely to the mechanical 
construction; it does not give an idea of the condition prevailing 
in the machine itself. The speaker knows of a low-pressure 
machine, now in operation in a New England town, in which 
the electromotive forces are induced in a radial direction, but 
from a mechanical point of view it is a cylinder machine. 
To avoid possible confusion, then, the speaker adopted the terms 
“axial and.“ radial.” ee 

Regarding armature reaction, it is true that a comparison 
with the effect of the cross ampere-turns of multipolar machines 


Fic. 2. 


apparently justifies the conclusion that the difference in pressure 
between no load and full load should be greater than is indi- 
cated in the paper; but there is a considerable difference in the 
action of the cross ampere-turns in multipolar and acyclic 
dynamos. In the former type the effect of the secondary flux 
produced by the cross ampere-turns is threefold: first, there 
is a rectangular intersection of primary and_ secondary 
fluxes at A; secondly, there is an action in the direction of the 
primary flux at B; thirdly, an action in direction opposite to 
the primary flux at C. The first one is of the least influence 
and corresponds to the armature reaction in acyclic dynamos. 
As far as total primary flux is concerned, actions B and C would 
neutralize each other if there were no saturation. But since 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 23 


there is saturation, the loss in density at C overbalances the 
gain in B and thus affects the regulation. In acyclic machines 
where the pole encloses the armature in a complete cylinder 
there is no such crowding of lines but a plain rectangular 
intersection of fluxes as discussed in the paper. Its influence 
on regulation can, by the way, become very strong if the den- 
sities are not properly chosen. 

As far as core losses are concerned, blow-holes in the arma- 
ture are not really a very serious matter. The speaker has bored 
holes in both the armature and fields for purposes of ventilation 
and still the core loss is not high. The openings-in the frame 
produce core loss chiefly in the armature and the openings in 
the armature produce core loss chiefly in the field. If these’ 
openings are sufficiently removed from the air-gap, the influence 
is not very strong; more serious is the unevneness of the air-gap. 

For theoretical reasons it is impossible to put collector rings 
insiae of the frame. As far as the relation of ring speeds to” 
losses is concerned, the curve in Fig. 19 indicates that while 
tne I R drop rises with increasing speed, yet the friction iosses 
decrease so that the total losses remain practically constant 
above certain high speeds. 

The collector rings are of cast-steel, although for mechanical 
reasons it would be better to have them of nickel-steel. There 
is, of course, wear on the brushes but not more wear than on 
the carbon brushes generally used with turbine machines. 


24 ACYCLIC es a [Feb. 1 


’ 


Discussion on ‘“‘Acyciic (HomopoLar) Dynamos,” AT Boston, 


Fesruary 1, 1905. 


A. E. KENNELLY: A curious feature about this machine is 
that although we have discarded smooth-core armatures for 
years, and thought they had been scrapped, here comes once 
more a smooth-core armature with the conductors lying on the 
top and tied on with a binding wire. This shows that one 
cannot be sure that when a piece of apparatus has been dis- 
carded and laid on the junk-heap, that it will not come tolife 
again. Now the query arises; is the extra expense of drilling 
the solid armature core at sufficient depth to permit of the 
conductors going in without producing eddy currents in the 
pole pieces as they go round, such that the improved mechan- 
ism of a toothed-core armature would be not worth while? 
The speaker thinks that although a machine could be made 
solid and sound by binding the conductors on the surface, 
yet at high speeds one would feel less uneasy if the conductors 
were embedded in the solid metal. 

_As regards the question of stationary or rotating field, the 
speaker thinks that on any hypothesis—in this machine at 
least—the field should be looked upon as stationary, and the 
armature as cutting through that field. Most people who have 
entered this contest—it has been a theoretical contest for many 
years—would concede this case. There are other structures, 
however, different from this one, where there would be more 
discussion as to what takes place, although the speaker believes 
it is conceded now that flux-lines have in a certain sense a 
physical existence. The speaker does not know whether any 
conclusion has been reached in some cases as to whether the 
flux in particular types of unipolar machines remains station- 
. ary or is rotating. 

J. E. Norccrratu: The wires were not embedded on ac- 
count of reaction. As far as the size of the machine is con- 
cerned, the length of the armature conductors is somewhat 
over one foot, not much more than that. 


A. E. KEenneE tty: It is extremely interesting to note that 
out of a machine with 12 conductors one foot long one can get 
300 kilowatts and 500 volts. 

H. E. Heatu: The difficulty of compounding depends on 
the type of machine. Take for instance the same type, but 
with five volts and 15 000 amperes or something of that sort: 
it is readily seen that it would be rather difficult to put in series 
coils and get satisfactory compounding action. That would 
require large conductor and would be rather difficult to handle. 
There are also some other forms that are extremely similar. 

W. H. Pratt: Further remarks on the matter of com- 
pounding are asked for: the speaker does not quite gather the 
arrangement of compounding by shifting the brush position 
in connection with the armature conductors. ’ 


1905] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON. 25 


_E. Norecceratu: The field coils are wound cylindrically 
around the shaft. If there is circumferentially a space between 
the brushes and stationary conductors, a current flows, in the 
same or opposite direction as the current in the field coil, and 
therefore there is a compound reaction. Since there are 12 con- 
ductors in series, if all of them are shifted there is 12 times as 
much reaction; in other words the compounding is effected by 
the length of the brush leads. 

H. E. Heatu: There is a bare possibility that one or two 
people may not quite understand what Mr. Noeggerath meant 
by compounding action. His armature is really a cylinder of 
iron carrying 12 conductors; these conductors cutting the 
magnetic circuit when the armature is revolved, with a conse- 
quent generation of electromotive force. The collector rings 
and leads embrace portions of the magnetic circuit. If the 
leads from collectors to conductors are straight and parallel 
to the lines of force, no addition to the magnetomotive force 
is produced when current flows in them, the magnetomotive 
force due to this current tending to produce distortion only. 
But if the leads are carried spirally around the armature (and 
therefore the magnetic flux) then, when a current passes be- 
tween collectors and conductors, we get a magnetomotive 
force which either assists or opposes the main magnetomotive 
force, the strength of this magnetomotive force in ampere-turns 
being the fraction of a turn taken by the lead multiplied by the 
current. 

Now speaking of a type about which there can be no doubt 
as to where the cutting takes place. Let us take a hollow iron 
cylinder as an armature, supported at one end and surrounding 
a cylindrical magnetic pole from which it is separated by the 
usual air-gap. The supporting shaft passes through the center 
of this pole, or is in line with it. A magnet pole in the form 
of a ring surrounds the cylinder and the magnetic circuit is 
completed through an exciting coil at any convenient point 
away from and outside of the armature, the material being 
assumed to be so distributed as to give uniform flux density 
in the air-gap. Then we have the magnetic circuit through 
the cylinder from one pole to the other and the electrical cir- 
cuit lengthwise of the cylinder through the flux. We have 
then possibly as simple a form as you can conceive, and there 
is no doubt about the cutting. You do not imagine for a 
moment that the lines of force are going to cut out through the 
sides of the exciting coil, nor do you expect any coiling of them, 
so the action must take place in the cylinder. 

Roughly, this is the type mentioned by the speaker as the 
heavier form that it might pay to use for very low pressures 
and comparatively low currents. Instead of the external- 
ring pole we may use another internal pole in the opposite 
end of the armature cylinder with the armature support be- 
tween the two poles and the shaft running through their centers. 


26 ' ACYCLIC DYNAMOS. [Feb. 1 


The magnetic path will then be through the cylinder from 
pole to pole, and the electrical path from outside of armature 
to shaft. In both of these forms we have the same maximum 
collector surface velocity for same pressure and speed. If we 
now make both the internal poles of the same magnetic pres- 
sure and use the ring for the opposite pole, we shall be able 
to get double the electromotive force for same collector surface 
velocity and revolutions per minute, as this electromotive force 
is determined by the polar section at the entrance of the cylinder 
and now the flux enters at both ends; that is, we have a double 
magnetic circuit type with series armature. ; 

All the above refer to single elements; there is of course 
the possibility of much modification, but they are all accessible. 
There is no doubt that the less accessible forms will be con- 
siderably lighter than those which are more accessible. 

One thing more with regard to these types—there is no 
doubt about where the action takes place; for if we could hold 
the armature still the cutting would take place just the same. 
There is a case where the flux actually revolves, because the 
reluctance revolves. It is the speaker’s opinion that a revo- 
lution in a case of this kind is a purely relative matter in the 
machine itself; it makes little difference which part moves, 
the action would be just the same. 

G. H. Stickney: Is there any possibility of reducing the 
collector velocity? 

H. E. Heatu: Not in a machine of that kind, and for the 
reason that the collector rings have got to be outside the mag- 
netic flux; it is merely a matter of how much density can be 
carried through there. 

As to core loss, the speaker will not say there is none, but 
it will be so small that it will require considerable care to detect 
it. On one machine we had—we were driving the machine 
as a motor, and were unable to detect whether the field was 
on or not by the reading of the instrument—there was no 
variation at all in the motor readings when one excited the 
field or cut it out. 

C. M. Green: That also enables you to run at a very high 
density? 

H. E. Heatu: At high density, yes; but there is a limit to - 
the density. The speaker would not hesitate to run at as high 
a density as 100000 or 115000 per square inch, but running 
at that density costs money. 

As long as the armature is centred there will be no pull; 
if the machine is running at extremely high density there 
will be very little pull. Fairly large shafts are used, something 
that has no spring. 

C. M. Green: There is no magnetism on that shaft? 

J.E.Norccrratn: There is no or very little stray field in the 
shaft. There is considerable side pull to a machine of that con- 
struction, and it is not possible to increase the densities up above 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON. 27 


a certain point, because the core loss will be detrimental. As 
pointed out in the paper, it is necessary to have a certain re- 
lation of density near the air-gap to the total flux and to the 
density in the remaining part, but there are certainly limita- 
tions as to the density. If the air-gap is uniform the machine 
could be run at very high density; but while this is true at the 
start itis not the case afterward. The machines now vary from 
0.0625 in. up to 0.4375 in. air-gap. 


A paper presented at the 193d Meeting of the Amert- 
can Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
January 27, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


MODERN CENTRAL STATION DESIGN AS EXEMPLI- 
FIED BY THE NEW TURBO-GENERATOR STATION 
OF THE EDISON ELECTRIC ILLUMINATING COM- 
PANY OF BOSTON. 


ee 


BY I. E. MOULTROP. 


The design of most of the central stations in this country can 
hardly be said to be ideal; first, on account of the handicaps 
and limitations imposed by the location and environment of 
the selected site; secondly, because usually the cost of the land 
to be built upon renders it imperative that the area covered 
be made as small as possible. 

In selecting the site for a large power station, three main 
problems confront the engineer: first, a satisfactory location 
with a low valuation must be found which is reasonably near to 
the bulk of the business; secondly, the location must be so 
situated that the fuel can be brought to it with the least expense 
for freight and handling; that is, it should be somewhere on a 
main ship-channel below all drawbridges with ample depth of 
water and docking facilities for coal-carrying vessels up to seven 
or eight thousand tons burden. Also there should be ample 
ground adjacent to both the dock and the proposed station site 
to permit the storing of at least six months’ supply of fuel, and 
so situated that the minimum amount of coal-handling and 
conveying machinery is required. Thirdly, an unlimited supply 
of suitable cooling water must be provided for the condensers, 
this should be such that the temperature will not be excessive 
during the summer time. The water should be free from 
sewage, seaweed, and other debris; and the proposed location 
for the station should be such that the distance the water has 
to be lifted from the level of the supply to the top of the con- 

29 


30 MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. [Jan. 27 


densers is as small as possible; and the length of pipes or tun- 
nels employed to take the water from the supply to the farthest 
condenser is as short as possible. 

The location of the L Street station of the Boston Edison 
Company fulfils these conditions admirably. The ground con- 
sists of two city lots of about 25 acres, two-thirds of which is 
solid ground. It is situated at the corner of L and East First 
streets, South Boston. Measured by an air-line it is about two 
miles from the centre of the business section of Boston. It hasa 
water front of 815 feet on the so-called ‘‘ Reserved Channel,”’ 
is one-half mile from the main ship-channel of Boston Harbor, 
and is so located that no bridges will ever be built between it 
and the main ship-channel. 

The solid ground consists principally of gravel with a bed 
of clay underneath so that the heaviest construction called 
for in the building of the station can be carried on ordinary 
footings without the use of piles. The area of the solid ground 
is more than double that required for the ultimate size of the 
station under consideration, consequently there is ample room 
for the storage of fuel close to the boiler-house. 

Before taking up in detail the design of the station, a brief 
description of the company’s territory will be given. The Bos- 
ton Edison Company’s system supplies electricity to a heavily- 
loaded business section of the city, which covers a compara- 
tively small area located within a mile of the water-front. This 
business is supplied by a direct-current station on the water 
front having 10 500 kw. of machinery, with room to increase 
the capacity to 14500 kw. Surrounding this business section 
is a city residential district where the load is considerable, al- 
though much lighter than in the business part. Here the cus- 
tomer receives direct current from sub-stations supplied, through 
motor-generator sets, from the existing alternating-current sta- 
tion of 9 000 kw. capacity, located on the L Street property. 
The output of these sub-stations being direct current, they are, 
with one exception, equipped with storage-batteries. 

Many of the business people of Boston live in the surrounding 
cities and towns. Up toa few years ago most of these suburban 
places had their own local electric-light companies, usually 
operating small uneconomical steam-generating stations equipped 
with more or less obsolete forms of machinery. 

Within the last two years the Boston Edison Contpann: have 
purchased the property of many of these local companies, and 


ee ee ees 
+ 0 wh eae Pee 
+85 - ++ pie > ae ge or 
. ‘ 
7 * ~ 


ae 


SORPLL DEES f OS ARAL TAET. Be at Ru DEPOT IY IEE ELIS LIP: DOES USS PLESSIS OS PIGS 
. S +" Ca Pa PS ay Be IQS AAG LS ELISE OLD ELIE MID ERD FOE LSS POEM EG AEE P OSI LE ® i vi Pe ECG ES) r 548i MIDE LT PP 
PUI Lgl CS NT ed NEED LEITR. Ft VIBE ELL LIED TS COMBDELI SES: 2 LESEELES LE QELEL SOLEIL EL! BELLI NL ME 
Semmes (Sa. TR kee ree OER: EE a OS 


Dre jw ae — ' 


~ 


Ct SST 


ee oo 


a omwex: 4 eae; 


| 


Sap =e! = ques 
: z 


bill 


Rises eas Ee = . 
: ; a C hg 2 = = =" 3 : 
leap 


pe ee Re 


Sed TRL SES FN Cd ARS APIS, FLOR ee OPEL AIRE AAA PAO SEE OOLCREED, 
the AEE AEE SLE FL NB Ni  LLNERLALLISITLSLL ELE LS OLE SERLE A ME 


LLLLILLS SOLEUS SLLELAI LIISA TTT: ROLLA IRAE ELS AL ETL 
1 SRST | BRS | RS | PS 


CERES 


NN 


ou) 


Tot 
PE aa 


iF is a 


Sess et kee 
get pe re 


1905.] MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 31 


in most instances are changing the stations to modern alter- 
nating current sub-stations, making a suburban business which 
extends in various directions from 12 to 30 miles outside of the 
city. 

This large increase in suburban territory together with the 
rapidly growing city business called for an immediate enlarge- 
ment of the alternating-current station which was already 
loaded to its full capacity. A new station was therefore planned 
with an ultimate capacity of 60000 kw. to be built on the L 
Street property alongside the existing station. The first in- 
stallation of 10000 kw. is just being completed. The 
position of the existing station on the property was for- 
tunately such that it was no handicap in the location and ar- 
rangement of the new station. As a matter of fact, the old 
station naturally merges into and becomes a part of the new 
station, and had it not existed it is doubtful if any change would 
have been made in the design of the latter. 

The value of the real estate is very small and will doubtless 
so continue for many years to come. Therefore the station 
buildings could spread out over the land as much as desired, 
and no attempt was made to build additional stories for the 
sake of saving ground area. Under these conditions, it is 
cheaper to spread out the buildings on the ground than to carry 
them up inthe airtoanequivalent area, and liberal room for 

and around the apparatus facilitates the operating, cheapens 
the cost of making repairs, and renders it easy to keep the 
stations clean. 

The shape of the property was such as to make it desirable 
-to erect the station with the end toward the water front, © 
which naturally brought the building of that end of the station 
first. 

The turbine-room will be 650 feet long, 68 feet. wide, 56.5 
feet high, and without a basement. It has no side windows. 
A liberal monitor with glass sides and roof gives a better distri- 
bution of daylight than do side windows and in connection 
- with windows in the end walls provides good ventilation. 

The boiler-house will be 640 feet long, 149.5 feet wide and 
of same height as the turbine-room. The arrangement of the 
boilers practically divides this building into seven fire-rooms. 
The lighting and ventilating is done from the roof similarly to 
the turbine-room. : 

‘The switch-house will be 605 feet long, 30 feet wide, and 


32 MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN.  [Jan. 27 


several stories high. The buildings for the installation of 
60 000 kw. of machinery cover about 160 000 square feet, which 
is equivalent to about 2.67 square feet per kilowatt. 

The ends of the buildings facing the water have been made 
the front of the station; with an entrance through offices located 
in the front end of the switch-house. The buildings are set 
back 136 feet from the sea-wall; the intervening space is covered 
with a fine lawn and planted with shrubbery. Through the 
centre of this lawn a paved driveway leads from the ornamental 
entrance gates on L Street to the office entrance, making a well- 
finished and attractive environment in keeping with the interior. 

In designing this station the grouping of the apparatus has 
been given special attention and care has been taken so to ar- 
range them that they naturally come under the charge of the 
class of operators best fitted to care for them. 

The turbine-room has received all of the machinery in the 
station; even the boiler feed-pumps usually considered an ad- 
junct of the boiler-house are treated as part of the turbine 
auxiliaries, and are placed in charge of the turbine operators, 
The boiler-house contains only the boilers with the necessary 
piping, etc., so that the work in this room is to burn coal prop- 
erly and maintain the steam pressure. 

All of the electrical apparatus has been grouped together 
and installed in a separate building adjoining the turbine- 
room, isolated from the noise and dirt of the latter and free 
from liability of damage by accidents to any of the turbine- 
room machinery. 

The electrical operating, a matter of brain work, is done under 
as favorable conditions as are found in any office building, with 
no duplication of apparatus, and the operators cannot be dis- 
turbed by anything going on in the turbine-room. Escaping 
steam can neither damage the apparatus nor interfere with the 
work of the operators, while they can oversee any of the gen- 
erating rooms by stepping through doors in the side walls on to 
observation galleries. 

To add to the architectural appearance of the interior of the 
turbine-room, and also to facilitate the work of keeping the room 
neat and clean, it is finished with tile and enameled brick. The 
floor is tiled in dark red with black borders arranged in the form 
of a simple design to relieve the monotony of one color. The 
walls have a wainscot of two-colored green tile about ten feet 
high, and above they are paneled with a light-colored tile and 


4 
4 
on 


> > : 
* iM 4 , i M . } 
ee eS : 

" Se) > - : 

; Eds oe | 

—) \ ; ‘ 

t . ' . ay; t . 

| ben a7 

. \ 
ee 
3 @ 


Hod 
2k mee 
c™% 


a? 
+ 
z 


Tor 


‘ 
* 
é 
peas 
] 


4 G2 +4 Me pe EL | = a 


ena J 
& . . } ya 


e 


fy ifm 
: 

e 

f 

: 


ye 2 


A» 8 60 
no 
mi 


(fe 
PA CTORS 

t 

5 


AS wis/ehes 


fer OY srvitfer 


Con, 


Busses. - 


ri 
oy 


Ad 


4 Candi) Cows 


Pa: 


gu ROA RENEE MET FEAL OLDE © 


Vol? 


a 


6900 


4h " : an ; Bases Ras, § i 
0 i : - Tie ; , 
125" OC. Busses. (Auxthary ) pale 
: % 7 a : , 
ss , 9 i i ‘ 
‘ 5 Rea lamp 1s f-ghlel vi 
; i yi 4 vie Pon shen 00 SLES a cried oe 
ym iige . if Greta lamp i /ghied 0 
ae OR + i 8S wbaw O7 Sails open, 
(eo ‘ f Bs Ba! saat <2 aes 4 
a 


Cob tre/ ‘Swikhes 
al Sir > 


far 


= 
UE ene rer gp me mano 
PE POR RSA SESE TAON , eile Aa % 


- 


ii ery ravens 40h, wey? eri a 
$$ Sean 


SG teaiet bea 
ae wore ee 


ate 


Stee hey 


i ey ae 


ro BESS 


1905.) MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 33 


enameled brick. The crane track is concealed by the wall finish. 
The room is divided into three parts by permanent division- 
walls in which are large doors at the floor level, and large win- 
dows above, all equipped for quick closing. Ordinarily these 
will be opened, giving practically one long room, but in case 
of a serious accident in any room the openings can be quickly 
closed, isolating the trouble and leaving the other rooms free 
to operate without any interruption. The boiler-room has walls 
finished in tile similar to the turbine-room, but the floor is not 
tiled. The result is that these rooms are ornamental in character 
and are easily kept clean, while at the same time the cost of 
the decoration is quite moderate. Before the finish was deter- 
mined upon, cost estimates were made on the various possible 
methods of satisfactorily finishing the rooms, including the up- 
keep for an extended period of years, and the finish employed 
was found to be the cheapest that could be adopted, being even 
less expensive than painting. 

The exterior of the station buildings is simple and massive 
in character. Cut granite underpinning is used and the promi- 
nent walls are faced with a dark paving brick trimmed with 
terra-cotta. 

The apparatus is installed on the unit system. In the tur- 
bine-room all the auxiliaries required for a generating unit are 
grouped around that unit and are generally of sufficient capacity 
to serve that unit alone. The boilers necessary to supply the 
generating unit are in one row directly behind the turbine. In 
this way each generating unit is a small central station in itself. 
Practically no cross-connections are installed between the various 
units except that between each pair of units the steam mains 
are joined by a small-sized tie so that a generating unit can be 
run temporarily from the boilers of its mate, should an emer- 
gency require. In this way a very simple piping system is 
sufficient, reducing the cost of installation and maintenance, 
and simplifying the manipulation of the station under emer- 
gencies when the engineer has to think quickly, and when he 
_must be sure that the manipulations are made rapidly and cor- 
rectly. The duplication of auxiliaries is eliminated, and should 
a generating unit be put out of commission by the failure of 
any one of its essential parts, it is intended that the entire unit 
will. be shut down and another one started in its place. 

Before determining upon the apparatus to be installed in’ the 
station, careful consideration was given to the respective merits 


34 MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. (Jan. 27 


of turbines and reciprocating engines as prime movers. The 
advantages of the turbine over the engine in first cost, the lesser 
amount of help required to operate, the ability to use condensed 
steam with safety for feed in the boilers, together with the fact 
that the apparatus takes very much less room decided the ques- 
tion in the favor of the turbine. These considerations were 
held to justify the decision without regard to the water con- 
sumption, and the decision will be considered wise even though 
the water consumption proves to be no better than that of a 
good engine, although it is expected to be better. Another im- 
portant feature is the ability to start an idle unit quickly. The 
earlier turbines were open to improvement in this respect, but 
the later machines have been safely started and brought up to 
full load with remarkable speed. 

The turbines used in the first installation are of the Curtis 
type with a rated capacity of 5 000 kilowatts on a conservative 
temperature rise in the generator. They are four-stage machines 
with surface condensers built in their bases and are equipped 
with mechanical brakes for bringing the machine to rest for an 
emergency stop. In these features they are the first machines 
of their kind to be installed. The base condenser was adopted 
because it will give a somewhat better vacuum in the turbine, 
which is an important consideration in turbine work. It also 
considerably reduces the floor space required for the installa- 
tion, somewhat simplifies the piping, and makes possible a more 
symmetrical and pleasing grouping of the machinery. Its dis- 
advantage is that it increases the height of the turbine a 
few feet, which is, however, of little moment. Its first cost is 
somewhat more than an independent condenser, which may be 
partly balanced by the saving in piping; it also requires special 
arrangement for filling the condenser tubes with water when the 
turbine is to be run non-condensing. 

The brake is very useful for emergency shut-downs, because 
the turbine will run for some hours with no load and no field, 
while with the brake it is possible to bring the machine to rest 
in about five minutes. It also facilitates the overhauling of. 
the step bearing by sustaining the weight of the rotating parts. 

The generator is a three-phase, Y-connected, 60-cycle 
‘machine, generating at 6 900 volts. This number of cycles 
was | determined upon because the bulk of the alternating- 
current business is lighting, and also for the. reason that the 
existing alternating-current apparatus has the same number of 
cycles. 


1905.] MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 35 


The auxiliaries for each turbine consist of a circulating-pump, 
a wet and a dry vacuum-pump, a step-pump, a hydraulic-ac- 
cumulator, and a boiler feed-pump for the group of boilers 
connected to the turbine. All these machines are steam driven 
with the exception of the wet vacuum-pump which is motor 
driven because its speed is too high to be conveniently handled 
by an engine. Careful consideration was given to the subject 
of steam- versus electrically-driven auxiliaries, and steam was 
determined upon because it gives better station economy. 
All the exhaust steam from the auxiliaries is carried to the feed- 
water heater and is condensed in heating the boiler-feed. ie 
condensation is then discharged to the sewer as it contains too 
much cylinder oil to warrant trying to purify it. As all the 
exhaust from the auxiliaries can be condensed in heating the 
feed-water, the greatest possible use is made of the heat orig- 
inally put into this water in the boilers, for practically all that 
is not taken up in the form of work in the engine cylinder is re- 
turned to the boiler in the feed. Moreover the first cost of steam- 
driven auxiliaries is less than electric drives, and speed regula- 
tion over wide ranges is much more easily accomplished. 

The circulating-water pump consists of a centrifugal-pump 
driven by a simple high-speed engine with a throttle governor. 
The quantity of water to be handled is very great, and the head 
very low, so that a centrifugal-pump is well adapted for this 
duty. -It also makes a very much smaller machine than a 
piston-pump, is much less expensive, and at the same time it 
is very simple and requires almost no attention. 

The distinctive feature of the dry vacuum-pump is that the 
air-cylinder is placed at a right angle to the steam-cylinder, 
thus giving a better turning moment on the crank, and it takes 
less room. The air end is built single stage, and will maintain 
a vacuum on a closed tank within one-half inch of absolute. 
The steam end is throttle governed to permit of speed varia- 
tions while running. The wet vacuum-pump consists of a two- 
stage centrifugal-pump, motor driven. This pump will maintain 
a vacuum in the condenser equal to that of the dry vacuum- 
pump without the use of either suction- or discharge-valves ; 
thus requiring a minimum amount of repairs and almost no 
operating attention. The boiler feed-pump is an ordinary 
duplex, center-packed plunger-pump, selected because it is 
easier and quicker to repack, and a casual inspection will show 


if there be leakage from the plungers. 


36 MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN.  {Jan. 27 


The step on the turbine is lubricated by water instead of oil, 
because the water is as good a lubricant for this purpose, is 
cheaper, and the lubricating system simpler. The water is 
forced into the step under a pressure of about 900 lb. 
by a steam pump of similar design to the boiler feed- 
pump. As even a momentary stoppage of the water supply 
to the step would result in damage to the bearings, a motor- 
driven triplex-pump, which can be started much quicker than 
a steam-pump, is installed asarelay to the main step-pump. 
To obviate fluctuations in the pressure due to the pump’s re- 
versing its stroke, a weighted hydraulic accumulator is used. 
This is made of sufficient capacity to keep the step supplied 
with water for ten minutes, thus giving time either to shut 
down the turbine by means of the brake or to put the relay-pump 
in service, should the steam-pump fail. 

The condensing apparatus is designed to condense 153 000 lb. 
of steam per hour and maintaim a 28-in. vacuum in the 
condenser, with the cooling water at summer temperature of 70 
degrees Fahrenheit. The same apparatus under winter condi- 
tions and when the heaviest loads occur on the station, will 
give a vacuum within about three-quarters of an inch of the 
barometer. 

Brick tunnels running under the center of the turbine-room, 
at such a grade that they are always flooded, convey the cool- 
ing water to the pumps. They are constructed within the 
building, so that the machinery can be installed above them. For 
additional insurance, two tunnels are provided for the incoming 
water, each supplying one-half the station. The notable feature 
of this system is the intake construction at the sea wall. Racks 
and screens, provided to keep out all floating material, are so 
installed that they require very little cleaning, and the screens 
are arranged to be easily removed and cleaned without per- 
mitting debris to pass into the tunnels. Where the tunnels 
join the screen chamber, heavy timber gates are provided so 
that the tunnels may be pumped dry for inspection of repairs. 
The water-front construction is of concrete with a wing-dam 
so designed that, while the warm discharge-water empties into 
the harbor alongside of the incoming tunnels, thus simplifying 
the construction, at the same time the latter tunnels get the 
coldest water available, without danger of taking any of the 
warm discharge-water. 

The rows of boilers are placed in pairs alternately face to 
face and back to back, with a chimney for each pair midway 


1905.] MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 37 


of the row and between them. Thus six chimneys in all are 
required, each being 230 feet high above the level of the grates, 
this height dispensing with forced draft. Building the chim- 
neys between the rows of boilers, considerably increases the 
ground area of the boiler-house, but the additional space is very 
useful for work-room, toilet-rooms, etc. The boilers are ele- 
vated from the ground to provide liberal space beneath for the 
ash handling. Large brick chambers immediately below the 
boiler furnaces collect the ashes, and discharge through valves 
in their bottoms into carts or cars on the ground floor. 
Other distinctive features of the boiler-room are the provi- 
sions for bringing air to the furnaces, the location of the piping 
mains, and the small capacity of the coal-bunkers. 

The ash-room has a free circulation of air at all times through 
openings in the exterior walls which are without doors and are 
provided with grilles. In the front wall of each ash-chamber, 
close to the fire-room floor, are openings equipped with dampers 
admitting air directly to the ash-pits and maintaining an ade- 
quate supply to the furnaces, while permitting the windows 
and doors in the fire-room to be closed, during extreme. weather 
conditions. . 

A portion of the basement under each two rows of boilers is 
separated from the ash-room by partitions forming the pipe- 
room. Immediately under each row of boilers in this pipe-room 
are installed all the various pipe-mains which connect with them, 
and only branch pipes to each battery of boilers are taken into 
the fire-room. This puts the most of the boiler-room piping 
into a warm, clean room by itself where it is accessible, free 
from cold drafts which would tend to start leaks, and where it 
can be carried upon substantial supports. 

The grouping of boilers and turbines which has been adopted 
gives a smaller amount of piping than would be the case were 
the boilers placed in the usual manner in two rows, parallel to 
the turbine-room, and makes a very short smoke-flue with a 
minimum amount of reduction in the draft. 

Supplying each row of boilers is a line of coal-bunkers built 
in monitors above the roof. As there is practically no piping 
on top of the boilers, little space is needed above them, and 
building the coal-bunkers in the monitors enables the boiler-house 
to be made quite low, saving considerable expense in the cost 
of the structure, and also making a small waste space above the 
boilers to be heatcd. As there is always a large amount of coal 


38 MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN.  [Jan. 27 


stored alongside the station, the capacity of the bunkers is made 
small, being sufficient to last during the time of making routine 
repairs in the coal-conveying system. This reduces the cost 
of the building very materially. The boilers are equipped with 
the attached type of superheaters and automatic stokers. They 
_are higher by two rows of tubes than is the usual practice, 
which provides for additional storage of hot water, and in such 
form that it will also serve as additional heating surface. 

The amount of superheating, 150° fahr., was made conservative 
to be sure that the temperature would not cause trouble with 
flanged joints and in the steam-cylinders of the auxiliaries. 
The attached type was selected because they took no additional 
room and are self-regulating. Use of superheaters at the direct- 
current station shows a gain of about 9% per 100° fahr. of super- 
heating in the engine economy, and while with the attached 
type it is impossible to make comparative tests with and with- 
out superheaters upon the same apparatus, the station economy 
indicates a substantial net gain by moderate superheating. 

Stokers were selected that seemed to give the best results with 
the high-grade fuel used in New England, and with a minimum 
amount of repairs; the labor required to operate them is small, 
and very little combustible fuel is wasted in the ash pits. 

Beneath the coal-bunkers small non-automatic weighing hop- 
pers are installed. Direct-reading beam-scales are used because 
they are reasonably accurate, cheap in first cost, and are easily 
tested. 

No economizers have been installed because of their doubtful 
value under the operating conditions of this station and of 
their effect on the chimney draft, which is liable to cause a re- 
duction in the capacity of the boiler plant at the time when the 
maximum is needed, or else make it necessary to cut the econo- 
mizers out of commission at a time when they would be most 
useful. 

The storage of coal is a very essential feature of a large cen- 
tral station, and is seldom adequately taken care of. Alongside 
of this station and adjacent to the water front an open-air stor- 
age of from 60 000 to 70 000 tons of coal is provided where the 
coal is stored without any shelter and immediately on the 
ground, The winter’s supply of coal can therefore be pur- 
chased while the freight rates are low during the summer time, 
even including the loss from weathering coal, this reduces the 
cost of fuel delivered in the fire-room. 


1905.] MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 39 


The coal-wharf is equipped with an electric tower, operating 
a one-ton clam-shell bucket and one electrohydraulic tower 
operating a similar bucket of 1.5 tons. « The electrohydraulic tower 
is of a new design in which vertical hydraulic-elevator cylinders 
furnish the power for operating the bucket. The water pressure 
is obtained by a three-stage centrifugal-pump driven by an 
induction motor. This pump is automatic in its action, and 
when the water pressure reaches the maximum point the pump 
continues running and maintains that pressure without deliver- 
ing any water until the pressure drops. The tower is operated 
by one man, with a minimum amount of physical exertion. 

The coal is conveyed from the wharf to the Storage-yard by a 

system of conveying belts, tae conveyors from the wharf to the 
yard having a maximum capacity of 700 tons of coal per hour. 
This conveying system was adopted because it was possible to 
‘obtain a very large capacity when desired, with a minimum 
amount of attendance and repairs. 
_ The storage-yard is equipped with an electric reclaiming- 
bridge which operates a clam-shell bucket of the usual type 
and of two tons’ capacity. This bridge is so installed that it 
will cover the entire storage-yard, and besides taking coal from 
the field and putting it on to the conveyor running into the sta- 
tion, it is very useful to turn over the coal quickly should it 
show signs of heating. 

The distinctive feature of this reclaiming-bridge is the fact 
that all the machinery for operating the bucket is installed on a 
trolley car running on the deck of the bridge. The operator 
riding on this trolley is always immediately over his work, and 
can control the motions of the bridge at the same time he is 
operating the bucket. 

The water-supply for the boilers is of equal importance to 
that of the fuel. Water-service pipes of ample capacity for the 
total station are brought into it from large mains in the two 
adjacent streets. These will shortly be fed from separate trunk 
mains., For a further safeguard to the water-supply, a system 
of storage-tanks, with a combined capacity of 50 000 cubic feet 
of water, or sufficient to run one turbine on the condenser for 
about ten days, is installed on the ground alongside the station 
building and at an elevation considerably above that of the 
feed-pumps. 

An inspection of the wiring-diagram will show the general 
arrangement of the switching. There are of necessity three bus-bar 
pressures, the excitation, and the possibility of a fourth pressure 


40 MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN.  {Jan. 27 


being required later. The engine-driven alternators generate, 
as stated above, at 2 300 volts, and the turbine-driven alter- 
nators at 6 900 volts. This latter was fixed upon after careful 
consideration of the location of the present business with reference 
to the station and of its probable growth. There is also a cer- 
tain amount of 4 600-volt business which crept into the system 
some time previous because a considerable amount of business 
developed at a distance too far away for the economical use of 
2 300 volts, and the standard cables on the system would safely 
carry only 5 000 volts. Therefore, the simplest expedient at 
that time was to install two-to-one transformers and supply 
them from the old station bus-bar. This business which started 
in asmall way long before a turbine station was considered had 
grown to a considerable size at the time the turbine was installed, 
and the lossin the underground cables and other apparatus—which 
would have no commercial value in case this pressure was changed 
—prohibits making any change at thepresent time. The turbine 
pressure of 6 900 volts promises to be ample for the present needs 
of the company, but it can be easily foreseen should the lines 
be extended beyond their present limits or should the business 
at the end of some of the transmission lines materially increase, 
that this pressure might be too low. If this happens, it is 
planned to double the pressure on the transmission lines in ques- 
tion and transmit in these instances at 13 800 volts. All trans- 
formers installed on these lines are built with 13 800-volt taps. 

The bus-bars in each system are installed in duplicate, and so 

arranged that they can be cut into short sections of no more 
than 10 000 kw. each by tie-switches, and any transmission line 
or generator can be isolated if it is desired to do so. Transmis- 
sion lines are grouped with the generators on a section of bus-bar 
so that this bus-bar does not have to carry much current any dis- 
tance lengthwise. The generator is connected to the bus-bars 
‘through one main-switch and two selector-switches. These 
switches are designed to open under the full station capacity, 
‘should emergency ever demand it. The transmission lines 
have selector-switches but no main-switches at present, space 
being reserved for the installation of main-switches should 
they prove desirable later. 

The switches are all installed on the third floor of the switch- 
house. The selector-switches are in two rows. Each row consists of 
two.groups of switches (placed back to back) running through the 
center of the:building and immediately over the bus-bars to which 


f 


1905.] MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 41 


they connect. The main-switches are installed in two single rows, 
one on each side of the switch-house and against the side walls. 
On the floor below, the bus-bar compartments are arranged 
similarly to the selector-switches, two rows of two through the 
center of the room. in two single rows on each side wall im- 
mediately under the main-switches are grouped the instrument 
transformers in special compartments. 

The oil-switch cells, the bus-bar chambers, and the instrument 
transformer chambers are all built of a light-yellow brick with 
a fine cement joint, -the brick being selected for its 
low absorption properties. The barriers in the bus-bar com- 
partments and also in the instrument compartments are of re- 
inforced concrete with a fine, close-grained finish. These are all 
made in moulds and set in place as is done with alberene; 
they have as good insulating qualities as alberene with less ab- 
sorption, are much cheaper, and furthermore are less liable to 
break. The bus-bar chambers are fully enclosed, small doors 
being left in the wall for access to the connections only. The 
instrument transformer cells are left open. The front of each 
switch-cell is enclosed with a wooden frame filled with a pane 
of glass which permits an inspection of the pot; at the 
upper part of the frame there are a few slats for ventilation, and 
for vents in case of an explosion. 

The transmission lines and also the turbine-leads and trans- 
former-leads enter the basement of the switch-house in duct-lines 
which terminate in this room and at a point nearly underneath 
the selector-switches that they connect with on the upper floor. 
The lead-sheathed cables terminate in end-bells as close to the 
end of the ducts as possible, from which points cable with flame- 
proof braiding is carried on glass insulators and through porce- 
lain tubes to the switches overhead. From the end of the ducts, 
the cable is taken in air-runs and they are so grouped throughout 
the basement that there is ample air-space between all cables. 
Provision has been made for the installation of static-discharge 
apparatus in this basement but at present none has been in- 
stalled. 

The electrical operating-room is on the top floor of the switch- 
house in about the center of the building and contains nothing 
but the operating apparatus. ‘Convenient stairways leading 
down from this room through the switch-house bring the operator 
in close touch with all the switching apparatus. A signal sys- 

‘tem similar to that used on board ship enables him quickly to 


42 MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. (Jan. 27 


communicate his orders to any of the generating rooms, doing 
this with a certainty that the order will not be misunderstood. 
This system also provides for an acknowledgment indicating 
when the order has been carried out. 

All the switching apparatus with the exception of the excita- 
tion system is remote-controlled. The controller panels with 
all the necessary instruments are grouped in the operating-room 
in the form of a rectangle, facing inward so that the operator 
can see at a glance any panel in the room. The excitation 
switching is hand-controlled. The bus-bar for this is brought into 
the operating-room and placed between the two groups of switch- 
es controlling the engine-driven alternators and the turbine- 
driven alternators. The panels for the ground-detectors are 
installed alongside the excitation bus-bar so that the operator has 
grouped at one end of the room all the apparatus which requires 
constant attention. The transmission-line panels, transformer 
panels and others are scattered along down the room in the order 
that is most convenient for their installation, without reference 
to the sequence of the switches themselves down stairs. 

The excitation is furnished by onesmallsteam-driven set of suffi- 
cient capacity to start up an engine-driven alternator in case the 
‘entire station should be shut down, three small motor-gen- 
erator sets located in the old engine-room having a capacity 
sufficient for all the engine-driven alternators, and three large 
motor-generator sets, one in each of the individual turbine- 
rooms with sufficient capacity to supply the turbines. In ad- 
dition to the motor-generator sets there is a storage-battery 
with capacity of 1 000 amperes for an hour, floating on the ex- 
citation bus-bar. Besides the generator fields, there are fed 
from the excitation bus-bar a few other pieces of apparatus which 
are particularly necessary to the operating of the station, such as 
the motors operating the oil-switches, the relay-pumps for the 
step-bearings, and a few lights around the station which would 
be essential in case the general lighting system should give out. 

Unfortunately no test or station-economy figures can be given 
at this time. The turbines are still in the builder’s hands and 
while the first machine has been in commercial service for about 
three months, the conditions under which it has been operated 
make the station-economy figures of little value. 

Much more could be written upon this subject if space per- 
mitted, but so many distinctive engineering features in the sta- 
tion call for special mention that this paper is of necessity rather 


1905.]. MOULTROP: CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 43 


long and unfortunately seems to have an appearance of being 
merely descriptive rather than technical. 

Simplicity and reliability have been the aim of the engineers 
throughout the work. Experimenting and the use of untried 
devices have been avoided. Special care has been taken to 
install apparatus which would operate continuously with ‘a mini- 
mum cost of attendance and repairs, notwithstanding the fact. 
- that this would oftentimes largely increase the cost of the in- 
stallation. : 


44 CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. OM (Jan. 27 


_Discussion on “‘ MODERN CENTRAL STATION DESIGN AS EXEM- 
PLIFIED BY THE NEW TuRBO-GENERATOR STATION. OF 
THE Epison ELectric ILLUMINATING COMPANY OF Bos- 

a? 
TON. 


PRESIDENT Lies: The paper by Mr. Moultrop on ‘“‘ Modern 
Central Station Design,’ brings us face to face with a problem 
which has been before us these 20 odd years. It will not be a 
loss of time to consider for a moment the progress which has 
taken place in central station development, and in order to 
place this before you the speaker will abstract some of the 
data and some of the conclusions drawn therefrom as they ap- 
pear in the last United States census report. 

In the last census report, covering the operations up to June 
30, 1902, there were in operation in the United States 3620 
central electric light stations, of which the cost of construction 
and equipment was $504 740 352. The income from light and 
power distribution was $85 700 605 and the total expenses of 
operation $68 081375. It was also estimated at that time 
that the power required for the central stations was 1 379 941 
ich.p., with an additional 438 472 h.p. in water wheels. The 
current output from lighting stations alone has been estimated 
at 2453502652 kw-hr., and there were connected to these 
stations 385 698 arc lamps and 18 194 044 incandescent lamps, 
or including the electric light service operated from railway 
power plants, the total income for 1902 becomes $90 458 420, 
the total number of arc lamps 419 561, and thesotal incandescent 
lamps 19 636 729; these figures do not include the installations 
in isolated plants. It will be seen, therefore, that the central 
station industry has made remarkable strides, particularly 
when it is recalled that the industry is only 23 years old, whereas. 
the gas industry dates from 1806. A brief comparison between 
the progress of these rivals in the business of artificial lighting 
may be of interest. 

We find in 1902 that while there were in operation 3620 
electric light stations, the number of gas plants was 877. The 
income from electric light plants was in excess of $85 000 000 
and from gas plants approximately $75 000000. It is inter- 
esting to note that whereas there were 2714 electric light sta- 
tions in cities of 5000 inhabitants and less, there were in the 
same class of cities only 200 gas plants. Of the total income 
from the central lighting stations 29.7% was from arc lighting, 
52.1% from incandescent lighting, 16.4% miscellaneous electric 
service and 1.8% from outside sources. 

The design and construction of the power-house is influenced 
not only by the local conditions but also to a large extent by 
the personality of the designing engineer. One of the main 
features influencing the design which is perhaps not duly ap- 
preciated in the selection of the equipment of boilers, engines, 
and dynamos, is the effect which the load-factor should have 
in the selection of the apparatus, and the extent to which the 


1905.) | DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 45; 


maximum and part loads on the power-house are distributed 
throughout the hours of the year. In one of the largest electric 
lighting stations of this country it is found that of the total 
generating capacity, 10% of it is used only during 25 hours 
of the whole year, and these 25 hours come within the range 
of one month’s operations; 25% of the capacity of the plant 
is used but 75 hours in the whole year, and practically all 
within two months; one-half of the plant capacity is used not 
over 500 hours of the whole year, all within seven months. 
It can be seen, therefore, that this factor is well worthy of 
consideration in the selection of the generating equipment, and 
it does not follow necessarily that for the part of the equipment 
to be used for such short periods the highest efficiency 
represents also the highest commercial economy when invest- 
ment costs are considered. 

H. G. Storr: A matter of great importance in central sta- 
tion design is the ratio of the interest charges plus depreciation 
to the operating cost. This ratio is, of course, largely dependent 
upon the load-factor, which, in a lighting plant, is extremely 
low; as an example, 50% of the machinery in a lighting plant 
operates only about 300 hours per annum, so that it becomes 
most important to keep down the first cost; for assuming that 
a plant costs $125 per kilowatt capacity, then the interest and 
depreciation charges upon the portion of it used for peak load 
would amount to 5.2 cents per kilowatt-hour, or probably five 
times as much as the operating cost. Upon the same basis an 
extra investment of $12.50 per kilowatt would mean 0.5 cents 
extra per kilowatt-hour of fixed charges. From a consideration 
of the above it is evident that it is more impcrtant to keep 
down the investment on that portion of a plant which is only 
used on peak load, than it is to make it highly efficient. 

The ideal plant is one in which the fixed charges are equal 
to the operating and maintenance cost. In this connection, 
the adoption of the steam-turbine is undoubtedly a step in 
the right direction, as the investment is probably 30% less than 
for reciprocating-engine units. In the same direction a mate- 
rial decrease in the cost of plant can be obtained by purchasing 
machinery with a large overload capacity for two hours, 50% 
overload capacity for that time being readily obtainable, and 
at a slightly greater increase of cost, as much as 75% overload 
capacity. ; 

Apparatus operated at this overload will not and need not 
be so efficient as at normal load, as a comparison of the operating 
cost and the fixed charges shows that the former is relatively of 
no importance on peak loads. io 

The speaker questions the wisdom of omitting the cross con- 
nection between the various units, referred to by the author on 
page 33. The absence of these cross connections is a:mistake: 
from every point of view; this absence might cause the shutting 
down of a 5000-kw. unit on account of the breakdown oi a 10-h.p. 


46 CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. [Jan. 27 © 


pump. The same criticism applies to the cross connections of 
the steam mains, because if one unit is shut down suddenly 
and another unit is needed, it will be necessary to use six or 
eight boilers that have been banked. This process requires 
the use of coal, whereas if there were sufficient steam cross 
connection it would not be necessary to fire any more boilers. 

In any lighting station with large one- or two-hour peaks, 
the banking of boilers will require almost as much coal as the 
actual operation of the peak-load part of the plant. The speaker 
does not agree with the author that a turbine-driven unit can 
be started more quickly than an ordinary engine-driven unit. 
He has seen 5000-kw. engine-driven units started in less than 
two minutes. 

The cost of condensers, relatively to the cost of the entire 
plant, is a matter of some interest. A large surface condenser 
with extremely high vacuum will probably cost $8 per kilowatt. 
A barometric condenser which will give equally high vacuum 
can probably be had for $2 a kilowatt. Here isa difference of 
$6 per kilowatt in an investment and that $6 means, for 300 
hours’ use a year, one-quarter of a cent per kilowatt-hour in 
fixed charges. The extra cost of water due to the use of a baro- 
metric type condenser would be less than 0.01 per kilowatt-. 
hour. It seems then that there would be a saving of 0.24 of. 
a cent per kilowatt-hour by putting in the cheaper condenser, 
without taking into account the fact that water cannot be 
used over again more than about 75% of the time, due to leaky 
condenser tubes where salt water is used for circulating water. 

F. C. Bates: On page 34, Mr. Moultrop mentions “ the in- 
ability to use condensed steam with safety for feed in the 
- boilers.”’ In this connection the speaker wishes to mention 
the results of a recent investigation. In a large central station 
in New York City, approximately $6000 per annum is paid 
for boiler water for a 5000-kw. unit. Assuming that 90% can 
be saved by the elimination of oil from the turbine, we have a 
net saving of $5400, which sum represents 10% on an investment 
of $54000. This sum of $5400 may also be said to equal ap- 
proximately two pounds of water per kilowatt-hour on the 
following basis of calculation, which agrees within a few dollars 
with the actual records. 


Sib. Water evaporated .* ci). a Sanat Aaa 1 lb. coal 
Capacity of Unit-1L IlOWatis iii.’ Rilo etn 5000 
Load factor (holins pet year) 7) gnc lace > see 4000 
Kilowatt-hours per year.......... he Waco sh tae 20 000 000 
Tots! of coal per.yeary.cied halite ene 1250 
Cost of ‘coal per tonis 7... 0s.aeaweba seca eee $2.25 
One pound water per kilowatt-hour........... . $2812 


-Puitie Torcuio: One of the points which occurs to the 
speaker is that Fig: 1 illustrates one characteristic of the new 
station design, and that is, on account of the reduced space 
taken up by the engines, the boilers have been put at right 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 47 


angles to the engine room, contrary to the usual standard sta- 
tion layout, where the engine room and boiler room run in parallel. 
The speaker has been connected with an operating company 
and has given some consideration to the layout of the electrical 
operating room and has had it entirely separated from the 
engine room, but he finds there are some drawbacks to that 
plan, as the operator in charge of a station of that kind should 
have nothing to interfere with his seeing all that goes on, but 
when he is confined in a room entirely separated from the place 
where the current is generated, he cannot keep in touch with 
the plant. The operating of a station of that kind is soimportant, 
that even small sounds mean a lot to the operator, which he 
detects, and which would be unnoticed by another man. 

As to surface condensers being put in the base of a machine 
of the Curtiss type, to economize space, it seems somewhat un- 
warranted, as the turbine itself takes so little space there would 
be plenty of space available for the condenser outside and per- 
haps make the condenser more accessible and more roomy. 
The author says that careful consideration was given to the 
subject of steam- versus electrically-driven auxiliaries, and 
steam was determined upon because it gives better station 
economy. In general this would be found. correct in American 
practice, though eventually there may be the possibility, with 
the further development of the turbine, of using steam turbine- 
driven auxiliaries, driven with electric motors and driven from 
the current generated by the turbine at a higher efficiency. 
Theoretically, in such a case. you. would get perhaps as good 
an efficiency as from the steam-driven  reciprocating-engine 
units, which are necessarily of very poor efficiency. 

_ The author says they have not used forced draught in Boston. 
Probably they do not use the small coal which is used in some 
parts of the country, in which case the forced draught would 
be a necessity. What is the draught of the chimney in inches? 
The superheat has been limited to 150 degrees fahr., which is 
probably a sufficient limit and one which is a commercial limit. 
If the auxiliary should be driven by the steam-turbine the 
superheat could perhaps be increased somewhat without run- 
ning into the danger of getting into trouble with reciprocating- 
engine steam auxiliaries. 

As to what Mr. Bates has said about the saving of water, 
which would compensate to a large extent for the poorer econ- 
omy of steam turbines, equivalent to about two pounds of 
steam in favor of the steam-turbine, the speaker does not think 
that the figure would be so much for commercial load-factors 
in lighting stations because that figure can be anywhere from 
perhaps one-tenth of a pound to two pounds. It depends on 
the number of hours the turbine is run in the course of the 
year. The speaker agrees with Mr. Stott that cross-connection 
of steam mains would be desirable in a station of this char- 
acter. He does not agree with Mr. Stott in the statement 


48 CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. [Jan. 27 


that surface condensers are undesirable in connection with 
steam-turbines, but he certainly thinks that the point is well 
taken if it applies to steam-engine units. 

_ H. Hatiperc: The speaker reminds Mr. Torchio that 
recently public attention was called to the fact that the jet con- 
denser has been used successfully at the Atlantic Mills in Provi- 
dence, on a 750-h.p. Parsons turbine, with 28-in., or better 
vacuum. It has been entirely satisfactory. 

C. O. Maittoux: The author’s comments on steam turbine- 
driven auxiliaries are interesting. In Europe the speaker has 
seen places where steam-turbines are used to drive feed-water 
pumps successfully. There are great possibilities ahead for 
this kind of auxiliary apparatus, as soon as the pump is suffi- 
ciently developed and made cheap enough; but there is danger 
of getting our steam auxiliaries too efficient in the use of steam. 
On page 38 the author gives sufficient reasons for leaving out 
the economizers. In the absence of economizers, means must 
be provided for heating the feed-water, and usually the heat 
from the exhaust of the auxiliaries is used for this purpose. 
When the steam consumption of the auxiliaries is small, there 
is danger of not getting exhaust enough properly and ade- 
quately to heat the feed-water. 

The speaker thought a case might arise where live steam 
would have to be used to heat the feed-water to a point where 
it would be sufficiently warm to feed it into the boiler without 
producing troubles from contraction due to insufficient heat. 
All needs considered, perhaps it is just as well not to attempt 
too much in the way of undue economy in steam-driven auxil- 
iaries. The speaker has had to deal with this problem in a 
practical way recently, and he is more worried about not having 
enough steam from these auxiliaries than he is from having 
too much; he fears that he will have to resort to some means 
other than the auxiliaries to heat the feed-water sufficiently. 
He knows of cases where it has been proposed that a connection 
may be made at the second or third stage of the Curtiss turbine 
so as to furnish live steam—steam which,has done some work 
and is partly expanded—for the purpose of supplementing the 
action of the feed-water heater. 

The condensing tunnels of this station are particularly inter- 
esting to the speaker. The fact that there are three tunnels, 
giving a spare one for emergencies so that normally while each 
one of the intake tunnels may take only one-half the water, 
yet it might, in emergencies, serve for the whole at a slightly 
increased velocity, is particularly interesting. In a large plant 
with which the speaker is closely identified, he has endeavored 
to go one step farther; that is, to utilize the other tunnel so 
that in case of necessity it could be used as an intake or dis- 
charge tunnel. This can easily be done by modifying the design. 

The speaker agrees with Mr. Torchio and others that favor 
the surface condenser. The speaker’s experience with a jet 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 49 


condenser is that it fails entirely for steam-turbine work, and 
does not give anything like full vacuum especially on overload. 
The speaker has investigated the barometric condenser care- 
fully; he found that while there was undoubtedly much better 
prospects of getting satisfactory vacuum, yet there seemed to 
be an element of chance in it. 

Perhaps it will be of interest to note that the vacuum ob- 
tained in this country is considerably more than that obtained 
in Europe. In Europe they are quite satisfied when they ap- 
proach 27 in.; in many places 26 in. seem to be considered fairly 
good. The speaker found a few places where it was thought 
that nothing better than 28 in. could be obtained. 

The matter of placing the condenser in the base of the tur- 
bine is important from considerations other than that of space; 
the importance of having little loss of pressure due to the flow 
of the steam in the condenser pipe itself must be considered. 
In order to get as good a vacuum as possible, the fall of 
pressure in the steam pipe of the condenser itself must be 
reduced as much as possible. By placing the condenser in 
the base of the turbine the condenser is installed practically 
without any piping. 

W. F. Wuire: Mr. Stott’s contention in behalf of the jet 
condenser is based on the difference in cost between the surface 
and the jet types of condenser; he distributes this difference 
over a comparatively few hours of the year, which is unfair 
because a large portion of the plant operates many hours per 
day. It follows that comparisons based on a few hours’ opera- 
tion per year do not hold good for that portion which operates 
constantly, because peak conditions are not average conditions. 
The surface condenser, due to the ability of turbines to utilize 
greater expansion and to benefit from higher vacuums than 
reciprocating engines, is undoubtedly preferable to the jet 
condenser. The decision as to the character of condenser to 
be adopted is not determined alone by the merits of the con- 
denser itself, because the character of other parts of the station 
design will depend upon the type of condenser used. 

With the jet condenser, outside feed-water must be used 
and no benefit is derived from the re-use of condensation. This 
condition affects not only the economy of the station in the 
cost. of feed-water, but also materially affects the reliability of 
the boiler plant and the length of time during which the boiler 
can be operated continuously, and the cost of boiler repairs. 
This is an important matter in turbine station economy, because 
with surface condensers not only will boiler repairs and the 
fuel consumption be decreased, but the life of the boiler plant 
will be increased. . 

The decision as to the type of condenser also influences the 
use or non-use of economizers. With surface condensers, and 
using the condensation for feed-water, there is not the same 
need for economizers as with jet condensers. The exclusion of 


50 CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. [Jan. 27 


economizers may also mean the exclusion of forced or induced 
draft equipment. It is thus seen that the use of surface con- 
densers in a turbine station may effect economies outweighing 
many times over the advantages of lower first cost of jet con- 
densers and may easily reduce the cost of the station as much 
as $5 to $10 per kilowatt. 

The absence of economizers in the Boston plant should be 
emphasized, as should also the arranging of all auxiliary appar- 
atus under the immediate eye of the engineer, eliminating 
engine-room basement and otherwise reducing the total cost of 
the station. This Boston plant seems to have provided what 
most stations do not have, a sufficient coal-storage capacity. 
Most stations have their entire capacity in coal bunkers above 
the boiler room. It is impossible with reasonable cost of build- 
ing to put an adequate supply in such coal bunkers. Most large 
stations, notwithstanding their expensive coal bunkers, have an 
inadequate storage. Every large station should have outside 
storage in addition to the bunker capacity above the boilers. 
If outside storage is necessary, then why make the coal bunkers 
overhead as large as is customary practice? A considerable 
saving in cost of building could be effected, without introducing 
any disadvantage, by reducing the capacity of the coal bunkers 
overhead, as the Boston company has done, and its example 
in this direction is to be commended. 

H. G. Srorr: The speaker takes issue with Mr. Mailloux 
on the question of the inability of the barometric tube condenser 
to maintain vacuum. The speaker can show this condenser 
operating with an average vacuum of 27.5 in. without the use 
of a dry-air pump; with the use of a dry-air pump attached 
there is no difficulty in maintaining 29-in. vacuum. This is 
within 1.5 inches of the barometer. 

Mr. White has apparently overlooked one feature connected 
with the coal supply; that is, the possibility of bituminous coal 
taking fire when exposed to the air. Bituminous coal when 
warmed perceptibly will lose from 25 to 30% of its heat units. 

I. E. Mouttrop: Owing to the lateness of the hour the 
speaker will only take time to touch upon a few of the prin- 
cipal points brought out in the discussion. He would request 
the privilege of replying by letter to some of the other speakers 
after their remarks have been revised. 

The speaker agrees with Mr. Stott that an engineer may be 
criticised for installing expensive apparatus to carry a peak 
load which exists for only a few hours during the year. This 
criticism does not apply to the station referred to in the paper, 
a station built to care for the increase in business of a large 
company. As the demand for power increases new apparatus 
of the very best quality is installed. The Jatest and most 
economical apparatus is used for the steady load and the older 
apparatus is retained for the peaks. The engineers of this 
company believe this to be the most economical method of 
equipping and operating their central stations. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT.NEW YORK, 51 


Attention should be given to the cost of repairs as well as to 
the first cost of the apparatus. In the plant under discussion, 
special care was taken to install apparatus which would run 
continuously and overloaded when necessary, with a minimum 
cost of repairs... 

The speaker does not agree with Mr. Stott that many cross 
connections are essential. The Atlantic Avenue station of 
the Boston Edison Company was originally built with many 
cross-connections; they finally became too complicated for 
practical use. Some were never used, and it is doubtful if the 
engineers would have been able to avail themselves of many 
of them in emergency. Most of these cross-connections were 
then removed and the station was operated just as well with 
much less apparatus to maintain. Possibly, in the station 
under discussion, the engineers have gone to the other extreme, 
but it must be remembered that this is the beginning of a large 
station and in such a station simplicity is essential. A very 
few cross-connections have been used, but generally each piece 
of apparatus, each line of pipe, and each cable or wire is put 
in to do only one thing. This reduces to a minimum the pos- 
sibility of the operators making mistakes, which in a large sta- 
tion supplying a considerable territory by alternating-current 
transmission through sub-stations, might result seriously. 

In the matter of condersing apparatus it should jbe remem- 
bered that this station was designed more than two years ago 
and that the apparatus is virtually two years old, although it 
has been in use only a short time. The speaker is quite sure 
that to-day this condensing apparatus can be improved upon 
and doubtless simplified. The form of the condensing appar- 
‘atus should, in a measure, be determined by the location of 
the station and whether or not the supply of cooling water is 
suitable for feeding into boilers. 

The speaker believes that it is very desirable to put the 
electrical apparatus and the electrical operating room in a sep- 
arate building. This can usually be done with a very small 
increased cost. The men in the turbine-room generate the 
current and deliver it to the switch-house. The electrical 
operators maintain the pressure and distribute the current to 
the sub-stations and the outside system; they do not neces- 
sarily need to know what is going on in the turbine-room and 
do require a quiet room where there is nothing to distract at- 
tention from their work. In the station under discussion, the 
electrical operators can at any time see what is transpiring 1n 
the turbine-room by stepping through a doorway in the side 
wall of the switch-house. 

The chimney is designed to give an adequate draft to burn 
an ample quantity of soft coal under any atmospheric condition. 
If mechanical draft were used the height of the chimney could 
be somewhat reduced, but the products of combustion, which 
will be considerable when the station reaches.its ultimate size, 


52 CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. (Jan. 27 


have to be removed in such a way that they will not be obnoxious 
to the neighborhood. The chimneys would have to be built 
quite high for this purpose, even if some form of mechanical 
draft had been installed. 

Replying to Mr. Mailloux, the speaker would state that an 
effort was made to install turbine-driven auxiliaries, but at 
the time the auxiliaries were purchased, no manufacturer cared 
to build slow-speed turbines for this purpose. 

P. JUNKERSFELD (by letter): Mr. Stott says that the 
steam turbine has reduced somewhat the fixed charges of the 
station. In central stations of recent design, such as the one 
described by the author, the steam turbine has also reduced 
the so-called operating costs, particularly the labor item. 

The writer now desires to call attention to the necessity of 
improving the quality as well as reducing the cost of the central- 
station product. The seriousness of the widespread and simul- 
taneous effect of interruption in power and lighting, or trans- 
portation service, and the possible consequence can not usually 
be measured by any monetary standards. The quality of 
-service or rather the degree of reliability which it is possible 
to furnish is necessarily circumscribed by commercial limits. 
In other words it is possible to provide for a greater degree of 
reliability than the income from the business will warrant. 

Continuous service is dependent upon the efficiency of oper- 
ating men as well as on the reliability of apparatus. Simplifica- 
tion of apparatus is always desirable, but a certain additional 
simplification in arrangement of apparatus and in methods of 
operation, even at extra expense, is often warranted in order 
to minimize the chances of error in operating and to localize 
. trouble if it should start from any cause whatsoever. 

The author’s paper describes a type of station in which much 
attention has been given to these considerations. The selection 
and arrangement of proper apparatus for the particular con- 
ditions is of prime importance; it fixes largely the ultimate re- 
sults to be obtained. However, a little extra care and thor- 
oughness in construction which are not items of great expense, 
are often considerable factors in the results obtained after the 
station is in regular service. In addition to good workman- 
ship on all apparatus, careful and conscientious detail work, and 
rigid inspection of all piping will do much to minimize future 
troubles and repairs. There is no part of the station which is 
more vulnerable than the high-pressure connections and auxil- 
iary apparatus between the generators and the cable in the 
street. Such items as insulation and isolation of conductors 
in high-pressure apparatus and connections, the proper installa- 
tion of cable terminals, and the provision for unfailing control 
of oil-switches—all these are worthy of much more ‘attention 
than is ordinarily given. : 

Proper consideration of these and many other important de- 
tails of construction, coupled with good design of the greatest 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 53 


simplicity which the commercial limits will allow are essentials 
in providing reliable service. The development of men and 
methods of operation needs unceasing attention to minimize 
the disputed ground between preventable and unpreventable 
troubles, troubles which will persist as long as we are dependent 
on the brain and hand of men to direct the design and opera- 
tion of the station. 

The central-station engineer in his efforts for economic re- 
sults must strike balances between fixed charges and operating 
costs; for reliability of service he must strike balances between 
error of men and failure of apparatus. 


+ ein 


. 
= 
« 

. 

F 4 
fhe) 
oy" 

a 
» 
AT? 
$y nd 
' 
4 
ae © 
= 
a 
7 
+ 
f ~— 

: 

. 

ut 
. 

= 
~ < 
Py ai 
se ae 


A paper presented at a Mecting of the Chicago Branch 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Feb. 28, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. 1. E. E. 


CEMENT IN CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 


BY EUGENE B. CLARK. 

The Illinois Steel Company has just completed and placed 
in operation at its plant in South Chicago, a new power-house 
for the supply of power to its various mills at South Chicago, 
and at Buffington, 10 miles distant. This station contains, at 
the present time, two units, each consisting of a 2000-kw., 
25-cycle, 2200-volt, three-phase generator, direct driven by a 
24-in. by 60-in. by 48-in. horizontal-vertical, cross-compound 
engine. The addition of two more generating units, of a ca- 
pacity of 4000 kw. each, is contemplated in the near future. 
This alternating-current station operates in conjunction with a 
direct-current station which has been in operation for some 
time. The two power-houses are connected by means of syn- 
chronous converters. Both stations take steam from blast- 
furnace boiler-houses, in which the fuel is excess blast-furnace 
gas. The supply of this excess gas is quite variable at times, 
and it is desirable under such conditions to be able to shift 
the load from one station to the other, as desired. Such an ar- 
rangement gives the opportunity of utilizing completely all 
excess blast-furnace gas at either point. The principal points 
of interest with which we are concerned to-night, deal. entirely 
with the use of cement in the building of this and other power- 
houses. 

The foundations for the machinery and the building rest 
upon piles and are made of slag concrete, consisting of one 
part cement, three parts torpedo sand, and seven parts crushed 
slag. The cement used for those parts of the foundations 
which are not exposed was of the brand known as ‘“‘ Puzzolan; a 
for those parts which are exposed, Universal Portland cement 

55 


56 CLARK; CEMENT IN [Feb. 28 


was used. The foundations were started in the coldest weather 
of last winter, and the concrete, which had to be mixed with 
warm water and warm sand, to keep from freezing in the mixer, 
did freeze immediately after being tamped into place. Filling 
was used to. follow up the foundations as rapidly as they were 
put in place, so that the concrete was not permitted alternately 
to freeze and thaw as the warmer weather came on. The result 
was to obtain a thoroughly solid foundation, the concrete set- 
ting up firmly as it gradually thawed during the spring months. 
About the middle of summer the foundation was tested by 
drilling a hole several feet deep into that part which had orig- 
inally been frozen. It was found that it had set up to make 
an extremely solid and strong concrete. 

A considerable amount of time and attention was devoted 
to determining the most desirable method of floor construction. 
The power-house apparatus is controlled by electrically-oper- 
ated switching devices. The electrically-operated switches, to- 
gether with the bus-bars, control-pedestals, instrument-posts 
and feeder-panels, required for their accommodation the con- 
struction of galleries at one end of the engine-room. Two of 
these galleries were built, and the engine-room floor was used as 
another gallery. On the engine-room floor were located the 
generator-switches; on the first gallery were located the bus- 
bars, the instrument-posts, generator-control pedestals, feeder- 
panels, etc.; on the third gallery were located the feeder-switches 
and the. lightning-arresters. A transmission line, carrying a 
pressure of 20 000 volts, was necessary to transmit the required 
amount of power to Buffington, located 10 miles south of South 
Chicago. At least 4500 kw. of transformers had to be located 
in:the power-house. It was decided best to place these on the 
engine-room floor, under the first gallery, constructing an 
isolated transformer-room for that purpose. The transformer- 
room was isolated from the rest of the apparatus on the engine- 
room floor, by means of a wall about three inches thick and 
17 feet high, built of reinforced concrete, in accordance with 
the method to be described later. This wall proved, after 
erection, to: be thoroughly solid and substantial; as rigid, in 
fact, ‘as ‘would have been a masonry wall 12-in. or 14-in, 
thick. It then became necessary to take wires carrying a 
pressure of 20.000 volts through the operator’s position on the © 
first'gallery. In order to harmonize these various requirements, 
it:'soon became evident that much additional space would be 


1905.] CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 57 


required if it should prove necessary to have the usual steel. 
beams in the gallery floors, inasmuch as the beams would be 
in the way of the many wires which it would be necessary to 
take through these floors. These conditions pointed to, the 
advisability of using a floor construction of concrete slabs or 
of fire-proof tile. Careful consideration of the subject proved 
that, even with the comparatively long spans for such heavy 
loads, the concrete construction would be far preferable, both 
from the standpoint of cost and from the standpoint of fire- 
proofing. Experience at. the Baltimore fire had shown that 
properly constructed concrete floors had withstood the test of 
fire and water better than any other kind of floors. 

To make certain of the safety and conservatism of the pro- 
posed design, a section of the floor, as proposed, was built and 
tested prior to the final decision as to the construction of the 
floor for the building and galleries. After being allowed to 
set 21 days, this section of floor was tested by piling pig iron 
upon it, to the extent of 500 Ib. per square foot. The test slab. 
was 7-in. thick and 15-ft. span, made of concrete, consisting of 
one part Universal cement, two parts Torpedo sand, and four 
parts 0.5 to one inch crushed limestone, reinforced with 0.5-in. 
steel rods, spaced five in. apart and laid on top of No. 10 gauge 
expanded metal placed one inch from the bottom of the slab. 
Upon test, the slab collapsed under a load of 550 Ib. per square 
foot. An even distribution of the load over the surface was. 
obtained by covering the top of the slab with about four inches 
of sand, upon which was piled the pig iron. Deflections were 
measured as the load increased. The deflection at the center 
had risen to about 1.5 inches by the time the slab failed. It 
was determined’ that the expanded metal was comparatively 
valueless for purposes of reinforcement when used in conjunction 
with the 0.5 in. round rods, as all the tension was taken by 
the rods. These rods were bent at the ends for a distance of 
about 10 or 12 iaches through an angle of 180°, thereby insuring 
that they would not pull out at these points. It was found 
necessary to bend the rod through 180°, and not through 90°; 
for those which were bent only 90° showed a very decided ten- 
dency to crack the concrete at the corners and then to pull 
out. Round rods were used in preference to twisted or notched, 
or any other form of rods designed to prevent slipping or pulling 
out of the concrete, and for two reasons: first, the round rods 
are far cheaper; secondly, it was decided that nothing was gained 


58 CLARK: CEMENT IN [Feb. 28 
by preventing the rods from pulling out of the concrete, pro- 
vided they were properly fastened at each end. The mixture 
used in all the floor construction was one part Universal Portland 
cement, two parts Torpedo sand, and four parts crushed lime- 
stone, 0.5- to l-in. mesh. The shoring under all floors was 
permitted to remain 28 days before removal. In the engine- 
room floor, for the very long spans, some floor beams were 
used, but in all cases they were entirely covered with concrete, 
to give thorough fireproofing. 

Wherever generator-pits or fly-wheel pits were to be covered, | 
such covers were made of cement castings, reinforced with ex- 
panded metal, rather than of cast iron. These cover plates. 
were made to exact fit for each place as the work progressed, 
no drawings being necessary. The carpenter made a small 
mould of the correct size, in which the cement worker cast his 
floor plate and finished it exactly as the rest of the floor. The 
gallery floors were completed and the shoring removed before 
any work was done on the installation of the electrical control 
apparatus or the supports therefor. Each gallery was treated 
as independent of the one under it, so far as support was con- 
cerned, though, in building up the switch-cells, the bus-bar 
construction, and the barriers, the practical result was to give 
additional support to each floor from the one under it. The 
switch structure was also constructed in such a way as prac- 
tically to be a beam in itself. Round iron rods were cast into 
the lower part of the structure and allowed to extend through 
from the first switch in the row to the last. The result was to 
provide a construction of the switch-cells which, being in itself 
a beam, would distribute the load to those points where the 
load might best be taken. In addition to this fact, the barrier 
which rose from the switch-cell to the ceiling above, taken in 
conjunction with the lateral barriers—all of which were built 
monolithic with the wall rising from the switch structure— 
formed a column of great strength. It would probably not be 
poor engineering to depend, in a measure, upon the strength of 
this column to support the floor above it; but in the case which 
is being described this was not dene. Even though no attempt 
were made to utilize the switch structure as a column, still, the 
fact was taken into consideration that there would be a natural 
tendency, by reason of the presence of the switch structure, 
to transmit load from one floor to the one under it, and there- 
fore to impose a greater load upon the lower floor than would be 


1905.] CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 59 


accounted for by the weight actually upon that floor. This 
effect was compensated for by giving the lowest floor additional 
supporting columns, which were placed between the basement 
and the engine-room floor. These columns were covered with 
expanded metal and a cement plaster to insure against failure, 
in case a fire should occur, due to the storing of inflammable 
materials. It had not been contemplated that such materials 
should be stored in the basement, but it was thought wise to 
provide against this contingency. 

The roof of the engine-house was constructed of concrete 
laid in place as is usual for sidewalks. In each bay a removable 
wooden frame was secured to the structural roof cords in such 
a way as to permit of ready removal by. knocking out wedges 
after the roof was in place. A thin layer of cement mortar, 
consisting of cement and sand, was placed on the top of this 
woodwork support. The function of this thin layer was to 
give a smooth coat for the finished interior of the roof. The 
expanded metal reinforcement was laid immediately on top of 
this preliminary coat, and was covered with about two inches 
of concrete of about the same mixture as was used for the floors. 
On top of this was placed a thin layer of rich mixture, which 
was given a sidewalk finish on the side exposed to the weather. 
After 28 days, the wooden supports were removed from the 
inside, by knocking out wedges, and were lowered to the engine 
room floor. The roof, made in this way, developed cracks 
after drying out. These cracks were filled by pouring into them 
a thin grout consisting of cement end sand. The result was 
to stop all leaks and insure a roof which -was cheap and 
thoroughly fireproof. It has the disadvantage of being heavy 
and requires rather heavier roof-trusses than does a tile or 
slate roof; it is very strong and is not damaged by men 
walking upon it, or by falling pieces of stone or other mate- 
rials. The latter consideration is an important one in the 
case described, because the station is located near blast 
furnaces, which, unfortunately, have the habit of throwing 
stone and ore out of the top at times. The advantage of using 
expanded metal on such a place as a roof, rested entirely in 
the economy of labor in handling the material. The writer 
believes the disposition of material in expanded metal to be 
uneconomical and, at times, disadvantageous. All of that 
material which lies transversely to the strain is wasted, and 
furthermore it is the speaker’s belief that there is a tendency 


60 CLARK: CEMENT IN [Feb. 28 


on the part of expanded metal, when subjected to strain, to 
elongate the diamond-shaped meshes and to shear off the con- 
crete between the meshes. The tendency to shear the concrete 
would be trifling and unimportant if, in addition to this, there 
were not a tendency to break the concrete which is always placed 
below the expanded metal for fireproofing purposes. This 
lower section of concrete is generally about one inch thick; 
being in tension, it is apt to crack when the floor is heavily 
loaded. After the lower section of concrete cracks, there is a 
tendency for the expanded metal to shift in position, and 
therefore become ineffective. This belief of the writer’s arises 
from observations of heavy beams reinforced with concrete 
and tested to the breaking point. He does not mean to convey 
the impression that for light beams, loaded comparatively 
lightly, expanded metal is not a desirable reinforcing material. 

The electrically operated oil-switches which are usually 
mounted in a brickwork cell structure, were mounted in a cell 
structure built up of concrete. A collapsable wooden mould was 
made, set up in the proper position for the switch, and filled 
with concrete from the top. This mould was built similarly to 
a hinged flask standing on end, and was made large enough 
to allow of casting two switches at one setting. The mould 
was properly lined up, leveled, and braced to prevent moving 
while tamping the concrete. The bolts for holding the switches 
in place were set in the concrete of the cell structure by means of 
a template on top of the mould, just as foundation posts for 
engines are set. The concrete mixture was one part Universal 
cement, two parts Torpedo sand, and. three parts screened 
limestone, which would go through a #?-in. mesh. After the 
mould was constructed, the only skilled labor required was 
that of the carpenter, who lined up the mould each time it was. 
moved into a new position. After the concrete had set for 
approximately 48 hours, the mould was stripped and again set 
up for the next two switches. After all the switches of a row 
had been cast, and the moulds removed, the cement worker 
went over them to point up any voids which might have occurred 
- in the corners, and to give the whole structure a finished appear- 
ance. The result was a pleasing one. It was decided that 
the mould—which in this case was built of dressed lumber, in 
the attempt to give a smooth and. finished appearance to the 
concrete work—might better have been of rough lumber, in 
which case it could have been built. for about $50. In case 


1905.] | CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 61 


a large number of switches were to be built, however, the speaker 
would recommend the construction of a metal mould, which 
perhaps would cost $100. A mould constructed of metal 
would be free from liability to warp, which always exists in the 
case of a wooden mould. The wires leading from the oil-switches 
were separated from each other by means of barriers built up 
of thin slabs of concrete. The method of construction of these 
barriers was simple and effective. Pipes, or 0.5-in. rods, were 
set up and tied together with wire in the form of the proposed 
compartment construction. A light metal lath, such as is used 
for plaster partitions in building construction, was then wired 
to the light framework. A cement mortar was then applied, 
in the same way as the plaster. The cement worker became so 
expert in doing this class of work that he could build these 
compartments more rapidly than a draughtsman could make 
the drawings for them. The bus-bar structure was built up 
_in the same way as was the cell structure for the oil-switches. 
Where lines left the building, or where they were run in any 
horizontal position, barriers were suspended from the ceiling 
by allowing a piece of metal lath to project down at the time 
the floors were put in. The barrier was plastered to this piece 
of lath in the same way as just described. Where conductor 
wires were taken through the floor, which, of course, was fre- 
quently necessary, the insulators were set into the concrete as 
the floor construction progressed; therefore, when the floor and 
switch construction was completed the wiremen had the insu- 
Jators through which the wires were to be run properly located. 
One great advantage of this form of construction rests in the 
economy of space which it makes possible. Any brick wall 
must necessarily be four inches thick, whereas a concrete wall 
may be put up only two inches thick, provided it is reinforced. 
In case brick construction is employed, where thin partitions 
are desired, they must be built of soapstone or marble. The 
concrete is just as effective in most cases, and is much cheaper. 

In constructing the switch-cells and bus-bar structures, an 
attempt was made to obtain a perfectly smooth finish by dress- 
ing the mould smooth and coating it with shellac, as is customary 
for patterns. This was found to be a mistake, as the bubbles 
of excess water contained in the wet mixture tended to gather 
on the smooth surface and make a rough finish to the work. 
It was found preferable, to leave the mould rough and to finish 


the work with a final float-coat. 


62 CLARK:.CEMENT IN [Feb. 28 


The generator leads were brought from the machines in 
three-inch bituminized fibre conduits, laid in the cement floor 
of the basement. Under the generator switches, they were 
brought from the basement floor to the engine room floor in a 
solid concrete wall. The lead sheathing was removed from the 
cables, and additional coating consisting of paper and shellac 
was provided. After allowing a few days for this to dry, the 
cables were built into a wall of concrete. Inasmuch as the wall 
was only a few inches thick, little difficulty would be encoun- 
tered in cutting the cables out, if necessary ; in fact, three cables 
were cut out, under the mistaken impression that they were 
improperly connected. Little difficulty and slight expense 
were involved in the operation; and the cables were found to 
be in perfect condition. In the basement, no important wire 
or cable was permitted to be exposed. The result is that if a 
fire should start in any material which might be stored there 
it could not affect the connections to the generators or instru- 
ments, nor could it cause the collapse of the structure, due to 
the failure of exposed steel columns. The instrument leads 
and the control wires for the switches were buried in cement. 
It was originally intended to use for this purpose lead-covered 
cable run in an iron-armored conduit, the latter being imbedded 
in the floors. It was decided later, however, to do without the 
iron-armored conduit, and tolay the lead-covered cables directly in 
the cement floor. For this purpose, a top‘coat of 2.5 in. of cement 
on the floor was allowed, in addition to the original cement 
floor which was designed to support the full loads. Of this top 
dressing, two inches consisted of a mixture of cement, sand, and 
sawdust, in the proportions of one of cement, one of sand, 
and two of sawdust. The method of installation consisted of 
laying the conductor cables on the top of the original supporting 
floor. When all the instrument wiring was completed and 
tested, the cables were covered and imbedded in this mixture 
of sawdust-cement, and on top of all was laid a 0.5-in. finishing 
coat for the floor. The mixture of sawdust-cement is soft 
enough to permit of chopping a cable out at any time without 
damage to the cable, or to surrounding cables. The repair of 
the floor is very simple, and the floor is perfectly solid and to 
all intents and purposes the same as if constructed wholly of 
concrete. The necessity for chopping out cables is very remote, 
because, once properly installed, there is no chance for move- 
ment or damaging of the cables. The item of labor saved by 


1905.] CENTRAL STATION DESIGN. 63 


making it unnecessary to draw into the conduit the very great 
number of cables which are required for the installation of 
electrically-controlled switching apparatus is very considerable. 
_ The 20000 volt wires which were led from the transformer 
room on the first floor to the lightning-arresters and building 
outlets on the top gallery were provided with thorough pro- 
tection where they passed through the operator’s gallery. For 
each wire a chimney was built of 10-in. bituminized fibre con- 
duit. The three chimneys carrying the three wires of a circuit 
were placed close together and were surrounded with a con- 
struction of expanded metal lath, covered with cement plaster. 
The result was, to outward appearance, a rectangular column. 
In effect, there was a thoroughly-insulated duct provided for 
the conveyance of each high-pressure wire, which entirely pre- 
vented an operator coming into contact with these wires. 

After the installation of all apparatus and connections thereto, 
the cement work was given a final finishing wash of whiting, 
glue, and a slight amount of dark coloring matter, producing a 
uniform natural cement color over the whole job. It is im- 
possible to produce this without some such wash, since all 
cement work will discolor more or less as it cries out. 

The final result is most pleasing from both engineering 
and artistic standpoints. Not much effort was taken at the 
start to lay out the work with a view to insuring good archi- 
tectural lines, but even though this was not looked to as ‘it 
might have been, it was possible, by adding a touch here and 
there, to get some very satisfactory effects from the standpoint 
of appearance. Of recent years, most large power-houses are 
designed with a view to obtaining cood architectural lines on 
the exterior, whereas the interior is generally designed from 
an engineering standpoint only. The possibilities of cement 
construction in insuring artistic and decorative interior effects, 
with very slight increased cost, and without sacrificing engineer- 
ing requirements, have so far received too little consideration. 


‘i ‘ , * 
‘ Pet ‘ seerigts fF ie) RANTES, 


start eee 
: ws 


Ag - >. ‘ (ans 
ea eX te : ay: a4 
"ph esa satiate: 


A paper presented at the 194th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, Feb. 24, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. ByA.I.E. E. 


TWO-MOTOR VERSUS FOUR-MOTOR EQUIPMENTS 


BY N. MC D. CRAWFORD. 


It is manifestly impossible to consider judiciously the rela- 
tive commercial efficiency of two-motor versus four-motor 
equipments, or to reach any absolute conclusion unless certain 
conditions under which the equipments are to be operated 
have first been determined. For the purpose of this paper a 
line was selected having light grades and reasonably small 
line losses, a‘line passing through the business center of a city 
and reaching the residential section, thus at all hours of the 
day calling for a fair average number of stops and therefore 
reasonably rapid acceleration, in order to mak the time schedule. 

Four types of equipment were selected for this service, as 
follows: car 169, having a 20-ft. body, single trucks, two 25-h.p. 
motors, and a gear-ratio of 1 to 4.87; car 138, having a 26-ft. 
body, two trucks, two 35-h.p. motors, and a gear-ratio of 1 to 
2.82; car 101, having the same length of body and number 
of trucks as car 138, but having four 35-h.p. motors and a 
gear-ratio of 1 to 2.82; car 480, having a 29-ft. body, two 
trucks, four 40-h.p. motors, and a gear-ratio of 1 to 3.67. 

The service required of these four equipments was exactly 
the same, namely, 136.5 miles per day at an average schedule 
speed of 8.45 miles per hour. The runs were made on succeeding 
days and during the same relative hours. Each car was equipped 
with a wattmeter, an ammeter, and a voltmeter; the wattmeter 
readings at the end of each half trip were recorded, and. at the 
end of the run checked by the ammeter and voltmeter readings. 
The wattmeter was also carefully calibrated with a standard 
meter, using a water rheostat as aload. The peaks were noted 
at times of acceleration and on grades, These tests have 
been tabulated as follows: ee 

65 a 


66 


Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 


CRAWFORD: MOTOR EQUIPMENTS. 


1, the average watt-hours per ton-mi 
2, kilowatts at peaks during day’s run. 


3, passengers and kilowatt-hours per half trip. 


4, passengers and kilowatt-hours per half trip. 
5, passengers and kilowatt-hours per half trip. 
6, passengers and kilowatt-hours per half trip. 


Table 1 has been deduced from the sheets given. 


TABLE L 
Car | Capacity |Horse power| Gear- | Total | Total Cost per 
No. seats motors ratio | tons |. cost Seat Ton 
169 26 two 25 1:4.87 | 9.075/$2710 | $104.23 | $298.62 
138 34 two 35 1:2.82 |12.425) 3275 96.38 263.59 
101 34 four 35 1.2.82 14.675} 4360 128.23 297.10 
480 42 four 40 1:3.67 |20.680] 5040 120.00 243.71 


[Feb. 24 


Commercial 


efficiency 


The commercial efficiency, E , was obtained as follows: A+ B+ 


C+D 


Bit CU oe eae ee ee Be) 
wie 


WATT-HOURS PER TON PER HALF TRIP 


eae La -tk Se eeee 


= E, and 


EB 


commercial efficiency. 


Fic. 1, 


TH 
a 
CI 
aan 
cH 
CCN 
AN LL A 
COZNZNSCCCC NE ~ hehe 
I NZNO Speer eren Tt 
AZINZ TACIT ZINE Trees rnt, PERT T 
INE CETATAPORALLVA TAT TN=favertos gues 
HINES? PEN PER TON _| 
ALLY s 
| C1 ei OR SP LTO TRE em ae ee 
FH FEEEEEEEEEE EEE EEE EEE 
rr] Beales A a PS 
[0 N DO on Oe OS 
1) 7.28 8.43 9.58 11.1908.28 1.43 2.68 4.13 5.28 6.43 7,58 9.13 10,28 
Me . TIM 


The same formula, substituting B for H, will give the greatest 
commercial efficiency. The letters used in the above formula 
represent the following: 

A Cost of current per watt-hour at station switchboard. 


’ B’ Value of seated load. 
‘~’C Platform labor per mile run. 
_ D ‘Interest and depreciation per mile run, figured at eight 
“ber cent. . . 
H Value of actual passengers carried per mile. 


1905.] CRAWFORD: MOTOR EQUIPMENTS. 67 


In obtaining the commercial efficiency, line losses and repairs 
of equipments and track have purposely been omitted, because 
it is almost impossible to determine what these values should 
be; the’ value of the standing load has been omitted for the 
same reason. 

Applying the above formula and substituting values obtained 
during the test, the results are as follows: 


Car No. 169. 
0.0006787 + 1.30+0.04754.0.0043 = 1.3525 
0.23 
(ae 0.1698% 
0.0006787 + 1.30+0.0475+0.0043 = 1.3525 
1.30 
1.3525 ~ 0-967% 
Car No. 138. 
0.001056+ 1.70+0.0475+0.0056 = 1.7542 
0.23 
0.001056+1.70+0.0475+0.0056 = 1.7542 
1.70 
17642.) 0.96% 
Car No. 101. 
0.0011744+1.70+0.0475+ 0.0070 = 1.7557 
0.22 
te 0.1253% 
- 0.001174+1.70+0.0475+0.0070 = 1.7557 
1.70 
17557. > O27 '70 
Car No. 480. 
0.000847 + 2.10+0.0475+ 0.0087 = 2.1570 
0.23 
= 0.1065 
2.1570 %o 
0.000847 + 2.10+0.0475+0.0087 = 2.1570 
2.10 72. 0.97% 


2.1570 


68 CRAWFORD: MOTOR EQUIPMENTS. (Feb, 24 


An examination of Table 1, readily shows that car 169 is 
the most efficient for the service selected. This apparent effi- 
ciency must, however, be modified when the number of passen- 
gers carried, as shown in Fig. 3, is considered, because it will 


TRIPS. ; 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 il 12 13 
100 
90 
oa Be cI 
CAR 480 
Sian on ae a 12 TRIPS. 
60 (ea 
ape | 
pe) 
w AC 
30 tate Prada Ss os Seal : 
ma! i” DGUBLE-TRUCK |CLOSED CAR.| FOUR 40 H.-P. MOTORS. aehR-paT}O 433.67 
WEIGHT WITHOUT LOAD 20/68 TONS. | 83-1n) WHEELS 
10 4 — — I | = } 
0 
[ ERTL 
100 | Co L 
80 


=I CAR 101 
ae 13 TRIPS. 


90 + io = it | 
-|- : 
| 


50 —— tl cl r | 

40 —} i — + 

30 i opel ealine OK CLOSED CAR. | FOUR|40 H.P. MOTORS.) GEAR-RATIO 1;2.82 
eee | —* 

sab oat witHour LOAD, 14.\675) TONS, "| 30-1IN. WHEELS 


0 Raha Be in 


KILOWATT- HOURS 
o 


KILO ATT-AT PEAKS DURING DAYS RUN. 

60 hat 

os Pa al Se 

6 | CAR 189 
13 TRIPS 

30 

20 — i 

DOUBLE-TRUCK CLOSED CAR. | TWO 25 H.P) MOTORS.) GEAR-RATIO)1:4.87 

10 hee ations Ptaatin a + 

WEIGHT WITHOUT LOAD|9.075 TONS. 30-|N, WHEELS 

90 

80 + CAR138 

10 | 12-TRIPS' 

60 

S DOUBLE taal CLOSED bha 35 MOTORS.| GEAR 

- .| Two .P. MOTORS. AR-RATIO 1:2. 8: 

40 ts {- + + bs eks 

pa WEIGHT WITHOUT LOAD 2.425 TONS. 30-IN, WHEEL! 

20 

10 

0 

6.13 7.28 843 9,58 11,13 1228 1,43 2,58 4,18 5.28 643 7,68 9,13 10,28 

AWM. P.M, TIME, 

Fic. 2. 


be seen that many times during the day’s run the number of 
passengers was greater than 26, the excess constituting a stand- 
ing load. ee 

Car 138, although showing a lower commercial efficiency, 


1905.) CRAWFORD: 


MOTOR EQUIPMENTS. 


69 


probably on account of its greater weight, yet accommodates 
the passengers much better throughout the entire day. - 
Car 480 was' the’ least efficient of those tried) although. there 


i TRIPS. 


é |: 
3 i EL a at 
2 TL [CAR NO Tr 
w eo OTR a 
o: ey ONE TRIP=10,5 MILES il 
Zi < TOTAL|MILES RUN 136.5 | 
o: 35 fe en 
@ SF Piers 
aig miss eal 
50 Bt 1 { ~ AVERAGE:KILOWATT-HOURS—|— 
: ae 1 fT PER CAR MILE-0s69—|— 2 
40 45 : f i 
30 3t - i AVERAGE STOPS PER MILE 4/6 | 
ai iN 7. _ [MAXIMUM STOPS RER MILE 712 | _ 
6 oh fama ; j OTAL PASSENGERS 633 | |_ 
I 4 i (|, |RASSENGERS| PER CAR MILE 4.6 
ry st! Lal el Re: itt pe . 4 Z oe tt 
Phe ; Pot u yh ie ig 
: 6.13 "7,28 8.43 ails ae is Re 4.18 5,28 6.43 7.58 MeFi ; is 
AM. P.M. TIME. \ 
Fic 3. 


was only a short time when all the passengers could not be 
seated. This car was provided with 33-in. wheels and could 
have made the time schedule easily with a lower gear-ratio. 


Sat ee EE 


KILOWATT-HOURS 


= 


Bipieck oe eto 


PASSENGERS, eA cutr ears 
ain 


MAXIMUM STOPS PER MILE = 8.1 | 


s 
ao pe ot 
tt 


we 
i) 
7 


aN \_ “TOTAL PASSENGERS, 585 | 


8 
cr.) 


IEEEW EY TE (PABSENGERS|PER CAR MILE 4.6 
; 


| 


1 


_ 
is; 


zs 


0 
Dare 7.28 843 9.08 11. Sa ncaa 208 


a) 


AM 


cane 
es pee 43 7.58 9.13 10.28, 


Fie 4. 


qhaeratares: were Pieken at the end: of ‘each day's 


these were not excessive except possibly in the case of car 138, 


due no doubt to the weigh 


t of the equipment and the greater 


70 


& PASSENGERS, 


& © Passencers 


CRAWFORD: MOTOR EQUIPMENTS [Feb 24 


& HOURS. 


P.M. 


eg 
|_| 
2 | 
u cI 
10 q | 
9 AC ‘ 
BNA 
Hae 
; Beak 
: FEE 
PEE 
5 
et fe HH | 
4 acs BE x & ane 
SFEEEEEEEH rH 
VN VAN AVE 
2 “Ana=GEnii MAXI Ti ILE 7 
H EAN ETT TN Na an |_[TOTAL PASSENGERS 559 |_| 
APECCEEBEL EEE EREEEEE EEE PY Peete ri 
1 
a H H EEE RH tive we BEER HEH 
13 7.28 8,43 9,68 11.13 12.28 1.43 2,68 £.13 5,28 6,43 7,58 9,13 10,28 
M. 


= §S KILOWATT-HOURS 
BEERS 
RR aRRe 


TIME. 


Fic. 5. 


e-natioltis.e7]| T1111 tt 
fad, wreels| TTT tL 
CET eke et 0 


CCCRECCCCCe | 


a 
oo oc + Ww 


maui 7 
PET TTT TP eT ye ee TT leqegencens re 


Fic. 6. 


1905.] CRAWFORD: MOTOR EQUIPMENTS. 71 


number of stops to the mile as shown on Fig. 4. (See appendix 
for record of temperatures.) 

The tabulated records point to the superiority of the light 
two-motor, single-truck equipments for service on the line and 
under the conditions selected. With longer trips, heavier 
grades, greater speed in miles per hour, and greater density of 
population, requiring more rapid acceleration, there is no doubt 
but that a car of the 480 type would show the greatest efficiency. 

The operating manager is loaking not only for an equipment 
that will fulfil all the requirements of any particular service 
with the least cost for repairs, and the minimum demand on 
the power station, but also for one that will combine these ad- 


PLATFORM LABOR COST PE 
BASED ON PAYMENT OF ONE CENT 
FOR 3 MIN. RUN. 


t 
ao ¢ 
fe etl 
| 

xia 
sae 
oe 


atte 


fa 
as 
roa a 
“Ey 
rH 
ele 
eat 


| 
|_| 


2 
OMe Cae mG ee Oma 7 a8) 91011 12" 18) 1149 15 els 
SCHEDULE SPEED MILES PER HOUR 


Fic. 7. 


vantages at the greatest speed with safety to the public, and 
the distance to be travelled per trip will allow. If the distance 
is, say, 6 miles per half trip, or 12 miles per round trip, re- 
quiring four cars for 15-min. service at 12 miles per hour, 
and three cars for the same headway at 16 miles per hour, the 
platform labor per mile in the first instance will be 0.0335 x4 = 
0.1340, and in the second instance 0.025*3 = 0.075, a 
saving in labor of 0.059 per mile, and 0.0085 per car mile. This 
great saving in cost of operation appeals to the operator, but 
not so greatly if the operating costs are increased by excessive 
demand on power-station equipment and by added interest 
charges due to increased line copper and rail bonds. In select- 


€ 


72 CRAWFORD: MOTOR EQUIPMENTS 


[Feb. 24 


ing motors and cars for a given run, it will be found necessary 


to consider the following: 


Density of population, as governing the size and seating ca- 
pacity of the car body; the number of stops per mile, and con- 


MILLIONS’ ~5 


‘OTAL MILES 
OF TRACK ~~ 


IN OPERATION, 


t—t 


= aol! 
i=) 


es os i 
|_TOT, L MIL 8.9 OF TRAGK: | oe 


AVERAGE SCHEDULE SPEED MILES PER HOUR AND PASSENGES PER CAR MILE. 
~ * op KILOWATT“ HOURS PER CAR MILE : ze 


Bas. cae 
HS 
ety tei 


oy 
f- 


eta oe eding 
——-EEE | 
merit HH 
Brraane 


Saace ns Nee PE 


nave 
Fe val 


1868 1900 


| 
to 
Ae 
2 
| \s 
He 
| | te 
Dp 
= 
HH it 
Halt 
la 
| 
LL | 
iY 


1901 1902 1908 1904 
Fic. 8. 


sequently the acceleration; the frequency of service; and the 


speed in miles per hour, 


The number of trucks and motors, as determining ite size and 
weight of cars selected; the tractive effort; and the acceleration 
The speed in miles per hour, as determining the number of 


* 


73 


MOTOR EQUIPMENTS. 


CRAWFORD 


1905.] 


ee 


09 09 04 ¥L os 18 ¥8 Terceceecee eres cess --Dazelado sieo Tenses J9qQuinN, 
8e9°9¢ eeg°L¢ crO'€9 F19°S9 V9 a9) 97°99 . e24¢° 29 ee ae oe AS te ig) aa eae cae PIL 
SIL'T SLI en'T 18°l 00°Z ara ez tote ee cnet ee seseeesessgnur zea sad smoy-372Mo[y 

O10 $23 ¢ | 789 6F8 SG | 889 SFI 9 | css OcG 2 coe 922 8 | 26 968 8 | O8F FOG OT J preoquoyms ‘simoy-77e MOTT 
Looe: 16° or en's 18° 96° 00°F Livre eteteeseverees cess sss +gnmur geo god sreBuesseg 
629 FOE ZI | 8ZL EFO ST | SSS GIS FI | 890 FEF ST | SZE 006 SI | TLO GZ OT | 2468 OL ZT | rrereesscees-sigBuassed [e}OL 
_ GOL £90 8 | PIE B46 E | 79S Cha © | PIF Sct F.| SSP POT...) Sey 900 F WiS28 OCP 79 | os ee solgee aera 
gest. | eet | | ooct |  106r OBI £061 706T | . 
ea a ae ee 
wf. GTEVL 

24€0°0 ¢Z10°0 180°0 8¢0°0 L9L°0 0°0 ++" tgasearour “gua sod ‘poyeiedo sieo Iejnser Joquinyy 

ecT0°0 cr1o'oO 0°0 80F0°0 960°0 910°0 Sate: cet OSESTIUL S30), sad ‘ypery Jo soprur yejoL 
90°0 $80°0 SOI "0 c9F0'0 820°0 8e0'0 ~ [°° "°° ‘eseerour “yueo Jed ‘eqrur Jeo zed stnoy-3;eMo[r yy 
9F1'O TSOn0 me, ¥60°0 Z2S'0 TSs0°0 ¢10°0 “** *gsvoeiour "gue Jod ‘prvoqyozIMs 78 SINOY-FEMO[TY 
¢¢0'0 PcT0'O ¢ZE0"0 CLE sco°o0 600'0—  |'°° °° °° °° eseerout “gueo sod ‘aprur eo tad siosuesseg 
¢90°0 ¢g0°0 1£€0°0 ¢4L0°0 1c0°0 90°0 vecsessssssssss sgsearour “quad Jod ‘sroBuassed TeIOL 

T¢0°0 2¥c0°0 Go10'O— TLZT'0 c80°0 40°0 Spa tis Fe Asie se OSCOIOUE A UOO) sod ‘so[tul Ieo-Iasuesseg 

FOG gost. | —-Z06T TOSI 0061 Gost 

a a el CRE 5 TRS TE EER NEA E. 
ni a 1a 


74 CRAWFORD: MOTOR EQUIPMENTS. [Feb. 24 


cars in service; the. platform labor; the demand upon power- 
plant equipment; the increased interest charge for line and 
power plant. 

The gear-ratio, as determining the size of motors; the peecicees 
tion; the number of stops per mile; the heating af motors, and 
consequent repairs; and additional power-station and line re- 
quirements. 

Too much care cannot be exercised in determining the gear- 
ratio for given service; for there can be no doubt that in many 
cases lack of power-station equipment and excessive motor 
repairs can be traced to the use of wrong gear-ratio. In the 
first place,cars should be selected of ample capacity for the 
service requirements, and then motors should be selected with 
a rating only slightly greater than the service requires, and 
with a gear-ratio so designed that the schedule may be made 
without resorting to rapid acceleration on starting, and,as a 
consequence, running the motors on low-efficiency points in 
order to kill time. The additional tables contained in this 
report show the various conditions existing in Hartford, and 
may be of general interest. 


Average Schedule Speed Miles per Hour. 


DROS Sion atria ie bohemia heer ym oie Ake eee 7.6 
1LSOS Skee Oh ee etcetera tad Santee eed ree 7.44 
LODO ee Pe aia o nui ts ccm cmeadeniap an eee ere 8.5 
itt) Pes eee Pee er Le aR Sete cae ne 8.55 
PO Die eG a seats wlail on ebonata ty saleeatdi: caleieanh a elise eaeaen 
TOUS iL) igi cvs vie «seat pone Rl RIYA Rysed steerer 8.56 
1 eNOS Se oes as cir ice Caney aaa tatia aire eee 8.56 
APPENDIX. 


Car 138. Jan. 16. 
Motor 1: 


Car in at 10:35 p.m. 

Temperatures are in degrees centigrade. 

Temperature of air: 0. 

Temperature of armature iron: 68°. 

Temperature of field: 63°. | 

Note: Nearly 10 minutes were lost in getting thermometers 
in place on this motor. 


1905.] CRAWFORD: MOTOR EQUIPMENTS. 75 


Car 101. Jan. 17. 
Moror 1: 

Car in at 10:35 p.m. 
Temperatures are in degrees’ centigrade. 
Temperature of air: 1°. 
Temperature of armature iron: 70°. 
Temperature of field: 46°. 
Temperature of air.in car barn at 6 a.m.: 17°. 


Car 480. Jan. 18. 
Motor 4: 

Car in at 10:35 p.m. 

Temperatures in degrees centigrade. 
Temperature of air: 1.5°. 
Temperature of armature iron: 29°. 
Temperature of field: 25°. 
Temperature in barn at 6 a.m.: 23°. 


Car 169. Jan. 19. 
Motor 1: 

Car in at 10:35 p.m. 

Temperatures in degrees centigrade. 

Temperature of air: 5°. 

Temperature of armature iron: 41.5°. 

Temperature of field: 27.5°. 

Temperature in barn at 6 a.m.: 20°. 

In all the above temperature readings the temperature of 
the field coil was obtained by placing a thermometer on the 
top right-hand field coil at about the same point. The arma- 
ture temperature was obtained by placing the thermometer on 


the iron core. 


76 TWO- VS. FOUR-MOTOR EQUIPMENTS. [Feb. 24 


Discussion on “ Two-Moror vs. Four-MoTor EQUIPMENTS.” 


N. McD. Crawrorp (by letter): I desire to explain more 
fully the term “A’”’ in the efficiency formula given in my 
paper. The definition of the term, as given, may be misleading; 
its value is obtained by multiplying the average watt-hours 
per ton-mile by tons weight of car, and this result by the cost 
of power per watt-hour at the switchboard. 

I have named the efficiency obtained ‘‘ commercial efficiency.” 
It has been suggested that possibly ‘‘load factor’ or “ earn- 
ing efficiency’ would be better. But I have looked at the 
matter from the standpoint of the street railway manager 
rather than from that of the engineer. ; 

A. H. Armstronc: The contest between two- and four-motor 
equipments is of long standing, but of late years it seems to 
have settled itself rather definitely in a majority of cases in ~ 
favor of the four-motor equipment. As Mr. Crawford brought 
out in his paper, no general ruling will apply in all cases, and 
each traction problem will have to be solved according to the 
local conditions. Perhaps the fundamental reason for adopting 
the four-motor equipment is the need felt for increased traction, 
due partly to climatic conditions in the north, partly to the 
presence of excessive grades on many roads, and partly in 
some cases to an exacting schedule, calling for a more rapid 
rate of acceleration than can be obtained by a two-motor equip- 
ment. In the latter class of roads may be included surface 
lines in cities of considerable size. On elevated, subway, or 
other city roads on which the surface condition of the rails is 
particularly good, the adoption of two-motor equipment is 
permissible so far as the question of traction is concerned, 
and this practically constitutes the legitimate field of the two- 
motor equipment. . oa 

In suburban and interurban service somewhat different con- 
ditions apply, cars are usually run singly at infrequent inter- 
vals, in many cases over excessive grades; because of the 
infrequency of the headway snow and ice accumulate, thus 
calling for as large a tractive effort as can be obtained even 
with four motors. 

Referring to the paper, there are several assumptions made 
which perhaps can be looked at in a different way. In ar- 
riving at the efficiency of operation of the different cars cited, 
the author assumes that at the end of every mile an entirely 
new set of passengers is taken on board. Thus, if instead of 
a one-mile basis a two-mile basis had been taken, the 17% 
efficiency of operation noted in the case of car 169 would have 
been nearly doubled, without in any way changing the factors 
entering into the case. It would seem, therefore, that the 
method of the author is somewhat misleading, in that the 
commercial efficiencies obtained are arbitrary and do not neces- 
sarily represent the true prevailing conditions, 


1905.] ; DISCUSSION’ AT NEW YORK. AL 


Again, on pages 69 and 70, the energy consumption of the 
two-motor equipment is given as somewhat less per car than 
that of the four-motor equipment. This brings up another 
point which has been the subject of discussion at previous 
meetings of the InstituTE; that is, the relative amount of 
energy consumed by two-motor and four-motor equipments. 
If one car is equipped with two motors, and a similar car is 
equipped with four motors, both cars having the same aggregate 
horse power capacity, there is no reason why the energy ‘con- 
sumption in one case should be different from that in the other, 
provided the car weights, schedules, frequency of stops, and 
general conditions, are similar in each case. The method of 
comparing two- and four-motor equipments adopted by the 
author is somewhat unfair, as the operation of two 35-h.p. motors 
‘is compared with that of four 35-h.p. motors placed upon a 
similar type of car; obviously, in one case the motors are over- 
loaded; in the other they are underloaded. Of course the 
four-motor equipment will weigh more and the energy con- 
sumption will be increased on account of the increase in weight. 
It would have been fairer to compare the operation of two 
‘75-h.p. motors with the operation of four 35-h.p. motors. 
The watt-hours per ton-mile assumed for any given service is 
practically independent of, the subdivision of power on the 
car inasmuch as the railway motors of the same manufacturer 
are all designed along the same general lines and offer about 
the same efficiency curve as expressed in per cent. at full load. 

Perhaps one reason why results given by the author are 
more favorable to two motors than to four motors is that an 
insufficient numbér of tests has been taken. The average of 
a large number of tests is necessary in order to arrive at a cor- 
rect understanding of the operation of a car under any given 
conditions. There is no reason why, with the conditions in 
the two cases the same, the four-motor equipment should not 
show as small, if not a smaller, energy consumption per ton-mile 
than the two-motor equipment. 

S. T. Dopp: In attempting to express the commercial 
value of different cars, the author has included both their 
operating expense and seated-load value in one term which he 
has called ‘‘ commercial efficiency.” Apparently it would have 
been clearer to have separated this term into two different ex- 
pressions. I have tried to indicate my idea of this method of 
expression in a table, in which the items of “interest ”’ and 
“ platform labor ’’ are taken directly from the values given on 
page 67. The expense of car repairs should be included, and 
in the absence of more definite data, this is assumed as 1.5c. 
per car-mile. The author’s method, on page 67, of getting 
at the expression for cost of power per car-mile hardly seems 
correct, but it will not be far from the truth to assume the 
cost of power to be lc. per kilowatt-hour delivered at the car, 
and take the amount of power for the several cars from Figs. 


78 TWO- VS. FOUR-MOTOR EQUIPMENTS. [Feb. 24 


3-6. Adding the terms together gives an expression for opera- 
ting expense per car-mile which indicates that car No. 169 is 
the most economical in operation. Going one step further and 
dividing the expression by the seating capacity of each car, 
gives the operating expense per seat-mile, which indicates that 
car No. 480 is the most economical. 


Gar NO vaacuscr iad ota caters ame 169 183 101 480 

Platiotns labor seine et ene 0.0475 | 0.0478 | 0.0475 | 0.0475 
Interest and depreciation...... 0.0043 0.0056 0.0070 0.0087 
Oarrepairs.ans wt be geet See 0.0150 | 0.0150 | 0.0150 | 0.0150 
POWers tere ...-.-| 0.0069 | 0.0140 0.0180 0.0175 


Operating expenses per car-mile| 0.0737 | 0.0821 | 0.0875 | 0.0887 
Operating expenses per seat mile] 0.00368 | 0.00241 | 0.00257 | 0.00211 


Seat factor 0.23x5.25 [ 0.23x5.25 | 0.22x5.25 | 0.23x5.25 
1.30 1.70 1.70 2.10 


=71% | =68% | =57.5% 


This method of discussing the question shows that if the 
seating capacity of car 169 is sufficient to accommodate the 
travel, this car is the one to use; but that if it has not sufficient : 
_ capacity, then car 480 is the one most advisable to use because 
of its iow operating expense per seat-mile. 

Now if in addition to this information it is desired to intro- 
duce an expression indicating the amount of idle seating room 
in each type of car, this may be expressed by a separate ratio, 
which I have called ‘‘ seat factor,’’ and which is obtained by 
dividing the earnings per trip by the “value of the seated 
load.” This expression I have also given in the table. 

I have assumed 1.5c. per car-mile for repairs, but very little 
information on car repairs is available for determining the re- 
spective cost of repairs of large and small equipments. It 
appears from the table above that an increase in car repairs 
of 1.5c. per car-mile, on car 169 over car 480 for example, 
would make a four-motor equipment more economical from the 
standpoint of operation per car-mile, as well as from the stand- 
point for operation per motor-mile. 

A claim that is often made for the superiority of the four- 
motor equipment over the two-motor equipment of the same ag- 
gregate capacity is that the four-motor equipment having a 
greater radiating service will run at a cooler temperature than 
the two-motor equipment when working under the same load. 
But comparative tests which I have made upon stationary 
motors indicate that the average four-motor equipment should 
operate at the same temperature as a two-motor equipment 
of the same aggregate capacity. 

Turning to the appendix to the paper, it will be seen that 
the differences of temperature do not correspond to the dif- 
ference between two-motor and four-motor equipments, but 
that cars 138 and 101 are running at temperatures in the 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK.’  . 79 


neighborhood of 70°, while cars 480 and 169 are running at 
temperatures in the neighborhood of 30°. The cause of this 
difference in temperature is indicated in Figs. 2-6, inclusive, 
which show the large amount of power per car-mile used by 
the cars 138 and 101; while Fig. 2 in particular shows that 
the maximum peaks of power taken by car 138 (a 12-ton car 
with two-motor equipment) are equal to the maximum peaks 
taken by car 480 (a 20-ton car with four-motor equipment). 
Apparently the difference there indicated is due to the differ- 
ence in gearing between the two equipments; and the differ- 
ences in temperature shown in the appendix indicate very 
clearly that the two cars in question were geared for a speed 
too high for economical operation upon the schedule and for 
number of stops required. 

CALVERT TOWNLEY: Frequent comparisons between two- 
motor equipments and four-motor equipments have been made, 
and these comparisons are nearly always clouded by the intro- 
duction of other factors; for example, the question of the size 
of car to use, a question to be determined by the density of 
traffic and other local conditions. After the size of the car 
best suited for local conditions is selected, the number of 
motors to be used should be taken up as an entirely 
separate question. Similarly, within ordinary limits, any 
reasonable gear ratio can be applied to either form of equip- 
ment so that gearing should be eliminated from the compari- 
son. 

Mr. Crawford’s comparison of the watt-hours per ton-mile 
shows the most economical motors to be those having the 
greatest gear reduction, as will always be the case for city 
service with low schedule speed and frequent stops. The 
comparison of a two-motor equipment with a four-motor 
equipment of a greater aggregate horse power capacity 1s 
unsatisfactory; to get an absolutely fair comparison, the same 
horse power per ton of weight carried should apply to both 
styles of equipment. A four-motor equipment would be some- 
what heavier than a two-motor equipment having the same 
capacity and, therefore, if the horse power per ton were kept 
equal, the total weight of a car equipped with four motors 
will be greater than of, one of equal capacity equipped with 
two motors. Additional energy to propel this car would be 
required at least in proportion to the additional weight. In a 
similar manner, the first cost of the four-motor equipment will 
be somewhat greater. Further, there is an increased main- 
tenance to be charged against the four-motor equipment be- 
cause, as is well known, repair-shop facilities must be pro- 
vided for a given number of units, and a larger shop, witha 
greater number of men, is required to take care of twice the 
number of motors, with twice as many wearing parts, etc., to 


be maintained. 
Summarizing, therefore, there should be charged against the 


80 TWO- VS. FOUR-MOTOR EQUIPMENTS... [Feb. 24 


four-motor equipment an increased first cost, an increased 
consumption of energy due to increased weight, increased num- 
ber of bearings, pinions, gears, etc., and an increased cost of 
maintenance. Admitting this, what is the reason for the ten- 
dency toward the substitution of four-motor equipments that 
is noticeable in the practice of to-day? The answer always is: 
because four-motor equipments afford increased traction. 

The speaker excludes from the comparison, cars of such 
great weight or high speed that sufficient motor capacity in a 
two-motor equipment can not be provided, and limits the 
comparison to cases where either arrangement will be available. 
With the two-motor equipment, there will be from 55% to 60% 
of the total weight of the cars on the drivers. Under the best 
conditions of rail, straight track, etc., 20% adhesion is easily 
obtainable. With 60% on the drivers, there are 1200 pounds 
on the drivers for every ton weight of the car, and 20% of this 
is 240 pounds. Therefore, there is available with a two-motor 
equipment, under good conditions of track, 240 pounds tractive 
effort per ton. On a very heavy grade, say 8%, 160 pounds 
per ton will be required to lift the car up this grade, and if 20 
pounds be allowed to overcome friction (an allowance rather 
higher than usual), there will still remain 60 pounds per ton 
for acceleration, which will give a very satisfactory performance. 
This brief consideration of the problem shows that even for 
very heavy grades, with fairly good track conditions, there is 
ample adhesion wiih two-motor equipments to get the neces- 
sary acceleration. 

On the other hand, with snow and slush on the rail, there 
may be at times practically no adhesion from one truck, so 
that the 1200 pounds per ton is reduced to 600 pounds, and 
with an icy rail, instead of 20% of adhesion, only 10%, or 
even less, may be available. Ten per cent. of 600 pounds is 
60 pounds, and with a slight grade and heavy snow in front 
of the wheels this amount is at times insufficient to start the 
car. These conditions, therefore, demand a four-motor equip- 
ment. 

Engineers should not be carried away by fashion and adopt 
a four-motor equipment because others do so, or simply because 
such equipment afforded better traction, unless a careful study 
of the local conditions shows that such traction is necessary 
for the service. 


A paper presented at the 194th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, New 
York, February ®, 1905. 


Copyright, 1905. By A. 1E E., 


ON TRACK BONDING. 


BY C. W. RICKER. 


In the earliest days of electric-railway work with crude ap- 
paratus and light loads, track resistance was neglected. As 
the need became evident, auxiliary return wires were run and 
connected to the rails at frequent intervals, but of a size which 
now seems absurdly small. Joint bonds were first of small 
iron wire like railroad signal-system bonds, then pieces of cop- 
per wire with the ends riveted in holes in the rail-web, then 
pieces of trolley wire with channel-pins and so on, until specially- 
designed terminals were developed. 

About eight or ten years ago, the real usefulness of high 
track conductance began to be understood. The work of Mr, 
F. H. Farnham regarding the electrolysis of buried metals 
called attention strongly to the return-circuit losses in what 
was then a well-equipped electric railway system. Since 
then the progress has been along the general direction of utiliz- 
ing the track metal to best advantage for the return circuit; 
and except in the case of rather complex city networks and 
single lines fed from a power-plant unfavorably situated, this 
course has proved more economical than the installation. of 
copper return cables. In the special case of elevated railways 
using steel structures, the metal of the latter has been used 
to excellent advantage, though this presents some peculiar 
problems in bonding, and a serious risk of electrolysis of anchor 
bolts. 

With the prospective use of alternating currents and the 

six- to sevenfold increase of apparent track resistance, an in- 

creased use of copper may become necessary; but with all 

direct-current operation the engineering problem is to. use. the 
81 


82 RICKER: TRACK BONDING. [Feb. 24 


rails to best advantage, and this is largely a matter of the selec- 
tion and installation of track bonds. 

The first condition to determine the character of the bonding 
is the rail joint, which in turn is determined by the roadbed. 
Track joints are of two general types, rigid and flexible. The 
first is applicable only to track laid on continuous rock or con- 
crete foundation, with the rails buried in hard pavement, and 
includes electrically-welded, cast-welded, and riveted joints. 
Electrically-welded joints require no secondary electrical con- 
nection, but their availability is limited and they have not at- 
tained great use. Cast-welded joints are widely used in 
large cities, and unless the current density is high need no ad- 
ditional bonding. Riveted joints, used somewhat abroad, are 
similar to cast-welded. The majority of all track, including 
all not buried in pavement, must have flexible joints of either 
bolted or wedge types, and the electrical conductivity must 
depend upon bonds installed for that sole purpose, that of the 
rail joint itself being slight. 

Classification of Rail Bonds. While rail bonds are made of a 
wide variety of forms and materials, all in general use have 
some flexibility, for ease of application and for durability after- 
ward, varying with the amount of flexure expected in the track 
structure. This has led to the general adoption of a form 
consisting of two terminals with a connecting shank of consid- 
erable length, to which all bonds conform, except some special 
kinds of very limited use, so it is convenient to classify bonds 
by the kind and form of contact with the rail. Contact with 
the rail is made in the following ways: 

1. Compressed Terminals. <A hole is drilled or punched in 
the rail and a cylindrical terminal of the bond is upset in the 
same way by great pressure applied slowly till the bond metal 
fills the hole very tightly, with the two metal surfaces in intimate 
contact and held there by elasticity. This is commonly called 
a compressed terminal and is the kind most generally used in 
this country. 

2. Expanded Terminals. A terminal of the same form is 
expanded in the hole in the rail by means of a drift driven 
through a hole in the terminal. This may be called an expanded 
terminal. 

3. Soldered Terminals. A flat terminal is soldered to the 
surface of the rail with either soft or brazier’s solder. 

4. Amalgcmated Terminals. The terminal of a copper bond 


1905-17) RICKER: TRACK BONDING. 83 


and the surface or a hole in the rail are amalgamated and held 
in contact with slight pressure, depending upon a layer of tin 
amalgam to maintain the metallic contact. In one form a mass 
of tin amalgam is placed between amalgamated surfaces of the 
rail and joint plate and held in place by a cork washer squeezed 
- between the same. 

5. Bolied Terminals. Copper strips or sheets are pressed 
against the surface of the rail by bolts designed for that pur- 
pose, or are pinched under the joint-plates. 

6. Makeshift Terminals. There are many sorts of make- 
shift bonds, used mainly where there is no money with which 
to get those of better designs—channel pins, and cylindrical 
washers for round wires, and hammer rivetting are the most 

-common. They depend mostly upon the ingenuity of the man 
on the work and are seldom worth consideration save when no 
better can be got. 

Conditions Governing Material, Form, and Structure of Bonds. 
To get the necessary conductivity, bonds are nearly always of 
copper, about the only exception being those of tin amalgam. 
To reduce cost and resistance, they must be as short as prac- 
ticable, and the manufacturing cost must be kept low, to pre- 
serve the scrap value as near the first cest as possible. For 
durability they must 5e flexible enough so as not to break or 
lose contact by the allowable relative motion of the rails. They 
must be formed so they may be applied to the types of rails 
in ordinary use, in such position as to be protected from acci- 
dental damage and from theft. They should be readily accessible 
for inspection and repair. The cost of application must be 
kept low, and to this end it is very important that the process 
shall be so simple and easy that no highly-skilled labor or ex- 
traordinary care is required to install them with certain and 
uniform results. The bond that satisfies all these conditions 

- has not yet been devised. 

The ordinary process of selection has developed a form of 
bond made of annealed copper and consisting of a flexible 
stranded or laminated shank about eight to twelve inches long, 
welded to solid terminals of considerable mass, which are at- 
tached to the rail-web under the joint plates or less frequently 
under the base of the rail. Accessibility for inspection and 
repair, however, is almost wholly sacrificed and the importance 
of good work in manufacture and application is thereby greatly 
increased. 


34 RICKER: TRACK BONDING. [Feb. 24 


Pure copper is a very plastic material of low strength and 
elastic limit, and under moderate pressures behaves almost like 
a liquid. The surface oxidizes slowly at ordinary atmospheric 
temperatures, but very readily at high temperatures, and so 
it is very difficult to weld. The result is that the union between 
the shank and terminals of a composite bond is always subject 
to suspicion, and not the less so that the outside of the same 
and all the welds that show at or near the surface may be very 
nice and neat to look at and the resistance moderate as the 
unwelded interior contacts are still bright when the bond is 
new. Under the smooth exterior may be defective welds that 
will corrode, and weakened strands that will soon be broken 
by the motion of the rails, either of which will materially dimin- 
ish the utility of the bond. 

It is a common practice to saw partly through a terminal 
and split the copper with a wedge. In some cases this will 
open up defective welds, in other cases the soft metal will 
tear close to a bad joint without showing the same. The writer 
has seen some bonds of excellent appearance that when com- 
pressed much harder than in ordinary practice developed open 
cracks in the upper parts of the terminals. Perhaps the most 
satisfactory inspection of the workmanship is made by section- 
ing the terminals in various planes, polishing the cut surfaces 
with a smooth file, emery, and crocus to remove all burrs, and 
then etching with a mixture of strong sulphuric and nitric 
acids, when the defective welds will show as fine black lines, 
and the actual welds and the form of the various component 
parts of the bond at that surface can be traced by the different 
colors of the metal after etching. 

With a good process carefully followed out bonds of good 
and uniform quality can be produced, but the material is deli- 
cate and a little carelessness may spoil many bonds. Con- 
sidering the cost of copper bonds and the importance of their 
function, it would seem worth while to have their material and 
manufacture inspected in the shop, in much the same manner 
as is done with structural steel and machinery, by the engineer- 
ing inspection bureaus. The writer has not heard of any great 
amount of inspection of electrical apparatus by these bureaus, 
but the quality of their work in other directions would suggest 
their probable usefulness in this one. 

Area of Contact. Discussion of the ratio of contact area to 
cross-section of bond, has not lead to the adoption of any standard. 


1905.] RICKER: TRACK BONDING. 85 


Practice seems to be to get as large contact area as convenient 
and make the best of that. The ratio increased as the size of 
bonds increased, till with No. 0000 short bonds with 0.875-in. 
cylindrical terminals it became about 9.33, while with 500 000 
cir. mils bonds of later design, it is only 4.5. The smaller ratio 
seems ample to secure a negligible contact resistance, if the 
contact is only close enough. Unfortunately the full possible 
contact area is seldom realized, because of rough or dirty sur- 
faces and insufficient compression or soldering. ’ 

Failure of Bonds in Service. The failure of a bond is that con 
dition in which the resistance of the joint made by the same is 
seriously increased, which may occur without interruption of 
the continuity of the bond itself. The general cases are 

1. Breakage of bonds; 

2. Disintegration of the bonds; 

3. Impairment of contacts 

Breakage of Bonds. Breakage may occur because of defects 
in manufacture, as in copper bonds with welded terminals the 
strands may be weakened by overheating where they enter the 
terminal; and a slight but continuous motion of the joint will 
cause them to break, one by one, at this place. Long-con- 
tinued jar and repeated flexures will produce fatigue in the 
metal (what has been called the Bauschinger effect in steel). 
Such breakage in the case of either welded or solid bonds is of 
course most frequent where the flexure of the bond due to rail 
movements is too great for its flexibility, which means ill-se- 
lected bonds or badly-kept track. 

A less common manner of breakage occurs in laminated 
under-plate bonds which are too large for the space between 
the joint-plate and the rail, the bond shank is pinched and 
the working of the joint under passing wheels tears off the 
outer strands by a kind of ratchet effect, working them into 
the narrowing space at top or bottom of the rail-web and some- 
times squeezing them out of the joint in thin ribbons. Bonds 
secured under the base of the rail may be frozen in the ballast 
and torn off by the movement of the rail. 

Disintegration. The surfaces at the imperfect welds in com- 
posite bonds corrode, increasing the resistance greatly and 
loosening and weakening the bonds so that they may be pulled 
apart. 

Tin amalgam used at contacts or in masses, hardens and 
shrinks, losing flexibility and contact with the bonded surfaces. 


86 RICKER: TRACK BONDING. [Feb. 24 


In the case of amalgam plugs enclosed in cork boxes, the cork 
sometimes breaks allowing the soft amalgam to run out. 

Impairment of Contact. By far the most important cause of 
impaired contact is oxidation. This is greatly facilitated by 
the presence of moisture, so that the slightest crevice into 
which moisture may penetrate and lodge is dangerous. 

Soft-soldered contacts underground are not to be trusted, 
especially on track laid in streets, which is sure to be wet with 
dirty water, though there is no apparent reason why soldered 
contact entirely above ground should not be durable, if all 
traces of corrosive flux are removed. Brazed joints seem to 
give no trouble. 

Amalgamated steel surfaces are not durable and soon rust 
in track exposed to dampness. 

Expanded or compressed terminal bonds, which have not 
been properly applied, may be loosened by the movement of 
the rail, and well-soldered bonds may be loosened or torn off 
by the same means if they are too rigid. 

No mention has been made of accidental breakage of bonds. 
Of course bonds which are improperly located may be knocked 
off by rolling stock; and various local external conditions may 
operate to destroy any kind of bonds. 

Importance cf Good Contacts. The rapid deterioration and 
general unreliability of track bonding has been a favorite sub- 
ject of complaint. Impairment of contacts and breakage are 
the most common grievances, and while the latter is easily 
traced to improper selection or ill-kept track the former is no 
less due to poor work in applying the bonds, which too often 
is left to cheap workmen; with poor supervision and as the work 
is usually covered up as soon as done and is seldom tested at all, 
it gets no more attention till trouble develops. The writer 
knows of one case in which the superintendent of a rather 
notable electric railway made public a letter praising the per- 
formance of a certain kind of bond used on h's road and in less 
than three months careful tests showed the condition of the 
bonding to be so poor that it had to be completely renewed. 

The importance of clean and tight contact between bond 
and rail can not be insisted upon too strongly, both for imme- 
diate effect upon track conductivity and for its still greater 
effect’ upon deterioration, yet the importance of this is not 
generally enough understood. The apparatus most commonly 
used for applying bonds throws light upon this. In two recent 


1905.] RICKER: TRACK BONDING. 87 


jobs using compressed terminal bonds, the screw presses for 
applying which were got from large and. highly reputable 
makers and were selected for the bonds used, the writer was 
able to get reasonably good contact only by overworking the 
presses to such an extent that two presses wete always being 
repaired for each one on the work. A press would seldom do 
200 terminals without breaking down. The makers of the press- 
es said merely that the presses were used too hard. 

The resistance at the terminal of a bond depends upon the 
area and intimacy of the actual contact; with good bonds 
of ordinary design this may be made negligible if proper care is 
taken. If contact by pressure is to be used, both copper and 
steel surfaces must be smooth, clean and dry; if soldered they 
must be clean, well tinned and free from corrosive flux when 

the operation is finished. As large a proportion as possible of 
the surfaces must be brought into contact and kept there. 

The writer has inspected many compressed terminals, some 
applied with ordinary care, some with greater care, and usually 
a considerable part of the copper surface, sometimes more than 
one half, shows plainly that it has never touched the steel. Ina 
short time that part of the contact surface becomes oxidized 
and is of little further use. A film of oil, such as is left in 
holes in which oil is used to lubricate the drills, decreases the 
conductivity seriously and increases the deterioration. Such 
holes show in time a black deposit from the decomposed oil, 
and ultimately rust. Rough surfaces require greater pressure 
to get good contact and allow more crevices into which 
moisture may penetrate with resulting corrosion. -In the case 
of soldered bonds complete contact between the terminal sur- 
face and the rail is seldom obtained, no matter how carefully 
the work is done. The heat capacity of the rail is so great 
that it is difficult to get any considerable part of it to soider- 
ing temperature by exernal heat application, without excessive 
expense and possibly damage to the rail, so the edges of the 
terminal surface are usually well soldered and the middle portion 
but imperfectly. 

Large flat surfaces held in contact by bolts have been tried, 
though they have never attained great vogue. The cost and 
bulk of any arrangement of bolts and plates which could main- 
tain intimacy of contact similar to that of an ordinary com- 
pressed terminal, together with the cost of finishing and fitting 
the flat surfaces, would be prohibitive. In some cases such 


88 | RICKER: TRACK BONDING. [Feb. 24 


bonds have been used in joints where there is supposed to be 
enough motion to keep the surfaces rubbed bright, but here 
there would seem to be little advantage in using copper, as the 
joint-plates fill the same office. 

The following data illustrating the foregoing may be of inter- 
est. A track laid with 87-lb., 60-ft girder-rails on concrete base, 
in unusually substantial manner, with joints driven tight and 
made as rigid as possible, was bonded with two 0000 bonds 
with 0.875-in. terminals expanded with a steel drift left in 
the hole. On account of the rigidity of the joints the bonds 
were very short, of horseshoe type 4 in. and 2.5 in. be- 
tween terminals. Bond holes were punched at the mill and 
reamed bright with taper reamers just before applying the 
bonds, which were set with the shank at the small ends of the | 
taper holes. Measurements of 15 joints by comparison of fall 
of pressure through the joint with that in ten feet of rail, made 
with a millivoltmeter, showed the mean joint resistance equal 
to that of one foot of rail. The same joints measured in the 
same manner with the same instruments one year later showed _ 
no perceptible increase in resistance. 

A double track railway laid with 60-lb. T rails, rock ballasted 
and maintained unusually well for an electric railway, was bond- 
ed with masses of tin amalgam enclosed in washers of treated 
cork, pinched between the rail-web and joint-plates. After 
the road had been in operation about four and a half years 
and parts of it one and two years less, measurements were 
made upon joints in the various sections by the same method 
as the preceding test. 


Mean resistance of joints 


Number of Years in Res. too high to read 
joints. service, No. measured Equiv. ft. of rail |] (over 500 ft. of rail) 
13 4.5 8 15.7 ; 5 
6 3.5 12.4 
18 2.6 17 8.4 1 


About 40 joints of various ages were opened for inspection 
and in none of them were the amalgamated surfaces unim- 
paired, while the older joints were nearly or completely rusted 
over. The amalgam masses were (with one exception) either 
dry’ and crumbly or hard and brittle. The cork washers were 
generally. intact, though a few were broken. 

’ Tn a'single' track interurban electric railway laid with 70-lb. 


1905.] RICKER: TRACK BONDING. 89 


T rails on private right of way, the joints were each bonded 
with one 0000 copper bond 10 in. long with 0.875-in. 
welded terminals. In the earlier part of the work, the bond 
holes were drilled with oil lubrication and the bond terminals 
were upset with a screw compressor by one man using a wrench 
about 36 in. long. To estimate the improvement possible, 
the resistance of 633 ft. of one rail containing 20 joints was 
determined in the condition described, then the bond terminals 
were thoroughly compressed with a similar compressor using 
a wrench about 66 in. long with a heavy man on the end 
applying the pressure slowly and steadily. Then a similar 
section of one rail 425 ft. long containing 14 joints was drilled 
with soda-water lubrication, the holes carefully wiped and the 
bonds compressed thoroughly as above. The sections of rail ' 
when measured were disconnected at both ends and the ballast 
scraped clear. The readings were taken at night in dry weather 
and very nearly uniform temperature. Pressure readings 
were taken with a low reading voltmeter. Only switchboard 
‘ammeters were available for current measurements, but they 
were new and three were connected in series and the mean 
readings used. They checked very closely and were reliable 
enough for comparative measurements. 

Ohms perft. rail. % increase res. 


Drilling with water, bonds well compressed, 1.29 x10” 0 
o 2, aya Hf s ba L,47K10" 14 
is aa ““ poorly ~ 1.96 x 10° 33 


Cost of Applying Bonds. Two cases are presented in detail 
as it is proposed to try to derive from them some conclusions 
regarding the most economical expenditure for bonding in two 
typical roads. 

On a single-track interurban railway quoted herein. it was 
necessary to organize a bonding gang of entirely green 
men, none of whom had ever seen a bond before. It contained 
12 men at $1.75 per day and a foreman at $3.00, total of $25.00 
per day. The work consisted in unplating the joints which 
were half bolted up, drilling two 0.875-in. holes in the rail-web. 
compressing one bond per joint, and replating and bolting up: 
the joints in permanent shape with four bolts each. The 
equipment consisted of three portable rotary track-drills, three 
screw-compressors, about sixty 0.875-in. twist-drills and the 
necessary track tools, costing altogether about $350, on which 
the salvage was about $150. The capacity was 100 bonds per 


90 _ RICKER: TRACK BONDING. [Feb. 24 
‘ 


day, making a labor cost of 25c. per bond. Grinding drills 
cost about $1 per day and repairs to compressors, about $1.50, 
making total cost 27.5c. per bond, of which 5c. was chargeable 
to plating and 22.5c. to bonding. The work was continually 
interrupted by construction trains, and the temperature was so 
high that several men were overcome by heat. With clear 
track and decent temperature the daily output could be in- 
creased 20% at the same total cost 

On a larger installation in somewhat more favorable condi- 
tions, the bonding gang consisted of ten or eleven men and a 
foreman, with a total pay roll of $23 to $25 per day. The 
drilling apparatus consisted of a gang-drill driven by an elec- 
tric motor which made two 0.875-in. holes at once, piercing the 
rail web in one minute and drilling an average of 30 joints per 
hour when smartly handled. The position of the drills was 
determined by a jig so that no time was lost in adjustment. 
The machine used an average of 2000 watts when drilling, 
derived from the trolley wire used by the construction trains. 
It weighed about 1500 pounds and had to be removed from 
the track by the bonding gang about four times per day to 
allow construction trains to pass. The capacity of this gang 
was 200 bonds daily, making the labor cost about 12c. each, 
of which 3c. was chargeable to plating and 9c. to bonding. 
The machine contained a drill grinder so there was no addi- 
tional expense for sharpening drills. The equipment included 
six screw compressors of the best type obtainable, but they 
were too light and three or four were always crippled, adding 
1 to 2 cents for repairs to the cost per bond. The drilling 
machine was built especially for this job and required consid- 
erable changes after work was begun, so the cost of tools was 
rather large, about $2000, on which the salvage was probably 
$1000. 

Economical Bonding. It is at once evident that the propor- 
tion of the resistance of the rail circuit due to the bonds ‘is 
small; in the first case cited using 60-ft. rails, it is a little less 
than 2%, in the third case it is about 13%, and as the resist- 
ance of the rail circuit is usually not over 25% of the whole 
resistance, the saving by a considerable increase in bonding is 
relatively small. 

In order to reach some general conclusions regarding the 
economical expenditure for bonding in cases similar to the 
two described, by means of Kelvin’s law, it is necessary in 


1905.] RICKER: TRACK BONDING. 91 


order to make the law apply to make certain assumptions, 
which are not strictly true, but which if carefully adjusted to 
the case taken up may be near enough for the purpose. 

The following data of equipment may be taken as typical of 
the interurban electric railways of moderate size and capacity 
built extensively in the middle Western states. The 0000 
copper bond 12 in. long with solid 0.875-in. terminals, is 
is selected as a unit, because it is a convenient market size and 
well adapted for use with the rails assumed. 


Dine TeCt Packie s sages store's els iat basi two 75-lb. T rails 

COs On POWCL. WING, wp. ae ee eee os 0.02c. per kw-hr. 

Mean current in ttack.4. 0). s.i-aalea 200 amperes 

Pojolnt DOME so se- sora «= oéile eyes ane 0.19c. per 1000 cir. mils 
(based on No. 0000 x12-in. bond @ 40c.) 

Applying same. .......---+.0++++%% 0.094c. per 1000 cir. mils 
(based on 20c. per bond) 

Scrap value of bond............--- (0560: Sa % 

Net cost of bond..... gts AR Vo. ae. - 

UWeetuliite of bond. 2... cress ss 10 years 

Aanual cost of bond @ 15%....... 0.034c. per 1000 cir. mils 

Resistance of bond, ohms.......... CLO16 erat i 


(12-in. 0000 copper+ 8% for contacts) 
Annual (7300 hours) loss in one bond 847 kw-hr. per 1000 cir. 


mils 
Cost of same @ 2c.......-.+-++-: $16.94 per 1000 cir. mils 
0.00034 cir. mils _ 16. 94 x 1000 
1000 a) “cir, mils 


cir. mils = 223 000 

The equipment described would correspond to that of a road 
operated by synchronous converter sub-stations having an 
average traffic of two 40-ft. cars per section. Such a road 
would usually have one 0000 bond per track joint, which would 
seem to be a little too small. 

For a road of somewhat heavier construction and traffic and 
operated at high speed the following data may be assumed; 


‘items which are the same as in preceding case are not repeated. 


Mouble tracks... e062 .-+2--6-- four 80-lb. T rails 

Mean current in track......... 800 amperes 

1 joint Poude cues Sanaa ne 0.19 per 1000 cir. mils 
Applying same.....--.+-+-++-> 0.057c. cel we. ss 


(based on 12c. per bond) 


92 RICKER: TRACK BONDING. [Feb 24 
Scrap value of bond...........0.056c. . * ¥ 
Net: cost of bond.........+-3.: 0.203c. 
Annual cost of bond @ 15%....0.0304c. “  “ 
Annual(7300 hours) loss in bond 3.387 kw-hr. per 1000 cir. mils 


“e “ec “ 


Cost of same @ 2c......,..--- $67.76 
.000304 _ 67.76 x 1000 
1000 ~~ car. mils 


cir. mils = 472 900 

This case is fairly comparable with the Aurora, Elgin, and 
Chicago Railway which is bonded with two 250 000 cir. mils bonds 
per joint. 

If this method indicates a cross-section of bonding varying 
greatly from a multiple of the typical bond selected, a second 
approximation will be necessary, as the cost of bonding will 
not vary with the cross-section unless the unit size is practically 
adhered to. In a more precise solution the square root of 
the mean square of the current should be used instead of the 
mean current. It would be interesting to compare the results 
obtained by this method carefully carried out, with those 
obtained by the summation of annual cost and annual loss 
curves covering all the elements of the conducting circuit in 
the above typical cases. The brief time at the writer’s com- 
mand does not permit of his doing this at present. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 93 


- Discussion on ‘‘Some Notes on Track. Bonopina.” 


C. W. Ricker: The cost of applying bonds, which I have 
given, may be criticized as unduly low; it is intentionally 
very close, but it is attainable with compressed or expanded 
terminal bonds. The use of reliable hydraulic compressors 
might reduce the figures a little, but the amount would not 
be great, as the copper must be compressed rather slowly. and 
the hydraulic machines are heavy and difficult to handle, so 
that the net saving of labor cost would be probably small, 
though the quality of work might be improved by their use. 

The expression for the economical cross-section of bonding 
may be stated conveniently. 


oq. cm. = 10004] 


or the economical cross-section varies inversely as the square 
root of the annual cost. In the first case considered the net 
cost per 1000 sq: cm. of bond was 23 cents of which 9 cents 
was for application, about 0.4 of the whole (based on cost 
of application of 20 cents per bond). It is evident that any 
considerable increase in the cost per 1000 sq. cm. of applying 
bonds will radically decrease the economic section of the same. 
In this case increasing the cost of application 50 per cent. 
will decrease the economical cross section 10.4 per cent., and 
doubling the cost of application will decrease the economical 
cross section 19 per cent. This is worthy of attention in view 
of the increased cost of application of various soldered bonds, 
for which lower contact resistance is claimed. Unless a con- 
siderably greater saving is made than the 8 per cent. herein 
allowed for contact resistance of compressed terminal bonds, 
which seems also to accord with the results of tests by Mr. 
W. C. Burton, the greater cost of soldering to the rails would 
seem a rather doubtful investment. : 

H. A. LarpNneER: The trouble in securing a suitable bond is 
largely due to the difficulty of obtaining a permanently good 
contact between the bond terminal and the rail, and the speaker 
believes that this is primarily due to the difficulties under which 
bonds are usually installed. Therefore, some radically new 
methods of bonding should be devised. The question of a 
proper weld between the bond strip and the terminal has been 
worked out, and the market contains plenty of good bonds, 
so far as this feature goes. , 

The attainment of a low contact resistance between’ the 
terminal and the rail depends so largely on the individual 
applying the bond that even with the best supervision we 
cannot be certain that a low resistance contact will be per- 
manently secured. Undoubtedly all rails should be drilled, or 
at least reamed on the work, and it is a question whether or 
not the bond terminals themselves should not actually be 


annual loss 
annual cost 


94 TRACK BONDING. [Feb. 24 


machined so as to present an accurate fit. If this is done, less 
expanding will be necessary. If the fit is not very close, the 
bond must be expanded to such an extent that the copper 
becomes hard and does not actually fill the hole. Such bonds 
when removed after a period show a very small percentage 
of the surface actually in contact with the rail itself. 

Owing to the many difficulties experienced in placing ex- 
panded terminal bonds, it is likely that in the end they must 
be supplanted by some form which will obviate this difficulty. 
This is especially true in the case of heavy traction, where the 
bonds must be installed under the plates of an existing track. 
The placing of bonds under these conditions becomes very. 
serious, owing to the lack of proper time for drilling the holes 
in the rails and for installing the bonds with all the care and 
attention that is demanded. It is also a matter of great ex- 
pense, especially where lock-nuts or some of the special forms 
of bolts are used for keeping the joints tight; in such cases it usu- 
ally means throwing away the old bolts and providing new ones. 
The difficulty in maintaining bonds located under the splice- 
bars is also very serious for the same reasons, especially on 
steam railroad tracks where the train service is frequent. 

The speaker feels, therefore, that eventually we must look 
for relief to some form of bond which can be more readily in- 
spected than the expanded terminal bond commonly placed under- 
neath the splice-bars. The usual form of long bond extending 
around the splice-bar is expensive, its resistance is great, and 
the bond is easily stolen. It is to be hoped that some form of 
bond can be devised to utilize splice-bars with short flexible 
connections between them and the rails. 

A. A. Knupson: In Brooklyn last fall I saw the application 
of a method of bondiag which has not been referred to in the 
paper. I believe this method has features equal in importance 
to any of those mentioned by the author. 

Briefly, it consists of two steel bars electrically welded to 
the web of the rail, one upon each side. Heat is applied by 
electricity at three points, one near each end of the bars and 
one at the center. When the metal is brought to a welding 
heat, hydraulic pressure is then applied.’ 

In reference to electrolysis the author says: 

‘In the special case of elevated railways using steel struc- 
tures, the metal of the latter has been used to excellent advan- 
tage though this presents some peculiar problems in bonding, 
and a serious risk of electrolysis of anchor bolts.”’ 

In my opinion, there should not, except in special cases, 
be much concern on this point, as the large masses of metal 
composing the structure would, as a conductor, very largely 


1. This method originated with Professor Elihu Thomson and has 
passed through several stages of improvements. Details may be found 
jn an illustrated article in the Street Railway Journal, Sept. 12, 1903. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 95 


exceed that of underground mains, and therefore but little if any 
current would be diverted to them. There may be some cases 
where such damage will prevail, but probably there will not 
be any general corrosion of anchor bolts as seems to be in- 
ferred in the paper. 

The author has considered the various points bearing on 
the subject in a very fair way, the defects as well as advan- 
tages of the many styles of rail bonds mentioned being explained. 

Wm. PestELi: I have had occasion during the last few years, 
in construction and reconstruction of electric railways, to ob- 
serve several kinds of bonds applied under different condi- 
tions. I have noted the extent of corrosion at terminals 
under various conditions. The compressed or expanded ter- 
minal bond in a track exposed to moisture and street con- 
ditions, as in street railway service where T-and girder-rails 
are laid in a roadway surrounded by paving or macadam, 
deteriorates more rapidly than where the track is on private 
right of way, the bonds in the latter case not being exposed 
to the action of moisture to so great an extent as when buried 
in the ground. Bonds that have been recently tested and 
shown to: be of good conductivity indicate a great deteriora- 
tion, sometimes as much as 50% of the original conductivity 
after the falling of trolley wire and consequent passage 
of an excessive amount of current through them. I have 
also noted in taking out some of the earlier types of the. 
bonds, particularly in New England, where the steel terminal 
riveted bond was used, that after being in service for 12 or 14 
years the terminals seemed to be as clean and bright as when 
first applied, the only corrosion being between the copper 
wire and the terminal. This was also the case with the so- 
called West-End or Brown bond used in and about Boston, 
Mass. This bond consists of a tapered steel sleeve, through 
which is soldered the copper wire, the steel being expanded 
in a hole in the rail. These bonds are usually in good con- 
dition, and show practically no corrosion between the steel 
terminals and the rail. 

CALVERT TOWNLEY: A mathematical expression for the most 
economical bond should take into account the effect of increased 
bonding in reducing electrolysis. The greater the capacity 
of the bond, and the consequent greater conductivity of track, 
the smaller would be the tendency for current to seek a channel 
through water pipes. hisietactor makes a general math- 
ematical expression difficult; because in a locality having nu- 
merous water pipes the value of minimizing the chances of elec- 
trolysis will be much greater than in cross-country running 
where there are no water pipes. é 

Ra.pu D. Mersuon: I would like to ask Mr. Ricker whether 
he has any data regarding the contact resistance itself in rela- 
tion to the resistance of the bond. On page 91, eight per cent. 
is allowed for terminals, which presumably applies to the con- 


96 TRACK BONDING. [Feb. 24 


tact resistance. The question of contact resistance would 
seem to be a very important factor in any economical calculations 
such as have been made. Instead of basing his calculations 
on the centimeter cross-section of the bond perhaps he ought to 
take account of the resistance of contact as well; in other words, 
with the same sq. cm. of bond, better results might be obtained 
with two, three, or four bonds than with a lesser number. 

H. A. LARDNER: I have had some experience in trying to 
measure the contact resistance of new bonds, with the result 
that if the joint resistance shows the bond to be pro- 
perly applied, the actual contact resistance will be so small 
that it is impossible to measure it. The usual method of meas- 
uring the contact resistance of the bond is to determine the fall 
of pressure from some point on the rail to some point on the 
bond terminal. Of necessity, this measurement includes not 
only the contact but a small portion of the rail and a small 
portion of the bond, so that even if a reading on the milli- 
voltmeter is obtained it is not possible to say definitely that 
it represents the resistance of the contact. In a large nun.ber 
of tests with from 200 to 300. amperes passing through the rail 
and bond it is generally possible to get the contact points 
so near together that the difference in pressure can not be 
read ona sensitive milli-voltmeter. The above results apply 
to new bonds. If the contact resistance is measurable, it 
generally indicates that the contact is bad and would probably 
grow worse if left in place. 

C. W. Ricker: In several cases where I have tried to learn 
the probable contact resistance of compressed or expanded 
terminal bonds by measuring the resistance of a definite length 
of rail in the track and subtracting therefrom the resistance 
of the rail and that of a length of copper equal to the aggregate 
length of the bonds, measured between centres of terminals, 
the average resistance per contact of 0000 bonds with 0.875- 
inch terminals, in good condition, was that of about 0.5 inch 
of the bond. In Foster’s Pocket Book, Mr. W. C. Burton is 
quoted as saying that tests show an average resistance of 0.375- 
inch of the bond per contact. My measurements were all 
made in the course of work on track that was in service, and 
often they could not be made as complete as might be wished. 


A paper presented at the 195th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New Yert, March 24, 1905. 


Copyright, 1905, by A. I. E. E. 


LINE CONSTRUCTION FOR HIGH-PRESSURE ELECTRIC 
RAILROADS. 


BY GEORGE A. DAMON. 


The single-phase high-pressure trolley has arrived and evi- 
dently has come to stay. The advantages gained by delivering 
energy directly to a car without the necessity of an investment 
in synchronous converters and heavy feeders has long been recog- 
nized. That it is entirely practicable to. take current from a 
high-pressure conductor by means of a moving contact has 
been fully demonstrated. It has required some time to show 
that there is a field for a single-phase traction motor sufficiently 
promising to justify its commercial development, but a number 
of motors of this type are now upon the market and within 
the last few weeks have been put in actual every-day operation. 

To get the full benefit of the new system, it is desirable to 
carry as high a pressure as practicable on the trolley wire. 
It is apparent at once that the methods of installation which 
have become standard with the 500-volt system are inadequate 
for the new conditions. Several methods of supporting the 
- high-pressure trolley wire have already been developed, and 
now the time has come to standardize the pressure and the 
location of the current conductor, as well as the method of 
current collection in order to provide for an interchange of 
equipment. . 

It is the object of this paper to present a brief record of 
what has already been accomplished in line construction, and 
to examine the requirements and difficulties of installation in 
order to obtain permanent insulation at reasonable cost, safety 
to the public, and reliability in service. It is important that 


97 


98 DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. [Mar. 24 


a discussion be developed at this time which will at least in- 
dicate the tendency of the developments which are taking 
place. In order to allow an opportunity for the presentation 
of the details and advantages of certain systems which are 
being perfected by others, this paper is purposely left incomplete 
in certain parts. 


THREE CLASSES OF CONSTRUCTION. 

The successful use of a single high-pressure trolley wire will 
have a marked stimulus upon three distinct branches of the 
electric railroad art: 

1. Moderate speed and inexpensively equipped electric lines 
for country districts. 

_ 2. High-speed interurban roads for service between large 
centers of population. 

8. Electrification of steam railroads. 

This will leave the city systems with their suburban exten- 
sions to be served, for the present, by the direct-cur- 
rent motor. In studying the methods of line construction, it 
will be desirable, to keep in mind that each of the three 
classes of roads indicated will have its own individual 
problems and requirements. 

For moderate speed lines in the country districts, the full 
benefit of the high-pressure system will be obtained only when 
the first cost of such a road has been reduced to a minimum, 
consistent with good work. A study of the map, Fig. 1, which 
shows the electric railway situation in the middle Western 
States, will emphasize this point. It will be seen that nearly 
all the territory which promises even a fair return on the in- 
vestment has been preempted and that some roads are even 
now. being built where there may be some doubt as to their 
being able to stand the fixed charges resulting from the cost 
of the illogical synchronous converter sub-station system. 
There are still left whole sections of rich productive agricultural 
districts which will remain unserved by a trolley road until a 
system has been developed which is so simple in its requirements 
that, it can be built and equipped complete for less than $15 000 
per, mile, and operated on a basis equally economical. This — 
class of installation means a trolley pressure as high as pos- 
sible,, as well as transformer sub-stations operating without 
attendance and working in parallel from one transmission Jine. 

For high-speed interurban roads the high-pressure trolley 


a ahrrnone oc ATLANTA e 
— an aheit Meprogo ae g MERRILL, ‘ i, 
4 \ ry “s t 
©Meprpison ~e Lirexriece a a ATIS Re r “ ; O Wausau Jj \ aie KAL KAS KA oreo -—_ 
: z 2 MINNEAPOLIS &  HNSEA MPPEWA Faics j NO. yy “@ Taayeagery, “3, 
s = o 4 : SHAWANO, ¢ if © Roscommon cS 
© ogra Te Fapis SLsncor . : } Enémonie rey Sa ; ~~ \ o Sonny we 
oN Hastingses Gasve \ a) 
. s ‘ ' : | 4 wes BRA = 
RAN - 
OR BEAVER Fauis = ; Ounane NeiLisvnie bSrevens Pr. Green Bay 2p } ei ees ., 
OC RENDERSON eae PLOVER. } e ; i i 
: @ Mamsmmn  \_ . v ws White HALL SGRANDRAP IDS WaLPACA Mf ManisTee ce \ S ¥ f ny 
- ls SRM TONG) 4 © Lak f 4 : 
°. NEw in OSt Paves bFarimaucr oO BLACK RIVER Fairs Aprust , ae oe : aay te Se Stak be jt A: tog, 
LAK Berron ° r od 4 eye \ Lipinever c & - ¢ ss Se 
~—* ‘ B, ' wa? ‘ 
- “y MANKATO : Marto € a Senko) pubic yf J } ; . ERSEY 1 : —<—s S ng 
xs t i ‘ah wt ; 4 : 
24 SSiavron o'SrJancs Waseca 2 ER bets iguana nit SARs « wa Gin re Heese 5S 
oO Winton OnaraSxa Ewer a HE BOYGAN : ‘ie canto pf Wie, Pueaaan ‘ — ,~ ‘4 sf “~ 
La ee oMAYSTON (n Forno DuLac “ \ Vassan i eolaveG Teer . 
t \ he 
- pe ’ + \ Uis eo ~ pate - } fa 
Seveanc * Bove Eaern WES PREsTon y f , if Newaras 5 SrLo BS pe ee J # i er ets 
° . c RY x , HAC ; Z ee - ‘ > ma 
2) Jackson ALBERT Lea evingaue Fo Agee iad % West Beno / Port WAsHinsTen elt i 7 a : A i Siar 
SRS ee Ne aS ad 4 BARABOCO vent . \ USKEGOM a 4 Cort nore oh Seg hg 
P > StfyY.o Es a ay © f & sia fl Ne 4 -_- Ponr st = sy ¢ >. 
: =e ~ gtsr tLe 4 \ pmo oui ‘ +o me 
~RESCO RichLane chal Se Le : - 
mg Osase De AH © j : WATERTOWN } : 7. F 7, x aes 3 “Reet o. Bi Ads es 
= Forest ° o of. 7 et he t Grano Haven \ YY eae Orroac a o ad 
SPencee WAU KO ? a a elas Sie o : © 
> e Mas Cr f 4 , 3 P 
ORanse 22 tthe eat: > cme 2 ° ’ Tris Du Crier MaDison vere rl oe . \f aves PonTiatg 
Devagevires STOUGHTO ; 
Naas 3 ys XS OLANCASTER “ali 
oN clemar< E Cisse lnc oo JGUMNER PE Leahey ; inet: es 
“oot > SCRMONTAS > = $ .. f hig ries! ras 
c “ ORixk FS cao ° Se ° . Wavire Lx rR DARLINGTONO e K st 
-~* > ° beed A\\\ is 
Ew : 2 CoxCiry (PoxrDopee me 
G SeuttSieox Cc ~ d oWEester Woovst cf _S 
As : ™ wo, A Safty © ‘ VIDERES a LAKE roneay Partsoye 
=e - : CoLowater RIAN v i, 
FENDER ° DowanGiac " nicaBoa. 
ca 
- ao’ MAQUOKETA spnestseren 
° t 
: é. = SE Agew. ARION 
: Rss \.¥Onawa © DENisoNn Dae Rarios/\ ‘ c ree 
F ; = ‘gh 
“ xy 5 : ; : - Cuimre Te _poure BEND 
=xAM an 5 Avauses x > GRit ae ; OhiFTON dane a Laren Ss : of AveuRn ; 
; “3S aM t ey Sa Cei ras * ‘TON town Cite 3 ex - : : “aya: PARAIS z ‘ abs on « a 
2 F ~ Sa ee Pe DavVENro Brier 2 tests ; sags ‘ 
<= : + Abel = 5 Moines : Z mein t j fe, = pig Win na Lake 
~ c FeMoxntr Pd —s RES } INES ei? < ai Nort Jupser ; MBotunerA | . 
——_— F Norra, ae se KALonad MuscaTinces® eas HINGTO ae. + nage 
i= \ 2 £ of. LANTIC ee tr : : ao ape BRA: WOOD. ge e eek rer Y, y 
-r SiWinse eles a 5 : oh e-e--? ee ee : bares N hone ; Fr Wav < 
> Ge] Seunch Bi gees . ff ne ET ee fOosKarbosa O WASHINGT Sy UL. , a Winsimaca : 
2 : o's 3 GALVA. ‘ 
bes - A Ye EAR EKA x Erne es . Peles : y 
ASHiansy | c Rese = PeBia SS y Soci: 
= se PRRESTON ¢ - ¢ moet on Gacespuna ONTIAL oo Loaansee 
£ tag : Cuakiron we: . mA ee RNexvILLE f Werseen ie 
a Tv t 
x.. = ; ; Monroy A Ee) FureKxa oP bie 
=i b> ae LANDA “Buminarcn, ; BINGD é . Pa 
+s a f Siac, c ‘ a fs A et a A i ’; Riis PEO 1A dLexineron “Fowur 
Me Saas cal a c 2 CEN FRVILL eS i P Avg 
Sr AyR F ADISOM i Lies ug ma a 4 
a ee Be i ee 8 Fe a ee ep te en tM ap . s GEE iron © Paxto \Laravere 
= : CLANS ‘ ee Mace: : ee : 
= I Tre MOE ia J oGranty S o ASTER: et ? Renee ‘oe H ne 
* Sao =: ° Rocxsonr © Panceron Sesh, HaWiron a ore 
2 Stargice VEEN o Mtmrvire Z “i aia yok | es és ate 
. 3 AM j 
; 5 pO agin ae AIG RS ville i oe be : <4 Lincoun 3 mre “Choe Avestiile “OR 
© s. ° © os ‘ Z “ =~, be yf ‘ ve 
MIREES = = Man ee O: ; oe Rusuvince cari 3 ' Ras: Pos i Neen: For ET OW TY 
et es hey FatisGre Oxeacn *REAToRNO ; : Cree ; Es Bade ; : a zi s at 
~~ OFOL\ = 25 p Orin 
7 Savansan 2 Heo LING of lures RS VECATUR pruscoum 2 cae ve DANVILLE 
S - SeNece S : i ° See uey vac e ‘Sprinerigto® ae : Spake 14 eels Nt 0 PLAINE, 
Ther © STtJOS EPH Cul. rcorne % Weitere, eee Jaen WVILLES- ae mare } Broa : be 
° Macon Hantmaparge an eee WINCHESTER fsvnvn'icavonvsct & ay 
- AwcH ison OFPLATTs SURG P : ae ee pee es ey a pe conte Kap MALL 
WEST MOeeisns © HOLTON . “RUNTSs MILE Pawel aires 52 es ; a shes ‘ o--—- Suet pyviite ei 
© “a CRreRoiLtoN © © 3 * oa te are Ree a cToueso 
teawiwoarn .. Re : : 
a Os *#100sa5 = % : 
= =“ ohexicse 
Ser SM oe Teximeron, F © Faverre peas 
Ramac ToPrx,z bikpebentencd : ~ 3 ee : vt ee 
5 fae Poet omc AMSAS Ciry ° Covuneia : 2 GR in L 
2 ch viLyy 
aoe eCARScun oes ae © Fuctor 5 fEDwards 
. ; Wereenszene é ee? 
tee! ee at = © Stoncin Ex 
; oun egeve Lrnwen 3 ga i © Haamisonvitre 
$ 4 ; - 


es JerreRson. » 
a 
Ni ot pitas = Vedehieys a 
 eBurcem  o Wamsmw TWw3curein sie: 
{ =; Vig Rw 
Osgec.a %¢ Chee. : 
° ReMi nas: 


oe Akash 


ee Srananitad oo 


o - 
PoateKe A 
; 
ty 


Cee SS 


al 


be 


5 
fps 


we 


ry 


ah 


1905.) DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 99 


Opens up new possibilities. Heavier cars with more powerful 
motor equipments can now be operated at high speeds between! 
cities without prohibitive first cost. ‘‘ Limited ” electric train 
-service with speed schedules of 60 miles an hour from the heart 
of one city to another will soon be in vogue, and without the 
necessity of changing from third rail to trolley in passing from 
private right of way at corporate limits. Roads of this char- 
acter, with their better earning capacity, can afford such refine- 
ments in line construction as a sectionalized trolley, individual 
transmission lines to each sub-station, and separate pole lines 
for the trolley and the transmission systems. 

The electrification of steam roads will present a different set 

of conditions. Here the steam locomotive will share the tracks 
with its electric successor for some time, and will do all it can 
with its acid-charged gases to destroy the handiwork of the 
- electrical engineer. This will make the installation of a contact 
wire anywhere except at the side of the track a doubtful propo- 
sition, and thus calls attention more strongly to the statement 
that line-construction problems must be divided into classes. 


Lines ALREADY BUILT. 


It will be instructive to examine the details of construction 
of several high-pressure trolley lines already in operation. 
There are details available of three installations in Europe — 
‘Valtellina, Spindersfeld, and the Huber system. There. are 
~ several other lines building in Europe, but either the details 
of the line work have not been disclosed or the systems adopted 
are similar to the ones described. 

In this country the overhead equipment of the Lansing, St. 
Johns & St. Louis Electric Railway, the Indianapolis and Cin- 
cinnati Traction Co., and the Bloomington, Pontiac & Joliet 
Electric Railroad will present types, leaving the interesting 
work which has been done near Schenectady and at Pittsburg 
to be described and discussed by others. 

Valtellina, Figs. 2 to 7. This is really a three-phase road having 
two trolleys, but the line construction could easily be adapted for a 
single trolley. The line is 66 miles long, with three branches; is 
located near Milan, Italy, and has been in operation since Sep- 
tember, 1902. The trolley pressure is 3000 volts at 15 cycles. 
The transmission line, at 20 000 volts, is carried on the trolley 
poles. The contact wires are fixed ata height of 20 feet in open 
stretches and at 16 feet in tunnels. The trolley wires are hard- 


100 DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. (Mar. 24 


rR 
y= 
rm 
pS 
fi loh tersion 
eae] Hy Losvlator 
bine 


Tet Dora! lines show 
Stay wires at Curves. 


Trolley 


| 
Solke { sron to 
prevent Alia k dat 


c------- 


Pigs 


1905.]° ° DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 101 


drawn copper wires of 8-mm. diameter, and the span wires consist 
of galvanized steel wires of 5-mm. diameter. The span wires which 
hold the trolley wires, after the usual suspension method, are 
attached to the poles by means of porcelain insulators of a 


Bracke? Iyppor 
Fie. 3. 


special type. The contact wire is suspended by ambroin in- 
‘sulators consisting of a cast-iron bell holding a steel bolt im- 
bedded in ambroin and having a mechanical clip at its lower 
end. The insulators are tested to 10 000 volts. 


102 DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. [Mar. 24 


On tangents and on curves with a radius greater than 3000 
feet, single-bracket poles are used; on curves the éontact wires 
are suspended on double poles with span construction. At 


| 


Two Arm Support 
Fic. 4. 


stations double-bracket poles are used. A peculiar detail is a 
circlet of iron with protruding spikes to prevent people from 
climbing the poles. 


Porcelain Insulator “righ Tension Insulotor 


Fie. 5. Fie. 6. 


The current collector consists of a roller of electrolytic copper 
‘of 3.125 in. diameter and 2 ft. 1.625 in. long. The cur- 
rent is taken from the roller by contacts rubbing on both ends 


1905.] DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION, 103 


of the roller. One break of the contact wire on this line 
is. reported, the wire falling on the roof of the car, which was 
thoroughly grounded and thus no harm was done. 
Spindersfeld, Fig. 8. Thisis asingle-phase experimental elec- 
tric line installed on the State Railroad near Berlin. | The line is 
three miles long; it was put in operation in June, 1903. The 
trolley pressure is 6000 volts at 25 cycles. The trolley wire is 
hung from two steel catenary wires with suspensions every 


“10 ft. The steel wires also act as current conductors. 

The copper wire is of 8-mm. diameter; this seems to be the 
' standard size on foreign roads. This wire is slightly smaller 
than No. 0 B. & S. gauge. The contact device is a sliding 
bow. On parts of the line a single catenary suspension is used, 
the double catenary being a later development, having been 
adopted to insure greater safety and to increase the lateral 
rigidity of the conductor. The catenary wires are attached 


104 DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. (Mar. 24 


by short rubber chains to a bar mounted on two insulators 
and fastened to the bracket arms by means of special clamps. 

Underneath the bridle wire there is an earthed bar, so ar- 
ranged that a break in the line or in the catenaries will cause a 
contact to be made with the live conductor, grounding the 
system and throwing a circuit-breaker and thus protecting the 
line. 

All telegraph, telephone, and other wires passing over the 
trolley, are protected by a wire cage which completely sur- 
rounds them in order to prevent any possibility of their coming 
in contact with the high-pressure railroad conductors. 


* 


Detail of Coatenary Constrvetion. 
Spendlersfelde Line. 


Fro. 8. 


Huber System, Figs. 9to 17. An experimental line has been built 
by the Oerlikon Machine Works after the plans of E. Huber, tech- 
nical director of the Company. The line uses a single-phase 
current at 14 000 volts directly on the conductor wire. The cur- 
rent-collecting device is of novel design; it consists of a curved 
metallic stem with its convex surface bearing lightly on the top 
of the current-carrying conductor. Normally the wire is located 
at the side of the car, but in passing through a tunnel or under 

an over-head crossing, the wire can be brought over the center 
ofthe track. The collecting stem has a rotary motion in a plane 
perpendicular to the track; the position of the stem at any 


1905.] DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 105 


time is regulated automatically by the location of the overhead 
conductor wire. Figs. 9 to 17 indicate diagrammatically the 
various relative positions of the collecting device and the wire. 

In making contact with the wire when over the car the col- 
_ lector arm rubs beneath the wire, but this is only done in tunnels 
and in other contracted spaces. The current collector is mount- 


Fic. 9. 


ed on porcelain insulators and the light arm is held in place 
in such a way that it can readily be removed and renewed. 
The entire device is further mounted on a parallel link motion, 
which is controlled automatically so as to shift the center of 
rotation of the contact stem when required. 

The side wire is carried in mechanical clips held in place on 
the top of the poles by special porcelain insulators made large 


106 DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. [Mar. 24 


enough to stand a test of 30000 volts. The entire line has 
withstood a test of 16000 volts. The average height of the 
contact wire alongside of the track is 15 ft., and inside tunnels 


16.5 ft. The distance between supports is about 100 ft. 
The Huber system is being installed upon the Seebach- 


1905.] DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 107 


AMM 


108 DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. [Mar. 24 


Wettigen line, where its operation will be watched with more 
than ordinary interest. 


Swedish State Railroad. It is instructive to note that upon 
the experimental line authorized by the government of Sweden, 


Fie, 15. 


and. now building, a pressure on the contact wire of 6000 
volts at 25 cycles will be used. 


DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 109 


1905.] 


Fic. 16. 


Ni \ 
Wares). 
~—s— —— 


Fic. 17. 


110 DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. [Mar. 24 


Lansing, St. John’s & St. Louis El. Ry., Figs. 18 & 19. This was 
the first single-phase electric road to be built. It. runs 
20 miles north from Lansing, Michigan. The line was 
the scene of the pioneer single-phase work done by Bion J. 
Arnold in 1900-1904. The line has been operated with a pres- 
sure of 6000 volts on the trolley wire. The genera] method 
of suspending the trolley wire followed in direct-current work 
was adopted for this line, but the usual hanger was replaced 
with a large special insulator of annealed glass, tested to 30 000 


Fic. 18. 


volts. This special hanger was held in place on a flexible cross 
wire suspended between malleable-iron brackets attached to a 
wooden cross-arm. It was originally intended to stagger the 
wire supports and use a bow collector, but the experiments 
were finally conducted with the use of an ordinary trolley 
wheel. This wheel would at times slip off the wire, and the 
breaking of the glass hanger insulators from this cause soon 
demonstrated that this form of suspension was not adapted 


1905.] DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 1 


for places when there was any probability of an ordinary trolley 
wheel being used. ‘ 

This line proved, however, that the use of trolley pressures 
as high as 6000 volts were entirely practicable; and the atten- 
tion which was attracted to single-phase possibilities by the early 


Betai/s t overhead construction 
Lon a StJohns & 5? Lovis fy 


Fic. 19. 


work done at Lansing had a marked influence in creating the 
demand for the general development of high-pressure railroad 
systems. 

Bloomington, Pontiac & Joliet Electric Railway. F igs. 20 to 24. 
This line will be 90 miles long, connecting Bloomington and Joliet, 


412 DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. (Mar. 24 


Illinois. A section of the line was put in operation February, 1905. 
The trolley pressure is 3300 volts, and the wires are held in place 
by catenary construction. Owing to local conditions, such as 
turnouts, there are two No. 00 grooved trolleys over each 
track, each hung from a 0.375-in. galvanized steel cable. The 
poles are so placed that eventually they will be in the center 
between a double track. The brackets holding the catenary 


Porcelain bnsulotor Stranded Gale Steel Coble. 


a Concrete. 


Cress suspension for high tension trolley’ 
City Streets. 


Fic. 20. 


insulators are made of Washington fir, with a wooden brace 
underneath. The insulators are cemented on iron pins. 

The trolley wires are suspended from the steel cat-naries by 
means of special mechanical clips attached to the wires every 
11 feet. In Pontiac iron poles are used and a special insulator 
has been designed for the support of the cross-suspension wire. 


1905.) DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 113 


Above the trolley in city streets a lighter catenary construction 
is placed for protection in case the trolley wire should break; but 


most of the strain is carried by the regular cross-suspension 
wires. 


nies Gale 


Indianapolis and Cincinnati Traction Co. This is a high- 
speed interurban line, 41 miles of which are practically finished. 
Sixteen miles were-piit into service January, 1905. The trolley 


ass on private Bes p 


400-0 


Fic. 22. 


pressure is 3300 volts. The catenary form of suspension is 
used with one 0.4375-in. steel messenger wire supported every 
100 ft. by large flat insulators held on an iron bracket. The 


BxXS “CrossArm. 2 


ee 


Fic. 23. | 


1905.].. DAMON: LINE.CONSTRUCTION. 115 


copper trolley wire is No. 000 B. & S. gauge and is carried eight 
inches under the messenger cable. The trolley is supported 
every 10 ft. by means of special steel clamps in such a manner 
that the wire is held very nearly at a perfect level. Over the 
center of the track and 18 ft. above the rail. 
The transmission line pressure is 33000 volts; a separate 
pair of wires connects the power-house with each sub-station. 
The trolley pole-line and the transmission pole-line are sep- 
arate, the former being at one side of the right of way. The 


Deto:l of Straus wisvloror suppork 


Hire, 24. 


iron brackets holding the catenary insulators are made of 
-angle-iron with a loop at the outside; this will allow for con- 
siderable adjustment in the position of the insulator. It is 
the intention to stagger the position of the catenary supports 
and thus produce a horizontal wave in the trolley line, which 
will distribute the wear on the bow collector, eventually to be 
used on this line. 
REQUIREMENTS OF INSTALLATION. 

Bearing in mind the distinct requirements of the three classes 
of roads already referred to, the problem of line construction 
may be discussed under the following heads: 


116 DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. (Mar. 24 


1. Pressure and Insulation; 

2. Location of Conductor; 

3. Requirements for Safety and Stability. 

As an entire paper might be devoted to any one of these 
subjects, there is offered an opportunity for considerable dis- 
cussion. 

Pressure and Insulation.—The single-phase lines now in opera- 
tion in this country have 3300-volt trolleys, and several lines 
under construction have also decided to use this pressure. 
From present appearances, therefore, 3300 volts is to be the 
standard for interurban lines. It would be well, however, 
to consider just at this time whether it would not be advisable 
to use a trolley pressure of 6000 volts. From an operating 
standpoint there seems to be no reason why this higher pres- 
sure is not just as practicable as a lower one; and to get the full 
benefit of all the advantages inherent with the high-tension sys- 
tem the higher pressure should be adopted. 

Even if a few of the first roads are built with a 3300-volt 
trolley, there is no reason why, with the catenary suspension, 
the insulation provided should not be capable of standing a 
working test of 6000 volts, so that when the time comes to 
double the pressure, the expense of the change will be a minimum. 

For steam-railroad conditions, the larger amount of energy 
required indicates that a pressure of at least 15 000 volts will 
probably be desirable. Just where to strike a balance between 
the cost of copper and the cost of insulation for steam-road 
work is a problem which should be carefully worked out; but 
there seems to be no reason at this time why pressures of over 
10 000 volts for steam-road electrification should not be considered. 

The so-called catenary form of suspension affords so convenient 
a method of insulation that it should become standard practice for 
interurban electric lines. When selecting an insulator for this 
construction, mechanical strength should be the first consid- 
eration, and a few cents more spent on the insulator will.insure 
an abundance, of insulating qualities. As far as insulation is 
concerned, there is no reason why the catenary construction 
could not be operated at more than 30000 volts, if desired. 
For pull-offs and cross suspensions to iron poles special porcelain 
insulators are being designed and used with success. 

It has long been admitted that dry wood is one of the best 
insulators. The convenience with which a wooden rod fitted 
with suitable terminals can be worked into an overhead con- 
struction will commend this form of insulation. Impregnated 


1905.] DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 117 


with an insulating compound, and of sufficient length to with- 
stand high pressure tests, the long wooden insulator is appli- 
cable to the insulation of guy wires, anchors, and cross suspension 
wires. Its use in actual practice will be watched with interest. 

The use of a wooden bracket to hold the insulator for support- 
ing the catenary will probably appeal to some as a step back- 
-ward. As far as looks are concerned, however, it may be said 
that a wooden bracket of a section 3.5 by 5 in. presents an 
appearance fully as attractive as the ordinary cedar pole to 
which it is attached; and that a double-track road with a line 
of center poles equipped with wooden brackets will be much 
less offensive from an esthetic point of view than a double 
row of side suspension poles raked outward in the usual fashion. 

The wooden bracket has an element of safety not possessed 
by an iron support, as the insulating properties of the wooden 
arm would be useful in the case of the failure of an insulator. 
Unless the wooden bracket were wet it would safely hold up a 
6000-volt catenary until the line could be repaired. 


LocaTION OF CONDUCTOR AND COLLECTOR SYSTEMS. 


For moderate-speed roads the natural tendency will be to 
have the trolley wire where it has proved to be so thoroughly 
satisfactory; that is, over the center of the track, and to con- 
tinue to use the present trolley-harp and wheel. For speeds 
not exceeding 40 to 50 miles an hour at trolley pressures up to 
3300 volts this arrangement will work satisfactorily. 

For high-speed electric lines there will be little objection to 
the conductor wire remaining over the track, provided it is 
properly suspended; but the danger of the ordinary trolley 
wheel jumping off the wire at high speeds will, no doubt, sug- 
gest the use of some form of collector other than the wheel. 
The bow, the roller, and the shoe will each find advocates until 
more experience has been obtained and the results are reported 
and discussed. 

Special cases will arise such as the installation of a high- 
pressure conductor wire over a road already equipped with a 
direct-current trolley, as was the case with the Ballston, N. Y., 
road. In such an event the catenary construction can be 
very nicely adapted to suspending the wire at the side of the 
track. This location could be advocated for an entirely new 
installation on the grounds of cheaper first cost and some addi- 
tional safety in case the wire should break and fall, but both 


118 DAMON. LINE.CONSTRUCTION: (Mar. 24 


these arguments lack sufficient weight to establish the wire 
in the side position as standard practice. 

For steam-road conditions considerable objection may be 
found to locating the conductor wire over the center of the 
track: the danger to trainmen standing on top of the cars; 
the fouling of the conductor; the deterioration of the insula- 
tion, and the destruction of the wire and supporting cables by 
the gases of locomotives which may jointly occupy the tracks; 
the blocking of traffic when it is necessary to repair a 
broken wire—all these are serious drawbacks to this location 
of the conductor for heavy railroad practice. To avoid the 
deleterious effect of the Jocomotive gases it would seem to be 
imperative to place the contact wire at one side and as low as 
possible consistent with general safety. The advisability of 
installing an independent and duplicate system of conductors 
is also to be considered for Jines of importance; this can be done 
only by putting the wires on opposite sides of the track. 

The Huber system appears to have been carefully worked out, 
and at the present time is the best suggestion for a solution of 
the line problems in connection with the electrification of steam 
roads. There is one serious objection to the arrangement, 
but this can be overcome. The contact wire carried from pole- 
top to pole-top is lable to break, and some form of support: 
should be devised to prevent the broken ends falling to the 
ground. A double-catenary suspension system with one wire 
carried on an insulator at each end of a cross-arm attached 
to the pole, say a foot from the top, could be provided, and 
the contact wire could be supported from the apex of triangular 
supports attached to the two catenary wires. This method 
would offer advantages over any system of guard-wires or cradles 
which might be devised to catch the broken wire, as it would 
require three wires to be broken before any part of the system 
could fall to the ground. 


REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFETY. 


Frequent Supports. Whatever method of construction is 
followed, every precaution should be adopted to prevent acci- 
dents to the public or employees from the loose ends of a broken 
live wire. Suspensions or supports properly installed every 10 
to 15 ft. will lessen this danger. 

With bracket construction having poles about 100 ft. 
apart, there will be no need of a double-catenary suspension 


1905.] ‘DAMON: LINE-CONSTRUCTION. elo 


for the wire which is to be used. with an under-running collector. 
In such a case, the double suspension would mean twice as many 
insulators as would be required with the single catenary, thus 
-decreasing the insulation resistance and increasing the chances 
_for trouble. With what is known as the ‘‘ tower’’ method of 
construction—using long spans—the double catenary, spreading 
at the points of insulated supports and converging 
at the center of the span, will be found desirable. The neces- 
sity of keeping the wire from swaying will justify the double 
catenary in this case, and the fact that the number of points 
of support is reduced by using long spans will.more than 
balance the use of two insulators at each support. 

- The frequent clips holding the contact wire are not only 
advantageous from the standpoint of additional safety, but 
they contribute to the permanency of the construction by keep- 
ing the wire almost. perfectly horizontal at all temperatures, 
and thus avoiding the bending of the wire up and down at the 
support points every time the collector passes. The only dis- 
advantage to clips holding the wire every few feet is the tendency 
for the trolley wheel to spark at these points.. This is not 
a serious objection if a coliector similar to the bow device is 
used, in which case there will be no interference between the 
collector surface and the mechanical clips. 

Protection from Sleet. In a hard sleet-storm every “attach- 
ment. connected to the wire will naturally be the cause of addi- 
tional trouble. The arcs due to a coating of ice between. the 
- wire and the collector will be much more vicious at 6000 to 
15 000 volts than at 500 volts, but there is no occasion to be- 
-come alarmed at the possible danger from this source. In this 
country one of the high-pressure lines using a trolley wheel 
_on a 3300-volt wire has already passed through a hard siege 
_of sleet; and though the sparking was spectacular, very little 

damage was done. The frequent trolley SEDC however, 
- added considerably to the sparking. 
Greased trolley wires are sometimes used to prevent the 
“trouble caused by sleet; it would be interesting to_ learn the 

experience of members of the InsTITUTE with this device. It is 
_ well. known that the grease finish of an aluminum wire pre- 
vents the collection of sleet upon the wire, and.it may be. pos- 
_ sible that a coating of grease on the. Ahigh- pressure conductor 
_ wire would entirely obviate. this. trouble. lt as evident that 
with a collector taking the current by.. means. of a contact: made 


120 DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. (Mar. 24 


on the top of the wire, as in the Huber system, the trouble 
from sleet would be a minimum. In sleet storms in 
which icicles are formed and hang from the wire, a top- 
bearing collector. would have every advantage, but when 
the sleet freezes equally all round the wire the lighter pressure 
of the top-bearing contact might put the Huber collector at a 
disadvantage. ; 

Transmission Lines. The transmission lines from the power- 
plant to the sub-stations will be at a higher pressure than the 
trolley pressure, and will therefore require careful treatment. 
For a road which is to be built economically, a single set of 
transmission wires serving all of the static transformer stations 
in parallel will be sufficient. These transmission wires will 
ordinarily be carried on the tops of the same poles which sup- 
port the trolley bracket. 

The next refinement would be to have a separate set of trans- 
mission lines from the power-house to each sub-station, making 
it possible to put the overload protective devices on the central- 
station switchboard and thus eliminate the sub-station attend- 
ance. With this multiplicity of wires and consequent higher 
first cost adopted, it is but one step farther to separate entirely 
the two systems and to install two pole lines on the same right 
of way; where the electric 1oad is of the high-speed class 
this should be done. 

To be consistent, however,.in insuring safety to the public, 
it would be well to advocate as standard practice the plan of 
carrying the high-pressure transmission lines entirely around 
small towns and cities instead of through them. If the trans- 
mission lines are too dangerous to be carried on the railroad 
company’s trolley poles, then there is more danger in carrying 
them along the streets and over the network of telephone wires 
inside the corporate limits. The problem of the proper regula- 
tion for this situation is one that will shortly have to be faced. 

The first investment in the transmission line, the cost of 
maintenance, and the loss by leakage—all these can be cut in 
half by thoroughly grounding one side of the single-phase trans- 
mission line so as to use the earth as one leg of the circuit. An 
actual trial of this suggestion to further simplify the distribu- 
tion system is under contemplation, and no doubt will furnish 
valuable information as to its effect on telephone and tele- 
graph lines as well as data in connection with the resistance 
of the earth with alternating currents. 


1905.] DAMON: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 121 


Grounded Guard Wires. Where the transmission lines pass 
over other wires, there should be a cradle of grounded wires 
to prevent a broken transmission line from coming in contact 
with a foreign wire. This cradle will be of little use unless it 
is of ample dimensions. Some effort has been made on Euro- 
pean roads so to install grounded wires that the breaking of 
a conductor would at once cause the live end of the wire to 
make a contact with the grounded guard-wire, but in two cases 
which have come to notice the grounded guard-wire caused 
more trouble than it eliminated; for this reason it was soon 
abandoned. 

In order to encourage the discussion of the unsettled 
features of line construction for high-pressure electric railroads, 
the following are offered as 

GENERAL CONCLUSIONS. 

1. There are no reasons why the standard pressures of the 
conductor wire for interurban electric lines should not be at 
least 6000 volts; this is suggested as a standard in order to 
provide for interchange of equipment. 

2. For the electrification of steam roads a pressure of about 
15 000 volts on the conductor wire is desirable. 

3. For electric interurban lines, the present tendency is 
toward the catenary form of suspension, with the trolley over 
the center of the track. A connection should be made about 
every 10 ft., between the steel catenary wire and the trolley 
wire. 

4. For steam-railroad conditions a contact wire at the side 
of the track appears to offer the greatest advantages. Some 
form of construction should be adopted, however,. to prevent 
the falling of the conductor in case it should break. 

5. A successful bow collector for interurban work and a 
contact arm for steam-road insta!lations similar to that in use 
by the Huber system would allow the location of the contact 
wire to be standardized. ; 

6. A trolley wire 20 ft. above the center of the track is 
suggested for interurban roads. For steam-road electrification 
the height of the contact wire at the side of the track could be 


made standard at 16 ft. 


4 “en Sy eet PE 
2s HUN est tt 
Pee ee “ + whe 
‘ ~ ‘ = ve M4 
ore - > 
. . _ 
my . : 
. 2 4 re 
he , 
a w 
& Pas : : 
ba! Se = aU oer ~ 
- . - . 4 ~ « 
~ « 
wig ~ ~ ‘ Bee srw é 
: . . > 5 ’ 
© ct * 


- fe : 
x = « onay ie 2 
: uA , 
; : a ad ; x 
- a 
f : me J ote 


as 


A paper presented at the 195th Meeting of the waa BSG 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, March. 24th, 1905. 


Copyright, 1905, by A. I. E. FB. 


HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CONSTRUCTION FOR ALTER- 
NATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS. 


BY THEODORE VARNEY. 

The chief advantage to be derived from the direct applica- 
tion of the alternating current to railway service‘is in the use 
of high trolley-pressures. Having a successful alternating- 
current motor, the remaining problem of greatest importance 
is the method of supplying current to the car. The third 
rail, which is largely used in heavy railway work, is obviously 
unsuited for carrying 3000, 6000, or 10000 volts on the score 
of insulation and of safety. Moreover, the third-rail construc- 
tion, whatever be the pressure, is not suitable for terminal 
yards in which there are many tracks and in which de- 
railments are not unusual. A smash-up would be almost 
certain to result in tying up the system. 

Of.the various methods of current supply heretofore em- 
ployed the overhead conductor is believed to be the only one 
capable of development into safe or permanent operation with 
trolley pressures running up into thousands of volts. The pres- 
ent paper will describe some preliminary work which has been 
carried out on a practical scale with overhead conductors. 
In laying out a suitable overhead high-pressure alternating- 
current system, it was decided to make a radical departure 
from the present methods of construction wherein the insula- 
tion is made only good enough and the supporting structure 
only strong enough to keep the cars running by the aid of an 
efficient repair department. It was rather the aim to obtain 
a system which would be serviceable and reliable for several 
thousand volts and which when once in place would at least 
equal in durability and: cost of maintenance the bridges, track, 


123 


124 VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. (Mar. 24 


and other portions of a standard railroad. While the exacting 
conditions and heavy traffic of the present steam roads will 
require for successful operation by electricity a carefully planned 
and substantial construction, the lighter interurban roads may 
frequently be equipped with a less expensive system. 

- Several classes of construction have been designed; of these 
the least expensive type employing bracket arms will be de- 
scribed first. 


T-9$+~-- 


‘fa=- 


Fic. 1.—T-Iron Bracket with Main Insulator and Steady Strain. 


BRACKET-ARM CONSTRUCTION. 

This system consists of a single line of wooden poles spaced 
well apart and fitted with bracket arms and steel catenary 
suspension cable for supporting the trolley wire. The bracket 
arm is a T-iron supported by a tension rod at its outer end and 
fitted at the inner end with lugs which partly embrace the 
pole and to which they are bolted with lag screws. Fig. 1 
indicates the construction. 

The insulator is of corrugated porcelain, cemented to a 
malleable-iron sleeve which in turn is slipped over the bracket 


1905.] VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 125 


arm and held by clamps and set screws. The porcelain insu- 
lator has a groove at its center surrounded by a malleable-iron 
collar similar to a pipe clamp. This collar has an eye on the 
lower side into which the hooks of a clamp which carries the 
steel supporting cable or messenger are inserted. Wheel trol- 
leys will probably be used to a considerable extent with the 
lower pressures. Guard loops are provided to prevent breakage 
of the porcelain, in case the trolley should leave the wire under 
a bracket. The insulator with its fittings is shown in detail 
qa Big, 2: 

The guard loops are also of service in temporarily support- 
ing the cable while it is being run out and pulled up. The 
trolley and messenger are run out together, and the former is 
supported from the messenger at occasional points by tem- 
porary tie-wires. The tension in the messenger cable is ad- 
justed to give the proper sag, and the trolley wire is pulled up 
tight enough to take out all kinks and bends. Both trolley 
and messenger are then anchored. The messenger is next 
clamped to the insulators and the trolley is permanently sup- 
ported from the messenger by means of hangers or clips which 
are adjusted in length in such a manner as to hold the trolley 
horizontally. By this means, the tension in the trolley is slightly 
relieved and allowance is made for expansion and contraction. 
The hangers are stiff and, being placed only 10 feet apart, 
correct any tendency of the grooved trolley wire to twist. This 
insures that the smooth lower surface will always be down- 
ward, a feature especially necessary when bow or sliding trol- 
leys are used. The short distance between hangers also pre- 
vents the end of a broken trolley wire from coming dangerously 
near the ground. 

The method of supporting the messenger below the bracket 
arm enables a tension rod to be attached to the outer end of 
the bracket without the necessity of fishing the messenger cable 
over the arm and under the brace. The cable and trolley may 
be run out along the track and pulled up in place under the 
brackets with a minimum amount of labor. Another advantage 
jn this arrangement is the slightly flexible character of the point 
of support of the messenger; this is not sufficient to permit any 
considerable vibration of the span as a whole but will allow 
any small vibration set up by the trolley to pass on. It has 
been noticed in rigidly-supported spans of considerable length 
that a tendency exists for waves to be reflected from these fixed 


[Mar: 24 


VARNEY; LINE CONSTRUCTION, 


126 


SS 
‘i Sy 


of 


bd 


Single Catenary, Main Insulator Details. 


Ries2: 


1905.} VARNEY: ‘LINE CONSTRUCTION: 12% 


points which, when they reach the trolley, lift the wire from it, 
thereby causing flashing. 

The hanger is illustrated in Fig. 3 and consists of a galvanized 
malleable-iron casting made in 10 lengths. It is fitted with 
a bolted clamp to take the messenger cable and is secured to 
the trolley with screws. At intervals of about 1000 ft. and: 
upon curves of large radius, a steadying device shown in” Fig: 
lis used. The pull-off used on sharp curves the method of 
anchoring, and the section-break insulator are shown in Figs. 
Aa OTs and: 8: 


Fic. 3.—Hanger made in Ten Lengths. 


Fig. 11 illustrates a 120-ft. span and anchor. Fig. 12 rep- 
resents an 80-ft. span with steady strains on a slight curve. 
Fig. 13 is a view taken from an overhead bridge, showing the 
use of steady strains on a moderately sharp curve. 


MEASUREMENTS ON SPANS IN SERVICE. 


A road five miles in length has been in operation for about 
five months, and upon this road several, forms of. construction 
have been installed. One ‘portion has been equipped with 


128 VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. [Mar. 24 


120-ft. spans with sags of 24 in. in the messenger cable. 
Another section has spans of about 96 ft. and sags of about 
4 inches. In the latter case both messenger and trolley 
wire are tighter than the former. The effects of temperature 
upon these two forms of construction are indicated by the 
following observations during a period of two months: 


Temperature | _ Height of Trolley Wire above Rails 


Bes: oe Span No. 1 Span No. 2 
120-ft.| Span. 

12-22-04 33 .8° SS 21.3 Ain. 21 ft. 5.1 in. 

12-23-04 52737 Bt eects: ry tage Soe 

1- 405. 16.0° CS a? ¥ Voy 4 arg <i 
96 ft.| Span. 

19-22-04 34.7° 20 ft. 7.0 in. 20 ft. 7.5 in. 

12-23-04 52.3° et eee 20 Fae 

1— 4-05 14.7° v2. ey Be 20S ee 


The greatest temperature variation noted on the 120-ft. 
spans was 36.3° fahr., and the corresponding changes in height © 
at the centers of the spans were 2.1 in. and 1.9 in. re- 
spectively. For the 96-ft. spans the temperature variation 
was 37.6° and the corresponding changes in height were 0.6 
inch and 0.5 in. respectively. 

The combined weight of messenger, 000 trolley wire, and 
hangers averages one pound per foot which gives a tension in 
the messenger cable with 120-ft. span and 24-in. sag of about 
900 pounds. Zhe tension with 96-ft. span and 4-in. sag is 
about 3500 pounds. 


Best ARRANGEMENT. 


For best results with this form of construction both as re- 
gards cost and operation, the following arrangement is consid- 
ered satisfactory: the spans should be 120 ft. long on straight 
track, reducing the length as may be necessary on curves. 
The messenger to consist of a 0.4375-in. galvanized Bessemer steel 
cable composed of seven strands and having an ultimate strength 
of about 6000 pounds. The trolley wire to be 000 grooved 
section supported in horizontal position by hangers placed 10 


1905.] VARNEY. LINE CONSTRUCTION. 429 


ft. apart. The messenger cable is to be pulled up to a mini- 
mum cold-weather sag of about 11 in., corresponding to a 
tension of about 2000 pounds. 


CRross-SPAN CONSTRUCTION. 


For conditions where bracket arms cannot be used, cross- 
span work may sometimes be employed. For this purpose the 
arrangement indicated in Figs. 9 and 10 has-been designed. 
The difference between this arrangement and the bracket-arm 
construction is the substitution of a 0.4375-in. steel span cable 
for the bracket. Other details are practically the same. 


BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION. 


For the heavy service requirements of sveam roads having 
from two to four tracks, the construction described above is 


Fic. 4.—Single Catenary, Curve Pull-off. 


not adequate; a more substantial equipment and one which 
will not encroach upon the present standard clearances is 
necessary. Obviously, the best form of support to accomplish 
this result is a bridge long enough to span all tracks with ample 
clearance on the sides and overhead, and stiff enough to carry 
all of the overhead conductors without undue vibration. Bridges 
of this character are at present in use on many roads to support 
semaphores and other signal apparatus. oa 

~ Fig. 14 illustrates a section 2500 ft. long of a three-track 
road, one track of which has been equipped with the bridge 
construction. ‘The double catenary system is used, each mes- 
senger being a 0.4375-in. steel stranded cable. The trolley wire 


130 VARNEY LINE CONSTRUCTION. [Mar. 24 


Fic. 6.—Anchor Scheme. 


‘ en tere err hn 


pa ee —- —— — —_ -— - 
Fic, 8.—Single Catenary, Section-break Insulator. 


—— 763 -o = hy pe eae 


1905.]} VARNEY. LINE CONSTRUCTION. 131 


is 000 grooved, and the supporting hangers are placed 10 feet 
apart. The average total weight per foot supported by each 
cable, including its own weight, is 0.91 pounds. The vertical 
sag in the first span, which is 230 ft. long, is 2.6 ft., and in 


Fic. 9.—Cross-Span Main Line Suspension. 


Fic. 10.—Cross-Span Suspension and Steady Strain. 


the second span, which is 270 ft. long, 3.6 ft., both at 26.6° 
fahr. The corresponding tension in the messenger cables is 


2300 pounds. 
The observed variation in height of trolley wire due to tem- 


perature change was as follows: 


132 VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. [Mar. 24 


’ 


Fic, 12.—Single Catenary, 80-ft. Span with Steady Strain on Curve. 


1905.] VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 133 


a ee 


Height of Trolley Wire above Rails 


? Temperature 
Date. fahr. Ee al ee 
Span No. 1 Span No. 2 
1-16-05 26 .6° 23 ft. 39,1 1m, py uitin [faik shale 
1-26-05 6 .8° 2) NO 230 ae 9.9 
2-03 39. 2° ya te At ee Sue AVS, or 


nr 


Fic. 13.—Single Catenary Curve Showing Use of Steady Strains. 


134 VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. (Mar. 24 


The maximum temperature variation is 32.4° and the corre- 
sponding change in height of trolley wire is 2.8 in. for the 
930-ft. span and 5.6 in. for the 270-ft. span. 


Fic. 14—Double Catenary Bridge Construction. 


Fig. 15 shows an extension of the double catenary constru¢- 
tion supported upon latticed poles, while Fig. 16 represents a 


curve of 425-ft. radius. In the latter view the use of double 
catenary curve pull-offs is illustrated. 


1905.} VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. 135 


PROPOSED GENERAL PLAN. 
It was first thought advisable to run the messenger cable 
over the bridges. Fig. 14 shows this construction. It is neces- 
sary, however, to provide an unobstructed view of the signal 


4 
$ 
4 
$ 
5 
et 
et 


Fic. 15.—Double Catenary, Latticed-pole Construction. 


apparatus and it is accordingly considered preferable to make 

the bridge high enough to permit the semaphores to be sus- 

pended below the truss. 
Fig. 17 indicates a signal bridge which has been devised 


. 136 VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. _ [Mar. 24 


for a four-track road carrying beside the semaphores, the four 
sets of cables and trolley wires suspended below the truss. 
This construction is a decided advantage in erecting, as the 
cable and trolley wire can be run out along the track and lifted 
into place. Massive porcelain insulators will be used mounted 
on heavy pipe and fitted with collars having soft lead strips 
under them. From these the cables will be hung by means of 
bolted clamps. By anchoring all cables to the bridges after 
being drawn up to a uniform tension, the effect will be to steady 


Fic. 16.—Double Catenary, Curve with Pull-off. 


the bridges. For roads having wide rights of way compara- 
tively light bridges steadied with guy cables may be used, but 
for most cases a substantial structure similar to those now 
used for signal towers will probably be preferable. It will be 
noted, however, that owing to the comparatively long intervals 
between signals only a few of the bridges carry semaphores; 
the others may be made lighter than the one indicated in Fig. 17. 

Spans of 300 ft. for straight tracks appear to be-satisfactory, 
not being so long as to permit undue vibration in the cables, 
and not so short as to require a large number of bridges per mile. 


GR ae 


ara 


A ee ee 


Poi, i Ae 


4d LED 


page a ee emer enh ae eee 


ney 


* 
© | 


Vertical (aed or7 


nO 
95 - weuuns tit Nayoig $2 $ WW 2a 
$ ss 
iS 
76g WARE rae. 
ae 
tah 
4 


- 
~ 


1905.] 


Vertical Component 


VARNEY. LINE CONSTRUCTION. 137 


\ 
10 ft. 


6 600 Ib. 
Vertical 
om ponent 


900 1b. 
900 Ib. 
900 Ib.. 
900 Ib 
7 000 Ib, 


Vertical Component 


4 000 Ib. -<— 4.000 Ib. due to.curve 


Oo 
Sa 
%, 
(-) 
§ e 
: ‘16-1 
CURVE PULL-OFF ~ INTERMEDIATE BRIDGE ON CURVE 


27000 Ib, resultant pull of 8 cables 


‘STs 
Be 
a HENS > 
A Ty 
pace A LY 
age clang 2 
Sa = a oS a 
ae ey pe ee : i 
: tl Vertical component of guy tension 3 
3 200 Ib..due to curve 2 
G ee 


- 
eS, 


BRIDGES SPACED 150 FT. APART ON CURVES 


MEASURED ON CENTER LINE OF INGIDE TRACK 


6 000 Ib. tension [| 8 cables 


END BRIDGE AT TANGENT 


Fic. 18.—Curve, 500-ft Radius, 


138 VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION [Mar. 24 


Fic. 20.—Double Catenary, Curve Pull-off. 


1905.] . VARNEY. LINE: :GONSTRUCTION. 139: 


For the messenger cables 0.625-in. extra-high strength steel 
strands are suitable. With a 0000 grooved trolley wire and, 
hangers spaced 10 ft., the average load per foot on each cable, 
is 1.43 pounds, and with a vertical sag of 2.7 ft. the tension. 
is 6000 pounds. In a rough climate, wind and sleet will at. 
times increase this tension; assuming that the tension may be 
doubled, a factor of safety of about 3.5 will still remain, as the 
breaking strength of the cable is about 40 000 pounds. 

For use in localities where milder weather conditions may be 
assumed, lower grades of steel may be used having breaking 


Fic. 21—High-pressure Pantagraph Trolley. 


strengths for the same weight per foot of 25 000 pounds and 
19000 pounds. These latter cables are somewhat easier to. 
handle and would be sufficiently strong for most conditions. 

The sag given above is taken to be the cold-weather con- 
dition and for 100° fahr. rise the sag would be about 4.4 ft., 
or a variation of 1.7 ft. In Fig. 17, this allowance is made: 
in the height of the bridge so that the lowest point of the trolley 
wire will be 22 ft. above the track. It is not believed that 
the variation will be this much on account of the giving of the. 
supports and other causes. 


140 VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. {[Mar. 24 


For curves, the length of span will be decreased; and when 
necessary to hold the wire in the center of the track radial 
pull-offs will be used, secured to strain insulators. These will 
be mounted on latticed poles which in turn will be braced by 
guy anchors. 


Fic. 22, 


For sharp curves, the radial pull of all the messenger cables 
would be severe, and it is intended to provide at the tangent 
points anchor bridges which will have trusses stiff enough in 


1905.] VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. b41 


the horizontal plane to stand the strain of slacking off the cables 
about one half. These anchor bridges will then be held by long 
guys running out a considerable distance from the bases of the 
bridges and anchored to cross-ties or channel-irons buried in 
the ground and concreted. Fig. 18 represents in outline a 
500-ft. radius curve. 

Several details for the double-catenary construction are 
shown in Figs. 19 and 20. All of the metal parts other than 


eGae2oe 


the bridges and trolley wire are galvanized, but as a further 
protection against depreciation from locomotive fumes period- 
ical painting is advisable. 

Regarding the efficiency of the insulation employed, it may 
be stated that under the snow-clad conditions. indicated in 
Fig. 15, the 2500 ft. of iron bridge work and. five miles of single- 
catenary construction showed under test a leakage of one 
ampere at 6000 volts. 


142 VARNEY: LINE CONSTRUCTION. [Mar. 24 


CONCLUSION. 

The foregoing describes the actual work which has been car- 
ried out with the view of developing a system of overhead con- 
ductors ‘for moderate and heavy. traction service which will 
approach in a far greater degree than heretofore the reliability 
and permanency of present steam-railroad equipments. 

Aside from the work described above, 40 miles of road using 
the single catenary wood-pole construction have been put in 
operation in Indiana. This has been in successful running order 
‘since the first of this year. Fig. 22 is a view of a portion of 
the road showing the track and overhead construction. The 
remaining 60 miles of this road will probably be completed 
in the near future. The pressure is 3300. 

Fig. 23 is of interest in showing the type of air-operated 
sliding-bow trolley in use on this road. Another form of trolley 
with which satisfactory results have been obtained is shown 
in Fig. 21. It is also air operated and is insulated for 6000 volts. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 143 


Discussion on ‘LINE CONSTRUCTION FOR HIGH-PRESSURE 
ELECTRIC RAILROADS,” AND ‘‘ HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CoN- 
STRUCTION FOR ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAYS.” 


PresIDENT Lizz: I am sure it is gratifying to all interested 
in this class of work to learn from Mr. Varney’s paper the 
character of the electrical engineering construction that is 
being done in connection with heavy traction on steam rail- 
roads, and that it is comparable with the civil and mechanical 
engineering construction of railroads, as represented in track 
and bridge construction. It would be most unfortunate for 
the development of electric traction on our great steam rail- 
road systems if the character of construction followed in the 
pioneer days of electric traction at comparatively low voltages 
were continued in pioneer high-pressure traction work. It 
is apparent from the details laid before us that in attempting 
to solve the problems of important trunk-line traction, electrical 
engineers are alive to the necessity of avoiding anything that 
savors of flimsy or cheap construction, and are seeking to devise 
equipments based upon such sound engineering principles as 
will ensure safety in operation and permanence under the 
strain incident to heavy work. 

The papers of Mr. Varney and Mr. Damon are now open for 
discussion, and I think they can be profitably discussed together. 
The suggestion in connection with protection by guard-wires, 
referred to in Mr. Damon’s paper, is a reminder of the danger 
that sometimes follows an attempt to add a safeguard to a 
- system, whereby an element of danger may be introduced even 
greater than the trouble which it is desired to guard against. 
In one of the earlier installations of the synchronous converter 
system, it was important to prevent the high-pressure current 
from getting over to the low-pressure system through contect 
between the primary and secondary windings of transformers. 
To that end, some of the earlier transformers were equipped 
with ground-shields between primary and secondary windings. 
In the first two years all the troubles encountered with the sys- 
tem as a whole were due to the presence of the ground-shields ; 
they were an element of danger rather than of protection, as 
in the case cited by Mr. Damon. 

F.N. Waterman: The papers of the evening have very fully 
covered the limited field of actual experience in this kind of 
engineering work. But some observations in the way of fur- 
ther details and as to the results of use may be worth adding 
even if somewhat incomplete. 

The longest experience with the problem of conveying energy 
at high pressure to a movirg vehicle has been that of the Ganz 
Co., which has now extendea over about five years. This has 
all been with three-phase currents at 3000 volts and low fre- 
quency, and, therefore, two trolley wires were employed. The 
preliminary trials on the experimental line at Budapest lasted 
for something over a year, and the system has been operated 


144 HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CONSTRUCTION. [March 24 


in Italy altogether nearly four years, of which two and one-half 
years represent actual practical service. The original line 
erected at Budapest was practically reproduced at Valtellina, 
except for a few minor details. 

During the experimental work at Budapest both single- and 
double-catenary suspension were tried, the construction being 
essentially similar to that used on the Spindersfeld line. The 
cross-suspension type, however, was adopted, the system of 
double insulators and double supports, shown in Mr. Damon's 
paper, beingused. A considerable sag was allowed in span-wires, 
and every effort was made to give an elastic and uniform suspen- 
sion. The insulators, as installed, are extremely heavy, and 
certainly do not aid in securing this result. Dry wood, im- 
pregnated, as suggested by Mr. Damon, forms an important 
feature both of the old and new construction. 

For long spans and at switches an arrangement similar to 
that of Fig. 20 of Mr. Damon’s paper is employed, and a very 
interesting special type of span-wire construction is also used, 
particularly where the trolley wires are lowered to pass under 
bridges, and for this reason undue rise and fall with the passage 
of the trolley would be objectionable. This consists of a cat- 
enary type of cross-suspension connected at intervals by sus- 
pension wires with an upwardly arched span-wire, which car- 
ries the insulators, thus making a construction that does not 
sacrifice the substantial elasticity of the line, but holds it accu- 
rately in place, permitting a limited rise and fall with the 
passage of the trolley. 

During the experimental period some difficulty. was experi- 
enced with the overhead construction, and in one or two cases 
the wire broke. But the chief difficulty was encountered in 
the tunnels; it was both mechanical and electrical in its nature, 
the accumulation of deposits from the steam locomotives con- 
tinually running through the tunnels during the experimental 
period, and the leakage of tunnel roofs, caused insulation 
troubles; while owing to the very small clearance of the tun- 
nels, difficulty was experienced in keeping the wire from ground- 
ing between supports. This was overcome by shortening the 
distance between supports, and weighting the conductors by 
clamping small iron rails upon them, which were put on in sec- 
tions several feet in length in the same manner as a mechanical 
clip. 

Although the construction is not by any means heavy, and 
the wcerkmanship shows the effect of inexperience on the part 
of the linemen, it has successfully withstood the wear and tear 
of use, and so far as I have been able to learn is still in place. 
In one or two instances at the beginning of the experimental 
operation the trolley caught in the suspension-wire, owing to 
the improper location of curves and turnouts, the result was to 
break some portion of the trolley mechanism, but to leave the 
rest of the line unharmed. ; 


1905 .] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 145 


For the latest construction the double-catenary type is used ;. 
no span-wire supports whatever being employed, and two mes- 
senger wires serve to carry both contact conductors. The 
spacing of the conductors is maintained by wooden insulator- 
bars upon which the insulators proper are carried, and to which 
supports from the messenger wires are attached. The insu- 
lators have been very much lightened by the substitution ot 
pressed steel for malleable-iron castings. The messenger wires 
are carried on iron girders, spanning the track, and placed 130 
ft. apart; the distance between points of attachment to the 
wire is 65 ft., there being two supports between girders and 
none immediately under them. 

The block-signal system is interconnected directly with the 
contact conductors, and the entrance of a train into a section 
in face of a danger signal disconnects the section. Iwas unable 
to learn the details of this system. In addition, the con- 
ductors within the limits of the stations, and for a definite 
distance on each side, are dead at all times, save when a train 
is actually approaching or starting from a station. These 
sections can only be thrown in by the signal operator. It is 
customary for express trains to coast over the dead parts of 
the conductors with trolleys down, and it is the usual practice 
for trains moving at full speed to lower the trolleys at all switches, 
excepting such trains as are off schedule and are making up 
time. 

The feature of double insulation, which is used throughout, 
has proved particularly useful in rendering possible the break- 
age of a single insulator without causing interference with 
traffic until repairs can be effected. This feature, while, of 
course, not a novelty, seems particularly worthy of perpetua- 
tion in high-tension lines where special liability to mechanical 
breakdown exists. The idea of cutting. out sections at stations, 
and the extension of the same idea carried out on the Spinder- 
feld line, of cutting out sections under bridges where the 
right of way passes under highways, seems also worthy of 
consideration, at least for special cases. 

The Valtellina system seems to have been free from trouble 
with the overhead construction to a remarkable extent, not- 
withstanding the fact that two overhead wires are required; 
and this fact emphasizes the importance of using a trolley con- 
tact-device that cannot get off from the wire and thus either 
break insulators or pull down the construction. 

The trolley itself is a single apparatus and not two inde- 
pendent devices. It requires, however, two separate bases 
and poles, the same as if there were two single -trolleys. 
The outer ends of the two poles are connected by a con- 
tinuous bar of impregnated wood, the centre portion of which 
for a distance of about eight inches is the full diameter of the 
rolling contacts. On either side the diameter is reduced to 

receive two contact-cylinders, which are slipped over and sup- 


146 HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CONSTRUCTION. [March 24 


ported on insulated ball-bearings, the current being taken off 
by carbon contact-rings at the ends and carried by flexible 
jumpers to the trolley poles. 

The cross-bar, with its contact-rollers, is flexibly connected 
to the ends of the arms by horizontal spiral springs, permitting 
simultaneous contact with the two wires even where they are 
at widely different heights. The rollers originally used were of 
copper, which gave trouble by elongation under the hammering 
incident to service, and a resulting binding of the bearings. 
Ganz & Co. now send out copper-plated steel rollers, and 
claim for them a service of 10 000 km. per roller, or 20 000 km. 
per vehicle before replating becomes necessary. The copper 
rollers gave a life of 30000 to 40000 km. per vehicle, but 
then had to be entirely renewed. The operating company 
prefers bronze, and finds no trouble from elongation. 

The trolley poles are supported by spiral springs in tension, 
the tension being put on from within the vehicle by compressed 
air. With this device the slow-moving trains take 300 amperes 
without sparking or burning the wire. The normal speed of 
passenger trains is 40 miles per hour, and the maximum cur- 
rent that has been taken off at that speed is about 240 amperes, 
under which conditions the collectors worked satisfactorily. 
The highest speed at which the device has been tested is 62 
miles an hour, taking off.a current of about 100 amperes. This 
test was made without alteration of springs or line construction 
and gave entirely satisfactory results. The plan of construc- 
tion employed has therefore demonstrated its effectiveness at 
moderate speeds in spite of the handicap of the extreme weight 
of the insulators. 

After two years of use the trolley wires show practically 
neither wear nor evidence of burning. Very little sparking is 
perceptible at night when running at full speed; but, as would 
naturally be expected, such flashing as does occur takes place 
at the points of suspension. The type of trolley used seems 
therefore to combine the advantages of the wheel- and bow- 
forms. It cannot leave the wire, and, as at present constructed, 
cannot catch. The rolling contact practically eliminates the 
wear on the wire and contact conductors. The only serious 
objection to the overhead construction raised by the local 
engineer was to the location of the wires over the track, neces- 
sitating much of the work being done at night, or else con- 
ducted under serious disadvantages. During the entire period 
of operation no one has been injured or killed by contact with 
the overhead construction, but an engineer of the Ganz Co. 
was killed in one of the sub-stations. 

The organization for the maintenance of overhead construc- 
tion is very interesting. The line is 66 miles long, and for 
the purpose of controlling is divided into five sections for each 
of which five men are required. Their duties include patrolling 
the line and visiting the sub-stations at regular intervals. When 


1905. DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 147 


not otherwise engaged one man is always on duty at the sub- 
stations. In general charge of all sections is a superintendent 
who reports to the electrical engineer. 

_ The total cost of maintenance of primary and secondary 
lines, care, attendance and maintenance of sub-stations, and 
patrolling of the line on this plant is about $102.00 per mile, 
per annum. This force is not kept fully occupied, but it is 
held that no smaller force would be allowable. The engineers 
of the operating company, and of the Rete Adriatica, seem to 
agree that the exigencies of trunk-line railway service demand 
that a sufficient force should be maintained to insure the prompt 
resumption of service in case of accident, and that the cost of 
maintenance and repairs, and of the supervision of sub-stations 
is not determined by the actual labor involved, but by the 
necessity for prompt action in emergencies. The difference 
in cost of maintenance between a three-phase and a single-phase 
line on trunk-line railways is, therefore, according to this view, 
simply the difference in the cost of material and hence a neg- 
ligibly small qaantity. This point of view is interesting, and, 
so far as I know, has not been mentioned in just the same form 
in this country; but in view of the higher cost of labor here it 
is questionable how far the plant could be adopted. 

Regarding the Huber system, the practical difficulties are 
not fully brought out in the papers of the evening. The contact 
device itself is carried on a rectangular framework hinged to 
the car-roof, and leaning outwardly for contact with the con- 
ductors when at the side of the line, but requiring to be moved 
inward when the line passes the centre of the track in entering 
tunnels and bridges. This movement is not automatic, and 
does not follow from mere change of position, but must be caused 
by special actuating devices, which must be operated. from 
within the train, or by means of a contact-rail laid along the 
side of the track and operated by a contact-shoe. Any failure 
of this auxiliary contact would mean the tearing of the struc- 
ture from the roof of the locomotive. The actual contact- 
maker is a light brass tube which, as seen on the experimental 
line, showed deep cuts, indicating rapid wear from use; and 
wherever it showed the effects of wear the damage was con- 
siderable. As used on the experimental line last spring, the 
device gave the impression of being still in the early experi- 
mental stages. 

CALVERT TOWNLEY: ‘The only changes in the overhead con- 
struction for trolley service have been those of improvements 
in detail, whereas the proposed departure in the direction of 
using high-pressure current is an extremely radical one. The 
advantages of high-pressure trolleys are not to be disregarded, 
but a considerable amount of caution should be observed in 
the immediate adoption of very high pressures. fe 

I disagree with Mr. Damon’s recommendation that it is now 
time to standardize trolley pressure and the location of the 


od 


148 HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CONSTRUCTION. {March 24 


trolley wire, on the ground that although it will be essential 
to standardize with reference to these points ultimately. Enough 
is not yet known about the matter from practical experience to 
enable standards to be selected without the danger of making 
very serious mistakes. 

Regarding Mr. Damon’s suggestion that 15000 volts should 
be adopted for steam railroads, it is doubtful if so high a pres- 
sure would be warranted by any railroad problem now in sight, 
either on the ground of first cost or of operating advantage. I 
am inclined to think that a system for such a high-pressure 


would be more expensive to install and maintain than one for 


a lower pressure. 

A. H. Armstronc: It would seem advisable that the trolley 
line pressure shall be kept as low as possible under the oper- 
ating conditions involved. A trolley wire suspended from a 
steel catenary can be insulated for 15 000 volts or more, as Mr. 
Damon says, but because a construction has been found capable 
of withstanding higher pressure, and because a motor system 
has been found that can use high pressure, that is no justifica- 
tion in using higher trolley pressure than the operating needs 
of the road requires. The apparatus is increased in cost; the 
liability to breakdown is increased, and the 3000 volts ordinarily 
in use upon our suburban lines seems to be high enough to 
secure all the economic advantages of higher trolley pressure. 

There is another way of lodking at the matter. With 3300 
volts at the sub-station, it is possible to operate heavy suburban 
cars at speeds approaching 50 miles an hour on from one-half- 
hour to one-hour headway, with sub-stations placed fully 20 
miles apart, assuming, of course, that the sub-stations are tied 
together. It is a question in the operation of the road how 
much trolley line is liable to be disabled in case of accident. 
Twenty-mile blocks seem too long for satisfactory operation ; 
and a higher trolley pressure, permitting of greater distance 
between sub-stations, is an undue refinement, unnecessary ex- 
pense for the apparatus, and presents a refinement that entails 
disadvantages which outweigh any possible saving in feeder 
copper. 

In considering the operation of heavy freight trains ot 2000 
or 3000 tons, where the output of the locomotive must reach 
1500 h.p. or more, it is proper to consider trolley potentials 
higher than 3000 volts suitable for single-car suburban work. 

Long blocks upon steam railroads are much more objection- 
able than upon suburban roads, and consideration of the oper- 
ating conditions involved will show that 5000 or 6000 volts 
upon the trolley is amply able to provide an electric system 
having a cost as low as the conditions vill warrant, while a 


higher trolley pressure in many cases offers no reduction in 


first cost, and carries with it the additional chance of breakdown. 
The position of the trolley wire has been alluded to; there 
are arguments in favor of both the center trolley and the cffset 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 149 


trolley. Of the three alternating-current lines now in opera~ 
tion in this country, two have center trolleys, and the third 
is equipped with a trolley wire placed over the edge of the 
car; in all three roads the trolley wire is suspended from a 
steel catenary. The advantage of using a center trolley is 
that it permits the use of the same trolley-pole for both city 
and suburban tracks. Suburban service, however, may be 
carried on by means of sliding-bows, or rollers, for which the 
city overhead construction is not adapted, thus in some measure 
destroying any argument in favor of the center trolley for 
suburban service. It is possible that our suburban lines will 
adopt a trolley-bow, or roller, best adapted for high-pressure 
trolley operation, in which case it will be necessary to provide 
an extra trolley-pole, with wheel, for city operation. With 
four trolley-poles upon the car, there is no objection to-con- 
sidering a trolléy suspended at the side of the track, while the 
adoption of this construction offers certain advantages not 
enjoyed by the center suspended trolley. In changing from 
alternating current to direct current, and vice versa, the side- 
suspended trolley permits contact being made with both alter- 
natin*-current and direct-current lines at the same time, thus 
facilitating changing over. We are hardly in a position as yet 
to standardize in any way the location of the trolley-wire, and 
the operation of the different lines now constructed and in 
process of construction will be watched with considerable 
interest as affording operating data in this connection. ; 

The frequency of hangers between the supporting cable 
and the trolley itself is also an open question. The Pontiac 
and Ballston lines are both operating with a single connection 
between trolley and catenary, placed midway between poles, 
while the Indianapolis & Cincinnati line provides for supports 
"every 10 ft. The latter line is not yet running at full speed, 
and we cannot say how much inconvenience is caused by the 
frequent supports, but it would seem hardly necessary to pro- 
vide supports more frequently than once or twice between poles. 

Mr. Damon has suggested the use of a separate transmission 
line to each sub-station, as an improvement upon a trunk 
transmission line feeding all sub-stations in multiple. From 
experience in transmission systems I am led to believe that 
any trouble experienced with them is proportional to the num- 
ber of miles of wire in operation, and separate transmission 
lines to each sub-station is open to criticism on this score. 
Separate transmission lines offer the possibility of operating 
the sub-stations without labor, but while such a system of opera- 
tion is possible it would seem advisable to have an attendant 
within call of a sub-station, although the proportion of his 
time taken up in sub-station duties is negligible. 

A road operating from a high-pressure trolley is new to this 
country, and as yet we are hardly in a position to attempt 
any standardizing either in type of apparatus, or in the con- 
struction of overhead lines. 


150 HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CONSTR UCTION. {March 24 


Presipent Lies: I will now call upon Mr. Babcock, the 
consulting engineer of the Southern Pacific Railroad, and Sec- 
retary of the San Francisco Branch of the INSTITUTE. 

A.H.Bascock: On the Pacific coast the conditions are such 
that the first and third classes of construction mentioned in 
Mr. Damon’s paper will probably be the ones that will be en- 
countered first, namely, comparatively inexpensive lines over 
‘a country not very well settled between points where there 
is a large movement of freight and over which the freight traffic 
must form the large proportion of the earnings. Then there 
will come the steam roads, of which we have hopes. But the 
natural prejudices of railroad men to radical innovations must 
first be overcome. 

The question of line pressure and installation is one that is 
very vital along the ocean front. It has been demonstrated 
that transmission lines of very high frequency tan be operated 
in the interior and in the southern portion of California with com- 
paratively little insulation, but on the coast the fogs make the 
conditions entirely different. i 

As to operating above 3000 or 6000 volts, it becomes at once 
a question not only as to whether it is worth while from the 
standpoint pointed out by Mr. Armstrong, but whether it is 
worth while in view of the leakage. The construction, as de- 
tailed in Mr. Varney’s paper, certainly has the appearance of 
fine workmanship; but the leakage that he gives, if that is to 
be carried throughout the length of the line in bad weather, 
I think it is a question how far we may go even with the best 
developed form of construction. For example, on page 139, 
he states that five miles of single catenary construction showed 
under test a leakage of one ampere at 6000 volts. Now, on a 
40-mile line of double track this would be equal to 96 kw, con- 
stant loss. In 500-volt direct-current work the loss-constant 
is not great. The greatest loss is while the cars are moving. 
It appears that this constant loss would pay for a whole lot of 
line loss while the cars are moving. 

C. O. Marttoux: The subjects discussed and suggested for 
discussion in the papers presented this evening are, undoubtedly, 
of great importance at the present time. If the statement be 
true that the question of the hour, in electric railroad engineer- 
ing, is the extension of electric traction into the field that has 
been hitherto occupied exclusively by steam, then the first 
question to answer is of necessity that of conveying electrical 
energy in large amounts safely and conveniently from a sta- 
tionary conductor to an electric locomotive or motor-car. 
I have had the conviction for some time that material pro- 
gress in the direction of a general supplanting of the steam loco- 
motive by the electric locomotive must wait for progress in 
methods adequate for the purpose just stated. 

Before making, last year, a personal inspection and study of 
experimental and commercial alternating-current traction sys- 


1905 .] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 151 


tems in Europe, I was somewhat skeptical in regard to the 
feasibility of raising above 3000 volts the difference of pressure 
applied direct to the motors, in spite of the fact that 3000 volts 
had been used successfully in this manner for a year or more 
on the Valtellina line in Northern Italy. Doubts on this point 
were dissipated by what I saw, especially on the Spindersfeld 
line near Berlin, and the experimental line built in Switzerland 
by the Oerlikon Company near Ziirich, which has since become 
a working line. I am now a firm believer in, and a strong 
partisan of, high-pressure contact lines, whether overhead 
trolley or third-rail conductors. 

Mr. Damon’s view, expressed on page 116, in favor of higher 
contact-line pressures for alternating-current railway motor 
cars is in the right direction; and as between 3300 volts and 6000 
volts, I am inclined to favor 6000 volts as the standard which 
should be adopted for interurban lines. As Mr. Damon says, 
for steam railroad conditions a line contact pressure of at 
least 15000 volts is desirable. Its feasibility is borne out by 
tests and experiments that I made abroad. 

The contact line with catenary suspension has been recently 
introduced here, and, judging from the data contained in Mr. 
Damon’s paper, has already reached a high stage of develop- 
ment. The catenary contact line on the Spindersfeld line, 
with 6000 volts pressure difference, appeared to work satis- 
factorily in every respect. Nevertheless, it would seem that 
either on account of municipal restrictions or for other reasons 
not readily apparent, the catenary contact lines for other pro- 
jected alternating-current single-phase roads, that came to my 
notice, were limited to 2400 volts. I surmise that notwith- 
standing the fact that so few breakdowns of the contact line 
have occurred at Spindersfeld, and that none of these break- 
downs caused any accident, there is still some feeling of unrest 
associated with the thought of a contact line of 6000 volts 
placed directly over the car or locomotive; and even though 
the probability of accident is very remote, yet, so long as the 


possibility thereof still remains, the objection will doubtless 
ersist. 

The double catenary, as Mr. Damon states, has the advantage 
of keeping the contact wire from swaying, but its increased 
cost does not appear always to justify its use. With the tower 
method of construction, using long spans, probably the double 
catenary would be indispensable. With the ordinary trolley- 
line form of suspension, where the distance between poles is not 
excessive, the single catenary would seem adequate and satis- 
factory tor all purposes. At Spindersfeld, the poles are placed 
about 39 metres apart. Both the single- and the double-cate- 
nary suspension have been tried, and both have proved satis- 
factory. 7 

The reference made by Mr. Damon to spectacular, sparking, 
when the contact line was coated with ice or sleet, emphasizes 


152 HIGH-PRESSURE LINE ee [March 24 


a very serious and, in my opinion, radically inherent, defect in 
any contact line arranged to deliver current from its lower side. 
The fact that the sparking increases with the frequency of the 
trolley supports, in the cases observed by Mr. Damon, proves 
conclusively that ordinary trolley-line construction, using a 
trolley-wheel, is wholly unsuitable for high-pressure contact 
lines. With the catenary suspension, even with a trolley- 
wheel, the sparking should be independent of the number or 
frequency of the line supports. 

The necessity of employing higher pressures for the trans- 
mission lines will obviously depend on the pressure of the 
contact line. When this pressure difference is as low as 3000 
volts, undoubtedly it would still be necessary to employ higher 
transmission pressure in most cases for interurban lines; but 
if the pressure difference at the contact line is raised to 6000 
volts, there are many cases where this pressure would be suffi- 
ciently high for both transmitting and distributing purposes. 
When the contact line pressure is raised to still higher values, 
say, for instance, to 15 000 volts, the same pressure difference 
will suffice in a large number of cases for both transmitting 
and distributing purposes. Indeed, it it were not for the con- 
venience of subdividing the total line into blocks or sections 
the contact line itself could serve as the feeder. 

Mr. Huber, of the Oerlikon Company, mentioned a project 
for the equipment of a steam line in Switzerland, where it was 
proposed to supply 50 miles of track, in both directions from a 
central station, without feeders, simply by using duplicate 
contact lines, one on each side of the track. This method has 
the advantage of providing a duplicate line equipment, which 
can still answer the purpose at lower efficiency and without 
materially crippling the service in case of defect or derangement 
in either of the two contact lines. 

Mr. Huber has kindly furnished me with a set ot slides and 
photographs showing interesting details of his system, which I 
will now show. 


(CoMPLETION OF DiscusSION AFTER ADJOURNMENT.) 


The slides and photographs referred to illustrate the char- 
acteristic features of the high-pressure, single-phase, alternating 
current electric railroad equipment of the Seebach-Wettingen 
line, in Switzerland. This line, which is a branch of the Swiss 
National Railroad system, is about 20 kilometers long, with 
single track of standard gauge. It has been operated by steam 
since it was first built, and will continue to be partly operated 
by steam for some time to come. When visited by me last 
‘summer, a portion of the line situated a short distance from the 
works of the Oerlikon Co., was equipped electrically, and was 
used by the Oerlikon Co. for making experiments with electric 
locomotives and various forms of contact lines and line supports. 


1905. DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 153 


It was then expected that the entire branch-line would be 
equipped and operated electrically by November or December, 
1904; but it seems that sufficient allowance had not been made 
for official procrastination and obstruction. The plans for the 
equipment of the Seebach station, for instance, were only ap- 
proved some time last January. 

The portion of the road equipped and the electric locomotive 
intended to be used were both inspected by the Federal author- 
ities, on November: 18, 1904. As Mr. Huber states, it would 
have been difficult to select worse weather, there being a thick, 
wet fog, which lasted all day. The results were entirely satis- 
factory, however; not the slightest defect being observed as 
the result of a great. diversity of very severe tests of the line 
and of the electric locomotive. 

This case is interesting as being the first in which the Huber 
contact-line system, referred to by Mr. Damon and illustrated 
in Figs. 9 to 17 of his paper, has been adopted. It is particularly 
interesting and important as a pioneer movement toward the 
electrification of steam railway lines in Switzerland; for ap- 
parently both the Swiss government and the Oerlikon Co. are 
as much interested in the ulterior possibilities as in the imme- 
diate results; and in endeavoring to produce a satisfactory 
‘“‘sample ”’ of electric traction as a substitute for steam traction 
for the specific conditions, both parties are evidently desirous, 
the former of testing, the latter of demonstrating, the general 
fitness of«the system for all kinds of steam roads. This may 
account, in a large measure, for the careful and time-consuming 
scrutiny which has been given by the authorities to every detail 
of the proposed equipment. The further development ot the line 
is to proceed apparently in the same conservative and cautious 
manner. It has been decided that the regular daily trips ior 
which the official time-table has been issued shall be made, for 
a certain time at least, on the short portion of the line already 
equipped, before proceeding further with the electrification of 
the rest ot the line. 

The following is a quotation from remarks by me before the 
New York Electrical Society, last November, as published in 
the Street Railway Journal, Nov. 26, 1904: 

“The electric train service proposed for this line will require eight 
trains, or four trains in each direction, per day. It is expected that 
this service can be done with one single electric locomotive. Each train 
will carry both freight and passengers, mostly freight. The estimated 
average train loads, not including the weight of the locomotive, are: 
180 to 200 tons for trains running west, in which case the up-grades 
average about 0.8%, and 150 to 170 tons for trains running east, in which 
case the up-grades average about 1.0%. The average speed will be 
about 40 km. per hour. There are seven stations in the line including 
the. two terminal stations.. One of the present steam locomotives will 
be retained in service, at first, to run at least two more trains per day, 
one each way. This will be done partly to avoid the necessity of a sec- 
ond locomotive, but principally to enable the comparison between steam 
and electricity to be made under substantially the same operating. con- 


ditions,” ebay}. 


154 HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CONSTRUCTION. [March 24 


The members interested will find in this article a brief refer- 
ence to the electric locomotive which is passed by here as ex- 
‘traneous to the subject under discussion. The following para- 


Fic. 1.—Single Wire Held by Wire-Holders Rigidly Supported. 


graph, which is a quotation from a reference made by Mr. Huber 
to the slides and photographs, contains interesting details re- 
garding various forms of contact-line supports experimented 
with by him: 


Fics, 2 AND 2a.—Single Wire Held with Clamps with Lever to Secure 
the Wire Horizontally. 


“From the photographs you will see that we are experimenti i 
different methods of carrying the trolley or etukaee sees fel ee 
You will find (Fig. 1) the single wire held by wire-holders rigidly sup- 


1905.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 1 


Fic. 4.—A Specimen of ‘“‘ Inverted” Catenary. 


156 HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CONSTRUCTION. [March 24 


ported in the way which you know from our short experimental line in- 
spected by you when here. Next, you find (Figs. 2, 2a) a single yt 3 
held with clamps to which a kind of lever is attached for securing the 
wire horizontally, while a spring made of steel wire, having some play 
vertically, supports the weight of the wire and takes up the hypothetical 
‘blows,’ or the downward pressure, of the current collector. You will 
also find (Fig. 3) a pair of wires carried over the poles with the two 
wires interconnected by loose links. The inside wire is intended as the 
contact-wire for the current-collector, the outside wire as a reinforce- 
ment of the cross-section or conductivity of the line. The outside wire, 
having a somewhat greater sag, is less likely to break and will therefore 
constitute a safety-suspension for the inside wire in case the latter should 


Fic, 5.—Another View of the ‘' Inverted’’ Catenary Suspension. 


break near a support, it being then held above the ground by the inter- 
connecting links just mentioned. The same principle of mutual safety- 
suspension has been adopted for road crossings of small importance 
(Fig. 6). You will also find two different forms of ‘inverted’ catenary 
suspension, which have so far given excellent results (Figs. 4 and 5). 
This suspension has been used on about 5/4 kilometers of length. During 
these last days, when the weather was very cold, the trolley or contact- 
wire, supported on these catenaries, was so straight that the current- 
collector showed no appreciable up-and-down motion. We have,. how- 
ever, come to the conclusion that this suspension, although it costs only 


1905.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 157 


about 200 francs per kilometer more for erection, and hardly as much 
for material, will not be desirable for crdinary purposes. With two 
current-collectors on the car there has never been any appreciable spark- 
ing in passing over the supports: of the contact-wire at the poles, with 
line construction of the types shown in Figs. 1 to 3.” 
Fig. 6 shows the arrangement of the contact-line at an ordi- 
hary crossing. The arrangement is based on the form of con- 
tact-line construction illustrated in Fig. 3; there being a pair of 
wires, which are interconnected by loose links. The object is, 
obviously, to make provision for supporting the ends of one of 


Fic. 6.—Arrangement of the Contact Line at an Ordinary Crossing. 


the wires in case it breaks, and to prevent the ends from reaching 
the ground, . 
Fig. 7 shows a more elaborate form otf road crossing. In this 
case a bridging structure made of angle-iron 1s placed over the 
road and under the wire, and serves both to catch and to ground 
the ends of the broken line wire. In order to make the pro- 
tection more adequate, a short section, or block,” of the 
contact-line itself, varying in length from 40 to 70 meters, 


' 


158 HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CONSTRUCTION. [March 24 


according to the width of the crossing, has its connection with 
the source of electricity controlled by the gates in such manner 
that this short section is connected with the line-wire only 
when the gates are closed and a train is passing; it is entirely 
disconnected and ‘‘ dead ’’ when the gates are open, at which 
time the current passes through a short auxiliary line which 
is specially installed over the street crossing. The cost of an 


Fic, 7.—Angle-Iron Bridging Structures at Important Crossing, to 
Catch Broken Wires, 


ordinary street crossing, such as shown in Fig. 6, is estimated 
at 600 francs. The cost of a street crossing such as shown in 
Fig. 7 is estimated at 1300 francs. 

Fig. 8 shows the line-contact construction at a station, and 
over switches and side-tracks. In this case, the line construc- 
tion is such that the current-collector makes contact partly 
above, partly at the side, and partly under the contact wire. 
It is proper to emphasize, at this point, the fact that while the 
Huber system is designed to permit the collector to take current 
from the contact-wire by touching it either below, on the side, 


1905,] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK, 159 


or above, the top contact is preferable and is the normal method. 
The collection of current from the side or from below the 
contact-wire is to be regarded as, in reality, only an expedient 
called for by certain conditions, especially by the limited space 
usually available for trolley supports, in railroad tunnels, under 
bridges, and at switches and side-tracks. On steam railroad lines 
only a comparatively small percentage of the contact-lines 
would require other than top-contact current collection. 
Where a sufficient width is available, under bridges and ~ ‘gh- 
ways, the shifting of the pivot of the current-collector can be 
readily eliminated. This has been done in the case illustrated 


Fic. 8.—Line Contact Construction at a Station, over Switches and 
Side Tracks. 


in Fig. 9. It does not follow, therefore, that the shifting of 
the current-collector, which has been criticised as one of the 
objectionable features of the Huber system, would be required 
in every case. Moreover, this device has now been brought to 
such a degree of perfection that its use 1s no longer a serious 
Se rerine to the large photographs, attention is called to the 
thin wire carried on ordinary insulators on the side of the pole 
away from the track. This wire forms part of a “ block 

system devised by the Oerlikon Co. The entire length of the 


160 HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CONSTRUCTION. [March 24 


Seebach-Wettingen line is to be divided into 13 sections. The 
contact-wire at or near each station will form a section or block, 
and the portion extending from one station to another will 
also constitute a section; hence, there being seven stations, 
including the terminal stations, there will be 13 electrical sec- 
tions or blocks in the entire distance of 20 km. The small wire 
shown in the photographs, which is called the “cut-out” 
wire, or the “‘ feeling’ wire, is connected with a weatherproof 
fuse to each insulator pin. If the insulator begins to leak ex- 
cessively, or if it actually breaks down, current flows through 
its pin, and through the fuse, and is conveyed by the cutout 


‘Fic, 9.—Illustrating an Instance where a good Bridge Clearance makes 
Unnecessary the Shifting of the Current-Collector Pivot. 


wire to the operating solenoids of certain line switches located 
at the ends of the sections. Thus, any section or block on 
which there is a leaky or faulty insulator is automatically cut 
out. When the fuse is blown there is an explosive sound like 
that of a gun-shot, serving to attract the attention of the guard- 
men or station-men, even at a considerable distance. After 
the fuse has blown, the fuse-holder hangs from its support in 
such a position as to make it visible even from a considerable 
distance. Some of the switches controlling the blocks or sec- 
tions are placed on poles. Figs. 10 anu 11 show one of the 
switches open and closed, respectively. * 
Another form of section switch is shown in Fig. 12. The 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 161 


Fics. 10 anv 11.—Block Controlling Switches Closed and Ope 


sf 


Fic. 12.—Another Form of Section Switch. 


162 HIGH-PRESSURE LINE CONSTRUCTION. [March 24 


faulty insulator is located, first, by the audible signal produced 
by detonation of the fuse; secondly, by the visual signal given by 
the displacement of the fuse holder, and thirdly, by the absence 
of the fuse from the fuse holder. 

As Mr. Huber stated to me, perhaps some of these operating 
features will be found superfluous, and sufficient reliability in 
line equipment can be realized without some of them. It was 
deemed prudent, however, to develop and apply such devices 
in this case, if only to meet the objection urged by steam rail- 
road men that electrical troubles on a trolley line will be hard 
to detect, and that their removal would cause trouble and 
delay. At my request the experiment was tried of making an 
artificial ground at one of the line-contact insulators, to simulate 
the case where the insulator breaks down and grounds the 
contact-line. On making the artificial ground the audible and 
visual signals were unquestionably such as would attract atten- 
tion, even though the location of the pole were not definitely 
known. * It took less than three minutes for a lineman to re- 
place the damaged insulator with a new one, and to have the 
current again turned on to the affected section. 

Mr. Huber has ‘paid close attention to the requirements of the 
contact-rod of the current-collector. After trying different 
metals, he has found that brass or composition metal tubes 
answer the purpose very well. He has also succeeded in lubri- 
cating the rod, and furthermore, has resorted to the expedient, 
of zigzagging the contact-line tor the purpose of minimizing 
wear on the contact-rod, and to equalize it along the length of 
the rod, thereby preventing the rod from being sawed 
through by the contact-wire. 

The top-contact method of current collection is unquestion- 
ably superior to all others in sleety and frosty weather. On 
this point Mr. Huber furnishes interesting evidence in the fol- 
lowing comment on the results obtained since the portion of 
the line electrically equipped was put in regular operation: 


“The aggregate number of kilometers run, up to the present time 
(Jan. 25, 1905), is 450 km. The speed varies between 45 and 50 km. 
per hour. We have thus far always had to cqntend with a very large 
amount of frost on the wire during the first trip; in the morning. The 
frost, owing to its nature, envelops the wire from all sides, while the 
sleet, which very often is produced from the frost, clings only to the 
under side of the wire. For this reason, on one day when the frost was 
exceptionally heavy, there was a continuous light sparking on the cur- 
rent-collector, which, however, was without any influence upon the 
volt- and ampere-meters; and, on the next trip, the line was perfectly 
free from sparking, simply because the frost, as formed on the upper 
side of the wire, will always be inevitably wiped away by the current- 
collector, while a cover of sleet will never be destroyed in the same 
way. It has also been observed that the sparking is very much heavier 
on those portions where the current-collector touches the wire from the 
side or from below. It is therefore proved that with regard to frost and 


sleet on the wires the contact from the top of the trolley wire is a marked. 
advantage,”’ 


1905. ] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 163 


In conclusion, I may state, that after careful study of the 
Huber system, I have become a convert to, and a partisan of, 
the top-contact theory for contact-lines intended for long-dis- 
tance traction. It possesses constructive and operative fea- 
tures which recommend it as preferable to the under-contact 
system. Not the least important of its recommendation is 
that of cost. I am convinced that if a comparison is made on 
the basis of equal mechanical and electrical results, also in- 
cluding cost of maintenance, the top-contact method is so much 
lower in cost as to outclass the others. This is the more true, 
the higher the line-pressure, and consequently the more per- 
fect the insulation demanded. 

The impedance of the iron rails of the track on this line has 
been carefully studied by the Oerlikon Company. The mem- 
bers who are interested in this matter will find an article on this 
subject in the Electrotechnische Zeitschrift for April 1, 1904, by 
Dr. H. Behn-Eschenburg, of the technical staff of the Oerlikon 
Company. It has been found that the pressure loss due to im- 
pedance of the track rails assumes such importance in some 
cases as to necessitate a special system of current-return line, 
with special booster transformers for the track, an inter- 
esting form of which is described in the article just mentioned. 

THEODORE VARNEY: Referring to Mr. Babcock’s remarks con- 
cerning leakage, it is important to keep in mind the fact that 
the entire line was covered with wet snow. Upon another day 
when the line was clear of snow, although the insulators were 
black with locomotive and other kinds of smoke which exists 
in the Pittsburg district, the leakage could scarcely be read 
with shop instruments. This appears to be the only point 
requiring especial remark. © 

Gro. F. Sever: The remarks of Mr. Armstrong are par- 
ticularly pertinent as to the continuity of service by having 
- fewer transmission lines, having one trunk line connecting all 

sub-stations, and having the sub-stations nearer together than 
is contemplated by the higher trolley pressure suggested in Mr. 
Damon’s paper. 

PRESIDENT Lies: 1 think it should be said that undoubtedly 
a great deal of credit is due to the pioneer builders of this high- 
pressure trolley line, Messrs. Ganz & Company of Budapest; but 
I think it also might be stated that the road in question could 
hardly be considered a heavy trunk-line. While it is a branch 
of the Adriatic Railway system it is rather a spur from the 
main line. I do not remember the exact conditions as to 
amount of traffic, but the impression that I got in reading the 
description of the road, led me to believe that it was not 
a very heavy line, not at all approaching our trunk-line condi- 
tions. 


ee 


-% 
thee 


A paper presented at the 196th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, April 28, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I.E. E. 


SOME NOTES ON POLYPHASE METERING. 


BY J. D. NIES. 

During the summer of 1904 a series of tests was carried on 
for an operating company for the purpose of determining the 
most satisfactory method of metering the power delivered to 
certain consumers whose demands ranged from. 200 to 1000 
kilowatts. The aim was to determine, as far as possible, the 
nature and probable extent.of the errors that occur in the estab- 
lished available methods of polyphase metering, and to find 
which of these methods would be on the whole the best to use 
for the given work—regarding as best that system in which 
errors are not only least liable to occur, but. also in which, if 
they do occur, their presence can be most quickly and readily 
detected. 

The established practice of this company had been to install 
polyphase meters on such circuits, and in cases where especial 
accuracy was desired to put two of them in series. It was 
found in such cases that the two meters would never give iden- 
tical. readings; they were seemingly affected. differently by 
changes in frequency, pressure, and power-factor., The differ- 
ence between their readings was not constant; one meter would 
sometimes register alternately faster and slower than its mate; 
but always. in the long run, the divergence. between the two 
readings would become so great as to make it a matter of some 
risk to accept either of them, or the average of both, as the true 
value of power registered. The behavior of the instruments 
seemed somewhat capricious, indicating clearly enough that 
errors: existed other than those of calibration, errors which 
would make it unwise to place implicit. confidence in the readings 


165 


166 NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. [April 28 


of such meters unless some means were provided whereby their 
readings could be continuously checked. 

The field of application of the polyphase meter is necessarily 
rather limited. It will probably always remain true that the 
bulk of the alternating-current output will be delivered through 
single-phase meters. On the one hand, it is true that when 
power is consumed in large blocks—from 25 to 1000 kilowatts 
or more—the delivery is nearly always made in the polyphase 
form; for example, the power measured at the input end of a 
transmission line or at the input side of a synchronous converter 
has to be measured nearly always by a polyphase meter. There- 
fore, though there are fewer examples of polyphase meter in- 
stallations the individual cases are of greater importance. The 
requirements for high accuracy are far more strict, inasmuch 
as the load carried by such a polyphase meter may be several 
thousand times as great as that on the average single-phase 
meter, and an error of a small fraction of one per cent. in its 
registration means a considerable error when figured in dollars. 
It is not correct to say that a percentage error bears the same 
significance whether it applies to a large or to a small amount. 
Besides, many of the errors occurring in individual meters will 
be averaged out when a large number of them is considered; it 
would be possible to have an error of one per cent. in each one 
of 100 meters, and yet have a combined error of almost vanishing 
dimensions. But a polyphase meter of large capacity must 
operate as an individual, and will impress its own peculiarities 
upon the power bill that is based on its readings. In this fact 
may be found the justification for what might appear to be an 
unreasonable amount of hair-splitting, apparently more fit for 
the laboratory than for commercial work, which, however, is 
necessary in the effort to analyze the errors involved in meas- 
uring polyphase power. In what follows, the reference is prin- 
cipally to the high-tension, three-wire, three-phase system with 
balanced load, employing instrument transformers as inter- 
mediary between the line and the meter, the latter being of the 
induction type. 

Inasmuch as the errors introduced by instrument transformers 
have the same effect upon the accuracy of all meter systems, 
whether single phase or any form of polyphase, the considera- 
tion of them will naturally precede consideration of the different 
systems. For many well known reasons it is necessary, 
in all high-pressure meter work, to use instrument trans- 


1905.] NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. 167 


formers instead of connecting the meters directly into the line. 
In this way the meter instead of receiving upon its shunt coil 
the full line pressure, receives a known fraction of that pressure, 
through the agency of the pressure transformer; and, instead 
of carrying through its current coils the full line current, 
it carries a known fraction of that current, through the 
agency of the current transformer. The result is, that the 
meter receives at its terminals only a small fraction of the actual 
power undergoing measurement, and its reading must, there- 
fore, be multiplied by the product of pressure transformation- 
ratio into current transformation-ratio, in order to get the 
registration. The instrument transformers then really con- 
stitute parts of the meter system, and should be considered in 
connection with it. The question may then be asked, do the 
instrument transformers correctly perform their function of 
delivering to the meter those fractions of line pressure and of 
line current called for by their ratios? 

A pressure transformer differs in no radical way from an ordi- 
nary transformer, its operation is similar and is governed by 
the same rules, and therefore the pressure delivered from the 
secondary coils (supposing constant primary pressure) will 
vary with the amount of load that is put upon the transfor- 
mer, by reason of the impedance drop in its coils. 

Take for example a 200-watt transformer built for 10 000 volts 
in the primary and 100 volts in the secondary ; the impedance of 
such a transformer would be about 10 000 ohms, and with the full- 
load current the impedance drop would be 200 volts, reduced 
to the primary; this would represent a drop of 2%, but as it is 
a vector subtraction, the error is less than this; it is about 1.6%. 
This will vary with the frequency, and with the power-factor 
of the load. All instruments supplied by such a transformer 
at fuli load would read 1.6% low. The error could be reduced 
by putting more turns on the secondary coil; but in that case 
the secondary pressure would be too high at all lower loads. 
Perhaps the best that could be done would be to make the ratio 
correct at half load. The point is, that the ratio can not be 
correct throughout the whole range of the transformer; and 
that the results of even the most careful calibration can be 
vitiated by using a meter in connection with a recklessly loaded 
pressure transformer. 

For a transformer supplying voltmeters only this will be the 
only error to expect; but when wattmeters are supplied there 


“168 NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. [April 28 


is another effect to be considered, namely, phase displacement 
between primary and secondary electromotive forces. In a 
perfect transformer without reactance this phase displacement 
should be exactly 180 degrees, so that when the secondary 
electromotive force is reversed it will be returned into perfect 
phase with its original, the line electromotive force. If the 
displacement is not exactly 180 degrees, the result will be that 
the meter receives an electromotive force the phase of which, 
with respect to the line current, is not the same as it actually 
is in the line; the meter, therefore, works on and registers a 
false power-factor. The phase error introduced by a loaded 
shunt-transformer represents an apparent decrease in the angle 
of lag of the system of perhaps one-half degree—this depending 
upon the frequency and upon the power-factor of the secondary 
load. 

The error in the case of the current transformer arises not 
directly on. account of the impedance of the coils, but on account 
of the fact that not all the primary current is transformed, as 
‘part is diverted for the purpose of magnetizing the core. After 
the exciting-current component is subtracted vectorially, the 
residue is transformed at the true ratio. Consequently two 
errors are introduced: the quantity of secondary current is too 
small, unless the ratio of the transformer is corrected by re- 
moving the proper number of turns from the secondary coil; - 
and the phase of the secondary current is different from the 
phase of its primary. The curves in Fig. 1, which were cal- 
culated from measurements of exciting current and coil impe- 
dance over 1 wide range, give the variation in ratio on a per- 
centage basis, taking the full-load ratio as 100%, and the vari- 
ation in phase from 180°, for a current transformer with 60- 
ampere primary and 5-ampere secondary, and with a load rating 
of 40 watts. The curves in full line are for a secondary load 
resistance that will take up full load at full current; those in 
broken line are for a load consisting of an ordinary wattmeter 
series coil and 200 feet of No. 12 B. & S. wire for leads, making 
about } full load. The curves indicate a falling off of ratio 
and an increase of phase displacement on low loads, which 
would introduce errors quite comparable with the usual low 
load calibration error. 

The curves in Fig. 2 show the per cent. of error introduced 
by a current transformer into the readings of a 5-ampere, 90-volt 
wattmeter supposed accurate in other respects, as a function 


1905.) NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. 169 


of the lag of the load current. The current’ transformer ‘is 
supposed to be correct in ratio at full load, and to be supplying 
a wattmeter together with 200 feet of No. 12 B. & S. wire as 
leads (in all about one-third full load). Curve A is for full volt- 
amperes, curve B for 0.5 full volt-amperes, and curve C for 0.2 
full volt-amperes. The curves in Fig. 3 give the correspond- 
ing errors translated into watts; the lettering is the same. 
It is clear that the effect is negligible in circuits that are 
operated normally at or near unity power-factor, except on low 
loads. 


‘bogie 
Fae ale 
Nes 
| 
: - 
| 
o--~-w> Degrees 


97 
a 
oO 
3) 
& 
96 


Amperes 


Pree de 


Fig. 4 illustrates the combined error produced by shunt and 
current transformers. , represents the primary pressure, and 
E, the secondary pressure, the latter more than 180° behind 
its primary. J, is the primary current, and J, the secondary 
current, less than 180° behind its primary... These statements. 
apply only to the usual condition of nearly non-inductive load 
on the transformers. The angle between E, and I, is less than 
that. between F, and, /,. That is, the effect of both trans- 
formers is to produce an alteration in the apparent. phase of the 


170 NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. [April 28 


current in the direction of lead, which may be called the phase 
error; combined with a reduction, both of pressure and of cur- 
rent, which may be called the percentage error. Thus a lagging 
current registers in the meter with a reduced angle of lag, hence 
higher power-factor and increased registration; therefore the per- 
centage error and the phase error are to some extent compen- 
sative. A leading current registers in the meter with an in- 
creased angle of lead, hence lower power-factor and decreased 
registration, and the phase error and the percentage error are 
additive. The curves in Fig. 5 may serve to indicate the 


BitGus. 


probable magnitude of this error. Curve A is for the condition 
of full load on both pressure and current transformers, the 
impedance of the secondary circuit of the latter being such as 
to take up rated full load at full-load current, in a single-phase 
circuit of 90 volts and 5 amperes; the per cent. of total regis- 
tration is plotted as a function of the circuit lag. Curve B is 
also for the condition of full volt-amperes in the circuit but 
with half-loaded instrument transformers. Curve C gives the 
percentages of curve A reduced to watts on a basis of 450 watts 
at unity power-factor. This curve gives the probable limit of 


1905.] NIES” POLYPHASE METERING. yu 


the error; to avoid this extreme it is evident that it is necessary 
to use instrument transformers with judgment; and wherever 
the highest possible accuracy is desired it is best to install 
special transformers for the meter and use them for that purpose 
only, or else run the risk of introducing errors which may com- 
pletely overshadow the ordinary errors of calibration. 

Current transformers are subject to another error which may 
occur if they are installed too closely together. Ordinarily the 


A 
pa! Ss Penal os ae Ik 
a | 
Tp fa g—f—_t} 
ne s re | L 
mY ee | 
Lag ed ne ‘Lead 


70 6 50 640 30 5) 1+. 108) 20 S30) 40 rap) 7 6) 70 ©6080 90 


| ASS Cert 
deci ee oe 
eee eee 


ne Ht i ee | 
Fic. 3: 


| 


primary winding consists of but few turns, and on that account 
the magnetizing effect of strong currents in neighboring conduc- 
tors cannot be neglected in comparison with the magnetizing 
effect of the current in the transformer’s own primary circuit. 
This result is the same sort of inaccuracy in the registration of 
the meter that would occur if the meter itself were installed in 
the presence of an external field. The error simply arises in 
the transformer instead of in the meter. Ordinarily in high- 
pressure circuits the necessary mechanical separation between 
conductors is sufficient to prevent this effect. hice 

At this point may be considered an inaccuracy which is due 


172 NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. [April 28 


to the wiring loss between transformers and meter. It is the 
usual practice to provide the two sets of transformers, for pres- 
sure and for current, with the same common return. The 


Vp 


\g 
eb ceme: & 


result is, that the drop of pressure in this common return, 
though it does not affect the operation of the current trans- 
formers materially, is subtracted from the pressure delivered 


t —e T 108 


\ | Per} cent 
inn ot 107—> 


y tts 
aay | | j 4206 | 4 bs | -12 


tT 7 t ——} Los | — +——;-—-+ 


ee x oe 
Seclatian wa 
BE 


—19g 
Fi6..5. 


‘rom the pressure transformers as shown in diagram in Fig. 6. 
The triangle A BC revresents the electromotive forces as de- 
livered from the terminals of the pressure transformer secondaries. 


1905.]_ . NIESs‘ POLYPHASE METERING. 173 


Then if the two-meter method is used, C A and C B are the elec- 
tromotive forces that should be received upon the terminals of 
the meters. C is the common return, in which the current, 
assuming non-inductive load, is 7. This current in passing 
through the conductor C will cause a resistance drop r and a 
reactance drop x. Then the one meter will receive the pressure 
C’A and the other the pressure C’B. It is easy to prove that 
the registration of the meters will be too low by just the amount 
of the J? R loss in the common return, and is therefore the 
same for the same current no matter what the load power- 
factor may be. If the common return is 100 feet of No. 12 
B. & S. wire, the error will be about 5 watts when the current 


A B 


Fic. 6. 


in the common return is 5 amperes. This is far too great an 
error to neglect, and it would be a good deal greater if the re- 
turn wire were longer or of smaller size. This one item may 
mean a difference of hundreds of dollars annually in the bills 
based on the readings of a high-capacity meter. The effect could 
be prevented by running a separate return wire for the pressure 
transformers, connected at but one point to the return wire for 
the current transformers. It is interesting to note that ‘react- 
ance in the common return is entirely without effect upon the 
total registration of the meters, unless by way of interfering 
with the normal operation of the current transformers; this 
means that the point C’ can be displaced in either direction 


174 NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. [April 28 


to any distance along the line x without altering the total 
registration, provided the meters can withstand the abnormal 
pressure conditions that this would impose. All meter wires 
should be run close together, preferably in conduits, to pré- 
vent inductive effects from outside fields. 

As is well known, metersof all types have a tendency to run 
‘“‘slow’’ on full load and also on low load. This difficulty can 
best be met by calibrating ameter for its probable average load. 
By careful calibration and checking, a very close average reg- 
istration can be obtained, the more so because in his class of 
service a meter is rarely called upon to operate without a 
fairly large load, and the light-load errors would ordinarily 
have little significance. 

Occasionally a considerable error is introduced by displace- 
ment of the phase of the shunt field from the proper position, 
90 degrees behind the impressed electromotive force. This 
displacement may arise in several ways. It may be due to 
improper adjustment at the factory, the method of adjustment 
being such as to permit a possible variation of the shunt phase- 
angle of from 0.5 to 0.75 of a degree on either side of the true 
position. The usual plan is to supply a meter with a pressure 
and a current in quadrature, and to adjust the phasing resist- 
ance for no motion of the disk. The adjustment should be 
made for no torque; no motion and no torque mean the same 
thing only when the frictional resistance of the moving parts 
is zero. No torque exists when the shunt and series fields are 
exactly in phase. But there will be no motion until the devia- 
tion from quadrature phase produces sufficient torque to start 
the meter in either direction. If W is the watts—non-induct- 
ive—necessary to produce perceptible motion of the disk, V 
the volts, and A the amperes used in making the adjustment, 
then the range of variation 3 the shunt phase when thus ad- 
justed will be: 


The effect of the friction compensating torque will not be to 
alter this range, but merely to shift its location with reference 
to the 90° point. Perfect friction compensation would place 
one end of this range at the 90° point, which simply moves 
the middle point of it away from 90°, and increases the chances 
for an incorrect adjustment. The effect is not eliminated by 


1905.] NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. cites 


tapping the meter to remove friction. The displacement may 
arise after the meter is put into service on account of the aging 
of the iron composing the cores of the reactance coils, or on ac- 
count of the variations in the resistance. It may be caused by 
mechanical alterations of the positions of various parts; for 
instance, a change in the length of an air-gap. Usually it is 
affected more or less by the operation of adjusting the light- 
load calibration. Variations of circuit pressure, wave form, and 
frequency, always alter the phase of the shunt field. That 
the effect is not always negligible may be shown by the full- 
line curve in Fig. 7, worked out for a single-phase meter with 
a shunt phase-displacement of 2° (to 92°), with full pressure 
and full current, and with various angles of lag of the load 
current. The meter is supposed to be in perfectly correct 
calibration for non-inductive load. The curve shows the error 
to be a maximum for a lag or a lead of 90° in the load current ; 
therefore, any system of polyphase metering that compels a 
meter to operate at or near a phase difference of 90°, is 

liable to be subject to this error. Evidently when high accur- 
acy is desired, and the power-factor of the load is variable, 
the phase of the shunt field should be checked with just as 
much care as is devoted to the regular calibration on non- 
inductive loads, as it determines to a yreat extent the perfor- 
mance of the meter on inductive loads. 

Mention must be made of the error caused by variations of 
temperature; it makes a very complex problem in the induction 
meter, and analysis of it is out of place in this paper. The 
effect of any one of the factors is not large, and to a certain 
extent they are compensative, making the probable total effect 
small, though the whole matter is somewhat problematical. 
A meter should be calibrated under the same temperature con- 
ditions that it will be subjected to in service; in this way the 
error can be made practically negligible. 

We may now take up for consideration the different methods 
of applying induction meters to the measurement of polyphase 
power. One method employs a single-phase meter with star 
box, the meter pressure-coil acting as one arm of the star-box. 
The meter reading ig then to be multiplied by three. This 
method is open to the objection that it is difficult to get the 
impedances to balance perfectly, and to restore them if the bal- 
ance becomes disturbed. The method is not accurate unless 
the load is in perfect balance; the entire responsibility rests on 


176 NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. [April 28 


a single meter, and any error that occurs in it is multiplied 
by three in making the final estimate; and there is no check 
on its reading. 

A preferable method of applying a single meter to a bal- 
anced circuit would be to insert the current coil into one of 
the conductors, and connect the pressure coil between that 
conductor and the middle point of the transformer secondary 
connected across the two other conductors; the true power is 
found by multiplying the reading by 2. This method elimin- 
ates the troublesome star-box. 

Another method in common use employs two separate single- 
phase meters so connected that the two meters receive in their 
current coils the currents in two of the wires, and receive in 
their pressure coils, respectively, the pressures between these 
wires and the third wire. This method gives results which are 
theoretically correct on any three-wire circuit whatever, with 
balanced or unbalanced load; but it has practical disadvantages, 
particularly on circuits where the average power-factor is low, 
when by reason of the unequal division of the load, one meter— 
the one on the lagging side—is made to run habitually on the 
low-load end of its calibration curve, andthe other meter car- 
ries nearly the whole load. This introduces the low-load error 
of the lagging meter into the final result, even though the 
actual load of the circuit may be fairly heavy. 

To give correct readings on circuits in which the power-factor 
goes below 50%, the meters used must be able to register as 
accurately when running backwards as when running forwards. 
Any meter which is provided with a friction compensating 
device is debarred from consideration for this particular service. 
This statement should be qualified to suit those cases where 
the power-factor of the circuit may only occasionally go below 
50%. The commutator type is entirely unfit. Another ob- 
jection is that the meters are compelled to work under false 
phase-angles, which is especially the case with the meter on 
the lagging side. This increases the probability of error due 
to improper adjustment of the phase of the shunt, which error 
has been shown to be a maximum at 90° of lag or lead. 

Besides, the meters do not furnish a check on each other, 
and in many cases practically the whole responsibility rests 
upon one meter only. Another and much better method is 
to use two single-phase meters as just described, but with the 
difference that the meters are combined and both moving ele- 


1905.] NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. LUTE 


ments are attached to the same shaft, thus making the so-called 
polyphase meter. This removes most of the objections that 
may be urged against the preceding methods, except that the 
error due to the displacement of the phase of the shunt is just 
as great in the polyphase meter as it is in the two separate 
single-phase meters. The speed of the combined meter is the 
average for the separate meters, and in this way the operation 
of each of the latter is brought to a better point on the cali- 
bration curve. 

The fact that both meters are combined into a single unit 
increases materially the difficulty of calibration. If the cali- 
bration is done by the process of ‘‘ bucking ’”’ the meters, and 
adjusting for no motion, then the difference between them will 
fall somewhere within a range of no motion the extent of which 
is determined by the starting friction of the meter. 

It is suggested that a better plan than any one of the pre- 
ceding would be to employ three separate single-phase meters, 
one for each phase of the circuit, having three pressure coils 
connected in star, the junction point of which is connected to 
the neutral formed by a star connection of the secondary of 
the pressure transformers. The summation of the three read- 
ings gives the true power on either balanced or unbalanced 
circuits. This is true, even though the neutral is displaced 
from the true central position—which might happen if the junc- 
tion point of the three meter shunts is not connected to the 
transformer neutral, in which case the three branches must 
establish their own neutral—provided the deviation from the 
correct position is not great enough to bring an abnormal pres- 
sure to bear upon any one of the meters. It is better, 
however, to make use of the fixed neutral than the de- 
rived one. Such an arrangement of three meters would possess 
many marked advantages over the polyphase meter. In the 
first place, there would be. no difficulty in calibration, more 
than exists in the case of the ordinary single-phase meter, and 
very much less than exists in the case of the polyphase meter. 
By arranging the meters in series, all three could be calibrated 
in but little more time than would be required for one alone. 
This is surely a strong point in favor of this method. Other 

things being equal, that meter which is most easily calibrated 
4s most likely to be correctly calibrated. ; 

The checking of the meters in, place, which is practically 
impossible with polyphase meters, becomes comparatively easy 


178 NIES: POLY PHASE METERING. [April 28 


and. simple when three single-phase meters-are used, as each 
meter can be checked individually, either by using a 
standard indicating wattmeter, or by temporarily connecting 
two of the meters in series on the same phase and thus check- 
ing them against each other. This should conduce to high 
accuracy. After a meter becomes inaccurate it can be taken 
down for recalibration, and the registration will be maintained 
by the two remaining meters. Another advantage is that 
the responsibility is distributed over three meters instead 
of one, and it may be expected that the average of the three 
will be more nearly correct than any one of them singly. 
Again, an installation of three single-phase meters is less liable 
to be affected by errors due to displacement of the shunt phase. 
It is true, that if all meters in any installation are subjected 
to the same error, then the total error is the same for any sys- 
tem of metering whatever method is used; but it is altogether 
unlikely that all the meters should be affected in the same way, 
and if they are not, then the total error, if the three meters are 
used, will be less than if the two-meter method or polyphase 
meter is used. This is because in the three-meter installation 
the meters are not compelled to operate on false phase-differ- 
ences, thus reducing the error which has been shown to be a 
maximum when the phase-difference is 90°. 

The curves of Fig. 7, all worked out for the same displace- 
ment to 92°, illustrate this point. Curve A shows the per cent. 
of error caused by a displacement occurring in both sides of a 
polyphase tneter and in each of three Y-connected single-phase 
meters with full volt-amperes in the line, as a function of the 
(three-phase) angle of lag. Curve B shows the result of a dis- 
placement in the leading side only of a polyphase meter, and 
curve C in the lagging side only. Curve D shows the result of 
such a displacement in two of three Y-connected single-phase 
meters, and curve — in one of three. These curves indicate that 
in this respect the three star-connected single-phase meters 
would have'a noticeable advantage. 

But the prime advantage that this method presents is that, 
on balanced circuits, the three meters give a continuous and 
automatic check on one another. Onsuch circuits all three read- 
ings should always agree, or at least should differ by a fairly . 
constant ratio. Any departure from these usual conditions, 
any failure on the part of one of the meters to agree with its 
companions, would result in throwing suspicion on that par- 


1905.) NIES: POLY PHASE METERING, 179 


ticular meter; thus no inaccuracy can arise in any one of the 
three meters. without immediate notice being given of the fact. 
It is true that errors affecting all three meters in the same way 
could not be detected thus, but the chances are, of course, 
that the three meters would not develop the same error simul- 
taneously. They might become subject to it one after another ; 
but the first one to go wrong would give warning immediately 
of its error; whereas in the polyphase meter the same error 
might be present for a long time with no means whatever of 
detecting it, except by comparison of readings from time to 


time—a very unsatisfactory and untrustworthy method. Each 
meter would act in the capacity of a critic of its companions; 
if the three readings agree, then the same credence can be given 
them that is accorded to three agreeing witnesses inlaw. Such 
occurrences as the blowing of a pressure-transformer fuse, the 
short circuiting of a current transformer, or bad contacts any- 
where in the meter wiring—which with a polyphase meter 
installation might be present for a considerable time without 
detection, perhaps until someone “guessed” that something 


180 NIES: POLYPHASE METERING. {April 28 


must be wrong—would be immediately discovered if the three 
meters were used. The latter would act like a “‘ trouble indi- 
cator,” and no variation of any sort from normal circuit condi- 
tions could occur without being brought to light at once. 

To use a homely illustration: suppose that on a certain farm 
there were three woodchucks and that the farmer’s boy owned 
three dogs, one for each. If he wanted to make sure of cap- 
turing the woodchucks, he would not begin operations by tying 
the three dogs together, but would leave each dog free to do 
the best that might bein him. The chances of getting the wood- - 
chucks would not only be improved, but after the hunt was 
over he would also be able to tell which dog was eager, and 
which dog was slow. This is a fair though crude statement of 
the advantage of using three separate single-phase meters on a 
three-phase system. 

The only disadvantage of the method is that it requires the 
presence of a neutral conductor, and therefore is not available 
for ordinary three-wire three-phase service. This disadvantage 
does not exist in systems using pressure transformers, since 
the secondaries of the latter can as easily be connected in star 
as in ring, thus furnishing the required neutral. The cost of 
the three meters is higher; but this item sinks into significance 
in comparison with the value of the output that would be passed 
through the meters when used on a circuit of large capacity. 

In conclusion, the statement can be made that in metering 
three-phase systems the method of using two separate meters 
is not entirely satisfactory; the modification of this method, 
the polyphase meter, is much better, but is still very far short 
of perfection; that three separate single-phase meters make 
the best arrangement, and should be employed when the high- 
est degree of accuracy is demanded. For low-pressure three- 
wire circuits of small capacity the polyphase meter would un- 
doubtedly be preferred. The conclusions reached in this paper 
are intended to apply mainly to high-capacity circuits using 
instrument transformers and involving a large multiplier. 
On such circuits it would seem almost essential to employ the 
three Y-connected meters. 


A paper presentea at the 196th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, April 28, 195. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. B. E. 


NOTES ON THE USE OF INSTRUMENTS ON SWITCH- 
BOARDS. 


BY F. P. COX. 

The object of this paper is to invite discussion on what seems 
to be the more important features of instrument engineering, 
and its value to the InstituTE should be found in the discussicn 
rather than in the paper itself. 

In selecting instruments for any particular class of service 
the conditions under which they are to be used must be given 
careful consideration. It is evident that the conditions on a 
central-station switchboard will not permit of the same accuracy 
as could readily be obtained in a laboratory, and the informa- 
tion to be derived from the instrument readings does not require 
so exact a determination of values. For example, consider a 
shunt ammeter: an instrument best adapted for laboratory 
conditions would have a shunt loss too great for switchboard 
service, and one designed for switchboards would have tem- 
perature errors so great that its use in the laboratory could not 
be contemplated. It is the author’s intention to confine these 
notes to the conditions which are found on switchboards in 
central stations. 

One of the most important considerations is in connection 
with the capacity of instruments to be used, and present needs 
cannot be altogether overshadowed by possibility of future 
growth. An ammeter whose needle constantly hovers around 
zero position is of comparatively little use, and an integrating 
wattmeter, which normally operates at ten per cent., and fre- 
quently at less than one per cent. of its rated capacity, may 
give a false impression of the operating efficiency of the station. 


181 


1s2-=—=—Ss« COX: NOTES ON SWITCHBOARDS... © "(April 28 


Under such conditions agreement is difficult to’ obtain’ where 
totality meters are used and an effort is made to check them up 
with the sum of the individual feeders. Better results would 
be obtained by metering each generator, for under these con- 
ditions the meters would not be required to operate upon as 
low loads as they would if placed upon the feeders. 

The friction of a jewel-bearing is generally considered so 
small that it may be neglected; but it must not be forgotten 
that a torque of 25 millimetre grammes is a little less than one — 
five-thousandth ofa foot-pound, and friction. must be’ very 
small indeed if it is negligible as compared with this torque. 
Under normal working conditions, integrating instruments fre- 
quently operate at much lower torque, and even at full scale 
indicating instruments never approach this value. 
| It must also be remembered that the vibration of the board 
tends to impair the perfect polish of both jewel and pivot, 
and thus affect the accuracy of the readings. Other things being 
equal, it is apparent that these errors will be minimized by 
high torque, but they must not be altogether overlooked even 
under the most favorable conditions. 

In deciding upon the capacity of an instrument it is necessary 
to take into consideration the relations between the smallest 
load, which it is desired to read, and the peak. It is generally 
considered advisable on railway circuits to have considerable 
‘overload capacity, and but little attention is paid to the light- 
load period. On lighting circuits, however, the overload is not 
considered to be as important as on railway circuits, and the 
light load is given more attention. It is usually good practice 
to select instruments of such capacity that under normal work- 
ing conditions the needle of an indicating instrument will rest 
between half- and two-thirds scale. This allows a reasonable 
capacity for growth and for overloads, and at the same time 
permits of sufficient accuracy during the light-load period. 

Integrating instruments should be fully loaded under normal 
conditions, for they have an inherent overload capacity not 
possessed by indicating instruments; such practice insures not 
only low-load accuracy but also a reasonable dial registration 
over comparatively short periods of time. Where hourly or 
even daily readings of the dial are recorded, it is not necessary 
that the registering train should have a capacity sufficient to 
care for several months’ output. A rapidly-moving dial-train 
permits full advantage to be taken of the meter’s accuracy, 


1905.] COX: NOTES ON SWITCHBOARDS.:: ' 183 


and'a change of one or two figures should be recorded for each 
observation period. 

Accurate records necessitate occasional calibration and ‘ad- 
justment of switchboard instruments, and suitable arrangements 
should be made for conveniently doing this work. Too little . 
attention has been given to this feature in the past. It-is fre- 
quently very difficult and sometimes impossible to introduce stan- 
dards in circuits for calibration purposes. Perhaps this is a 
matter which should’ come under switchboard design rather 
than under instruments, but it is one of great importance and 
should be very thoroughly discussed. ; 

Stray fields are always present in central stations and are 
frequently so strong that they cause marked instrument errors. 
In locating instruments on the board it is not sufficient to allow 
for position of bus-bars in relation to the instruments them- 
selves, but the location of the iron framework of the board 
must also be taken into consideration. Magnetic fields have 
been carried by such iron frames and kave introduced errors 
in instruments located many feet from the bus-bar itself. Such 
errors may be almost entirely eliminated by properly shielding 
the instrument, and no error need be introduced on account 
of residual magnetism or hysteresis of the iron shield. Prop- 
erly designed instruments of this class show no appreciable 
difference between ascending and descending scales, or between 
alternating and direct currents, and they are entirely unaffected 
by fields which would influence the readings of unshielded 
instruments as much as 10 or 15 per cent. 

“The use of series transformers, even on circuits of compara- 
tively low pressure, seems to be increasing; the’ added coti- 
venience in removing or in cutting out instruments for re- 
calibration, and the added security for the operators, more 
than compensate for the slight errors introduced by their use. 
This practice is particularly to be recommended in those cases 
where both sides of the line are brought into the same instru- 
ment; such for example as the polyphase, integrating, or indi- 
cating instruments. It is also a good practice to interconnect 
the stationary and moving circuits and case of indicating 
instruments, and very often this would hardly be practicable 
unless series and pressure transformers are used. 

Commutator meters are the only ones available for measure- 
ment of direct current; properly equipped with cupped diamond 
jewels, and occasionally corrected for commutator friction, 


184 COX: NOTES ON SWITCHBOARDS. [April 28 


they give excellent results. But induction meters with light 
moving element and no commutator are to be preferred wherever 
their use is possible. 

Balanced three-phase circuits may be accurately measured 
by a single-phase wattmeter with a Y box. An instrument of 
this character records three times the energy of the phase in 
which the current coils are connected; therefore, it should 
be used only in those cases where there is no possible question 
as to the circuits being exactly balanced. 

Polyphase instruments, both integrating and indicating, are to 
be preferred even for balanced circuits, and for unbalanced circuits 
they become a necessity. Professor Nies advocates the use of 
three independent single-phase meters. Of course the resulting 
records of the different phases are interesting, and on a balanced 
circuit any material difference in the readings of the three instru- 
ments would indicate an error in one of them, and serve as a warn- 
ing that recalibration is necessary, or that the circuit has become 
accidentally unbalanced. In any case, it indicates a necessity 
for investigation. Still it is very doubtful if these advantages 
are sufficient to offset the added expense of three instruments 
and the space required on the switchboard for their installation. 

In the measurement of polyphase circuits, the greatest care 
should be taken to see that the instruments are installed exactly 
in accordance with instructions received from the manufacturer. 
Sometimes a slight deviation from the connection shown on the 
diagram to connections which seem to be equivalent introduces 
considerable error, due to the instrument coils being in wrong 
phases; instruments are not infrequently charged with errors 
which should properly be attributed to incorrect connections. 


A paper presented at the 196th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York April 28, 1965. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


THE OSCILLOGRAPH AND ITS USES. 


BY LEWIS T. ROBINSON. 


The usefulness of a satisfactory method of observing or re- 
cording the wave forms of rapidly varying electric currents and 
pressures has been appreciated almost from the time that in- 
vestigators and designers commenced working with electrical 
apparatus. The various methods which have been used for 
obtaining these records or indications have had, and are having, 
an important influence on the design of apparatus and a clearer 
understanding of the phenomena accompanying their use. It 
is the purpose of this paper to outline briefly the steps which 
have led up to the methods in use at the present time, and to 
describe more fully the devices which are now most employed 
and the uses to which they may be put. 

Instruments for obtaining wave forms divide themselves 
naturally into two classes; those using point-by-point methods, 
most generally useful in connection with the investigation of 
recurring waves, and continuous methods which show recurring 
waves or record the individual waves. The first class can be 
traced to a common origin in the point-by-point method of 
Joubert,* and the second to the vibrating-coil device of Elihu 
Thomson, 1881 (not previously described), and to his later 
apparatus, and that of Frélich for observing the excursions 
of a telephone diaphragm acted upon by the current, the wave 
form of which is to be investigated. A description of these early 


methods will be given: 
*Comptes Rendus, vol. 91, 1880, p. 161; Journal de Physic, 1881. 
185 


186 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. _ [April 28 


Joubert’s Method. One of the collector rings of the alternator 
is connected through its brush to one terminal of a condenser. 
The other terminal of the condenser is connected to a brush 
which touches, during a small part of a revolution, a moving 
contact attached to and rotating with the alternator shaft. 
At the instant this contact is broken the condenser is left with 
a charge which is proportional to the instantaneous pressure 
in the armature. The charge may be measured by discharging 
through a suitable galvanometer or continuously indicated by 
an electrometer. By setting the contact to correspond with 


Bicol. 


various points in the revolution of the armature, the curve of 
pressure may be plotted, Fig. 1. 

The device of Elihu Thomson, constructed in 1881, while it 
would not satisfy the modern requirements as to frequency 
and absence of appreciable inertia in the moving parts, is a 
true continuous method. Dr. Thomson has furnished the fol- 
lowing description of his early instruments, which will be given 
in his own words: 

“T first started to study the wave forms given by the coils 
in our three-coil arc light dynamo in New Britain in 1881. 


1905.] ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 187 


which were brought near each other with a small space between. 
One pole was a ring and the other a cylinder asshown in 
Fig. 2. In the polar space was mounted a small light coil 
through which the waves to be investigated were sent. This 
caused oscillation of the coil which was mounted upon an arm 
of a lever, the other end of which carried a fine aniline pencil 
point resting lightly on a surface of paper carried on a cylinder, 
which, when revolved, was screwed along as in a chronograph; 
Fig. 3. The lever was held in a central position by springs and 
was, also, damped. With this apparatus I was enabled to 
map curves of current and e.m.f., some of which records I still 
have, I believe. The instrument was a sort of crude oscillo- 
graph.” 


iG 


Following this device we find, in 1887-1889, the diaphragm in- 
struments of Dr. Thomson and Frélich.* That of Dr. Thomson - 
will be described, as information concerning this was more 
readily obtained by the writer. Again quoting Dr. Thomson: 

“When we began alternating-current work, or about 1887, 
I made two instruments as follows: 

One of these consisted of a dark box in which was mounted 
a polarized (adjustable) magnet on whose pole was a coil through 
which the waves or impulses to be mapped were passed. In 
front of the magnet pole was a telephone diaphragm to which 


oN 0 ee eam ae eae ree 

*O. Frélich, May, 1887, Elektrotechnische Zettschrat, vol. 8, p. 210; 
Thomson, reported in United States notes by Wetzler, La Lumiére Elec- 
trique, February, 1888, vol. XXVIL., p. 33; Froélich, July, 1889, 1D 98s Ay 
vol. 10, pp. 65 and 345. 


188 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. {April 28 


was fastened a very light lever, which in turn was attached to 
a small pivoted mirror. See Fig. 4. 

A spot of light from the mirror was thrown upon a screen 
and showed as a vertical streak when the wave was on. By 


traversing the magnet so as to cause the spot of light to traverse 
the screen horizontally the wave form was disclosed. In this 
case a sensitive plate was used to record the wave form. A 
considerable number of these photographic records were made. 


The other apparatus was a duplication of this, except that 
there were two magnets which acted on a single mirror to swing 
it on axes at right’ angles with each other.’ See Fig. 5. 

It is thus possible to compare the phase relations of two 


1905.] ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 189 


waves and obtain figures on the screen or plate depending on 
the phase relations. 

Adjustments were made to give ite same amplitude of swing 
to the mirror from each of these magnet systems. 

With waves at exactly 90° phase difference the figure was a 
circle, a luminous ring (with sine waves). When the waves 
were in the same phase the figure was a vertical line, and 
when in opposite phases, also, a line at right angles to that when 


Ric? 5: 


in phase. Intermediate phase relations gave approximate 
ellipses (with sine waves) leaning to right or left. The single 
waves alone gave slanting lines at right angles to each other. 
The diaphragms were damped. See Fig. 6. 

The apparatus which you remember was the one with sensi- 
tive flames observed by revolving mirrors, Fig. 7. This was the 
first made and in this case the gas pressure was modified by 


Fk / 


90 PHASE SAME PHASE INTERMEDIATE SINGLE WAVES 
DIFFERENCE PHASE RELATIONS ALONE 
Fic. 6. 


diaphragm under action of wave forces with polarized magnet 
(adjustable in power). 

The flame seen in the revolving mirror showed the. wave 
forms thus, Fig. 8. 

The original apparatus of 1881 came nearest to being like the 
oscillograph, although it was, of course, very much less refined 
in all respects. It embodied an idea only.” 

Referring to the point-by-point methods which has been 
traced to that of Joubert we find, after various modifications, 


190 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. [April 28 


the resulting modern instruments: Hospitalier’s Ondograph 
Rosa’s Curve Tracer, and the General Electric Wave Meter. 
While there may be other methods in practical 
use at the present time, it is believed that these are the only 
ones which have been used commercially to any extent, at 
least in this country. 

These instruments are not suited to commercial work on 


SSS 


WILL 


a 


ese Bo Sa 
SSSA RANA 


instantaneous phenomena, as they require many repetitions of 
the wave to be viewed or recorded before its complete form 
is shown. They can, however, be made’ to operate with very 
little energy from the circuit to which they are attached and 
can be constructed to give records of any desired size and 
of considerable accuracy. These records are, therefore, well suited 
for analysis and furnish a positive means by which records or 
observations by the oscillograph may be checked and the ab- 


1905.) _. ROBINSON::THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 191 


sence of errors, due to Jack of critical damping and sufficiently 
high frequency of vibration, determined. 

No doubt they will for this reason continue to be used al- 
though the oscillographs, to which we will turn our attention 
later, are more universal in their application and may be used 
to study many events which, by reason of the time required to 
record a complete wave and the impossibility of reproducing 
many conditions a sufficient numper of times to produce a 
record by means of succession of points, cannot well be handled 
by any point-by-point method. The three instruments re- 
ferred to, while they accomplish broadly the same purpose, 
show that their designers in each case thought it desirable to 
emphasize strongly some features at the expense of others. 

In the Rosa Curve Tracer the record is obtained on a drum 
by printing automatically from a potentiometer contact which 


Fia.:8. 


is set by hand to a point indicated by a zero reading on a gal- 
vanometer. We have then an instrument producing highly 
accurate records but which requires the close attention of the 
operator for a comparatively long time and which, as usually 
made, requires, also, direct attachment to the dynamo. Fig. 9 
shows the instrument complete and Fig. 10 a diagram of the 
connections when taking an ordinary curve of current or poten- 
tial. 
LL, are the terminals of the circuit whose wave is required. 
CM is the contact maker. G is the galvanometer above re- 
ferred to. D is the drum on which the record is made. P is 
the potentiometer contact which is moved along the potentio- 
meter wire MN until balance is secured, when record is made 
on the drum by the printing finger F. VM is the voltmeter 
by means of which the current flowing through the potentio- 


192 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. [April 28 


meter wire M N is kept constant, using the variable resistance 
R to vary the current if necessary. 

In the General Electric Wave Meter the record is obtained 
on a photographic plate from a galvanometer receiving the dis- 
charge from a condenser which is charged and discharged con- 
tinuously by means of a commutator and contact brush at- 
tached to a synchronous motor, which is, in turn, electrically 
connected to the circuit under test. The contact brush or com- 
mutator is carried around, with reference to the poles of a 
synchronous motor, automatically at any desired speed, and 


RACKS he 
AN ea possi 


Fic. 9. Rosa Curve Tracer. 


in this way the record of the wave is made. We have here an 
instrument producing records accurate enough for all prac- 
tical purposes, entirely automatic in its operation, and with 
a speed limited only by the limitations of the recording gal- 
vanometer. Fig. 11 shows the complete device and Fig. 12 a 
diagram of the connections. 

LL, are the terminals of the circuit whose wave is required. 
B is the brush passing over the segments of the 8-part com- 
mutator (8-pole motor is used) by means of which the con- 
denser C is charged and discharged. B, and B, are brushes 


» 1905.] ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 193 


connecting to the four long and four short segments respectively 
of the commutator. S is sector by means of which the contact 
B is carried around with reference to the poles of the synchronous 
motor by means of the weight W. DP is a dash-pot which 
controls the speed with which the contact B is moved. Pis 
the photographic plate which receives the record from the 
galvanometer. J is a resistance in series with the galvanometer, 
which may be adjusted to obtain deflection of suitable size if 
the condenser C is not sufficiently subdivided. 

In this instrument the inconvenience of obtaining photographic 
records was thought to be outweighed by the fact that a photo- 
graphic recording instrument can be operated with a minimum 


Fie, 10, 


of energy, and its record can be produced almost absolutely 
correct with reference to rectilinear codrdinates: ; 
In the Ondograph the record is obtained by an inking pen 
on a revolving drum. The actuating part of the recording 
instrument is traversed by the discharges from a condenser. 
The condenser is charged from a revolving contact which, by 
an ingenious method of gearing, is automatically changed with 
reference to the poles of the synchronous motor, thus producing 
on the recording surface the desired record of the wave.. We 
have here an instrument entirely automatic in operation, but 
in which the time of taking the record is fixed by the frequency 
of the circuit to which the synchronous motor is attached.’ 


194 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. [April 28 


The Ondograph is, also, not particularly well suited to pro- 
ducing waves for analysis by reason of the fact that the record 
is not made with the abscissas referred to a straight line, there- 
fore, the record is bent over (see Fig. 13), which is a little con- 
fusing to one who is not used to the records made with the 
instrument. This distortion is due to the fact that the pen 
arm, although of Jong radius, still travels across the recording 


Fic. 11. 
Wave Meter and Wave Meter Photographic Attachment. 


surface in a curved line and all abscissas must be referred to 
this curved line instead of to a straight line as in the other two 
instruments referred to. Fig. 14 shows the complete device 
and Fig. 15 a diagram of connections. 

‘LL, are the terminals of the circuit whose wave is required. 
C-and R.are the condenser and resistance as before. D is the 
drum on-which the record is made by. means of the curve-draw- 


1905.] ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 195 


ing galvanometer. B, B,, B, are the contacts bearing on the 
revolving commutator by means of which the condenser is 
charged and in turn discharged through the galvanometer. 
The commutator is geared to the drum and to the synchronous 
motor in such a way that the commutator makes 999 revolutions 
when the synchronous motor makes 1000, and hence the com- 
mutator is revolved around with reference to the motor poles 
and the wave drawn. The drum D is also driven by gearing 
from the synchronous motor. 

The true oscillograph, that is, the instrument with high 
period, critical damping, and comparatively good sensibility 
is to-day existent in two forms, both due primarily to Blondel, 
C. R., April, 1893, who has developed, to a high degree of per- 


ASS ie ~) 
| * 
ra) ‘ 


BiG. 12. 


fection, the moving iron or vibrating strip type. 

This consists of a thin ribbon of iron tightly stretched be- 
tween the pole tips of a powerful magnet, thus forming a polar- 
ized needle, held in position by the directive force of the mag- 
netic field, and, also, by the resistance to torsion of the strip 
itself. Two small coils, to which the circuit under investiga- 
tion is connected, are arranged on either side of this strip in 
such a way that the strip is acted on by the current flowing 
in them and at any instant the strip, having the necessary 
high period of vibration and critical damping, takes up a posi- 
tion which is a measure of the current flowing in the coils at 
that instant. A minute mirror is attached to the middle portion 
of this vibrating strip and a beam of light reflected from its 


196 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. [April 28 


surface can be made, by suitable means, to render the wave of 
current in the coils visible, or to record it on a suitable photo- 


— oe 


oy Ck aa Se HY ia 
(SSS ge 


GEG Dae RIE ee 


Fic. 13a. 


-\ omy? 

A 

= sane fn a ot LE 
Berne ht 


Fic. 133. 


graphic surface. Fig. 16 shows the general arrangement of the 


parts. 


1905.] ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 197 


In the plan view ‘‘C,’”’ N and S are the poles of the magnet. 
fs and PP, are the pole pieces. C and-C, are the coils. 
And in the enlarged sectional plan ‘‘ D,” M is the small mirror 


Fic. 14. Hospitalier Ondograph. 


attached to the vibrating strip. GC 1s the insulating tube and 
‘y T are the pole tips which concentrate the field on the vibrat- 


Z Leg 
Fic. 15. 


M is the mirror attached to the strip J S. 
-loop construction, is in 


hich two small metallic 


ing strip J S. 
The alternate type, or the vibrating 
reality a D’Arsonval galvanometer in w 


198 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. {April 28 


bands constitute the moving coil, as well as the suspensions. 
These are located in a strong magnetic field and the varying 
current to be investigated is led through the strips in opposite 
directions. The current flowing through the strips will then, 


SM 


ROSH LER 


TWAT WRENS 


ZL he | 


IORI 


FDL A_______-_ ape 
« 


: ae ee 
_———— 
RA QWwe777Zz7 
fi Ga VL eee Le. 


Fig-A be aoe 


at any instant, bend them in opposite directions, with reference 
to the field in which they are situated, and a small mirror, at- 
tached by its edges to the middle portion of the strips, will be 
‘deflected. The deflection of this mirror can be used, as in the 


1905:] ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 199 


first mentioned type, to indicate or record the wave form. of 
the current passing through the strips. Figs. 17, 18, 19 show 
diagramatically the strips in the magnetic field, traversed by a 


BIGeli. 


current, with the mirror deflected. At this point we may con- 
sider briefly the advantages and disadvantages of the two 


types. 


An oscillograph, to give satisfactory results, should have: 
1. -A short free periodic time compared to the period of 
the wave forms being recorded. 


9. Critical damping, that is, the motion just ceases to be 


oscillatory. 
3. Negligible self induction. 


200 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. [April 28 


4. Sufficient sensibility (Duddell, Inst. of Elec. Engineers’ 
Journal, vol. 28, No. 188, p. 7). 

And we might add the fifth ‘consideration: The instrument 
should be so constructed that the working parts are readily 
accessible and of sufficient size so that they may be renewed 
or repaired by persons ordinarily skilled in the handling of 
testing instruments. 

Referring to these various conditions in the order given, it 
is undoubtedlv true that the iron strip type can be made to 


Fie. 20. 


‘have a shorter free periodic time than the moving strip type, 
unless the dimensions of the parts in the latter are reduced to 
an impossible degree. 

Both types can be given critical damping. 

The vibrating-loop type is superior as far as negilgible self 
induction is-concerned, and it is believed that it can also be 
operated with less expenditure of energy than the iron-band 
type. 

The fifth condition is believed to be more fully realized 
in the instrument which you have before you than in any in- 


1905.] ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 201 


strument which has heretofore been made, and which will, at 
the same time, satisfy, to a reasonable extent, the other con 
ditions given. For practical work it is, in most cases, not neces- 
sary to use a periodic time shorter than that which can be 
conveniently obtained with the moving strip type, and it is 
also believed, that the negligible self induction and small fe 
sistance of this type is of the greatest advantage when large 
currents, especially undirectional ones, are to be dealt with. 
Cases have frequently arisen in practice where such currents 
of several thousand amperes have been measured by passing 
them through shunts, similar to those used in connection with 
direct current moving coil ammeters, which is believed could 


Fic. 21. 


not have been successfully handled with the iron-strip type. 
Referring to accessory parts of the oscillograph, the arrange- 
ments which have been adopted for photographing and viewing 
the waves, these exist in great variety and have been devel- 
oped to meet the special requirements of various investigators. 
It is not possible at this time even briefly to refer to these ar- 
rangements, except such as have been found necessary in con- 
nection with the instrument to be described. We shall, there- 
fore, describe those which have been adopted for the instrument 
with which the writer is most familiar, and refer those who may 
be further interested to the list of references at the end of this 


paper. 


202 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. [April 28 


The instrument consists of a light tight box, Figs. 20 and 21, 
in which is placed a three-element galvanometer, and to which 
are attached devices by means of which the waves may be 
viewed, or photographic records of them taken. 


HirG.o2e 


The three-element galvanometer is shown complete in Fig. 22, 
and the moving element removed from it in Fig. 23. The 
details of the containing cell which is inserted and held be- 
tween the pole pieces of the magnets, and in which the vibrator 


Fic. 23.—Vibrator for Oscillograph. 
is inserted, are shown in Fig.:24. 


The principle on which the instrument operates has already 
_been referred to in speaking of the vibrating-loop type in gen- 
eral. The three elements of the galvanometer are entirely 


1905.] ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 203 


complete within themselves, with the exception of the mag- 
netizing coils, and can, therefore, be insulated from one an- 
other to stand almost any required pressure. It is then not 
necessary to insulate the vibrating loop from the frame which 
holds it, or to rely for insulation on the somewhat uncertain 
condition that the vibrating loop can always be kept a safe 
distance away from the pole pieces, between which it moves. 
In fact, it has been found desirable in most cases actually to 


=) a | 
—|—| -L— 
= B 
ee a ee 
5 


Eee 


aS 


Fie. 24. 


connect the strips electrically to the magnet, between the poles 
of which they are located. In the instrument shown, a pres- 


sure of 5000 volts has been applied between the separate gal- 
vanometer elements and between all of these and the frame to 


which they are attached. 
Referring to Fig. 23, it will be seen that the vibrating strips, 


when the vibrator is removed from the containing cell, are @X- 
posed on all sides; this is of the greatest advantage in re- 
stringing the vibrator and making any required adjustments to 


204 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. [April 28 


the moving parts. The vibrating strips, and consequently the 
mirror to which they are attached, can be moved around a 
vertical axis passing through the center of the mirror by 
means of the knurled head on the worm W, Fig. 22. The 
containing cell as a whole is movable around a horizontal axis 
passing through the same point by means of the screw S, Fig. 22. 
These two adjustments make it possible to bring the image 
of the mirror into the desired place on the photographic film 


r 


aa 


c x c f: ‘ 
VM. Fad = cae ae acai ==> 
{ F 


SLIAYS 


Fign2o: 


or vibrating mirror, even though it has been attached to the 
vibrating strips in a somewhat imperfect manner. The contain- 
ing cell is filled with a damping liquid above the Jevel of the 
bridge B, Fig. 24. The vibrating loop, or strips, is usually 
made of pure silver hard drawn, and the mirror of silvered glass. 
Referring again to Fig. 24, T T, are the terminals con- 
veying the current to the strip S T through the soldered joints 
J J; By means of the slit SL the strip is placed in position © 


1905.] _ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 205 


without being passed through any holes. CS is the clamping 
screw by means of which the removable vibrator is held in the 
containing cells. TR is the tension rod attached to the block 
_FB through which the pull of the spring balance S B is trans- 
mitted to the pulley P. TS is the tension screw by means of 
which the tension is regwated by moving the tension nut N. 

In a standard pattern the period is one five-thousandth sec- 
ond, the sensibility about 0.007 amperes per millimetre de- 
flection, and the resistance about one ohm. 

The dimensions of the mirror which’ is employed are 80x20x10 
mils, which is large enough to be easily handled and admits of 
a better photographic record than.a smaller mirror. It is, of 
course, possible, by employing smaller mirrors, to obtain higher 
period, up to, perhaps, 10 000; -but unless such a high period 


Fic, 26. 
Oscillograph.—Film Holder for Photographic Attachment. 


is absolutely necessary, the advantages are more than out- 
weighed by the difficulty in handling the very small mirror re- 
quired and of reflecting sufficient light from its surface. 

The advantage of silver over phosphor bronze which has 
usually been employed for the vibrating strips, is considerable. 
The resistance, and consequently the energy required to operate 
the vibrator, is, by this means, much reduced, which permits 
current waves to be taken with shunts having comparatively 
small fall of pressure, and the danger of creeping of the reflected 
image, due to expansion of the strips on account of the current 
passing through them, is entirely overcome. With high re- 

sistance alloys this is one of the limiting features. : 
‘The optical system employed is shown in Fig. 25. We have 
here the source of light at A, usually an arc lamp; the con- 


206 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. {April 28 


densing lense C L,, by means of which very nearly parallel 
beam strikes the three small prisms P,, P,, and P,, and is, by 
this means, split up into three portions, which are directed on 
to the vibrating mirrors v m,1, 2, and 3, and from this are reflected 
to the photographic drum F or to the synchronous mirror S M, 
from which they are reflected on to the surface T where they 
may be viewed or traced. 

In front of the photographic film is a cylindrical lens C L,, 


Fic, 27,—Oscillograph, —Synchronous Motor, 


and in front of the synchronous mirror a cylindrical lens C L. 
The synchronous mirror and its cylindrical lense are removed 
from the path of light when photographic record is to be made, 
in a manner which will be described in connection with the 
general arrangements for viewing the waves. 

The light from the arc lamp is intercepted by the shutter 
S H, which is operated by electrical contacts by the arrange- 
ment shown at the left of Fig. 20. The shaft which operates 


1905.]. ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 207 


the shutter contacts is also arranged to drive the photographic 
drum and usually receives its motion from a small electric 
motor, the motion of which is transmitted from a cone pulley 
_ through a counter-shaft. By this means speeds of from 6 to 600 
revolutions per minute of the drum may be obtained, with a 
wide range of intermediate values. The photographic drum is 
shown in Fig. 26. 

The shutter operating mechanism is so arranged that the 
shutter S H, Fig. 29, is open during one revolution of the drum, 


Fic. 28. 


and for this purpose two devices are employed. In the first 
the shutter is opened just after passing the joint in the film and 
is closed when the joint is again reached. The cylinder which 
carries the contacts by means of which the shutter is opened 
and closed may be advanced by means of spring pin and holes 
in the ends of the cylinder, so that time required by the shutter 
to open may be allowed for. The adjustment required varies 
with the speed at which the photographic drum is rotated. 
For obtaining records where it is not possible to wait for the 


208 ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. [April 28 


joint in the film before the exposure is made, the second device 
has been provided; this opens the shutter at any required 
instant and allows it to remain open for one revolution. 

For viewing recurring waves the arrangement shown in Fig. 
27 and Fig. 28 is used. By means of the lever L, shown in Figs. 
21 and 28, the lens and vibrating mirror are lowered into the 
path of light and the shutters, which cannot well be shown, 
but which close the opening to the tracing surface T, are opened. 
The synchronous motor and mirror driven by it then being in 
operation and the shutter S H open, to allow the light to pass 
along the path indicated, the wave is visible on the surface T. 

The vibrations of the mirrors having been adjusted to have 


Fic. 29. 


a suitable amplitude, and the synchronous mirror being moved 
through a suitable angle during one complete cycle, the point of 
light on the surface T will move through a path equivalent to 
the figure obtained when the wave is plotted to rectilinear co- 
ordinates. As the mirror returns to its original position the 
shutter S, Fig. 27, cuts off the light and again allows it to pass 
when the mirror again moves in the direction first indicated. 
This prevents the admission of light to the surface when the 
mirror is not moving in the proper direction. Fig. 29 shows the 
internal arrangement with cover removed. 

Given an apparatus similar to that just described we can 
see and record waves of current and electromotive force in any 
circuit which can furnish sufficient energy to operate the device, 


1905.] ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. — 209 


and the frequency of which is not too high to be correctly 
recorded by it. In general it may be said that a period in 
the neighborhood of 5000 is sufficient for handling most phenom- 
ena which occur on circuits up to and including those having 
a fundamental frequency of 125 cycles. 

The tests in which such a device has been found useful are 
of such great variety that it is possible to allude to them only 
briefly and in a general way. The following records which have 
been taken will, in connection with the description given with 
each one, show the field of usefulness of the instrument better 
than it can be described in words. 


ed | 


\ {Currerdin... \ Cumrent ua 
ey Condenser \, \_/ Reactance 


Fic, 30, 


Impressed electromotive force. 

Current in reactance 

Current in condenser. Reactance and condenser connected to same electromotive force. 
Reactance without iron core. All three waves recorded simultaneously and having common 
zero, In Fig. 34 the records were made simultaneously but with separate zero lines. 


* 


: 0 Suideoi9 vw Aq UMOYs 0q pnom Suiduwp 
*Supjooysi0ao Aq Sudurep jusoynsay pus yMo119 oq} JO Zujuedo 10 Sulso[o Yows 10358 pioser_oy} J I ohana alert ode 
@ATSHOOX “sOUII} [BIOAOB Delors pue pouodo sem yoryM ‘9010s JUAIIND-JOaITP B 0} PI}09TIUOD BBA IOWAGIA OY, ‘Sujdurep peoryi49 JO wo!puoo sMoYyS—"ee ‘OL 


‘peat mes 
f 9; /¢- tl 
j f 
burduory HE) WOOL 
reqs, BRAN LMA) “LEA9Y 49°92 yoo" lEgG209 ¢ 


x 
Q 
<s 
Re 
1S) 
1) 
) 
~~ 
iS) 
Y) 
So 
ea) 
q 
Ww 


“qouIMs YRoiq-yornb Aq pouedo prey Jungs “Jojou quaLind-oad{p UI oIusseid Jo os]1 satjonpul— Ts Pl 


| 


ROBINSON: 


211 


THE OSCILLOGRAPH, 


ROBINSON 


1905 ], 


“SH1OA COGS ‘sofaho Gy ‘ploy JowIaUaS OY} Ul JUELIND Joop oy} UO JMaIIND oINYBULIL 9} JO UOL}oveI OY} puL oseqd payMoryo-J10Ys 
91 Jo ommssoid pus yuolMd oy} SMOYS WY oy “Yo}fMs-[lo oemMojne Aq pouedo pue JoJBIoUEd yUeLIMI-SULWVUIE}[e aB1e[ 0} pay[dde ymmoi[9 JAOUS— FE POLL 


‘Ss duy 206 eS 


ce ae? 


Sane 
y ‘sduposepe? 


¥ va ¥ ¥ “y y 7 ¥ 
0022 asvud pazinrAts Yous fo [or144r0ed 


é y 


‘SL LOA 


YUP DER Sul 


“BULOA 008% ‘sa]o40 Gz {0109 JOUIIOJSUBI} OY} UL Sutziyousvur Jo UoIpuod snorAcid oy} pue 


P2sO[D ST JIMOITI.oY} YOM JV OAVA JUOLIND-SuTyVUI}[8 94} UT yuIod 94} UO Surpuedop ‘poute}qo SI jUIIIND 94} JO OSTI SHOEUBIULISUT “OIOUL 10 SOUT} dei} Pesopo 
SVM J{NOIID OY} PUB SUONN[OASL [wIOADS YSNoIG) pouiny svad WUTY oy, “wodo yrmosjo Arwpuodes “TouLIOJsURI} “AMY-3/8T Jo Areumpid UT YsaI JuoLMO— Eg “DLT 


os 
sduy oo0F 7} 


‘sdwy osg? 


ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. [April 28 


212 


‘roqyTuIsUel} auogdala} pus 4£197}8q 01 peyoeuTOD ee ory Jo Areuntid ‘rouLoysuvIy [Teus Jo Aivpuodes UI pojJ0eTUOD BEM TOYsIqrA 
«Ydviso[[1980,, pom uayodg— 9g “OL 


“que1In9 


WRU YIM JMOIID uy JUNYS 0} payowye IOJBIGIA “O10Z 0} WANJoI pldvI aiouL pue ia1od Suryreiq oy} 0} dn aua1mM9 ay} JO OSL [BNPeIS oy} SMOYS P10Ie1 ONL 
‘JoYBalq-jMosl9 o1ywuUI0jNB £q UsYOIq 8}[0A Qug9 puB setedulY OUB LI— se “Ol 


1905.] ROBINSON: THE OSCILLOGRAPH. 213 


Fie. 37.—No load pressure wave, 3750-kw., 2300-volt, 25-cycle alternator. 


The following is a list of references relating to the subject, 
these may be of interest. 

Some of the devices described in the articles have not been 
referred to as it was not the intention to touch on anything 
which was not distinctly related to practical work. Given con- 
ditions to be met which are different from those which prevail 
at the present time, some of these devices might be of the great- 
est practical use as they have already been in special investiga- 
tions. The Abraham Rheograph and the Braun Tube are de- 

serving of special mention. 


CONTINUOUS METHODS. 


Dr. Elihu Thomson, La Lumiére Electrique, Feb. 18, 1888, vol. 27, p. 
339. , 

Gerard, Bulletin de l Academie de Belgium, 1888; Lecons sur I’ Elec- 
tricite, 1-773 (7th ed.); Jackson Alternating Currents, p. 290. 

O. Frélich, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, vol. 8, p. 210; vol. 10, pp. 65- 
345; Electrician, vol. 28, p. 59, Nov. 20, 1891. 

Blondel, Comptes Rendus, 1893, Mar. 6 and Apr. 10; Eclatrage Elec- 
trique, vol. 31, pp. 41, 161, Apr. 12, 1902; vol. 33, p. 115, Oct. 25, 1902; 
vol. 36, pp. 326, 344, Aug. 29, 1903; Comptes Rendus, vol. 116, pp. 502, 
748. 
Rollefson, Eclairage Electrique, vol. 1, p. 461. 1894. 

Duddell, Electrician, vol. 39, p. 636, Sept. 10, 1897. 

Abraham, Eclairage Electrique, vol. 11, pp. 145, 462, Apr. 12, May 29, 
1897; vol. 12, pp. 180, 350, July 17, Aug. 21, 1897; vol. 26, pp. 196, 349, 
Feb. 9, 1901. 

Hotchkiss and Millis, Physical Review, vol. 3, pp. 49, 358; vol. 4, p. 128. 

McKittrick, Trans. Am. Inst. E. E., vol. 13, p. 245, May 20, 1896, 

Stillwell, Niagara Falls Plant, TRANS. Am. Inst. E. E., vol. 18, p. 474. 
Aug. 23, 1901. 

Ryan, H. J. TRANs. Am. Inst. E. E., vol. 22, July 2. 1903. 


214 ROBINSON. THE OSCILLOGRAPH. ~~ [April 28 


Becker—Larmeyer-—Picard, Lumiére Electrique, vol. 31, p. 16, Jan. 5, 1889. 

Moler, Trans. Am. Inst. E. E, vol 9, p. 223, June 6, 1892; Physical 
Review, vol. 1. ; 

Colley, Wied. Ann., vol. 26, p. 432, 1885. 


POINT-BY-POINT METHODS. 


Joubert, Journal de Physique, 1880; Comptes Rendus, vol. 91, p. 161. | 
Blondel, Lumiére Electrique, vol. 41, p. 401, Aug. 29, 1891; vol. 44, 
f. 135, Apr. 16, 1892; vol. 49;.p. 501, Sept. 16, 1893. 
Morton, Thomas, Journal A. A. A. S.,.1880. Ke 
Ryan, Trans. Am. Inst. E} E., vol. 7, p.1, Dec. 17, 1889. 
Duncan, Hutchinson, Wilkes, Electrical World,.vol...11, p. 160.. 
Fleming, Electrician, vol. 34, pp. 460, 507, Feb. 15, 22, 1895. 
Bedell, Miller, Wagner, Trans. Am. Inst. E. E., vol. 10, p. 497, Oct. 
18, 1893. : 
Duncan, Electrician, vol. 28, p. 61; vol. 34, p. 617, Mar. 15, 1895; 
Trans. Am. Inst. E. E., vol. 9, p. 179, June 6, 1892. 
: Hicks, Electrician, vol. 34, p. 699, Apr. 5, 1895. 
Barr, Burnie, Rodgers, Electrician, vol. 35, p. 719, Sept. 27, 1895... 
Pupin, Trans. Am. Inst. E. E., vol. 11, p. 528, May 18, 1894. 
Crehore, Physical Review, vol. 2, p. 122; vol. 3, p. 62. 
Pionchon, Comptes Rendus, vol. 120, p. 872. 
Braun, Wied. Ann., vol. 60, p. 552. 
Nichols, Journal A. A. A. S., vol. 42, p. 57. 
Burch, Electrician, vol. 37, p. 380, July 17, 1896. 
Janet, Comptes Rendus, vol. 118, p. 862; vol. 119, pp. 58, 217, 399. 
Fessenden, Electrical World, vol. 28, p. 688, Dec. 5, 1896. 


A paper presented vat the 190th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, New 
York, April 28, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. by A. I. E. E. 


MAINTENANCE OF METERS. 


BY W. J. MOWBRAY. 


To the company supplying electric energy which is meas- 
ured by meters and charged for accordingly, the maintenance 
of meter accuracy is of supreme importance. Losses in other 
apparatus become insignificant when compared with the loss 
of revenue from meters that are allowed to follow their natural 
tendency to run slow. For example, in a steam boiler a drop 
of 10% from normal efficiency would be detrimental to approx- 
imately the same percentage in the single item of the cost of 
coal, whereas in the metering system it would be 10% of the 
entire gross revenue to which the supplying company is legiti- 
mately entitled. Furthermore, if a metering system did actu- 
‘ally deteriorate so as to record 10% less than the true energy, 
this loss would by no means remain constant; it would continue 
to increase. 

Periodic overhauling is the obvious and generally adopted 
means of maintaining meter accuracy. Overhauling—a strict 
‘examination for correction and repairs—is efficient in proportion 
to the cheapness and accuracy with which it is done and to the 
permanence of the result. Means of making the result as per- 
manent as possible will be considered later. Attention will 
first be called to a portable test-meter used by the writer 
for the accurate and almost instantaneous determination of 
the percentage by which a meter is running fast or slow. 
This meter is similar to a customer’s ordinary watt-hour 
motor-meter in that it has a rotating armature, each revolution 
of which represents the passage through the meter of ‘a certain 


Fie: 
215 


216 MOWBRAY: MAINTENANCE OF METERS. [April 28 


number of watt-hours. A rotating armature in a test-meter 
is advantageous in that its revolutions and those of the meter 
under test are directly comparable, making it immediately 
apparent whether the latter runs faster or slower than it should. 
Another advantage is that the comparison of revolutions is 
quite unaffected by fluctuations in pressure or current which 
“would tend to render an indicating instrument unreadable 
because of the swinging of the needle. 

The ampere capacity of this test-meter can be varied at will 
by means of a plurality of windings. To understand the 
utility of an adjustable carrying capacity it should be noted 
that a meter generally operates most accurately at full load 
and that as the load is decreased the meter is likely to become 
inaccurate. This is because it is impossible entirely to eliminate 
friction from the bearings and contacts of a meter armature, or 
to keep this unavoidable friction at a constant value. Suppose 
this friction to vary sufficiently to cause an inaccuracy of one 
per cent. at full load and full torque, then at one-half load and 
one-half torque the proportion of this same friction variation 
to the torque would be doubled, and the inaccuracy would 
also be doubled. Similarly at one-quarter load the inaccuracy 
would be increased four times, and at one-tenth load ten times, 
Suppose it be required to test a meter of 15-ampere capacity. 
On full load a corresponding 15-ampere winding of a test-meter 
sould be used with a high degree of accuracy. On a light 
load, however, say 1.5 amperes, both meters would be subject 
to the serious light-load inaccuracy above noted. In the 
latter case an adjustable ampere capacity in a test-meter can 
be utilized by changing say from a 15-ampere to a 1.5-ampere 
winding, thus restoring the test-meter to full-load conditions. 
of torque and accuracy. Meters of widely varying capacity 
have to be tested in practice, and a test-meter should accordingly 
be equipped with at least three different current windings and 
two different pressure windings. 

A test-meter in use by the writer can be started or stopped 
at will by means of a switch, the meter under test meanwhile 
rotating continuously; in practice this test-meter is allowed to: 
rotate only during the interval that the meter under test takes 
to make 1 or 10 revolutions. A comparison of the watt-hours. 
corresponding to the latter revolutions with the true watt- 
chours as recorded by the test-meter shows instantly whether 
the rate is fast, slow, or correct. Explanatory of the relation. 


1905.] MOWBRAY. MAINTENANCE OF METERS. 217 


between armature revolutions and watt-hours, it may be noted 
that integrating watt-hour meters have what is called an arma- 
ture or disk constant. Generally speaking, this armature con- 

“stant in any particular meter is the number of watt-hours cor- 
responding to one armature revolution. Hence, the number of 
revolutions multiplied by the constant gives the watt-hours. 
If either of these factors—revolutions or constant—be made 
equal to 1, 10, or 100, the multiplication necessary to obtain 
the watt-hours resolves itself into a mere shifting of the decimal 
point. Accordingly, in the case of the meter under test, 1 or 10 
revolutions are taken, and therefore the constant of that meter 
with proper location of the decimal point, becomes equal to 
the recorded watt-hours. The true watt-hours can be similarly 
obtained from the revolutions of the test-meter, since in the 
latter the constants are arranged decimally; and it can at once 
be seen whether the consumer’s meter records more or less than 
the true energy. 

Accurate and cheap calibration is, however, of comparatively 
little value if a meter soon returns to its former condition of 
inaccuracy, therefore in old meters appliances should be pro- 
vided for increasing the permanence of calibration. Owing to 
the advance of the art, modern meters are fairly reliable, but 
their improvements are not generally applicable to the older 
forms. Suitable appliances, have, however, been developed, 
chiefly by the large operating companies, with the result that 
meters manufactured some ten years ago can now be made at 
least equal in efficiency of operation to the most modern ones. 
Among the most prominent of these appliances are the adjust- 
able friction compensating coil, the cupped, or concaved, 
diamond bearing, and a means for correcting the disposition of 
the drag-magnets relative to the field coils. 

The friction compensating-coil in operation carries a current 
of constant value, and can be moved into such proximity to 
the rotating armature that its accelerating effect exactly neu- 
tralizes the retardation due to friction. Commutator friction 
increases very rapidly when a meter is first put in service, 
but after a time it assumes practically a permanent maximum 
value. If at this time the compensating device be adjusted, a 
great part of the inaccuracy due to commutator friction will 
be permanently removed. 

The cupped diamond bearing is partly the result of what has 
been termed by Lockwood the “ cross fertilization of the sci- 


218 MOWBRAY: MAINTENANCE:OF METERS. [April 28 


ences.” Diamond being the hardest known, substance, was 
long recognized as the most desirable bearing material, but it 
seemed impossible to get any one to grind out.a nicely curved 
and highly pglished cavity in a diamond to receive the lower end 
of the vertical steel shaft. In the search for a new optical effect, 
however the lapidary art has so developed that no serious difficul- 
ty is now experienced in satisfactorily cupping the surfaces of a 
diamond. Asa meter-bearing it seems to embody the ultimate 
degree of perfection, the initial friction being a minimum. and 
the wearing qualities a maximum. It is especially necessary 
in the old types of commutator meters with their very heavy 
rotating elements, because in these meters the material next 
ia hardness to the diamond and which is generally . used 
sapphire, quickly breaks down in service. 

The object of changing the disposition of drag-magnets is to 
prevent meters from running fast after being subjected to the 
tremendous currents resulting from short circuits. In. old 
meters the stray flux thus produced found a convenient path 
along the drag- or braking-magnets; this tended to demagnetize 
them, thus causing the meter to record more than the true 
energy. It has been found that by changing the disposition of 
the magnets so that the stray flux traveled across instead of 
along them; this effect was minimized, and manufacturers 
changed their designs accordingly. Old meters can now be 
modernized in this respect by removing the magnets and at- 
taching additional small bases thereto, the drilling of these new 
bases permitting the magnets to be remounted in the meter at 
right angles to their former positions. 

In conclusion, it may be stated that this general system of 
overhauling has been productive of excellent results, and is 
coming into extended use as the importance of maintaining 
meter accuracy becomes more fully realized. 


1905.] ' DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 219 


Discussion ON MeAsurinc INsTRUMeEnts. 


PRESIDENT Lies: The »papers presented this evening repre- 
sent an interesting series relating to indicating and recording 
instruments. This is a subject in which we are interested, 
either as buyers of sellers of current, or engaged in making tests, 
or conducting investigations in which this class of apparatus 
is used. : 

One of the most interesting questions "in connection with 
supplying electricity is the proper metering of the product. 
There is not the proper public confidence in the systems of 
metering ordinarily in use, to which the results obtained would 
seem to entitle them; and there is’ also, unfortunately, no ade- 
quate legislative provision as to what really constitutes an accu- 
rate meter. 

It is obvious that when a meter is tested under laboratory 
conditions, with ideal surroundings, it is possible to eliminate 
vibration, stray fields, variations in current strength, and 
other factors that affect the accuracy of the test. It is also | 
possible to eliminate the personal equation and the errors of 
the test itself, and greater accuracy is to be expected and can 
be attained than when one undertakes to test a meter in a 
dark cellar, probably by candle light, located high on the side 
walls, or in other places difficult of access, and with a testing 
current that is influenced by a neighboring elevator motor and 
subject to variations of current and pressure—in general 
where the conditions for conducting the test are wholly un- 
favorable. 

Hence, there is considerable variation as to the require- 
ments that can be imposed or the results that can be ex- 
pected in a meter test made on a customer’s premises, as Com- 
pared with a test in the laboratory. It is somewhat difficult, 
on the other hand, to persuade a customer that a test on a 
meter that has been removed from his premises and the in- 
fluence of local conditions is a satisfactory one. He feels that 
the meter should be tested under the conditions and in the loca- 
tion in which it is to be used. 

Unfortunately, as I have said, there is no legislative pro- 
vision or municipal regulation, or even accepted custom, which 
clearly defines what shall be the conditions of test to obtain 
commercial accuracy, and this is the more remarkable when 
one considers what large amounts of money depend on the indi- 
cations and registrations of such instruments. We hear from 
time to time about erratic meter performances, not only in 
regard to the accuracy of the electric meter, but also as to 
the indications of its elder brother, the gas meter. It is often 
difficult to reconcile the opinion a customer holds in per- 
fect good faith, as to the amount of current he believes he has 
consumed, with the actual indications of his meter, and I 
know of no more difficult task than that of satisfying a cus- 


220 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [April 28 


tomer who believes that in a certain month he has used only 
half as much current as in the preceding month, and yet re- 
ceives a bill of substantially the same amount, as shown by the 
meter. On the one hand one is face to face with a question of 
fact, as registered by the best instrument that is available, 
and on the other hand with a matter of belief, which may be 
the result of personal observation, or, what is more likely, a 
general impression as to what the conditions of use may have 
been. 

_We all know, as has been pointed out in the papers, that 
the tendency of most recording apparatus in use is to run 
slow. As to the extent to which apparatus of this character 
runs slow under commercial conditions, it is difficult to state; 
but the ordinary types of commutator meters must, of neces- 
sity, considerably under-record. To begin with, it is difficult, 
owing to the extension of installations and the maximum 
demand which each installation is likely to make upon the 
street service, to obtain a total meter capacity that is much 
less than the total installation capacity connected with the 
street mains. It is not difficult to obtain a satisfactory ratio 
in the case of residences, but it becomes difficult in installations 
that have variable demands and in which sudden changes in 
current strength and unusual demands must be taken care of. 
For this reason it is considered good practice so to proportion 
the ratio of meter capacity to installation, that some meters 
may be burned out from time to time; and it is safe toinfer 
that a supply system in which no meters are ever burned out, 
is “ over-metered”’; the rate at which meters burn out gives a 
rough indication as to whether an economical policy is being 
pursued in selecting the appropriate sizes of meters. 

Assuming a ratio of meter capacity to connected installation 
capacity of 1 to 1, we find that under the conditions of heaviest 
load on the system, the meters, on the average, will then operate 
at only 30 to 50 per cent. of their capacity; and since the heaviest 
load on a large system lasts for little more than one hour aday, 
for only a few months in the year, and during the months of 
light load, and for considerable periods of the day and night 
' the load carried is insignificant, the meters will practically 
work under conditions where the load is considerably under 
10 per cent., and probably not over five per cent. of their 
capacity. Now, we know what the results are of operating 
meters on loads well under 10 per cent. of their average 
capacity. 

To get an approximate idea of the conditions that may be 
expected on a large system, I will give a few facts as to com- 
mercial accuracy of meters in every-day service. The figures 
tefer only to commutator meters. In a large meter system 
that is kept in good condition, the records show that of one thou- 
sand meters tested at random on the customers’ premises, after 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 294 


they had been in operation for about one year, 75 per cent. 
were between plus five and minus five per cent. of absolute 
accuracy; and of the remainder approximately twice as many 
were slow as fast; the average accuracy of all the meters was 
98.12%; and only 2.7%, of the whole number were more than 
10 per cent. fast. The tests were made under what may be 
considered full-load conditions; that is, at 50 to 100 per cent. 
of the meter capacity. Under light load conditions of 10 to 
25 per cent. of the meter capacity, 50 per cent. of the meters 
were between plus five and minus five per cent., and of those 
outside of this range, four times as many meters were slow as 
fast. 

Those who have to do with apparatus of this kind should 
carefully consider the conditions under which results are ob- 
tained, and in case of doubt should thoroughly investigate 
these conditions before questioning the accuracy and reliability 
of the metering instruments. 

CaryL_ D. Haskins: I wish to call the attention of the In- 
STIUTE to some valuable official statistics which are now avail- 
able, covering the real facts as to the accuracy of the electric 
meter, and also of the gas meter. For several years the State 
of Massachusetts has been conducting on the consumers’ premises 
official tests upon electric and gas meters against which a 
complaint of inaccuracy had been made. The average error 
of all the electric meters tested, in 1904, in the State, was 1.08 
per cent. at full load, and less than one per cent. at one-fifth 
load, which was 50 per cent. better than shown by the tests 
made on gas meters. These figures are more flattering to the 
meter than those that the President has cited. The reason 
for that is, the layman does not appeal to the State unless he 
thinks his meter is fast. wy 

It is my impression that Mr. Nies has assumed conditions 
more adverse to accuracy than those that usually prevail. 
I suspect also that some of his statements in regard to trans- 
former accuracy might not accord with general observations that 
have been made on devices of that kind. The same state- 
ment applies also to the meters—the aging of the iron in ‘the 
meters. . 

Mr. Cox has mentioned the importance of studying the 
relation of stray fields about the switchboards to the instru- 
ment accuracy. This has not been studied enough. There 
are innumerable switchboards in the United States where the 
effect of stray fields almost destroys instrument accuracy. 
He has also referred to the inaccuracy of indicating instruments 
at the very low reading of the scale. A safe rule to adopt is 
that an indicating instrument should not be installed of such a 
capacity as to call for the acceptance of readings below the one- 
fifth scale. That area might almost as well be left blank. 

There is scarcely any electrical phenomenon the study of 


222 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [April 28 


which will not be made twice as easy by the use of the oscillo- 
graph or of the kindred devices of which it is a type. 

I think Mr. Mowbray errs in attributing at least some, pet- 
haps many, of the latest improvements in integrating instru- 
ments to the operating companies. The manufacturing com- 
panies have been more largely concerned in making such 
improvements than have the operating companies. They 
naturally should be. 

Epwarp B. Rosa: Ihave. not yet made use of the 
oscillograph, but am familiar with the point-by-point pro- 
cess and have used one of the instrments that Mr. Robinson 
describes for that work. Some experiments with the curve 
tracer were made at the Bureau of Standards last summer to 
illustrate the possibility. of attaining great accuracy in the 
determination of the wave-forms of alternating currents. The 
dvnamo used was built to have, as nearly as possible, a sine 


4 . 


wave; it was constructed by the General Electric Company. 
The wave when drawn looks so nearly like a sine wave that 
one would not be able to identify any harmonics by inspection. 
The current was used in the absolute determination of induct- 
ance; that is, the value of our standard inductances, and it was 
necessary to determine the wave-form with the greatest pos- 
sible accuracy. In order to do this three circuits in parallel 
were used, all supplied with the electromotive force of the 
machine; one circuit was inductive, another had non-inductive 
resistance, and the third contained a condenser. The condenser, 
of course, would amplify the harmonics. It is obvious that if 
the forms of the three waves of current in the three circuits, 
respectively, are plotted, one can be derived from the other; 
that is to say, from the form of the condenser current, after 
analyzing it and determining the harmonics, the exact value of 
the harmonics of the electromotive force to produce that cur- 
rent can be calculated. Having the electromotive force, the 
form of current which would flow into and through a certain 
inductive circuit can be calculated; that is, the harmonics in 
the current curve can be derived directly from the electro- 
motive force curve and also from the condenser current curve. 
These curves were analyzed and computed in this way: the cur- 
rent first from the electromotive force, and second from the con- 
denser current to see how closely they checked, with the following 
result: the fundamental was 46 738, the average of six separate 
determinations. The third harmonic had a value of a little 
less than two per cent. of that—0.866 is the average—and the 
average variation from the mean was about two per cent.; 
that is, about two per cent. of the component of the wave. 
The fifth harmonic had an average value of 0.056 as compared 
to 46 720—a little more than one-tenth of one per cent.—and 
the variation from the mean -was very small. The seventh 
harmonic was 0.040, the ninth 0.008, the eleventh 0.004, and the 
thirteenth 0.004, out of a total of 46738; that is, the ninth, 


-1905.]} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 223 


eleventh, and thirteenth had values of only about one in 10 000 
of the fundamental, as determined from the analysis of the - 
electromotive force. waves. 

The analysis of condenser-current. waves gives still more 
accurate results, for the reason that when the harmonics are 
determined and. divided down to obtain the harmonics of the 
current, the errors in drawing the curves and making the an- 
alyses are themselves divided down in a similar'ratio. The 
results agreed closely with those which precede, but the inde- 
pendent determinations. agreed more closely: among them- 
selves, and gave, for example, in the case of the third har- 
monics, an average on the basis of-the three observations, .of 
0.874 instead of 0.866, which is a difference of one in 100 in the 
value of the harmonic, which latter is only two per cent. of the 
total. If that were drawn out on a curve five inches high, for 
example, the error in the determination would amount. to 
about one-thousandth of an inch. In order-to get that degree 
of accuracy it was necessary to eliminate the errors of the paper 
on which the curves were drawn, and those due to the slight 
inequalities of the potentiometer wire. Then these inde- 
pendent analyses were made, which agreed with surprising accu- 
racy, the ninth, eleventh, and thirteenth harmonics being prac- 
tically absent; that is, all the six separate analyses agreed in 
showing that the magnitude of these highest harmonics were 
not more than one or two parts in 46 000. 

I would like to emphasize one point in Mr. Cox’s paper in 
regard to the inadvisability of using switchboard instruments 
as precision instruments for testing. It is hardly necessary to 
say they should not be so used, but nevertheless they are fre- 
quently employed for that purpose. We have recently tested 
at the Bureau of Standards a series of four current shunts 
which had been used in the test of an important electric railway 
station, the capacities of which were from 1 000 to 3 000 amperes, 
and we were requested to get their correct values. Their tem- 
perature coefficient was considerable, the thermoelectric effect 
was pronounced, and the design was such that on certain 
contacts the variations in the resistances at the contacts of 
the leads would change the distribution of current in the ter- 
minals of the shunts and so change the potentials at the ends 
of the shunts. In one particular case, which was investigated, 
several values were found by connecting up and disconnecting 
that varied eight per cent. from the minimum to the maximum 
value, and yet the shunt had been used on a test of some im- 
portance. Other shunts were better, and yet showed a differ- 
ence of two or three per cent. between their capacity values 
at full load, and values at light load the current being con- 
tinued for some time... - ; 

The suggestion to correct the instruments by inserting a known 
resistance in the bus-bars, is valuable and should be followed 
up. It is perfectly practicable, if arranged in advance, to 


224 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [April 28 


connect in a standard resistance in order to calibrate the instru- 
ments of a switchboard. The standard resistance may be sent 
away to be tested, and thus be used at intervals to test instru- 
ments, no matter how high the range of current might be. 

Standard current shunts should be submerged in oil or other- 
wise kept cool, or they should have large radiating surfaces. 
They should be made of materials having a vety small thermo- 
electric coefficient. One of the most important precautions 
is to have the design such that a variation in the contacts 
where the current enters and leaves the shunt shail not so alter 
the distribution of current in the terminals of the shunt as to 
alter the difference of potential between the potential terminals. 
That can be done, but is not generally done. 

As to potential transformers, my experience is that they are 
more accurate and more reliable than is popularly supposed, 
provided the load on the secondary is constant, or provided 
the transformer has been calibrated and its ratio of transforma- 
tion with a given load is known. The chief cause of variation 
of the ratio of the transformer is the varying load upon it; 
whether it is supplving current to one instrument or to two 
instruments, and whether the instrument is taking more or 
less current. 

CLtayton H. SHarp: The danger of the influence of stray 
fields on the accuracy of indicating instruments placed on a 
switchboard is a real one. The errors so introduced may be 
quite large. The influence of stray fields is likely to be much 
greater upon alternating-current instruments without iron than 
upon direct-current instruments of the permanent-magnet, 
moving-coil type. The remedy proposed by Mr. Cox is a 
radical one, but it is hardly applicable to instruments at present 
installed and in use. The important thing, as far as such 
instruments are concerned, is to check their accuracy in position 
and under working conditions. 

The difficulty with the ordinary methods of checking by 
comparison with standard instruments is that the standard 
instruments themselves may be so affected as to yield erroneous 
results. This difficulty may be surmounted in two ways: 
the first way is to use an instrument that is unaffected by 
stray fields in the work of making checks. The potentiometer 
is such an instrument, which, in a simplified form, has been 
introduced into central-station practice for this purpose with 
good results. The second method is to use an alternating- 
current instrument as standard. The moving coil of the in- 
strument is first connected in circuit, and the position of the 
instrument determined in which the moving coil is unaffected, 
and readings are taken with the instrument in this position. 
This method of eliminating the influence of outside fields has 
been pointed out by Mr. Thos. Varley. 

Mr. Cox mentions the increasing use of current transformers. 
It is a good plan to get a determination of their ratio of trans- 


e 


1905.] DISCUSSION AI NEW YORK. 


bo 
bo 
or 


formation before installing them permanently. Inasmuch as 
the ratio changes with the degree of saturation of the iron, 
it should be measured with diiferent values of current. By 
having the results of such measurements on record, it is neces- 
sary only to check the indicating instrument when it is desired 
to determine the accuracy of the measuring devices at any 
future time. This error, combined with the transformer error, 
gives the total error in measurement. The measurement of 
the ratio of transformation may be made with the aid of two 
ammeters or with a Kelvin balance and an ammeter, and can 
be carried out on a low-tension line—a consideration of im- 
portance. When used with integrating meters the errors of 
series transformers can largely be compensated for by adjusting 
the meter. 

' The paper by Mr. Robinson relates to a subject that has not 
previously been discussed by the Institute. I am able to 
speak from personal experience with the wavemeter and oscillo- 
graph, instruments of the sort described by Mr. Robinson. 

The wavemeter is an exceedingly practical instrument, and 
is to be preferred to the oscillograph for recording and studying 
periodically recurring phenomena, such as alternating-current 
waves, because the instrument is easy to manipulate and gives 
a result on a larger scale and hence more easily studied. In 
eases where it is desired to analyze alternating-current wave- 
forms to determine the harmonics present, it is advan- 
tageous to dispense with the photographic attachment and 
to substitute a voltmeter or millivoltmeter for the galvano- 
meter. The contact brushes are moved forward one notch or 
five electrical degrees at a time, and the indications of the 
voltmeter are read for each notch. There are 72 notches, so 
that a series of observations of this sort covers an entire wave. 
The values so obtained are at once available for making the 
computations for the analysis of the wave-form. They may 
also be plotted in rectangular codrdinates, and the wave-form 
thus be reproduced to any desired scale. A set of observations 
of this sort can be made in a few minutes. 

In my own work I have attached a strip of millimeter paper 
to the ground glass of the photographic attachment, so that 
the muneasurements can be made by using the galvanometer 
and spot of light already provided, and the point-by-point 
record or the photographic record can be made without changing 
any electrical connections. 

The ondograph of Hospitalier is an extremely convenient 
instrument for recording alternating-current waves, being small, 
self-contained, always ready for use, and easy of manipulation. 
It does not, however, have the range and the flexibility of 
the wave-meter described by Mr. Robinson. Professor Rosa’s 
curve tracer, while capable of yielding very accurate results 
when its contact maker is directly connected to the shaft of 
the alternator that is being studied, would, it seems to me, 


226 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [April 28 


practically be no more reliable than the wave-meter used with 
a voltmeter, as indicated, provided the contact of the curve 
tracer is driven by a synchronous motor, as in the case with the 
wave-meter. 

As to the oscillograph, as nearly as I can find out it is diffi- 
cult to use and certain to get out of order sooner or later by 
the rupture of the vibrating strips or by the mirror becom- 
ing injured or detached therefrom. This being the case, it is 
of great importance that the oscillograph should be so con- 
structed that the user of it may be able to repair it when it 
meets with an accident. 

I have studied the construction of two very well known foreign 
makes of oscillographs and I believe that no man of ordinary 
skill could replace in them a broken strip without the expendi- 
ture of a great deal of time and patience, and perhaps not at all. 

The oscillograph that Mr. Robinson has designed can, on the 
contrary, be readily repaired; as I have found out by experi- 
ence, a broken strip can be replaced by a new one and a mirror 
attached in a very few minutes. The rupture of a strip due 
either to overheating or to undue tension is no longer a serious 
matter. The manipulation of this oscillograph is in other re- 
spects quite simple, and the results obtained with it seem to 
be all that are required for ordinary testing. I have obtained 
satisfactory records of capacity currents of a frequency as high | 
as 3500 cycles per second, and an instrument that will do this 
has as high a frequency as is required in commercial work. 
For the purposes of the physical investigator it might some- 
times be desirable to have an instrument of greater refinement 
and of higher natural period, but for the ordinary purposes of 
the electrical engineer it would be a disadvantage to attempt 
too much in the way of high period, as this would involve re- 
duction in size and increase in delicacy of the moving parts of 
the instrument. 

The means whereby the oscillograph record is made visible 
is of great utility, because by its aid changes can be watched as 
they occur. Engineers have felt the need of a more intimate 
knowledge of the phenomena which takes place in lines, in gen- 
erators, and in motors; the oscillograph is the only instrument 
by means of which these phenomena can be studied to the best 
advantage. The production of a practical oscillograph, which 
can be used without making an extended special study of this 
form of instrument, is therefore a valuable achievement. 

Referring to Mr. Mowbray’s paper, it has found its way very 
extensively into the meter-testing practice of a number of large 
electric lighting companies. The principle on which it works 
is an excellent one, not only for the attainment of accuracy in 
testing customers’ meters but also for saving time and expense 
in doing so. 

A. R. Everest: The subject of transformers used in con- 
nection with instruments has been referred to several times 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 227 


this evening. Dr. Sharp suggests the desirability of calibrating 
the current transformer before it is put into service, in order 
that complete data may be on hand regarding it for future 
reference. This is undoubtedly desirable in connection with 
the apparatus of a standardizing laboratory, but I hardly think 
Dr. Sharp intended to suggest its necessity in the case of a 
transformer employed for switchboard use; at least when such 
transformer is of a design known to introduce errors of less 
than one per cent. throughout the useful range of the instru- 
ment with which it is employed. 

As to the potential transformer, Professor Nies says: ‘‘A 
potential transformer differs in no radical way from an ordinary 
transformer; its operation is similar and is governed by the 
same rules.’’ He refers to the fact that the accuracy of the 
transformer depends on the regulation drop, which he suggests 
varies with the load on the secondary. This gives an erroneous 
impression. A potential transformer, especially one designed 
for high voltage and low frequency, takes a very large exciting 
current in proportion to its output, and since the impressed 
voltage is practically constant that part of the regulation drop 
that is due to exciting current is also constant and may be taken 
care of by a permanent correction in the ratio of the winding. 
Professor Nies, for illustration, mentions a transformer having 
total regulation drop of 1.6%, and says: “‘ All instruments sup- 
plied by such a transformer at full load will read 1.6% low.” 
As a matter of fact, with proper ratio correction for the constant 
drop due to excitation, the ratio variations due to changes in 
load would be well below one per cent. 

Another characteristic feature of the potential transformer 
Professor Nies has not mentioned, namely, its extremely low 
reactive drop due to the fact. that the output of such.a trans- 
former is always very small for its size, as compared with a 
transformer designed for lighting service. The réactive drop 
in a potential transformer will usually be a small fraction of 
one per cent. 

Referring to the question of phase displacement, Professor 
Nies suggests that the displacements produced by the current 
and potential transformers are in the opposite direction, and 
therefore cumulative. This disagrees with experience, both in 
calculations and tests on the designs employed for, instrument 
transformers. In the potential transformer the exciting com- 
ponent being relatively large, and the reactive drop small, the 
impressed primary voltage lags behind the counter electromotive 
force ; that is, the reversed secondary voltage leads with respect to 
the primary. In the current transformer, since the primary cur- 
rent contains a magnetizing component that is not present in 
the secondary, the latter reversed leads the primary. Thus 
both phase displacements are in the same direction and tend 
to cancel each other. Since the magnitude of either is usually 
not over one degree, the resultant error is very small. If the 


228 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [April 28 


potential circuit were derived from a heavily loaded transformer 
having large reactive drop, or in other abnormal cases, the re- 
verse conditions would be found; but with proper apparatus, 
employed under the conditions for which it is designed, the 
errors introduced by current and potential transformers will 
be much smaller than Professor Nies’ paper would lead one to 
expect. 

W.H. Pratt: Insupporting a particular method of metering 
which is adapted to a few cases, Mr. Nies seems to place the 
general problem of polyphase metering in an incorrect light. 
The matter of the transformer has been already well discussed, 
but a word may be added as to the stray field of one trans- 
former influencing another transformer. It would be an almost 
neligible effect. 

The case cited of errors introduced by variation of the lag 
adjustment of the meter gives the impression that errors of 
large magnitude are likely to occur, whereas in fact they rarely 
occur in anything like the magnitude shown by the curves. 

As to the use of two meters for metering a polyphase circuit, 
it is true that when two meters are used with a circuit that is 
lagging, one meter will take a much higher load than the other, 
and will, therefore, register at a higher percentage accuracy. 
However, when the fact that the meter giving the lower accu- 
racy has the lighter load is taken into account, it will be found 
that the total error due to friction is uninfluenced by the dis- 
tribution of the load. The friction error of a meter may better 
be considered as a constant than as a percentage error. For 
instance, a meter inaccurate on account of friction to the extent 
of two per cent. at five per cent. of load full, gives therefrom 
a constant error of 0.1 per cent. of its rated capacity irre- 
spective of its load. This will hold good for the light-load error 
in any motor-meter, and hence in the use of two meters for a 
polyphase load the distribution may be ignored down to the 
point where one meter should stop. 

The same general line of remarks applies also to the matter 
of phase displacement. In a polyphase meter with equally 
incorrect phase adjustment in both elements, the total efiect 
on registration is the same as in a single-phase meter with the 
same error in adjustment. In the case of equal and opposite 
errors in phase adjustment of the two elements, there is only a 
very slight error, and a small correction factor proportional to 
the sine of the lag angle. . 

I cannot agree with Mr. Nies that a polyphase meter is more 
difficult to calibrate than two single-phase meters; in many 
cases, where it is only a matter of checking, it is certainly 
much easier to calibrate the former; and, further, there is only 
one running mechanism to examine and one set of readings to 
take; the two elements can be thrown in series as easily as two 
or three single-phase meters can be thrown in series for calibra- 
tion, 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 229 


_ The use of single-phase meters would, of course, entail the 
use of three currents and three potential-transformers on a cir- 
cuit such as described. And it is an open question whether the 
same amount of effort that would have to be expended on the 
three meters could not be more judiciously employed in other 
directions. 

G. C. Van Buren: I wish to mention a condition which 
was recently brought to my attention for correction of the two- 
single-phase-meter arrangement. The installation consisted of 
one three-phase, 220-volt motor and one single-phase, 220-volt 
motor. Both meters rotated in the proper direction when the 
three-phase motor alone was running; upon starting the single- 
phase motor one meter would decrease its rate of speed, and 
by varying the load upon the single-phase motor this meter 
could be made to come to rest and reverse its direction of rota- 
tion. 

A. H. AcKkERMANN: In a certain central station there are 
some 15 or 16 balanced three-phase high-tension generator 
meters. Considerable difficulty was encountered in keeping 
them accurate on account of the sapphire jewel bearings. From 
the meters the circuits were split into some 30 feeder meters, 
the registration of which was seldom within five or ten per cent. 
of the correct readings as observed by the system operator. 
After all these meters were equipped with cupped diamonds the 
errors were considerably diminished and the average error for 
the past eight months has not exceeded 1.5%. 

There is a point in Mr. Cox’s paper which needs emphasiz- 
ing—that suitable arrangements should be provided on every 
switchboard for testing the meters. The maker of the switch- 
board puts it up, and is done with it; the man that sets the 
‘meter is through with it after he has put it in place, but the 
meter department begins its work from that time on, and 
periodically tests the meters, say, once a month, once in six 
months, or once a year. 

The 45 meters before mentioned have been equipped by the 
operating company with short-circuiting switches for the series 
transformers and double-throw switches for the potential 
transformers to disconnect them from the high-tension system 
and for the purpose of testing them with rapidity as secondary 
meters. Formerly, two men tested one or two meters in a 
day under the old system of disconnecting from the back of 
the board; now the work is expedited through the employment 
of the switches, so that it is possible for two men to calibrate 
10 or 15 meters in a day. It is practically the same in low- 
tension work. In New York about six to eight meters are tested 
per day; this is the average for all classes and of meters in use, 
including large capacity meters. The average would be con- 
siderably higher if all the meters were of small capacity. 

The greater part of the time required for testing meters is 
consumed in getting the standard instruments 1m position, dis- 


230 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [April 28 


connecting the leads, and work of a similar description, all of 
which could be avoided by providing convenient devices for 
inserting the standards. There are 50 1 200-ampere meters in 
use in New York, besides two 3000-ampere meters; tests of 
meters of such large capacity naturally reduce the average rate 
of making tests. I have investigated the method of testing 
by calibrating the bus-bar to obtain a definite drop at a suit- 
able load, and connecting therewith a milli-voltmeter to read 
current; this method eliminates the laborious operation incident 
to insertion of a standard shunt; the test can be accomplished 
in about one-fifth of the time needed with the present method. 

The figures quoted by President Lieb on the results of 1 000 
periodic tests were made at the expiration of one year, and as 
he stated, included tests on meters as they came, irrespective 
of size, capacity, condition, or any other influence. I have in 
mind also another set of tests that were made on large-capacity 
meters, all of which were equipped with the so-called flat- 
diamond jewel bearings, which have been superseded by cupped- 
diamond jewels. The tests showed the extent to which the accu- 
racy of a meter is affected by the character of the bearing and 
resulting friction. The figures were increased about 50 per 
cent. with the old flat-diamond jewel over those obtained with 
meters provided with sapphire jewels. Those within plus two 
and minus two were considerably more—some 25 per cent. 
more at full load—than the figures for the sapphire jewel. 
The old meters with their heavy moving elements must be 
provided with some suitable means for decreasing friction; 
the cupped-diamond jewel seems to be the solution of this 
vexatious problem. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT PHILADELPHIA. 231 


Discussion ON MeaAsurinc INSTRUMENTS AT PHILADELPHIA, 
May 8, 1905. 


PREsIDENT LizB: I know that if there is a spirit pervading 
the administration of the InstiruTE—it has also pervaded pre- 
vious administrations—it is the feeling that the InstiTUTE 
is not merely a body of electrical engineers living and working 
in New York, but that it is a national body, that it represents 
and has at heart the interests of electrical engineers all over 
the United States. I feel that the central organization is cer- 
tainly alive to its obligations and to its duties to the local 
organizations, as representing a very much larger constituency 
than merely the local membership of New York. Perhaps 
this feeling of greater interest which* the members removed 
from New York should have will be aroused when our en- 
gineering building shall have been completed. 

Work is about to begin on this building; the contracts are 
about ready to let. I think we shall shortly have a worthy 
monument to the engineering professions in which the electrical 
engineer—the youngest profession—has had a very fortunate 
and proud part in developing and bringing to a fruition. 

As representing the parent organization of the INsTITUTE 
I bring to the Philadelphia Local Branch its warm salutations, 
and wish you continued success and continued activity along 
the lines which have already produced such good results in 
Philadelphia. 

Ratpu W. Pope (Secretary of the INstiruTE) addressed the 
meeting upon the condition of the affairs of the Institute and 
its future prospects. 

CHAIRMAN Pike: The papers that were read at the last meeting 
of the Institute in New York are before you for discussion 
to-night. I shall ask Mr. J. F. Stevens to give a short dis- 
cussion of Mr. Cox’s paper. 

J. F. Stevens: Mr. Cox says that in the case of the shunt 
ammeter an instrument best adapted for laboratory conditions 
would have a shunt loss too great for switchboard service, and one 
designed for switchboards would have temperature errors too 
great for laboratory use. I do not agree with this statement. 
In the first place the laboratory ammeter, being an instrument of 
considerably greater delicacy, operates, asa rule, with a smaller 
potential drop in the shunt than is the case with a switchboard 
instrument. It is not unusual to find laboratory instruments 
operating on a drop of from 25 to 50 millivolts at full scale, 
while in switchboard work the customary drop is from 50 to 
100 millivolts. Laboratory and switchboard shunts do not 
differ in materials of construction, and in both cases it is cus- 
tomary to wind the moving coil of the millivoltmeter with 
copper wire. Since a correctly made shunt is constructed of 
material having practically zero temperature coefficient, the 
increased heat in the switchboard shunt, made necessary by 
the increased drop, does not interfere with the accuracy of the 


232 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [May 8 


ammeter’s indications. Temperature “errors may be larger in 
switchboard ammeters than in laboratory ammeters but this 
is simply because the temperature of the engine-room cannot 
be regulated as conveniently as the temperature of the labora- 
tory. 

tt is true that ammeters should be selected of such a range 
tha: the normal indications will be at about two-thirds of the 
maximum reading. But Mr. Cox intimates that indicating 
instruments are unreliable when readings are taken in the 
lower part of the scale, and Mr. Haskins, in his discussion, 
states that indicating instruments are substantially worthless 
at low scale readings. I do not view the matter in the same 
light. The percentage accuracy is the same throughout the 
working range of any instrument. An instrument having an 
equally divided scale, such as the d’Arsonval type, may be 
read with equal facility and equal accuracy at any part of the 
scale. 

Instruments having unequally divided scales, such as the 
hot-wire, the electrodynamometer, or the electromagnetic 
types, are, as a rule, safe and accurate within the calibrated 
range marked on the scale. Instruments of this type do not, 
as a rule, give readings at less than from one-tenth to one-fifth 
of the total range. One instrument maker has asserted that 
the reason instruments of this type are not calibrated below 
one-tenth the total range is because of the errors in this portion 
of the scale, forgetting the fact that the law of the instrument 
will not permit such readings to be obtained. The curve of 
calibration of these three classes of instruments shows that 
the largest divisions are near the middle of the scale, which 
may or may not be half the total range of the instrument. 
At and around this point, of course, it is most easy to obtain 
accurate readings. 

Mr. Cox states a real trouble when he mentions the difficulty 
of obtaining an agreement in reading between the totalizing 
ammeter and the various generator or circuit ammeters. Cir- 
cuit loads are constantly changing, and unless it is feasible to 
station an attendant at each ammeter and another attendant 
at the totalizing ammeter so that readings can be taken simul- 
taneously, it will be found almost impossible to make the sum 
of the circuit readings agree with that of the totalizing am- 
meter. In my opinion it is far better to test each ammeter 
separately, for it is comparatively easy to control the load on 
one circuit at a time. 

Friction in the jewel bearing is an element of inaccuracy, but 
would not be so if the instrument were properly handled from 
the time it leaves the factory until placed on the switchboard. 
The actual energy necessary to operate the instrument is ex- 
ceedingly small. Undoubtedly jewels tend to wear the points 
or polish of pivots on account of switchboard vibration, and 
it is wise so to install the switchboard as to reduce this vibration 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT PHILADELPHIA. 


bo 
Og 
OF 


to a minimum. But the greatest damage usually occurs be- 
tween the time an instrument leaves the factory and the time 
it starts in service. Switchboard builders are apt to be care- 
less in handling instruments. It is well known that if a switch- 
board instrument is laid on a board, and the board struck a 
sharp blow, that in nine cases out of ten the lower jewel of 
the instrument will be pierced. 

In checking the calibration of switchboard instruments by 
means of portable instruments, it is, of course, important that 
the portable instrument should not be subjected to the same 
stray field which may be present at the switchboard. Portable 
instruments are not, as a rule, shielded. They may, however, 
be removed toa considerable distance from the switchboard 
and are almost invariably used at right angles to the switch- 
board instrument. The influence of stray fields on portable 
instruments can be counteracted by constructing these in- 
struments on the principle of the electrodynamometer. This 
point is brought out by Mr. Sharp. 

Mr. Rosa objects to the commercial type of instrument shunt 
now on the market. My experience is that this shunt is very 
satisfactory if it is properly installed. The instrument maker 
can not of course be responsible if bad contact is made. I| 
know of errors caused by poor contact where the leads connect 
the instrument to the terminals of the shunt. 

I do not quite see how thermoelectric effects are introduced 
in shunt ammeter readings, for all the shunts with which I am 
familiar are so constructed that thermoelectric effects are neu- 
tralized. There are, however, errors introduced by the Peltier 
effect. These are inevitable, but fortunately the errors intro- 
duced are usually negligible. 

The influence of external fields on switchboard instruments 
affects the instrument readings. Practically all switchboard 
instruments are shielded by enclosing them in iron cases. I 
do not know of any difficulties caused by the proximity of the 
iron framework of the board, but errors have been introduced 
on account of a field produced by the busbars or feeders. In 
one case the generator cables were led to the top of the board, 
forming a loop, within which was mounted the generator 
voltmeter. As these risers carried 2000 amperes, the effect 
of this field was very marked, causing variations of as much as 
15% in the readings of the voltmeter. This could be corrected 
by proper switchboard design. 

For two- or three-phase alternating-current work at least 
two ammeters or two wattmeters should be used. The poten- 
tial coil should be connected in circuit with a Y-box for three- 
phase systems. Aside from the advantage of knowing whether 
the system is balanced or unbalanced, it is not advisable to 
depend on the switchboard attendants remembering to multiply 
readings by two or three. 

Wa. McCietran: The great value of the oscillograph is 


234 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [May 8 


its ability to give the wave torm from one wave. The shortest 
time in which I have seen a record made with the Rosa tracer 
is about six minutes. With a 60-cycle current, this would mean 
uniform conditions through about 20000 waves. But owing 
to the operator’s inexperience and the complexities of the instru- 
ment, the time necessary is usually much longer. The time 
required to obtain a curve with the ordinary contact-maker 
and voltmeter is still longer, and usually requires two operators, 

There is one feature that, so far as the writer knows, has re- 
ceived little attention. When curves are taken with the 
double oscillograph, it is frequently assumed that the plate 
shows the phase difference between the quantities recorded. 


Bieod: 


The accompanying illustration shows the current and electro- 
motive force curves taken on a standard of self-induction. 
The frequency was 60 cycles, the resistance 9.89 ohms, and 
the inductance 40 millihenries. This would give an angle of 
lag of about 54°. Measurements on the plate will show that 
the angle is about 17° 20 min. The error is, of course, the 
same error that always accompanies wattmeter measurements. 
The instrument must always be put in circuit so that it includes 
either the electromotive force or the current of one of the coils. 
In the illustration given we have an extreme case, for the 
current in the coil under measurement was about equal to the 
current in the loop of the oscillograph. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT PHILADELPHIA. 235 


The true phase angle can be obtained by measurements on 
several plates, the least number being three. One of these 
gives the ratio of the galvanometer actions of the two loops, 
the second eliminates the induction of the loops, and the third 
(Fig. 1) gives the apparent lag. There are many cases of course, 
where the angle on the last plate, that is, the apparent lag, 
will be very close to the true angle. When the oscillograph is 
shunted, it is difficult to obtain the true angle of lag. 

The oscillograph proper, or what has been called the oscillo- 
graph galvanometer, is comparatively a simple piece of ap- 
paratus; but usually there is rather a large amount of accessory 
apparatus that makes the use of the instrument tedious. To 
make it thoroughly commercial there should be a finely ad- 
justable non-inductive resistance, to bring the electromotive 
force within the limits of the instrument. A shunt, 
easily adjustable over wide limits, should also be provided. 
Otherwise there is considerable risk of injuring the very fine 
loops. Transformers may be used for high voltages and heavy 
currents, but one is always a little uncertain as to results, 
especially in the details of the waves. 

PRESIDENT Lies: Inthe presentation of the papers of the even- 
ing at the New York meeting, the accuracy of recording wattme- 
ters was particularly considered. I madea statement as to the 
results that were obtained under average conditions by tests 
on Thomson commutator meters, made on customers’ premises 
connected with a very large system—New York Edison system. 
The tests were usually conducted under very unfavorable con- 
ditions, on account of inaccessibility, varying voltage of pres- 
sure, stray fields, and vibration. The results, as I remember, 
were obtained from regular periodical tests upon 1000 meters 
that had been tested perhaps 12 or 18 months before. There- 
fore after perhaps a year had elapsed these same meters came 
under test again. 

On full load, that is, on 75% to 100% of the meter capacity, 
75% of the meters were between 5% fast and 5% slow, and 
of the remaining meters there were twice as many slow as fast. 
Under conditions of light load; that is, approximately 10% 
of the meter capacity, about 50% were between the limits of 
5% fast and 5% slow, and there were four times as many of 
the remaining meters slow as fast. The average arithmetical 
accuracy of the 1000 meters was 98.1% at full load, and 89.34% 
at light load. The tendency of the meters is to run slow 
after installation on account of the well known Joule effects and 
the commutator effects, so that, as a general thing, they require 
correction by means of ‘their adjustable shunts after they 
had been installed and running from two to three months. | 

The current delivered to the customer’s premises is well- 
known to be much greater than the current paid for. Just what 
the difference is cannot be stated, but I think it is safe to say 
that even with very carefully maintained meter systems the 


236 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [May 8 


current unaccounted for is very close to 10 per cent. of the 
current delivered. 

The fact can be appreciated, however, when the difference 
between the efficiencies at full load and light load, as before 
given, is called to mind; and it is further realized that usually, 
even in the best adjusted systems, it is not practicable to in- 
stall meters of a full-load capacity much less than the load 
that would be put upon them if the customers’ installations 
were in full operation. It is practicable, of course, to install 
meters of much less capacity in residences; but as a general 
rule the average meter capacity cannot be less than 75% of 
the customer’s installation; it is usually nearer 100%. 
Now, when it is considered that during times of maximum load 
in a large system probably not more than 30% of the in- 
stallation in use at any one time contribute to the maximum 
load, that the maximum load lasts for only an hour or an hour 
and a half, and occurs for only a very few months in the year, 
and that during the remainder of the time we have merely a 
fraction of that fraction of the maximum load, it will readily 
appear that the meters on the average are operating consider- 
ably under 10% of full load, so that the conditions that are 
obtained of low reading of 10% short or 90% efficiency are 
quite extricable. 

I have a series of readings of induction meters which were 
made for another purpose and which tell quite a different story. 
The meters had been running perhaps six to eight months; 
and their average accuracy at full load was 99%. The average 
accuracy at light load was 101; all the meters were accurate 
within +5 and —5%, and over 88.9% of them were accurate 
within +2 and —2; so we have quite a different story as to 
accuracy in the case of the induction meter as compared with 
the direct-current commutator meter. 

Cuartes Hewitt: Has President Lieb any data as 
to the relative difference between the loss in the Edison 
chemical meter and the Thomson recording meter since it has 
been installed; whether that loss is as great as before the 
present type of recording meter came into use? 

PresIDENT Lies: I cannot give any exact figures in answer to 
the question; but I think that the current not accounted for 
in the case of the Edison chemical meter was greater. To 
venture a guess, I should say that it was at least 15%. When 
the change was made in large systems from the Edison chem- 
ical meter to the Thomson recording wattmeter, it was ex- 
pected that a larger difference would be found; in other words, 
that the recording wattmeter would be the more accurate; 
but I know that in almost every case this expectation was not 
realized, and only a part of the expected improvement was 
actually obtained, and I think perhaps 15%—a ratio of 15 to 
10--would represent about the degree of improvement. 


1905.] DISGUSSION- AT PITTSBURG, 2: 


NJ 


DISCUSSION ON MEASURING INSTRUMENTS, AT PiTTsBURG, 
Pa., May 8, 1905. 


Wm. BrapsHaw: One would infer from Mr. Nies’ paper 
that the polyphase meter is an inherently inaccurate instru- 
ment. A polyphase meter so constructed that there are no 
mutual electrical or magnetic influences between the two meter 
elements, should and does operate just as accurately as the single 
element of a single-phase meter. This independence of the 
two meter elements is made permissible by connecting them 
together mechanically instead of electrically and magnetically. 
A polyphase meter mechanically connected between the two 
elements (that is, with two complete meter elements respectively 
acting upon two discs fixed to the same shaft) is polyphase only 
in that it may be so connected with polyphase circuits as to 
measure accurately the power whether the circuits are balanced 
or unbalanced. 

A polyphase meter is not more difficult to calibrate than two 
single-phase meters. When the “ bucking” process is used to 
bring the two meter elements into step, the error introduced 
by friction is negligible because the adjustment is made midway 
between the limits that give motion forward and backward. 
The total range being about 0.5% of full-load torque, the 
roughest approximation will give results of sufficient accuracy. 
If this method is used for setting the meter for zero power- 
factor, it will give very reliable results on loads of any power- 
factor. 

Either a mechanically or an electrically constructed polyphase 
meter will be affected to the same degree as the single meter 
element is affected by varying voltage, frequency, wave form, 
etc., hence the use of a number of separate single-phase meters 
in place of a polyphase meter will not insure any greater reli- 
ability. 

The possibility of using the separate readings of single-phase 
meters as a check on each other would be very remote, because 
a polyphase circuit that would be balanced within the limits 
of a modern service meter would be an ideal condition seldom 
attained; if it were attained it would be better to connect the 
two meters in series in one phase. 

A polyphase meter with mechanically connected meter ele- 
ments, and connected with transformers especially designed for 
use with instruments, will give, when the transformers are not 
overloaded, far more accurate results than those maintained in 
Mr. Nies’ paper, under any condition of load, voltage, or fre- 
quency. It is strongly recommended, when a change 1s to be 
made from the readings of a meter, that each meter be installed 
with a separate series transformer. nee 

Referring to Mr. Cox’s remarks on switchboard indicating 
instruments, good switchboard, instruments should have the 
following requisites: the readings should be accurate within 
plus or minus 2% under all conditions after being installed. 


238 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [May 8 


The instruments should have the maximum length of scale 
permissible for minimum switchboard space. The scale should 
be conveniently divided, with open divisions. The instruments 
should be deadbeat. The ratio of torque per unit weight 
should be maximum. The total weight of moving elements 
should be small. They should be but only slightly affected 
by external fields, changes of temperature, wave-form, fre- 
quency, unbalancing of the circuit, and should be accurate on 
inductive loads. Their mechanical design should be pleasing 
and substantial. 

The testing meter described by Mr. Mowbray has a useful 
field, but it must be used with discriminating judgment. 
Such a standard meter should be used to test meters 
in service to indicate whether or not the service meters need to 
be removed for recalibration. And the central station using 
an integrating standard meter for this service should have an 
accurate and reliable indicating standard for frequently check- 
ing the calibration of the standard integrating meter. The 
best service is obtained from a standard meter when its use is 
practically continuous, because a meter while standing idle is 
more liable to get dust in the jewel and develop friction than 
is a meter that is in continuous operation. The standard meter 
should be of the same type as the service meter under test; 
or else the load, voltage, and frequency characteristics of both 
the standard meter and the service meter under test should 
be known and compared before the service meter is condemned 
as being inaccurate. Some types of meters will run fast on less 
than their normal voltage and frequency, while others will run 
slow; and consequently a meter might be condemned as being 
as much as four or five per cent. in error, when in reality it 
would be within two per cent. of being correct. When a 
standard integrating meter is used with the precautions 
given above, it furnishes a reliable, accurate, and rapid 
method of checking integrating wattmeters while in service. 

STEPHEN Q. Hayes: Concerning Mr. Bradshaw’s remark 
that there is no reason why the series and shunt leads, referred 
to on page 173 of Mr. Nies’ paper, should be connected together, 
I understand that Mr. Nies’ idea is to connect one side of all 
of the series transformers and one side of all of the shunt trans- 
formers to a common ground wire. One side of the current 
coils and one side of the voltage coils of the switchboard 
instruments would also be connected to a common ground, and 
the two grounds would be connected together by a single wire. 

Referring to Mr. Cox’s paper, page 182, relative to the size 
of indicating instruments to be used on generator and feeder 
circuits, some engineers advocate the use of instruments of such 
size that even on a sudden heavy overload there shall be no 
possibility of the needle swinging to the end of the scale and 
possibly being bent or broken. The rule of the Westinghouse 
Company is to supply instruments of such size that they will 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG. 239 


take care of 50% overload on the feeder or generator circuits 
with which they are connected; but for special cases, when re- 
quired, larger instruments have been furnished to obviate the 
possibility of damage to the needle due to heavy overloads. 

Referring to page 183 of Mr. Cox’s paper, relative to the 
calibration of switchboard instruments, the Westinghouse Com- 
pany recently made it a practice, whenever requested to do so, 
to place testing plugs on the switchboard panels, both for the 
current coils and for the voltage coils of the instruments, so 
that it is a comparatively simple matter to connect in a portable 
testing meter in order to calibrate the various instruments. 

Too much importance cannot be placed on the last paragraph, 
on page 184 of Mr. Cox’s paper; with polyphase instruments it 
is of the utmost importance that the connections should be 
made correctly; it is better to be guided by a diagram of 
connections than for one not thoroughly ‘familiar with the 
switchboard instruments to connect up meters in a manner 
which he supposes will give the same results, 


240 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [May 9 


Discussion ON MEASURING INSTRUMENTS, AT SAN 
Franciso, May 9, 1905. 


C. W. Hurtron: The idea of frequently calibrating and 
adjusting instruments, particularly integrating wattmeters, and 
providing a means for readily inserting standardizing instru- 
ments is to be highly commended. The use of modern poten- 
tial and current transformers greatly simplifies the operations 
of standardizing and adds to the safety of the installation. 
The cupped-diamond bearing is a recent innovation; its use 
is highly recommended by those who have tried them. 

The Y-box and single wattmeter method has little to com- 
mend it, as slightly unbalanced conditions cause its records 
to be totally unreliable.* 

In measuring polyphase power by the use of integrating 
wattmeters, there is little choice between the polyphase meter 
and the combination of two single-phase meters by the so-called 
two-wattmeter method. Two independent wattmeters are, it 
is true, easier to calibrate than is a polyphase meter, but not, 
I think, quite so easy as Professor Nies says. Very good results 
could be obtained by placing the current coils in series and 
putting the potential windings in parallel on the same trans- 
former; in this case the speed of the meter would be twice the 
speed of the single-phase standard calibrating meter. 

Another interesting method by which two single-phase 
wattmeters may be used on a three-phase circuit was brought 
out some time ago by one of the large manufacturing companies. 
It has been used in a few cases for indicating wattmeters, but 
not so far as I know for integrating wattmeters, although I 
see no reason why it could not thus be used. This method has 
one virtue in common with the three-wattmeter method—the 
two meters run at the same speed as long as the load is bal- 
anced, regardless of the power-factor of the load. The chief 
drawback to the use of this method is its complication and 
the fact that one meter operates on 86% of full voltage, and 
the other on 86% of full current as compared with each other. 
This, of course, introduces complications in calibrating. 

J. W. Swaren: In the ordinary small plant of one or two 
generators and a proportional number of feeder panels, if proper 
regard is had for peak loads, the instruments and meters are 
working on the low end of their load curve the greater part 
of the time. Incidentally, all the costs of operating are com- 
paratively higher at this time, so that the showing made by 
the engineer in charge is really worse than the conditions justify. 

In larger plants, unquestionably the best plan is to meter 
each generator separately, doing away with totality meters 
and instruments generally. This leads us to switchboard de- 
sign, and we may as well look at it from this standpoint. The 


Deanne eee EEE EEE PSSST oe eo ee 2 en ee 
*Por results of experiments by the author and A. J. Bowie i 
this method see the Electrical World and Engineer, vor 33, page Uae 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT SAN FRANCISCO. 241 


instruments are the most important part of a switchboard, 
the brains of it, to use a common simile. Switchboards may be 
classified into two parts—direct-current switchboards and 
alternating-current switchboards. Take the direct-current 
switchboards first and beginning with the generator end, one 
usually finds a swinging bracket with one or two voltmeters. 
If the swinging bracket has two voltmeters, there is a plug- 
switch to give the generator voltage in paralleling. If it has 
one voltmeter, there is a shelf to hold a portable voltmeter for 
use in paralleling. This practice cannot be too strongly con- 
demned; it is placing a delicate instrument in the presence of 
stray fields and subjecting it to rough handling. Nor is it in 
a convenient place to be read. With two voltmeters on a 
swinging bracket, they are in plain view of the operator, and 
can both be read at a single glance. This is less likely to result 
in an error in throwing a new machine into service. On the 
generator panels proper, we find an ammeter, selected according 
to the size of the generator. All these instruments should be 
of the illuminated-dial type. 

The recording meter is usually placed on a sub-base; this 
is relatively a good place for it, as the vibration is less. If 
placed high enough from the floor, the meter is easily accessible for 
repairs. Here we are confined to the commutator type of meter, 
as the author of the paper under discussion states. But there 
are two vital points which he has not brought out; the de- 
magnetization of the magnets, and errors due to stray fields. 
The last virtually covers both points. 

As pointed out by Mr. Mowbray, the demagnetization caused 
by short circuits may be overcome by the relative positions 
of the field coils and magnets. This applies to the fields of 
force set up by the field coils only. To guard against other 
demagnetization forces, the magnets must be carefully shielded. . 
The speaker has in mind an interurban road operating a third- 
rail system, with meters on the feeder panels of the sub-stations. 
- The road had not been operating long betore the feeder meters 
showed a greater output than the generator meters. Tests 
showed the feeder meters to be very fast. The trouble was 
overcome by installing meters with properly shielded magnets. 

The error in running due to stray fields must be a minimum. 
A meter that is not practically insensible to stray field effects 
has no place on a switchboard. 

An ammeter should be sufficient on the feeder panels. On 
the battery panels there should be an ammeter with the zero 
in the middle of the scale, and a low-reading voltmeter for 
the cell voltage. The second voltmeter on the bracket should 
be sufficient for the battery voltage by using suitable switches. 
Here also should be placed a meter to register on separate dials 
the charge and discharge of the battery. In selecting instru- 
ments, the same points in reference to stray fields apply as well 
as to meters. Other points to be considered carefully are: 


242 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [May 9 


retention of calibration; liability to injury due to short circuits ; 
ability to obtain repair parts, and the ease with which repairs 
can be made. . 
“Ag for accessibility for calibrating, this can be taken care 
of by using a standard switch throughout the switchboard. 
A standard shunt can be fitted with lugs and inserted in place 
of the switch-blade. Current measurements can then be made 
with a millivoltmeter. 

Alternating-current switchboard practice may be criticized 
‘in two respects: first, there are too many meters and instru- 
ments on a board of this type; secondly, bus-bars and high- 
tension wires are brought unnecessarily close to the instrument, 
and frequently into the instrument itself. A switchboard at- 
tendant usually concentrates his attention on a definite opera- 
‘tion involving only a small proportion of the apparatus at 
present found there; the fewer instruments he has to distract 
his attention, the less likely he is to make a mistake. For this 
reason a great deal of the apparatus now put on the face of 
the switchboard should be put elsewhere. With this in view, 
it will be well to divide the switchboard into two divisions, 
the operating division and the recording division. 

Taking the operating division first, and beginning with the 
- generator end, we find a swinging bracket and on this bracket 
is placed a synchronizer and two voltmeters. One of these 
voltmeters is connezted permanently to the middle phase of 
the bus-bars; the other voltmeter is connected by a system of 
plug-switches to any phase of any generator. 

On the generator panels there is found an ammeter in each 
phase, and possibly a power-factor indicator, also the neces- 
sary plug-switches for the voltmeter on the bracket. The 
exciter panel holds the customary ammeter and voltmeter, and 
the feeder panel a single ammeter, and a voltmeter if a feeder 
regulator is installed. On the end of the feeder section there 
is another bracket with a single static ground-detector on it. 
On the feeder panels will also be found plugging devices to 
connect this ground-detector to any line. It is doubtful if 
this instrument is worth the complications necessary to connect 
it to the generator panel. On switchboards supplying current 
to step-up transformers it would obviously be omitted. 

The point of the second criticism can be overcome by sup- 
plying all the meters and instruments through current and 
potential transformers. 

' At the generating end of the recording division there is a 
‘polyphase meter on each generator Notwithstanding Professor 
Nies’ advocacy of three single-phase meters, the speaker thinks 
‘that a polyphase meter should be placed here. This meter 
should never operate on a light load, and the power-factor 
should never go low enough to introduce the errors he points 
out. The polyphase meter requires less ‘Space, and shows 
the entire record on one dial. It thus requires less of the 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT SAN FRANCISCO. 243 


operator’s time to obtain the readings and, being under con- 
stant observation, any variation in its registration would be 
noticed at once. As to Professor Nies’ contention that it 
cannot be calibrated while in service, the speaker does not 
agree. This applies especially in the case under consideration, 
where the load is large. The single-phase meter with Y-box 
should never be used, as balanced loads are mostly mathematical 
fictions. Here we should also find any curve-drawing instru- 
ments that are wanted. 

It does not seem advisable to place recording meters on the 
feeder panels unless it is desired to go into the segregating 
of the load very carefully. The panel supplying the station 
auxiliaries should however, be carefully metered. Where the 
feeder panels are metered, the three wattmeter method might 
be advisable. 

As to curve-drawing instruments, it is simply a matter of 
refinement. Voltmeters on the feeder panels would be the 
most important in lighting stations. Their use is also important 
‘on circuits supplying municipalities. When used to a sufficient 
extent, the superintendent has a check on every man’s work. 
Curve-drawing instruments should be especially free from 
vibratory effects, yet sensitive to load fluctuations. They should 
draw a fine clear-cut line. In the curve-drawing wattmeters, 
the speaker thinks the polyphase instrument should not be 
recommended, as the ones he has examined are especially 
liable to the faults Professor Nies has pointed out. 

Throughout this discussion, the speaker has taken the view 
that the following points are of most importance: first, accuracy ; 
secondly, obtaining the results desired; thirdly, maintenance; 
fourthly, first cost. Too often, first cost is made the most 
important point. Where accuracy should be the most impor- 
tant consideration, the slight per cent. increase of the cost of 
the whole station in getting the apparatus necessary instead of 
something just good enough, should not be allowed to influence 
their selection. : 

R. F. Monces: The determining feature for the capacity 
of instrument will generally be the overload capacity of the 
piece of apparatus with which it is to be used. Machines built 
for general power and lighting purposes have usually an over- 
load capacity of 50% for one or two hours. The indicating 
instruments, such as ammeters and wattmeters will, therefore, 
have to be sufficiently large to take care of this overload. In 
railway plants, momentary overloads as great as 100% are 
frequent and will require instruments capable of indicating 
them. 

As pointed out by Mr. Cox, the integrating instruments 
need not be so large in capacity; ordinarily they can be of the 
same normal capacity as the machine to which they are con- 


nected. . pe 
Regarding the instruments that are to be mounted on a 


244 MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. [May 9 


panel. These will vary slightly with the needs of the plant. 
For direct-current generators, a voltmeter, an ammeter, and a 
recording integrating wattmeter are all that are required. 
For alternating-current generators, an ammeter will generally 
be required in each phase, one voltmeter with two potential 
transformers to take the voltage on each leg, and a field ammeter. 
To this equipment, an indicating wattmeter could well be added 
in plants containing two or more generators to indicate the 
division of load between the prime movers; also, an integrating 
wattmeter. One integrating wattmeter for each machine is 
better than oae total-output meter, as it operates at more 
nearly full load all the time. 

In plants where most of the load is three-phase apparatus, 
such as synchronous converters and synchronous motors, two 
of the ammeters could be omitted and a power-factor indicator 
substituted. 

Regarding the use of series and potential transformers, I 
think these should be used with all instruments on circuits of 
2000 volts and more, so as to remove all high-tension wire from 
the face of the board. 

The only place where balanced three-phase meters can be 
used is on plants having a purely three-phase load, such as 
railway plants operating synchronous converters; even then 
the polyphase meter is to be recommended. 

Regarding the question of making provision on the board 
for the introduction of standardizing instruments. If this 
were done, switchboard instruments would be more closely 
checked. As it is now, a machine has to be shut down and 
time taken to introduce a standard into the circuit. Some 
simple and inexpensive means could probably be provided, 
particularly where series and potential transformers are used. 

C. L. Cory: Where switchboard instruments are supposed 
to indicate the output of the plant without careful checking, 
serious errors are sometimes discovered. I happen to know 
of one case where the error was carried into the bookkeeping 
and financial side of the plant. It was said that the plant 
was generating a certain number of kilowatts with a certain 
number of barrels of oil, that the cost at the switchboard was 
a certain number of cents per kilowatt-hour. Now, as a matter 
of fact when the test was made the results were in error over 
25%. That sort of test, particularly when applied to the finan- 
cial side of a power plant, is not a proper way for engineers 
to make up such data. It is not difficult to place in connec- 
tion with the switchboard some arrangement whereby these 
instruments could be kept straight. 

F. E. Smiru: Periodic testing is without doubt the only 
means of maintaining meter accuracy, such testing to be done 
on the customer’s premises and under as near working condi- 
tions as possible. If the test should prove that the meter 
requires a general overhauling or repairs, it should be removed 


. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT SAN FRANCISCO. 245 


to the company’s meter department for the purpose, and a 
new meter installed in its place. 

My experience in checking recording wattmeters with a 
portable standardized recording wattmeter has not been very 
‘successful, mainly for the reason that I found the portable 
meter unreliable, its failings being due principally to disar- 
rangement in carrying it about. 

It is a well-known fact that hardly two recording wattmeters 
are installed under like conditions: the adjustment for elim- 
inating initial friction varies in each installation, and an error 
due to this cause would apply to some extent in the case of 
the portable meter. The greatest liability for error would lie 
in the commutator and brush adjustment, which many times 
requires hours of running before a normal and lasting contact 
is established. For this reason it is not always wise to attempt 
to clean and dress the brushes and commutator of a meter on 
the customer’s premises; on the contrary, if they must be 
cleaned, it is much safer to remove the meter and put a well- 
seasoned one in its place. 

In practice I find the most reliable tests are those made 
with indicating instruments having two or more ranges in 
order to meet conditions of greatest accuracy, the testing 
load being an artificial one. In my practice this load consists 
of a bank of special resistance lamps giving loads from the 
minimum to the maximum. Under such conditions, the only 
variations to be contended with are the ordinarily small fluctua- 
tions in voltage, which as a rule should not affect the results 
to a greater extent than perhaps one per cent. ; 

One of the greatest sources of loss to companies supplying 
electric energy by meter is that caused by slow meters due to 
cracked or scratched jewels; this fault, as indicated in Mr. 
Mowbray’st paper, can be lessened to a very great extent by 
the use of the diamond-cupped bearing. 

This question of providing a pivot and bearing that will 
withstand the very heavy duty imposed upon it seems to be 
the all-absorbing topic in meter construction, the tendency 
being to increase the torque to such an extent that the friction 
would form only a small percentage of the power to be over- 
come by the motor. 

With a perfect jewel and pivot, this theory may hold good; 
but in practice and under the severe conditions imposed, namely, 
a hardened-steel pivot rotating on a jewel under a pressure 
of approximately 500 000 lb. per square inch, it would seem 
that a very great reduction in the weight of the moving element 
would tend more toward removing jewel troubles than any 
attempt to compensate for the ever increasing friction by 
means of a greater torque. 


A paper presented at the 197th Meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, — 
New York, May 16, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I.E. E 


TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. 


BY GEORGE F. CHELLIS, 


In power stations and sub-stations feeding large alternating- 
and direct-current distribution systems, relays form a necessary 
part of the station equipment for the protection of apparatus 
and feeders, and for the purpose of rendering the operation of 
a system automatic. In connection with the operation of oil- 
switches on high-pressure alternating-current systems the 
function of the relay is to close the control-circuit to the switch, 
thereby opening the main circuit when the current exceeds 
the value at which the relay is adjusted to operate. Not taking 
into consideration the time-element of the switch, its operation 
would be practically instantaneous if controlled by a simple 
relay. Therefore, since heavy currents due to swings of the 
load may often flow for such short periods that it would not be 
desirable to open the circuit, relays are provided with some form 
of time-limiting device by means of which the length of time 
a given current may flow without operating the switch can be 
adjusted to meet existing conditions. 

Relays may be divided into three classes: 

1. Differential relays, operating at a lower current value 
when the direction of the flow of energy is reversed than when 
flowing in its initial direction. 

2. Straight overload relays, operating when the current 


reaches a certain predetermined limit, irrespective of the direc- 
tion of flow of energy. 


3. Reverse-current relays, operating when the current reaches ' 
a certain predetermined limit, upon reversal of the direction of 


flow of energy. 
_ 247 


248 CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. [May 16 


ALTERNATOR RELAYS. 

The type and design of the ideal relay for the protection of 
alternators will depend upon the conditions under which it is 
to operate. A relay should operate on overload at normal 
pressure; on short circuit at zero pressure, or reduced pressure, or 
when the direction of the flow of energy is reversed. It can be 
designed to operate in the event of any of these conditions pre- 
vailing, and each at a different value, in which case a differential 
relay would be required. The principal advantages of the 
differential relay are that it can be so designed as to permit the 
alternator to be loaded to its maximum current capacity at 
normal pressure without danger of being cut out, and also op- 
erate on short circuit, when the pressure is zero, at a point 
sufficiently under the short-circuit current of the alternator 
to allow a suitable factor of safety. Compared with the straight 
overload relay, set to operate on short circuit with an equal 
factor of safety, at power-factor values usually attained (50% 
and higher), it will permit a greater load being carried at any 
operative pressure. 

Assuming that the relay is to operate on short circuit and 
reversal, but not on overload at normal pressure, the ideal 
relay should have the following characteristics: 

1. It should permit the alternator to be loaded to its max- 
imum current capacity at normal pressure. 

2. It should limit the current on short circuit to not more 
than 75% of the short-circuit current of the alternator. 

3. It should limit the current on reversal to the lowest value 
at which no difficulty is experienced when synchronizing. 

4. It should be provided with a positive time-limiting device, 
the time adjustment of which is independent of the current 
value at which the relay is operated. 

In existing forms of alternating-current relays of the dif- 
ferential type the energizing coils consist of two windings 
with a common magnetic circuit. These windings, which for 
convenience will be called a and b, receive current from a shunt 
transformer, and a series transformer, respectively connected 
with the alternator. Therefore, the current in a is de- 
pendent upon the pressure, and that in b upon the current. 

Since with constant pressure the magnetomotive force due 
to coil a is fixed in direction and magnitude, it serves to polarize 
the relay. The action of coil b in conjunction with coil a, 
at 100% power-factor, depends therefore on the direction of 


1905. CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS, 24 


the magnetomotive force due to coil b, and the ratio of ampere- 
turns of coil a to those of coil b. Under normal conditions 
coils a and 6 act differentially ; but if the direction of the magneto- 
motive force of 6 is reversed their action is cumulative. 

In Fig. 1, let OA represent the magnetomotive force of coil 
a; O B’ the magnetomotive force of coil b for normal conditions, 
and the angle (supplement of ¢, as given in diagram) their 
phase relation; the coils act differentially, the resultant mag- 
netomotive force being OC’. On reversal of the direction of 
flow of energy in coil b the magnetomotive force thereof will 
be represented by O B; as will be seen, the action of the coils. 


{ 
¢ 
' 
i] 
t 
4 
t 
' 
i) 
' 
zB 


FIG.4. 


is now cumulative, the resultant magnetomotive force being 
Oe 

Assuming the constants for an alternator in terms of the 
secondary current to be: rated current, 2.2 amperes; short- 
circuit current, 6.6 amperes, and minimum current permissible 
on reversal (on account of sensitiveness when synchronizing), 
1.1 amperes, a differential relay to comply with the previous 
specifications should operate on short circuit (pressure assumed. 
to be zero) at 75% of the short-circuit current of the alter- 
nator = 0.75X6.6 = 4.95 amperes for coil 6. The current for 
‘coil a, expressed in terms of the operating current for coil 0, 
must be 4.95 — 1.1 = 3.85 amperes. 

A relay having these characteristics would operate as fol- 
lows: short circuit = 4.95 amperes; overload current at nor- 


250 CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. [May 16 


mal pressure = 4.95+3.85 = 8.8 amperes; reversal = 4.95 — 
3.85 = 1.1 amperes. 

~ Since at unity power-factor the value for coil a, in terms of 
the operating current of coil b, is 4.95 —1.1 = 3.85 amperes, 
coil a bears to coil b the ratio of 0.775 to 1. This ratio is called 
herein the “‘ differential factor” of the relay. While this would 
give the desired operative characteristics, it is doubtful if a relay 
having so high a differential factor could be successfully con- 
structed, and for the following reasons: 

In general, relays of this type involve such principles of 
operation as to include a partly closed magnetic circuit, which 
is closed by the operation of the relay. The reluctance of the 
magnetic circuit therefore varies, being maximum at the starting 
point, and minimum when the relay has operated. If started 
in operation by a heavy current of short duration, due to an 
exchange of current between the alternator and the bus-bars 
at the moment of closing the circuit when synchronizing, the 
magnetic conditions in the relay would so change that it would 
operate at a much lower current than the normal if the current 
did not drop sufficiently low to permit the core of the relay 
to recover its normal position. The liability to this condition 
is greatest when the time-limit is comparatively short. By a 
series of experiments it was found that the highest permissible 
differential factor was about 70%. With a differential factor 
higher than 70% for the core-type relay, especially at low fre- 
quencies, a rise in pressure with no current in coil b would set 
up a series of vibrations of the armature in synchronism with 
the alternations of the current, which in some cases would not 
cease if the pressure were reduced to normal, the relay also 
being so sensitive as to make synchronizing very difficult. 

While the solenoid-type relay was free from this disadvantage, 
it was found that after the relay had operated the flux due to 
coil a was sufficiently great to prevent the relay core from re- 
covering its normal position. 

In Fig. 2, is shown the characteristic curves for a bellows-type 
differential relay, having a differential factor of 61.8%; and 
in Fig. 3 the curves for a similar relay having a differential 
factor of 25 per cent. 

Differential relays are commonly so connected that the current 
in coils a and b is in phase, when the alternator is operating at 
100% power-factor. In a three-phase system this is accom- 
plished by bringing out a tap from the centre of the secondary 


1905.] CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. 251 


coils of the pressure transformers, which are A connected. 
This gives, by Fig. 4, the pressures ab, cd, and ef, in phase 
with the currents 1, 2, and 3 respectively, and at an angle of 
30 degrees to the pressures ac, ce, and ea, which gives for the 
relay pressure x cos 30°, where x = A pressure at secondary 
of transformer. 

The actual connections for a two-coil relay are shown in Fig. 


PER CENT POWER-FACTOR 


AMPERES 
lates, Y, 


Characteristic curve of differential relay. Differential factor 61.8 per 
cent. Current in A and B coils in phase at unity power-factor for the 
alternator. 


5, the b coils of which are connected to the secondaries of the 
current transformers in phases 1 and 2, and the a coils receive 
respectively, the pressures a b and ¢ d of Fig. 4. By this 
method of connection the power-factor of the relay is ap- 
proximately that of the alternator.. 

When the load condition is such that a low power-factor. of 
the alternator is always caused by a lagging current, the average 


252 CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. [May 16 


power-factor of the relay may be improved by the method of 
connection shown for a two-coil relay, in Fig. 6. The 6 coils 
are connected to the secondaries of the current transformers 
in phases 1 and 2, and the a coils are connected, respectively, 
across ac and ab, of Fig. 6a. This causes the current in the b 
coils to lead that in the a-coils 30 degrees at 100% power-factor 
for the alternator, and to lag 30 degrees at 50% power-factor. 


100 


PER CENT POWER-FACTOR LAQGGING CURRENT 
s 


Raeehes 
, Fic. 3. 
Characteristic curve of differential relay. Differential factor 25 per cent. 
Current in A and B coils in phase at unity power-factor for the 
alternator. 


Therefore, at a sacrifice of 14% at unity power-factor, the average 
power-factor of the relay is kept high over a range of from 
100% to 50%. At 50% power-factor for the alternator, that 
of the relay would be 86.6%, as against 50% with the pre- 
viously described method of connection. 

Fig. 7 shows the characteristic curves of a relay with the cur- 
rent in the b coils 30 degrees ahead of that in the a coils. <A 


1905.] CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. 253 


comparison of Fig. 7 with Fig. 2 will show the advantages of 
the method of connection shown in Fig. 6. 

A two-coil relay as shown in Figs. 5 and 6, would protect a 
three-phase alternator, as follows: reversal at normal pressure, 


VA 


FIG. #. 


poles 1 and 2 operate; short circuit between phases 1 and 2, 
poles 1 and 2 operate; short circuit between phases 2 and 3, 
pole 2 operates; short circuit between phases 1 and 3, pole 1 


operates. 
To the knowledge of the writer, no relay having a positive 


CONTROL C/RCU/T- 


: POTENTIAL 
OII0N) “AA NVSFORMERS 


TAC AUAUAG) 


URRENT 
TRANSFORMERS 


F/G 5. 


time-limiting device has been placed upon the market. In 
relays brought out recently, a form of pneumatic time-limiting 
device has been adopted, such as a bellows, or dash-pot, which 
is acted upon directly, or through a system of levers connected 


254 CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. [May 16 


‘with the core of the solenoid, and provided with suitable means 
for adjusting the air discharge. While ideal from the stand- 
point of simplicity, these devices are not positive, the time 
adjustment being inversely proportional to the current at which 
the relay is operated. 


CONTROL CIRCUIT 


POTENTIAL 
Uy TRAWVSSORMERS- 


PHASE /. 
- ws 
- 7: 


CURREN 
TRANSFORMERS 


FIG.E 


In Fig. 8 is shown an ampere-time-curve for a bellows-type 
overload relay. This curve was obtained by adjusting the 
relay to operate with five amperes in 10 seconds, the current 


/ 


was then increased step by step and the times for the relay 
+o operate were noted. The “inverse ”’ feature of this relay 
as described later, may be used to advantage in connection with 
the protection of feeders. 


No 
Or 
Ou 


1905] CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. 


FEEDER RELAYS. 


The method of protecting feeders depends upon the operating 
conditions. This subject may be most consistently discussed 
by considering the conditions from the power-house alternating- 
current bus-bar to the sub-station direct-current bus-bar. 

To guard against overload, and to open the circuit in the event 
of a short circuit, a relay is required at the power-house end of 


100 faa — 


90 


80 r 


* 
_MAIL PRESSURE 


REVERSE CURRENT, HALE NORMAI 


60 


ALF NORMAL PRESSURE 


‘aaa 


NORMAL PRESSURE 


50 


40 


VERSE CURRENT, 


OVERLOAD CURRENT | 
; 


30 


PER CENT POWER-FACTOR LAGGING CURRENT 
R 


10 


0 1 2 Samet 5 
AMPERES 
Less We 


Characteristic curve of differential relay. Differential factor 61.8 per 
cent. Current in coil B 30° ahead of coil A at unity power-factor 


for the alternator. 


each feeder. A relay is also required at the sub-station end, 
where the feeders are operated in parallel, being connected to a 
common sub-station bus-bar, or where the sub-station bus-bar 
is divided, leaving groups of two. or more feeders in parallel. 
This can be seen by considering the diagram, Fig. 9, in which 
four feeders, a, b, c, d, are shown in parallel, and four con- 
verters connected to the sub-station alternating-current bus-bar 


256 CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. [May 16 


and feeding the direct-current bus-bar. Should a short circuit 
occur at the point x on b feeder there would be a rush of current 
from the power-house bus-bar, and also from the sub-station 
bus-bar to the point x. In a, c, and d the current would be 
increased, due to the short circuit being fed by these feeders 
through the sub-station bus-bar. 

Since a synchronous converter generates an alternating-cur- 
rent electromotive force corresponding to rated pressure at 
synchronous speed, in case the point x is near the power-house 
it is possible that the direction of the flow of energy in feeders 


SECONDS 


AMPERES 
Fig. 8. 
Ampere-time curve for bellows-type overload relay. 


a,c, and d would be reversed, due to the synchronous converters 
feeding the short circuit back through the power-house bus- 
bar, as well as directly over the short-circuited feeder. 
Because of the great amount of energy stored in the synchron- 
ous converters, it is also possible for all the sub-stations to 
feed back into a short circuit in this manner. To fulfil require- 
ments properly an ideal combination would be an overload 
time-limit relay at the power-house end and an instantaneous 
reverse-current relay at the sub-station end of each feeder. 
The writer does not know of an alternating-current reverse-cur- 
rent relay, the operation of which does not depend upon the 
pressure of the system, nor a relay that depends upon the pres- 


. oe — a ae ee eee ee a eee ay, 
STATIC TRANSFORMERS 
Cee TRANS. CURRENT GES CONVERTER PEVEASE CURAENT RELAY. 
oo OER Seag AV aVaW se ry wa eee aescatatas omteteabh Gatti chor: 
ee eT ey. AFEDER, & 2 ee APE Brea nears ey we A = eg 
00 ak a > oare a a Bavavaviwel ay 
ans = VAAF PIMA COL . 
OVERLOA C RELAY. Bg. 58 | 
i ke SBUES ‘ @ 
FEEDE?. 3. —IRPR-CO +14 ae 
x ape oo 4 oO 
v2) 
> 
&Q 
S 
= € 
w ™ | 8-C-D. LIME A. 
5 EEDEF: C. ~O 
Q 
. S 
x Q 
2 CS) 
g e Pekavevem enbioniasas , renee eam ee ee Q 
Eth Bistie® Sues FEEDER OD. saad pRB Ts ER or ey 
00-56 _______|_arrt—o-0— sO. ~ 
4 : 
OCONTROLLING C/RCL/T x 5 Q. 
OF SW/ TCH. yx >” 3 
A) ok 9 : 
s yO - 
=: eK S 
z EES 
8 ; 
is 58 a 
y 
Mabefafefofele fet =e + 
POTENTIAL TRANS, 
TYPICAL LAYOUT FOR THREE PHASE SYSTEM A ie 
n> > < SHOWING LOCATION AND CONNECTION OF 
&> . < ¥ ; at ; . 
ERENTIAL RELAY ALTERNATOR-FEEDER AND ROTARY RELA Ys. “ woe 
GENERATOR S. 
FIG.9. 
me — ~ are te may <he ~ - Yt . 


1905.] CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. 257 


sure operating on a reversal only, that would not become com- 
pletely inoperative at zero pressures or at comparatively low 
pressures. If differential relays were used, with a “ differential 
factor ”’ sufficiently high to render the relays of any appreciable 
value at low pressures, it is probable that they would be so sen- 
sitive that any disturbance causing a momentary reversal, 
without a serious decrease in pressure, would cut the station 
out unnecessarily. ; 

This theory is borne out by the experience of the Interborough 
Rapid Transit Company in the sub-stations of the Manhattan 
division, where instantaneous differential relays were installed 
at the sub-station end of the feeders. When feeders were op- 
erated in parallel, it was found in most all cases where a feeder 
became short circuited that all the differential relays at the 
sub-station end would operate, and also those of one or more 
of the other sub-stations; this caused the remaining relays in 
the other stations to operate because of overload, thus resulting 
in a total shutdown. After straight overload time-limit 
relays were substituted for the differential relays, on the occa- 
sion of several very severe short circuits the affected sub- 
station cleared itself in a perfectly satisfactory manner and 
without disturbing the rest of the system. It would appear, 
then, that the straight overload time-limit relay is the most 
satisfactory device obtainable for the protection of feeders at 
the sub-station end. 

With synchronous converters a straight overload time-limit 
relay in the high-pressure side of the transformers will give 
satisfactory protection for the alternating-current side; while 
for the direct-current side a reverse-current relay, operating 
the direct-current breaker, will be required to open the circuit 
and thereby prevent the synchronous converter from attaining 
destructive speeds, in the event of the field circuit being opened. 

Satisfactory direct-current reverse-current relays are obtain- 
able; they are commonly of the motor type, having an armature 
separately excited from a source of constant pressure, such as a 
storage-battery. They are provided with a stop to prevent 
continuous rotation, the field depending for its intensity and 
direction upon the line current. This type of relay, as installed 
on the 1500-kw. synchronous converters of the Interborough 
Rapid Transit Co., will operate at about 15% rated current on 
reversal. ‘ 

The relative value of the time adjustments for the various 

SS 


258 CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. [May 16 


relays depends on the order in which it is desired to open the 
‘switches. If feeders are operated in parallel, when a short circuit 
‘takes place on any given feeder there will be arush of current to 
‘the point of short circuit from the power- -house and also from the 
sub-station bus-bars; the comparative value of these cur- 
‘rents depending upon the location of the point of short circuit, 
‘the number of feeders in parallel, and the ratio of the kilowatt 
canacity of generators to the synchronous converters in service 
‘at ‘the time. While the overload current limit may be ex- 
‘ceeded in all feeders, both at the power-house and sub-station 
ends, the current in the short-circuited feeder at the sub-station 
end with » feeders in parallel will be »—1 times as great as 
‘that in the other feeders, plus the current supplied by the 
‘synchronous converters; or the current may be supplied entirely 
“by the synchronous converters, and the direction of the flow 
‘of energy in the unaffected feeders reversed; in any case the 
- ‘current in the latter will be the same at both ends. The current 
at both ends of the affected feeder will, therefore, reach a higher 
value than in the other feeders, and to clear it necessitates 
opening the switches at both ends. 

“To break the circuit at the lowest possible current value it 
is necessary first to open the switch at that end of the feeder 
‘which has the highest current value. Since the circuit will 
-still be closed from the other side, there will not be a high pres- 
sure across the terminals of the switch at the point of breaking. 
‘This permits making the final break with the resistance of the 
‘other feeders, plus the resistance of the affected feeder in series 
‘therewith to the point of short circuit, in which case the current 
‘at the time of the final breaking of the circuit will be much 
‘lower than in the event of the operation being made in reverse 
‘order. 

Since the current in the affected feeder will always be heavier 
than in the others, a relay having an inverse time-limiting 
‘device may be used to advantage. A series of tests carried out 
‘with the bellows-type time-limit overload relay, showed that. 
‘with equal’ current adjustment, by adjusting the time of two 
‘relays in the ratio of 0.5 to 1, when operated in series, they 
‘would discriminate properly at all loads—the one with the 
ighorter time adjustment operating a sufficient time in advance 
‘to leave ample contact clearance on the one with the longer time 
adjustment. 

“NOPherefore, with équal time adjustments at a given current. 
* 


1905.]J CHELLIS: TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. 259 


value, the relay having the heavier current will operate in a 
correspondingly shorter time, and thereby disconnect only the 
affected feeder. The time-limit for these relays should be ad- 
justed at the current value at which they are intended to operate, 
and so as to make the final break at the lower current value; 
the time and current adjustment at both ends should be the 
same, the time being that at which it is desired to limit the over- 
load on the feeders. In all cases the time-limit of the alter- 
nator relays should be greater than that of the feeders to permit 
the operation of the latter without operating the former. 

Assuming the safe time-limit of the alternators to be twice 
that of the feeders, and that of the synchronous converters 
equal to that of the feeders, but at a lower current value, the 
numerical value of the time ajdustments may be three seconds 
for the alternators, and 1.5 seconds for the feeders and syn- 
chronous converters, which values are within the range of most 
relays. 

Special operative conditions may demand adjustments vary- 
ing greatly from these values, but in all cases they should be 
so made as to give the desired protection for emergency condi- 
tions, as far as these can be predetermined. 


A paper presented at the 197th Meeting of tne 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, May 16, 7905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


DUPLICATION OF ELECTRICAL APPARATUS TO SE- 
CURE RELIABILITY OF SERVICE. 


BY H. W. BUCK. 


The question of the proper reserve in an electrical installation 
is a problem, like many in engineering, which must be set- 
tled largely upon a basis of cost. It is nearly always a question 
involving a balance between a power company’s obligation to 
its customers and the obligation to its stockholders. From the ° 
standpoint of the consumer the more reserve the surer will be 
his supply of power. On the other hand, to the power com- 
pany’s stockholders the less the investment in reserve the larger 
the dividends, unless the reserve has been cut down to a point 
where the power company’s reputation is endangered by inter- 
ruptions to service. The question is purely a practical one 
and no definite laws can be enunciated, nor can any curves be 
plotted which will indicate the proper amount of reserve to 
be installed under various conditions. The decision in each 
case must be based on intimate knowledge of the local con- 
ditions and requirements of the particular installation in ques- 
tion. All that will be attempted in this paper will be a dis- 
cussion of the general principles involved. 

Before a decision can be made upon the degree of duplica- 
tion advisable for any given piece of apparatus, an analysis 
must be made of the defects which may develop therein, the 
length of time required for repairs in case of a breakdown, 
and the number and importance of the power customers depend- 
ent upon that particular appliance. 

For purposes of discussion electrical reserves may be di- 
vided into several classes of apparatus, each governed by dif- 
ferent conditions. These classes are: 


261 


262 BUCK: DUPLICATION OF APPARATUS .. [May. 16 
Generating units. ac 
. Generating plant switchboard. 
. Generating plant transformers. 
Underground distribution system. 
Overhead lines. 
Sub-station apparatus. 
. Apparatus on premises of individual Cutonecs 
Reserve apparatus applicable to the above can again be 
divided into two classes: 
a. Actual, apparatus installed complete ready for service. 
b. Reserve ‘parts held in storeroom. Ma 


NOP WN 


(loneene ee 


There is no place in a power system where reserve apparatus 
is so important as in the generating station. In the writer’s 
opinion the following conditions should be observed in every 
large generating plant where continuous service is demanded: 
the maximum overload capacity of the generators normally 
operating on the bus-bars ‘should be such that at any time 
and under any conditions of load any one of the generators can be 
instantly disconnected from the bus-bars without necessitating 
a reduction of station load or causing a serious. momentary 
drop of pressure. If any trouble, either incipient or actuai, 
should then develop in one of the generating units, the unit 
can be immediately put out of service without waiting to 
start up another machine to take its place. Furthermore 
there should, if possible, be one unit held as absolute reserve 
which need not be operated except as a substitute. This 
enables any one generator to be out of service for repairs, 
even during ‘load-peaks. The size of generating unit selected 
for an installation has an important bearing on the question 
of reserve. The larger the unit the lower the cost of the 
plant per kilowatt, but, by necessity, the larger will be the 
investment in the idle reserve machinery. The proper relation 
can only be determined by a study of the local conditions 
under which the plant is to operate. 

A station operated by steam-turbines or by water power 
has certain advantages in reserve conditions. With steam 
turbo-generators, on account of the comparatively high part- 
load efficiency ‘of the steam-turbine, all the units installed in 
the plant,’ including the reseryes; can be kept in operation on 
the bus-bars at all times without ‘serious sacrifice in steam 


1905.] ..- BUCK: DUPLICATION OF APPARATUS. 263° 


economy due to the partial load on each unit. This enables a, 
generator to be quickly disconnected from the bus-bars at any , 
time without overloading the remainder or causing a serious, 
drop in pressure. This condition also obtains in a water- 
power plant since the additional use of water caused by the, 
continuous operation of the reserve units has only little effect 
on the cost of producing the power. With a reciprocating 
engine, however, each unit must be operated as far as possible 
at exactly the full-load point on account of the economy re- 
quired in steam consumption. This Pee eR obtaining the 
full utility of the reserve machines. 

The exciters in an alternating current generating station are 
of course the heart of the entire system, and the most careful 
provision should be made to insure continuity of service there- 
from. Since the cost of the exciters is in every case only a 
small proportion of the cost of the plant there is little excuse 
for not installing ample reserves in connection with the exciter 
equipment. 


Of equal importance with the complete reserve machinery 


installed is the stock of reserve parts held in the storeroom. 
There should be kept on hand at all times ready for immediate 
use a complete outfit ofthe parts of the prime-movers and gen- 
erators which are most likely to wear out or break down. In 
the selection of such spare parts the most careful judgment 
should be exercised. In many instances a carefully selected 
reserve stock vill enable breakdowns to be repaired in a few 
hours, that might require weeks, if the new parts, many 
of which might be special, had to be obtained from the manu- 
facturer. From the standpoint of reserve, then, there is no 
part of the power-plant of more importance than the storeroom. 


GENERATING PLANT SWITCHBOARD. 


‘Under this heading might be included all of the electrical 
equipment of the station from the terminals of the generators 
to the point where the outgoing feeders leave the power-house. 
This will necessarily involve a large amount of cable as welt 
as all of the switch equipment and controlling appliatices:. 
Here the question of reserve is almost wholly a’ storéroont 
proposition. In the writer’s opinion, the actual installation 
of duplicate cables in the station wiring and duplicate switches, 
controlling devices, ete., ‘should be avoided’ as far as possible, 
as’ tending to occupy too much valuable space and to compli* 


o 


264: BUCK: DUPLICATION OF APPARATUS. [May 16 


cate the organization of this vital part of the plant. There 
should, however, be kept on hand, preferably in the 
power-house itself, the fullest inventory of switch-parts 
which are liable to injury, and full lengths of all sizes of 
cables used in the installation. The duplication of bus- 
bars is of course quite necessary in a generating plant, 
but more for reasons of flexibility of operation than for 
reserve. Bus-bar installations as now constructed are less liable 
- to breakdown than almost any part of an electrical system. 
A great deal can be accomplished toward reserve in the case 
of switchboard equipment by keeping on hand a suitable out- 
_ fit of jumpers with proper terminals soldered on to use for 
emergency connections to temporarily transfer feeder or gen- 
érator leads from one switch to another. 


GENERATING PLANT TRANSFORMERS. 


Many of the considerations involved in the generating units 
enter into the question of duplication for reserve in a trans- 
formerequipment. Here also a proper balance must be estab- 
lished between the saving in cost per kilowatt by the adoption of 
large units and the saving in investment in reserve transformers by 
the installation of smaller ones. Another important question has 
recently been brought up in connection with transformer plants 
by the introduction of one polyphase transformer as a sub- 
stitute for two or three single-phase transformers for a bank. 
A polyphase transformer occupies less space and costs less than 
a bank of single-phase transformers, but when reserve is con- 
sidered it is not so good. If a bank of separate single-phase 
transformers breaks down the trouble is not likely to involve 
more than one of the component transformers and this can be 
replaced. by a small kilowatt reserve. If, however, a poly- 
phase transformer breaks down, capacity equal to its full 
polyphase rating is put out of service. 

In the writer’s opinion all important transformer stations 
should have a complete spare bank which can be shut down 
at any time without overloading the remaining transformers, 
and in addition one single-phase transformer should be held in 
stock to make good any bank in case one of the component 
transformers should break down. 

A transformer station usually involves more or less of an 
equipment of high-pressure cables, switches, lightning-ar- 


1905.] BUCK: DUPLICATION OF APPARATUS. 265 


resters, etc.; and in the present state of the high-pressure art 
there is nothing more liable to frequent destruction than the 
devices involved in this part of an electrical system. Conse- 
quently, here the storeroom reserves should be most carefully 
provided for. 

OvERHEAD DISTRIBUTION. 


If there is a single element in an electrical system where 
trouble is sure to develop sooner or later it is on the overhead 
lines, and the higher the pressure the more likely is the trouble 
to occur. This is so because the overhead lines are subjected 
to influences over which the power company has no control. 
These influences are principally lightning, general abnormal 
weather conditions, malicious interference, and accidental inter- 
ference caused by the contact of other companies’ wires during 
construction work. For these reasons it is practically out of 
the question to attempt to maintain a continuous power service 
over a single-circuit overhead line. There should always be 
enough circuits installed so that at least one can always be 
shut down without necessitating a reduction in load. This is 
especially true in the case of high-pressure lines. In low- 
pressure systems of 2300 volts or less it is nearly always possible 
to replace insulators and do other work on the line while it is 
‘“ alive,” but at higher pressures this should not be allowed if 
there is any regard for human life. In many plants where 
important interests are dependent upon the power transmitted. 
the matter of duplication should be carried beyond the circuits 
and reserve pole-lines installed. Carried to its limit without 
regard to cost, the ideal condition would be a number of single 
circuits each installed on a single pole line and each line follow- 
ing a different route. With this arrangement lightning would 
not be likely to disturb more than one line at a given time, 
and a complete shut-down from malicious interference involving’ 
all the lines would be very improbable. The cost, however, in 
such a separation of lines would in most cases be prohibitive 
on account of purchase of right of way, patrolling, etc. 

UNDERGROUND DISTRIBUTION. 

When trouble develops on an overhead line the location of 
the breakdown can usually be quickly found by patrol, and 
repairs made without delay. In an underground feeder, how- 
ever, the conditions are radically different. Breakdowns are 
difficult to locate and when found repairs frequently occupy 


266 BUGK DUPLICATION. OF, APPARATUS. [May 16 


many hours on account of the necessity for pulling out the 
defective cable from the ducts, putting in new cable and re- 
splicing. Duplicate or triplicate cables should always be 
installed where important service is involved. This obliga- 
tion is conceded by most engineers, and spare underground 
cables are usually installed. The installation, however, is 
apt to be carried out in such a way that the security of the 
reserve cables is impaired. Underground conduits as now 
generally constructed consist of a congested mass _ of 
ducts so grouped that in the manholes the cables are 
crowded closely together and all in constant danger of destruc- 
tion in case of a violent short circuit in the manhole. There 
is little value in installing spare cables when they are liable 
to be damaged at just the time when they are most 
urgently required. Such risk can only be obviated by con- 
structing electrical conduits in such a way that the cables can 
be separated in the manholes by short-circuit proof barriers. 
Preferably, whenever possible, duplicate conduits should be 
constructed on opposite sides of the street or, still better, laid 
through different streets. Only by such precautions can the 
full benefit of the reserve cables be insured. — 

Investment in duplication of generating units and trans- 
formers for reserve purposes does not result in any saving in 
operating expenses. On the contrary, if the reserves are kept 
in continuous service, in general the losses will be increased 
and consequently the efficiency of the plant lowered by just 
so much. Investment, on the other hand, in reserve cables 
and overhead circuits can be made to pay directly; for if such 
reserve circuits are kept in operation the efficiency of the trans- 
mission is raised and the cost of producing the power oe 
by that amount. 


~ SuB-STATION APPARATUS. 

The general considerations which apply to generating-plant 
reserves also apply to outlying sub-stations but in a less degree, 
for the complete shutdown of a sub-station involves only a 
portion of the power system. Farther out on the power 
network to the plants of individual customers, where the trans- 
former or other apparatus is supplied by the p wer company, 
no reserve seems necessary under the ordinary obligations of 
such cases.'.,Ifa breakdown occurs,only the individual is in- 
convenienced, and therefore the risk is: usually justified. 


i) 


'1905.] BUCK: DUPLICATION OF APPARATUS. 267 


GENERAL: eset 

. The above stated conditions of reserve apply particularly 
where certain public utilities are involved. Among which may 
be mentioned: 

1. Electrified steam railroads. 

.2. Traction system in large cities. 7 
3. Street lighting and the lighting of large public buildings. , 
Where such interests are at stake storage-battery reserves 

are probably justified aside from all considerations of economy 
resulting from improvement in load-factor. 

When the present steam railroads adopt electricity as a 
motive power for all traffic, both passenger and freight, more 
rigid requirements in reserve are likely to be found than have 
ever been considered necessary as yet in central-station prac+ 
tice. Under present steam road conditions if a locomotive 
breaks down, as frequently happens, probably only one train 
is stopped. The simultaneous breakdown of every locomotive 
on the road is of course improbable, consequently there is, no 
likelihood of a complete tie-up of the system. Under a com- 
plete electrification, however, one whole division of the* rail- 
road might be operated from a single power-house and a break- 
down in that plant would involve every train on the division. 
No important railroad system would venture to operate with 
such a risk hanging over it. This condition, in the writer’s 
opinion, will lead beyond the mere duplication of apparatus 
in a power-house to the installation of duplicate or possibly 
triplicate generating plants, having such capacities that any 
one of the plants can be shut down in cases of catastrophe 
and the whole load of the system carried by the others. Such 
an arrangement with suitable reserves in transmission conduc- 
tors would practically insure continuous train service at all 
times. : 

Where water-power is used for the operation of important 
power systems, duplication of generating stations is especially 
important. In steam-plants as now constructed with multiple 
stacks there is no single element of the plant which is common 
to and necessary for the operation of all the power units. Con- 
sequently any part of the equipment can be inspected and re- 
paired without a total station shutdown. In an hydraulic plant, 
however, there are a number of elements in the development 
which are essential to the operation of the whole plant, among 
which may be mentioned the dam, flume, fore-bay, tail-race, 


268 BUCK: DUPLICATION OF APPARATUS. [May 16 


tunnel, etc. In cases of emergency it may become necessary 
to shut off the main water supply in order to get access to 
these parts. Furthermore hydraulic plants are subject to ice 
troubles and floods in winter and low water in summer. it 
therefore seems essential if steam roads or other public utilities 
are to be operated electrically by hydraulic power that the 
system should be operated by more than one generating station. 
Such are some of the considerations entering into this 
problem of duplication for reserve. The matter of re- 
serve grows more important each year with the development 
of electrical applications. Ten years ago or more shut- 
downs on electrical power systems were taken as a matter of 
course, and no one used electrical power unless interruptions 
to service could be taken without serious inconvenience. At 
the present time, though the obligations of the power-gen- 
erating companies are much more serious, and absolutely con- 
tinuous supply of electric power is demanded by all users. To 
avoid loss of revenue and possibility of damage suits from 
shutdowns every power company is justified now in making a 
large investment in reserve to assure continuity of service. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 269 

Discussion On, ‘‘ TimME-Limit RELAys’’, AND ‘‘ DUPLICATION OF 
ELECTRICAL APPARATUS TO SECURE RELIABILITY OF 
SERVICS”’, AT NEw York, May 16, 1905. 


H. G. Stott: The ordinary overload relay as described in 
Mr. Chellis’ paper is employed to do the opposite of what the 
telegraph relay does : that is to say, the telegraph relay is 
used to apply a strong current to operate the receiving appar- 
atus, while the purpose of the overload relay is to apply a com- 
paratively weak current to operate a switch apparatus, because 
the main current has reached such pressures and strengths that 
it has become exceedingly expensive if not impossible, to design 
relays to work on main-line current. Different requirements 
have called for the design of different types of relays. The 
principal types mentioned in the paper—the overload, the 
differential, and the reversed-current, all have an application 
which is very concisely described in the paper. 

I think that in this paper the principal points having to do 
with the control of a large amount-of energy, are given on page 
264; there the author recommends first opening the switch at 
that end of the feeder having the highest current and by 
that means making use of the resistance of the transmission 
lines to reduce the current on the short circuit when the second 
and final relays open on that current. This, of course, is an 
extremely important point in reducing the possible limit of 
current to be broken on short circuit. 

Passing to Mr. Buck’s paper, it contains a general and timely 
treatment of several important subjects. I do not quite agree 
with the recommendations in regard to the treatment of some 
of the apparatus. There seems to be a tendency nowadays to 
believe that the limit in size of stations has been reached. What 
the reason for that belief is it is rather difficult to tell. A 
capacity of at least 50 000 kw. has been attained, and there is 
no reason why power-houses should not be constructed with a 
capacity of 100 000 kw. or even more. 

The principle of design in modern power-stations is to make 
each unit virtually a separate power-station in itself. The iso- 
lation of the generators, the main cables, the individual cables 
connected with them, the oil-switches, bus-bars, etc., permits all 
operating devices in almost all modern stations to operate as 
one unit, back to the boilers. Economy does not, however, dic- 
tate this separate operation. The question of how large to 
make the station is simply a question of how safe each unit 
can be made. I do not think the impression should be con- 
veyed that the limit in size in large power-plants has. been 
reached, unless there is some special point, where there is un- 
reliable apparatus, such as the dam, flume, forebay, tailrace, etc., 
that regulates the entire amount of energy. In the steam- 
plant there is no one operating element of the plant that 
controls the whole amount of energy; the nearest approach to 
this condition is found in the water supply. In practically all 


270 TIME-LIMIT RELAYS...» [May 16 


stations the water supply is in duplicate and is also further 
assured by the use of large storage-tanks. 

In regard to the safety of underground cables, one point has 
been rather neglected in the paper, which is that the higher the 
voltage the less the damage that is likely to be done to sur- 
“rounding cables.’ It is a ‘fact, which has been proved by ex- 
perience, that the safety of a cable, in regard to its neighbors, 
varies inversely with the voltage; in other words, the larger 
the current carried, the greater the danger to surrounding 
cables, and the damage done is proportional to the square of 
the current. For instance, the damage done to itself by a 
short-circuit in a three-conductor, 11 000-volt cable, is very 
small, and practically no outside harm results. The limit now 
is not the amount of energy that can be transmitted, but the 
amount of voltage which can be carried safely, or for which the 
cables can be constructed. I think that shortly cables will be 
built to withstand pressures of 25 000 volts, as danger to the 
‘surrounding apparatus is much lessened by using high voltage. 

On page 267, Mr. Buck emphasizes the importance of having 
several power-stations, at least more than one energizing 
electric railroads, in order to avoid the failure of the energy 
supply to the trains. I think too much stress has been put 
upon this point: I do not think the liability of failure of energy 
in this way is so important. I have examined the statistics of 
the percentage of time of interruption of train service in three 
years due to various causes, and find that of the total inter- 
ruptions those due to the failure of electric energy are. less 
than one per cent. If by the duplication of a station one per 
cent. of the interruptions could be avoided the other 99 per 
cent. due to such causes as derailments at switches, cross-overs 
and collisions, etc., would not in any way be affected by the use 
of two, three, or more power-houses. I think that is a rather 
important thing to emphasize, as it increases our respect very 
materially—at least it has mine in the investigations I have 
made—in regard to the reliability of service which can be 
‘given by one power-house. 

Puitiep Torcuio: The problem. of protecting high-tension 
systems against shutdowns is of great importance, and it has 
necessarily received the careful attention of the engineers who 
-have been concerned with the operation of central-stations. It 
is probably true that our largest central-stations are now 
equipped with protective devices to meet almost all of the exigen- 
cies of the service for each particular condition. It is also true 
that these conditions vary greatly in different stations, and 
it is doubtful if the same devices would be applicable to all cases. 

The speaker has been connected ‘with the development of 
the system of protective devices used by a prominent New York 
company; it may be interesting to describe the general features 
-of the system that has, for. the particular ‘conditions of that 
‘company, given most satisfactory results. “Seven years ‘ago 
read rN pias ‘ : ‘ Ve Sher St aes eh BAA ‘ 


» 


1905.] ° DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 27k 


the company adopted for use on all of its high-tension switch- 
boards two types of relays; one type a fixed time-limit over- 
load relay installed at the generating end and..one at the re- 
ceiving end of each high-tension feeder, and the other an in- 
stantaneous reverse-current relay placed at the receiving end 
of the feeders. At the beginning the company did not feel 
confident of the reliability of these safety devices, so the relays 
were connected only to signal lamps. The relays were not 
entirely satisfactory and for considerable time a lot of ex- 
perimental work had to be done before it was felt safe to con- 
nect a few of these relays to the trip; mechanisms in a few 
stations. Then followed a period of investigations to find out 
whether the relays did more good than harm. ; About 3 years 
ago the experience was quite discouraging. Investigation of 
relays used. on other systems proved equally: unsatisfactory. 
A careful study of the problem clearly demonstrated two facts; 
one, that the existing type of relay was inadequate to fulfil 
all requirements of the service; the other, that to accomplish 
satisfactory results it was necessary to develop a well coér- 
dinated scheme of relays in which each element should have its 
proper relation to the other elements of the protective system. 
It was thought that the solution of this problem lay in the 
development of a time-limit relay which would operate in an 
interval of time in inverse proportion to the amount of current. 
The only, relay of this nature available at that time was the 
dash-pot device attached to the ordinary overload relays; 
this was found to be unsatisfactory in service, and was dis- 
missed from consideration. The manufacturers had been urged 
to develop a better relay to meet certain specifications which 
were given in detail. Developments along such a line of appar- 
atus were, however, slow to materialize and in the meantime 
the New York Edison Company was not making great headway 
in protecting its increasing high-tension system. | 
A form of overload bellows-type relay which gave a charac- 
teristic curve somewhat similar to that of Fig. 8 of Mr. Chellis’ 
paper, was brought to the speaker’s attention and upon this 
type of relay a scheme of safety appliances was designed for 
the system. Aside from the system, of protection of auxiliaries 
at stations and sub-stations, the continuity of the service of the 
system is safeguarded by the following relays: ° 
Generators.—It has not been found desirable to install auto- 
matic circuit-breakers on the generators, as reliance is put upon 
the attendant to disconnect the generators by hand operation 
of the oil-switches whenever he finds it necessary so to do. To 
guide him an overload relay, operating signal-lamps, 1s mounted 
‘on‘each generator, This relay is without ‘time-limit. a 
High-Tension Feeders, Waterside Station.—On' each feeder is 
- mounted an overload relay with a variable time-limit in inverse 
proportion to the amount of current. Curve I; Fig. 1 shows the 
‘characteristic curve of this type of relay, the points at which it 


272 TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. [May 16 


is adjusted, and its relation in time and load to other similar 
relays at the sub-station end of the feeder. 

High-Tension Feeders, Sub-stations. —The feeder-switch is 
automatic and is controlled by a relay similar to the one at the 
Waterside end of the feeder. The relay itself is identical and 


by suitable current transformer ratio a curve is obtained as 
shown in curve ? : 


400 


elite — STATION _| 


Ney En, 


rors er Mase Os Pf} ttt 
Pike telco aha i Ree waSS 
: J OF ads CHRONONS CONVER ER 
(eau cid aa PERE EQUIVALE Tt Gm 


13 


: 7 8 - 
= SECONDS 


Fic, I 


Die 10 se 11 eis 14 15 - 


High-Tension Side of Synchronous Converters.—Each syn- 
chronous, or rotary converter, is equipped with a relay of the 
same kind as previously discussed, its load being proportioned 
by the current transformer ratio. Curve 3 shows the calibration 
of this relay. 

Direct-Current Side of Synchronous Converters.—To be con- 
sistent with the general scheme above outlined the direct-current 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. PANES 


side of each converter should be equipped with a reverse- 
current’ inverse time element direct-current relay. A relay with 
an instantaneous opening could not be used at this point unless 
set to operate at a very heavy reverse current, which would in 
itself largely defeat its purpose. A fixed time-limit irrespective 
of current would render the relay of very little value, as the 
short circuit on the direct-current side might reach disastrous 
proportions before the fixed time of the relay had expired. The 
selection of the reverse-current .direct-current relay in this 
instance is made feasible by the fact that each sub-station is 
equipped with large storage batteries which can always energize 
the pressure coils of the reverse-current relays. Curve 4 shows 
the characteristic curve of this relay, figured on a basis of primary 
amperes for the purpose of comparison with the curves above it. 
It will be noted that Curve 4 has only approximately the same 
characteristics as the other curves, but as the relay is not called 
upon to operate in a fixed relation with other relays this 
difference in the characteristics of the curves is not material. 

These relays are now being installed to operate only signal 
lamps, until such time as they may demonstrate their ability to 
meet the emergencies for which they are eventually intended. 

Two years ago in a paper before the InstiruTE the speaker 
outlined the respective features of the relays just described and 
he then summarized the subject saying: 

“All relays at the different points of the system and their time elements 
must be properly adjusted to operate the different circuit-breakers in 
the proper order, so that if the trouble is once cleared by the opening of 


certain circuit-breakers, the other relays reset themselves in the normal 
position, leaving the rest of the system in operation”. 


It is gratifying to report that expectations have been fully 
realized by subsequent experience. The success of such a 
system of protection is dependent upon the care that is given 
to the maintenance of the several relays, but it is also a fact that 
apparatus is now available which is not freaky and unreliable 
and certainly sturdier than most of the other switchboard in- 
struments. sees 

It is probable that as further experience is obtained it will be 
found that a number of these intricate and delicate pieces of 
auxiliary apparatus may be advantageously omitted, but as 
matters now stand inconvenience of this kind must be put up 
with. Experience proves that a system based on the use of 
the inverse time-element relays gives a solution free from serious 
drawbacks. 

There are cases in water-power installations where a short 
circuit on one line reduces the speed and voltage of the generators. 
and when the short circuit is cleared the speed and pressure 
increases, while the synchronous motors operating on the other 
lines fall out of step, overload the lines, and cause their 
circuit-breakers to open. Troubles of this kind have created a 
feeling of uncertainty as to the desirability of installing auto- 
matic relays in such cases. 


274 IM E-LIMIT RELAYS. - [May 16 


The speaker does not wish to advocate a complex system of 
protective devices, if such can be omitted with advantage; 
but if it is found necessary to install these relays, he would 
emphasize the necessity of not confining the installation of the 
relays to only a portion of the systems, but to extend them 
to the whole installation so as to codrdinate the different factors 
into a protective scheme in which every element bears the proper» 
relation to the other elements. 

-C. O. Marttoux: The relay question is a very interesting 
one. As Mr. Torchio has pointed out, there have not been 
any satisfactorily working relays until recently. Having had 
occasion to study the question closely both in this country and 
abroad, I was surprised to notice the impatience, so to speak, 
with which the relay question is discussed by most operating 
engineers. This is especially so in the far West, where it is found 
that if the designing engineer does put in relays the operating 
engineer insists on making no use of them. He prefers to take 
his chances with machinery without the relays rather than 
with the relays in the state of their development up to two or 
three years ago. 

In a case where there are synchronous converters, it is indis- © 
pensable to have some device that will prevent the synchronous 
converters from running away. In cases where the distribution 
is by alternating currents, as well as the transmission, and 
therefore converters are not required, for example, where 
the load is principally or wholly lighting, it may be said that 
there is scarcely any necessity for relays. Ita New York city 
and many other large cities, the transmission is by alternating 
current at high pressure, and the distributionis by direct current 
at low pressure. In such cases synchronous converters must 
be introduced to convert the alternating current into direct 
current, and it is necessary to have some system of relays. 

Referring to Mr. Buck’s paper, the preamble, so to speak, con- 
tains an interesting statement of what might be called the 
equation of obligation, where he equates the obligation of the 
company to its stockholders with the obligation of the company 
to the public. That is an important question, and one that 
every engineer has to consider, whether he is designing a station 
or operating it. Unfortunately, it is difficult to define and 
formulate the quantities that enter on each side of the equation. 
On the one hand too much disregard of the quality of the service 
may be shown, with the object of reducing the initial cost and 
fixed charges; and on the other hand many engineers are inclined 
to err in the other direction by taking too many precautions for 
the security and continuity of the service, the result being that 
there is a large investment and an expensive one. The evo- 
lution of central-station design is greatly increasing the obliga- 
tion. of control and of safety. The switchboard and all the 
appliances that go with it and are part of it, which originally 
were but a small part of the central station,—have now become 
not only a large part, but an important part and in many cases 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 275 


a very expensive part of the equipment. It may be said that 
in some cases there has been too much elaboration, just as there 
has been too little in others. The reference to what is called the 
‘‘ store-room ”’ reserve, is a sensible and timely one. There are 
many instances where the reserve can be provided in just 
that way, and where it is possible to avoid incumbrances of 
extra parts at the switchboard and elsewhere. The refer- 
ence, made by the last speaker, to the station where everything is 
accessible is also important; every one who has visited modern 
stations and studied the question of the requirements of their 
design realizes that they should be made that way; otherwise 
they could scarcely be managed or operated at all. The refer- 
ence to the cost of replacement, as affected by the size of the 
unit, is indeed a very important question, but as the last speaker 
pointed out it is a question which the engineer should really 
discuss and consider at the time the system is designed. 
One sees, especially in electrical traction stations, the 
wonderful growth which they have had; they have had suburban 
extensions which have called for increased power and compelled 
the company to resort to all manner of expedients,in order to 
get current at all to operate its lines. The difficulties are some- 
times great, but where it is at all possible to anticipate such 
growth, the question of the number and size of the units should 
be carefully considered. That has a great bearing, not only 
upon the initial cost of the plant, but also upon the cost of the 
reserve apparatus, as Mr. Buck points out. There are cases 
where large units would be desirable, but of course the reserve 
must be larger, and here the character of the load-curve comes 
in. It is important to consider that. If the load-curve is com- 
paratively flat, the reserve capacity required might be quite 
different from what it would be if there was a heavy peak; and 
the size of the units for reserve would be different. 

It is almost always the rule in Europe that polyphase trans- 
formers are used for polyphase transmission and distribution, 
while here the general rule is to use single-phase transformers. 
So far as I have been able to ascertain, this difference in practice 
is due to the fact that it costs less in America to make single- 
phase transformers, and in Europe to make the polyphase 
transformers; the reason for the difference in cost being, per- 
haps, that more handwork is required to make polyphase trans- 
formers than to make single-phase transformers. I am not fam- 
iliar enough with the methods of manufacture to understand 
the reasons for the difference, but it is a fact that the cost of 
the reserve capacity is greater when polyphase transformers 
are used than when single-phase transformers are used. I 
have been compelled to use single-phase transformers, not only 
because polyphase transformers could not be obtained, but 
because in the case of the three-phase plant, for instance, the 
reserve transformer only added one-third, making four single- 
phase transformers, instead of adding another polyphase trans- 


former. 


276 TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. [May 16 


S.D. Spronc: The proper selection and adjustment of the 
various relays in a system of this nature is one of the determining 
elements in the continuity of service. 

Referring to the last paragraph on page 249, it is said that 
some of the characteristics of the relay referred to for generators 
would be as follows: Short circuit current, 4.95 amperes, 
overload current at normal pressure, 8.8 amperes. 

Is it not probable during periods of light load when only one or 
two units are running that a short circuit on one of the feeders, 
if occurring close to the power-station, would so depress the gen- 
erator voltage as to cause the relays to operate under the char- 
acteristics of “short-circuit ’’ rather than under those of “ over- 
load” at normal pressure? if so, this would reduce the opening 
point to nearly one half of what it should be for any kind of 
feeder trouble, which is in its relation to the generators an 
overload. If it is essential to maintain the differential factor, it 
would seem for these reasons that the differential feature is 
not desirable in a generator relay at all points of the 24-hour 
load. 

The question arises, however, whether a generator that gives 
6.6 amperes on short circuit will give the necessary overload 
current to trip at 8.8 amperes at or near normal pressure. In 
other words would the generator under any conditions ever trip 
its relay by overload? 


In the last sentence before Fig. 6 on page 254, it is saidthata «— 


time limiting device such as a bellows or dash-pot, while ideal 
from the standpoint of simplicity, is not positive. One of 
the large operating companies in New York has had a varying 
number—more than 150—relays of this type in operation for a 
period of about 18 months and has not experienced failure 
in operation in a single instance, nor has the regular periodic 
inspection and test made on all the relay devices disclosed any 
of them in an inoperative condition due to the air type of time- 
limiting device. 

Referring to the broad question of relays in the generator 
circuit, does Mr. Chellis consider it essential for good opera- 
tion to have automatic opening of switches in the generator 
circuit under any conditions. It is not the practice among some 
of the larger companies that have been in operation for some 
years to have automatic operation of the generator switches. 
Their practice of having a relay that will signal the operator 
only at times of extreme load has proved entirely satisfactory. 

In the last paragraph on page 256, it is said that in an ideal 
combination the sub-station end of the feeder should have an 
instantaneous reverse-current relay. This seems open to question, 
unless the relay is set at a high figure in consequence of 
which it would lose much of its value for the purpose intended. 
If set at a relatively low point, practice shows that the momen- 
tary reversals due to synchronizing a synchronous converter, or 
short depressions of voltage due to short circuit, will cause the 
converters to reverse for an instant due to the energy stored in 


bo 
“I 
“NI 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 


them, and trip the relay, thus cutting out one or more good 
feeders. This will occur whether there are storage-batteries in 
multiple with the system or not. 

In the second paragraph on page 257, it is said that a direct- 
current reverse relay operating a circuit-breaker on the direct- 
current side may be used to open the circuit of an inverted 
converter thereby preventing the converter from attaining 
destructive speed in case of open field circuit. It would seem 
that relays of the type described, and without time-limit either 
fixed or inverse, would be very liable to disconnect the converter 
during momentary depression in the system voltage resulting 
from short circuit on a feeder, or other causes. This applies to 
sub-stations where storage-batteries are employed, or where a 
system is divided into two or more sections operated indepen- 
dently, each section supplying a portion of each sub-station’s load. 
The next paragraph says that the relays referred to are ad- 
justed to operate at about 15 per cent. rated current in the 
reverse direction, and that such relays have a value for limiting 
the speed of the converters. It seems to be the opinion of 
most engineers that when a speed-limiting device is found 
necessary, it should be a device designed for that purpose only, 
and its operation should depend solely on the speed of the 
converter. 

“n the first sentence of the paragraph on page 258, beginning 
with the bottom line of the preceding page, it is said that the 
order of operation of relays may be determined by the value of 
the time adjustments. This, of course, is true up to a certain 
point, but does not hold over the whole range of current flow in 
cases of severe short circuit. It has been found in practice that 
even with a considerable difference in time adjustment a number 
of relays that may be in series would all operate and open their 
respective switches. This is possibly due to the fact that two 
relays which are adjusted for series working, and have a con- 
siderable difference of time in operation at certain overloads, 
will both come within a certain minimum time if the overload 
is carried to the extreme point which is sometimes reached in 
operation. This minimum_time is that which is required for 
an oil-switch to operate. It is therefore easily seen that while 
the relay with the lesser time will start the operation of the 
oil-switch, if it does not actually open and free the circuit of 
the load before. the second relay has reached the operating 
point, both switches will open. The practical result of this 
is that no discrimination is possible between relays in series 
if the load goes above a certain point. 

This is referred to again in the last paragraph on page 258 where 
it is said that they will discriminate at all loads; they no doubt 
will at all ordinary loads or overloads, but when current flow 
reaches an extreme figure, as sometimes occurs in a large system, 
all the relays connected in series are very liable to open their 
switches. 

W. F. Wetts: In the opening paragraph Mr. Buck says, 


278 TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. [May 16 


“The question of the proper amount of reserve capacity in an 
electrical installation is purely a practical one, for which no 
definite laws can be enunciated’’. Experience is reputed to be a 
good teacher and the general practice of a large lighting com- 
pany, deduced from the experience of a number of years, may 
be of interest. This company generates alternating curreat at 
6 600 volts, which is transmitted underground to sub-stations, 
where it is. transformed to direct current at 120-240 volts. 

In general sufficient equipment is installed and operated to 
render it possible at all times to disconnect instantly any indi- 
vidual or group unit, wthout interfering with the service. As 
the number of units increases, the proportion of investment in 
emergency or spare equipment diminishes and soon becomes of 
relatively minor importance. The interest and depreciation 
charges on account of this spare equipment are partly offset by 
the greater flexibility in operating, and decreased transmission 
losses. The proportion of reserve required in each of the 
seven classes of apparatus mentioned by Mr. Buck, depends to 
a large extent on the reserve in the following class. It is simp- 
ler to discuss them in reverse order. 

Commencing with the distribution net-work supplying cus- 
tomers; sufficient feeders connect this with the sub-stations to 
maintain the pressure in case any of them should burn out. In 
growing districts this simply means the installation of feeders a 
year or so in advance, and the fixed charges incident thereto. 

In the sub-stations, the reserve is proportionately of as great 
importance as in the generating stations, as it must provide not 
only for accident in the sub-station but also for part interruption 
of supply caused by accident to the transmission system, or in the 
generating station. In general, the practice has been to design 
the sub-station to contain from 4 to 8 transforming units 
and to install one more unit than is necessary to carry the 
maximum load. <A storage-battery has been found absolutely 
necessary, the capacity of which at the one-hour discharge rate, 
is equivalent to one of the transforming units. Where more 
than 5 units are installed the battery capacity exceeds 25 per 
cent. of the maximum load. Animportant part of the reserve of 
each sub-station is the assistance that can be rendered by the 
adjacent sub-stations. 

‘All the transmission cables are underground and in order to 
avoid interruptions from ‘‘ congested mass of ducts and cables 
crowded in manholes” as referred to by Mr. Buck, 4 separate 
and distinct lines of subway have been constructed, starting from 
4 separate manholes in front of the generating station. Each 
sub-station has at least one more cable than is required for its 
maximum load, and these cables are divided among the dif- 
ferent subway routes. In this way the greatest possible harm to 
the transmission system by a violent short circuit in a manhole 
would be to put out of service, and perhaps destroy less than 25 
per cent. of the transmission system. Should this amount of 
damage occur at the time of the maximum load, the overload . 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW.YORK. 279 


capacity of the cables following the other routes would be 
sufficient to maintain the service. by 

_ To guard further against a violent short circuit the cables 
in all manholes are: protected by a fire-proof covering over the 
lead. In 5 years’ experience on a system containing many 
miles of high-tension underground cable, there has been no case 
where a cable burn-out has injured an adjacent one, 

_In the generating plant the high-tension and exciter bus- 
bars are the only parts of the plant which are common to and 
necessary for the operation of all power units, and, these have 
been designed and constructed with the greatest possible care. 
Every known precaution has been taken with each generating 
unit, consisting of engine with individual condenser, and 
generator with its armature, field, and control cables, 
switches, rheostats and instruments to. protect them from 
possible injury from adjoining apparatus or external source. 
The installation of two oil-switches, of the compartment type, 
in series in generator leads has not only insured the opening of 
the circuit between the generator and bus-bar in case of trouble, 
but has provided an additional means for synchronizing, etc. in 
case a switch or instrument transformer fails to operate properly. 
- The reliability of the supply of current for the generator fields 
and control circuits is secured by a storage-battery, connected 
at all times to the excitation bus-bars. The station lighting and 
all auxiliaries can be connected by these bus-bars. 

It has not been found necessary, as stated in the paper, to 
operate reciprocating engines at exactly full load on account of 
steam consumption. The engines and generators are so propor- 
tioned that the variation in steam consumption.per kilowatt hour 
as shown by tests, between the limits of 25 per cent. underload 
and 25 per cent. overload is less than 5 per cent. from the maxi- 
mum economy. The practice is to operate engine-driven units 
at slightly under normal load and to depend on their overload 
capacity in case one is instantly disconnected. Should it be 
necessary to disconnect two simultaneously, the batteries would 
supply the necessary energy until an additional unit could be 
started. : 

‘During the maximum, all units carry approximately normal 
load, and if it is necessary to take one out of service the overload 
capacity of the remaining units and the batteries can be depended 
on as a substitute. It has not been deemed commercial, nor 
has it been found necessary, to hold one, unit, out of service as 
reserve during the peak. a é 

In the boiler-plant duplication is avoided by arranging the 
steam-piping so that all boilers and engines are connected to 
a ring-main, divided by suitable valves. This renders it possible 
for any group or groups of boilers to be used with any combi- 
nation of engines. Boiler feed lines are similarly laid out and 
at least one, more feed-pump operated than is required by load 
conditions. With such an arrangement it is necessary to run 
only a very small percentage of boilers for emergency use. 


2380 TIME-LIMIT RELA YS: [May 16 


In general each group of transmitting and transforming 
equipment has sufficient capacity to permit the withdrawal 
from service of any individual unit without making it necessary 
to operate the balance beyond the normal capacity. The 
generating station is capable of carrying the entire load when 
operating at normal capacity. In case of accidents the sub- 
station storage-batteries and overload capacities of the remain- 
ing equipment are capable of maintaining service until repairs 
are made. 

G. F. CHELLIS: With regard to the various remarks in con- 
nection with relays, I think a great deal of relay trouble is 
caused by improper connections and adjustments. That is 
my experience. 

H. W. Buck: Mr. Stott has spoken of the relative damage 
in underground cables between those operating at high voltage . 
and those operating at low voltage in cases of manhole short 
circuits. In general I fully agree with this contention, but I 
have noted a number of instances where 11 000-volt, 3-conductor 
cable short circuits have caused considerable damage to neigh- 
boring cables, due to the fact that the circuit-breakers on that 
feeder have not opened promptly at the power-house, thereby 
allowing the short circuit to hang on for some time. That is a 
condition which may occur on any system. . 

In spite of what Mr. Stott has said in the matter of one power- 
house vs. two or more. I still favor two independent plants as 
the sources of power. In the case of steam-plants, for the 
reasons stated in my paper, this duplication of generating 
stations may not be so necessary, but accidents may happen 
even to steam-plants: boilers and steam-pipes may burst, 
and fly-wheels or armatures may also burst, due to engine 
runways, all of which might temporarily wreck the power- 
station. I, therefore, believe that with either steam or water- 
power two generating stations are more reliable than one. 
Whether one plant is reliable enough or not under a given set of 
conditions is another matter. 

The variety of apparatus in the generating station is very 
important. This applies especially in the case of some of the 
older plants, where good judgment was not exercised by the 
engineers who laid them out. There is a tendency sometimes 
in designing plants to provide generating units for immediate 
load conditions only, without taking into consideration the 
possibility of greater demands upon the station in the future. 
The result is, after a few years, that the station is called upon 
to meet a load demand of an entirely different character, 
which necessitates the installation of units not only of 
different size, but of entirely different type. At the end of 
‘5 or 10 years, then, a miscellaneous, assortment of generators 
will be found, which makes the problem of reserve a difficult one, 
since the generators installed cannot be used interchangeably 
on the various circuits. 


[June 5 TIME-LIMIT RELAYS. 281 


Discussion ON ‘“‘Time-Limit RELAys,” AND ‘‘DUPLICATION OF 
ELECTRICAL APPARATUS TO SECURE RELIABILITY OF SER- 
VICE,” AT PitTsBURG, JUNE 5, 1905. 


H. R. Stuart: Mr. Chellis is mistaken about one or two 
' things. There are two time-limit devices that are independent 
of the load; that is, they are not inverse time limits and will 
operate in the time they are set for, no matter whether the 
overload is 100% or 500%. One device operates as follows: 
on one end an arm works a dash-pot, and the weight of the 
core holds that arm down; and on the other end imagine a 
weight which will not quite balance the armature core, but 
will slowly move the dash-pot and arm when the core is re- 
moved. A short circuit raises the armature core, allowing the 
arm to move slowly. When it has made its full travel, it will 
make contact, closing a tripping circuit. The other design 
has a clockwork mechanism that has the same time no matter 
what the overload is. 

No two installations of relays are alike, for different con- 
ditions require different applications of the same relays. The 
relay described by Mr. Chellis is in some respects similar to a 
wattmeter in that it has series and shunt coils. One might 
infer that it is not so good as a straight overload relay, which 
is simply a kind of solenoid movement that closes a contact, 
and is kept from closing that contact by means of an opposing 
or retarding force, such as a dash-pot or bellows. I do not 
know how many different applications have been made of 
these relays. Various types of these relays are on the market, 
each one good for its particular purpose. 

P. M. Lincotn: The first law of the operating man is to 
keep the power on his circuit. It is only when he is convinced 
that the addition of a relay is going to prevent more trouble 
than it is likely to cause that he decides to insert it. The ten- 
dency is to abandon the finer developments of relays, the feeling 
being that they cause more interruptions to the circuits than 
they prevent. The relay acting wrong. on one occasion and 
throwing off the load, will do more toward prejudicing the 
operating man against it than a good many years’ experience 
when it goes all right. 

H.R. Sruart: I think the time-limit relay is all right in 
its place. Even if it did not work satisfactorily 90% of the 
time, it would still be satisfactory. In motor work above 
100 h.p. at high voltage, a fuse is a bit dangerous; it simply 
keeps the circuit breakers from opening when the motor starts; 
when the current drops to normal the time limit goes back 
and everything is all right. If something goes wrong for more 
than the time limit, the breakers come out and protect the 
apparatus. A good deal of damage might be done in 10 sec- 
‘onds, but this is better than not having any protection at all. 
' The tendency in generating stations is to fasten in the generator 
breakers, making them non-automatic, then the automatic 


* 


282 DISCUSSION AT PITTSBURG. 1905.] 


breakers on the far end of the feeder circuits will open to pro- 
tect them and the time limit on the station end of the feeder 
circuits will protect the station. But it is a question whether 
it is best to put them in on the generators or not. 

Cuas. F. Scott: Perhaps Mr. Buck’s paper will lend itself 
to a mathematical solution—a solution involving a coefficiency 
of reliability for the different parts of the plant. For. ex- 
ample, take all the generators in the country; they will have 
accidents, say once a year; the switchboard cables and power- 
house cables may have an accident once in five years; trans- 
formers once a month or once in 20 years, as you choose. Then 
take the cost of duplicating these different elements and make 
calculations for definite limits. Say a generator is liable to 
have an accident once a year, and some other element, a trans- 
former or time-limit relay, once a year; it is evident that one 
could be duplicated at very small cost, the other at considerable 
cost. Therefore, although both have the same liability to 
accident, you could increase the reliability of the system at 
much less cost by duplication at one place rather than at an- 
other. 

A case came to my attention two years ago: the transmission 
voltage proposed was 30000, with two circuits run on one 
line of poles. The distance was only 15 or 20 miles. I sug- 
gested that possibly the voltage was rather hi,h, that it would 
be better to have two pole lines. I asked what the total cost 
of transmission was, including poles and wires, in percentage 
of the whole plant. I have forgotten the figure; it was some- 
thing like 2 or 2.5%. I suggested that this most vital part 
of the system would be much safer by reducing the voltage 
and putting in duplicate pole lines at an increase of only 1 or 2% 
of the total cost of the plant; and that was done. 

A plant about 25 miles long, at 20000 volts, running 
through a rocky, mountainous country, had a single-pole line 
and gave remarkable service. I think it is running still with 
simply one line of poles; I know some time ago it had the record 
of running several years with practically no interruption due 
to the line. 

While visiting some Western transmission lines I found 
that the operating engineers were not very solicitous about 
generators or switchboards or line. They were more con- 
cerned with the choking effect of leaves in the flume. The 
flume line was constantly patrolled, and there were automatic 
means of readily opening the flume at different points to let 
the water out. In short, the reverse-current relays were ap- 
plied to the hydraulic transmission rather than to the electric. 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A.I. E, E. 


THE ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF 
NATIONAL ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. 


PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS. 


BY JOHN W. LIEB, JR. 

The most important factors in promoting the advance of 
the engineering profession, and in disseminating and rendering 
available to the world the valuable experience and data accumu- 
lated by engineers, are the professional associations or national 
engineering societies. The importance of interchange of data, 
and results of observation and experience, was realized long 
before the practice of engineering had been exalted to the 
dignity of a profession. 

While military engineering was recognized as a special calling 
from the earliest times, and great military engineers, such as 
Vauban, and bridge and highway engineers, such as Perronet, 
had achieved eminence, it was ‘manifestly impracticable for 
“military men to associate for the purpose of interchanging 
information, on the secrecy of which the military establishments 
of nations were dependent for their offensive and defensive 
efficiency. The first important step for associating engineers 
into a professional body was taken, in 1828, by Thomas Tel- 
ford, who applied for Royal Charter for the Institution of 
Civil Engineers, of Great Britain, in the name of 156 of his 
colleagues, some of whom had already formed a society as 
early as 1818. The original charter recites that the body is 


formed: 
x * *& * “for the general advancement of mechanical science, and 
more particularly for promoting the acquisition of that species of knowl- 


283 


284 LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. [June 19 


edge which constitutes the profession of a civil engineer, being the art 
of directing the great sources of power in nature for the use and conven- 
jence of man, as the means of production and of traffic in states both 
for external and internal trade, as applied in the construction of roads, 
bridges, aqueducts, canals, river navigation, and docks, for internal 
intercourse and exchange, and in the construction of ports, harbors, 
moles, breakwaters, and lighthouses, and in the art of navigation by 
artificial power for the purposes of commerce, and in the construction 
and adaptation of machinery, and in the drainage of cities and towns.”’ 


It will be seen that this comprehensive, and now historic, 
definition of the field covered by the profession of the civil 
engineer, as formulated by Tredgold, includes broadly all 
branches of modern engineering science, except military engi- 
neering, and, directly or by implication, includes within its 
scope, mechanical, mining, electrical, and sanitary engineer- 
ing, and naval architecture. It was not long before important 
discoveries in the realm of physical science, and epoch-making 
inventions and improvements in the mechanical arts, opened 
new fields of industrial activity, which broadened the field 
covered by the engineer, and were reflected in a differentiation 
of the profession, resulting, in Great Britain, in the organiza- 
tion of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, in 1847, the 
Iron and Steel Institute in 1869, and the Society of Telegraph 
Engineers and Electricians in 1871, which, in 1889, became the 
Institution of Electrical Engineers. 

Coming now to our own country, the American Society of 
Civil Engineers was organized in 1852, the American Institute 
of Mining Engineers in 1871, the American Society of Mech- 
anical Engineers in 1880,’ and the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
ELectricaL ENGINEERS in 1884. While these are the distinct- 
ively national engineering societies, there are other technical 
associations like the Society of Naval Architects and Marine 
Engineers; the American Society of Heating and Ventilating 
Engineers, the American Street Railway Association, etc., 
which, although of national importance, do not come within 
the scope of this address. 

There are many other professional bodies in the United States 
also identified with the engineering profession, some of them 
of a national character, which, in addition to professional 
activities, are organized for commercial relations, and whose 
members consist largely of business corporations. To this class 
belong the National Electric Light Association and the Associa- 
tion of Edison Illuminating Companies. 


1905.] LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. 285 


There are also others that are largely local in character, such 
as the Pacific Coast Transmission Association, the Engineers’ 
Society of Western Pennsylvania, and the league known as the 
Association of Engineering Societies, which represents a total 
membership of 1766, in 11 local Engineers’ Clubs or Societies. 

In this review we shall confine our attention ‘to the four 
national engineering societies first referred to, with some refer- 
ence to the corresponding bodies in Great Britain and on the 
Continent. 

The membership of these bodies, divided into classes ac- 
cording to the last official reports, is given in the following 
table; as a matter of general interest there is also added a 
corresponding tabulation of the more important European 
engineering societies.. 


NATIONAL ENGINEERING SOCIETIES (U. S.). 


Name and Date of Date Hon. | Full | Asso. Junior 
Organization of Mem- | Mem-| Mem-} Asso- | Mem-] Total 
Report bers | bers | bers ] ciates| bers 


American pera? > Cavite En- 
gineers, 1852 Jan. 1, 1905 9 1795 903 127 | *367 | 3203 


American ete. of t Mining ; 
Engineers, 1871.. ees Jan. 1, 1905 tf 3483 — 190 = 3680 


American Society of Io oe 
ical Engineers, 1880.. a. Jan. 1905 19 1915 237 609 | 2780 


American Institute of Electric- 
al Engineers, 1884 ........] Jan. 1, 1905 2 481 |] 2851 = — 3334 


—_—_—————————— eee aaa 


* Including 27 Fellows. 


FOREIGN ENGINEERING SOCIETIES, 


S$ OO 


% Date — }'Hon. | Full | Asso. 
Name and Date of Organization of Mem- | Mem-| Mem-| Asso- | Total 
Report bers | bers bers | ciates 


Institution of Civil Engineers (of Great 


Britain) 1818.20... de jeserrcensns Jan. 1, 1905 19 | 2191 | 4116 | 271 |*6597 
Institution of Mechanical Engineers 1847] Mar. 1, 1905 9 2351 | 1545 72 |13977 
Iron and Steel Inst., 1869............ Jan. 1, 1905 11 1898 os a 1909 
tInstitutionof Electrical Engineers 1889]Aug. 31, 1904 6 |§1101 | 1435 | 1761 || 43803 
Verein Deutscher Ingenieure, 1891....]Apr. 24, 1903 6 117543 om — {17549 


Sects des Tnacalenme Ci de Frans) oon | || ih sams 


_ eheea use each see ers eae ee ; 
udents or Graduates 
1 Geb inally organized as the Society of Telegraph Engineers and Electricians in 1871. 
§ Not including 1144 Students or Graduates. 
|| Not including 1107 Students or Graduates. 


286 LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. [June 19 


‘A study of the annual reports of these bodies and of their 
constitutions and by-laws is of considerable interest, as showing 
their progressive expansion, growing influence, and higher pro- 
fessional standing from year to year, and the lines along which 
these developments take place. We shall not undertake a 
retrospective analysis, however, but rather confine ourselves 
to a comparative study of the methods of organization and 
business administration of the four national engineering So- 
cieties, as revealed in their last annual reports. 

It should be stated at the outset that this study is not under- 
taken with the view of criticizing the methods followed, or re- 
sults accomplished by, our sister societies, but for the purpose 
of profiting by their experience, and, if possible, avoiding in 
our own rapidly growing body any abnormal development which 
may detract from its efficiency as a whole, or result in purely 
local development at the sacrifice of general usefulness and 
national standing. : 

One of the first questions we encounter is the grades of 
membership, then the requirements of admission to them, and 
the method of election. These questions are of fundamental 
importance and are worthy of the closest attention, because 
upon them more than upon any other feature of the organiza- 
tion must depend the professional standing of the society and 
its healthful growth in membership and influence. There is 
no honor within the gift of the society that requires the exercise 
of so much judgment, such fidelity to its interests, such con- 
scientiousness, impartiality, and impersonality, as membership 
on the Board of Examiners, or committee on admissions, and 
it is deserving of the highest recognition. The requirergents 
for Honorary Membership demand no lengthy discussion, as 
the practice of all the societies is essentially identical in this 
respect. The requirements for full membership vary greatly 
in the four societies, as will be seen in extracts from their Con- 
stitutions. 


AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS. 
CoNSTITUTION—ARTICLE II—MEMBERSHIP. 


29. A Member shall be a Civil, Military, Naval, Mining, Mechanical, 
Electrical, or other professional Engineer, an Architect or a Marine 
Architect. He shall be at the time of admission to membership not less 
than thirty years of age, and shall have been in the active practice of 
his profession for ten years; he shall have had responsible charge of: work 


1905.] LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIE TIES. 287 


for at least five years, and shall be qualified to design as well as to direct 
engineering works. ‘Graduation from a school of engineering of recog- 
nized reputation shall be considered as equivalent to two years’ active 
practice. The performance of the duties of a Professor of Engineering 
in a technical school of high grade shall be taken as an equivalent to an 
equal number of years of actual practice. 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF MINING ENGINEERS. 
CONSTITUTION—ARTICLE II—MEMBERS. ; 
Sec. 3. The following classes of persons shall be eligible for member- 
ship in the Institute, namely: As Members, all professional mining engi- 
neers, geologists, metallurgists or chemists, and all persons practically 
engaged in mining, metallurgy or metallurgical engineering. 


AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS. 
CONSTITUTION—MEMBERSHIP. 

C9. A Member shall be thirty years of age or over. He must have 
beea so connected with Engineering as to be competent; as a designer 
or as a constructor, to take responsible charge of work in his branch 
of Engineering, or he must have served as a teacher of Engineering for 
more than five years. 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 
CoNSTITUTION—ARTICLE [I—MEeEMBERSHIP. 

2. A Member shall have been an Associate, and at the time of his 
transfer to membership he shall be not less than twenty-seven years of 
age, and shall be: 

a. A Professional Electrical Engineer; or 

b. A Professor of Electrical Engineering; or 

c. A person who has done important original work, of recognized 
value to e’ectrical science. 

3. To be eligible to membership, as a professional Electrical Engineer, 
the applicant shall have been in the active practice of his profession for 
at least five years; he shall have had responsible charge of work for at 
least two years, and shall be qualified to design as well as direct electrical 
engineering works. Graduzction from a School of Engineering of recog- 
nized standing shall be considered the equivalent of one scars active 
practice. 

4. To be eligible to membership as Professor of Electrical Engineering, 
the applicant shall have been in responsible charge of a course of Elec- 
trical Engineering at a college or technical school of recognized standing 


for a period of at least two years. 


It will be seen that two of the societies fix an age limit of 
30 years, one of 27 years, and one fixes no limit; one society 
réquires professional practice for 10 years, one for 5 years, 
and two set no limit; three of the societies require professional 
competency in designing as well as constructing or directing 
engineering works, and one ae the applicant to be pro- 


288 LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. [June 19 


fessionally or practically engaged in the branch of engineering 
with which the organization is identified. 

In the case of the Mechanical Engineers and the Civil Engi- 
neers the election is by ballot of the membership at large after 
approval by the Executive Board or Council; in the case of the 
Mining Engineers and Electrical Engineers, election is by direct 
vote of the Board of Directors, in the latter after submitting 
the names to the membership at large, in the former without 
so doing. In the Mining Engineers, Mechanical Engineers, 
and Electrical Engineers the application is first passed upon 
by a Board of Examiners and then by the Executive Board 
or Council; in the case of the Civil Engineers it is passed upon 
by the Board of Directors without action by an Examining 
Board. The Electrical Engineers’ Constitution requires that 
all Members shall first be elected as Associates, and then trans- 
ferred by the Board. 

It will be seen from the above how different are the require- 
ments for full membership in the several societies, and how 
varied is the procedure for election. It would seem at first 
thought that the more explicit the Constitution in its exact 
definition of the conditions for membership the easier it would 
be for the Membership Committee to act, but this is by no 
means always the case, as it often prevents taking a broad 
view of the candidate’s eligibility and is liable to exclude de- 
sirable material on technical grounds, although on the other 
hand it is a protection against too liberal an interpretation of 
the requirements by examiners. It would seem that a better 
division of responsibility and a more direct control of the class 
of men admitted to membership ought to result by giving wide 
publicity to their candidacy and election by ballot of the mem- 
bership at large, after the candidates have passed the scrutiny 
of the Board or an examining committee. A young society 
covering a branch of engineering that has but recently become 
specialized cannot in the beginning impose rigorous require- 
ments as to age limit or time of professional service, furthermore 
the branch of engineering may be such as to make it difficult to 
impose severe technical requirements. 

In the case of the Civil Engineers the accepted definition is 
sufficiently broad to cover applicants who are professionally 
engaged in any of the other branches of engineering; the Mech- 
anical Engineers’ definition is somewhat less comprehensive; 
that of the Mining Engineers is still less so, while that of the 


1905.] LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. 289 


Electrical Engineers is really restrictive to professional electrical 
engineers. Under our INsTITUTE’s constitution, however emi- 
nent a man may be as a civil, mechanical, or mining engineer, 
he may not fulfil the qualifications of an electrical engineer. 
It will thus be seen that anything like standardization in the 
matter of requirements is wholly out of the question, although 
a greater uniformity in requirements and procedure for election 
would be advisable. It is difficult for an applicant in every 
respect qualified for full membership in our INsTITUTE to under- 
stand why it should be necessary for him to pass through the 
preliminary, or, as it were, probationary grade of Associate, 
and then be transferred to full membership, but the Constitu- 
tion is clear on that point. Applicants whose superior qualifi- 
cations would entitle them to immediate election to full mem- 
bership, after their election to the preliminary grade of Asso- 
clate—which would take some time, several months at least— 
are liable not to make application for transfer, with the result 
that many remain in the Associate grade who should certainly 
be transferred, and when they find the cause of the delay are 
likely to criticize the administration. 

We now come to the consideration of the other grades of 
membership—associate membership, associates, juniors, etc. 
It would lead us too far afield to treat each grade in full and 
we shall confine ourselves to some general observations. It is 
necessary to provide one or more grades for young men just 
entering professional life through which they can rise, as they 
acquire experience, to the dignity of full membership; but it 
is necessary also to provide for another class of men who, though 
not professional engineers, nevertheless coéperate with them, 
and conduct engineering works, while at the same time acting 
as executives or as business managers. To such men, eminent 
in their particular branches of activity, it is humiliating to be 
placed permanently in an inferior grade of membership with 
the beginners in professional service, the situation could be 
satisfactorily met by establishing the grade of Associate, 
Junior, and Associate Membership, to represent successive steps 
in the advancement to full membership, the Associates forming 
a class by themselves. 

We now come to the question of dues, and at the same time 
we may with advantage consider the general question of in- 
come and expenses, or the cost of conducting the business of 


the societies. 


290 LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. [June 19 


The expense of membership in the several societies is as 
follows: 


Entrance Fees. Annual Dues. Foreign. 
———_ — OO | | 
Jun- Asso- Mem- Jun- Asso- Mem- Asso- Mem- 
iors. ciates. bers. iors. ciates. bers. ciates. bers. 


Amer. Society Civil Engineers ....... $10 $20-25 $30 $10-15 $10-15 $15-25 

Amer. Institute Mining Engineers.... — 10 10 _ 10 10 

Amer, Society Mechanical Engineers, 15 25 25 10 15 15 

Amer, Institute Electrical Engineers... — 5 15 _ 10 15 5 10 


In view of the new relations entered into between the three 
national engineering societies that are to occupy jointly the 
Union Engineering Building, and as they now have approxi- 
mately the same number of members it would seem desirable 
to have membership dues as nearly uniform as practicable. 

It is probable that the cntrance fees of our INSTITUTE might 
be revised without disadvantage by increasing the entrance 
fee for Associate to at least $10, and requiring payment of an 
additional $15 on transfer, making a total of $25 for full mem- 
bership. An increase in annual dues, also, is not at all im- 
probable in the near future, and they might with advantage 
be increased to $15 for resident Associates (within 50 miles of 
New York) and to $25 for resident Members; this increase for 
resident membership would seem to be warranted by the greater 
advantages enjoyed by the members residing in or near New 
York, more especially after occupancy of the Union Engineering 
Building. 

Let us now consider the annual receipts and disbursements 
per paying member per year in the four societies. These figures 
are presented purely as a niatter of general interest and not at 
all for the purpose of invidious comparison; the table of receipts 
and disbursements per member is subdivided under appropriate 
heads as accurately as they can be compiled. These figures 
do not include extraordinary receipts and disbursements, but, 
as far as can be learned from the annual reports, they cover only 
the regular and ordinary items of income and expenditure. 


1905.] LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. 291 


RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS PER YEAR PER MEMBER. 


RECEIPTS. Civil Mining | Mechanical | Electrical 
SRE abtance Hoes. ces we cgi a cawreaionns aay i| $2.89 | $0.28 $2.45 $0.83 
PES nL. Sia ltate echt e oe See een ee eee 16299 10.64 14.04 9.30 
Transactions, Sales and Adv. .............. 1.86 2.09 1.64 1.70 
Badsesiand: Certificates. ia ecc0s+ ie ose 8 en's 65 — ——— .28 
PNTETESbaprn ie eels ine Oo orcas wi eevee cya eros ave . 36 34 Sse ol 
DISBURSEMENTS. $22.45 | $13.35 $18.13 $12.32 
PUTANISACEIONS cae eMibtere ste setts we asveleiiors eee as] $4508 $5.28 $7.50 $3.77 
SULATIES HOLC va car seoletaNs, ocaje) staraVelaie or eVeibis es ©. sins 6.13 4,22 3.99 2.20 
Meet: Pxpensesipa-cursaid.eave's se ia,s co's Sysiate 3 .29 .30 : .94 .82 
Library, including Rent and Salaries........ .30 -80 .39 .81 
PRETIB yore) oie reo tela) ere stalin « ies) oie: di 2.84 74 2.79 75 
Stationery and Miscellaneous Printing....... .62 .34 1.19 .70 
BP OSLAL Es aihctee wale cers a alst'ny oon We eet SUN e Less vie 1.10 1,02 -26 - 66 
SoS ee ee oeek ee ee .34 .47 qulpil .54 
Badges and Cortificates... 05 se se cee creed .50 os os +25 
NS KITOEE SS tape eos sc cele Neee: wis oie vie eiey/sleiioreiia\Glie(e Siei’ero' = .83 ss YP) 
otalsn ane cettieie eyie ma helsys ease PLO hOy [eel 400) $17.50 $10.72 
Credit Balance per Member................| $5.70 |—$0.65 $0.63 $1.60 


It should be borne in mind that no deductions of value can 
be drawn from a comparison of these figures alone. Take the 
cost of the Transactions for instance: In order to make a com- 
parison of the relative economy with which this item is handled 
in the several cases, it would be necessary in each instance 
to know the number of pages and cuts, and the number of 
advance copies distributed at meetings, or monthly advance 
publications sent to members in addition to the regular annual 
volumes. The figures therefore represent the amounts which 
are being spent on the several items, rather than a comparison 
of their economic handling; it would be fallacious to assume 
that the figures necessarily represent the comparative economy 
with which the societies conduct their affairs as indicated by 
the items in the table. 

It may also be interesting to compare the receipts and dis- 
bursements per InstiITuTE member within the last five years, 
during which the membership has increased from 1 260 to 3 460. 


292 LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. [June 19 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 
RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS PER YEAR PER MEMBER. 


During each fiscal year for the last five years. 


Year. tictiabs ssh picts eee ere apie eto Oke 1902 1903 1904 1905 


Mertiberships 1.0 Samoaeiae eee eas aera eOe 1549 2230 3027 3460 
RECEIPTS PER MEMBER 

Extrance Rees sat eae eae ae ae Ol Sho $1.59 $1.65 $0.83 
TO ei Sor RR Scr eso Ac. cicee arse orc tess 10.06 9.01 9.33 9.30 
Transactions, Sales and Advertising........ 1.03 1.54 1.79 2.11 1.70 
Pad Gece c .jereserste cer oeyeleunig efols etresyyoia axeters > eon 18 .26 .35 .39 .28 
Triterestisn. oe scccteve aisle o,(etatese nie iais oa ale)fote cece ings .12 .24 21 .18 .21 


' $10.55 $13.26 $12.95 $13.66 $12.32 
DISBURSEMENTS PER MEMBER: 


Aman SACHONS Eee ne ie oe ee eee eee oO $3.50 $4.67 $3.43 $3.77 
Salaries earch ak ace eee ee ie ee 2.78 2.49 2.50 2.20 
Meeting Expenses.....-..- esse ee ereeceeee 1.05 1.13 87 16 82 
Rents nh peace aie cairn sie 94 .94 65 =o 75 
Library, including Rent and Salaries........ .55 1.85 1.38 1.39 -81 
Postage. onan sg vei ous shoes te wie lee einen 46 51 69 66 .66 
Stationery and Miscellaneous Printing...... .39 .53 96 1.01 70 
General Expense..... 60-0. seer ee ee ee ceees .33 .59 .52 -45 .54 
Bad Ges cise sstepe trem w1e'srsine vie sis nls's 88 9. vin eras 16 .19 .27 35 .25 
TEXPresS eas cee 0.50800 sees te ninvie tin sie wieiee 15 .15 15 -28 we 
Eee Ratah\n ks) Yinpeos va Cures SO0S Slit Sie ee $12.02 $10.72 
Credit Balance per Member....+++++++++e05 $1.20 $1.09 $0.00 $1.64 $1.60 


Our next concern is with the officers of the societies and the 
methods of nominating and electing them. A truly national 
society should draw its membership from all parts of the coun- 
try, and should afford representation, through its officers and 
those on its administrative committees, to the membership 
at large; in other words, it should select its officers as far as 
possible with a view to their geographical distribution. It is 
admitted that this plan is difficult owing to the opportunities 
afforded to practising engineers by large enterprises, whose 
administrations, technical as well as financial, are generally 
located in the important commercial centres. For this reason 
the important groups of members are found in the large cities, 
and from them are drawn the majority of the officers, such 
selection being emphasized by the necessities of the central 
administration of the society. This procedure is liable, however, 
to operate to the disadvantage of candidates qualified for the 


1905:] | LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. 293 


important posts of honor within the gift of the societies, can- 
didates that happen to be stationed some distance away from 
headquarters. To keep the InstiruTE on the plane of national 
standing it should have a care to the broad geographical distri- 
bution of its officers. This end can best be accomplished by 
having a nominating committee the several members of which 
are respectively selected from the same number of geographical 
groups of members of the society, each group to consist of, 
say, 300 or 400 members. Upon this committee, in consulta- 
tion- with a number of past officers, should rest the selection of 
the official nominees. Provision should also be made for the 
filing of such nominations as may be made directly by the 
general membership. This procedure was introduced by the 
American Society of Civil Engineers several years ago; it has 
the advantage of providing geographical representation and 
at the same time discouraging unseemly electioneering and 
advertising by circular for the coveted posts of honor. It is 
thought by some members that our own INstiruTe could with 
advantage modify its procedure in this direction. 

Furthermore it would be to the advantage of the interests 
of the Institute if the officers-elect were to take office at the 
close of the Annual Meeting, or at latest as the last act of the 
Annual Convention. The retiring of the President and other 
officers and the installing of their successors should be an 
official function at a general INsTITUTE meeting, the lack of 
which in our present method of procedure allows four months 
to. elapse after the election of officers before they assume their 
duties,.and within three months, or at most four months, after 
taking office the active canvass for their successors is already 
under way. 

It will be admitted by all who have had experience in the 
administration of professional societies that it is desirable to 
eliminate every tendency toward political agitation in connec- 
tion with the election to honors within the gift of the member- 
ship, and to concentrate every effort upon advancing the pro- 
fessional standing of the society and the interests of its mem- 
bers. It would also seem of advantage to have the fiscal year 
coincide with the calendar year; this would lengthen the time 
between the Annual Meeting and the Annual Convention, and 
by spreading the time taken by the former over several days a 
larger number of the out-of-town members would be secured 
for the transaction of business at the Annual Meeting and to 
attend the annual banquet, or for other functions which could 


294 LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. [June 19 


be held in the time available. The Annual Meeting as held at 
present is not markedly distinguished from the regular monthly 
meetings, and there is usually only a month between it and 
the Annual Convention. With the growing importance of the 
financial interests confided to the care of successive administra- 
tions the business matters of the Annual Meeting should re- 
ceive more attention, and the membership at large should 
participate in them to a greater degree than is the case at 
present. 

The administration of the societies should be conducted by 
their Board of Directors or Councils, and similarly the im- 
portant standing committees, with whom rests the conduct 
of affairs in the several branches of administration, should be 
committees of the Board or Council. Such being the case it is 
desirable that their appointment should, in the beginning, rest 
with the Board itself, and that one member of each standing 
committee_should retire each year, and the new President fill 
the vacancies; this would be a much more satisfactory arrange- 
ment than the plan followed by our INsTITUTE at present, under 
which the responsibility of appointing all committees, whether 
standing, special, or temporary, rests alone with the President: 
The suggested plan of appointing the administration com- 
mittees primarily by the Board or Council, the President filling 
the vacancies that occur each year, is not the one usually fol- 
lowed by our national societies; but even where all the appoint- 
ments devolve upon the President alone, membership on the 
standing committees is limited as a rule to Members of the Board. 
The advantage of selecting the standing committees from the 
members of the Board is evident; the committees are then 
not likely to follow a policy at variance with the wishes of the 
executive body, which would disturb harmonious relations 
between the society officials and continually raise questions of 
jurisdiction. 

It is also desirable to avoid constant changes in the per- 
sonnel of such important committees as the committee on Fin- 
ance, the Library Committee, and the Board of Examiners; 
provision should be made for standing committees of three or 
five members, with one member retiring each year, the vacan-. 
cies to be filled by the incoming President. This-plan secures 
continuity of policy, gives the committees the benefit of accu- 
mulated experience, and relieves the President of the responsi- 
bility of making a large number of appointments on entering 
his term of office Such standing committees as the committees.on 


-1905.] LIEB: ENGINEERING SOCIETIES. 295 


finance, membership, library, publication, and meetings, or the 
last two consolidated into one, are necessary for all societies, 
together with such other committees as the particular field 
covered by the work of the society may require. Outside of 
the standing committee required by the regular routine, it is 
desirable to avoid as far as practicable the appointment of 
special or temporary committees, and when the special work 
assigned to them has been performed, such committees should 
be discharged. Nothing is more subversive of energetic and 
effective administration than Board meetings at which an in- 
terminable series of committees make ‘‘no report’ or the 
chronic “‘ report of progress.”’ 

In case it is considered inadvisable to appoint a separate com- 
mittee on meetings, or on papers and meetings, and a commit- 
tee on publications, or editing committee—a division of work 
which becomes necessary when monthly meetings are held 
with reading of papers and discussions, in addition to one 
or more general businczs meetings of the InstiruTE—it 
becomes necessary to define their respective responsibilities 
very clearly, placing upon the committee on meetings, or 
papers, the responsibility of accepting papers or communi- 
cations for’ presentation at the meeting, and upon the 
publication, or editing committee alone, the responsibility 
for the publication of papers and discussions, in whole or in 
part, in the official Transactions of the society. 

It might be observed here that great care should be exercised 
‘so to conduct a society identified with a specific branch of 
engineering, that, as far as practicable, all of its divisions re- 
ceive due consideration. In an Institute of Electrical Engineer- 
ing, the telegraph and telephone, electric traction and electric 
lighting, the central station and the isolated plant, transmission 
and distribution, design and construction, theory and practice,— 
in fact all branches of electrical engineering, should receive 
consideration; and in soliciting papers for the series of meetings 
held during the year a wide range of subjects should be covered 
so as to interest and attract the largest circle of members. 

Reference has already been made to the importance of con- 
ducting a national society on broad lines so that the members 
at large shall have a share in the benefits as well as the obliga- 
tions of membership, whether they are located near the head- 
quarters of the society or at a distance therefrom. It is manifest 
that when the monthly meetings, as well as the more im- 
portant annual functions, are held at the headquarters of the 


296 LIEB: ENGINEERING chee eae - (June 19 


society, the distant members feel that they are at a disadvan- 
tage, from which arises a tendency to form local clubs, or 
organizations, and to secede from the parent society, or at least 
to lose interest in it. Our InstiTuTE has met this situation 
courageously, and through the initiative of Past-president Scott 
a series of local organizations was established, the number of 
which has been increased under ‘succeeding administrations. 
These organizations have done much to keep up the interest 
of distant members in the Institute, and have undoubtedly 
induced desirable accessions to our membership and are an 
important stimulant to professional activity. 

Our sister societies are facing the same problem and are 
watching the result of our undertaking—it can no longer be 
- called an experiment—with great interest. But this scheme of 
local organizations, while undoubtedly successful, is developing 
new problems and new conditions, and requires the constant 
care and supervision of the central administration. 

As the close of another administrative year draws near I 
have felt it incumbent upon me, in the fulfilment of a duty, to 
direct your attention to some of the questions that are before 
us, and to give expression to a few thoughts that have oc- 
curred to me as a result of several years of experience in con- 
nection with the administrative work of our own society, anda 
study of the methods followed by our sister Cngineering societies. 

The comparisons which have been presented and the sugges- 
tions which havé been offered are not made in a spirit of criti- 
cism, nor am I unmindful of the splendid work accomplished by 
the framers of our present Constitution, to whom the highest 
credit is due for that altogether excellent instrument. But our 
INsTITUTE is growing rapidly and with its expansion new prob- 
lems are arising; its field of activity is constantly broadening, ° 
and it should be expected, therefore, that modifications in its 
organic law may from time to time become necessary. 

It is in the meeting and solving of new problems of society 
administration, such as I have referred to, that the youth and 
enthusiasm of our members is of the utmost advantage; we are 
less handicapped by precedent and tradition than some of our 
older sister societies, and we may therefore expect for the 
INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS a glorious future, full of 
activity, initiative, and prosperity, and successful in the attain- — 
ment of the highest professional standing, dignity, and use- 
fulness. 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905, 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


HIGH-POWER SURGES IN ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION 
SYSTEMS OF GREAT MAGNITUDE. 


BY CHARLES PROTEUS STEINMETZ. 


In the following, I intend to give a review, investigation, and 
discussion of a high-power surge, which occurred in the high- 
potential distribution system of the Manhattan Railway, in 
New York, during the early days of its electric operation. 
_The very complete data on the phenomena occurring during 
the surge and the effects caused by it have been furnished by 
Mr. H. G. Stott, at that time Superintendent of Motive Power 
of the Manhattan system. The surge resulted in a complete 
shutdown of the power station at 5.50 p.m., July 238, 1903, 
and again during the following night at 12.45 a.m. 

At 5.50 p.m., July 23, the load on the generating station was 
37 000 kw. and was being carried by six 5000-kw., 11 000-volt, 
three-phase, 25-cycle generators, No wlowr4 35.6 sand /.e Lhis 
power was being transmitted to a sub-station, No. 1, located 
in the generating station, and also to seven other sub-stations 
by three-conductor, lead-covered underground cables, as fol- 


lows: 
To sub-station No. 2—6 cables each 27 901 ft. long. 
To sub-station No. 3—5 cables each 14 545 ft. long. 
To sub-station No. 4—5 cables each 18 328 ft. long. 
To sub-station No. 5—4 cables each 26 191 ft. long. 
To sub-station No. 6—5 cables each 13 246 ft. long. 
“To sub-station No. 7—5 cables each 9 988 ft. long. 
“To sub-station No. 8—4 cables each 27 021 ft. long. 


The sub-station high-tension bus-bars were divided into as. 


297 


298 STEINMETZ. HIGH-POWER SURGES. [June 19 


many sections as there were synchronous converters installed, 
and at the time of the trouble they were being operated with 
these section-switches open. 

All feeders to sub-stations, except 4-C and 7-C, were protected 
with static dischargers at the power-station end of cable but not 
at the sub-station end. The dischargers consisted of nine air- 
gaps in series with three carbon resistances each of 0.003 megohms 


FIG.1 ¥ 
-)* 
Ped 
27901 FT. 
3 


- 


14545 FT. C*) YX 


18328 FT. zy \s 


POWER-HOUSE* 
x 
oa 


26191 FT. 
=) 
13246 FT. 2 ™; 


9988 FT. D Le 


Xe 
27021 FT. = 


resistance. Feeders to sub-stations are designated by a number 
and aletter; the number denoting the number of sub-station 
and the letter the number of the feeder. For example, feeder 
8-F is feeder F of sub-station No. 8. A diagrammatic sketch 
of the high-pressure, three-phase distribution system is given 
in Fig. 1. 

At about 5.45 p.m., sub-station No. 7 notified the powre- 


1905] STEINMETZ. HIGH-POWER SURGES. 299 


station that there was quite a lot of static discharge on cables 
at that station, but that it could not be located on any par- 
ticular cable. Immediately after, sub-station No. 8 made a 
- similar report and then the power-station operator went to the 
cable gallery to examine static dischargers and try to locate the 
trouble. He had examined the dischargers on two cables 
when a loud explosion was heard; whereupon he ran up to the 
switchboard gallery, and as soon as he arrived there No. 4 gen- 
erator short circuited. Two or three seconds before the gen- 
erator short circuited, a synchronous converter in the power 
station arced over, and its positive direct-current circuit-breaker 
opened. This circuit-breaker was arranged to operate on re- 
verse current only. The explosion heard before the generator 
short circuited came from a manhole just outside the power- 
station, and was caused by a cable short circuiting. When the 
generator short. circuited, the time-limit relays on generators 
Nos. 1, 2, 4, and 5 opened their respective oil-switches, and 
the oil-switches of generators 6 and 7: were opened by the 
switchboard attendant. As these relays were set to operate 
after three seconds, it is possible that the switchboard attendant 
opened switches 6 and 7 before the relays had time to act. 

On the feeder system the following occurred: feeder 8-F 
siort circuited at a joint 243 ft. from the power-station, the 
three conductors being blown out for about 12 in., and one 
leg of the feeder punctured a porcelain insulating tube and 
grounded in the power-station between the oil-switch and 
eable-bell. Feeder 8-B broke down in a section, and at point 
23 980 feet from power-station. The breakdown showed two 
legs completely open and the other grounded, Feeder 2-E 
broke down at a joint 4.800 feet from the power-station, the 
break showing one leg open and grounded. 

At the power-station the time-limit overload relays on feed- 
ers 4-E, 4-F, 8-B, and 8-F opened their switches; the connec- 
tions from the main leads to the static dischargers on feeder 
4-A, 4-B, and 2-F burned off; the walls of the static discharger 
compartments of 4-B were cracked and sprung, and two small 
holes were burned in the end-bell on the power-station end of 2-F. 

At the sub-stations no damage was done, but most of the 
--reverse-current relays and some overload relays operated, 
showing that the converters in the sub-station were feeding 
back into the cable system. 

Careful investigation shows that the following damage was 


300 STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER. SURGES. [June 19 


caused by the cables and generator short circuiting: On generator 
No. 4, 28 armature bars and 11 connectors at the terminals of 
machine were broken, bent, or badly burned. On generator 
No. 1, the insulation at the end of a bar in phase ‘‘ A” and 
one in phase “‘C”’ was punctured, showing that the pressure 
had jumped across the intervening air-gap of four inches; the 
pressure also jumped from an end-connector of phase “A” 
to the frame,a distance of six inches, and a number of over- 
hanging ends of armature bars of phase ““C”’ were slightly bent. 
On generators 2, 5, 6, and 7 some of the armature bars of phase 
““C” were also slightly bent, showing excessive current. 

In addition to the damage mentioned above, some harm was 
done to the transformers supplying power for lights in the 
passenger stations. 

Step-down transformers—11000 to 2300 volts—for the 
lighting system are located at the sub-stations. The current 
is transmitted to the passenger stations at 2300 volts and is 
there transformed to 110 volts. 

When the cables broke down and the generator short circuited 
at the power-station, the fuses blew on nine of the 2300/110-volt 
lighting transformers, and on four of them several coils of the 
high-pressure winding short circuited. 

The damaged parts of the system were cut out, and the 
power-station and sub-stations again started. 

On the following night, July 24, at 12.45 am., a com- 
plete shutdown of the system again resulted from a surge. 

The load on station at the time was about 3500 kw., being 
carried by generators 1 and 5. A short time previous (about 
midnight) the ground-detectors on the 11 000-volt bus-bar 
indicated a 10000-volt ground on one phase. Preparations 
were at once made to locate the ground by a process of elimina- 
tion, by cutting out the feeders of each sub-station in turn. 
Some delay was caused by waiting for the adjacent sub-stations 
to cut in enough synchronous converters to carry the load of 
the station cut out. Just as everything was ready to cut out 
sub-station No. 8, a synchronous converter in the power-station 
blew its direct-current positive circuit-breaker. Immediately 
thereafter the following occurred: 

Feeder 4-F short circuited in a section 16 000 feet from the 
power-station, burning one conductor completely open and 
grounding another conductor. The current transformer in one 
phase of feeder 3-D, and the relay on the transformer, burned 
out. 


1905] STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES, ~— 301 


One main lead from the bell at the power-station end of 
feeder 3-B burned off for about two inches at a point seven 
inches from the copper sleeve of the joint. The static-dis- 
charger lead was connected at this point of main lead. The 
copper sleeve was found to be loose when the cable was re- 
paired. The static-discharger leads from this cable were 
burned off, the discharger-compartment division .walls were 
badly cracked and sprung, and a hole one inch in diameter 
and another four inches by two inches was burned in the bell 
at the power-station end. On feeder 3-A the static discharger 
leads were burned off, and the discharger-compartment walls 
were slightly cracked. No damage was done elsewhere to the 
system. 

Regarding this occurrence, Mr. H. G. Stott makes the following 
comments: : 


‘A summary of the happenings of that night in their proper sequence 
is: 4 
“ First: A static discharge over the high-tension insulators and cables 
was observed in sub-stations, Nos. 7 and 8. 

“ Second: Within a few minutes a feeder short circuited in the man- 
hole nearest to the power-station, blowing out about 12 inches of three- 
conductor cable, and raising the manhole and pavement all around it 
with a loud report. 

“ Third: One of the six generators operating in multiple short circuited 
near the terminals, conductors on two turns of the winding being driven 
out until they struck the iron of the frame of the generator; 1.¢., to say, the 
armature bars, which are 2 in. by 4 in., three in each slot, were bent 
edgewise for over six inches, showing that the force bending them prob- 
ably amounted to at least 3000 or 4000 lb. 

“ Fourth: Practically simultaneously several of the three-conductor 
feeders from sub-stations 8, 4, 3, and 2 short circuited, some of them 
in the manholes at a greater or less distance from the power-station, 
and some of them on the static dischargers in the power-station, and one 
across an end-bell in the power-station. No damage took place in the 
sub-station. 

“Upon examination, one of the generators, which was apparently 
otherwise uninjured, showed that the current had jumped across between 
the end connectors near the end of one phase, a distance of four inches, 
through the air. At another point on another phase of the same machine 
marks showed that the current had jumped from one of the end bars 
to the iron through the air, a distance of six inches. Other arcing dis- 
tances showed conclusively that the potential must have risen to not 
less than 70 000 volts. 

“The above is a brief resumé of what happened. 

“‘ My own opinion is that the source of all the trouble was in the feeder 
in the manhole next to the power-station breaking down the insulation 
to ground; this caused the static to show up at the sub-stations; the 


302 STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. [June 19 


large capacity current of the system burned the insulation of the neigh- 
boring conductors in the three-conductor cable, and formed a short- 
circuit which blew out the arc, due to the sudden expansion of air in the 
manhole from the heat generated by approximately ‘70 000 kw. (each 
machine being capable of giving out 12 000 kw.). The arc was probably 
re-established several times, thus setting up an oscillating current, and 
giving rise to the potential above mentioned.” 


The most characteristic feature was the enormous volume, 
and relatively very low frequency, of the oscillating surge 
occurring in the system. This explains the severity of the de- 
struction and its widespread extent. Any oscillation of very 
high frequency could be local only and could not extend over 
any considerable part of such a system, since the high capacity 
of the cables necessarily would act as a short circuit to any 
very high-frequency oscillation. 

The trouble was undoubtedly started in the manhole next 
to the power-house by a spark discharge between one of the 
conductors of feeder 8-F and the cable armor, possibly due to 
the gradual breaking down of a weak spot in a cable-joint. 

This spark discharge between conductor and cable armor, 
or ground, was oscillating in character, local in extent, and of 
moderate power and pressure, but of rather high frequency. 
It was the discharge of a condenser of a pressure equal to the 
pressure between conductor and ground; that is, the Y pressure 
of the system, or about 6400 volts, and the capacity and induct- 
ance between the cable conductor and ground. The capacity 
and inductance however in this case were distributed. 

The length of cable, from the sub-station where the electro- 
static displays were observed to the point of discharge in the 
manhole, was 26780 ft. The estimated capacity between 
conductor and ground was approximately 0.115 microfarad, 
and the inductance between conductor and ground 0.106 milli- 
henry per 1000 ft. of cable, or a total of 3.07 microfarad and 
2.83 millihenry respectively. 

In general, in a circuit containing distributed capacity, in- 
ductance, resistance, and (shunted) conductance, let: 

Z =r—jx = impedance per unit length of circuit, and 

Y = g—jb = shunt-admittance per unit length of circuit,! 
where: 


R 
I 


fac INL. 
DiTeINE Ge = 


Il 


1. Alternating Current Phenomena, Steinmetz, 3d edition, p. 163, seq. 


1905] STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. 303 


Let N = frequency, L = inductance, and C = capacity per 
unit length of circuit, and denoting the distance on the circuit, 
from a starting point 0, by u:?, the equations for electromotive 
force and current are, respectively: 


E=>y | (A -Be™) cosPu-—j(A M4+Be) sin But 

: r (1) 
f= V (A &+-B ee") cosBu—7j (Ae —Be™) sin Bu | 
where: Ne gee = Vig Rh 


V=a-j78, 


w= VEE Fr=bx)), a 


be VEilye =(gr—bx)}, J 


and A and B are (complex) integration constants. 

Neglecting, as a first approximation, resistance ry and conduct- 
ance g, which is permissible in such a cable of very low energy 
loss, and means that we assume the oscillations as not notice- 
ably weakened by the energy absorption when traversing the 
length of the cable,° 


r= 0; g = ()) gives: 
Qo> ’ 
B= bx =2nNVLC; (3) 


and, substituting: 
eB eS CLT ,, } 


Aree = 2 = -d;77 4, (4) 
gives: 
E.= j/b[C cos Bu —j Dsin B u] 
=1/b [(—c, cos But d, sin Bu) +j(c, cos 8 utd, sin 6 u)], 5) 


I = j/8([D cos §u—jC sin Bu] 
= 1/f[(—d, cos Bu +c, sin Bu)+j (d, cos Butc,sin 8 u)] J 


2. Alternating Current Phenomena, Steinmetz, 3d edition, p. 169 (14). 
3. Alternating Current Phenomena, Steinmetz, 3d edition, p. 181, sec. 


1235 


304 STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES {June 19 


Equations (5) apply to a circuit supplied by an impressed 
frequency as well as to an internal surge or oscillation of the 
circuit. In the latter case, however, the frequency is such as 
to make the circuit a quarter-wave, or an odd multiple thereof. 

That is, the frequency N of the circuit is given by the con- 
dition: 

cos Bl = 0, (6) 
where | = length of circuit.‘ 

This gives: 

Bl = (2«—1) 2/2, 


hence, equation (3): 


2x-1 2x-1 


*GIETE GN OE, Ue @) 


where L, and C, are the inductance and the capacity, respec- 
tively, of the total circuit. 
The oscillation therefore has the fundamental frequency: 


ti MEG (8) 
and the higher harmonics: 


N = (2e—-1N,. (9) 


From the available data on the breakdown in the Man- 
hattan system, in the cable 8-F, which discharged to ground 
in the manhole near the power-house, it is estimated that 


L, = 2.83 millihenry, 


C, = 3.07 microfarad, 
hence: 
N, = 2670 cycles. 


Denoting then by u the distance from the fault in the man- 
hole towards sub-station 8, with / = 26 780 ft. the total length 
of this cable, and representing the total distance / by angle 
w = 90° = 7/2, or a quarter-cycle, that is: 


£99, 
Pe (10) 


4. Alternating Current Phenomena, Steinmetz, 3d edition, p. 184. 


1905] STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. 305 


hence: 


Bu = (2«—1)a, (11) 


the equation of the oscillation is: 
1 ioe] ' 
E= Dance" [—c,* cos (2k—1)w+d,*sin (2«—1)0] 


+ j, [¢,* cos (2k —1)w+d,* sin (2«— 10} 


1 e (12) 
i 2nNiVLC >k [— d,* cos(2 kx —1)w+c,* sin (2 c—1)o] 
1 
+], [d,* cos (2«k—1)w+c,*sin (2«—1)o] t 
where: N, = fundamental frequency of oscillation, 


c,*, da,” c,*, d,* = integration constants. 


The spark passing in the manhole, at w = 0, from the con- 
ductor to the cable armor, that is, to the ground, connects the 
conductor to the ground by an arc. The potential difference E 
between conductor and ground, therefore, falls to zero, or prac- 
tically zero, while a current J flows towards the break w = 0, 
_ which is the charging current of the system against ground, or 
about 200 to 300 amperes. With the potential difference E 
disappearing, the current in the short arc shunted by capacity 
blows out the arc explosively, and so disconnects the conductor 
from ground. At the moment when the grounding arc opens, 
it is therefore: E = 0, 7] = 7, = constant, in the conductor, at 
least near w = 0. The current 7,, still flowing towards w = 0, 
produces a potential difference in the conductor, so that as a 
result of this period, we get zero current: J = 0, but a potential 
difference E = e,, in the conductor, at least at and near w = 0. 
This potential difference ¢, again causes a spark to jump atw = 0, 
and .again grounds the eee In the moment when the 
spark jumps, it is: ] = 0, £ = 

We have the two periods ee each other, the starting 
condition of each being the final condition of the preceding: 

a. From the moment where the arc at w = 0 ruptures, until 
a spark restarts it. During this period the conductor is not 
connected to ground at w = 0. 


ll 


306 STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. [June 19. 


b. From the moment where the arc starts at w = 0, until it - 


ruptures itself again, or while the conductor is grounded at w = 0. 
This results in twe oscillations or wave trains, originating 
at w = 0, and alternating with each other. 


a. Conductor not connected to ground at w = 0. The dura- 


tion of this period is the time required for voltage e, to jump a 
spark and ground the conductor. The starting condition, at 
time ti= 0, or 6 = 22N,t =0, is: E= 0; 1 = iy (13) 

b. Conductor grounded at *w = 0. The duration of this 
period is the time required by the arc to produce sufficient 
heat to blow itself out explosively. The starting condition, 
at 6 = 2x N,t =0 is: 

l= 0; B= 2, (14) 

Both wave trains follow equations (12). 

These equations, by eliminating complex quantities, and sub- 
stituting: 

op=2xN,b 


assume the form: 


1 be 
E Soe NGC >k [ —c,* cos(2«— 1) w+d,* sin(2 k— 1)a] 
1 


cos (2x—1) $ + [c,* cos (2e—-1) w+ d,*sin (2«—1)o] 


sin (2«—1) pl 
1 : (15) 
~ 22 N, TEES" — 4," cos 2k—-1jpw + ¢,* sin } 


I 
(2x—1) w] cos (2x—1) d + [d,* cos (2x—1) w 
+c," sin (2«— 1) w]sin (2*-—1) ot 


And the terminal conditions are: 
a. Open circuit: 


for: = 0 
Ei se'Q), 

hence Co* = 0; dh = 0; 
[= % 


1905] STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. 307 


a 
>«[—d," cos(2K«— 1) ee," sm (2x—-1) 0) = 227N,V/LC ty: 
1 


a 
>«K [—id,* cos. (2 «—1) — é,* sin(2x—1) oo) = —22N,+/7 € to; 
i 
hence: d,"= 0, 
= 
and: 
ao 
Dx c*sin 2e—-1) 0 = 22N, VEC i, (16) 
1 


gives the terminal conditions of the equations of oscillation: 


4 ao 
B= Spe Bees cos @e—1) wsin 2a-1) $ 2 
i pa 
1 a) ( (17) 
| >* ¢,*sin (2x—1) wcos (2K—1)¢. | 


Dae IV N/T 


1 


From equation (16) are found the coefficient c,* in the usual 


manner 
1 ; 
2 Pe) 
ic (2«—1) w > kK ¢,*sin (2xn-—1) wda 
1 
0 a 
eS 
= 22N,/LC fas (2K-1) wda; 
0 
hence: i 
"= 2 aN, eH Pa ets Qk—-ln (18) 
and : 


2x—1 


B= Ai ES . oto ane Geetioe 
gi 7 ay) 


in (2x—1) wcos (2«—1) d; 


— 
I 
oe 

3 
> 
-Ms 
, a 
2) 
x | 
‘ 
n 


308 STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. ~ Dune 19 : 


and by similar considerations, for the period: : 
(b) short circuit: 

B= 19S, : sin (2x—1) wcos (2x—1) 4, : 
te 2«k—-1 : 

noir (20) 
Tees C >": : cos (2x«—1)wsin (2x—1) ¢; 2 
7 ia : 2x-—1 
F 
or, substituting the approximate numerical values: | 
iis wae | 

e, = 6400, —_ 
0 ee alee ioe * 10 33 
i, = 300, (21) 


Hence, the equations of the two wave-trains are: 
(a) open circuit: 


Bec 


ee 1 aes : 
Bre re 1 sie eae a J 


900 = - eos 2 e—1) wsin 2«—1) 4, | 
Lin 


(b) short circuit: 


: a 1 
Ir == 6400 es >‘ Fen Sit (2xk—1\weos (2x—1) ¢, 
are 
pe (23) 
94 — S*5 j cos 2 «— 1) wsin 2Q«—1) ¢, 
1 


where: w = z/2 corresponds to the length of the line, 
¢& = 2 zcorresponds to one cycle of the fundamental 
frequency of oscillation of V, = 2 670. 


Aes 1 
a eden 


j ©0S 2@e—1) wsin (2«-1) ¢ lfor:¢ > ow, 


= }for:¢ =a, 


= Ofor:¢ < w. 


1905.) STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. 309 


At 1 ‘ 
32 SS ae (2x—1)wcos (2«—1)¢) 
1 


I 


1 for: ¢ < wo, 


3 for: ¢ = wo, 


Ofor:d > w. 


I 


I 


The two wave-train equation (22) and (23) alternate with 
each other and so cause a successive series of impulses of high 
electromotive force but zero current, and of high current but 
zero electromotive force, to run along the circuit, starting from 
the fault at w = 0 and traveling toward the sub-station 8 with 
such a velocity that the distance from w = 0 to w = 7/2, or 
26 780 ft. is traversed during } cycle of the fundamental fre- 
quency of oscillation N, = 2670. 26 870 ft. in 1/4 x 2670 sec. 
gives a velocity of wave propagation of 4 x 2 670 x26 780 = 285 
x 10° ft. per sec. = 54000 miles per second, or about 30% of 
the velocity of light. 

The duration of the successive periods of current and of 
electromotive force depends on the conditions existing at the © 
starting point of the wave; that is, at the fault in the manhole, 
but not directly on the constants of the rest of the circuit, and 
as a rule the duration of the period of high electromotive force 
and the period of high current are not equal. 

As illustrations, the distribution of electromotive force be- 
tween cable conductor and cable armor are shown in Fig. 2 by 
dotted line, and of the current flowing in the conductor towards 
the ground by full line, with the distance along the cable as_ 
abscissas, denoted by the angle w, and for successive moments 
of time represented by the angle ¢, which is chosen so that 
d& = 2x corresponds to one complete period of the fundamental 
frequency of oscillation N, = 2 670. The period of high current, 
or the time from the start of the spark towards ground until 
thé rupture of the arc, is assumed as 21°, and the period of high 
electromotive force, or the time-lag of the jumping of the spark 
after the application of the electromotive force, as 16°. 

These two. successive wave-trains also constitute a cyclic 
phenomenon with a period ¢ = 74°; that is, at @ = 74° from 
w = 0 a second wave issues identical with the wave issuing at 
od = 0. ae, 

A complete period of ¢ = 74° of this traveling wave gives a 
frequency N, = 360/74 N, = 13000 cycles. 


310 STEINMETZ? HIGH-POWER SURGES. [June 19 


These waves of current and electromotive force which travel 
along the circuit from the source of disturbance, with high fre- 
quency, are in their simplest form flat-topped with steep wave 
front and back. The steepness of wave front and back depends 
upon the rapidity with which the are at w = 0 establishes 
itself and ruptures, and also upon the distance w from the start- 
ing point. The latter feature is not shown in Fig. 2, since the 
resistance and conductance of the line r and g are neglected. 
Taking them into consideration shows a gradual rounding off 


of the wave with the increase of distance from the starting point. 
Where these waves meet obstructions, as localized inductance, 
the steepness of the wave front results in the induction of high 
electromotive forces of very limited extension, and gives the 
pyrotechnic displays observed at the switchboards of Ingh- 
pressure stations when there is a disturbance on the line, which 
sometimes are called “static.” Due to their very limited 
power, these phenomena are relatively harmless of themselves; 
their danger rather lies in producing or establishing a path for 
short circuits or surges of high power, as happened in the case 
under discussion. 
Localized inductance offers sume protection to the system 


1905.) STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. pla 


against these waves even if the inductance is very small. For 
instance, assuming 11000 volts and 300 amperes as full-load 
condition of the feeder cable and an inductance of 0.05 milli- 
henry inserted. This inductance at the impressed frequency 
of 25 cycles would give a reactance x, = 0.008 ohms; hence 300 
amperes consume 2.4 volts or about 1/50 of one per cent. 

Assuming in Fig. 2 the maximum current of the traveling 
wave as 300 amperes and at the steepest part of the wave to 
change in strength 250 amperes during ¢ = 1°; that is, ¢ =1/360 
x2 670=1.04x10% sec. This gives d1/dt = 240 x10, and the 
counter electromotive force which this wave front would meet 
in such a reactive coil would be: 


L di/dt = 12 000 volts. 


I have dwelt somewhat fully on this system of wave-trains 
and the frequency of propagation along the circuit, since I 
believe this phenomenon of a third frequency, besides the im- 
pressed frequency and the frequency of circuit oscillation, has 
not before been fully recognized. It seems, therefore, that in 
an electric circuit containing distributed capacity and in- 
ductance, as in an underground cable, a long-distance trans- 
mission line, or in the high-pressure winding of a transformer or 
high-pressure generator, three distinct frequencies must be 
recognized that are essentially independent of one another. 

1. The impresed frequency supplied by the generating sys- 
tem, of 25, 40, or 60 cycles as fundamental, and their odd mul- 
tiples as higher harmonics or wave-shape distortion, which higher 
harmonics are usually of small or even negligible magnitude. 

2. The frequency of oscillation of the system, or natural 
period of the circuit, depending on the constants of the circuit, 
mainly the capacity and the inductance, and consisting of a 


1 
fundamental frequency N, = 2UEC and all the odd mul- 
0 


? 


tiples thereof.as higher harmonics. The relative: magnitude 
of fundamental and higher harmonics depends on the distribu- 
tion of pressure and current in the circuit at the moment where 
the oscillation starts. As a rule the higher harmonics are not 
negligible, but usually rather predominate. 

3. The frequency of circuit disturbance, which has no direct 
relation to impressed frequency or to the natural period, but 
depends upon the character of the disturbance. It appears as a 

system of waves traveling along the line, and results in the 


* 


312 STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. [June 19 


static displays at the end of the line; that is, at the station switch- 
boards. In its simplest form, as a single wave or impulse 
traveling along the circuit (frequently visible to the eye as a 
luminous streak), it probably appears when a moderate light- 
ning flash or side discharge strikes a transmission line, and from 
there to the ground, giving at the point of impact a sudden 
rise of pressure against ground, immediately relieved by the 
discharge to ground. 

This phenomenon, so far as I know, has never been investi- 
gated from the theoretical point of view. While of itself rather 
harmless, its danger consists in the self-destructive forces that 
it may set into play. In the circuit under discussion here the 
impressed frequency is 25 cycles, the natural period 2 670 cycles. 
The frequency of the static display 13 000 cycles, but of such 
steep wave front as to correspond to a far higher frequency, 
possibly of the magnitude of 200 000 cycles per second. 

In the breakdown in the Manhattan system, starting with 
a spark discharge between conductor and cable armor in a faulty 
joint in the manhole near the power-station, attention was 
called to the disturbance by the arrival of the wave trains and 
the resultant static displays on the cables and switchboards 
of the next sub-stations. No direct harm was done by this 
‘‘ static,’’ but before the fault could be located and cut out, the 
spark discharge had reached the next conductor of the cable. 
and started a short circuit between two conductors. With 
six generators of 5000-kw. rating and a momentary maximum 
of 12000-kw. each, and the synchronous converters feeding 
back into the short circuit as evidenced by the opening of the 
reverse-current relays in the sub-stations—it probably is a con- 
servative estimate to assume that for a short period a power 
of 100 000 kw. was concentrated in the short-circuiting are in 
the manhole. The energy of 100 000 kw. applied during only 
one-tenth second equals the explosion of about half a pound of 
dynamite. 

The explosion tore off the insulation and protection of the 
conductor, and a flaring arc started in the manhole, and being 
oscillating or self-rupturing in character, created a surge of 
low frequency and enormous power in the whole system, beyond 
the disruptive strength of any part of the system or any pro- 
tective device. This short-circuit oscillation was a surge of 
the whole system throtghout, and almost instantaneously 
caused all the breakdowns in feeders, cables, cable-bells, trans- 


1905.) STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES, 313 


formers, generators, etc. The static protectors apparently 
discharged and somewhat lowered the pressure, but could not 
be expected to take care of the enormous volume of the surge. 
Some burned up explosively due to the excessive pressure 
imposed upon them. 

From the data available I estimate the capacity of the system 
between two conductors as C = 76 microfarads. In series 
with this capacity is the self-inductance of the generating sys- 
tem. Extensive tests which I made some years ago on a long- 
distance system at high pressures with aid of the oscillograph, 
proved that electric oscillations due to changes of circuit con- 
ditions, when occurring in a high pressure line, are not limited 
to the line but extend back into the generating system even if 
the generators are separated by transformers from the oscillat- 
ing line, as was the case in my experiments. That is, the whole 
system, including generators, oscillates electrically. This has 
since been corroborated by observing that a breakdown in one 
feeder causes breakdowns in other feeders issuing from the same 
generator bus-bars, and therefore that the oscillation passes into 
and over the main generator bus-bars. 

Assuming that the short circuit current or synchronous im- 

pedance current of these generators at full pressure and no-load 
excitation is about three times full-load current or approximately 
800 amperes, gives a synchronous impedance of 8 ohms Ye 
We may probably assume that somewhat less than one-half of 
this is self-inductive reactance participating in the oscillation, 
and that the rest is armature reaction. 
’ With the understanding that there is some reactance in 
the station wiring, current transformers, etc., we may assume 
the self-inductive reactance per generator as about x = 4 ohms, 
corresponding to an inductance of 25.5 millihenrys. The self- 
inductance of the six generators in circuit during the accident 
then is: 4.25 millihenrys. Allowing 0.25 millihenrys for effective 
resultant inductance of the cable system gives a total inductance: 
L = 4.5 millihenrys. 

The fundamental frequency of the surge of the whole system 


would be: Ny, = = 270 cycles, or quite low. 


1 
OA EC 
With C = 76 microfarads, L = 4.5 millihenrys, and e = 


= 6340 volts per phase, the instantaneous short-circuit 


11 000 
3 


314 STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. {June 19 
current or the volume of the surge would be: 
49 = e/22NL = 9000 amperes. 


where N = impressed frequency, and the pressure of oscilla- 
tion: 


é, = 2xzN,L 1%, = 68 800 volts per phase 


or 119 000 volts between lines, where NV, = frequency of oscil- 
lation. 

With such a volume of surge all breakdowns that’ occurred 
would also be oscillating and therefore would not relieve the 
system by discharging the oscillation, but set up secondary 
oscillations. J observed this same feature in the experimental 
tests referred to above, where in one instance I had three oscillat- 
ing circuits simultaneously in existence, and still enormous 
electrostatic displays. 

Thirty-two static protectors of 0.003 megohms each, hence 
of a total delta resistance of 282 ohms, and a ‘“‘ Y ”’ resistance 
of 94 ohms, would, at 100000 volts delta or 58 000 volts Y, 
carry off about 630 amperes or 7%, and therefore lower the 
pressure of oscillation by 7%, that is, to about 110 000 volts 
between lines, but they would be loaded far beyond their ca- 
pacity, as evidenced. 

As seen, the most prominent features of the surge seem to 


‘have been its enormous volume and relatively low frequency, — 


which account for its very wide extent and destructiveness. 

From another phenomenon we can also estimate the 
approximate frequency of the surge. The burning out 
of the fuses of some 2300-volt transformers without de- 
struction of these transformers is explained by assuming that 
the high-pressure oscillation penetrated to these transformers 
and that their primary pressure rose so as to bring the iron of 
the transformers beyond magnetic saturation and blow the 
fuses by the excessive exciting current, due to magnetic satura- 
tion. This did not occur in the 11 000-volt transformers, 
which were operating at lower magnetic density; while the 
2300-volt transformers, built originally for higher frequency, 
were operating normally at fairly high density on the 25-cycle 
circuit. 

From this we may estimate the frequency of the surge. 25-cycle 
transformers are necessarily operated at fairly high magnetic 


1905.] STEINMETZ: HIGH-POWER SURGES. 315 


density, so that increasing the normal magnetic density two- or 
threefold results in such high saturation as to blow the fuses 
by the exciting current. The magnetic cyele of the surge is 
superimposed upon the normal magnetic cycle of the trans- 
former. It then depends at what point of the normal cycle 
the abnormal cycle started. If at the maximum point, an 
abnormal cycle of one-half the amplitude of the normal cycle 
would double the density and so saturate. If at the negative 
maximum point, an abnormal cycle would have two times the 
amplitude of the normal to treble the density. The most 
probable is that the abnormal cycle or the surge started near 
the zero point of the normal cycle or near the maximum point 
of the circuit pressure and then at 1.25 times the amplitude 
of the normal cycle, the abnormal cycle would increase the den- 
sity 2.5 times. 

Assuming from the striking distance a pressure of 80 000 for 
the oscillation, or 7.2 times normal pressure, to give an ab- 
normal cycle of 1.25 times the amplitude of the normal cycle 
would require a frequency of 9.0 times the normal frequency 
or 225 cycles respectively. The frequency of oscillation there- 
fore would probably be in the neighborhood of 225 cycles. 

The shutdown of the generating station ultimately stopped 
the surge. I should believe it quite possible, however, that 
besides the breakdowns which have been observed by their 
destructive effect, some more breakdowns have occurred lasting 
so short a time before the taking off of the generating system 
as not to cause any noticeable destruction, and merely weakening 
and partly breaking down the insulation. The breakdown 
occurring again towards midnight I attribute to such a partial 
breakdown, which was completed by some small oscillation as 
the opening of a converter circuit-breaker. 

Two years have passed now, and I believe no further surge 
of this magnitude has occurred, and a protection of the system 
has been devised. 


A paper presented at the Annual Convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engt- 
neers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A.I, E, E. 


AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF THE RISE OF POTEN- 
TIAL ON COMMERCIAL TRANSMISSION LINES DUE 
TO STATIC DISTURBANCES CAUSED BY SWITCh- 
ING, GROUNDING, ETC. 


BY PERCY H. THOMAS. 


The purpose for which the tests hereinafter described were 
undertaken was the experimental study of “static effects,” 
on full-sized commercial systems, the method used being the 
isolation of the various sorts of phenomena and the elimination 
of disturbing influences. It was hoped that by a study of the 
effects of simple fundamental causes on commercial plants 
the understanding and control of the more complex static 
disturbances met with in actual experience would be much 
facilitated. 

In papers before this INSTITUTE, in February 1902, and 
before the Franklin Institute, in May 1902, the writer discussed 
the nature of static disturbances, as met with in commercial 
circuits, and applied to them some fundamental laws of wave- 
motion of general application, to establish certain principles 
governing the location and maximum magnitude of the poten- 
tial strains resulting from the more simple types of static dis- 
charges. One object of the experiments described in this 
paper was the empirical verification of these principles in a 
full-size plant. 

The tests on the lines of the Missouri River Power Company 
and on those of the Utah Light and Power Company were con- 
ducted under the direction of Mr. M. H. Gerry and Mr. R. F. 
Hayward, respectively, and carried out jointly by them, and 
by the writer representing the Westinghouse Electric and 
Manufacturing Company. The tests were eminently —satis- 


factory. 
B17 


318 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


The tests on the lines of the”Telluride Power Company, 
which constitute the major portion of the static tests here de- 
scribed, were planned and carried out jointly by the writer 
and by Mr. F. D. Olmsted, to whose personal supervision the 
work is indebted for many of its most valuable results and for 
the signal opportunity of securing so large a number of simul- 
taneous readings, covering several weeks’ time, at points over 
100 miles apart upon a line otherwise in commercial service at 
high voltage. Mr. Olmsted’s illness, followed by his death, in 
1903, prevented his conduct of further work along this line, 
and his contribution of other material for this paper. 

Before describing the actual tests, the point of view from 
which they were planned, and from which they are to be studied, 
should be outlined. Broadly speaking, the functions of ohmic 
resistance, inductance, electromagnetic induction, etc.,in electrical 
circuits are well understood, and can beexpressedby mathematical 
formulas. The effect produced in a given circuit and under a 
given set of conditions by any one or all of these causes, can 
be pretty well predicted. Such, however, has not always been 
the case, and this highly desirable result has only been secured 
by the most painstaking study of the effect upon a circuit of 
each of such causes by itself. The same may also be said as 
to the phenomena of hysteresis and electromagnets. In each 
case the simple and fundamental laws governing the phenomenon 
had to be carefully determined experimentally by the elimination 
of other influences. Once the fundamental laws are under- 
stood, it is comparatively easy to combine their various effects 
and predict more or less complex cases. 

Our knowledge of the phenomena of static disturbances in 
commercial circuits is in a much confused and comparatively 
undigested form. We know of a great many things that have 
happened, but very little as to why and how they happened. 
Reports are frequently recounted of discharges at tremendously 
high voltage (some perhaps well founded) and in explanation 
the name of some well-known principle is generally mentioned 
Rarely, however, is the application of this principle so made, 
or the conditions under which it was supposed to have operated 
so stated as to enable an accurate knowledge to be obtained 
of what actually took place. Consequently such explanations 
are of little help in foretelling or forestalling similar disturbances. 

The principles indicated by the words ‘‘ resonance,” “ surge,” 
“oscillation,” etc., are of comparatively little value, as an 


1905.] THOMAS: .RISE..OF. POTENFIAL. 319 


explanation of any phenomenon, without,a statement of how 
these principles apply. For example, in the case of resonance, 
the location and source of the exciting periodic force, the designa- 
tion of the apparatus or portion of the circuit that constitutes 
the capacity or the inductance of the resonating circuit, etc., 

. Should be stated, otherwise the attributing of the phenomenon 
to “ resonance ”’ has little significance. 

Elementary static phenomena have been studied mathemat- 
ically and in the laboratory, and their fundamental principles 
and laws fully determined. They are common knowledge 
to those who have given the subject particular attention. All 
these fundamental laws apply, of course, to static disturbances 
in commercial circuits, but in such circuits new conditions are 
introduced and new. limitations imposed on account of their 
size, and a new determination of the relatively practical import- 
ance of the old laws becomes necessary. 

In the same manner as our knowledge of the laws of inductance 
has been built up step by step, and the limitations that apply 
in commercial circuits, such, for instance, as hysteresis in iron 
cores, have become gradually recognized and finally experi- 
mentally investigated quantitatively,so must our exact knowl- 
edge of static phenomena on commerical circuits be built up 
step by step, largely by experiment and experience, and their 
practical bearing on the design and operation of such circuits 
be finally determined. Furthermore, in view of the complex 
nature of static phenomena, and the difficulty of making meas- 
urements of the extremely rapidly varying currents and voltages 
involved, and determining the exact facts in any case of serious 
accidental disturbance, or even in a case where careful prepara- 
tion has been made beforehand, the complete knowledge and 
control of static phenomena in full-sized commercial circuits 
will be slow in coming. 

It is not to be assumed that the writer means to ignore the 
comparative success of the present apparatus for the protection 
of circuits from static disturbances; the point intended to be 
emphasized is the empirical cut-and-try methods which are now 
necessary in attempting to eliminate trouble from these causes. 

To emphasize this matter a little more strongly, it will be 
well to summarize the fundamental principles, static or other- 
wise, that may cause or have a direct bearing, under favorable 
circumstances, upon arise of potential in commercial electric 
circuits. This summary is necessarily. incomplete, as some 
possible causes are sure to be omitted from oversight, and 


320 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


some from lack of knowledge, but it will serve as a beginning, 
which may be extended hereafter. 

I. The fundamental laws applying to all electric circuits, as 
Ohm’s law, laws of magnetic and electric induction, Joule’s 

law, the magnetizing power of a current, laws of branch cir- 
cuits, laws of impedance, condenser charging, oscillating cir- 
cuits; that is charging or discharging condensers through coils 
skin effect, abrupt opening of inductive circuit, resonance, etc. 

II. Practically all commercial circuits involve capacity and 
inductance, as well as resistance, (usually the capacity and 
inductance are ‘‘ distributed,’’) so that there will be a ten- 
dency to oscillating charges and discharges. 

Owing to the presence of capacity, inductance, and resistance, 
commercial circuits may resonate, and will do so if an electro- 
motive force of the right frequency be applied to the circuit; 
a voltage will then be built up, and a corresponding increase 
of current will result in the condenser and inductance, which 
continually increases, alternation by alternation, until the rate 
at which energy is lost in the system becomes equal to the rate 
at which energy is supplied under the exciting electromotive 
force. If the periodicity of the exciting electromotive force is 
not exactly right for perfect resonance the building-up of voltage 
and current will still occur but to a less maximum, and, further- 
more, will be of a pulsating character. It should be remem- 
bered that resonance can occur locally, either in a small or ina 
large portion of a transmission circuit. 

Where the inductance and capacity in an electric circuit 
are ‘‘ distributed,” as in a transmission line, any change of 
voltage or disturbance at any point causes an electrical wave 
or charge to pass through the line in the same manner as a 
disturbance will cause a wave to pass along a trough of water. 
Such electrical waves cause changes of potential at various 
points, as follows: 

(a) A wave passing along a uniform wire will be unchanged, 
except for a diminution in amplitude, and alteration of form 
due to energy losses, and will always travel at a definite rate; 
and if the énd of the wire be open, the wave will be reflected 
back toward its source, and will cause a rise of potential at the 
reflecting point of double the potential of the wave as it reaches 
the reflecting point. 

If however, the end of the wire, be short-circuited or con- 
nected to a large condenser, so that this point is maintained 


1905.] , THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 321 


at zero potential, the wave will be reflected back toward the 
source with the opposite sign; that is, the positive wave will 
then be reflected as a negative wave. 

(b) Two or more waves passing one another add their numer- 
ical values at the passing point, and each passes on without 
affecting the form or intensity of the other. 

(c) Where a wave on a line of large capacity passes into a 
line of smaller capacity, a rise of potential occurs at the end 
of the former, since this is virtually a part reflection; but 
this rise is always less than the rise of potential that would be 
caused by reflection from an open wire, the relative capacities 
and inductances determining the exact numerical value of the 
rise at the reflecting point. In this case a portion of the energy 
is reflected into the original line, and a portion passes into 
the smaller line, going forward at a new rate, appropriate to- 
the new line, and having a maximum intensity equal to that 
at the point of junction of the two lines. If the second wave 
reaches an open end in the smaller wire, there results a rise of 
potential double the value of the wave, as it reaches this re* 
flecting point. Consequently, this rise theoretically may be 
four times that of the original wave in the first line; and, sim- 
ilarly, if the wave pass into a third line of still smaller capacity 
than the second, there may be a still further rise. 

(d) When a wave meets a division of the line into two or 
more branches or a change to larger capacity, waves pass. into 
all the lines, but each is of less magnitude than the original 
wave. The wave reflected back into the original line is re- 
versed in direction. : 

(e) When a wave meets a choke-coil inserted in a line, or 
at the end of the line, but with capacity beyond it (as is almost 
always the case), the wave suffers reflection and a change in 
value, and a rise of potential beyond the coil may even occur, 
due to the oscillating circuit formed by the coil and the capacity. 

(f) If the cause of static waves be periodic, so that a suc- 
cession of waves passes into the line, and the constants of the 
line be such that the waves reflected back arrive again at the 
periodic source in the right phase, resonance may occur as in 
properly-timed circuits of ‘“‘ undistributed’ capacity and in- 
ductance. 

(g) When a wave traversing a line comes to a coil, such as 
a high-tension transformer winding, its progress electrically 
around the turns is slow in comparison with its speed along 


322 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


the line wire, on account of the greater inductance and capacity 
of the coil, so that when the crest of the wave has reached 
the beginning of the coil the front of the wave may have pene- 
trated only a short way into the coil, and thus the full potential 
of the wave is impressed only on the outer portion of the coil. 
This phenomena is the well-known concentration of potential 
on windings of apparatus caused by static discharges and needs 
no further description. 

(h) Theoretically, a portion of the energy of a wave trans- 
mitted along a line wire is radiated, which causes a certain 
loss of intensity; furthermore, with very high potentials a dis- 
charge of energy directly into the atmosphere takes place, 
which has the same effect. 

(i) An arc of considerable length inserted in a circuit causes 
a great deformation of the wave-form of the current; this is 
the equivalent of a superposition of ne or more harmonics 
of current of higher frequency on the fundamental, which in 
certain cases may cause a rise of potential as a direct or indirect 
result of some of the principles above mentioned. In case 
such a rise does occur, however, it should be possible to point 
out in what manner it is produced. 

III. The possible sources of static disturbances include the 
following: 

(a) Lightning, either by direct stroke, or electromagnetic or 
electrostatic induction, or by a combination of these causes. 

(b) Induction, or actual contact with higher voltage lines 
when such contact results in an abrupt discharge. 

(c) Any of the static changes of potential that result from 
accidental causes, such as grounds, short-circuits, etc., or from 
the normal operations of switching and similar causes. 

(1) Miscellaneous disturbances in the electric circuit itself 
that may possibly result in an abrupt discharge somewhere in 
the system, as for example, the short-circuiting of a part of 
the primary of a transformer, thereby causing a rise of poten- 
tial on the secondary, or the short-circuiting of the one sec- 
ondary of a double Y-connected group of transformers where 
the middle point of the generator is not connected to the middle 
of the primary star. Under this heading are also included 
such causes as running-away of the generator, paralleling out 
of phase, great deformation of the electromotive force from 
any cause, momentary building-up of generator field from heavy 
momentary charging current, resonance from generator fre- 
quency, etc. 


1905.] THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. — 323 


The headings I to III roughly summarized the definite knowl- 
edge we have of the laws governing static disturbances in com- 
mercial circuits. Other particular elements can undoubtedly 
be added, and with such additions the list should be complete. 
If we were able to get at the facts of any particular static mani- 
festations, it should be possible to point out in the above list 
the exact cause or causes, and to state definitely the actual 
law or laws governing the observed results. Of course, this 
condition is not likely to be fully realized, but the nearer we 
approach to it the more certain and satisfactory will be our 
control of the danger from static disturbances. 

A much fuller discussion of the matter summarized under 
headings I to III, inclusive, will be found in the two papers 
by the writer referred to in the opening sentences of this paper. 

It is often convenient to think of a charged commercial 
electric circuit as a long stretched spiral spring that is being 
pulled in all directions, but in a state of equilibrium except 
for a certain motion representing the normal flow of current. 
If any of the supports of this spring, which are analagous to 
the insulation of the electric circuit, give way, there will be a 
sudden release and motion of a portion of the spring, usually 
resulting in little disturbances or waves throughout its full 
extent, which, in tutn, will produce mechanical strains at 
various points. Similarly, the electric circuit, charged at the 
instant of the highest electromotive force with quantities of 
energy in the form of electric charges at all points where ca- 
pacity exists; and in the form of magnetism at all points where 
inductance and current exist, will suffer a shock and an. elec- 
trical surging throughout different parts whenever any break- 
down of insulation occurs, or other disturbance takes place 
that tends to change the distribution of the stored energy. 
The surging and oscillations resulting frcm a disturbance of 
equilibrium will continue until a new condition of equilibrium 
is established, and in doing so will cause a rise of potential 
above normal in some point or points of the system if the dis- 
charges are of such a nature that, in accordance with any of 
the principles already laid down, a rise of potential should 
properly occur. 

Undoubtedly all the laws hereinbefore enumerated apply to 
every commercial circuit, but their relative numerical import- 
ance will vary enormously. If the conditions are such that 
any one principle produces a numerical effect of only one per 


324 - THOMAS: RISE .OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


cent. for any discharge, it would be considered as practically 
negligible under these conditions. For instance, if a long line 
be suddenly charged so that a wave is sent into the line and 
reflected at the far end, this will be of no importance, provided 
the resistance or other losses in the line cut down the maximum 
intensity of the wave to a small part of its original value by 
the time the reflecting point is reached; for in this case the doub- 
ling of potential at the end by reflection will be much less 
than the normal potential impressed when the line has had time 
to become fully charged. Again, it is theoretically possible 
where a small transformer is being fed through fuses in an under- 
ground cable system, by the blowing of one fuse and grounding 
of this leg on the transformer side, to cause the whole system 
to be charged through the impedance of the transformer. In 
this case if the generator frequency happens to be right, 
resonance will occur tending to break down the cable insulation. 
If. however, the iron losses in the core of the transformer (which 
js supplying the inductance for the resonance) becomes sufficient, 
as the voltage rises, to equal the inflow of energy from the 
supply circuit, say at double voltage, and if the insulation of 
the system is able to stand three times normal voltage, probably 
no harmful result will follow; whereas if the iron loss did not 
exist a very high potential might result. 

, Examples may thus be multiplied to show that although, 
theoretically, a principle applies to a commercial circuit, the 
numerical constants may be such that its effects are a negligible 
quantity. It is thus of great importance to determine, usually 
by actual experiments on full-size lines, under what conditions 
each principle may become of serious importance. With such 
knowledge it will usually be feasible to change conditions so 
that the effect of this principle, numerically, will be of little 
or no importance. 

The tests described in this paper were carried out in accord-~ 
ance with the plan outlined above, that is, to determine by 
actual tests on full-size commercial circuits the bearing of a 
few of the above principles. The tests, broadly considered, 
are necessarily limited in their range of conditions. But they 
were carefully made, and, within the degree of accuracy obtain- 
able by the methods used, are believed to be reliable and 


trustworthy. 
DESCRIPTION OF TESTS. 


In studying static discharges, the most important informa- 
tion to be sought is the resulting maximum potentials at various 


ee 


1905.] THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 325 


points in the system, the average or effective value being of 
little importance. The exact determination of the maximum 
. values of extremely rapid discharges is by no means an easy 
matter. The motion is, of course, too rapid for any mechan- 
ical instrument to respond, and no magnetic or optical means 
is readily available. 

The most convenient measure is the spark-gap, which is widely 
used for this purpose, and though it is not possible to get very 
accurate measurements from a spark-gap, an approximate indi- 
cation of the maximum voltage may be obtained by this means. 
In the tests hereinafter described such gaps were used to measure 
the maximum potential. 

In order to prevent the discharge from one gap interfering 
with the circuit as a whole and thus influencing discharges 
at other gaps, condensers were placed in series with all the gaps. 
The condensers, though small in static capacity had a very 
considerable capacity as compared with that at the air-gaps, so 
that the gaps received the major portion of the potential im- 
pressed on the measuring device as a whole. Calibrations were 
made with the gaps in position and in series with the con- 
densers, as will be noticed in the accompanying calibration plot. 
It was found convenient to use two different sizes of condensers, 
as mentioned in the tests. 

Furthermore, since the result of any operation that is inde- 
pendent of the generator electromotive force, such as switching, 
short-circuiting, etc., depends upon the exact instant in the 
cycle at which it may happen to occur (whether near the maxi- 
mum, or the zero point of the electromotive force wave) the test 
must be repeated a considerable number of times to insure the 
maximum condition having been reached. | In these tests about 
10 trials were made at each setting of the gap. To explore the 
static results in the various tests, gaps were placed to measure the 
potential between line-wire and ground, between line-wires, and 
also across switches at various places, as seemed desirable, and 
from thes& simultaneous readings were taken by as many observ- 
ers with different settings of the gaps, until a condition was 
reached where each gap was just ready to spark, but none 
actually sparked. This ideal condition was not reached in all 
of the tests. The tests were made on commercial lines, as they 
stood, with lightning-arresters, transformers, and the switches 
used in actual service, and usually with the addition to the 
circuits merely of the measuring gaps. In the tests summarized 
below, under heading ‘‘ Analysis of Data,” the probable sequence 


326 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


of events in each case has been arrived at only by inspection 

of the observed maximum potentials taken in connection with 

the known operations. 

J-A. Tests ON THE Provo-LoGAN PLANT OF THE TELLURIDE 
PowER CoMPANY. 

Tabulation of Readings, Diagrams, Analysis of Data, etc. 

Test (a). Object of Test. Effect of charging a single unex- 
cited open-circuited line wire together with a bank of raising 
transformers. No other line wires connected. Low-pressure 
switch closed last. 

Connections according to Diagram a. 

Switch A closed, others open. K used for test. 

For calibration of spark gap see Diagram 0. 

(See Table No. 1.) 

Analysis of Data. As line No. 3 is charged up it does not seem 
to rise appreciably above normal pressure at generator end but 
does experience a rise of some 30% at the reflecting end. This 
indicates that the apparatus charges quickly enough to cause 
an appreciable time lag between the exciting of the generator 
end and of the reflecting end. That is, a small portion of a 
wave is formed; if the line were several times as long, it may 
be assumed that a full charging wave would have resulted. 


Strangely the pressure between the live and dead line is greater | 


than the pressure to ground at the generating end and less 
at the reflecting end. This may be due to the fact that the 
dead line is a disconnected line conductor and has no stable 
potential. 

The pressure rises a little higher on the I and II transformers 
not connected to the line than on III. This is natural as no 
energy is drawn off from these. 

No noticeable rise of potential occurs on opening the low- 
pressure switch, as would be expected. 

The unconnected line wires received a potential something 
like half of that of the excited wire though entirely disconnected 
from the circuit. of 

A slight rise (25 or 30%) due to reflection at open end of 
wire may occur even in charging a very long line from the low- 
pressure bus-bars, though it would be expected that with 
low-pressure switch closed last that the pressure would rise 
too slowly to allow a lag between charging of the two ends 
of the line. 

Test (b). Object’ of Test. Effect of charging one line wire 


~ 
N 
rap 


RISE OF POTENTIAL. 


THOMAS 


1905.] 


“$Z/% 7 OZ Ul O UOTJO9UUOD puNoOIS ut [IOd-axoYo UO TZ ‘ON de3 uo 
*(SIJOA 006) FZ/E Ie AB2IG Pue exeU YjOq UO AjereI ‘TIT “IIe Jo [Too ayOYO UO YZ “ON de3 up 
*(S}JOA ONRE) FZ/T IP AROIG pue ayeur YIOG UO YT Ut J ‘T “Ie Jo [Ioo-exoYS uO GT “ON de3 uO 


| 000 G@ 000 &6 0Z 38 OL UE TG 32 OL UL] IJ Pury OF TI] eury | 1 8t 
0OL 16 000 82 4940 000 &F Of 72 OL Ut OF 1g 38 OT UT punois 03 JJ] eury 91 
000 €T . 000 FI oynpP PC/E Fe OF UT punois 03 J] eury ST 
000 $T 000 &t € 3 0 (6Z/Z 3” OOT Ut OT) & 38 0 (F2/z 42 OF Ut OT) aaa a ¥L 
002 16 00S 0€ 000 T& cr #2 OT UT cp ye OT US punois 0} JJ] 2ury. €1 
000 9& 000 &€ 09 38 OL UT cr 38 OL UG II eury OF TIT eury | TOL 
000 6€ 000 gz 7" 0 OL #2 OL UD og 32 OL TO III 9Ury OF TIT JsuesL | TS 
00¢ LE 00S %¢ 000 024 28732 OL VET LTE APO JI ‘suezy 07 TI] SuerL e 
00L Iz 000 66 000 gE 0Z 38 OL UES (0g 3% sTetty OT Ut sxieds Z) punois 03 TIT ae € 
“ueso'T 


i 


‘ad JSHL— il dav 


“QINSBAU 0} [JEWS 004 SI Sdes asoyy [JB UO 9dezJOA [eULIOU ay} FZ/F I” OJ Ul _Q ‘UOTJOsIIUOD punois ut [I00-axoyo 
punoiedesug *(S3]9A 008Z) FS/¥E IL OL UIO ‘[]] TeWAOJsuvIy UO STIOO-eHOYS Jejsoiie G punole QZ des uQ “(s}JOA 
OOSE) ‘Ut S/T 3 STeIII OS Ur syseds | ‘[ JoulIOJsUeIZ UO S[foo-eHOYS Jojse1Ie OM} Punole 61 des uQ9—'3/0N7 
*BUT}JOS SI} Je PoaAIesqo oloM syieds ou yey} Seyeorput Q + 
*de3 sty} YJIM pasn o19aM SIesuspUu0d SIL] EY} SOPEOIPUL “TJ x 
NN  —————— eee 


000 8T 48 0 000 81 L432 OF U0 LV OL UF III Ury 94 TI urd | 1st 
000 16 00S FG 000 86 : OL 38 OF HZ 61 72 OT VET punois 03 [IJ 9ulT 91 
000 cI +" 0 000 6T & 38100 UrO ©3200 UT punoi3 03 J] ery ST 
000 IT 380 ¥2/Z 4" 0 punois 03 J eur iA! 
; s “OAOIg 
ST 32 OF UT o. L0GF7.0TERT III Surry OF TI eur | “1-01 
002 Ge O00& 6 tT #2 snonurzu0) punois 0} J] eury | TéTx 
000 8 $1 7e@ snonutju0g punois 0} [ eury ras 
000 8 (sjetty 2 ut O)+ (Z 3 syers} OT Ut Z) punois 0} [J] “jsuery € 
000 IG 000 Té 3" 0 000 Iz § 32 sionurues punois 0} JJ ‘jsuery G 
000 12 000 Sz ueZo7T 
*TPWION “Burued¢Q, *suIso[D Pe Ve Maj e ydaoxe ‘spzg ut ssuIpear des {Ty 
SE et eee "YOUIMG ButusedO wu “YOJIMG BUISOTO U ‘d QO uO0t}e90' se) 
"000 TZ JO E8eIOA [BUIOU OJ Paz9I1IOS Sees aay ay} ye pearesqQ Pea jo ona : oe jog, gen 


saouejsip suryreds 0} Surpucdses109 a8e7zfO A 
ee eee a aa ! 


‘VY JSal—l aTaves 


i le ee is 


ea a > 
o B oo AaTIVA,uvas0 
eae 
=) H : 
ee ' ® ‘wyuDvId 
o 2 a 
° H H In an 
H IHONA 90 a 
a a\ Tf 
i ' Neer oe ae 
{ ' ils, BON PON, HV 6L“ON Ls 
H ZL'ONA TT z'0 Az'0Nn S 
1 ee ge 
H II : 
| My 4! oe 
s 


-mIn} jo 
wySua, uve gy “xoiddy ‘o[qeo parieaod-Joqqni 49 “ON Jo 
SUIN} OY SVY [Z ON dvs 48 uoTyoeMU0D PUNOID UT [109-ex0T) 
‘OAOIg 78 INOJ puv ‘uBdO'T 3B a[qeTBae 
910M sdv3 eay Ayu ‘[109 exOYD OJ sdeS-yieds Surjde0x a104 


Evidently the sudden charging current 


THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 
causes a building up of normal electromotive force shown 


Switches all open except K. Switch A used for test. 
on line III) and probably by the high pressure between trans- 


8 
iss) 
u 
fer) 
@ 
ion! 
A 
on “OAOIg 78 1B ‘WBBO'T JO PUNOIS OF adie 
bo S}IUN GZ “POSN OIR S19}S91IG PUB S[[0-OYOYD «. Ws» od ky, 
¢ ‘SoTOIIMS-[10 918 Y pue O “A “V “SoOUMS 
4 => ‘sorodure gy 0 ‘o[Tur ied Juazima suLSIvYQ “SpBivjorOTUL 
v Mog SIT o ‘orrur sad Aponded “@” 609'0 ‘errr red couopedury 4oLvaaNn39] 
te) Me 8 Mm -19¢'0 ‘ayrur sod uooNpuy “7 g¢'o ‘alot sod ysTs9y " 
oO 7S “qy 4 ‘o[suey JO sapig “OAOIg 0} uBsoT ‘oul, seq oon 
° ere) -yoddoo ¢ ‘oN ‘KaT[eA IBpad 0} OAOI = 
Tos} Fag “aur 10ddoa g “ON * UreIp 860°0 re} 
“4 oo yora ‘umurumye spueiys 4 ‘ojod ‘youn Tye] 0} OAOIg ¢q 
=e e2e7 5 “SOurT a 
oS kObic, ‘goyrar 9 ‘Aare A TepaO 0} eyod “youn Tye'T naa 
ee GS “sor ¢z ‘afod “young Tya'T 0} OACIg ed 
iS) cal aA oe FEL ‘OAOIT 45 wk re 
= o's “so[TUM ZOT ‘ofod “younr Tye] 0} Ues0'T wu 
= os *so0UBySI(T o 
S ida) "U tg ‘pp ‘p 9 %9 ‘q Se ‘VI = 
Fa Oars SLSHL YOd SNOLLOANNOO JO WVAOVIA E 
— 


the 35000 volts at closing on transformer III (also the 31 000 


from a bank of previously excited transformers. 
wires connected. High-pressure switch closed last. 


The charging is evidently in the form of a wave as a rise of 
potential is found at the end of line I1]—a rise of nearly double 


1905.] THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 329 


normal electromotive force. Probably partly due to the 
momentary heavy charging current and partly to the reflection 
at end of the line. 

As in test (a) the dead lines receive something like half 
potential by induction. 


CALIBRATION OF SPARK-GAPS. 
Ratio of transformers, 35. 


| ee < 
ae +— 
i | 
Be | — == g 
Te 
i ws 
< § | 
==! oe 1 < 
A ea 
oS aQ 
aN OD 
(v) X 
SH 4 cs re 
7 i = oN AS 
. t %, 
ww * a o 
oO te a» 
< > oD 
ees x | %) 
= 
< > 
< 
= w 
G &l-= o 
} a3} = t ® fimo g 
oe Zsa e| > o 
= a - 
Zz oO a a 
Qz o fo) 
E Yi. =F 
<—xr}s-sS > 
ac < “es ae} 
o a a a 
ye < = 
\ EP aly u 
| Ss oa 8 
z | 2 | ‘ 
ae OF o 
of ® th to 
¢ ee A AES 
2 ray ao »Y <9 
& 6 5 40v8) 49 > Pan x 
Paes 3° xv Joy a ao! 4 
3 uw 4 394 a 
Qs uw Me 17 ae Rg 
ww} 6-0} 
o </@ ge ® x 
me ohoate) . 
2 
1 
x00} 4 T 
. 
ps 4 } S 
| I 
= i) 
© ‘ ag) x SS SSHONI & 
: ~~ 
x 8 © SS songg © 


The excessive pressure between transformer III and trans- 
former II is probably partly momentary increase of electro- 
motive force due to instantaneous charging current and partly 
due to the dropping and probable reversal of potential of the 
lead of transformer III when switch is closed. 


330 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. rJune 19 


The action of opening the circuit is a repetition with small 
variations of that of closing—probably because the line being left 
charged at the zero point of the current in opening the switch 
is charged again in opposite direction at the end of one alter- 
nation by the pressure jumping the small gap in the opening 
switch; this explanation is indicated by the pressure across the 
switch on opening (39000 volts) which is some 80% above 
normal; showing that the line is left charged in one direction 
while the generator assumes the opposite potential. This 
explanation receives strong confirmation from the fact that 
switching may leave an open line charged to nearly full pressure 

,as shown experimentally by tinfoil electroscopes. 

Lightning-arrester choke-coils in line III show some signs 
of abrupt discharges due to high-pressure switching. 

Test (c). Object of Test. Effect of charging one line wire 
from a previously excited bank of transformers, two other 
line wires being already connected to same transformers. High- 
pressure switch closed last. 

Connections according to Diagram a except that lines I and 
II are connected to transformer III on transformer side of 
switch A. 

All switches open except K. Switch A used for test. 

(See Table III.) 

Analysis of Data. In this test no marked rise of potential 
occurs at the generator end, though a small rise is shown by 
the potential of 27 000 volts to ground on transformer IT; also 
the 27 000 and 24000 volts between lines II and III at Provo 
on opening and closing. 

Only a small rise is indicated at the end of line III. This is 
partly because lines I and II have only twice the capacity of 
III. They do not act as a rigid bus-bar but allow a certain 
drop of potential momentarily. This means that a consider- 
able increase of potential must occur at the reflecting point 
from the first wave before the ultimate normal potential is 
exceeded. No considerable evidence of sudden change of poten- 
tial of bus-bars is found on the lightning-arrester choke-coils— 
a slight wave, however, on transformer III. 

This test has the conditions under which a maximum rise of 
potential may be expected from reflection since a charging 
wave should be sent into a line by connecting it to a reservoir 
of electricity already stored, so to speak. But on account 
of the limited number of lines available for the ‘ reservoir ”’ 
the effect. is much masked. 


THOMAS: RISE, OF POTENTIAL 


1905.] 


‘$2/t ye syivds Q uoTJOoUUOD puNoOId [IOD punoIe TZ ‘ON de3 ug 

‘po/¥ ye syreds uo Ayjueredde JJ] “118 ur sjiod OMY punore OJ “ON des uo 

“$Z/T 7e syzeds uo Ajjueredde J “11e Ur s[Ioo OA punore GT “ON des uQ— joy 
SS aan 


QOU L& 000 66 Zy 328 OL UT oF 32 OL UT I] eur] 93 [I] eUFT { TSI 
000 [6 000 66 000 8é 0G 48 OT UET SET OReT punois 07 [J] suv 9T 
000 Ié 000 Sc 000 26 SE 42 OL VET FL #2 OL UGS punois 03 J] eury ST 
000 16 é 000 96 é FC/TL 38 08 UT Maser eerh FI 
000 Tz CO0 66 000 86 GT 7@ shonuTzuOS sow y Glee SRORUIsEOD punois 07 [J] Pury €1 
000 9& 000 8& 000 6& GL 38 OL UT FO 72 SHOUT OO OGY: J] ‘suey OF [II “Jsuerl | TS 

000 96 000 €@ 3” 0 0g #8 09 US 0¢ 38 0 III 9Uuvy OF JIT Jsuerl | Ts 
000 1é 000 06 000 Gz £72 06 UT 9 #8 snonuTju0S ynoqy punois 03 J[J “Jsurry € 
000 1G 000 &@ 000 66 GI 48 OF UG 8 +? OF UT punois 07 Sugeno. 6 


a 


‘OO LSAL— AI. a Tava 


*SuISO[D 10 Butusdo Jaye uO FZ/T 3" OS UI O punoi3 ur soo om} punoie TZ ‘ON des uO 
“BuIsoo 10 Butusdo s1ayyWe UO FZ/¥ Fe OL UE O ‘JIT “Ve Ur sfioo Om} punore OZ “ON de3 uO 
‘BuIsop[D UO FZ/T 3@ OZ UO 

*(S}OA QOSL) Burusdo uo FZ/Z 3 06 UE T ‘T “We Url sploo OMA Punore GT “ON des uQ—'3J0 NV 


000 Fé 000 246 GE 32 OL UT cy 38 OT US TLC OP TIT SSr Te  MiESe 
OOT €@ 000 0& 000 0€ SG 12.01 UF TE. Go 78 OL UT punois 0} [JJ eury 91 
OOT &@ 000 46 00S Sz GI 32 OL UG 61 48 OT UT punois 0} JJ oury cI 
OOT &@ 000 96 000 0€ ¥Z/OL 32 0G US FZ/GET 4° OF UT punois EOE: FI 
OOT &@ 000 46 000 $< GL Ye snonurzuo) Si OTe aL punois 03 TI] eury eI 
00¢ Go 000 Iz L632 OL UET 0G 38 OG UT DE SUrnOe ERO asp 
00S GG 000 06 26.78 OL UT ST 3% OG T III 2ury OF TI] jsuery | T8 
OOT €&@ 009 GZ 000 LT 3% 0 OL 38 0G UIT 93201 UO puno1s 0} JJ “jJsuery iS 
OOL &% 000 &@ 000 22 ZL 38 OL WT ZI ye snonurqyuod punois 04 TT ysuenL Va 
e ‘ues0'T 

[ewI0N ‘sutuadg *BUISO[D ‘suUIPZ PoyeUL Moy e ydeoxe ‘spzg ut sdurpesr des [TV 
“000 1z 3° . “YoUIMG ButusdO uO “YOPIMG ButsoyD uO “dex) Jo uorjze0077 ‘ON 
aBeIOA [BUIIOU IOF Po}091109 S9dUeSIP “poyON SBUT}S ay} Je pearesqO syxtedg jo ‘ON dex) 


suryieds 03 Burpuodser109 aseiyon 


‘0 ISGL—TI aTav1 


332 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


Test cc. Object of Test. Effect of connecting line six miles 
long at Lehi Junction pole, with other connections of test same 
as test (c). 

Connections according to Diagram a except that lines I and II 
are connected to transformers III on transformer side of switch 
A. Switches K, X, Y, Z closed, others open. Switch A used 
for test. 

(See Table No. IV.) bit 

Analysis of Data. Very much the same result as test (c). 
The rise at end of line III being cut down if anything as would 
be expected by the division of the wave at the junction point. 
The results are not marked enough to be conclusive. 

No sign of abrupt wave on lightning-arrester choke-coils. 

The usual slight rise due to effect of momentary charging 
current on generating system is seen. This is apparently em- 
phasized at the receiving end which might result from a reflec- 
tion of a small wave and might not have any significance. 

Test (d). Object of Test. Effect of charging one line wire 
from a previously excited bank of transformers, two other line 
wires being already connected to the two other transformers. 
High-pressure switch closed last. 

Connections according to Diagram a. 

Switches B, C, and K closed, others open. Switch A used 
for test. 

(See Table No. V.) 

Analysis of Data. Closing the high-pressure switch causes 
a ‘killing’ of terminal III, of transformer III, and the sub- 
sequent rush of charging current causes a rise of potential on 
all three transformers, the greatest of course on transformer 
III as shown by test. The results at reflecting point show a 
slight rise on all three lines, the greatest on itlenThatwsca 
wave is partly formed and causes a slight rise at the reflecting 
end and as usual the supply pressure is slightly raised. The 
sum of the two causes is perhaps a 50% rise. 

On opening the circuit the same result. is found slightly 
accentuated. The cause of this is already explained. _ 

Across the switch is found practically double normal poten- 
tial to ground, which is in accordance with the theory in the 
paragraph above. 

A very decided concentration of strain is produced on the 
choke-coil in the transformer lead III showing a very abrupt 
change of the terminal potential, probably from the instantaneous 


THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 


1905.] 


“pc/}% ye syseds Q WOTJOBUUOD Puno ut [loo punole TZ "ON des uo 

; “(SHO 000 ZI) 
Sutuado uo $Z/F 18 OF UE Z ‘(SHOA OOOL) SUrISOTS Ut $2/S Ye OS UT ‘TIT “te ur sproo om} punore 0g “ON des uO 
"$2/c ye syseds ou *xoidde J ‘118 Ur s[iod g punole 6T “ON des uQ—'a10 Ny 


000 9& 000 89 | é G0G 7208 BUT é II eury O4 JIT eurT | “P81 
000 16 000 ¢& | d TS 72 OF UT d punois 04 [IT 9ury ot 
000 IG 000 86 000 Sa JAD OS BOL OT 48 0G UE OT punois of [J eury ST 
000 16 000 96 Z PC/TL 42 OF UT fe punois 07 J oury ual’ 
“OAOIg 
000 9€ 000 09 000 FS 38 0 O9T 78 OF UE 8ZI 38 0G UEO TI oury OF JIT SUry | Tor 
000 16 000 SE 000 Sz 0f32 09 BET OT 48 06 UG punois of []T 9ury eI 
d 000 #¢ 000 8F 3” 0 Sc 32 OL US GIL 38 0 III eury OF TIT Jsuety | TS8 
000 16 000 0& 000 FE 0z +2 OF UG 0€ 72 09 UT punois 0} JT] JsurPry £ 
000 16 000 Sz 00S FG Gi F808 By. OT 72 OS UG punois 0} [J Sey é 
* “UPBOT 


‘dd LSHI—IA ATIAVL 


‘$Z/E ye OF Ul O UOT}JOsUUOD PUNoOIB Ur [IoD punole [Z ‘ON des uO 


*(SYJOA 000 ZI) FS/F 12 Av9Iq pue syeut YZOq uo ‘xoidde 0¢ ut g J] “He ut soo omy punoie Og “ON des uO 
$2/E ye (TeeIq Io ayeUl) Q J “We Ut SjIoD OM} PuNoIe GT “ON des uQ—'3j0 NV 
ee ee a a 


Suryaeds 07 Surpuodse1109 adeyOA 


See e ee ee ee 


‘@d ISGLl—A alTave 


000 9€ 000 $¢ 000 99 OSL #8 OL US O6E 72 OF VET II eury OF [IT PUT | TSI 
000 16 00g SE 000 SE €§ 72 07 CET OS 3% OL UST punois 0} [IT eury 9 
000 16 000 66 000 T& GT 72 OT UZ SS 72 0G UE T puno1s 0} TJ eurT ST 
000 IG é 000 66 id FZ/FT 3? OL UT punois oF J oury FI 
‘OAOIg 
000 9& 000 £9 000 23 GLT Ye OG UE PFI 38 0G UF II Our] OF TIT OUrT | “TOT 
000 16 000 FE 000 GE OS F20L SET Go 78 06 WET punois 0} JI] eury et 
d 000 &¢ 000 08 3% O Scr 38 OS UG GF 78 OT UO TIPeurg O92 Til Bee | Ts 
000 Ié 000 46 000 92. CT 72 09 UE CT 32 09 UT punois 0} [[[ jsurrl e 
000 16 000 26 000 $6 SUE AOS SEL GEt2 0S Pie punois 0} J] ‘jsuvry, z 
| “uesO'T 
*ewION “ButuedgQ *BuUISOTO ‘supe poylew Maj e ydeoxe ‘spzE ut ssurpeer des [TV 
“000 1Z Jo e3eq0A “you Buruedg uO “YDPMS BursojD uO *dex) Jo wor} e00°T “ON 
[euLLou 10} peyosi4109 saoueysIp *poJON $3uT}}9g 9Y} Je pearesqgO sytedg Jo ‘ON dex 


334 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


‘killing ” of the terminal by the connecting of the ‘‘ dead” 
line. The other transformer terminals showed no concentration 
nor did the ground wire from the neutral point of the high- 
pressure star. 

The concentration shown on the few turns of the choke-coil 
III probably occurred in much greater magnitude on the trans- 
former winding. 

Test dd. Object of Test. Effect of connecting line six miles 
long at Lehi Junction Pole. Other conditions same as test (d). 
Connections according to Diagram a. Switches B, C. K, X, 
Y, Z closed, others open. A, used for test. 

(See Table No. VI.) 

Analysis of Data. There is very little difference between 
this test and test (d) though some of the individual readings 
vary. The addition of the line to Cedar Valley does not seem 
to cause much effect. This cannot be assumed to be always 
true, however, as the length of this branch line was hardly 
great enough to cause an effect on such long waves, and further 
in this test and in test (c) and (cc) no distinct static wave was 
formed (as was to be expected). 

Test (e). Object of Test. Effect of having transformer con- 
nected on the farther end of long line when connecting line wire, 
Same as test (d) except for transformer at end of line. 

Connections according to Diagram a. Switches B, C. K, M, 
N, P closed, others open. Switch A used for test. 

(See Table No. VII.) 

Analysis of Data. The effect of adding the transformers at 
receiving end is to reduce the rise of potential all around but 
especially at the reflecting point on line III and across the 
switch A which now gets the normal potential between lines on 
account of connection through the lowering transformers. 

Severity of concentration of potential on choke-coil III is 
somewhat reduced. 

Test (f). Object of Test.. Effect of throwing potential into 
two high tension line wires with the third disconnected, potential 
being thrown in by low-pressure switch and high-pressure 
arrester so adjusted as to discharge. 

Connections according to Diagrams ¢ and a. 

Switches A and B only being closed. Three-pole switch K 
used for test. 

rrester II discharges often. 
(See Table No. VIII.) 


BHOMAS ARISE (OF POLANTIAL. 


1905.] 


‘SYOA OOSE—FZ/T 7e Ajerer UOT}OauUOD punoIs 1g des uO 

*s}JOA QOS TI—F2/F -3@ Yreds ovo ([]] “Ue) 0g des uC 

“S}OA OOSE—FZ/T 32 Syzeds autos ([ “11e) 6, des uO 

‘OL out] 94} Jo yxed pue puNoIs 0} sqrun [TT] sey J] “We stuty oY} JO PeG— I}0N 


000 #2 000 F¢ 000 SF 38 0 (teysty Apqissod) QgT 32 ¢ Ut T| ZIT 48 ST WO III eUry. 07 JI eary TSI 
000 $I 000 6F 000 9F 38 0 . cg 32 G ULT 6¢ 32 OT UEO punois 0} [J] eury 91 
000 €I 000 08 é oe ye G UT d punois 07 JT eury | | CT 
— d é d é punois 07 J sur] FI 
“OAOIg 
000 &T 008 FI 000 61 ¢ 42 OL UT OT 32 0G UT punois 0} TJ eury | ‘TZT 
000 #& 000 OF 000 1¢ 08 +8 OF UG OZ 38 OZ UT TIT eUry OF TT eur «| «TOT 
— 000 #8 3% 0 000 9F 0g 72 OF UT O 09 38 0G UT (é) [J eury OF TI “Jsurszy yy 
000 $I 000 OF 000 9F CF Ye OF UT 09 32 OF Ut T punoi3 03 [I] “‘jsuery € 
002 §I 000 23 000 FE 8 8 0§ UF O€ 32 OT UT puno1s OF a % 


a 


wi USGL LIA ala vil 


‘pZ/E ye Yeoiq IO oYeUI UT Q ‘UOT}D9UTIOD PUNoOIS ut [loo punore [Z “ON des uO 

: “(33104 0008) 
Sutusdo uo [ 32 OT ut 4 ‘(SOA OOOZT) Bursreyo uo J Ye OT Ul T ‘TIT “He ur sptoo om} punore QZ “ON des uO 
/ “$Z/k ye yeoiq Io oyeut UO’ ‘T “112 UT STIOD OMY puNnore GT “ON des uO 


O00 1é O00 GS 000 €¢ 246 72 OL UT 66 78 OL UT DS a Or Deora eS 
006 LI 00S 8& O00¢ 8G ol 38 OF VT Chen EL punois OF TT] eulVy i! 
. 006 ZT . 000 66 000 [& $I 32 OF Ut T €T 72 OF Urls punois 0} JT oury | ST 
006 21 000 86 000 62 6 38 OL US OT #8 09 UG punois oe LUT tl 
‘OAOIG 
000 T€ 000 FF 000 FE GLI2 OG UP OF 72 0G UG TSU OF iieotier: ‘TOL 
006 LI OOS FG 000 G6 8 428 06 UT 9 +2 OL UTZ © punois 07 JT] eury &T 
é 000 OF 000 8¢ 78 0 9¢ 78 OF UE ¥G 48 O TI SUrT OF TIT Seer slice, 
006 LI OOS SZ 00S €@ 872 0E UT } Z£yeOL VET punois 03 TIT jsuesry € 
006 21 000 96 00S SZ 8 #2 OL UES 8 72 OL UG punois 04 J] ‘Jsurry G 
z “ues0'T 
*TPULION, “Burusd¢g, *“SUISO]) ‘sUIFs PoyTeul Moy e 4deoxe ‘spzE ur ssuipeor des [TV 
"000 1g JO eBe3JoOA "YOUIMG SurusdO uO “YOUIMG BUISOTD UO .  *dex) Jo uoTzeo0’T “ON 
[etuIOU IO} Pez}oe1109 saoueystp *pa}ON S8ut}}9S ay} ye padArssqgQ sysedsg jo"ON | dty 


Suryieds 03 Burpyodsa1109 9340 A 


‘a USAL—HA ATavi 


336 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


Analysis of Data. The exciting cause is the discharge of 
arrester, and this being often continuous little distinction can 
be made between opening and closing. The same concentration 
of potential on lightning-arrester choke-coils is found. 

The low-pressure switch makes very little difference as the 
cause here is the discharge of arrester with double star raising 
transformers: 

Apparently there is the same rise of potential at the end of 
line III due to reflection as in I-A test (g). 

Test (g). Object of Test. Effect of connecting two high- 
pressure line wires with arresters so adjusted as to discharge 
to ground. Third line disconnected. Two-pole high-pressure 
ol-switch closed last. ,; 

Connections according to Diagrams ¢ and a. 

Switches A and B operated together for test. 

(See Table No. X.) 


DIAGRAM OF CONNECTIONS FOR TESTS IA, f, #f, g, gg, il. 
Same as Diagram A, except that low-pressure windings of transformers are in star 


with neutral grounded. 
1000-KW. a 
GENERATOR 


DIAGRAM C. 
1150 VOLTS 


60 CYCLES 


TOOOOOOUON ey (((( ))) ) 4 00000000000 


& HIGH-PRESSURE 
WINDINGS 


LOW-PRESSURE & 


WINDINGS ’ 


LOGAN 


Analysis of Data. This is a very complicated test and must 
be judged more by the maximum results than by analysis of 
exact occurrences, for there are several actions taking place 
in rapid succession, each depending on another and only the 
maximum effect can be recorded. Evidently one pole of the 
high-pressure switch must close last, probably III by the high 
potential developed for a very low normal electromotive force. 
When one pole closes (say II) and raises its potential a little 
the arrester jumps to ground and throws approximately double 
potential upon the other transformer which causes a rush of 
charging current and further rise and meantime the potential 
of line II drops to a low value. This effect is clearly seen 
on the values of potential to ground on transformer III at both 
ends. The charging wave only gets partly formed and gives 
a slight rise at the reflecting point. 


337 


THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 


1905.] 


(SYA 000) FZ/E 1B SoouSpIAe ISIS TZ “ON des uO 
“(SOA OOOL) F2/G 32 syieds auios ([]] “11e) OZ “ON des ug 
“(s}JOA OO8E) FZ/T 32 syreds auos (J “11e) 61 “ON dts uo 


008 eo | 004 GF ¥C/GL 48 YS UI GI II] eury OF TT eury rst 
009 €I 000 OF 000 OF og #2 OL VET Sy 72.01 UE punois Of JI] eur] 91 
009 €I 002 FZ é GI 38 OL UEP é punoi3 04 ei EGA ST 
é é é é é punois 04 [ sury hal 
i “OAOIg 
009 €1 000 &€ 000 0& ee: 09 32 06 UG OF #2 OT UE “3UOD [ punois 0} J] euryT TST 
008 €@ 000 0¢ 00F 6F 38 0 OZT #8 08 UL OZT 72 08 UO TEE Cua 0) Th ound. TOL 
é 000 FF 000 FF 09 38 06 UET 09 78 OG UT II 2ury OF IT “suet ZL 
009 €T 00L FF 00¢ 9€ 09 #8 OG UIE OF 32 06 UT punois 03 JJ] ‘Jsuvsy € 
009 €1 000 &@ 78 0 00L && 8 32 OT VEO OT 42 O8 UE punois 0} Teen z 
: ; “ueso'] 
—— —_— — — 
*[BVULION ‘sutusdg *BUuUISO[D ‘sUuIPs Poyreur moy e ydaoxe ‘spZE ur ssutpess des ITV 
“000 ET JO a8ez[0A “YOUMG Burusedg uO ‘YSHIAMG BUISOTD UGC “dey jo uor}e007T ‘ON 
[BWIIOU IO} P9}IeL109 sedueISIP "peqON Ss8urtz3eG oY} Ye paatesqg syiedg jo ‘oN der) 
Suryreds 03 Sutpuodsei109 ase}OA 


ee ee Ee ee eeeSee 


‘) LSdL—X ATAVL 


338 | THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


On opening, probably III is left charged to a high potential 
and when II is charged again in the opposite direction by the 
next alternation it will inductively raise the potential of III 
which is practically connected to the transformer III. Anda 
discharge of arrester II will accentuate this effect. 

Little reliance, however, can be placed on the detailed analysis 
of the exact Sequence of actions. The extremely severe effect 
of having the double-star connection with high potential neutral 
grounded on the raising transformer is evident. 

There is serious concentration of potential on the choke-coils 
I and III in this test. 

It must be noticed that the normal pressure is only 60% 
approximately of that of previous tests. 


I-B. Tests ON THE MissourR!I RIVER PowER Company’s LINES 
To BuTTE FROM CANYON FERRY. 

Tabulation of Readings, Diagrams, Analysis of Data, etc. 

Test (a). : 

Object of Test. Effect of suddenly charging single line wire 
from a previously excited bank of transformers. High-pressure 
switch closed last. Two other line wires dead. Connections 
according to Diagram e. Transformer leg C grounded. All 
switches open. Switch B used for test. 

(See Table No. XIV.) 

Analysis of Data. Evidently the momentary charging cur- 
rent here causes a momentary rise of supply pressure which is 
increased on B by the rise due to sudden charging of the line; 
that is, the true condenser action. The results at Butte are 
not very clear but it seems that a higher pressure was reached 
on B than in A and C but none of them was excessive. 

The fact that more severe disturbances are found on opening 
the switch is explained as before; viz., that the line is left charged - 
by pulling off the switch and that the next alternation recharges 
the line see I-A test (6). This result is confirmed by the fact 
that on pulling off a live open line, a minute more or less is re- 
quired for the line to discharge as is shown by the electroscope. 
The pressure across the line switch B indicates the same con- 
clusion. 

The ground in leg C though a most excellent one could not 
prevent a slight rise of potential during the discharges. The 
amount of this rise was small, however. 

Test (b). 


1905.] 


THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 


a NNN 


‘yO pay[nd [yun snonurzuoo sem seul] WY “SL ye punuois Of 9 oury 6 
MOT 000 9% ‘U3tU OOF EE = A PO petnd oszojeq paeddoys ynq punois 04 g sul’yT g 
 pue g uO outa yI0YS & 10} snonuTzUOD punoi3 03 VW oury yp 
‘ayn 
O00€ 0c 00 TE 000 22 > OOF €€ 9€ 72 E US 00¢ SE 9€ 2 € UO punoizs 0} g eury 9 
d 000 oe 00g I€> OOF €& 87 we 9 UT OOF €€ SP 72 9 UO q eury 09 g 89] “jsuely c 
000 SE 000 FE > 000 8& 00S ¢E 09 38 9 UO 00S SE 09 78 Apesig V 52] 03 g S29] “Jsurly F 
000 €= 000 ¢ 00S SE ~7e gE urg OOF EF Tye Egurzs punois 03 9 Say ‘Jsuery, € 
00€ 06 000 FE > | 000 €€ 00S GE 09 38 9 ULO 00S ge te Pa pete pnes ot = 2 acta G 
ee a " > ae, C 4e UL > Ap aye su BO 3 
008 02 000 Ff +000 £8 > 00G GE 09 382 9 UO 00¢ Ge | F S Sony esp = or 1 
‘a Sa enV 
f _, Ue} SSoT ,, SoyTusts > y 
“shq 10}e19U93 WI] POzTOXS IOULIOJSUI JO OPIS UOTSUS} YSTY UO Painsevel S}JOA Juv oie “Uad UO S}JOA AG—9j0 Ny 
; ‘ayuyep you oe 
qey} sSurpear Burz}IWO sp1oser ay} WoOI} UBSOYO o1e sasej}OA 10;e190U08 ayeridoidd¥? yyIM syutod esay..—‘ajo Ay 
? ae ‘SU}PS Peysteur Moy e ydaoxe ‘spzE url ssutpeel des [Ty - 
00€ ZI “OBEqOA 000 I& g ye [e1eAes UL 0 000 I€ | G ye JeIOAVS Ul Q punois 0} 9 oury 6 
é yeurou ‘xoidde pemoys ‘< 
00€ LT yorym 9 10 YW uo ueyy |  O00L FE 9€ 72 E US 00G 26 $S ve E UT punoi3 0} g surly 8 
q uo pesinos0 Buryieds 
008 ZI aIOUIyNG Pasnjuoo P10s9y 000 TE G ye JeIaAaS Ul 0 000 T€ ¢ ye |eIBAVS UI Q punoi3 wa ag L 
‘ § 008 8z 00L #6 09 #8 FurE 00Z 8€ 09 #8 [ UIT punois 04 g surT 9 
Pik OOF oF 000 Pe > 002 ¥G 09 728 T UT OOF €¢ 09 38 ZUrO q oury 0} g B39] ‘suery c 
000 0€ 000 9F 009 FE OOF &6 09 78 GUT 009 8z SF ye Juz}TULIEAUT V 823] 03 g B29] “Jsuery . ? 
00€ LT 00S F «000 €>. 006 26 $ye gus 006 Lz $ ye Eg urgy punois 03 d Bea] ‘Jsuery ¢ 
00€ LT 009 &F 000 I€ 002 #6 he s 5 ha . a ee oe e Cube pence ug Pe “JSUeLL Zz 
} ; F : I UT punoi3 03 Y 39] ‘Jsuer 
00€ ZT 000 9€ 000 &z 002 22 koe moked a I 
. dc “Burso “Uox) UO “sutuedgQ *uax) uo “BUISOID “ON 
yeaioNn  “SuruadQ ed (9) SOA S}OA, “uoryRI07T dex) 


00008 JO 28ezJOA TeUIIOU IO} pazde1109 
spuodsaiiog 33ezJ0A 
NE ee 


‘VY LS€L— AIX FTaVvi 


‘syredg wmnuwixeyy 


340 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


Object of Test. Effect of charging a single line wire from a 
previously excited bank of transformers with two line wires 
already connected to the same poles. High-pressure line 
closed last. 

Connections according to Diagram e. Transformer leg C 
grounded. All switches open. Lines A and C connected to 
transformer side of switch B. Switch B used for test. 

(See Table No. XV.) 

Analysis of Data. This test showed no rise of potential at 
any point except the general rise due to momentary charging 
current. This test is not very satisfactory. Little rise was 
to be expected cxcept perhaps on line B at Butte. Nothing 
was observed there, however. (See I-A, test (c), page 7). 


One condenser with each gap at Canyon Ferry. Two condensers with each gap at Butte. 


Switches A, B and C are fused circuit breakers with explosion tubes for fuses. All tests 
taken at 7200 alts., and switches operated were fused breakers in all cases. 


DIAGRAM e DIAGRAM OF CIRCUITS FOR TEST | B a-b-c 


Nott fnor 


ee 
tHoo00 an 8 
be as 
re ee ee 
tFoo000 Fno.9 
ae 


F 
—— 
IHoo00 BUTTE © 
LIGHTNING 
ARRESTERS 


CANYON FERRY 


Test (c). 

Object of Test. Effect of grounding one side of a symmetrically 
charged three-phase line. 

Connections according to Diagram e. Switches A, B, and C 
closed. Switch A (fused breaker type) used to ground line B. 

(See Table No. XVI.) 

Analysis of Data. The test shows a slight rise of potential 
above normal (perhaps 15 or 20%) probably rather due to 
momentary charging current building up the pressure. 

No rise of potential was indicated at Butte. 

Apparently the break to ground of phase B occurs at a point 
of the wave where A has a high electromotive force, and C a 


comparatively low one, and is shown by the larger pressure 
to ground on leg A. 


41. 


e 


THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 


1905.] 


a _ 


"SI ye Butusdo 10 Butsojs ye syiveds ON 
"00¢ Tg ‘ues uo “A ‘syreds OU SeWT}eUIOG “gy 7e sNONuTyUOD ATTensp) 


00g TE 000 €€ 000 €€ 00¢ T€ Sr ve P UE 00S I€ SPIE SUNG 
00S I€ 000 66> 000 6G> «| 009 T€ Gr 32 € UO 00¢ I& f Gh Iw EU O 
OO€ 8ST 000 Fo > 000 Fo> 00¢ TE reve E urd | OOS TE LAEBAM SIE Y) 
OO€ 8ST 000 Fo > 000 o> 00¢ T€ ¥o729 UO 00¢ T€ IEE.G AS: OREO 
GOS IE 000 & 000 Fé 00¢ T€ SPE OEE 00g T€ SF ye Apeais 
‘TeuoN “suruedQ “BUuISO[) “uas) uO “‘suruedOQ, “uax) UO *BUISO[) 
OOOTE JO O8"T[OA [EUIIOU IOF PozZoaLIO ‘SHTOA SHA 

: spuodsaisiog 23810 A “PajON $3UrI7}0G ye S[VL [eleAag Uy pearasqO syredg jo ‘oN 


a 


‘oO LSHL—ITAX WTEaVL 


, Dey} Sse] ,, SOYTUDIS 
punois 0} 9g eury 
punois 0} g oury 
punols 04 Y eury 

‘aying 
iW eSUR As OF Oo 
punois 03 9 sury 
punois 0} g surly 
punois 0} g oury 
punois 04 V eury 
*AlIa,J uoAUeD 


dex) Jo uorye0077 


7 


ANIL OH BOD 


[June 19 


THOMAS: RISE OF -POTENTIAL. 


343 


« 
« 


"ost ‘03308 
YOLVYINIO IVWHON 


os 
00s 


‘% OL 


‘F WVAOVIE 


als BUA X 0988_ 


= JONVLONGNI 40 3ONVLSISSY NI SLIOA GSLVINOIVS 


(8110; 


OVvuVJOUOIN 0°} =—=9) ‘SaluNa Hie) 9 0Bb Sy aNNSsy 


SSDVLIOA 


DIAGRAM g. 


6 MILES 


1905] THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 3: 


General Conclusions for Static Tests. The discussion under 
this heading must be considered in connection with the paper 
read before the Franklin Institute in May, 1903. The theory 
that, strictly as a result of switching operations and 
arrester discharges where no secondary effects occur, 
no rise of potential can occur over double that of the 


DIAGRAM p. 


at 
Va ae 


4000 5 


13-102 


VOLTAGE ON LINE 


“e 


‘ 


i 


a 
sa a 
a 
ie 


@ CURVE TAKEN ON OCTOBER 8~02 


o 
w 
c 
< 
2 
g 
ao 
3 
S 
ie 
2 
°o 

fe) 


x 


sso1 LLVMOT1X 


exciting potential change, is borne out by the experiments. 
In fact, this rise of potential still excluding secondary effects 
is usually less than 50% of its maximum theoretical value. 
However, secondary effects resulting from the static disturbances 
and modifying the maximum ise must be allowed for. The 
most common of these is the effect of the sudden excessive 


344 THOMAS: RISE OF\ POTENTIAL. [June 19 


momentary current flow, and its results in practically building 
up the ‘‘ generator’’ pressure for the time being. This effect 
may increase the rise of potential resulting from reflection of 
charging waves, to double potential in actual experiments. 

The effect of static disturbances of any kind to cause in a 
full-sized plant concentration of potential on the outer por- 
tions of windings connected to the circuit is proven clearly. 
Note that the existence of the strain is proved clearly. Severe 
damage may or may not result. The use of choke-coils in series 


with the line may or may not protect a transformer coil from 


DIAGRAM q. 


V. Electromotive force in static interrupter units, v is parallel to and equal to 0.5 line 
electromotive force between neutral point p and line. 


the strains according to its power. In the case of an insufficient 
powerful choke-coil the full value of the pressure change oc- 
curring at the line lead may be impressed on a small portion of 
the transformer winding, the exact proportion affected de- 
pending upon the suddenness of the static change. As a 
matter of experience it is found that serious damage results 
from local concentration of potential much less frequently than 
would be expected. 

Three-phase transformers connected star in primary and sec- 
ondary with high tension neutral grounded with two legs will 
cause approximately 1.7 times full voltage to ground when a 
short circuit occurs in such a manner as to affect one leg only 


Ot 


1905.] THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 34: 


of high pressure. This causes 1.7 normal strain on lightning- 
arresters and on all insulation to ground on the legs not short 
circuited. This extra potential on lightning-arresters is a very 
troublesome condition to meet if allowed to exist; it can be 
avoided by grounding the neutral point of the generating 
system. The excessive rise does not occur when two legs are 
simultaneously grounded. 


III. OBSERVATIONS ON THE EFFECT OF LIGHTNING ON A DEAD 
LINE. 


During the making of these tests a number of miscellaneous 
observations and experiments were made in allied subjects 


TABLE NO. XXI. 


Gap | Max. Volts 
No. Set. Cor. Remarks. 


* 32ds 1 21 30 000 1 puncture 1/16 in. diam. = prob. result of several single 
p. 1/64 in. (8/12). 
He 2 24 31000 | 4 punctures, probably more. up to 1/32 in. 
fs 3 15 25 000 | Large number charring hole } in. diam., some very small, 
Me 4 21 30 000 One .025 in. diam. othersat 9/320n8/2. Also great nume. 


bers (8/30) at 12. Some others at 12. 
5 15 25 000 | 6 or 7 punctures, 2 occasions. Many at 12/32, 1 at 8/32. 
6 12 26000 | 2 = also 2 at 9 and 2 at 6, none over .02. 
ke 7 18 31000 | Two .01 in. diam.. no others. 
8 9 22000 | Two .01 in. diam. and .005 diam., no others. 
9 20 32 000 Many, mostly fine. 
iN 10 3 9600 | 2 very fine (.005 diam.) but perfectly clear, also 2 larger 


ones (perhaps composite) at 14 (8/29) also large num- 
ber fine gaps at 14 (8/30). 


—— EE 

Inspection makes it seem probable that there are no large single punctures but that 
the charring of the paper in record papers 1s due to a large number of superimposed and! 
quickly recurring discharges. 


some of which are of general interest and are here given. They 
are self explanatory. 

(a) Six miles of line extended from the Utah Power Com- 
pany’s station at the mouth of Big Cottonwood Canyon to the 
town of Sandy. This is quite a severe lightning district. Ten 
gaps and one choke-coil were placed in this line as shown in 
diagram g and test papers kept in them being inspected and 
changed after every storm. 

Examinations made after five or six storms showed sparks as. 


follows: 
(See Table No. XXI.) 


346 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


Analysis of Data. Apparently all wires are raised to about 
equally the same potential above ground and each wire the same 
at all points. 

Discharges are apparently very numerous. This is good 
reason to believe that this line was not struck directly during 
this time. 

The reading on gap 10 shows that there are very sharp con- 
centrated waves on the line which may be due to the direct 
lightning or to the discharge of gaps in the same wire, as no 
condensers were used. 

See also article by N. J. Neall, Elec. Club Journal, March, 1905. 


IV. MisceLLtaNgous Static Notes AND TESTS. 


(a). Effect of Static in High-Pressure on Ground Connec- 
tion to Low-Pressure Coils. Apparently the ground connection 
(see diagram a) used in these static tests was entirely ade- 
quate to prevent a momentary deviation from zero potential 
in the low-tension coils even when severe static disturbances 
were taking place in the high-pressure windings. This is very 
important and the evidence is very good. The wiring to the 
ground connections was heavy but not particularly short. 
There was one common ground and connecting wire for all 
circuits. 

(b) Effect of Static in High-Tension on Type R Choke-Coils in 
High-Pressure. The severe static disturbances of the switching 
tests caused very severe short circuiting strains on the choke- 
coils of the lightning-arresters (see diagram a), (some 50 turns 
about three feet in circumference average, quite well separated) 
receiving between the start and finish strains as high as 18 000 
volts. Further, it is entirely probable that the transformers 
received strains very much greater on account of the enor- 
mously greater choking power of their high-pressure coils. 
These particular choke-coils, though offering a certain amount of 
protection, are probably unable to remove entirely the strains 
on the transformer windings tending to cause short circuits 
on account of their small power. There is little doubt that the 
actual transformers did receive very high instantaneous poten- 
tial strains as a result of static changes. 
to result. 


(d) Length of Time Required to Discharge Line by Leakage. 
The phenomenon that disconnecting an idle line sometimes leaves 
it fully charged has been referred to. This fact was shown 


No damage appeared 


1905.] THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 347 


conclusively by a tin-foil electroscope hung on the end of the 
line. The two legs of the electroscope would of course diverge 
widely when the line was charged and sometimes when the line 
was disconnected by a high-pressure switch the electroscope 
would stay spread. In some such cases more than a minute by 
watch was required for the spread of the electroscope to drop to 
1/10th of its original spread. This shows how slowly the 
charge leaked off the line. This phenomena was noticed both at 
Logan with an oil-switch and at Canyon Ferry with an air- 
break switch. 

These electroscopes may be made very helpful in high-pres- 
sure work as ready indicators of high pressure. They must, 
however, be shielded against the action of outside pressures or 
they may indicate even on a dead line. 

(h) Mutual Induction of Parallel Lines. From the Logan 
power-house of the Telluride Power Company, two high-pressure 
lines of three wires each run on separate pole lines parallel for 
a distance of approximately 80 miles. The lines are spaced 
about 100 ft. on the average. The east line in addition to the 
80 miles parallel to the west line extends 44 miles further to 
Provo. It had been found by experiment that when the east 
line was uncharged, and even grounded at the farther end 
that a severe shock could be obtained from this line. An in- 
vestigation was made to determine the cause and amount of 
this pressure. It was first determined to be alternating current 
by a telephone and its pitch determined as either the same as 
that of the generators or in harmony with it. Measurement 
showed a maximum of probably 200 volts between line and 
ground, which occurred at Logan when the three wires were 
grounded and short circuited at Provo. The measurement of 
this pressure under a number of different conditions with dif- 
ferent points grounded and paralleled and with lines grounded 
through one or more lamps, indicated that this pressure was 
due to the effect of the slight charging current induced by the 
west line which built up pressure on account of the inductance 
of the east line. This rather surprising result seems pretty 
well justified by a considerable number of experimental com- 
binations. Except at the time of atmospheric disturbances 
there seemed to be no other cause of pressure on the transmission 
line. 

(k) Tests at Utah Light and Power Company. No very difinite 
tests were made in the plant of the Utah Light & Power Com- 


348 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


pany, due to the conditions at this plant, although all lightning- 
arresters in the system were supplied with test papers and a 
number of spark gaps and condensers installed at various 
places and left on the lines. 

Static disturbances cause waves to pass along the high- 
pressure lines of great suddenness as shown by the short cir- 
cuiting of two secondaries of 50-kw. transformers in series with 
the line and boosting the voltage of the Cottonwood line to that 
of the Ogden line. These were thus placed in the middle of a 
long high-pressure line and were burned out in coils carrying 
the line current at a time of static disturbance. The same 
thing is shown by the choke coil in the idle line described 
above (p. 731). 

Papers were put in a great many gaps of lightning-arresters 
between lines and ground with condensers at a number of points, 


4=LINE WIRE-TO BUTTE 62 MILES 
9 10-6 F. 


50000 
RATIO $22.5 


DIAGRAM K. 


but little definite data was obtained for the system was not 
wholly mapped and no serious disturbances occurred during the 
time of observation. Lightning made frequent punctures in 
the papers, however, showing on the type R arresters a very 
free discharge to ground and on ‘the resistance type a very 
slight spark. 

V. TrEstTs FOR RESONANCE. © 


At Canyon Ferry, Missouri River Power Company. 

Object of Test. To obtain a rise of potential due to resonance 
from line charging current passing through an idle transformer. 

Connections according to Diagram k. 

With the above arrangement the speed on the generator was 
varied between wide limits. The ratio of the readings of V m, 
(idle transformer) to V m, (generator pressure) are plotted 
with the speeds in Diagram F. 


1905.] THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 349 


With slower speeds than that of resonance the pressure on 
the idle transformer should fall toward zero since the charging 
current and the inductive ohms are both steadily getting less. 
Above this speed the pressure on the idle transformer approxi- 
mates that of the generator since the charging current is so 
great relative to the increased inductive ohms through which 
it passes as to cause the latter to absorb all the generator pres- 
sure. Compare the actual curve for resonance. (See Dia- 
gram F.) 

In this case we have We maximum pressure on line shown 
by diagram n = 2.93 times generator volts. 


DISCUSSION OF FORMULA. 
The complete formula giving the current at any instant in a 
circuit containing electromotive force (V), resist (R), inductance 
(L), and capacity (C) is as follows: 


E 


: ayes R 
y+ (1-5, 


for a sine electromotive force. 

The formula shows that with perfect resonance the cyrrent 
and the resistance volts are in exact accord with the generator 
pressure and that the L and C pressure are exactly equal and 
opposite. 

The formula gives the current for any condition; the pressure 
over any one or more portions of the circuit can be obtained by 
deriving the pressure on each R, L, or C as the case may be 
from the simple formulas, 


a al Ee 5‘ ies 1 
4 pany sin pt. 4 = SE sin ( pt - ee, (+3), 
combining these if necessary by the usual geometrical or trigo- 


nometrical process. The numerical values of the pressure may 
be obtained by multiplying the various factors R, L, C, 


RG. Ci Re ape Re 
Ne op Z| eas 5 


etc., by the current strength. 

The curve for any condition of partial resonance may be 
found from the above formula or for any of the simple cases 
where R = 0, L = 0, or C = 0 or combinations of these.. 


350 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


Analysis of Data. This test is good and important. 

In Diagram F, the pressure across the condenser, that 
is, between line and ground, and also across the inductance 
and resistance in series both included principally in the trans- 
former (2) are shown. The observed values should follow the 
latter curve and do quite closely when such values of R, L, and 
C are taken as to give the same,maximum for calculated and 
observed values. The value of R (1880 ohms), L (31.25 henrys), 
and C (1 microfarad), are taken to give the maximum observed 
pressure rise as if on condenser, using the known capacity of 
the line and the frequency and hence are only roughly approxi- 
mate. The resistance K is assumed to represent all the energy 
losses in the circuit. 

It will be noted that the observed points below resonance 
speed are considerably higher than the calculated resistance 
and inductance 4/ R?+ p? L*? curve. This probably results from 
the variable inductance in the iron. The resonance was ob- 
tained by a gradually increasing speed. When a point is reached 
where the inductance of an idle transformer is such as to give 
a resonance the pressure and current and induction in the iron 
increase which reduced the value of the permeability of the iron 
and the inductance so that a higher speed is necessary to pro- 
duce fesonance. That is, the maximum value is postponed 
so to speak by the increase of induction and decrease of per- 
meability in the iron. 

Furthermore, it must be noticed that the maximum rise of 
potential, even with perfect speed adjustment, is limited by the 
loss in the iron included in the KR factor. To make this more 
definite, assume the idle transformer excited to full induction 
by a generator without electrostatic capacity. It is evident 
that then by adding just the right amount of capacity to pro- 
duce resonance the generator pressure may be considerably low- 
ered and the pressure in the transformer and ‘the induction 
in the iron remain unchanged. The reduction can be made 
only in that ratio which the true watts of the current through 
the transformer bear to the apparent watts. In the case where 
this ratio is three as in the above test the power-factor of the 
leakage watts is approximately one-third and the magnetizing 
volt-amperes are \/ 8 = 2.8 times the true watts. In this 
test the induction in the iron was probably about normal, 
being half pressure and half frequency. The observed results 
thus seem very Biba 5 


1905.] THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 351 


Under conditions in which the pressures and inductions 
would run far above normal some higher ratio of resonance 
‘increase of pressure might be obtained as the power-factor of 
the magnetizing current in such cases would be much smaller. 
In this case, however, the change of permeability will vary 
over a very wide range requiring a constant adjustment of speed. 

In conditions where there is a choke-coil with an open mag- 
metic circuit or in transformers built for high inductive drops 
there is no such moderate limit for resonance pressures as in 
these cases the losses in the choke-coil are comparatively small. 
Fortunately in these cases too the inductances are too small 
to give often the conditions of resonance. They are not so 
small, however, especially in the case of transformers for large 
leakage that precaution can be omitted. In large plants cases 
do exist where resonance with installed apparatus is a pos- 
sibility. For certain accidents, as blowing of single-pole 
breakers or fuses or wires burned off by grounds may cause 
such electrical connections as to render resonance certain if 
the constant of L and C happen to be right. The resonating 
circuits in such cases are quite obvious and the necessary con- 
ditions have already been discussed. 

Resonance at the frequency of static discharges except of a 
comparatively mild and transient type is unlikely, as per- 
sistent generating sources hardly exist so that the repetition 
of impulses necessary to build up resonance is lacking. 


VI. MEASUREMENT OF LOSS INTO THE ATMOSPHERE AND OVER 
INSULATIONS OF Two-WiRE LINE oF THE MissouRi RIVER 
PowER COMPANY BETWEEN CANYON FERRY AND ButTTtE— 
62.5 MILEs. 


Two 950-kw. transformers having the primary and secondary 
windings each in series were used to charge the two line wires 
and the middle point was grounded in the high-pressure as 
shown in diagram o. Pressure’ was measured by a voltmeter 
in the’ low-pressure and the high-pressure calculated from the 


ee making allowance for the building up 
of pressure by leading current through the inductance of the 
transformer. The cycles were nearly constant at 60. 
Connections according to Diagram o. 
(See Table No. XXII.) 


transformer ratio 


352 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 19 


For plot of results see Diagram P. 

Analysis of Data. A wattmeter constructed on the principle 
of the quadrant electrometer was used for these measurements. 

This type of instrument has the great advantage of being 
free from error of lowering voltmeter transformers or multiply- 
ing resistances. For a description of this instrument see paper 
by Miles Walker, Transactions, A.I.E, E., vol. XIX., p. 1035. 


DIAGRAM o. 


a. Coil and condenser of static interrupter. b. Ground connection on high tension system. 
c, Commutator to reverse direction of swing of needle. 


WATTMETER 


Corrections of Wattmeter. These are; temperature of sus- 
pension fibre, the presence of charged bodies in the neighbor- 
hood, adjustment for mechanical return of needle to zero and 
for the dissymmetry of needle and quadrants causing a de- 
flection due to the presence of pressure on quadrants when no 
energy is being measured. All but the first of these errors are 
corrected by taking the average of readings in opposite direc- 
tions and a commutator was provided with the wattmeter for 


1905.] THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. 353 


this purpose. This correction is eliminated by keeping the 
wattmeter approximately at the temperature of calibration. 

The two curves of observed losses (see Diagram P) are. very 
much alike except for the point 5 on the second curve; this loss 
seems larger than would be expected from the other curve. 
This is very likely accounted for by the fact that in the first. 
curve the line had been kept charged for hours before the test, 
while in the second the line was not so treated and the in- 
sulators may not have been wholly dry when this reading 
was taken. As considerable time elapsed between readings,. 
this leakage loss had very likely reached a normal steady 
value by the next or the next but one reading. 


TABLE NO. XXII. 


i 


; tpn , Loss over insulators 
Voltage between lines. Total loss. Loss in line resistance. and into air. 


Weather wet but line alive at 40 000 volts for some hours before test. 


40 000 2 864 - 1644 1 220 
50 200 8 120 2595 5 525 
53 500 8 892 : 2940 5 950 
61 400 14 160 3830 * 10 330 
Line not alive more than a few minutes before test; weather fairly clear. * 
39 600 4544 1600 2840 
50 600 7 216 2550 4 666 
56 000 8 824 3210 5 610 
62 000 13 710 3950 9 760 


eee ee 


Both curves would be very well represented by a straight 
line starting at about 40 000 volts and having a tangent about 
on or they may be better represented by a rapidly rising 
curved line. This represents a loss on two wires of about 140 
watts per mile at 62 000 volts. 

On a 150-mile three-phase line of similar dimensions the loss 
might be estimated for 75 000 volts as 600 x 150 = 90 000 = 90 
kw., though such estimation may be very misleading and is of 
little value. However, it seems probable that before the true 
loss reaches a value that will menace the efficiency of the plant 
at least 80000 volts will be reached. 


354 THOMAS: RISE OF POTENTIAL. [June 1) 


The loss seems slightly larger on a wet day but the difference 
is small. 

These two curves can be relied upon to give a trustworthy 
measure of the approximate line wire loss at 50 000 to 60 000 
volts on a full-sized plant under normal operating conditions, 
but only indicate roughly the form of the curve. 

It appears to the writer highly desirable that further tests 
of the same general character to those recorded in the paper 
should be made under as many different commercial conditions 
as possible. 


nN 


1905.] DISCUSSIONSAI ASHEVILLE. 35 


Discussion on, ‘‘ HiGH Power SurGEs IN ELectric Distri- 
BUTION SYSTEMS OF GREAT MAGNITUDE’’, AND ‘“ AN 
EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF THE RISE OF POTENTIAL 
ON COMMERCIAL TRANSMISSION LinES, Due TO SraTIC 
DisTURBANCES SUCH AS SWITCHING, GROUNDING, ETCc.”’ 


H.G. Stott: In opening the discussion on the two important 
papers presented this morning, I think very little can be added 
to either of them, except to outline what has been done in the 
endeavor to prevent a repetition of this very disastrous rise of 
potential which, besides putting one generator out of commission 
for a week or two, destroyed the insulation on, I think, 13 
cables. Each of these cables was punctured in one, two, or three 
places, apparently without relation to their distance from the 
power-house. Singularly enough no damage whatever was done 
in the sub-stations. After that occurrence the Interborough 
Company took up the matter with both Mr. Steinmetz and Mr. 
Thomas, who aided us in proposing different methods for pre- 
venting such a rise, and in the general investigation of the whole 
subject. 

In the first place it has been invariably noticed that the static 
ground detectors indicate the presence of a ground on one 
phase before a short circuit occurs in the feeder. The indication 
might come from 5 to 25 min. before the short circuit occurs. In 
this case the indication was given several minutes before the 
short circuit took place, as shown by the fact that the sub- 
stations telephoned, to the main. power-house that they had 
static display on insulators, oil-switches, etc. From this it seems 
that if the cable which had the ground in it could be isolated and 
cut out of service before the current had burned the insulation 
on.the neighboring phases no damage would be done. With 
something like 35 feeders it is a very tedious process to isolate a 
feeder having a ground, as it would not be possible to test all 
feeders in less than 45 min., because an oil-switch would have 
to be opened at each end of each feeder; meantime the sub- 
station would have to be communicated with and arrangements 
made to carry the load on other feeders. If the feeder in 
question happens to be the last one to be tested it might be 45 
min. before it would be reached; chance might determine that 
it be the first one tested, but this kind of good luck is rare. 

If the feeder in trouble were isolated what would happen to 
the lead sheaths on the surrounding cables in the manhole? If 
the short circuit occurred in a feeder would the feeder not be 
carrying more current through the lead sheaths than they would 
safely stand? and would the short circuit burn places through 
these lead sheaths, especially in the manholes where there is 
more or less ground on the cable hangers? In order to get 


356 HIGH POWER SURGES. [June 19> 


around that we have put in a resistance of large carrying 
capacity, one with a resistance of 6 ohms, and a rated capacity 
of 1 000 amperes for 2 minutes. The reason for this is, of 
course, the Y voltage is approximately 6 300 and sufficient cur-, 
rent must pass through that ground resistance, and through 
the ground which might occur at any future time, to make 
certain of opening the oil-switch on an overload. That in itself 
will evidently discriminate and pick out the bad feeder im- 
mediately, and ought to do so at both ends simply by the 
use of plain overload relays on each end of each feeder. This 
system is now installed, Putting the system into service has 
been delayed by the fact that two power-houses are operating 
in multiple, and grounding one set of generators without the. 
other has been purposely avoided. In future it is expected 
that any cable which grounds will be cut out of service auto-: 
matically long before it can do any damage. ' 

Another point which was brought out very strongly by Mr. 
Steinmetz was that we ought to guard in every way possible 
against the open arc. This is well taken care of in an oil-switch, 
as more than three and one-half years experience under all con- 
ditions of operating have failed to shake confidence in- the 
ability of the oil-switch to perform its functions satisfactorily 
4inder the most severe operating conditions. 

In the ducts the cables are enclosed so that a flaring’are is 
impossible. We have never seen any indication of a rise of 
potential from a fault which happened in the duct. The only 
case where we have had a rise of potential—there have been 
several—has been where the arc was free to play in the air, so 
that the cables in the manholes were the weak point. 

» After a great deal of thought, it was decided to surround 
these cables with an iron sheet which would probably be heavy 
enough to withstand the short circuit incurred until the oil- 
switch opened, and so prevent a flaring arc. These cables were 
already covered with two layers of asbestos tape wrapped spirally 
in opposite directions, and then wrapped withsteel tape. Covered 
as they now are with an iron sheath, every cable is completely 
enclosed, Since covering these cables—they have been covered 
now for some time—short circuits have occurred, but there have 
been no indications of a rise of potential in the manholes where 
they are covered. 

There is another advantage to be gained by the ground- 
ing of the neutral, which is this: the Y points of the gene- 
rators probably have zero potential relatively to the earth, in 
fact tests show that there is no perceptible difference of potential 
whatsoever. That of course is due to the effect of the balanced 
system, free from disturbances at the time. What the result 
might be during short circuits is of course difficult to foretell, 
but by grounding the neutral the sudden change of potential 
from zero at the neutral to zero on one of the phases is 
prevented. It seems to me the effect of sweeping a charging 


1905.] DISCUSSION" AT ASHEVILLE. 35, 


Gy 
Ni 


current, of something like 160 amperes, across the generator 
windings (that is to have a capacity current traveling through 
inductance), must result ina large rise of potential in the 
generator windings. On making the ground connection, thé 
charge will sweep backwards and forwards across the gene- 
rator windings from the zero point to the phase which is 
being grounded. That in itself will, I believe, cause a very 
serious rise of potential on the generator. 

P.N. Nunn: The papers by Mr. Steinmetz and by Mr. Thomas 
apply to the weakest spot in the weakest ‘branch of electrical 
work. The question is frequently asked by investors and busi- 
ness men, how far is it really practicable to transmit power 
electrically? They are usually referred to what is being done in 
Canada, in Washington, in California, andin Mexico. But when 
it is asked whether more or less trouble is not being experienced 
in the operation of the plants the electrical engineer has no clear 
and conclusive answer. 

The time was when it required a machine shop to operate a 
few motors, and an expert winder to operate generators. To-day 
the mechanical apparatus involved in the application of electrical 
power has been perfected to a greater degree of continuity of 
-service and to a lesser cost of maintenance than that of steam 
or water-power. The transmission has reached no such per- 
fectness. A few years ago the limiting factor was the trans- 
former; nowadays just as reliable transformers are built for 
60 000 and 80 000 as for 5 000 or 10000 volts. Later the question 
became how to construct the insulator, and 75 cents each seemed 
‘a large price. To-day we cheerfully pay $3.00 or $4.00 for an 
insulator which is reliable for 60 000 volts, perhaps for 80 000 or 
100 000 volts, yet the history of daily transmission operation 
impresses one with a feeling of uncertainty. 

The simple pole line carrying three or six wires, has given 
place to the more complex transmission system with trunk 
lines in parallel or in triangle and with branches from many 
points in all directions. A generating system of equal com- 
plexity is equipped with apparatus whereby each generator, 
when in trouble, may be automatically cut off without serious 
disturbance to the remainder of the system. As yet, however, 
there is no means whereby a section of a long high-pressure 
transmission may be cut out without danger of interrupting 
the whole system. 

It is not a question of lightning. If lightning puts a plant 
out of service, there is some dignity about that; it is an “Act of 
God’, But when an operator in the usual course of operating 
attempts to cut out a defective section of line, and a moment 
later finds the entire system shut down, he feels that there must 
bea glaring defect: both in his science and in his application of it 
to the problems of transmission. 

To quote a sentence from Mr. Thomas’ paper, ‘Our knowledge 
cf the phenomena of static disturbances in ‘commercial circuits 


358” HIGH POWER SURGES. [June 19 


is in a much confused and comparatively undigested form”. 
Although it seems that we know much of the theory involved, 
yet this statement appears true. One reason for this may lie in 
the extreme difficulty of testing the theory and working out the 
values of its factors upon practical transmissions. 100-mile, 
high-pressure lines cannot be taken into the laboratory and 
treated with the exactness and refinement of laboratory 
methods, nor can research work bear the expense of building 
long lines for experimental purposes. No sooner is a commercial 
line completed than it is put into service, frequently without 
allowing even a few days for test. Therefore opportunities to 
conduct experiments so prolonged and unbroken and under such 
constant conditions as those reported by Mr. Thomas are ex- 
tremely rare. 

The expression “‘ without interruption ’’ in Mr. Thomas’ paper 
may be misleading. Itis true that the purpose at first was to 
attempt only suchexperiments as could be conducted without in- 
terrupting or crippling the system, with the result that Mr. 
Olmsted became so engrossed in the theme that his demands 
upon both customers and operators became broader and 
broader, to the serious embarrassment of operating the plant. 

To make this discussion the more complete some further 
tribute should be paid to the memory of Mr. F. D. Olmsted, 
a Member of the InstituTE, who died in September, 1903. 
As stated in the paper, the greater part of the experiments 
were conducted on the lines of the Telluride Power Company. 
Mr. Olmsted had immediate charge of these experiments; and 
to his personal efforts and coéperation throughout were chiefly 
due the rare opportunities for making the tests and the com- 
pleteness and accuracy of the results secured. ; 

S. M. Kintner: Mr. Steinmetz has given an exceedingly 
plausible theory, if nothing else, and such experience as I have had 
with lines of this character seems to bear out that theory. I 
have made certain laboratory tests, which, as Mr. Nunn aptly 
states, are exceedingly limited in regard to any conclusions of 
value that can be drawn therefrom, but which also seemed to 
verify this same conclusion. I have succeeded to a limited degree 
in producing an open-air oscillating arc, and in getting excessive 
voltages therefrom. In only one case have I noticed this in prac- 
tice on an actual transmission line, and there the data were not 
sufficiently accurate to warrant accurate conclusions. I was 
present on only one occasion when these phenomena occurred, 
although I was told by the operators in the station at the time 
that they had occurred in exactly the same manner on other occas- 
ions. The phenomena occurred in somewhat this order: a ground 
was indicated first of all on the ground-detectors; the telephone 
lines paralleling the circuit became noisy; and it was a question 
of only a few moments when the other disturbance came on, and a 
voltage much greater than normal, probably several times 
greater occurred, flashing over the terminal of the circuit as it 
entered the power-house. The arc that jumped across the open 


1905, ] DISCUSSION. AT. ASHEVILLE. 359 


air-space must have had a voltage of two or three times normal 
value. The question of the steepness of the incoming wave, as 
Mr. Steinmetz has pointed out—his reduction of this toa certain 
wave-front steepness, if we may call it such, of a higher fre- 
quency circuit—is particularly interesting, and I have found it 
convenient to employ this same idea of looking at these phe- 
nomena though I had not formerly reduced it to a mathematical 
expression. 

I have made some tests along this line in connection with 
choke-coils for determining their reflective power, etc., in which 
an attempt was made to produce the same wave-front steepness 
in each test. This has been a very interesting work, and a 
very difficult one on which to get any accurate data. The 
measuring implements for such work are as yet exceedingly 
crude, and it requires the averages of a great many tests to get 
any thing like consistent data. 

F. A C. PErRrinE: When hearing these two papers the first 
thought was that Mr. Thomas had given,data which could be 
used directly in designing plants, while Mr. Steinmetz had given 
the explanation of circumstances that may arise; but which can - 
not be guarded against. In this thought the obvious remedy 
which Mr. Stott has described to us was missed; namely, that 
Mr. Steinmetz’s paper points out that anything that can 
be done to suppress the third frequency of the train-wave will 
tend to prevent the occurrence, and anything that can be done to 
prevent an open-air arc on the system will reduce the train- 
wave to such frequency and amount that its effect cannot be 
destructive. 

Though, of course, the method that Mr. Stott has proposed of 
making cables always enclosed so that no open arcs of high 
enough frequency can occur to produce destructive effects, may 
be applied to certain systems, #t may not be applied to others. 
One of the first and most serious occurrences of this nature to 
which my attention has been called happened in California, 
where a destructive arc occurred at the time when an oil-switch 
under short circuit was opened and blown to pieces by the arc, 
the oil scattering over the station. At that time the surge 
is said to have produced inductive currents in the iron structure 
of the power-house, so that one could see flashes all over the roof. 
There has been another occurrence in Hartford, experiments 
I think, performed under Mr. Steinmetz’s instructions with 
lightning-arresters, where they attempted to perform a series of 
experiments on lightning-arresters attached to an idle line paral- 
leling another carrying a current for lighting a theatre, without 
interfering with* the service, but when the lightning-arrest*rs 
acted the lights in the theatre went out and people in Hartford 
were left without light. That is to say the surge was so intense, 
that it opened the circuit-breakers on the parallel line, without 
destroying the insulation of the parallel line. 

Mr. Steinmetz has intimated that lightning-arresters may stop 
the generating current very quickly. This difficulty is, liable-to 


360 ¢ HIGH: POWER SURGES. unets 


be encountered, because stopping the generating current 
which would follow a lightning discharge, with great rapidity, 
might cause an exceedingly steep wave which might cause this 
result. 

In Mr. Steinmetz’s paper there is an observation that I think 
leads to a possible misunderstanding. He writes of the third 
frequency of the train wave as being independent of the line 
constants. He obviously does not mean this. The train wave 
must have a frequency that is largely dependent upon the con- 
stants of the circuits, but which is principally dependent upon 
the rate of interruption of the short-circuit current. In con- 
sequence it is not susceptible of calculation simply from the con- 
stants of the circuit, but also one must assume some rate of inter- 
ruption of the short-circuit current in order to assume the steep- 
ness of the interrupted wave, in order to obtain the frequency of 
the train wave. The effect is exactly similar to the method of 
producing high rate of alternation by ‘interrupting a circuit of 
known capacity and self-induction by means of a magnetic 
blow-out. 

We are at this time greatly indebted to the conditions pre- 
vailing on the Manhattan Railway circuit which were so simple 
as to admit of calculation, but more especially to the care with 
which all the conditions were observed by Mr. Stott’s assistants. 
The calculations given by Mr. Steinmetz are not open to ob- 
jection if one allows his assumptions as to frequencies. The two 
ends of the calculations are tied together, and I do not think 
it can be said that this is in consequence of theoretical reasoning 
only. There are definite results here. 

Finally, Mr. Steinmetz has pointed out the importance of the 
effect of the static discharge. There is no such thing as harmless 
static discharge. For a number of years engineers have been 
‘observing static effects. People say, ‘That is nothing but static 
discharge’. But there never has been a static discharge that did 
not represent defective insulation and a leak. The result of 
the particular instance considered by Mr. Steinmetz shows how 
serious may be the consequences following static discharges; 
which invariably can be prevented by making insulation perfect. 
Such discharges invariably indicate defective insulation. 

Mr. Thomas’s paper shows the result of switching, and what 
may be considered as the worst conditions under switching. In 
consequence in the paper there is a very clear plan on the basis 
of whicha remedy whichcan be definitely provided for the matters 
that are to occur every day. They do not represent, however, the 
worst conditions that may occur on identically the same lines; for 
example, the circuits that were made and broken under the 
conditions described in Mr. Steinmetz’s paper. 

H. W. Fisoer: About: 12 or 15 years ago I discovered 
the dangerous. effects produced by breaking the capacity 
current going to cables. For several years I thought that 
large disruptive rises in voltage were only produced in power- 
houses where considerable cable was employed; but recently a 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. » 361 


rise of voltage of 6 to 8 times the normal was produced in a 
piece of cable about 20 ft. long. In this case the insulation 
was broken down but the lead was not punctured, showing that 
it is possible to get a very abnormal rise of voltage without a 
direct arc in air. 

Presipent Lies: In connection with these papers I should 

like to say a further word ona matter that has been 
referred to by one of the speakers, and that is the extent to which 
the human element enters into the disturbances that are likely 
to take place on large transmitting and distributing systems: In 
the transmitting and distributing system of the New York 
Edison Company, I believe ten times as many disturbances take 
place due to mistakes and failures on the part of the operators 
as to any other cause. One of the serious problems that have 
to be contended with is to reduce the number of possible mis- 
takes from this cause. In many of the plants of this company 
it is possible to reduce the number of probable mistakes by 
interlocking switching gear, and such a method of throwing 
switches in and out as would make it necessary to follow a pre- 
conceived method of procedure, thereby eliminating mistakes 
in the sequence of operation. But this is not always practic- 
able. 
Another important element that should be referred to is 
the difficulty of starting up large systems when once shut 
down. . That difficulty is, of course, less with a railway system 
but it is great with a large lighting system; and the proper 
precautions and method of procedure which should be fol- 
lowed in case of a general shutdown of an extensive sys- 
tem with 20 or 30 sub-stations, with synchronous converter 
equipments and storage-batteries is a matter of very serious 
importance. These are systems which, unlike that of the 
Telluride Company, it is not possible to play with. 

The Edison Company has desired to make tests on a large 
scale of the starting of such a system from a complete shut- 
down; not temporarily to deprive the whole city of New York 
of electric light and power but to undertake to start up a gene- 
rator with converters connected. with it, and also with their 
load. This was done satisfactorily on a small scale recently,. 
by putting New York in connection with Brooklyn and starting 
up ‘“‘ Dreamland ”’, at Coney Island, from one of the New York 
stations; but unfortunately it was on a limited scale. We 
should like to establish the possibility of doing this on a larger 
scale, but the requirement of absolute continuity of service 
does not permit.an opportunity of making such a test. 

SAMUEL SHELDON: I should like some information from Mr. 
Steinmetz or Mr. Thomas. As I understand Mr. Steinmetz, 
the excessive rise of potential upon opening the circuit 1s due to 
the high natural frequency of the circuit. This high frequency 
makes the inductance and resistance different from what they 
would be at ordinary frequencies, and also brings into effect the 
distributed character of the capacity. The obtaining of this 


362 HIG# POWER SURGES. [June 19 


high frequency is dependent upon all of these quantities—the in- 
ductance, the capacity, and the resistance. Is it not a fact that 
upon opening a circuit the resistance becomes the determining 
factor, and that the resistance of the arc, varying as it must 
because of air current fluctuations and of its temperature, is the 
determining factor that gives rise to these high frequencies? 

Cuas. P. StEiINMETZ: My conclusion is that the origin of the 
disturbance and of the breakdown was due to the high- 
frequency oscillation of the traveling wave. But the high vol- 
tage was due to the oscillating short-circuit of the cable caused 
by the traveling wave, and was not an effect of distributed cap- 
acity, but due to an oscillation of massed capacity (that of the 
cable system, which has very little inductance) and massed induc- 
tance of the generating system. In this latter oscillation, the fre- 
quency was low and the destructiveness great, but it would 
never have started if there had not been a very high-frequency 
traveling wave preceding it. 

P. H. Tuomas: In spite of the unusually full detail available 
in this case, it is impossible to establish any particular theory 
of the phenomena as the correct theory. As is almost univer- 
sal in such cases, it is necessary to consider all possible theories 
and to accept provisionally that which seems most reasonable 
and most nearly fits the observed facts. 

One cannot consider that the theory put forward in this paper, 
involving a self-interrupting arc, to be demonstrated to be a 
correct theory of what took place. This explanation may or 
may not be the true one. Personally, it has always been very 
difficult for me to conceive of a series of rapid self-interruptions 
of a very severe arc associated with an extreme rise of poten- 
tial at the point of interruption, such as assumed in the paper. 
On the other hand, it is a fact that very often things that are 
not easily understood may, nevertheless, be true. ; 

The extremely rapid heatin, and cooling of the gas which is 
taken to have a more or less steady condition of interruption, 
together with the fact that such a large majority of severe arcs 
occur without noticeable rise of potential, make it seem probable 
that in those cases, such as the present instance, in which a rise 

.of potential is actually observed there is some other condition in 
addition to the presence of the arc, which is really the essential 
condition causing the extraordinary voltage. 

In a considerable number of cases within my knowledge, pre- 
arranged for the opening of a short-circuit, apparatus for 
measuring instantaneous voltages has shown no sensible rise 
of potential. The opening of the charging circuit to an open- 
circuited line is another matter. 

A careful examination of the details of the breakdown at 
the Manhattan Railway Co.’s power-house has suggested to 
me the possibility of another explanation of the phenomena 
which differs from that p.oposed in the paper and does ‘not 
involve a self-interrupting arc, oe ; 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT. ASHEVILLE. 363 


Consider the outline of circuits shown in Fig. 1 in which 
a number of generators in parallel feed three-phase bus-bars 
which in turn, feed three-phase feeders, each feeder supplying 
a group of step-down transformers connected with synchronous 
converter. Assume a ground to occur on one leg of one feeder 
as indicated at the point a; the full charging current of the 
system then flows from wire to earth at this point. This, cur- 
rent is between 100 and 200 amperes. This will produce a 
certain amount of unbalancing of potential together with a low 
static noise at the cable heads, which is probably not sufficient, 


CONCRATORS 


i 
‘ 


430434 
Y¥3ad434 


J 


f 


SYNCHRONOUS 
CONVERTER 


Ince 10 


however, to account for the hissing observed in the sub-stations 
immediately before the breakdown. Suppose, again, that this 
charging current ultimately burns off the feeder at the point a, as 
shown, and that the charging current to earth continues on the 
end of the cable toward the converter, but drops out at the other 
side of the open circuit. The charging current is now passing 
from ground to the short end of the cable through the step- 
down transformers to the capacity of the rest of the system, 
and the leading current passing through the inductance of the 


364 HIGH POWER SURGES. {June 19 


transformers, which are built with a large magnetic leakage for 
the purpose of automatic regulation in the synchronous con- 
verters, with the result, provided the frequency be right, that 
resonance must occur tending to -build up a high voltage 
between line and ground and across the transformers. <A calcu- 
lation of the capacity of the high-tension system and the induc- 
tance of the transformers indicates that the frequency of the 
system is not far from that required for perfect resonance. The 
calculations do not show, however, that the normal frequency is 
‘‘ the exact frequency for resonance ’’. The electromotive force 
supporting the resonance must come in this case from the rotary 
transformer. 

If the frequency be assumed to be somewhere near but not 
quite that of perfect resonance, there must be a complete 
building up of voltage to a certain maximum, and then there 
will be a decrease of the electromotive force as it gets 
out of step with the resonating circuit, down to normal again;, 
then later a repetition of the rise of potential, and so on 
indefinitely. If the rise of potential is assumed to be insuffi- 
cient to break down the insulation at any point, the hissing 
noise observed in the sub-stations can easily be accounted for; 
and then if some slight change in conditions of load or speed is 
assumed to cause a higher resonance rise so that a breakdown 
occurs, then there occurs a short circuit across the generator, 
probably on one of the other feeders, or possibly on one of the 
static dischargers, which may open the circuit-breakers on some 
feeder other than the one originally causing the trouble. In this 
case the short-circuit is eliminated and resonance will again 
start, causing another breakdown, and the opening of another 
circuit-breaker, and so on-until the entire plant is shut down. 
According to this view of the phenomena that may occur the 
large number of breakdowns are accounted for by the permanent 
condition of resonance, which causes breakdowns and _ short 
circuits, the short cireuits being immediately cut out by circuit- 
breakers. Naturally, the damage is finally stopped by the 
shutting down of the plant. 

It should be noted here that it would be likely for the cable 
that was originally grounded to remain in circuit, since it was 
grounded and not short-circuited. On the subsequent start- 
ing up of the plant this cable would operate properly for a 
time until some circumstance causes the ground to be re- 
established, in which case a second resonance condition would be 
established, as in the first case, causing other breakdowns. <A 
second breakdown actually followed a night after the original 
breakdown, and, subsequently, a cable was found with one wire 
open-circuited, but without short-circuit between conductors as 
has been assumed above. 

Mr. Stott has stated that in. many cases cables that have 
been grounded and seriously burned have subsequently failed to 
break down on test until as high as 20 000 volts between con- 
ductor and ground has been reached. This statement should 


1905.) DISGUSSTONSALVASH EV LELE. ; 365 


be taken in connection with the assumption above that it was 
feasible to operate with one leg open-circuited and a puncture 
to ground. In this connection, it is important to notice that 
the synchronous converter at the-end of the first injured cable 
will presumably keep in step in view of the fact that one phase 
remains intact, even after the opening of one leg at the point.a. 
As a natural result, the open end of the conductor on the in- 
jured cable on the side toward the generator will not receive 
the potential to ground that is impressed upon the rest of the 
system, by an amount equal to the generator voltage. 

A careful detailed study of the different arcs and punctures 
indicated that the results could all be readily explained by the 
presence in the circuit of abrupt changes of potential of not over 
40 000 to 60 000 volts. In a number of cases considerable air- 
spaces apparently were jumped, but it seemed always possible 
that the original exciting spark causing the arcs started by a dis- 
charge over the surface of the insulation, and that the same sub- 
sequent arc so transferred itself to some other point as to give 
the appearance of having jumped a considerable distance. Ac- 
cording to the above theory ‘the breakdown in the cable at the 
street was the last rather than the first of a long series, as 
assumed in Mr. Steinmetz’ theory.” This subject is of sufficient 
interest and importance to warrant a much fuller discussion of 
the phenomena, but the above outline of an alternative theory 
is all for which space will be taken here. 

A similar occurrence of less magnitude, in Berlin, has been de- 
scribed in an electrical magazine. Investigation and discussion of 
the accident showed conclusively that a cable system was made 
to resonate through the inductance of a small step-down transfor- 
mer on account of the opening of one leg of its feeder. In general 
wherever it is possible for one leg of a circuit, supplying apparatus 
containing inductance, to become opened without the complete 
cutting off of the apparatus, there is a possibility of resonance, 
if the system has a considerable capacitygas will usually Dest 
case with underground systems. This is a real danger, though 
;t will not often be met with because only occasionally will the 
constants of the circuit be such as to cause resonance with the 
normal frequency of the generator. 

Every engineer operating a plant should make calculations to 
determine whether any of the circuits contain the proper amount 
of inductance and capacity to resonate at normal generator fre- 
quency in case an accident should occur that might produce the 
necessary electrical connections. Usually it is easy to avoid 
the danger. ; 

Cuas. P. STEINMETZ: To refer to the last question first: I 
have also been of the opinion that fuses are not permissible in 
a very high-voltage transmission system. _ However, in the last 
years we have made a number of tests with fuses in cutting off 
branch-lines of moderate power in large, high-capacity and high- 
voltage systems, and found that with certain types of fuses the 
oscillograph showed practically no voltage rise; that is, these 


366 HIGH POWER SURGES. [June 19 


fuses apparently did not cause instantaneous rupture, so that 
for branches of systems, (not the main line), that carry only a 
moderate amount of power, and for which, therefore, this 
elaborate and expensive system of control by automatic oil- 
switches, etc., is rather undesirable, the question of fuses 
may be reconsidered. I cannot yet.say that I should recom- 
mend it broadly, but it may be taken into consideration in 
special cases. 

In regard to Mr. Thomas’s paper, I believe the statements 
made by Mr. Thomas on page 320 are important general dis- 
cussion of the phenomena resulting from what I call wave-trains, 
or traveling waves, and of which in my paper, I endeavored to 
give the general outline of the theoretical equations; that is, 
oscillations resulting froma disturbance in a system of distributed 

capacity and inductance. I have not had time carefully to digest. 
' Mr. Thomas’s paper, but it seems to me from the data of tests 
given therein that the phenomena observed by him were not so 
much the phenomena of a traveling wave as the phenomena 
of a surge of the system of fundamental frequency. The 
observed distribution of potential along the circuit, rising from 
the end where the switching takes place, towards the end where 
the circuit is open and the wave reflects, is the distribution of 
potential on a circuit resulting from a sudden change of circuit. 
condition. This consists essentially of the fundamental wave 
but it is not the same as the traveling wave to which 
I have referred above. This would aiso account for the ob- 
servations on branch lines, that the triple and quadruple 
voltage that a traveling wave should give-on a branch line 
was not observed by Mr. Thomas, but that the branch line 
is merely a localized capacity oscillating together with the 
rest of the system. I had occasion to carry out investi- 
gations of this character a few years ago on a transmission 
system at Kalamazoo; but there I was able to double back 
a number of lines “y as to get a considerable capacity, and 
also to choose the load, and to experiment with a non-in- 
ductive load, and with a load of very high self inductance; that is,. 
a load of very low power-factor, and with a combination of both. 
I got rises of potential, with an impressed electromotive force of 
30 000 volts, showing peaks of 100 000 to 118 000 volts. In these 
experiments I got a’surge of the fundamental frequency of the 
system. I believe that the observations recorded’ in Mr. 
Thomas’s paper are mostly of the same character. 

A number of causes of such disturbances are mentioned on 
page 322, but what I consider the most important cause; that is, 
the oscillating or self-rupturing arc, is not given, possibly because 
Mr. Thomas is not quite satisfied with the existence of such 
phenomenon. 

There is, however, no doubt that an alternating arc may be 
self-rupturing; that is, blow itself out with extreme suddenness. 
_ Such a self-rupturing arc becomes an oscillating arc if the 

supply voltage of the circuit is greater than the striking volt- 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 367 


age of the gap between the arc terminals; that is, after the 
rupture of the arc, the supply voltage, by striking across the 
gap, restarts the arc; it again ruptures itself, to be restarted, 
and so on. As seen, the oscillating arc is a natural conse- 
quence of the,self-ruptuting arc. . 

This phenomenon of the self-rupturing arc was first brought to 
the attention of engineers a number of years ago by Mr. 
A. J. Wurts, in his paper on non-arcing metals. The discovery of 
the self-rupturing alternating arc announced in this paper has 
not made the impression it deserves, possibly because it was 
coupled with the announcement of a new form of lightning- 
arrester, and also because the conditions under which the phe- 
nomenon occurred were not completely known. Asa result there- 
of, when repeating the experiments myself it frequently did not 
succeed. For instance, in starting an alternating arc between 
non-arcing metals, with a non-inductive resistance in series to 
limit the current, the arc is not self-rupturing, but is maintained. 

This feature of self-rupturing arc is, however, now exten- 
sively used in lightning-arresters, and is practically the only 
known method of producing oscillating currents of very high 
frequencies. It occurs not only with the non-arcing metals, but 
more or less with all metals, and even with electrolytic con- 
ductors, and is, I believe, the explanation of the action of the 
electrolytic, or Wehmelt, interrupter. 

The conditions most favorable for the production of an oscil- 
lating arc are that the flow of current the instant after 
the arc strikes is practically unlimited, and that after the strik- 
ing of the arc the voltage drops practically to zero. and 
remains low for a finite, even if extremely short, time after the 
rupture of the arc. The first condition is fulfilled by a con- 
denser or equivalent device in shunt to the arc; the latter by an 
inductance in series with the arc and the condenser. When the 
arc strikes, a larger rush of current, (the discharge current of the 
condenser) passes, and since, due to the series inductance, the 
supply current cannot instantly rise, the voltage drops. At the 
moment of rupture of the arc, the supply current still continues 
to flow into the condenser, and the voltage across the arc-gap 
therefore remains low, rising gradually while the condenser is 
being charged. If the supply voltage of the system is greater 
than the striking voltage of the gap, as soon as the latter voltage 
is reached, by the jumping of an electrostatic spark, the arc 1s re- 
started, and ruptures itself by the explosive effect of the sudden 
heating due to the condenser discharge, etc., and so the arc 
becomes oscillating. As seen, then, by reducing the arc-gap, the 
striking voltage, and thereby the time required for the condenser 
to be raised to the striking voltage, 1S reduced; that is, the 
period of open circuit of the arc-gap is decreased; and because 
of the decrease of the condenser discharge resulting from the 
lower voltage, the duration of the arc flow is also reduced; 
that is, the frequency of oscillation is increased. J especially 
desire to call attention to this very interesting feature of an 


368 HIGH POWER SURGES. [June 19 


electric circuit, in which the frequency of oscillation not only 
depends upon the circuit constants, inductance, capacity, etc.,. 
but also very largely upon the length of spark-gap and supply 
voltage; the frequency of oscillation increases with decrease of 
the gap-length, with increase of supply voltage, with decrease of 
capacity and of inductance. The frequency can be varied by 
varying the length of the spark-gap. As is well known, this is 
the usual method of varying the frequency in apparatus for pro- 
ducing very high-frequency oscillating currents. 

It is obvious now, how an alternating arc, with resistance in 
series with the arc, cannot well be oscillating, since coincident 
with the breaking of the arc the voltage would reappear at the 
arc-gap and so keep the arc from breaking. It also shows how 
the discharge between a conductor of a cable system and ground 
is specially liable to be oscillating, since with the passage of cur- 
rent between ccnductor and ground the potential difference that 
produced the discharge, disappears by the grounding of the con- 
ductor. The meaning and the effect of the inductance in the 
electrolytic rectifier, etc., is now easily explained by consider- 
ing its action as due to an oscillating arc. 

Under conditions like or similar to those described above an 
arc is oscillating, not only in an alternating-current circuit, but 
also when the supply voltage of the curcuit is constant or uni- 
directional. 

The phenomenon becomes somewhat more complex when 
instead of the localized capacity and inductance, as described 
above, a circuit of distributed capacity and inductance is con- 
sidered as in my paper. In its general character, however, the 
phenomenon is essentially the same, and an attempt at a mathe- 
matical investigation has been given in my paper. 

Speaking in favor of this explanation of the oscillating arc, a 
rather strange coincidence is patent in Mr. Stott’s statement 
that short circuits were almost always preceded by ground and 
static displays. 

In regard to the numerical values givenin my paper and in Mr. 
Thomas’s paper, it is obvious that these values must be con- 
sidered only as approximate, or restricted to the conditions 
under which the tests, or the assumptions, were made. Especi- 
ally is this the case with the frequency of the traveling wave. 
This frequency is merely assumed by me, and it may be different. 

The numerical values of the voltage rise given in Mr. Thomas's 
paper, I believe, do not mean that the voltage can never rise 
more than 30% or that it will always rise up+to 30%. 
In all such cases where numerical values result from definite 
experiments they must be considered as merely showing the 
character of the phenomenon but not its magnitude. One 
may observe, for instance, that if the circuit of an electric 
. conductor is closed the conductor rises in temperature by 30° 
cent. Now the conclusion would be, that the electric current 
heats the conductor, but not that it raises its temperature by 30°. 
The numerical value of the effect depends upon the conditions 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 369 


of the particular instance. So here the rise of voltage can 
not be determined generally, but frequently one can get at least 
the maximum possible values, and this may be sufficient. If the 
voltage of the surge wete over 100 000, as it sometimes may be; 
and as I have observed by the oscillograph record, and the current 
during the surge as high as 9 000 amperes, then there is no 
chance to insulate and protect against these surges, and the only 
thing to do is what Mr. Stott has done, to avoid the cause of the 
surge, by eliminating the continued occurrence of a spark dis- 
charge between the conductor and ground, by disconnecting 
automatically that particular cable in which the spark dis- 
charge appears before the damage can spread further and 
cause the destructive short-circuit surge of the system, of 
high-power and low-frequency surge. 

P. H. Tuomas: Mr. Steinmetz in stating that the result of 
certain tests in my paper does not support the statement that 
a rise of potential at the end of a short line that is connected 
to the end of a long line, indicates that Mr. Steinmetz has mis- 
interpreted my experiment. The rise of potential occur- 
ring at the end of the short line results only in the case where it 
acts as a continuation of a longer line, or, in other words, where 
the wave of the longer line is forced to enter the shorter line. 
The short line referred to in the test is a branch line and further- 
more has the same capacity as the main line. Mr. Steinmetz’s 
statement that the experiments given in my paper show nothing 
with regard to other line conditions on other plants is, I think, 
hardly justified. The object of the tests was to verify or dis- 
prove certain fundamental laws, derived theoretically. It 
appears to me that these laws have received a strong confirmation 
by the tests, which means that they are to that extent applicable 
to other cases. Because Ohm’s law has never been tried for 
every possible case it is not assumed that it does not apply in 
any new problem that may arise. 


er 


“ i] 
: 
peer a gw nbd OES Ad Cs Neekin eae 
e.-, i» 
* 
h 
— 
= 
. 
‘ yy 
« 
441 ‘ 
5 
e 
® ‘ 
’ 
; Fi 
4 
+ F 


A paper presented at the 22d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright, 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


CONSTANT CURRENT MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 


BY CHARLES PROTEUS STEINMETZ. 


I. GENERAL. 


The operation of the mercury arc rectifier is based on the 
phenomenon of the electric arc, that it is a good conductor in the 
direction of the arc blast, but a non-conductor in the opposite 
direction, and consequently permits only unidirectional cur- 
rents to pass.* 

In an electric arc the current is carried across the gap between 
the terminals by a bridge of conducting vapor, consisting of 
the material of the negative terminal or the cathode, which is 
produced and constantly replenished by the “‘ cathode blast,” a 
high velocity blast issuing from the cathode. 

An electric arc, therefore, can not spontaneously establish 
itself. Before current can flow as an arc across the gap 
between two terminals, the arc flame or vapor bridge must 
exist; and to establish it energy must have been expended. 
This can be done either by bringing the terminals into 
contact and so starting the flow of current, and then by 
gradually withdrawing the terminals derive the energy of the 
are flame from the current, as is done in practically all arc lamps; 
or by increasing the voltage across the gap between the ter- 
minals so much that the electrostatic stress in the gap represents 
sufficient energy to establish a path for the current, by causing 
an electrostatic spark to jump across the gap, which is followed 
by the arc flame. This occasionally happens against the wishes 

*Regarding the apparent exception of the carbon arc, see my paper 
on “.The Electric Arc,” International Electrical Congress Transactions, 


1904, Vol. II, page 710. 
371 


372 STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


of the engineer, for instance in lightning-arresters. Or by 
supplying the arc flame from another arc, an arc can be estab- 
lished between two terminals, as occasionally happens when 
a switch opens or burns up and its arc flame envelops the 
blades of another switch. 

The arc must therefore be continuous at the cathode, but 
may be shifted from anode to anode. Any interruption of the 
cathode blast puts out the arc by interrupting the supply of 
conducting vapor, and a reversal of the arc stream means stop- 
ping the cathode blast and producing a reverse cathode blast, 
which requires a voltage higher than the electrostatic striking 
voltage (at arc temperature) between the electrodes. With an 
alternating impressed electromotive force the arc, if established, 
will go out at the end of the half wave, or if a cathode blast is 
continuously maintained by a.second arc (excited by direct 
current or overlapping sufficiently with the first arc) only alter- 
nate half waves can pass, which will be those for which that ter- 
minal is negative from which the continuous blast issues. The 
arc, with an alternating impressed voltage, therefore rectifies 
or permits only unidirectional currents to pass, and the 
voltage range of rectification is the range between the arc 
voltage arid the electrostatic spark voltage, hence highest with 
the mercury arc, due to its low temperature, and zero with the 
carbon arc, hence the latter does not usually rectify. 


II. Description oF RECTIFIER SYSTEM. 


The constant current mercury arc rectifier system, as used 
for operating the direct-current series arc circuits of carbon 
magnetite, or mercury arc lamps from an alternating constant- 
potential supply of 60, 40, or 25 cycles, is sketched diagram- 
matically in Fig. 1. 

It consists of: a constant-current transformer, with a tap C 
brought out from the middle of the secondary coil A B; a rectifier 
tube having two graphite anodes ab; a mercury cathode c, and 
usually two auxiliary mercury anodes near the cathode c. (not 
shown in diagram Fig. 1), which are used for excitation, mainly 
in starting, by establishing between the cathode c and the two 
auxiliary mercury anodes, from a small low-voltage constant- 
potential transformer, a pair of low current rectifying arcs in 
the same manner as in the well known constant potential mer- 
cury arc rectifier. Two reactive coils are inserted between the 
outside terminals of the transformer and rectifier tube, respect- 
ively, for the purpose of producing an overlap between the two 


1905.] STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 373 


rectifying arcs, ca and cb, and thereby the required con- 
tinuity of the arc stream atc. A reactive coil is inserted in the 
rectified or arc circuit, which connects between the transformer 
neutral C and rectifier neutral c, for the purpose of reducing the 
fluctuation of the rectified current to the desired amount. 

The rectified or direct-current voltage is somewhat less than 
one-half of the alternating voltage supplied by the transformer 
secondary A B; the rectified or direct current is somewhat more 
than double the effective alternating current supplied by the 
transformer. 

III. Moper or OPERATION. 

In Figs. 2 and 3 let the impressed voltage between the sec- 

ondary terminals A B of an alternating-current transformer be 


Be fain On| 


shown by curve I. Let C be the middle or center of the trans- 
former secondary AB. The voltages from C’ to A and from 
C to B then are given by curves II and III. 

If now A BC are connected with the corresponding rectifier 
terminals abc,and at c a cathode blast is maintained, those cur- 
rents will pass for which c is negative or cathode; that is, the cur- 
rent flowing through the rectifier from a to ¢ and from b to ¢, 
under the impressed electromotive forces Il and III, are given 
by curves IV and V, and the current issuing from c will be the 
sum of IV and V, as shown in curve WI, 

Such a rectifier as is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 2, would, 
however, not be self-exciting; it requires some outside means 


374 STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


for maintaining the cathode blast at c, since the current in the 
half wave 1 in curve VI goes down to zero at the zero value of 
electromotive force III, before the current of the next half wave 
2 starts, by the electromotive force II. 

It is therefore necessary to maintain the current of the half 
wave 1 beyond the zero value of its propelling impressed electro- 
motive force III, until the current of the next half wave 2 has 
started, in order to overlap the currents of the successive half 
waves. This is done by inserting inductances into the leads from 
the transformer to the rectifier; that is, between A and a, and 
B and b, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1. The effect of tnis 
inductance is to cause the current of half wave 1, V, to continue 


to flow beyond the zero of its impressed electromotive force III, 
that is, until the electromotive force III has died out and re- 
versed, and the current of the half wave 2, IV, has been started by 
electromotive force II. The two half waves of the current 
overlap, and each half wave lasts for more than half a period 
or 180 degrees. 

The current waves are shown in curve VII; the current half 
wave 1 starts at the zero value of its electromotive force III, but 
rises slower than it would without inductance, following essen- 
tially the exponential curve of astarting current; and the energy, 
which is first consumed by the inductance as counter electro- 


1905.] STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 375 


motive force, is later returned in maintaining the current half- 
wave 1 beyond the electromotive force wave, that is, w degrees 
(44 degrees in the tests reported later on), beyond 180 degrees 
so that it overlaps the next half-wave 2 by w degrees. 


eee aad) ead 
Zoli ae 


PEE 
fig paneer | oes |e 
val 
Gans 
een | 


fs 


pepe ee 
as 
SSS 
[ES 
Bee 
aus 
ADR ae 
Sui 
Naa 
AL 
4nh= 
fala 

ie & 


ai 
[wl | 
NEY 
Leelee 
cs 
bind 
Ss 
ae 
Ea 
Re 
epy 
gq 
Ea 
Eeliad 


ae 

Veale | 

sae 

oes 

ei 
Zan 

x 
2a 


z= j 


nin 


\ 


aie 
ale 
a 
Os 
Z 
Re 
Eas 
al 
Eas 


Loe 


SET EAS 


aN 
ery. 


MS 
as 
Ne 


1\y 


A 


zi 
Seer iimN 
Patines als 


Hereby the rectifier becomes self-exciting; that is, edch half- 
wave of current, by overlapping with the next, maintains the 
cathode blast until the next half-wave is started. 

The successive current half-waves added together give the 
‘rectified or unidirectional-current curve VIII. 


376 STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


During a certain period of time in each half wave from the 
zero value of electromotive force, both arcs,c a and c ), flow. 
During the existance of both arcs, there can be no potential 
difference between the rectifier terminals a and b, and the 
impressed electromotive force between the rectifier terminals 
ab therefore has the form shown in curve IX, Fig. 3; it remains 
zero for w degrees, and then, with the breaking of the arc of the 
preceding half wave, jumps to its normal value. 

The induced electromotive force of the transformer secondary, 
however, must more or less completely follow the p.imary 
impressed electromotive force wave, that is, it must have the shape 
shown in curve I, and the difference between IX and I must be 
taken up by the inductance. In other words, during the time both 
arcs flow in the rectifier, the alternating-current reactive coils con- 
sume the induced electromotive force of the transformer sec- 
ondary, and the voltage across these reactive coils, therefore, 
is as shown in curve X; the reactive coil consumes voltage at 
the start of the current of each half wave. at x in curve X, 
and produces voltage near the end of the current flow, at y. 
In the intermediary time, that is, while only one arc is flowing, 
the reactive coil has practically no effect, and its voltage is low, 
corresponding to the variation of the rectified alternating cur- 
rent, as shown in curve XI; that is, during this time the alter- 
nating-current reactive coils merely assist the direct-current 
reactive coil. 

Since the voltage at the alternating-current terminals of the 
rectifier. ab, has two periods of zero value during each cycle, 
the rectified voltage, between c and C, must also have the 
same zero periods, and is indeed the same curve as IX. but 
reversed, as shown in curve XII. 

Such an electromotive force wave can not satisfactorily operate 
arcs, because during the zero period of voltage, curve XII, the arcs 
goout. The voltage on the direct-current line must never fall below 
the counter-electromotive force of the arcs, and since the re- 
sistance of this circuit is low, frequently less than 10 per cent., it 
follows that the total variation of direct-current line voltage must 
be below 10 per cent. ; that is, the voltage is practically constant, as 
shown by the straight line in curve XII. Hence a high reactance is 
inserted into the direct-current circuit, which consumes the excess 
voltage during that part of curve XII, where the rectified voltage 
is above line voltage, and supplies the line voltage during the 
period of zero rectified voltage. The voltage across this reac- 
tive coil is therefore as shown by curve XIII. Short-circuiting 


1905.] STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 377 


this reactance coil on an arc load therefore immediately puts 
out the rectifier, unless the external circuit contains sufficient 
reactance to prevent it. 

Regarding calculation of the rectifier: The angle of overlap 
w of the two arcs is determined by the desired stability 
of the system. From the angle w and the impressed elec- 
tromotive force is determined the sum total of electro- 
motive forces which has to be consumed, and returned. by 
the alternating-current reactive coil; and upon this sum de- 
pends the size of the alternating-current reactive coil required. 

From the angle w also follows the wave shape of the rectified 
voltage; and therefrom the sum total of electromotive force 
which has to be given by the direct-current reactive coil. This 
electromotive force determines the size of the direct-current 
reactive coil required to maintain the direct-current fluctuation 
within certain given limits. 

The given factors of the problem therefore are: the resistance 
of the circuit, the counter electromotive force of the direct- 
current circuit, the permissible fluctuation of the direct current, 
and the chosen angle of overlap of the rectifying arcs. 


TV. CHARACTERISTICS OF SYSTEM. 


The efficiency, power-factor, regulation, etc., of the mercury 
arc rectifier system are essentially those of the constant-current 
transformer feeding the rectifier tube: 

The losses in the system between constant alternating im- 
pressed voltage and constant direct current are: (1) The loss in 
the transformer, which changes from constant alternating poten- 
tial toc onstant alternating current. This amounts from 5 to 10 per 
cent., according to the size of the transformer. (2) The J’ Rand 
hysteresis losses in the reactive coils inserted into the alternating 
leads of the rectifier, the “‘ alternating reactive coils,” and in 
the reactive coil inserted in the rectified circuit, the ‘ direct- 
current reactive coil.’ (3) The loss of power in the rectifier 
tube, which in a series arc circuit is negligible. There occurs 
a constant drop of voltage, which amounts to about 18 volts, 
irrespective of load or current in the tube; the mercury arc 
voltage. With a 75-light rectifier, at 6.000 volts full load, this 
loss in the tube is 0.3 per cent. The loss in the reactive coils 
obviously can be reduced to the extent that the customer is 
willing to pay for copper and iron. 

Let N = frequency of the alternating-current supply, % = 
mean value of the rectified direct current, and a = pulsation of 


378 STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


vo 


the rectified current from the mean value, that is,7, (1+a) = the 
maximum, and i, (1 —a@) =the minimum value of direct current. 
Experience has shown that a pulsation from a mean of 20 to 25 per 
cent. is not only permissible in any type of arc, but advantageous 
in increasing the steadiness of the arc. The total variation of 
the rectified current then is 2 a7,, and the alternating component 
of the direct current has the maximum value a7,; hence the 


effective value is me Z,(or, for a=0.2:0.1417,), and the frequency 


2N. Hysteresis and eddy losses in the direct-current reactive 
coil, therefore, correspond to an alternating current of fre- 
< hte : : 
quency 2 N, and effective value Wat 1), or about 0.141 2,, which 
V2 

is insignificant even at relatively high densities. 

In the alternating-current reactive coils, the current varies, uni- 
directionally, between 0 and 7, (1+), that is, its alternating com- 


; 1 ; 
ponent has the maximum value abs %, and the. effective 


4 


— 


value tor (Ot, 0 1008 sa oh 0.2: 0.4257 ,), and the fre- 


ane 
2/2 
quency N, The hysteresis loss therefore corresponds to an 


alternating current of frequency N, and effective value oe i 
or about 0.425 7). 

Regarding the power-factor of the mercury arc rectifier system, 
the non-inductive character of the direct-current load increases, 
but the use of reactive coils in the alternating-current leads 
slightly decreases the power-factor, so that the power-factor 
of the load on the secondary terminals of the constant-current 
transformer is about the same as that; that is, the power-factor 
of an alternating series arc circuit; and the power-factor of 
the whole system is therefore about the same as that of the 
same constant-current transformer operating series alternating- 
current arc lamps at the same percentage of load, that is, with 
the same position of transformer coils. 

With decreasing load, at constant alternating current supply, 
the rectified direct current slightly increases, due to the increasing 
overlap of the rectifying arcs; and to give constant direct cur- 
rent, the transformer is therefore so adjusted as to regulate 
for a slight decrease of alternating current output with decrease 
of load. Obviously, just as in constant-current transformers for 


1905.] STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 379 


series alternating-current arc lighting, in larger units the 
regulation range for constant current is extended from full load 
down to } load only, and not down to short circuit. 

The maximum voltage which can be rectified is unknown, 
because a sufficiently high voltage power supply to break down 
a rectifier of proper design and vacuum has not yet been 
obtained; and since a high-frequency oscillator, giving an 8-in. 
spark between 1-in. spheres, does not send a discharge through 
the vacuum of such a rectifier, it is not probable that a voltage 
limit of rectification will be reached in the range of voltages 
coming into commercial consideration. An electromotive force 
of 36 000 volts, impressed upon the rectifier terminals, has been 
rectified with small current. In the following some tests are 
given on the operation of a rectifier tube under an alternating 
impressed electromotive force upon its terminals of 25 200 volts, 
giving an output of 10 000 volts at 4.6 amperes direct current; 
and at 24 300 volts impressed, an output of 9 500 volts at 6.25 
amperes, or 59.4 kilowatts, from a single rectifier tube. 


V. TEstTs OF SYSTEM. 


A constant-current mercury arc rectifier system has been 
in regular service for over a year, supplying 3.8 amperes constant 
current to 25 mercury arc lamps, for lighting streets and parks 
in a section of the city of Schenectady. The constant-current 
transformer is a so-called ‘‘ 6-light testing transformer,” with the 
secondary coil wound for 2 amperes, and operating at some- 
what higher magnetic density; therefore, the regulation range 
extends only down to 10 lamps. The records of test of effi- 
ciency, power-factor, regulation, etc., of this system is given in 
Fig. 4. As seen, in this small unit of only 3.9 kilowatts output, 
an efficiency of 80 per cent., and a power-factor of 70 per cent. 
is reached, between constant-potential alternating current 
received from the primary distributing mains, and constant 
direct current sent into the arc circuit. 

Oscillograms of this constant current rectifier, at full load of 
25 mercury arc lamps, are given in Figs. 5to 14: These curves 
show: Fig. 5, primary supply voltage; Fig. 6, secondary ter- 
minal voltage of transformer; Fig. 7, potential difference of 
alternating-current reactive coils; Fig. 8, alternating voltage im- 
pressed upon rectifier tube; Fig. 9, unidirectional voltage pro- 
duced between rectifier neutral and transformer neutral; Fig. 
10, potential difference of direct current reactive coil; Fig. 11, 


380 STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


rectified voltage supplied to arc circuit; Fig. 12, primary supply 
current; Fig. 13, current in rectifying arcs; Fig. 14, rectified 
current supply to are circuit. As seen, the angle of overlap of 
the two rectifying arcs is 44°. It is interesting to compare 
these curves with the corresponding curves, Fig. 3. 


NOV. 12TH 1904. 


TEST MADE BY J.L.R. HAYDEN, SCHENECTADY 


o 
WW 
[oad 
Wi 
a 
= 
< 
eo 
oO 
a 
< 
° 
ef 
o 
= 
< 
a 
re) 
c 
< 
> 
a 
=" 
(3) 
a 
wl 
= 
z 
° 


te 


c 
iL 
- 
Oo 
Wu 
c 
oO 
c 
< 

' 
> 
a 
2 
oO 
c 
Ww 
= 
Lol 
Zz 
Ww 
ac 
a 
2 
s. 
= 
z 
< 
bn 
wo 
z 
@ 
Oo 


Fig. 15 gives secondary terminal voltage, efficiency, regula- 
tion, and load of a larger rectifier set, operating magnetite arc 
lamps. At the highest load, of 57 magnetite arc lamps, car- 


1905.] STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 381 


iG 20: 


ites fe 


Fic. 8. 


Fie, 9, 


Fie. 11. 


Bras12: 


Pie. 14: 


1905.] STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 383 


ried in test the rectified voltage supplied to the arc circuit at four 
amperes was 4 260, at a voltage of 11 800 impressed upon the 
rectifier tube by the transformer secondary; the efficiency was 
above 90%. This set is now in service in lighting some of the 


| 
Beeeeeee eh 
Le es: Ht 
ee Alig 
g4ttts 


< 
S$ 


JAN. 19TH TO 12TH 1905, 


TESTS MADE BY R. FLEMING, LYNN 


CONSTANT-CURRENT MERCURY-ARO RECTIPIE! 
ON MASNETITE ARC LAMP LOAD 4 AMPERES 


streets of Schenectady, in the down-town district, with mag- 
netite arc lamps. a 

Still higher voltages are shown in the test in Fig. 16. Here 
the power was supplied directly from an alternator, by astep-up 


384 STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


transformer, to the rectifier tube, and a water resistance was used 
as load, because neither a constant-current transformer nor a 
sufficient number of lamps were available at that time to take 
care of the load. The maximum voltage was 10 kilovolts at 4.6 


eee wes ft 
iis al i id kee + ! 
eit 1 


el 3 
Zz 
> a 
HEA 7 
a Zz © 
<q wl a 
uw 
re oa Pisa: ieee 
So zZ 
Be Sat pies 
2 EF 5 Mt 3| aed 
oOo ° > 
eed gh = 2 > of oe 
eal z°* & 
£6 ||__|_& 
3 12 eS og 
= — 
3 3 
r= ay iat ar 
> 
mn 


Sas 
ee "| 
SK 
ee 


ei 
ak 
lL 


7 se 
sasseee dare 
a A ste Ai i 
NEE £ lebal 
Ae: ie a 
Pe OAL 0 sve ee 
Pec 


see aaee cH 
te 


& 
¢ 
Sx 


even Soncie 


amperes, with an impressed alternating voltage of 25.2 kilovolts; 
and the maximum output was 9.5 kilovolts at 6.25 amperes, or 
about 60 kilowatts. 


1905.] STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 385 


VI. THEORY AND CALCULATION. 

In the constant-current mercury arc rectifier, shown dia- 
grammatically in Fig. 17, let: on as | 

esin @ = sine wave of electromotive force impressed between 
neutral and outside of alternating-current supply to the recti- 
fier, that is: 

2esin fd = total secondary induced electromotive force of 
constant-current transformer. 

Z, = %,—j %, = impedance of reactive coil in each anode cir- 
cuit of the rectifier (‘‘ alternating-current reactive coil’’), in- 


clusive of the internal self-inductive impedance between the 
two halves of the transformer secondary coil. 

i,and 7, = anode currents, counted in the direction from 
anode to cathode. 

e,” = counter-electromotive force of rectifying arc, which is 
constant. 

Zo = To —j %o = impedance of reactive coil in rectified cir- 
cuit (‘‘ direct-current reactive coil ’’). 

Z) = A —j x = impedance of load on arc lamp circuit. 

e! = counter-electromotive force in rectified circuit, which is 
constant (equal to the sum of the counter-electromotive forces 


of the arcs in the lamp cireuit). 


386 STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


w = angle of overlap of the two rectifying arcs, or overlap 
of the currents 7, and 7). 

ig = rectified current during the period: 0 < ¢ < w, that is 
when both rectifying arcs exist. 


re cate wa apes | - RES 
SC eer TA Ht 4- 
tt oa 

ttt} |i cat 
ES RViES | Psa 


[| 
7 
Be 
A 
is 
i 
Nee 
Se 
eae) 2) 


ba 
Ey 


Fic. 18. 


i,’ = rectified current during the period: w < ¢ < z, that is, 
when only one are, or one anode current 7, exists. 
Let: 


1905.] STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 387 


5 = €9' +e” = total counter electromotive force in the recti- 
fied circuit. es 
Z=71—jx = (r,4%t7') -J Gane ee total impedance 
per circuit. 
We then have: 
a. During the period when both rectifying arcs exist: 


a aie 
= 4,14, (1) 


In the circuit me the Pertiomattre force 2 e sin ¢, the 
rectifier tube, and the currents 7, and 7,, we have, by Kirchhoft’s 
law: 


Qesin—rix Sh t ri + x 7p = 0 (2) 


We have, in the circuit from transformer neutral over electro- 
motive force e sin ¢, current i,, rectifier arc ¢,” and rectified 
circuit i,, back to the transformer neutral, the electromotive 
conditions expressed by the aay 


, di : d 
esin pri, — MiG — 0" Toto vegan 1y—X% LOT =¢o=0 
or: 
esin@—T, ty % Tet) fy (vata) § es é,=0 (3) 


b. During the period when only one rectifying arc exists: 


DEST PESe 
4, = 1%, 


Hence, in this circuit: 
| ; d ig 
esin @—11% — 14 A s = (%o+7’) %9’ — (Kor x?) a —@=0 (4) 


Substituting (1) in (2), and combining the result (5) of this 
substitution with (3), gives. the 


Differential Equations of the idee 


Qesing + 1, ig— 24;) +x 73 (i aoa) OD (5) 
20,4 (2r—1,) ig Qe) Fo 0 (6) 


: d 
esind —@y— 7 4%’ —% Tp (7) 


388 STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


In these equations, 7, and 7, apply for the time: 0 < ¢ <*w} 


and 7,’ for the time: w < ¢ < 2. 


These differential equations are integrated by the functions: 


4-21, = Ae +A’sin ($—8) 
i, = Bers +B’ 


ig! = Cow +€7+C" sin ($7) 


& 


@) 
_ (10) 


- Substituting (8),(9), and (10) into (5), (6), and (7) gives three 


identities: 


2Qesin¢+A’ [rsin (p— 8) +x cos (p — B)|+ Ae (7, —ax,)=0— rs 


2e, + B’ (2r—7,)+Be% [(2r—r,) —b (2x—~x,)] = 0 


esin de, —C"[r sin(f—7) +x cos (P—-7)]- C’r—C eed (r —c x) =0 


hence: 


r,-ax,=0 


(2r—r7r,)—b (2x—%x,) = 0 


r—cx=0 
2e,+B’ (2r—r,) =9 
@é,+C’r=0 
2e+A’ (rcos #@+xsin 8) = 0 
A’ (rsin B—x cos 8) = 0 
e—C” (rcosy+xsiny) = 0° 


C” (rsiny —x cos 7) = 0 
Denoting: 


2,>= Vrit+u? 

tan.a, = x,/7r; 
and: 

oS / r+x 


tan a = x/7 


2 


(13) 


1905.): STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 389 


substituting (12) and (13), into (11), gives by resolving the 9 
equations (11) the values of the coefficients a, b, c, A’, B’, C’, 
GY, B. r:, 


a=1,/%, 
2r—7, 
oot eres ip 
G = 1[% 
p= Oy 
(15) 
r=a 
ieee | 
ay 
eyes D6. | (16) 
2r—"; 
C’ = -¢,/r 
| Gmutel2 (17) 
‘from which tollow the 
Integral Equations of the Rectifier. 
| , ; Zeon. | 
eae lt eee — > sin (p— a) (18) 
1 
: 2e 
Sn pee ak a 
i, = Be mer (19) 
ig’ = Coed — 2 + = sin ($a) (20) 


where: a, b, c are given by equations (14); 
a and a, by equations (12) and (13), 
and A, B, C are integration constants given by the terminal 


- conditions of the problem. 
These terminal conditions are 


t4|d=0 = 0 
ltold=0 =o lio’ |o=x (21) 


li:le—w = lile—o = |to’leo 


390 STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


That is: At ¢ = 0, the anode current 7, = 0. After half a 
period, or z = 180°, the rectified current repeats the same 
value. At ¢ = o, all three currents 1, Zo, to’ are identical. 

The four equations (21) determine four constants: A, B, C, w. 

Substituting these constants in equations (18), (19), (20), 
gives the equations of the rectified current iy, 7)’, and of the 
anode currents i, and 7, = 1)—%, determined by the constants 
of the system: Z, 2,, 2, and by the impressed electromotive 
force é. ; 

In the constant current mercury arc rectifier system of arc 
lighting, ¢, the secondary induced voltage of the constant- 
current transformer, varies with the load by the regulation of 
the transformer; and the rectified current, 7, %)’, iS required to 
remain constant, or, rather, at its average value. 

Let then be given as a condition of the problem, the average 
value i of the rectified current: 4 amperes in a magnetite orina 
mercury arc lamp circuit, and 5 or 6.6 or 9.6 amperes in a 
carbon arc lamp. circuit. ; 

Assume as a fair approximation, that the pulsating rectified 
current 1), i)’, has its mean value 7 at the moment, d = 0. 
This then gives the additional equation: 


ligla=o = i | (22) 
and from the five equations (21) and (22), the five constants 
A, B,C, w, e are determined. 

Substituting (22), (18), (19), (20) in equations (21), gives: 


a er 
A=1%1—-—sina, 
By 


Baits (23) 


2h B, 
~Aew ~28 sin (@,-0) = Bet ~ 52 
Y, 2r—T; 


os eee Py 
es é . ; 3 sin (a — w) (24) 


1905.] STEINMETZ: MERU URY ARC RECTIFIER. 391 


Substituting (23) in (24) gives: 
2e ; : : 
7 pe 0e sin a, —sin (a,—) t =1 CRO g coe | 
L 


Dey ) 
—— a _— --bw fe 
2r—1", t! iets | (25 


@ : 5 isa 
<j ec(r-w) sin a + sin (a-)| =F) eclr-w) — <2-bw 
2 aN (2 ) 
__--bw bys eid c&x-w) __ | | a 
el al, ‘ 4 Pit SS (26) 


and, eliminating e from these two equations, gives: 


ee-o) sin wa + sin (w—w) _ 


e- sin a, — sin (a,—w) 


ec(x-w) poe oe) a. ATES, | tee} + sa ec&e-w) ip 1] 
22 - 4(2 r—71,) 47 
Z 2e ) 
1 -daw -bw — 0 e7bw 
= et ees Oman j 


(27) 
This equation (27) determines angle w, and’ by successive 
substitution in (26), (23), ¢. A. BY C are tound: 
_ Equation (27) is transcendental, and therefore has to be 
solved by approximation, which however is very rapid. 
As a first approximation, a= 5b =¢= Oae =) a3!=.90° or 
z/2; and substituting these values in (27), gives: 


e 
er = i és) 
Eee | )( Tir 


= 4, 
1 — cos w, zy Zz 


=(« — 1)(1 +e) ete 
2, Pe Pa LY, 
2, 


CO ae eta ie (28) 
ae 1) (14.73) + 1 


392 STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


This value of w, substituted in the exponential terms of 
equation (27), gives a simple trigonometric equation in , 
from which follows the second approximation W,, and, by 
interpolation, the final value: 


O= Wy Creech (29) 
Ws 
For instance, in the rectifier system of which tests are given 
in Fig. 4, oscillograms in Figs. 5 to 14, it is, at full load of 25 
mercury arc lamps: 
e, = 950 
t = 3.8 
The constants of the circuit are: 
Z, = 10-1857 
Z = 50— 10007 
From which follow: 


a =0.054 

b =0.050 (14) 
¢ = 0.050 

a, = 86.9° 

a.=\87,19 Om 


From equation (28), follows as a first approximation: w, = 
47.8°; and as a second approximation: w, = 44,2°. | 

Hence, by (29): 

w = 44.4° 

observed was 44~ 45°. 

Substituting a in (26) gives: e = 2100; 
hence, the effective value of transformer secondary voltage: 

2e 


£ = 2980 volts 
V2 


and, from (28): 

, A = — 18.94 
B= 24.90 
C= 24.20 


1905.) © STEINMETZ: MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER. 393. 


Therefore, the equations of the currents: 
ty = 24.90 <9 $ — 21.10 


4)’ = 24.20 «94 — 19.00+ 2.11 sin (p — 87.19) 


<<. 
my 
I 


12.45 €--9°°S + 9,47 6-944 — 10.58 + 11.35 sin (p—86.9°) 
ty a to pac ty 


The effective or equivalent alternating seconaary current of 
the transformer, which corresponds to the primary load current, 
that is, primary current minus exciting current, is: 


img. <1, 


From these equations are calculated the numerical values 
of rectified current 7,, i)’, of anode current 7,, and of alternating 
current 7’, which are plotted as curves in Fig. 18. As seen, they 
perfectly agree with the oscillograms. 


394 MERCURY-ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


Discussion ON, ‘‘ THE CoNSTANT-CURRENT MeErcury-ARC 
RECTIFIER.” 


-Presipent Lies: Mr. Steinmetz has outlined not only 

the practical instrument and its results, but he has given 
also a theoretical investigation of the phenomena involved. 
This apparatus is one which is very important in its appli- 
cations, as it will often even determine the selection of the 
type of distributing system. With the extended application 
of series alternating-current arcs, it has become, I think, 
more and more evident that they are not of equivalent 
value to direct-current arcs; the result is that in many 
cases a strong pressure is brought to bear for direct current for 
series arc lighting. This apparatus is efficient, small, and in- 
expensive, and I hope it will enable this question to be solved 
from our ordinary alternating current distributing systems. 

Joun W. Howe tt: Mr. Steinmetz has said, that the constant- 
current mercury-arc rectifier enables one to operate constant 
direct-current apparatus, from a constant-potential alternating 
source. That is a very desirable thing, as it enables one to 
substitute direct-current arc lamps for alternating-current 
arc lamps. It is well known that there are a number of recently 
developed direct-current arc lamps which are more efficient than 
arc lamps suitable for use on alternating systems, and sub- 
stitution of these by means of small apparatus which is also highly 
efficient is desirable. This will simplify matters for those who 
operate alternating-current systems; they will need generate only 
one kind of current. It will also have useful application in the 
operation of series burning mercury-arc lamps with alternating 
current. A constant-potential series mercury-arc lamp is one 
the most efficient light-producing devises known, but is only 
applicable to direct-current supply, and this device will be very 
highly efficient in this connection. 

P. H. Tuomas: We will all agree that the mercury-vapor 
converter has most remarkable properties and is capable of 
producing most astonishing results. 

It is rather misleading to consider the converter as an arc 
in the same sense as the ordinary arc, as utilized for electric light- 
ing. Although it is true that the passage of current through the 
converter and the operation of an arc have many features in com- 
mon, it is still true that the particular characteristics of the 
mercury-vapor converter which enable it to be of commercial 
service and do the remarkable things of which we know a part, do 
not exist to any material extent in the commercial atmospheric 
arc. I refer principally to the ‘‘ negative electrode resistance ”’ 
residing substantially at the surface of the electrode, which in 
the converter will resist pressures of many thousand volts, but 
which in the open-air arc, if the distance between electrodes 
be made small enough, cannot resist over one hundred or two 
hundred volts. Furthermore, the form of the curve of voltage 
and sparking distance at these low voltages indicates the absence 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 395 


of any true negative electrode resistance inthe arc. Again, the 
absenceof impeding:matter, such as the atmosphere, is necessary 
to secure a free transter of current from one electrode to another. 
In its historical development the mercury-vapor converter came 
not from the commercial arc but from the Cooper-Hewitt 
mercury-vapor lamp, the origin of which was not connected 
with the arc. 

Although theories of the operation of this apparatus are not 
the ultimate commercial object, yet they are important in direct- 
ing development and in overcoming difficulties. On this account 
it is well to call attention to the fact that another theory 
than that given in the paper may be strongly supported 
for explaining the starting of current through the container. 
According to former theory, with a perfect vacuum current 
once started passes from electrode to electrode with almost 
absolute freedom, since the source of the ions is assumed 
to be the negative electrode. It seems probable that the 
only action of gas or vapor within the path of the current is 
to impede the flow of current. This action seems very natural 
if it is assumed that current consists of either electrons, or elect- 
rons associated with atoms. Consequently, according to this 
view no preliminary “ bridge ’’ or residual gas is necessary for 
the starting operation. 

F. A. C. Perrine: Mercury arc rectification was first de- 
scribed by Jamin, in 1875, who rectified with mercury arcs and 
with arcs between dissimilar substances. I took up this matter, 
about 1888, and reproduced the experiments published and 
the results in the London Electrician. At that time, I meas- 
ured the electromotive force. with a permanent ‘magnet - 
voltmeter. The idea that is entirely and absolutely new 
at the present time is the use of the arc ina closed, hermeti- 
cally sealed tube. At the earlier time it was not advis- 


able to go'very far with the experiments because the work 
was dangerous; I was using a partly enclosed arc—a jar 
of mercury, with a vertical carbon passing through a cork 
in the top. Under these circumstances if anything had hap- 
pened to smash the enclosing vessel it probably would have 
resulted in serious injury to the investigator. 

E. F. Norturup: There is one feature of these currents that, 
it strikes me, might lead to error. After the alternating current 
is rectified it becomes a pulsating direct current. Now most 
direct-current instruments give only indications of the average 
value of a pulsating current. As the form of the wave is un- 
known unless the wave be taken with the oscillograph, the square 
root of the mean square value, or energy value of the pulsating 
current could not be accurately judged by the indications of 
instruments constructed upon the plan of a Weston direct-cur- 
rent instrument. Therefore, if these rectified currents are to 
be measured, suitable alternating-current instruments must be 
used to obtain measurements that are at all accurate. 


396 MERCURY-ARC RECTIFIER. [June 19 


Cuas. P. STEINMETZ: The output may be measured by a watt- 
meter. By using an alternating-current meter and a direct- 
current meter in: series with each other, I got a reading of 4 
amperes in the direct-current, and 4.10 in the alternating-cur- 
rent meter. 

In regard to the discussion by Mr. Thomas, on a negative 
resistance supposed to reside at the cathode surface: I have 
endeavored to explain the phenomena of the mercury-arc 
rectifier from the engineering point of view; that is based on 
strict empirical facts, and without introducing any hypothetical 
or mysterious phenomena, as negative resistances etc. I believe 
whatever success I may have had in electrical engineering, 
I owe mainly to my disinclination to leave the study and in- 
vestigation of actual facts in favor of metaphysical speculations. 
I believe the reason why I have succeeded in developing this 
rectifier is that at a very early timeI recognized that the phe- 
nomenon is an ordinary arc; it follows all the laws and charac- 
teristics of the typical arc, differing only by being enclosed 
in a glass tube. 

All typical arcs show the phenomenon of rectification within a 
certain range of voltage. This range is between. the arc 
voltage and the striking voltage at the arc temperature, and this 
range is therefore much greater with the mercury arc than with 
other arcs, and practically disappears with the carbon arc, but 
is still considerable in many other metal arcs. I had the 
pleasure last year to read a paper before the International Con- 
gress at St. Louis on this subject, giving a discussion of the 
character of the arc in general, and the mercury arc in particular 
from the engineering point of view without, as I stated, any 
metaphysical speculation. I refer you to that paper. 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electricul 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., Fune 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A.LE.E. oe 


DATA RELATING TO ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS ‘AND 
CABLES. 


BY H. W. FISHER. 

In America, the underground electric cable manufacturing com- 
panies for the most part have refrained from publishing much 
experimental data ‘relative to cables.’ The principal reasons 
for this are probably to prevent the disclosure of trade-secrets 
and manufacturing processes, and to refrain from giving elec- 
tric data showing the highest excellence of: cable construction 
because engineers would be apt to make specifications based 
on such data which might be difficult or derpossi bie. for the manu- 
facturers to meet. 

Such specifications are occasionally issued now, although 
not so frequently as was the case five or ten years ago. Within 
the last two months an engineer specified a test of 5 000 megohms 
per mile upon a rubber-covered electric-light cable of consid- 
erable size. If the test could have been met at all, it would 
have been only by the use of a very large amount of pure Para 
rubber, which would have entailed an excessive and unwar- 
rantable cost. It is to be regretted that the manufacturers 
and operators of electric wires and cables in this country do 
not draw up a reasonable set of specifications comparable to 
what has been done in this line abroad, because it would very 
much simplify matters for consulting engineers, operating com- 
panies, and manufacturers. 

The recommendations of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELEC- 
TRICAL ENGINEERS even are not always followed by engineers, 
who occasionally disregard the meter-gramme standard, as 
published in the Supplement to the Transactions, of October 
1893, and specify some other Mathiessen standard. 


397 


398 FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. [June 19 


In this paper, the copper conductor will first be considered 
and afterwards the insulation. It ‘is a well-known fact that 
commercial copper of to-day has a resistance which is very 
close to Mathiessen’s meter-gramme standard. It becomes 
possible, therefore, to make up stranded cables which shall 
have a conductivity of between 98 and 99 per cent. of Mathies- 
sen’s standard. The area of the stranded cable should be taken 
as the combined area of the wires composing it, based upon 
measurement of each wire at right-angles to its own axis. 

Tr the case of twisted multiple-conductor cables, the actual 
length of each conductor must be used in estimating the con- 
ductivity. : 

In a stranded-conductor cable the larger part of the current 
will flow along the individual wires, although, of course, there 
will always be a part short-circuiting action between individual 
wires of the strand. Hence, it cannot be expected that a 
stranded conductor will have a conductivity equal to that of 
a solid conductor of the same area. The tendency of the 
current to follow along the individual wires of a strand is for- 
cibly illustrated by the curves shown. in Fig. 1, which will now 
be explained. 

A question arose whether it would not be advisable to use a 
steel wire with six copper wires around it for power-transmission 
circuits suspended in long spans from steel towers. It first 
became necessary to determine the impedance of such a strand; 
curve b shows the results of this investigation. If the wires 
were laid straight instead of spirally on the steel wire, one 
would expect to find the impedance only slightly greater than 
that of an all-copper strand, the impedance of which is illus- 
trated in curve a by the circles. 

The writer therefore concluded that the larger part of the 
current followed the copper strands spirally around the central 
steel wire, and by magnetizing it increased the impedance. 
It at once became evident that if two layers of copper wires of 
the same total cross-sectional area as the cable with a single 
layer of copper wire, were laid spirally in opposite directions 
over the same size steel wire, the increased impedance would 
be reduced, if not entirely counteracted. Although more 
current would flow in the outside layer of copper wires than 
in the inside layer, the distance from the steel wire to the former 
being greater than to the latter, the magnetizing actions of 
the oppositely flowing currents in the two layers would tend to 
neutralize each other. 


4905.] FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. 390 


A strand with two lavers of copper wires was then constructed 
and subjected to impedance tests; the results are shown in 
curve a by solid circles. They practically coincide with the 
dotted circles, determined with an all-copper strand, and the 
writer's deductions were, therefore, confirmed. 

The points on the curve marked by a + were calculated for 
a solid conductor 500 mils in diameter, and 250 000 cir. mils as 
cross-section. The points marked * were calculated for a 
stranded copper conductor of 250000 cir. mils in cross-section, 
and 580 mils in diameter. 


FIG.|1 Esa 


Y c 


i) 
to 


te 
ie) 


nS 


8 
+ 
“Ay 
—t 


_ 
a 
Ng 


~ 
w 
a 
=; 
ee 


_INTER-AXIAL DISTANCES IN INCHES 


ra Es 
te 
i 

a 

+ 

At 

— 
st 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
RATIOS OF IMPEDANCE TO OHMIC RESISTANCE 


It will be noticed that at the shorter interaxial distances the 
calculations based on the diameter of a stranded conductor 
are closer to the experimentally determined curve b, while at 
the longer interaxial distances the calculations based on the 
diameter of a solid wire are closer to curve b. 

From the fact that copper has a greater coefficient of ex- 
pansion than steel it was thought that a strand made with a 
steel center might be subject to stresses that would finally 
cause it to break. For this reason a test was made upon a 


400 FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. [June 19 


7-wire cable of four copper and two steel wires around a central 
copper wire. The cable had a conductivity equal to that of 
250 000 cir. mils of copper. re 

Curve c in Fig. 1 gives the results of tests on the last-men- 
tioned cable. It will be noticed that the impedance is increased 
to an extent that would probably prohibit the use of such a 
conductor in practice. However, since the large electrostatic 
capacity of long aerial conductors tends to produce leading 
currents, it is thought that a conductor of higher impedance 
might be beneficial in tending to increase the power-factor of 
the circuit. 

The following formulas relating to stranded conductors were 
derived by the writer many years ago, and may be of interest 
and value: 


3N D 
= SS 
A=N@=2— 
p= Grrl) d= ES = 1.1546 | 44N—1 . 
3 4.N 
= 143 (n?+n) 


l| ;4N—1 1 
SING Mode Mend, 
Where A = Area of stranded conductor in circular mils, 
D = Diameter of stranded conductor 
d = Diameter of single wires comprising stranded conductor. 
N = Number of wires. 
n = Number of layers. 
The above data are for a perfect strand with one central wire. 
Table 1 gives reactances throughout a considerable range, 
and includes an auxiliary table by means of which reactances 
can be calculated for any distance between centers of conductors. 
It is thought that this table may be of use to members of the 
Institute. The foot-notes fully describe the manner of using 
the table to obtain reactances for frequencies and distances 
between centers not given in the table. The diameters given 
in the table were used in calculating the corresponding reactances. 
For 2-in. and 12-in. distances between centers of conductors 
the reactances are calculated to one more decimal place than 
for the other distances, so that by means of the auxiliary table 
it is possible to calculate any other reactance very accurately. 


401 


ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. 


FISHER: 


- 7 
5.) 


190 


jO 9ZIS 94} 0} But 
‘aIqQe} 9Y} UL soUPYSIP JoT[eUr 
*uoryeod1e}zUutr 


Pp Aq q apiara 


puodsai100 soueyoRelL 94} OF Peppe eq + 
S$ jsolvaxm oY} 
qoairp Aq punoj aq UO USAT Sazis ey} UseMzoq 2 


09 


f 


snur yorum ‘g jo anjeA SZutpuodseli09 8y} P 
= P 22] SMOT[OJ SB PUNO} oq Ud BIG} BY} 
] YOIYM. sIOJONPUOD jo SiayoUIEIpP oF seoUe 


*g-doueystp pue 1oyonpuods 
uy JUetjonb sy} 04 yservou PY jo enjea & Sule} pue 
Ul UdATS you G soULYsIP AUB IO} QouepoRal VU 


oval SUL, 
Aq parydryynur oq ysnur sjqe} 9} UI UeATS sooUBJOBeI OY} “f Aduanbasj 19430 Aue OF 


61€0°0 £6600 02c0°0 FSO 0 91c0'0 9810°0 IZ10°0 | ¢¢10'0 | 8EI0'O | 1ZI0°O | GOTO'O | F800°0 |F900'C F000 |cc00'0| “A 
00°S 06 °T 0st OL T 09°T og T cya OFT gevr oe 'T Sot 061 Ciel Ort cot) Vi 
ee eo 
6020 |661°0 |¢st°O | 291° | FTO JIgET'O | 9IT'O | SOTO c60°0 | ¢80°0 | G20°0 |2z¢0°0 ¢e0r0'0 1g9 1 000 000 & 
ZIz0 |z0z'0 |681'0 |. OZT'O | 2S1'O |z8et'O | OZT'O | 9OT'O 860'0 | 880°0 | ¢20°0 |8¢90°0 €8I10'0 9c¢ T 000 02 T 
91z'0 |90z'0 |g6t'0 | FLE°O | O9T'O |ZTFI‘O | SZI'O |} OTT'O ZOL'O | Z60'0 | 640°0 [7620 '°0 I8é10'0 GIF I 000 00S Tt 
120 |I1z’O |261°0 | 82410 | F9L‘O [6SFI'O | 4cT'O | FIT O 9010 | 960°0 | &80°0 |S€90°0 LS9T0 0 686 'T 000 OG< T 
GZZ'0 {E1z'0 |10z'0 | E81°O | OZT’O ITSO | ZEL'O | 6IT'O ITLO | OOT'O | 2480°0 |4890°0 020600 6ST 000 000 T 
82Z'0 |81z'0 |G0z'0 | 98T°O | SZ1°O |EEST'O | SET'O | TaT'O S110 | SOT’O | 060°0 |1120°0 00€20'0 ‘$60 °T 000 006 
0&z'0 |0zz‘'0 |20z°0 | 88t°0 | SZI°O |Z9ST'O | 8EI‘'O | F2T‘O | OTTO 901°0 | €60°0 |8€20°0 86920 0 Té0'1 000 008 
€&z°0 |ezz'0 |01z'0 | Z6L’O | SLI°O |E6ST 0 | IFL‘O | 8ZT'0 | OcT'O 6010 | 960°0 |6920°0 | ¢70'0 896¢0'0 $96 0 00D 004 
9&2'0 |9zz'0 Je1z'0 | S6L°O | TSI°O |8Z9I‘O | FFI‘O | IET'O | Ecr'O ZIL‘O | 660°0 |7080'0 | 8F0'0 CSFE0 0 £680 000 009 
1¥Z'0 |[€z°0 |81Z'0 | 6610 | 98L°O JOL9T°O | 8FI°O | Set'O LZ1°0 | L110 | FOT'O |9F80°0 | €20°0 GF0F0 0 ST8°0 000 00¢ - 
L¥Z'0 |Z8z'0 |#oa'0 | GOTO | Z6L‘O |ZZLT'O | FET'O | IPT'O €81°0 | ZZL'O | GOTO |8680'0 | 820°0 8Z1¢0'0 8¢2°0 000 OOF 
€6z'0 |2bz'0 |6zz'0 | O12°0 | 261°O |88Z1°0 | O9T'O | 9FT'O SEO | 8ZI°O | ST1°O |F960°0 | 7900 20690' 0 0£9°0 laa 
19z'0 |1¢z'0 |zez°0 | 61Z°0 | 9020 |6981°0 | 89T'O | Sst 'O | ZFT 0 9€1'O | SZI'O J9FOT'O | €20°0 98260 '0 8c¢ 0 000 0 
G9z'0 |s¢z'0 |zrz'0 | #20 | IIZ‘O |EZ6T'O | €21°0 | O9T'O | ZST'O ZFL'O | 6210 |6601'0 | 820°0 | 9F0°0 FECT O OLF 0 000 
ZLZ°0 |29%'0 |8Fz'0 | 0&4°0 | 9TZ'O |ZZ61°0 | 6L4T'0 | 99T 0 Scl'O | 24FL'O | FET‘O |EGIL'O | ¥80'0 | cg0'0 9ccst 0 SIF 0 00 
11Z°0 |292'0 |e¢z'0 | 8z'0 | GBZ'O |6z0G'0 | P8I°O | TZT'O €9T°O | Z&T°O | 6EL'O |GOzT ‘0 | 680°0 | 990°0 9610 eZ¢°0 0 
€8Z'°0 |€22°0 16¢z'0 | 1FZ°0 | 8za'0 |880G'0 | 06T'0 | LZT 0 691°0 | 8S1‘'0 | SFI‘O |F9zT‘°0 | 9600 | €90°0 ¥LPS 0 8ce 0 is 
8820 |422'0 |F9z'0.| Gho'0 | ZE°O |ZFIZ'O | FGT'O | TST'O €L1°0 | £91°0 | OST'O |8TEI‘O | 660'0 | 290°0 Ooze 0 6660 G 
£6z'0 |z8z'0 169c'0 | 0Sz°0 | 28z°0 |S61z'0 | 661'0 | 98T'O | 8ZT 0 8910 | SEl’O |aZeT'O | SOTO | c40 0 FE6E 0 09¢°0 € 
66Z'0 |88z'0 |¢2z°0 | 29°0 | FSO |ZFSS"0 | 90G"0 | E6T'0 | S80 PLT'O | T9T°O |FZFT'O | TIT’O } 820°O/ 096F°0 8s 0 py puets 
cog’o |F6z'0 |18z'0 | z9z°0 | 6FZ'O |G0ES'0 | IIZ°0 | 861 0 061'O | O81°O | Z91°O \z8FI'O | ZITO | ¢80°0 096F 0 $¥0< 0 4 
GTE0 |e0e'0 |z6z'0 | €4z'0 | 092°0 |ZIFa'0 | GEG"O | 60G'0 | 10c'0 1610 | 8ZL°0 |68ST‘O | 24210 | $60'0 8882°0 0c9T 0 9 
9z£°0 |S12°0 |z0g'0 | #8z'0 | TZ4z°0 J61Sz°0 | SEs'0 | OZ 0 zIz'0 | Z0Z°O | 681'0 |S69T 0 | 8ET°O | 2OT‘O Hoe 1 S8cr "9 8 
L@8°0 |9ze"0 |eTe°0 | ¥6Z°0 | 18c°0 |9c9'0 | FFZ'O | TEZ'0 €2z'0 | ZIZ'O | 6610 |SO8T'O | SFI'O | OTTO $66 'T F200) OTR BHeS 
09 SF 9¢ FG SI ZL 8 9 c F € G i = “yey soyouy -aBneny 
ee Vd Pe aN a le ee ea ee 089 ye STIM ut ‘§ Bau 
. JO “43 000% | Ja}@AWeIG | JOJONpUCy 
*‘sayoUT UT SIOJONpPUOd Jo S19}zUGI UVEMJ9q saoueysiq, Jad suiyo JO 921g 


a 


“puodas sad sapoA9 Qg Jo Aouanbary B 4V aatr JO “YF OOS dad suiyo ut soueoVeYy 


‘STONVLOVAM JO ATAVL 


UL a9UeISTSOY 


a ES 


A02 FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. [June 19 


For instance, suppose it is required: to find the reactance 
corresponding to No. 4 solid wire with a distance between 
centers of nine ft. For one ft. the reactance is 0.2305, to which 
0.0319 (corresponding to 2 in the auxiliary table) must be added 


170 


100 


150 


140 


130 


120 


; 
7 


AND| INSULATING COMPOUNDS 


110 


F 


90 


Le 


80 


HEAT-CONDUCTING PROPERTIES 
OF WATER, AIR 


Foose 


70 100 
RISE. IN TEMPERATURE IN DEGREES FAHRENHEIT 


60 


00 


40 


_éach time the distance is doubled. Therefore, for eight ft, 
there must be added’ 30,0319 = 0.0957, giving the total 
’ reactance for eight ft:, 0.3262. Now dividing nine by ei zht, 
‘gives A ='1,125, and by direct interpolation we obtain the cor- 


1905.] FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. 403 


responding value B = 0.0054, which added to 0.3262 gives 
0.3316, the required reactance. Similarly, reactances for dis- 
tances not given in the table can be calculated from those 
given in the column for distance between centres of two in. and 
reactances for distances less than two in. can be calculated by 
‘a reversal of the above process, that is, by subtracting instead 
of adding the values of B. 

The curves of Fig. 2 show the heat-conducting properties 
of air and water, and of some insulating compounds. To make 
these determinations, three vessels were erhployed: © an inner 
vessel containing oil in which four incandescent lamps and a 
rotating vane were submerged; a second vessel immediately 
surrounding it in which was placed the material to be tested, 
and an external third vessel in which water at the temperature 
of the room was circulated. 

Energy was supplied to the lamps by direct current, which 
was kept constant until the difference of temperature between 
the water and oil remained constant. This difference in tem- 
perature is the abscissa of the curves, and is a measure of the 
heat-insulating properties of the material tested. During each 
test the pressure and current were carefully measured, from 
which the watts were calculated. $y 
The equation of the water curve, the constants of which were 
found by the method of least squares 1S: 7 

W 
2.41+0.00258 W. 


FT ce 


and the equation of the air curve is: 


. Ww 
0.6029+ 0.00211 W 


Where W = watts 
and { = rise in temperature, in degrees centigrade. 

The other curves are for the following materials: 1, cotton 
seed oil; 2, linseed oil; 3, oil compound used in high-pressure 
cables; 4, hard ozite; 5, asphaltum compound. These data 
show that in order to most freely dissipate heat, cables saturated 
with an oily compound should be used. 

I shall next consider the variation of insulation resistance 
and electrostatic capacity with change of température. 


404 FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. [June 19 


Figs. 3 and 4 show the results of tests on rubber-covered 
cables. The curves present a very interesting feature of dis- 
similarity in the presence of a double curvature in the curve of 
Fig. 4, and in its absence in Fig. 3. The writer has noticed 
this phenomenon several times; it is not necessarily dependent 


2.22 2.32 2.42 252 2.63 


640 


600 
140 150) «160 


520 560 
180 


120 


110 


320 300 400 440 480 
80 9 100 
MEGOHMS PER MILE 


MICROFARADS PER MILE 
-92_ 1.02 1.12 1.92 1.32 1.42 1.52 1.62 1.72 1.82 1.92 2.02 2.12 


i 

RATURE | 

La Sey 
CTOR NO, € 

leat ey 


ITH TEMPE 


ae eae 


t 


RUBBER INSULATION 


| 
SINGLE CONDU 


— 
+ 


| [w 


| 


CHANGE OF INSULATION AND CAPACITY 


2 
80 
20 


| a 2a 

a : SS 

g ~ 
2 @2 28 8 § § 8 8 © 8 @ 98 


AIBHNAYHV4S S33BY9D30 NI SYNLVuadWaL 


upon the composition of the rubber compcund. The variation 
in the insulation and capacity of rubber cables may be very 
much greater than is given by these curves. 

The capacity tests were made with a galvanometer in the 
usual manner. The effective capacity for alternating currents 
(as determined from measurements of charging currents, fre- 


1905.] FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. 405 


quency, and pressure) does not vary nearly so rapidly with 
change of temperature as is shown in the figures. 

A study of the ratio between the effective capacity for alter- 
nating currents and the capacity, as measured by the discharge- 
deflection method, reveals many interesting and useful facts. © 


3 
cod ‘ 
& 
iJ 
B 
Re Ss 
B 
c Q 
maeliss : 
i 3 
& 
Fal : 
Ss 
2 | 
ae - ng 
= ot 
te ate 
g a 
= 4%) 
= 
i—J 
3 O 
a 
= 3 
Lol 
= 
“Ss 2 
alee 
ae 3 
ui 
ag So 
a 
— 
‘£8 3 
z_ 
og Z 
o 
mi 2 


8 
2228 8 3 a 
IAHNAYHV4 SAaYDaC NI SUNLVYAdWSL 


a 
1 


The smaller this ratio becomes the more apt is the dielectric 
of a cable to become heated under pressure stress. 

Generally the ratio becomes greater with increased percentages 
of Para rubber, although this is not always the case. With 
rubber cables the ratio may be as high as 0.95 and as low as 
0.75, at 60 cycles per second, and a temperature 60° fahr.; it 


406 FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. [June 19 


decreases with increase of temperature. For good paper cables 
the ratio is in the neighborhood of 0.9. For varnished cambric 
it may vary between 0.75 and 0.50; hence, such cables are liable 
to become hot under high pressure stress. 

Fig. 5 gives the variation of insulation resistance with change 


MEGOHMS PER MILE 


PAPER INSULATION 


CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE. 


Tel 
| 
> 
na 
° 
- 
nl 
> 
7) 
z 
w 
fe} 
wi 
o 
z 
< 
x= 
Oo 
oO 
z 
= 
[e) 
pss 
7) 
w 
> 
x 
=) 
oO 


NIQHN3YHVA S33YHD30 Ni SYNLVYadWaL 


of temperature of a three-conductor 3/000 B. & S. gauge paper 
cable. The equation of this curve is: 

Log I = 7.122 — 0.438 T -5%7. 

Where J = the insulation resistance per mile, 
and T = the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. 


1905.] FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. 407 

Fig. 6 gives the variation in capacity with change in tem- 

perature of the same cable. The equation of the curve is 

Log C-= T 0.38338 + (T — 32) ***- 

Where C = the capacity per mile, 
T = the temperature. 


+ 


B 
=a | rd 
here a 2 
"| ws oi 
' 433 
a 
L 13 
g =H 
Ps] 
| ot 
2 3 
a 
9 
Ugoee aw 
= te 
E | Ss 
> am ie 
z 3 : 
; fe) Big 
oui E aa 
< io < < 
a => 4 = 
ale ee a§ 
w ee ail Zz bik Fo 
Le & | we & 
| 2 Ss io a Oo 
ul ns 
erat 
z nls : 
a at | ig a 
ri Sle ey 
Ww 4 Ww = ie 3 
leo i nl 
| e| 3| él [ 
(o] xr 7) 
a 3 Es 
oe ( 
ee 8 2 
” oO 
ls = , 
3 
E: 3 
ig aries 4 GA 


i 
15 


So > > > = 
3 a a S & J & 3 
a a a = 
H 


JISHNSYHVS SSSYDRC NI aYuNLVusdWal 


50 
" 40 


o 
BUF 
ol rc 


With paper cables the variation is generally the greater the 
less viscous the compound. In the above case the insulating 


compound was quite oily, so that with other cables the varia- 
tion may be either greater or less than’ the above. 


[June 19 © 


{ 


ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. 


FISHER: 


408 


S3YuSdWV 
G 00% 


OOF _—08S 09S _—OOFS oes 008 08% 09% OF 06 OgT 09t OFT «MT Oot 08 09 OF 0% 0 


SiW YVINONIO 000'092"1 ‘erat 


” uaeenu cog RH ‘ 
[NOILVINSNI—uadvd sotkerv-ot —| = 


| STW BVINDUIO 000 oog ‘area 
| 000 4.INOO € |'9 Py 


: 


+ 


NOILVINSNI Y3dVd 
OGRE Br bs es oa a ie 
‘000 YHOLONGNOO-33Y8HL 
fies oa ee 
easiest. | 5 


se ERs 


BQVYSILNSO S33uD30 NI AUNLVuSdWaL 


*1905.] FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. 409 


Oily compounds are the best because the cables can be readiest 
handled in cold weather; and offer the highest resistance strains. 

Hence, the old idea of demanding high insulation resistance 
in megohms per mile, which was best obtained by the use of 
‘hard compounds, is incorrect, and the better-informed engineers 
of to-day either do not mention insulation resistance at 
all, or else specify 25 to 100 megohms per mile, depending 
-upon the size of the conductor and thickness of insulation. 

The subject which will next be considered is the carrying 
capacity of different cables. The results given were cbtained 
from practical tests made at Niagara Falls. 

Fig. 7 gives the rise in temperature due to currents of differ- 
ent strength in a three-phase 000 B. & S. gauge cable; the 
insulation on the conductor was of paper, gy’ in. thick; and 
over the three conductors, paper yz in. thick. The small 
diagram at the right of the figure shows the arrangement of 
ducts and the kinds of cables in the various ducts. The cables 
were connected in series'so that the same current passed through 
them all. , 

The heating effect in the 500 000 cir. mils and 1 250 000 cir. 
mils cables was, of course, very small. The 000 single-conductor 
paper and rubber-insulated cable did not get nearly so warm 
as the three-conductor cable. It seems reasonably safe to 
assume that these curves are accurate enough for practical 
purposes for a duct system similar to the one used, in which 
three or four three-conductor cables similar to the two em- 
ployed in the test are operating. 

Fig. 8 gives the results of current-carrying capacity tests on 
single-conductor 000 cable with yy in. paper. The diagram 
to the right of the curve shows the arrangement of cables in 
the duct system. It is interesting to note that the difference of 
temperatures between the earth and the cable in duct L was 
not nearly so great as the difference in temperature between 
the cable in duct G and earth. During the various tests the 
corner ducts always radiated the best, and all of the outside 
ducts radiated heat much better than the inside ducts. For 
this reason, a conduit system, two ducts wide, is to be preferred 
because there is direct radiation from all the ducts to earth. 
The tests showed that a rubber-insulated cable dissipates heat 
more readily than a paper-insulated cable of the same dimen- 
sions. The rise in temperature in the paper cable was about 
one-third greater than that of the rubber cable. 


410 FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. [June 19 ° 


BOVYDILNAO $3auda0 Ni SYNLVYadW3L 
YOLONGNOO ANY LONG N33ML3E SHNLVHadW3L JO 3ON3H3I5I0 


Ro. hav Ma Se Oe ee ae 


400 


ATION 
380 


I 


K, &/<, 000| RUBBER INSULATION 


360 


320 340 


&|L, COO | PAPER INSUL 


Ss, 


260 «280 300 


240 


220 


AMPERES 


180 =—-.200 


ER INSULATION 
146-160 


ia 


120 


=< 
100 


80 


ay 
ra) 
ro) 


by 


ot ea Peet Pee ee ete ek eee yey oe ey 
BSQVYSILN|SD S33Y4D30 NI 3YNLVYHSdWaL 
HL8V3 ONY LONG N3aML3E AUNLVHadWas AO ZONAHSIIIC 


1905.] FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. 411 


Fig. 9 gives the results of current-carrying capacity tests on 
a 1 250 000 cir. mils paper cable. Four such cables were con- 
nected in series and placed as shown in the diagram at the 
right of the curve. , The lead covers of these cables were bonded 


1000 


900 


= 


‘IN SERIES 


| 


1,260,000 CIRCULAR MILS 
800 


700 


600 


500 
AMPERES 


ii) 


—_—— 


a 


eae 
4,250,000 |CIRCULAR |MILS 


300 


ee PAPER INSULATION 


| 


ES Ey Era ee ee ee ae ee 
BQVYDILNAO S33YN9aC NI SYNLVYAdWAL 


together at several points so as to give the condition for maxi- 
mum temperature rise. It was a noticeable fact that with cables 
bonded the rise in temperature was slightly greater than when 
they were not bonded. In this case, also, the corner duct’ I 
was the coolest and the inside duct F the hottest. 


412 FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. [June 19 


Fig. 10 gives the results of current-carrying capacity tests 
on a 500 000 cir. mils cable insulated with sy in. paper. The 
diagram shows the arrangement of cables and the same current 
flowed through all the cables in series. Before passing on to 


900 


90,000 CIRCULAR MILs 


i 


, &C) THREE CONDUCTORS 


DuCTOR”%000 


3 CON! 
800 


000 ICIRCULAR MIL 


ULTIPLE 
250, 


Linn 
J, 1, 
& o| 


F,l, 


D) 
A 
E 
A 

700 


H 


600 


AMPERES 


500 


500,000 CIRCULAR MILS 


Be he 
300 


a oe 


i 
nee ee 


9 8 Rees SR RRR OR See ee ae 
SOVYSIANSO S33Y¥930 NI SUNLVUadW3L 


the next subject, the writer wishes to say that it is impossible 
to lay down any definite rule for the current-carrying capacity 
of cables; the dampness of manholes and ducts, and the con- 
dition and kind of soil, and arrangement of cables—all are promi- 
nent factors in controlling the temperature rise. When the 


1905.] FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. 413 


tests herein referred to were first started, the temperature rise 
was not so great as in later tests. For this reason current was 
applied to a lot of cables for about a week before the regular 
tests were made; and in this way the dampness in the duct sys- 
tem was largely removed so that the cables were tested under 
what might be considered ‘‘ normal conditions.”’ 

The closing part of this paper will be devoted to a considera- 
tion of the pressures that should be applied to different sizes of 
cables. 

Fig. 11 gives the breakdown pressures corresponding to dif- 
ferent thicknesses of gutta-percha. This curve is more inter- 
esting than valuable because it is hardly safe to use gutta-percha 
for electric light or power cables owing to the fact that as soon 


THICKNESS OF INSULATION IN MILS 


2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 
BREAKDOWN PRESSURES IN UNITS OF 1,000 VOLTS 


as the conductors get warm the gutta-percha will soften and 
the conductor become decentralized. Gutta-percha, however, 
has a wonderful dielectric strength; it will be noticed that 
39 000 volts is required to break down an insulation of 0.1 in. 
The tests were made on short samples and hence, long lengths 
of the insulated wire could not be expected to give as good a 
showing as is presented. . 
Table 2 gives the thickness of paper recommended for differ- 
ent working pressures and different half-hour test pressures. In 
presenting this table, the writer wishes it to be clearly under- 
stood that there is a large margin of safety in the figures given. 
There is no doubt that cables with considerably thinner insula- 
tion than is recommended would work successfully under nor- 


414 FISHER: ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS. [June 19 


mal conditions, but the abnormal conditions which occur occa- 
sionally and have been the cause of much damage, not only to 
cables but accessory apparatus, must be provided for. The 
extra expense entailed by the addition of a little more insula- 
tion is small compared with the much larger factor of safety 
obtained thereby. For three-phase cables, the table gives the 
thickness of paper between conductors. 


TABLE Il. 


Thicknesses of Paper Insulation. 


ee a a 


Thickness of Insulation. | Working Pressure. Factory Test Installed Test 
5 minutes. 4 hour. 
4/32 in. to 5/32 in. 1000 to 1900 7 000 4 000 
5/32 in. to 6/32 in. 1900 to 2250 10 000 6 000 
6/32 in. to 7/32 in. 2250 to 3800 13 000 8 000 
7/32 in. to 8/32 in. 3.800 to 5000 16 000 10 000 
8/32 in. to 10/32 in. 5000 to 6500 19 000 12 000 
9/32 in, to 11/32 in. 6500 to 8 000 22 000 14 000 
10/82 in. to 12/32 in. 8000 to 9500 25 000 16 000 
11/32 in. to 13/32 in. 9 500 to 11 000 28 000 18 500 
12/32 in. to 14/32 in. 11 000 to 13 000 31 000 21 000 | 
13/32 in. to 15/32 in. 13 000 to 15 000 34 000 23 500 
14/32 in. to 16/32 in. 15 000 to 17 000 37 000 26 000 
15/32 in. to 17/32 in, 17 000 to 19 000 40 000 28 500 
16/32 in. to 18/32 in. 19 000 to 21 000 43 000 31 000 
‘ /32 in, to 19/32 in. 21 000 to 23 000 46 000 33 500: 


It is difficult to predict at this time the maximum pressures 
that may be transmitted through cables in the near future. 
The experienced manufacturer can construct cables that will 
withstand very high pressure tests at the factory; but without 
subjecting such cables to pressures operating under working 
conditions for a long time, it is impossible to tell how they will 
withstand high pressures continually, and abnormally high ones 
occasionally. 

All cables which are to be placed underground should be 
lead covered, because even if the insulated conductor can be 
submergéd in water for an indefinite time without breaking 
down under pressure tests, yet if. a non-leaded cable of the 
same material be placed in ducts, some ingredient that will injure 
it will, sooner or later, get into the Cucts or manholes.. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 415 


Discussion on, ‘‘ Data RELATING TO ELECTRICAL 
ae CONDUCTORS AND CABLEs.’”’ 


H. G. Stott: There are one or two questions I would like 
-to ask, probably Mr. Fisher can answer them. At the foot of page 
404 it is stated: : 

_““ The. capacity tests were made with a galvanometer in the usual 
manner. The effective capacity for alternating currents (as determined 
from measurements of charging currents, frequency, and pressure) does 
not vary nearly so rapidly with change of temperature as is shown in 
the figures.” 

I would inquire why the capacity as determined by alter- 
nating-current measurements and special measurements, does not 
vary so rapidly as it would if the capacity were measured by the 
ordinary discharge galvanometer method? On the next page 
495 it is stated: 

“A study of the ratio between the effective capacity for alternating 
currents and the capacity as measured by the discharge-deflection 
method, reveals many interesting and useful facts: The smaller this 
ratio becomes, the more apt is the dielectric of a cable to beco~.e heated 
under pressure stress.” 

Is it intended to indicate the presence of dielectric hysterisis? 

The presence of heat is undoubtedly due to that. The different 

tables of data and curves are I think of value to the art, par- 
ticularly those showing the principle involved in the laying of 
conduits. Conduits are sometimes put in position under 
adverse conditions. In a limited space, already partly occupied 
by water-mains, gas-pipes, etc., a number of conduits must be 
installed.’ This paper indicates very clearly that the proper 
method is to have the minimum distance possible between each 
conduit and the earth in order to obtain maximum results from 
‘each conductor. Fortunately the heaviest load in cables is 
carried during the coldest weather. This fact is a boon to the 
engineer. tt . 

I think that Mr. Fisher has not made an exact statement of 
the limit of safety of a working current on underground cables. I 
note that he carried the working pressure up to 23 000 volts, and 
the test pressure up to 46 000 volts. That is encouraging because » 
it indicates that manufacturers are prepared to build cables and 
guarantee them up to a pressure. of 23 000 volts. I am, look- 
ing forward to the day not being very far distant when cables will 
be furnishéd that will stand an operative pressure of 50 000 

i : ; 
ay would also like to ask Mr. Fisher if he has determined what re- 
lationship there is, if any, between the thickness of the lead 
jacket on a cable and the radiation of heat. ; 

C. W. Rice: Referring to the first 1cw sentences in the 
paper regarding the fear that giving out information will 
prove a hardship to the manufacture of cables. My experience 
1. the purchase of cables has taught me that the greatest suc- 


416 ELECTRICAL CONDUCTORS AND CABLES. [June 19 


cess is in not assuming to know more than the manufacturer, 
but rather to consult the manufacturer frankly and ask him 
what is the best specification? 

Insulation resistance is often specified higher than is practic- 
able. With the development of the paper-insulated cable, the 
manufacturer advises that requirements be reduced until now 
the insulation resistance is in the neighborhood of 300 or 400 
megohms only for the three-conductor cable of 250 000 cir. mils 
such as are now used for three-phase transmission of power in 
cities with 6 600 volts or thereabouts. Formerly 1 000 meg- 
ohms was specified. This is the result of accepting the advice 
of a manufacturer, and it has proved a complete success. 

In New York, where probably there is more cable than in any 
other city in the United States, or in the world, interrup- 
tions of service due to the breaking down of a cable are 
almost unheard of. Most of the troubles are in the joints. 

Another particular wherein consulting engineers may err is 
in asking for a breakdown test of several times the working pres- 
sure. I think that two and one-half times is the ultimate that . 
should ever be required. More than that is a strain upon the 
insulation which gives it a permanent set, comparable to the 
set in mechanics. 

C. O. MarttLtoux: This paper presents features that are 
worthy of special mention. They are first, the liberal use which 
has been made of diagrams to express graphically the relation 
between variable quantities; secondly, the thorough manner 
in which these diagrams have been made use of. Those who are 
accustomed to the use of graphical methods cannot help but 
notice in these curves the fact that they pass either through the 
plotted points, or very close to them. 

The curves in Fig. 5, for instance, especially the one that is 
marked a, illustrate the manner in which it is possible to obtain 
an empirical formula that fits closely to data plotted graphically. 
The formula is given at the bottom of page 406. It will 
be observed that the exponent has been worked out to the 
fifth decimal and that the constants are given to the third 
and fourth decimal. In discussing this matter with Mr. Fisher, 
over two years ago, he showed me the necessity not only of 
determining carefully the constants in an empirical equation for 
expressing a mathematical relation of the kind represented in 
the formula just referred to, but also the importance of using a 
sufficiently large number of decimal places to suit the case. In 
this particular case it would not be possible to get an empirical 
curve that would even approximately fit the case, without work- 
ing out the equation as carefully as has been done here. Of 
course this close approximation between the plotted points and 
the empirical curve depends greatly upon the accuracy of the 
measurements made. . ' 

In the last paragraph on page 398, it is noted that it is found 
in certain cases that the current apparently follows the copper 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 417 


strands helically around the central steel wire, making in con- 
sequence a different resistance for the cables—a higher resist- 
ance than would be obtained with the equivalent amount 
ot copper wire laid straight for the same length as the cable. That 
is rather a small matter to figure out in a 7-wire cable, but 
in a 19-wire or 37-wire cable it is rather difficult to figure out, as 
the helical turns are unequal, and it is much more readily obtained 
with an ordinary apparatus for measuring the resistence, if one 
has the opportunity to apply it to cables, as Mr. Fisher has 
already done. The publication of the results of such measure- 
ments would be of great interest. 

On the last page of the paper is given a table of thicknesses 
of insulation for paper cables; this marks a distinct step oo 
advance that has recently been made by the manufacturers of 
such cables. A few years ago there was a limiting thickness in 
insulation beyond which an increase of thickness did not give a 
corresponding increase of permissible voltage. That was more 
particularly true of fibre-insulated cables than of paper insulation, 
but at the same time it was also true to some extent of paper- 
insulated cables, so that the table, which I believe is true to-day 
for one or more makes of paper-insulated cables, represents a 
distinct progress in cable manufacture. If cables up to 
17-32nds of an inch, for pressures of 21 000 to 23 000 volts, can 
be relied upon to-day it is much better than could be done a few 
years ago. It is the result of efforts to learn how to make 
a paper cable that will continually withstand a higher voltage as 
the thickness of the insulation increases. 

Cuas. P. Steinmetz: Regarding power transmission of late 
years, electrical engineering has proceeded in overhead transmis- 
sion to higher and higher voltages, voltages which were never 
thought of 10 years ago The increase of voltage in cable trans- 
mission has not kept step with it. Years ago cables were oper- 
ated at 6 600 volts; and then, with fear and trembling, the pres- 
sure was lifted to 11 000 volts. This voltage, 11 000, seems to 
be the maximum just now. There are very few cables operat- 
ing ata higher voltage. In operating voltages, in cable systems, 
the increase has not kept pace with that in overhead lines. Any 
information regarding underground cables that gives a clearer 
view of this matter, and thereby holds out a prospect of 
being able to follow ‘gn underground cable distribution, the 
advance of rising voltages in overhead transmission, 1S of value. 

There is one minor point regarding which I desire to say a few 
words, since I do not quite agree with Mr. Fisher. It ison 
the effect of the greatly increased impedance in a cable 
with two iron strands. Such an increase of impedance may not 
be objectionable in many cases. It may even be beneficial, in 
those cases where inductance is desirable, as when controlling 
voltage by varying the phase relation in a transmission system 
connected with compound rotary conductors. I believe, how- 
ever, that it is very undesirable in high-voltage, long-distance 


418 ELECTRICAL CONDUCTORS AND CABLES. {June 19 


transmissien lines of considerable capacity. I do net agree 
that this increased impedance compensates for the capacity of 
the long-distance line, since the impedlance is a series impedance 
and the capacity is a shunted capacity. To compensate for 
the capactiy would require a shunted impedance. Series im- 
pedance’ increases vastly the liability to resonance, and this is 
an undesirable phenomenon. 

Now: one can look at it from another point of view. The 
frequency of oscillation of overhead long-distance lines can, 
with sufficient accuracy, be calculated by dividing 47 000 by 
the length of the line in miles. This applies whether they are 
single sransmission lines or several transmission lines in multiple, 
but it applies only to a transmission line in air. If the material 
surrounding the conductor is not air, then the period of oscil- 
Jation multiplies and the frequency divides by the square root of 
the permeability and the dielectric constant of the material; it 
the inductance is doubled, this means the velocity of propagation 
of the current in the transmission line and thereby the frequency 
of oscillation is reduced by \/9, In other words, the trans- 


mission line has, in respect to the frequency of surges or oscil- 
lation and to their power,/2_ times the length; that is, it is 41 
percent. longer. Since the increased inductance is due to the iron 
such a surge or oscillation has a more rapid decrease due to the 
energy lost in the iron, than onan air line. Hence the matter is 
not quite as bad. Nevertheless, I do not consider the increase 
of inductance under such conditions as desirable wherever the 
capacity effects are considerable. 

H. W. FisHer: Inanswer to Mr. Stott’s question, the reason 
the capacity measured with a galvanometer increases more 
rapidly than capacity measured by the charging current method, 
‘is that when a cable is warm there is kind of polarizing action due ° 
to the return current, which in turn produces an augmented 
deflectam. To a person experienced in cable testing, this kind 
of. galvanometer deflection is familiar. Under such conditions, 
the gakvanometer will show a permanent deflection for a long 
time after the cable has been charged. The capacity thus 
measured is, therefore, larger than the true capacity, as measured 
by the charging-current method. 

Referring to the other question that Mr. Stott asked relative 
to the ratio between the capacities, as measured by the charging- 
current method and by the galvanometer method, it can be 
said broadly that when this ratio is small cables will get warmer 
under dielectric voltage stress than when the ratio is large. 
Whether the heating effect isinversely proportionate to that ratio, 
I cannot say. The heating effect is only produced when high 
voltages are applied, such as will nearly puncture the insulation. 

‘Dr. Perrine asked for more data in reference to the resistance 
of stranded cables... The variables are so great that exact data 
‘on this subject are difficult to obtain. In the old days, cables 
were frequently not made in accordance with perfect construction; 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 419 


namely, commencing with a one-wire center. Sometimes, the 
most peculiar strands are specified, such as cannot he made 
without having numerous open spaces between wires. The 
resistance of such a strand may be considerably higher than that 
of a perfect strand. I have known of cases where the conductiv- 
ity ran as low as 96%; that is, two or three per cent. lower than 
that of a perfect strand. Of course, there is a variable function 
that cannot be eliminated; namely, the insulating compound get- 
ting in between the strands, tending to insulate one from the 
other. 

H.G.Srorr: You suggested 23 000 volts. Are you prepared 
to make cables guaranteed to stand that voltage? 

H. W. Fisuer: Yes; there is no difficulty about doing that. 
The question is whether cables can be operated continuously 
at very much higher voltages, such as 40 000 to 50 000 volts? 


1 paper presented at the 22d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-28, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. 1. E. E. 


METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF HIGH ELECTRICAL 
PRESSURES. 


BY S. M. KINTNER. 


The need of some convenient and accurate method of meas- 
uring high electrical pressures has been felt for a number of years. 
The trend of modern development in electrical transmission of 
power toward higher pressures will doubtless make this need 
more and more urgent. The testing of dynamos, transformers, 
switches, cables, etc., at several times normal pressure, as a 
specified condition of their acceptance, is not infrequently the 
cause of considerable controversy as to whether the proper 
pressure test has actually been applied. 

The purpose of this paper is to summarize briefly the various 
methods of high-pressure measurement at present employed, 
pointing out the respective advantages and faults of these 
methods, and then to describe a new type of static volt- 


meter. 


Ratio MetuHop. STEP-UP TRANSFORMER. 


Probably the most convenient method of high-pressure meas- 
urement is the one employing the ratio of the step-up trans- 
former supplying the power. The pressure on the low-pressure 
side of the transformer is measured by the customary low-pres- 
sure instruments; the high-pressure value is obtained by mul- 
tiplying this measurement by the ratio of transformation. Un- 
fortunately the pressure ratio is not accurately the ratio of the 
number of turns on the two sides, and the real ratio of pressure 
is not a constant but is dependent upon the load and its char- 
acter. In well-designed transformers of large kilowatt capacity 


421 


422 KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. | [June 19 


no serious error will be encountered in using this method when 
the transformer is supplying a very small current. 

Owing to the large impedance of high-pressure transformers, 
due to the size of the spacings between windings required for 
insulation and the comparatively few interlacings of high- and 
low-pressure windings, currents of appreciable size will cause a 
considerable variation in the terminal pressure from that de- 
ducible from the ratio of transformation. If the current is 
used in charging a condenser the pressure may be higher than 
the ratio would imply, though for all other cases it would be 
less. The writer has noted instances of the first kind where 
the pressure was 20% high, due to the interaction between the 
inductance of the transformer and the electrostatic capacity 
of a machine under an insulation test. 

The ratio method is used regularly for tests on insulating 
materials, such as treated cloth, fullerboard, paper, oils, line 
insulators, etc., and with all the accuracy necessary for these 
conditions. Owing to its convenience, cheapness, and safety 
to the operator, this method will doubtless always find a place 
in high-pressure measurement. It is fairly accurate except in 
such cases as require considerable current, when a serious error 
of either a positive or a negative value may be introduced, 
according to the character of the load. 


Ratio Metuop. STEP-DOWN TRANSFORMER. 


The use of an auxiliary transformer to reduce the high- 
pressure to a value suitable for ordinary low-pressure instru- 
ments has been used very successfully within a certain range 
of pressure. The limits of the usefulness of such a transformer 
are soon reached with increasing pressures, on account of the 
size of the transformer required. It is impracticable to build 
a 15- or 20-watt transformer for 50000 volts—the minimum 
commercial transformer for that pressure would be more apt to 
have a rating of 15 or 20 kilowatts. The smallest size of 
wire that it is feasible to wind when properly insulated and 
placed on the most economical size of core, would give a trans- 
former of approximately the size stated above, in kilowatts. 

Results obtained by use of the voltmeter transformer are 
reasonably accurate over certain parts of the scale, but if accu- 
racy over a greater range is desired it is necessary to change 
the ratio of the transformer for the lower pressure values. The 
changing of the ratio introduces at times a certain amount of 
uncertainty as to the proper connections. Voltmeter trans- 


1905] KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT, 423 


formers for switchboard service, where the pressure range is 
limited and the high-pressure side of the transformer is from 
12 000 to 14 000 volts, are quite satisfactory and are likely to 
be continued in that service for some time. This method for 
general testing is reasonably accurate over a limited part of 
the scale and is quite safe for the operator, but is defective on 
the score of cost and lack of portability. 


VoOLTMETER Cor, AND MEASUREMENT Across PART OF THE 
HiGH-PRESSURE WINDING. 

Special coils have been -placed in the high-pressure circuit 
in an endeavor to have them linked with the same magnetic 
flux as the high-pressure winding and thus give an accurate 
and constant ratio. This method has met with only a limited 
degree of success; it is but slightly, if any, more accurate than 
the method of ratio from the low-pressure side. It is subject 
to certain errors due to the lack of uniformity of pressure in- 
duced per turn. This lack of uniformity is due to the leakage 
flux affecting some parts of the winding more than others. 

The insulation between voltmeter coils and the high-pressure 
winding is essentially the same as that between the low-pressure 
and the high-pressure windings, consequently these coils are 
subject to practically the same flux leakage as the low-pressure 
windings. Practically, the insertion of the extra windings 
introduces insulation difficulties and necessitates the use 
of additional leads. This latter point assumes more and more 
importance with increasing pressure. For the safety of the 
observer the pressure coil should be connected to earth. 

Measurement of the pressure over fractional parts of “the 
high-pressure winding is quite similar to the method of volt- 
meter coils. If such measurements are made over symmetrical 
portions, like one-half or one-fourth of the winding, according 
to the individual case, very satisfactory results will be obtained. 
When employing instruments connected directly on the high- 
pressure circuits, or on circuits like voltmeter coils electro- 
statically inductive to them and not grounded, it is necessary to 
connect one side of the meter to a metallic screen surrounding 
it, as a protection against disturbance from external charges. 
The screen is insulated from earth for full line pressure, and is, 

‘of course, dangerous to touch. | 

It may be stated in general that the method of employing 

‘a voltmeter coil is but slightly better than the straight-ratio 


424 KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. [June 19 


method previously described. It introduces insulation diff- 
culties, and increases the cost of the transformer, which are not 
warranted by the slight advantages of the method. Measure- 
ments over certain symmetrical portions of the high-pressure 
winding give satisfactory results, when proper precautions are 
taken in the screening of the meters. 


VoLTMETER ReEsisTANCE METHOD. 

An extension of the well-known plan of using extra resist- 
ance as a multiplier for a voltmeter in order that it may be 
used on a circuit of higher pressure than that for which it was 
designed, has been employed on pressures up to 150 000. 
Such a resistance, while it can be made practically free from 
inductance, is subject to capacity action between parts and to 
ground and surrounding objects. The capacity currents may 
cause the voltmeter to read high or low, depending on the loca- 
tion of the voltmeter in the resistance circuit. It is practically 
impossible to correct for these variations, and such methods 
as have been proposed* for overcoming them are both compli- 
cated and costly. 

The resistance required is bulky, difficult to mount, and 
delicate. It is also faulty in that considerable energy is consumed 
—about 6 kilowatts for 100 000 volts being an average value, 
which varies, however, according to the sensitiveness of the volt- 
mejer employed. Fora given sensitiveness of meter, the energy 
consumed in the resistance varies as the square of the pressure. 


CAPACITY IN SERIES WITH A CURRENT-OPERATED VOLTMETER. 


In all the preceding methods it is assumed that the volt- 
meters used depend upon current for their operation, and that 
the proper current-limiting devices are provided. A condenser 
of suitable size in series with a voltmeter will doubtless suggest 
itself as another possible combination. It is a possible method 
but not one to be recommended. A few of its many defects 
are the following: it requires a large and costly condenser; is 
subject to variation with frequency and wave-form; it is affected 
by static charges on surrounding objects. 


SpaRK-GAp METHOD. 


The measurement of pressures by determining the sparking 
distance has been accepted as a standard method readily ap- 


*Professor H. J. Ryan; International Electrical Congress, St. Louis, 
1904. ‘‘ Some Elements in the Design of High-Pressure Insulation.” 


1905.) KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 425 


plied, cheap, portable, and bearing the sanction of the AMERI- 
can INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. While the method 
has the above advantages, there are certain undesirable char- 
acteristics to which spark-gaps are subject that need to be con- 
sidered at greater length. 

In the majority of high-pressure measurements it is desirable 
to measure the voltage step by step for increasing values, and 
frequently it is desired to hold a particular value for a certain 
length of time. The spark-gap is not at all suited to such con- 
ditions. It is simply a weak spot, of approximately known 
value, in shunt with the object under test, and the pressure is 
applied and its value increased until the weaker one of the 
two breaks. Such a test is analogous to a measurement of 
current strengths by placing fuses in series with some device 
whose current-carrying capacity is under test. Results obtained 
with each method in the hands of an ordinary observer would , 
be of the same order of accuracy. 

In order to give a certain device a pressure time-test, the 
amount of pressure being determined by the spark-gap, one of 
two methods must be employed. 

First Method: A preliminary test with the spark-gap is made 
and the low-pressure reading noted, and then the regular test 
is applied according to the low-pressure reading. It is necessary 
for accuracy that all the apparatus be connected to the circuit 
at the time the preliminary test is made. The surges incident 
to the spark-discharge are liable to produce serious strains, both 
in the device under test and in the machine or transformer 
supplying the pressure. This method is to be condemned as 
unnecessary, and serious damage has resulted from this test on a 
number of different occasions. A part of this trouble can be elim- 
inated by placing choke-coils on the terminals of the testing 
transformer; these choke-coils tend to make the action more 
sluggish and thus relieve the severe strains. 

Second Method: The second method, which is preferable 
from the standpoint of abnormal insulation strains, consists of 
connecting current-limiting devices, such as condensers or re- 
sistances, in series with the spark-gap, to enable the pressure 
to be maintained without interruption after the spark-gap 
discharges. It is generally assumed that no appreciable drop 
of pressure through such devices is caused by the small charging 
current passing to and from the gap treated as a condenser, 
and that therefore it is possible to use the standard published 


426 KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT... (June 19 


spark-gap curves.. This assumption seems to be unwarranted; 
the experience of the writer during the last two years has shown 
very conclusively that these devices do affect the sparking 
distance. ; ' 

A number of tests made to ascertain the effect of various 
current-limiting devices arranged in different ways were re- 
cently made; the results of some of them are incorporated in 
the following sets of curves. 

The peculiar phenomena noted were obtained on several 
different occasions and were produced under conditions. likely 
to exist under the best testing arrangements for that particular 
apparatus. The curves in Fig. 1 illustrate the results obtained 
with sharp needle-point terminals. The variation of condition 
for each curve is stated on the drawing. 

The observations from which data for the above curves were 
obtained were made on a 25-cycle circuit having approximately 
a sine wave-form. The practice of varying the gap opening 
for a particular pressure was followed, as more accurate resuits 
could be obtained in that way. The necessary pressure for most 
of the tests was supplied by a 25-kw., 100 000-volt transformer 
though a number of observations were made on other testing 
sets, which gave values in general agreement with the first 
mentioned. 

Curve I was checked at several different values, as shown by 
the observation points. Sharp needles, properly supported, 
and with no current-limiting device in the gap circuit, were 
used in these determinations. 

Curve II was obtained in the same manner as Curve I, save 
for the presence of a water resistance in the gap circuit. This 
resistance consisted of a 3-ft. glass tube, of 0.25-in. bore, filled 
with distilled water. The connections to the resistance were 
made by immersing about 1 in. of No. 22 B. & S. copper wire 
in the water at each end of the tube. A difference of 10 or 12 
per cent. in the pressure required for a given gap is shown by 
Curve II in comparison with Curve I. 

Curves III and IV show the effect of condensers in the gap 
circuit. They produce a noticeable change in the sparking 
distance, which is, in general, of the same order as that produced 
by the water resistance. An effort was made to eliminate 
the effect of the condenser by placing more capacity in the gap 
circuit, but for capacities 50 times greater than that employed 


in the test. shown in Curve III a very perceptible. discrepancy 
remained, 


1905.] KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 427 


A modification in the spark-gap mounting produces a very 
decided change in the effect of the capacity or resistance, on 
the sparking distance. A certain amount of variation may 
also be produced by bringing objects near the spark-gap. This 
effect has been noted by Voege.* 


a: 


ow 


GAP SHIELDED WITH 8 DISC 


A.1.€.E. CURVE-CHECK VALVES 


WATER RHEOSTAT IN GAP CIRCUIT 
SMALL CONDENSER IN GAP CIRCUIT 


NEEDLE POINT SPARK GAP CURVE 


IHCHES 


2 


Ss 8158 Ral caes 2 
SLIOAOTIA 


Fie. 1. 


In general, anything that will tend to change the charging 
current of the gap, or of its mounting, will affect the sparking 
distance. we 

*Voege. Electrotechnische Zeitschrift; 1905, pp. 360. 


428. KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. [June 19 


The sudden bend in Curve III at about 50000 volts is doubt- 
less due to leakage of the condenser. It had a creep discharge 
over its surface at 65 000 volts. 

Curve V was obtained by Mr. H. W. Fisher, and is reproduced 
here with his permission, from his paper, read before the Inter- 
national Electrical Congress at St. Louis.t The curve was ob- 
tained by using 8-in. shields in the form of slightly concave 
discs mounted 0.5 in. back of the needle points. Mr. Fisher 
has found the use of shields very advantageous, and he has been 
able to obtain remarkably uniform results over the range tested. 
Their use is to be recommended when not using current-limiting 
devices, but the increased charging current required renders 
their value doubtful when capacity or resistance is placed in 
the gap to limit the current after breakdown. 

An interesting phenomenon was noticed with condensers used 
as current-limiting devices in the spark-gap circuit. As its. 
action caused a very erratic behavior of the spark-gap, it will 
be briefly described here. 

It was noticed that if there was a partial break or defect in 
the continuity of the spark-gap circuit, sufficient to cause a 
small spark at that point, the value of the measuring gap for a 
given pressure was very erratic. Variations of as much as 
70 per cent. were obtained, which were always in the direction 
of an increase in the gap. 

This phenomenon was investigated by placing a small spherical 
terminal gap in series with the condenser and needle-point gap. 
If, with the small spherical gap closed and the needle-point 
gap set at 10 or 15 per cent. beyond its breakdown value for a 
given pressure, the spherical gap was opened gradually a regu- 
lar cycle of effects resulted. The needle-points showed a slight 
glow or coronal formation on starting; this changed to a brush 
discharge on further opening the spherical gap, and again to 
sparks on still greater opening, the sparks increasing in inten- 
sity, as judged by sound and color, as the spherical gap was 
opened still more. This action continued till a point was 
reached where all sparking ceased. An exact reversal of this 
action took place on closing the spherical gap gradually; i.e., 
first heavy sparking which decreased in intensity; then the 
brush discharge, which was very pronounced, with beautiful 
long streamers; finally, when the spherical gap was completely 


—— EE eee 
t ‘‘ Spark-Gap Determinations of Voltages.” 


1905.) KINTNER. HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 429 


closed, the needle-points simply glowed without streamers or 
hissing sound. 

The experiment was tried with the needles so arranged that 
the projecting streamers or brush discharges crossed each other 
at an angle; the streamers were projected out almost in line 
with the axes of the needles. The photograph shown in Fig. 2 
gives a very good idea of the appearance of the discharges. 

A repetition of the opening of the series spherical gap caused 
this arrangement to pass through the same cycle as noted in 
the previous arrangement in which the needle axes were in 


Fic, 2. 


line. Some idea of the appearance of the sparks that passed, 
with the needles set angularly to each other, can be obtained 
from Fig. 3. 

The sparks follow the path of the brush discharge quite 
closely, and actually pass the point of crossing, choosing a point 
beyond from which to jump to the other terminal. This par- 
ticular sparking arrangement is a rather critical one as regards 
the angular setting of the needles, but in all cases the sparks 
followed the discharges for quite a distance. 

The phenomenon is intensely interesting, and more time 
should be given to its study than the writer had at his disposal. 
It was developed as a by-product, and, after a slight investiga- 


430 KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. |June 19 


tion, was dropped. Undoubtedly some form of a free oscillating 
circuit is established, which superimposes its values of pressure 
on the normal pressure and produces a marked increase. 

The writer has observed on several occasions, when deter- 
mining the capacity of high-pressure condensers by measuring 
the charging current and pressure of known frequency, that a 
small spark-gap in series or a loose contact would increase the 
ammeter reading 100 per cent. or more. This phenomenon 
indicates another cause for the erratic behavior of spark-gaps 


Fic. 3. 


when used with condensers; this is a very serious matter, and 
makes it imperative that good contacts be made in a spark-gap 
circuit. This has not heretofore been considered of any prac- 
tical importance, it being not uncommon to join the ends of 
cotton covered wire without removing the covering at the 
splice. 

Tests made in which spherical terminals were used in place 
of needle-points also gave some peculiar results. The tests 
were made with 0.5-in. hemispherical terminals of brass mounted 
on the same supporting device used in the needle-point tests, 
all other apparatus being the same as that previously employed. 
A ground on the high-pressure circuit, -either direct through 


1905.] KINTNER: ‘HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 431 


resistance or condenser, was found to have a very marked effect 
on the spark distance for a given pressure. This effect was not 
noticeable with the needle-point gap. The curve, Fig. 4, shows 


o 
oar 
< o 
ae 
2 
ao. 
a 3 
Zz 12 
Se 
wu - a 
aessce 
woo 5 
z=22 
ozg 
35za 
° 
226 2 
Fea eS ea NA 


EE 


3 


GAP DISTANCES IN INCHES 


9° 
s 


fanelocicas 
oasis 

Gis 
ae Sane 


aie 
ba 
al 
hedlesd 


brit 
7 


; 2 gg 8 s 2 8 eee sare ae ae 
oe ey * g10A01m 


Fic. 4. 


the. variations noted for the same spark-gap, when grounded 
‘and when not grounded. A critical condition seems to exist 
at pressures between 25.000 and 45000 volts. In the normal 
curve a very peculiar hump or change in the curve 1s noticed 


432. KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. [June 19 


at about the same values. This range of pressure is particularly 
subject to variation. 


In the Elektrotechnische Zeit., 1904, several of the German 


: - 


CURVES OF JUMP DISTANCES 
3¢"ROUND NOSE GAP. UNSHIELDED. UNGROUNDED, 


NON-INDUCTIVE WIRE RESISTANCE IN GAP CIRCUIT. 


SMALL CONDENSER IN GAP CIRCUIT. 
LARGE CONDENSER IN GAP CIRCUIT, 


NORMAL GAP ARRANGEMENT~ 


d 


BM 


© Ill 
7 Iv 


Oral 
g II 


3 
GAP DISTANCE IN INCHES 


2 


\\ 
ee 


\\ 
| IN 
aS ; 


$L10A01IM 


Fie. 5, 


writers have called attention to this same critical part of the 
curve. 

The effect of current-limiting devices when employing hemi- 
spherical terminals is shown in the curves of Fig. 5. . 


1905.) KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 433 


The effect of grounding when using the same current-limiting 
devices and terminals is shown in Fig. 6. a 
These curves show the same general effect of grounding note 


NON-INDUCTIVE RESISTANCE. 


” 
36 ROUND NOSE GAP. UNSHIELDED. GROUNDED= 
NORMAL GAP « 


III WATER RESISTANCE. 


I 
II 


CURVES OF JUMP DISTANCES 


) 
io 


GAP DISTANCE IN INCHES 


SLIOAOTIX 


Fie. 6. 


in the spark-gap curve in which no current-limiting device was 


employed, as illustrated in Fig. 4. 
The application of shields to the 0.5-in. hemispherical ter- 


484. KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT... [June 19 


minals for the various current-limiting devices gave results 
shown in the curves of Fig. 7. 

It will be noticed that the curves are very regular. Grounding 
one side of the line had no appreciable effect. 


24 BACK, 


6 SHIELDS 


NNO CHANGE IN ANY 


CURVES OF JUMP DISTANCES - 
SHIELDED GAPS. /< NOSES. 


J NORMAL GAP. 
II VOLTMETER RESISTANCE, 


~@ IIT waTeR RESISTANCE.* 


© IV_ SMALL CONDENSER. 
GROUNDED GAP, 


OF ABOVE CASES, 
# STATIC INTERRUPTER CONDENSER LIES 


IN WATER RESISTANCE CURVE. 


c) 
° 


GAP DISTANCES IN INCHES 


g 8 
SLIOAOM™ 
“Fre. 7. 


There are other objections to the general method of high- 
pressure measurement .by the spark-gap than those previously: 
mentioned. The erratic behavior of the apparatus renders the 
accuracy of the results uncertain, and it is the writer’s opinion 


1905.) KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT 435 


that this method should be used only when no other is 
available. 

For the measurement of sudden pressure variations, such as 
those produced on transmission lines by lightning, switching, 
grounds, short circuits, etc., where the use of an oscillograph 
or similar device is not feasible, the spark-gap method is very 
useful. It is in fact the only method by which any 
satisfactory quantitative results can be obtained under such 
conditions. 

When using a gap the writer prefers ‘‘ round nose ”” (hemi- 
spherical) shielded terminals; the gap shculd be standardized 
over the range for which it is to be used just prior to taking 
measurements, and under as nearly the same surroundings, 
connections, etc., as possible. This preference is based on the 
convenience of operation and greater freedom from erratic 
behavior of this form of gap. eahet 

The spark-gap, although apparently a very simple device, 
requires an expert operator to get results that are at all satis- 
factory. 


CorRONAL ForMATION MeETHOD.* 


Professor H. J. Ryan has proposed to utilize the coronal 
formation on wires of various sizes, or at various distances apart, 
as a means of indicating the pressure impressed. Before any 
definite conclusion can be drawn as to its good or its bad features, 
this method needs a practical test to develop its. reliability 
under service conditions. 


OpticaL METHODS. 


It has been suggestedf that high pressures might be 
measured by means of the effect produced by static stress on 
the refractive index of glass, quartz, or other transparent 
material. To the writer’s knowledge, this method has never 
assumed a practicable form. It is of interest as a possible 
method, and might be applied to measuring the maximum 
effect of the almost instantaneous changes of pressures in a 
circuit due to lightning, short circuits, grounds, etc. 


*Professor Ryan proposes in his paper read before the INsTITUTE in 
March, 1904, on ‘‘ The Conductivity of the Atmosphere at High 
Voltages”, the use of wires arranged in such relation to each other that 
the maximtim voltage values impressed on them can be determined by 
the coronal formations noticed when viewing them in the dark: 


+Pockels—Mechaniker; Vol, Zip 22: 


436 KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. [June 19 


Meruop EmMpLoyiInc CONDENSERS IN SERIES, THE VOLTAGE 
Bernc MEASURED Across ONE OR MORE. 


The fact that condensers, when grouped in series, divide the 
total impressed pressure among themselves inversely as their 
respective capacities has been made use of as a means of high- 
pressure measurement. Puekertt proposed to use a series of 
condensers of equal, or proportional, capacities and an electro- 
meter in shunt with one of the condensers, as an effective 
means for high-pressure measurement. Others have proposed 
to utilize an electrometer in shunt with one condenser, and 
keep its indication constant by varying a standardized condenser 
in series therewith as the pressure value changed. The use of 
static indicating instruments in series with condensers, standard- 
ized so as to be direct reading, is a modification of this same 
principle. t 

Attention has been called by Dr. Benischke to the fact that 
all condensers placed in series with electrometers or static 
voltmeters should have the same dielectric material, otherwise 
there would be a serious error upon change of wave-form or 
frequency, caused by the difference in electrostatic hysteresis 
or lag—of various materials. He proposes the use of air con- 
densers for connection to electrometers in suitable relation. 
This method, if properly arranged, should give very good re- 
sults. Care should be taken to see that little or no change 
in the apparent capacity of the condensers takes place, either 
by change in the proximity of adjacent objects, or leakage 
over the insulation. This method has not heretofore been used 
as much as its good features warrant. 


MetuHop EmpLoyInG ELeEctrostatTic METERS. 


Theoretically this is the ideal method of high-pressure meas- 
urement. Up to the present time it has not been as satis- 
factory a method in practical development and application as 
is desirable for commercial conditions. Of the meters developed 
-along this line, those of Lord Kelvin are the best known. A 


{Electrotechnische Zettschrift, September 29, 1898. 


tBenischke—Elek. Zeit. March 21, 1901. 
Jona—L’ Eclatrage Elect., June 3, 1901. 
Barnett—Electrical World and Engineer, August 26, 1899. 
Franke—Wiedmann’'s Annalen, 1893. 
Merchant and Worrall, Electrical Review, November 13, 1903. 


1905.) KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 437 
number of others, varying in detail, have been used with more 
or less success. 

The fundamental difficulty encountered in developing this 
type of instrument for high-pressure work has been the failure to 
use an insulating medium of sufficient dielectric strength. This 
has necessitated a great separation of the operating elements, and 
a correspondingly great reduction in the actuating forces. 
The great separation of the elements makes the instrument 
particularly susceptible to external influences such -as charges 
from adjacent objects, etc., and the weak. actuating forces 
make necessary a sensitive, delicate mounting for the moving 
system. The form of the scale for most of the direct-reading 
meters has been very poor, there being but a slight movement 
of the pointer over an unproportional scale. Lack of proper 
damping of the moving element has rendered the reading of 
the instrument very difficult on circuits with even slight fluctu- 
ations. For very high pressures the size of this type of meter 
renders its construction costly and cumbersome. The fact 
that this principle of operation gives a meter that requires. 
for its operation a negligible amount of power, that is free from 
the effects of variation of wave-form, frequency, etc., and is 
direct reading, makes it an attractive principle on which to 
attack the problem of developing a good high-pressure indicator. 

A new type of static voltmeter, which will now be described, 
it is believed, will eliminate, at least in a large measure, the 
faults to which other high-pressure static instruments have been. 
subject. 


New Type Static VOLTMETER. 


The most important improvement embodied in this new static 
voltmeter consists in the method of its insulation, which is 
obtained by surrounding the active parts of the meter with a 
medium of greater dielectric strength than atmospheric air. 
Such a medium is supplied by various liquids, and by gases 
under pressure; in some instances it is advantageous to work 
the liquids under pressure. The advantages that result from 
this method of insulating static meters can be briefly summarized 
as follows: 

Advantages common to both compressed gas and liquid 
insulation : 

(a) A great reduction in the distance between the operating 
elements of the meter of different potential, and also between 


438 KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. [June 19 


these elements and the case, thus permitting reduction in the 
size of the instrument. 

(b) A great increase in the actuating forces due to the re- 
duction of distance between active parts. 

(c) A much better form of scale for reading the pressure 
values is made possible by the reduction of distance between 
the active parts of the meter. The nearer the moving element 
is placed to the stationary elements or plates, the better can 
the shaping of the plates be made to control the form of scale. 

(d) The improved insulation and reduction in size permits 
the use of a metallic containing case which screens the instru- 
ment from external charges. It also makes it possible to 
operate the instrument on circuits that are grounded without 
any appreciable variation in its 1cadings from those taken on 
ungrounded circuits of the same pressure. 

The following additional advantages are gained by the use 
of the liquid insulation. 

(e) It acts as a damper and renders the instrument nearly 
dead-beat, thus making it very easy to read. 

(f) Having a higher specific inductive capacity than air, it 
gives a corresponding increase in the actuating forces. 

(¢) By properly shaping the moving system, making it 
hollow, etc., a buoyancy is obtained which relieves the bearings 
from the weight of the moving element. This greatly assists 
the restoring force in bringing the system to the proper position 
of equilibrium for each particular condition. 

The improvements above mentioned have been found to 
exist in the meter which the writer has developed, one form of 
which will now be described. 

The operating elements are immersed in a specially treated 
insulating oil. The general arrangement of the terminal 
plates, moving element, etc., is shown in the diagrammatic 
sketch, Fig. 8. 

The terminal plates, 7,, T,, are so arranged with regard to 
a moving element, M, that an angular deflection of M, in a 
positive direction, tends to shorten the gaps between it and 
the terminal plates. The induced charges on the two extremi- 
ties of M are of such a nature that they exert forces of attraction 
on the charges of the terminal plates T,, T,, which bring about 
such a movement. The turning of M is restrained by a spring, 
while the amount of deflection is read on a scale, S, by the 
movement of the pointer P. The curve of the plates T,, T,, 


+ 


1905] KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT, -439 


shown in the sketch is purely diagrammatic; it is found advan- 
tageous in practice. to use another form of curve which gives a 
very uniform scale over a large part of its range. 

Two or more moving elements can be used to advantage 
for different ranges of pressure; the ones for the higher 
pressures have a less spacing between the cylindrical extremes 
of the moving elements so as to give them greater gap openings 
to the plates. The form of the moving element, and its sup- 
ports, pointer, etc., are shown in Fig. 9. 


Fic. 8. 


An additional moving element is shown in the right-hand 
side of the view. This one is used on higher pressures than 
the one mounted in the support on the left. The bearings, 
springs, adjustments, etc., are similar parts to those in use 
in electrodynamometers. The terminal plates are supported 
from the same insulating base that carries the moving element, 
and.are supported in such a mannet that they are always in con- 
stant relation to each other. The connections to the plates 
are made through separate insulating bushings. ~~» ee 

The cylindrical parts of the moving element shown in Fig. 9 
are provided with spherical ends which make them tight. They 


440 


KINTNER 


: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 


1905.) KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 44] 


are so proportioned as to be almost buoyant in the particular 
oil employed. 

The counter-balance adjustment is not shown in the photo- 
graph, but one has been found desirable so as to have the instru- 
ment balanced about its vertical axis. When thus balanced, 
no leveling of the meter is necessary. If not balanced, a small 
error, the amount of which depends on the imperfectness of 
the balance and the displacement from level of the meter, will be 
found in the readings. 

A specially-selected torsion spring is used to supply the 
force against which the electrostatic forces operate and which 
serves as the standard of comparison. The amount of displace- 
ment of the moving system is read on a scale over which a 
pointer passes, the pointer being rigidly connected to the moving 
element. 

The scale is placed on a cylindrical form similar to that of 
the horizontal edgewise type of instruments so well known. 
This arrangement permits the instrument to be read from a safe 
distance. In general two scales are placed on each instrument, 
one of proportional parts and the other to read directly in kilo- 
volts. The proportional scale is found to be of great use in 
calibrating the instrument; it can also be used to advantage 
with other moving elements which may be used for various 
scale ranges in pressure. 

In calibrating the meter the uniform practice has been fol- 
lowed of first determining the actual neutral position of the 
moving element with regard to its plates. This is found by 
trial, pressure being applied and the direction of rotation noted. 
After determining the neutral position, from which the moving 
element will deflect in either direction according to which way 
it is slightly displaced, it is moved through a standard angle 
in the direction it is finally to deflect upon application of pres- 
sure. This practice makes it possible at any time to check the 
correctness of the angular position of the moving element with 
regard to the terminal plates, scale, and pointer. Troubles 
due to attractive forces between the needle and the scale sup- 
port and cover are avoided by metallically connecting all of 
them and thus keeping them at the same potential. 

The scale cover is all metal, except the glass window through 
which the scale is read; the cover acts as a screen to prevent 

external static fields from affecting the pointer. The contain- 
3 ing case is of metal, and with it grounded or not the instrument 


operates equally well. 


442 KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. [June 19 


One of these meters, of which Fig. 9 is a photograph of the 
moving element, has been in successful operation for several 
months in one of the testing departments of the Westinghouse 
Electric & Manufacturing Company. Its case and insulation 
were designed for 35 000 volts service but no difficulty has been 
experienced in subjecting it to 50 000 volts. It has been tested 
to 79 000 volts, a suitable barrier being used to prevent a dis- 
ruptive discharge from terminal to terminal, before a break- 
down occurred. The form of scale can be seen in Fig. 10. 

It will be noticed that the scale is very good from 5 000 to 
25 000 volts, and no difficulty should be experienced in reading 
to the one-tenth part of the divisions over that range. The 
upper part of the scale from 30000 volts up is very poor, but 
this could readily be remedied by a change in the form of the 
terminal plates. 


Fic. 10. 


“It is feasible to get an angular deflection of 90° with the 
pointer. The scale form given in Fig. 10 shows an angular 
deflection of 81° at 40 000 volts. This scale was started at 10° 
in the positive direction from the neutral point. The standardi- 
zation curve is shown in Fig. 11. 

This curve is the one from which the scale form, Fig. 10, was. 
determined. It was obtained by reading the static meter on 
the proportional-part scale at various impressed pressures. 
The value of these pressures was determined by ratio, a Weston 
voltmeter being used on the low-pressure side of the step-up 
transformer. The transformer was of 100-kw. capacity at 
100 000 volts and the curve is the result of a number of observa- 
tions made at different times. These points when plotted were 
all very close to the curve shown, not varying more than the 
width of the line. Readings were taken at various frequencies 
with the same result. 

The over-all dimensions of this meter are 12 in. by 12 in. by 
10 in.; the terminals project to an additional height of 7 in, 


1905.] KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 


above the top of the case. 


45 or 50 Ib. and is readily moved by one person. 
This form of meter is intended primarily for testing pur- 
poses, and it is believed it will be found to be very satisfactory 


DEFLECTION ON PROPORTIONAL PART SCALE 


443 


When filled with oil it weighs about 


a 
a4 


co 
o 


2 


o 
oO 


é 


STATIC VOLTMETER 
STANDARDIZATION 


— 
o 


g 


& 


KILOVOLTS 
jate, que 


in such service. At the present time none of this type has been 


designed for pressures higher 
tions are being made in the 


than 100 000 volts, but modifica- 
particular meter shown in Fig. 9 


to enable it to be used in some 150 000-volt tests, this meter 


444. KINTNER: HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. [June 19 


being considered to be the most reliable device for determining 
the test pressure on some very large transformers. There seems 
to be no good reason why meters of this type should not be used 
on pressures of 200 000 volts or even more. 

Two publications have appeared, since the meter above de- 
scribed was constructed, in which descriptions of oil-insulated 
meters of the attracted-disc type were given. One of these in 
the Electrical World and Engineer by Mr. Semenza described a 
meter designed by Mr. Jona, and the other by Professor A. Grau 
in the Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, March, 1905, was descriptive 
of a form devised by himself. 

Like most high-pressure problems, the insulation is the 
chief factor, and it is believed that the limit of pressure for volt- 
meters of this type will be the same as that for the transformers. 


1905.) HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 445 


Discussion on, ‘‘ MetTHOopS OF MEASUREMENT OF HicH 
ELECTRICAL PRESSURES.” 


Cuas. P. Steinmetz: I have been much interested in investi- 
gations of high potentials, and must corfess I have always 
been prejudiced against electrostatic voltmeters, possibly because 
of some disastrous experiences with early forms of such volt- 
meters, that were liable to. be 25 or 30 per cent. in error without 
giving indication thereof. Therefore I have always preferred 
the method of measurement by step-down transformer and the 
low potential voltmeter, or for very high voltages by ratio of 
transformation with step-up transformers, with a careful in- 
vestigation of the high-potential circuit, to see whether there 
could be any deviation from the correct ratio by capacity effects 
and how much that might amount to. 

The advantage of the step-down transformer is that it cannot 
well be wrong: the ratio is definite and unchangeable, or where 
several low-tension coils are used, connected in series or mul- 
tiples, there may be a factor of 2or 4, which, however, is not 
liable to cause an error since it can be noticed or easily checked 
by the spark-gap, and a low-potential voltmeter is an instrument 
very easily checked by comparison with other voltmeters. My 
objection to the electrostatic voltmeter has essentially been 
based on the undesirable characteristics of such an instrument in 
former times; these characteristics were, I believe, chiefly due 
to the fact that the step-down transformer method was quite suf- 
ficient for most purposes. The need and demand for an electro- 
static voltmeter for engineering purposes and for scientific 
laboratory purposes was rather limited and therefore less energy 
was devoted to the development of such an instrument—less than 
was devoted to the development of the low-potential voltmeter. 
It is, therefore, gratifying to know that such an instrument 
has now been developed which promises to be reliable. 

We must, however, consider, that at least for high-potential 
testing operations under the specifications of the Institute, not 
the voltmeter, nor the rate of transformation, but the spark-gap is 
the ultimate court of appeal. That is, if the apparatus is to be’ 
tested, say at twice the rated voltage, then, if the static volt- 
meter or the step-down voltmeter checks with the spark-gap at 
that voltage, the spark-gap is right; if the voltmeter and the 
spark-gap disagree, the spark-gap is correct, and not the volt- 
meter. The reason is that the purpose of the high-potential 
test is to expose the apparatus to a definite high-potential di- 
electric stress. If there is an absolute sine-wave of high-poten- 
tial testing voltage, then the voltmeter and spark-gap will agree, 
but if the voltmeter and the spark-gap do not agree, and both are 
correct in their readings, then that shows that the wave differs 
from a sine-wave, and the electrostatic stress is different from that 
which corresponds to the sine-wave of the voltage; therefore a 
test of this voltage would expose the apparatus to a stress 
different from that specified. Itis well known that the standard 


446. DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE... [June 19. 


requires a test at a definite voltage, with a sine-wave of electro- 
motive force, or at such voltage which gives the same striking- 
distance, as a sine-wave of the specified voltage. This feature 
has been considered because it is liable to be overlooked. 
The correct way is to use the sine-wave, but it is not always 
possible on the high-potential side of the transformer to get an 
exact sine-wave. 

Where the wave differs from the sine form, then the volt- 
meter gives a quantity which is the true effective voltage, but 
not the measure of the electrostatic stress desired, according 
to specification, to expose the apparatus, and so the voltmeter is 
to be checked by the spark-gap.. Now, the spark-gap, between 
needle points, is exact and reproducible within 2 to 5 per cent. 
according to the conditions and care of the observer. There are, 
however, some precautions to be observed. First, I believe in the- 
insertion of non-inductive resistance in series with the spark-gap, 
so that the discharge does not produce a destructive oscillation.: 
Sucha resistance must, however, be relatively low, so that there 
is no appreciable drop of voltage*in the resistance by the current 
that passes across the gap, a current that is quite appreciable. 
A moderate resistance will dampen out oscillations due to the 
discharge with sufficient rapidity to guard the appara- 
tus against excessive stress by oscillating discharge. Secondly, 
I do not believe that shields are permissible. It may be pos- 
sible, with the use of the shielded spark-gap, to draw 
out a curve which may be used as a measure, but the use 
of shields does not permit of the use of the sparking dis- 
tances given in Appendix V of the Standardization Report, 
as can easily be seen when one considers the equipotential sur- 
faces of the electrostatic system between the two points of the’ 
spark-gap and the surfaces of constant potential gradient’ 
which are most important.’ This I intended to show in the’ 
paper which I promised for this meeting, but unfortunately was 
not able to complete, since some tests which I desired could not 
be completed in time, due to the high-potential, 500 000-volt 
transformer burning outa coil, as occasionally happens with’ 
such transformers. If these potential-gradient surfaces are 
investigated, it will be seen that the shield modifies the electro- 
static surfaces between the needle points, and so modifies 
the striking distances. It appears to be essential, therefore, 
that the needle points must be unshielded, and stretching back a 
distance greater than the actual striking distance—very much 
greater indeed. Furthermore, one feature I havehad to guard 
against especially is to have in this spark-gap loose contacts 
which may produce an arc, and thereby an oscillation of extremely 
high frequency, the voltage of which will have no direct relation 
to the impressed voltage of the step-up transformer, and the 
spark-gap may breakdown at an impressed voltage lower than 
the voltage at which it is set, that is, a voltage will be produced 
at the gap higher than given by the transformer, , 


1905.) HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 447 


This can easily be found by having a spark-gap set for, say, 
50 000 volts, and connecting it with a 40000-volt circuit. The 
spark-gap at the moment of making connection, usually breaks 
down although set for 25 per cent. higher voltage. So the 
spark-gap must be guarded against becoming itself the seat ofa 
high-frequency oscillation. With these very reasonable precau- 
tions, the spark-gap is the most reliable check for measure- 
ment. As Mr. Kintner very properly says, it is not a measur- 
ing instrument, but acheck. If the electrostatic voltmeter 
as developed here, is of perfect reliability it is of the greatest 
value for testing, if checked by the spark-gap. 

SAMUEL SHELDON: I have been engaged for a number of years 
in experiments upon large Holtz machines and have endeavored 
to make use of the condenser drop method which employs an 
ordinary electrostatic voltmeter. It is very unsatisfactory, for 
the reason that dielectric hysterisis causes a continuous variation 
in the capacity. With condenser conductors varying in size 
and shape from each other the various sheets of dielectric be- 
tween them are subjected to different electrostatic flux densities. 
A little leakage into surrounding kerosene oil frequently, if not 
continuously, takes place and therefore the voltage drop over 
each sheet of dielectric of the condenser varies even though the 
voltage impressed upon the whole condenser remain constant. , I 
have also tound that the spark-gap voltage measurement is very 
much influenced by the presence in the vicinity of the gap of 
other parts of the conducting circuits or of conductors not direct- 
ly connected in the circuit as may easily be expected. 

C. O. Maittoux: I think that all who have had experience 
with high potential measurements, must agree with Mr. Steinmetz, 
that, after all, the court of appeal must be the spark-gap method. 
The author says, at the top of page 434, in reference to Fig. 7. 
“Tt will be noticed that the curves are very regular.” The 
implication is that, as these curves differ from the curves shown 
in the previous figure, the other curves are irregular. Now, 
I must say that to me it seems that if there be any irregularity, 1t 
must bein Fig.7. As Mr. Steinmetz has said, the effect of shields 
is simply to vary the striking distance. Fig. 7 illustrates a case 
where the striking distance has been changed, the effect being to 
change the scale or the size of the'curve. I think that the curves 
shown in the early Figs. (4, 5, 6), are the regular Ue CE 
is a physical reason why these curves should have : a ae : ‘ 
matical form, which, while it is not a form to be found in the 
standard works on analytic geometry, for instance, Be sph 
theless, a regular form. It is not an irregular curve althoug 
it may seem to be one. It is a curve capable of being Pee: 
fectly formulated. While we do not know all about all the 
different possible curves, nature knows more about them than ie 
do, and there are reasons why nature ‘‘selected this” particular 
form of curve. I will endeavor to give a hint for such reason. 

“The curves with a hump in them, Figs. (4, 5, 6), express the 


448 DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. [June 19 


well-known fact that for very short gap distances it takes a rela- 
tively large potential before the spark will occur. As the distance 
is increased, the relative increase of potential required diminishes; 
in other words, the differential coefficient of the curve diminishes, 
and for a certain ~ :nge of the gap, it does not take as large an 
increase of potential to cause the current to strike across the 
gap, as it did at first; but eventually a point is again reached 
where the potential must increase faster than or at least 
as fast as the gap. It can readily be seen that this must be 
so. Assume a case like Fig. 7. The curves in this case have the 
form of what may be called a “‘ standard parabola’. It is also 
a fact, that the other curves are parabolic curves. Fig. 7 con- 
tains a curve that is entirely, or almost entirely, concave with 
respect, to the axis of x. In the other case there is simply 
a eurve which is partly concave and partly convex. What is the 
reason? Mathematically, the reason is simple. This curve is 
simply the product of two curves of parabolic type, one of which 
has a very low exponent, or an exponent Jess than unity, and the 
other an exponent greater than unity. Algebraically, it would 
be put thus: 
y = bx*+cx™ 


where n < 1 and m > 1, both having the positive sign. The 
first term represents a curve that is concave to the axis of x, 
and the other a curve that is convex to the axis of x. On 
selecting suitable values for the coefficients b and c, it would 
be found that the two curves make exactly a curve like this. 

Instead of proceeding that way, the curve can be expressed in 
still simpler form by saying y = bx” with an exponent that is 
a function of x, the function of x ranging between zero and some 
function that is greater than unity, or y = bx/@- I donot know 
which of these two curves it is, from a casual glance, but it 
is certain that here there is a composite parabola. These com- 
posite parabolas are constantly met with in nature. I have 
found numbers of instances where phenomena can be readily 
interpreted in terms of composite parabolas. It must be so in 
this case, for it will readily be seen that a curve like Fig. 7, 
which remains constantly concave to the axis of x, eventually 
reaches a point at which the potential would virtually cease to 
increase, the curve becoming asymptotic to a line parallel with 
the axis of x. There would be a point reached at which any 
given finite increase of potential will jump an indefinitely long 
gap between the two points. This is contrary to what is 
known to be the case. There must be a distance reached 
finally—and that distance is reached quite soon—at which no 
finite increase of potential capable of being produced is able 
to produce a spark between the two points. 

H. G. Srort: In connection with the use of the static volt- 
meter, experience in the use of spark-gaps may be interesting. 
The Interborough Company started out some years ago to 
make high-potential tests on cables, generators, etc., using a 


1905.] HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. 449 


spark-gap as the standard. A short experience proved that 
it was entirely unreliable under practicable conditions of 
tests. It was impossible to shield the spark-gap from currents 
of air, which varied the sparking distance with a constant 
potential. Where it was necessary to expend two or three 
hundred kilovolts in a test we were compelled to use an ordi- 
nary commercial generator to generate that pressure. As 
probably everyone knows, it is physically impossible to main- 
tain constant voltage under fluctuating load. What was 
found was this, that when the spark-gap was set and the test 
started, almost immediately afterward a very slight change of 
voltage of two or three per cent. would cause the arc to jump 
across the needles, destroying them, and the’ test would have 
to be started over again with a new pair of needles. Under 
these conditions it became impossible to carry out a commercial 
test. The company abandoned that for another method, which 
involved the use of electrostatic voltmeters. These electro- 
static voltmeters are calibrated before and after every test. 
That has proved very satisfactory and has been accepted by 
all companies with which we deal, both in cables and other 
high-potential apparatus. 

Cuas. P. SteiNMETz: I’can answer the question asked by 
Mr. Mailloux. A few of these curves have been carried up 
beyond 300 000 volts, and at these very high voltages the curve 
of the striking distance, whether between spheres or between 
needle-points, becomes a straight line. Furthermore, | may 
say that I have been able to produce by calculation from mere 
theoretical reasoning curves of the striking distance of a similar 
character to those given in Mr. Fisher’s paper—theoretical 
‘reasons, based merely on the assumption that the air has a 
definite disruptive strength, that it breaks down and becomes 
conductive by a brush discharge as soon as the potential gra- 
dient exceeds a definite value, which value may obviously be 
a function more or less of temperature, air pressure, etc.; but 
it is’as definite as the breaking strain of a piece of metal under 
constant conditions. That is one of the things that I intended 
to bring out in my paper, and which I hope to be able to report 
at a later meeting. 

- H.W. Fisner: In a paper, which I presented before the 
International Electric Congress at St. Louis, it was shown that 
the sparking distance is very much affected by the degree of 
sharpness of the needle-points. By measuring No. 12 needles, 
I found that the points varied from 0.0001 to 0.002. At 40 000 
volts, the sharp points gave a spark distance of about 2.15 in. 
‘and the dull points about 3 in. Now the idea I want to bring 
out is this, that if these tests are correct—they were made 
repeatedly with the utmost care—it is unreliable to use ordinary 
needle-points where accurate results are desired. My tests 
showed that if one of the needle-points is dull, the sparking 
distance will be greater than when both points are sharp, with 
voltages ranging from 30 000 to 50 000. 


450 DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. [June 19 


C.O. Maittoux: I wish to add a word to what Mr. Steinmetz 
has said to the effect that of course it must be assumed that 
there are no discharges except from the point. If there are 
brush discharges, or any other shifting discharges, then, 
necessarily, what I have said is not’ wholly true. I am 
assuming ‘the discharges to take place from the points, and 
that precatitions are taken to prevent discharges elsewhere, 
othérwise it might start, or it might facilitate an action whereby 
the striking distance might be reduced, and in that case it 
would be impossible to get an ascending line. It would either 
remain straight or form a line which will be asymptotic to a 
line parallel with the axis of ~. 

E. F. Norrurup: I appreciate that the electrostatic volt- 
meter is a measuring instrument of precision, but I would like 
to ask Mr. Kintner how the scale of the instrument was cali- 
brated to as high as 40 kilovolts. If the wave-form of the 
current used in the calibration were a sine-wave form, it seems 
to me he would have obtained a different scale than would be 
the case if the wave form were different from the sine form. 
I would be obliged if he would explain what standard he used 
to calibrate his scale. 

Cuas. A. Perkins; The chief interest in this apparatus is 
connected with its use for high pressures. I wish, however, to 
ask whether it.can be used:for ordinary pressures such as 2 000 
volts? : 

The question suggests itself whether two needle-points rest- 
ing in cups as close together as here described will accurately 
center the moving parts. In this form of bearing there is 
usually some play, and in the design here shown it would seem 
that this effect might be quite appreciable. 

Cuas..P. Steinmetz: In the tests referred to, there were 
no side discharges or brush discharges except the brush dis- 
charge that always precedes the discharge between the needle- 
points, and therefore is an essential part of the phenomenon. 

8. M. KinTNER: Replying to the last question first, in re- 
gard to the possibility of using such a type of meter on low- 
voltage circuits: while it is certainly possible, there is, in general, 
not so much need for it there as in the higher voltage service. 

Regarding the question of difficulty with the bearings, no. 
special difficulty has been encountered with the form shown 
in Fig. 9. The fact that the moving element is buoyant, greatly 
reduces the wear on the bearings. If found desirable to do so 
there is no reason why the lower bearing could not be placed 
below the moving element. This would give very great dis- 
tance between bearings and reduce the movement of the ele- 
ment due to the looseness of the pivots in their seats. No 
difficulty has been encountered from the amount of movement. 
which the present arrangement allows. No doubt this is due 
to the arrangement of the respective parts which makes the 
displacement of the moving clement to one side unimportant, 


1905.] HIGH-PRESSURE MEASUREMENT. ~_ 461 


as the increase in the force on one side is approximately equal 
to the reduction of the force on the other. 

_The meter was calibrated by placing it on the high-tension 
side of a large step-up transformer, on which a standard volt- 
meter was used to read the voltage on the low-tension side, and 
the low-voltage values multiplied by the ratio of transformation 
for comparison. Power was supplied from a generator giving 
a very close approximation to a sine-wave as determined by 
an oscillograph. The static meter reads effective values just 
the same as all alternating-current voltmeters. 

I am much indebted to Mr. Mailloux for his discussion of 
the spark-gap curves shown in the paper. The work done in 
determining them was very interesting, but from the stand- 
point of one desirous of using the spark-gap as a measuring 
instrument it was not so pleasing. No effort was made on my 
part to determine an equation for them, as I found it necessary 
to run a curve every time I desired to use the gap and as 
nearly as possible under the exact conditions of the contem- 
plated test. The great variation from day to day suggested to 
me that I did not have all the variables under my control. 
There is material for some very interesting research work in 
connection with the spark-gap and its eccentricities. 

Regarding the use of low resistance in the spark-gap circuit: 
as suggested by Mr. Steinmetz, it has been my experience 
that when the resistance is low enough not to affect the gap 
it is too low to limit the current to a reasonable value. My 
experience with the spark-gap has been such that I invari- 
ably have a feeling of doubt after having made a measure- 
ment as to what the real voltage value was. It may have 
been anything within 50 per cent., high or low, from the value 
obtained. 

The type of meter described in my paper is intended pri- 
marily for testing purposes, particularly for insulation . testing 
of machines, transformers, cables, etc. 

Regarding the use of step-down transformers, as preferred 
by Mr. Steinmetz, their use is allowable within limits, but as 
soon as higher voltages are reached the step-down transformer 
becomes a formidable piece of apparatus. A transformer for 
a voltmeter for 50 000-, 60 000- or 70 000-volt service will have 
a rating of 15, 20, or 25 kilowatts. 

Cuas. P. Steinmetz: It is practically duplicating the ap- 
paratus. 

S M. Kinrner: * Practically; it becomes a very cumbersome 
piece of apparatus. 


A paper presented at the Rd Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers. Asheville; N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


COMMENTS ON REMARKS MADE BY COL. R. E. B. 
CROMPTON BEFORE THE INTERNATIONAL ELEC- 
TRICAL CONGRESS AT ST. LOUIS. 
x 


BY JOHN W. HOWELL. 


The following quotation is from the remarks made by Col. 
R. E. B. Crompton in his discussion of the papers read by Mr. 
Torchio and Mr. Dow, at the International Electrical Congress 
at St. Louis, last September. 


“In England our variety of distribution systems is not so great as 
we find here. We started with three-wire 200- or 220-volt systems, 
distributing at 110 volts. We have everywhere practically doubled 
this voltage. All our largest cities in England, including London with 
its 6000 000 inhabitants, after very careful consideration, practically 
adopted what you have called the double-voltage system. This doub- 
ling the voltage was not adopted without a struggle. For a long time 
the lamp manufacturers opposed it, and told the consumers, prob- 
ably with some reason, that they would be at'a disadvantage, as lamps 
of the double voltage could not be made so efficient as lamps at the 
single voltage; but we showed that this could be remedied by refine- 
ments in lamp manufacture, so that now it would be very difficult for 
the consumer to find that he was at any practical disadvantage on ac- 
count of inferior efficiency of the double-voltage lamps.” 

“The result is that the majority of our consumers take their supply 
at pressures varying from 200 volts in London up to 250 volts in Glas- 
gow. We therefore consider this question settled and therefore com- 
pletely disagree with all the arguments on this point in both Mr. Torchio’s 
and Mr. Dow’s papers.” 

These remarks indicate that either the English makes of 220- 
volt lamps are very much better than those made or known in 
this country, or that English makes of 110-volt lamps are very 


much inferior to those made here, or that the considerations and 


453 


454 HOWELL: CROMPTON’S REMARKS. [June 19 


conditions, other than the difference in quality of the two types 
of lamps, which effect the choice of one system or the other 
are different in the two countries. 


CANDLE POWER 


LABELLED VOLTS (220) 
MAY-1905. 


CANDLE POWER 


AT 
LABELLED VOLTS (220) 
MAY-1905. 


As alamp engineer seeking all available information on lamps, 
I recently secured samples of the best known makes of 220-volt 
lamps on the English market, thinking that the very extensive 


HOWELL: CROMPTON’S REMARKS. 


1905] 


use of such lamps there had led to the development of a better 


lamp than that produced in this country. 


I here present 


data on tests which I have made on these lamps, and also 


TYPE-B. 
AT 
LABELLED VOLTS (220) 


~ u “t 
4 a os) we Cal 


= 
waMOd JTGNYO 


MAY — 19C5. 


TTR 
AMARKE NA 
TOK 


WATTS 


COON 


ao 
— 


oS a 
a taal 


cal 


= “= 
y2MOd 310NVD 


n-made lamps. 


kes of lamps, Sunbeam, 


similar data on tests made on America 


J obtained 25 of each of these five ma 


and -Cryselco, -my, letter 


Royal Ediswan, Robertson, 


Stearn, 


456 HOWELL: CROMPTON’S REMARKS. [June 19 


to our English representative asking for samples of the best- 
known lamps on the English market. All these lamps were 
labeled 220-volts, 16 c-p. All of them were photometred at 
220 volts; the results are shown in the target diagrams. These 


WATTS 


60 Gi 62 63 64 65 66 6768S 0. 


19 LABELLED VOLTS (220) 
MAT - 1905. 
18 


0 


4) 
a 

ho 
aha 


i 
z 
el 
Ee 
ed 
Bi 
EW 
al 

fl 
ay 


ee 
Nt 
AA 


NIN 
LINE 
TEMA 

Kin 


CANDLE POWER 
—_ 
i=) 


as 

5 m= eter | 
Se See 
ae rt | | 
(see — > ae ee 
see ea 


a 


_ 
~t 


CANDLE POWER 
= 
oa 


eau yen GOLA | 


diagrams show a very great lack of uniformity in the individual 
lamps of each make, and a tendency to low candle-power and 


high watts per candle. The average of each group is indicated 
on the diagram by a small circle. 


1905] HOWELL: CROMPTON’S REMARKS. 457 


These averages are as follows: 


Candles. Watts per candle 
NE erica Gusset cout rts 15.5 4.00 
See Litre nee oe inert: 13.5 4.65 
EOS OR ee, 14.3 4.33 
Ngee 5 ag i aN cg See ans 14.5 4.37 
Ee el Diekat eee tak ack: 2b Raa 11.4 5.20 


HOURS AT 3.1 W. PER MEAN HORIZONTAL GANDLE POWER 


16 C. P, —220 VOLTS 


AT 
» 3.41 WATTS PER MEAN HORIZONTAL CANDLE POWER. 
MAY - 1905. 
N 


BNNG gi 
TN Ta 
mAs 


Q'S 


PER CENT CANDLE POWER 


16°C, P.— 220 VOLTS 
AT 


{p 


Z 


my 
Y, 


ce aaa YH 


PER CENT CANDLE POWER 


These are supposed to be 16 candles, 4 watts per candle. 
For comparison with these I reproduce here a similar diagram 
made on Edison lamps—220 volts—4 watts per candle which I 


458 HOWELL: CROMPTON'S REMARKS. [June 199 


take from a paper read by Mr. F. W. C. Bailey before the Na- 
tional Electric Light Association, May 1902. Mr. Bailey ob- 
tained these lamps on the open market through a supply house. 
These lamps average 16.2 candles, 3.83 .watts per candle, and 


HOURS AT 3.1 W. PER MEAN HORIZONTAL CANDLE POWER 


16 C.P. —220 VOLTS 
AT 


100 
3.1 WATTS PER MEAN HORIZONTAL CANDLE POWER. 


MAY - 1905. 


HS SSN 
BN 0 a 
[2 a a 
| oo i Len a 


PER CENT CANDLE POWER 


16-C. P,— 220 VOLTS 


. 1 WATTS PER MEAN HORIZONTAL CANDLE POWER 
MAY~-1905. 


PER CENT CANDLE POWER 


show very much greater uniformity of candle-power than the 
English lamps. 

The rectangles shown in these diagrams indicate: the:limits 
within which these lamps must come to meet the requirements 
of the American market. : 


1905] HOWELL: CROMPTON'S REMARKS. 459 


To determine the quality of. these lamps, 15 of each lot were 
set up for life-test. In order to make this comparison fair 
all were set up at the same watts per candle, all were set up at 
3.1 watts per candle as,ythe lamps were received in May and it 


HOURS AT 3.1 WATTS PER MEAN HORIZONTAL CANDLE POWER 
100 200 300 


fs se fo 
Nee a 


18-C. P.— 220 VOLTS 
AT 


pK rae ee 
yeea, cae Hate 
3 oN 


EDISON 
16-C, P, — 220 VOLTS 


PER CENT CANOLE POWER 


was necessary to set them up above their rated efficiency in 
order to finish the test in time for this meeting. 

For comparison with these I set up at the same time and 
under the same conditions lamps of our own make and rated 


460 HOWELL: CROMPTON’S REMARKS, [June 19 


the same as the English lamps. These lamps were taken at 
random from our own stock, no selection being made. 

The results of these tests are shown in the diagrams showing 
loss of candle-power and time of burning. The lamps in each 
lot were quite uniform. The average results are as follows: 


Make Ge eioe geen wate tae = epee 104 hours to 80 per cent. 
ae 5 Hy epee Chet res hte keh BEE . safe ey Mae Pe: 
tim Facet Stas a tints coke ancien tee are Goer ass “a i of 
tea LY skercas ha cones ala eee ee yi naw pak 
Ot Ad hae pein ta lee paaie aaw eben (9) area te 
SEAL ECisOthetaents wateih kan cn ea 156“ ee 7 iat: 


These results indicate that the Edison lamps made in this 
country are 50% better than the best make of English lamps 
of this type, and nearly twice as good as the average of the other 
makes tested. 

These samples may not fairly represent the average quality 
of the different makes of lamps but the uniformity of the lamps 
in each lot indicates regularity in manufacture. The total result 
certainly indicates that the American-made 220-volt lamps are 
not inferior to those on the English market. 

Regarding 110-volt lamps which are the standard for central- 
stations in this country. The Association of Edison Illuminat- 
ing Companies purchases several millions of these lamps each 
year; all of these are inspected and samples are regularly tested 
for life. 

These inspections and tests are made by the Electrical Testing 
Laboratories in New York. I have obtained from them the 
target diagram of Edison 3.1-watt, 110-volt lamps. They give 
it as.a fair sample of these lamps at the present time. 

The curve showing loss of candle-power with time for this 
class of lamps represents the average result obtained on 5 488. 
lamps tested for life during the year ending May 1, 1904. This 
shows 512 hours life to 80 per cent. The average efficiency of 
these lamps was 3.14 watts per candle, correcting this to 3.10 
watts per candle gives the useful life to 80 per cent. to be 480: 
hours, which is over three times the useful life of the American 
220-volt lamps and over five times the useful life of the average 
of the English 220-volt lamps tested. 

At any efficiency other than 3.1 watts per candle, the relative 
values of these various lamps would be the same, so it may be 


1905] HOWELL. CROMPTON'’'S REMARKS. 461 


said that at any efficiency 110-volt lamps are at least three 
times as long lived to 80 per cent. as 220-volt lamps. 

It is our experience, based on many tests, that 110-volt 
lamps of 3.1 watts per candle and 220-volt lamps of 3.8 watts 
per candle have equally useful lives. 


eee 
al ee 
Ee 


aE: 


CANDLE POWER 


REPRESENTATIVE TARGET DIAGRAM OF 
EDISON 3.1 WATTS PER CANDLE LAMPS 
TESTED BY ELECTRICAL TESTING LABORATORIES! 

MAY-1905, 


pt ed 
Ca 


AVERAGE OF 5488 
16-C.P. EDISON LAMPS 3.14 WATTS PER CANDLE 
TESTED BY 
ELECTRICAL TESTING LABORATORIES 
YEAR ENDING-MaY 1ST 1904, 


Nai 
(jis! 


CANDLE POWER 


It is the custom in England for the consumer to purchase his 
jamps where he pleases, the electricity supply companies fur- 
nishing current only. Under these conditions using lamps of 
the same efficiency and considering them dead when they have 


462 HOWELL: CROMPTON’S REMARKS. [June 19 


fallen to 80% candle-power, the customer using 220-volt lamps 
would have to buy three times as many lamps as one using 
110-volt lamps, and each lamp would cost more money. 

Or if lamps of equal life were used each 220-volt, 16-candle 
lamp would consume 11 watts more than a 110-volt, 16-candle 
lamp. Assuming that both lamps last 500 hours, each 220-volt, 
16-candle lamp would consume 5 500 watt-hours or 5.5 kw-hr. 
more than each 110-volt lamp; and with current costing 10 cents. 
per kw-hr. each 220-volt lamp of 16 candle-power would during 
its life consume 55 cents’ worth of current more than each. 
110-volt lamp. 

Colonel Crompton says: ‘it would be very difficult for the 
consumer to find that he was at any practical disadvantage: 
on account of inferior efficiency of the double-voltage lamps.”” 

This may be true under English conditions, but in this country 
most large lamp consumers buy lamps on close specifications and 
make tests to see that the specifications are fulfilled. It is. 
also a common custom in this country for consumers to buy sam~ 
ples of different lamps on the market and determine by test. 
which makes are best. This: forces: lamp* makers to mark 
their lamps very accurately for volts and candle-power, for any 
package may be tested in competition with lamps of other makers. 

If these customs prevailed in England it would be impossible: 
to sell such badly-rated lamps as those which are the subject. 
of the tests given in this paper. 

These tests indicate a general lack of information on the 
part of the English consumers on the subject of quality and 
performance of lamps. It is not surprising that people who. 
will continue to use lamps so poorly rated for volts and candle- 
power as these are, would not appreciate the difference between 
220-volt and 110-volt lamps but; English engineers should 
know the difference between good and bad lamps and between 
220- and 110-volt lamps. 


1905.] DISCUSSION VAL VASHE VIELE. 463: 


Discussion ON ‘‘SOME COMMENTS ON REMARKS MADE BY 
COLONEL R. E. Crompton BEFORE THE INTERNATIONAL 
ELECTRICAL CONGRESS AT ST. Louts.”’ 


Presipent Lies:* In the discussion which Mr. Howell re- 
fers to, and which took place in Section’ E” of the Inter- 
national Electrical Congress,, the question of the best form of 
distributing system to use hinged largely upon the question, 
whether the 220-volt lamp hed arrived at a point where it was 
quite equal to the 110-volt lamp. Colonel R. E. Crompton 
and some of his confreres of the Institution of Electrical 
Engineers maintained very stoutly that this was the case 
in England, whereas general experience in the United States 
had been to the contrary, and therefore if their contention 
was right an explanation should be forthcoming why Americans 
had not gone to the 220-volt x2 system. If their contention 
could not be made good, evidently a part, at least, of the argu- 
ment in support of their contention of the wisdom of changing 
to the higher voltage must needs fall. Hence the desirability 
of such information as Mr. Howell has laid before us in his 

aper. 

e é P. Steinmetz: Before we leave that subject, though I 
do not care to discuss it, I believe it would be desirable 
for general information if Mr. Howell would tell us whether 
there is any probability or possibility that the 220-volt lamp 
can ever arfrive at the standard of efficiency of the 110-volt 
lamp, or whether inherently there is not a difference in efficiency 
of some 20%. That is, even if the 220-volt lamp could be 
improved so as to have the efficiency of the 110-volt lamp, 
whether with the corresponding improvement the 110-volt 
lamp’ would not be more efficient. — This would be of. interest 
because the question still remains open: if these lamps are not 
so good as they are claimed to be, possibly they might eventu- 
ally approach the efficiency of the 110-volt lamps. It would 
be important in deciding the question whether the 110- or the 
220-volt lamp is the proper one to choose, or whether there is 
an inherent difference in efficiency between the two types. 

J. W. Howetz: In the present state of the art there is an 
inherent difference between the two lamps which cannot be 
overcome. I cannot prophesy what will happen in the future. 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Conven- are 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I.E. E. 


THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 


BY F. N. WATERMAN. 


The development of the single-phase motor and the pro- 
gress made toward the electrification of the terminals of the 
great railways entering New York City have given new interest 
to the discussion of the more general application of electricity 
to the operation of main line railways. The only line essen- 

tially of such a character which has thus far actually handled 
its entire traffic electrically is the so-called Valtellina line, 
in Italy, where high-pressure, low-frequency three-phase motors 
are employed. The final acceptance of this equipment and 
the planning of its extension to other parts of the system bring 
the subject of three-phase traction prominently to the front 
and make it especially worthy of study at this time. 

Though much has been said and written upon the subject 
of three-phase traction, it has been for the most part speculative 
rather than practical, and based largely upon street-railway 
practice and experience. The excellent papers of Mr. de 
Muralt and Mr. Berg, read before the INsTITUTE, some years 
‘ago, dealt with the subject more concretely; and _ the 
“adverse conclusions reached in the latter paper seem to have 
largely crystallized opinion in this country. 

It is not the object of this paper to discuss three-phase trac- 
tion in all its aspects, but to deal more particularly with 
specific features, and with some of the results attained. and to 
be expected, in practice. 

Much of the objection that has been raised in this country 
to the use of three-phase motors for railway purposes finds 
its origin, directly or indirectly, in the question of air-gap, 


465 


466 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. _ [June 19 


the assumption being made that the requirements in this re- 
spect as determined by direct-current practice are controlling 
and final, establishing a practical limitation not subject to 
review and correction by other considerations. European 
practice, however, does not support this conclusion ; and since 
all engineering questions are in the last analysis matters of 
dollars and cents there is no obvious reason why this particular 
one should be an exception. 

An examination of Mr. Berg’s paper* shows that with a 
change in the assumption in this respect greatly altered results 
would be obtained. It seemed to the writer that no better method 
of bringing out directly the financial aspect of the air-gap 
question could be found than by a comparison on the basis of 
identical calculations made from the performance curves of 
motors having the same air-ga9 as is employed on the Valtellina 
line, and the subsequent discussion of actual results obtained 
in practice. 

At first the writer hoped to make this comparison without 
introducing any other change, and then to repeat with the 
lower frequency employed in Italy, and thus separate these 
two factors; but unfortunately motor curves for this purpose 
were not available and therefore the figures given represent 
the effect of change of both air-gap and frequency. The data 
assumed by Mr. Berg are as follows: 

A .double-track road (loop) with 27 stations is supplied 
with power from a generating station located at a distance 
from the tracks. Eight trains are running in each direction; 
the entire distance is run in 52 minutes. 

The weight of a loaded train, including locomotive = 180 tons 
(2000 lb.). 

Weight on driving wheels = 50 tons. 

Maximum drawbar pull, at 25% of weight, = 25 000 lb. 

Which corresponds to a maximum acceleration of 2 ft. per 
second per second. (1.36 miles per hr. per second). 

Distance between stops is 2560 feet. 

Schedule speed is 15 miles per hour, ; 

Maximum speed with direct current = 27 miles per hour; 
with alternating current = 26.5 miles per hour. * 

Total distance is covered in 95.5 seconds, 20 seconds is al- 
lowed for stops at each station. 


* See TRANSACTIONS, AMERICAN INSTITUTE ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, 
Vol. XVIII., p. 603. 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 467 


Train friction assumed constant at 15.2 lb. per ton. 

No appreciable grades exist and the effect of curves is negligi- 
ble. Inertia of rotating parts is not considered... 

Mr. Berg employed geared motors of four poles and 25 cycles, 
- having open slots and air-gaps comparable with direct-current 
practice. 
~ The calculations offered for comparison are based upon 8-pole 


1000 


Z kitowatts S 


_ 400 


diréct-connected motors and 14-cycle current. The motors 
have partly-closed slots and a total air-gap of 4 mm., equal to 
0.079 in. clearance Only “ concatenation ”’ or cascade control, 
is employed, giving a speed reduction of one-half. 

For the sake of direct comparison the run first taken for 
comparison is identical with Mr. Berg’s standard run. | This is 
indicated in Fig. 1. This figure also shows the true and apparent 
power inputs as given by Mr. Berg and as determined from the 


468 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


motor curves* here used, Fig. 10. The alternating-current 
run is in solid lines; the true and apparent inputs, as given by 
Mr. Berg, are in broken lines; and those for the comparative 
run in solid lines. The direct-current run and input curves 
are given in dotted lines. Only one motor is used in running at 
full speed. 

The ratios of power input in the two alternating-current 
cases are: for cascade connection 0.898; for single connection 
0.917; while running 0.75, and in recuperation or casvade 
braking 1.069. Similarly, the ratios of apparent power are 
0.613 for cascade connection; 0.829 for single connection; 0.704 
for running, and 0.578 for cascade braking. 

The average input as determined from the station load curve 
is 200 kw. and 251 kilovolt-amperes; as given by Mr. Berg it 
is 237 kw. and 416 kilovolt-amperes, neglecting transmission 
losses in both cases. Comparing these results with the results 
of Mr. Berg’s direct-current run we find 200 kw. and 251 kilovolt- 
amperes for the alternating-current input, as against 190 kw. 
average input for the direct current. 

Instead, therefore, of the alternating-current system taking 
‘“26% more power and 2.2 times as many volt-amperes as 
the direct-current system,” as shown by Mr. Berg, we find 
that with the same run made in the same way but with motors 
having a smaller air-gap and at low frequency, the alternating- 
current system requires only 5% more energy and 32% more 
apparent energy. It should be remembered, also, that the 
run with alternating-current motors was made with an accelera- 
tion of 0.8 mile per hour per second, while the run with direct- 
current motors was made with an acceleration of about one 
mile per hour per second. When compared on the same basis, 
Z.e., with the direct-current run made at an acceleration of 
0.8 mile per hour per sec. it is obvious that the ratio as to 
energy would be the other way, while that for apparent 
energy would be very much reduced. 


CONDITIONS OF DISTRIBUTION. bs 


The motors are supplied with power at 2000 volts from 
four sub-stations distant, respectively, 16600 feet, 17 400 
feet, 33800 feet, and 35000 feet from the power-house. 
Each sub-station has four 500-kw., 11000-2000 volt trans- 
formers (one in reserve). The high-pressure feeders are two 
three-conductor cables (of which one is reserve) of No. 0.B. & S. 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 469 


* 


gauge for each of the distant stations and two No. 3 B. & S. 
gauge cables for the two nearer stations. The losses and drops 
correspond to those given by Mr. Berg’s distribution. 


Station and Sub-station Load Curves. 


6000 


Kilowatt Run No. 3. (Losses not included). 


2000 


KILOWATTS, 
AVERAGE © 9 222 


KILOWATTS s 


2 


100 


SECONDS 
120 


E 


KILOWATTS, 
AVERAGE =802 


bo 
— 

for) 
— 


2000 i — 


1000 : 


510 


1000 


780 820 860 


SECONDS 
900 
Gs A 


550 590 


940 980 


The trolley wires are No. 0000, three for each track, corre- 
sponding conductors being cross-connected. Only two wires 


are employed in European practice. 


The generating station has five 1300-kw., three-phase, 11 500- 
volt generators, and five 1200-kw. engines, one set as spare. 


oe, 


470 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


The Teast: of these units have been determined from the 
load curves, Figs. 2 and 3, as follows: the curves in heavy 
rectangular outline are the actual load curves (not includ- 
ing transmission losses) as determined from the time-table 
by point-to-point plotting, and from the maximum = and 


Station and Substation Load Curves. Kilovolt-amperes. Run No.3. Losses not included) . 


KILOVOLT- 
AMPERES 


average loads indicated by the load curves the transmission 
lines have been calculated and capacities of electrical appar- 
atus determined. 

The curves in light lines represent approximately the load as 
determined by points taken at 10-second intervals, and are 
identical in form with those given by Mr. Berg. For the sake 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 471 


of corresponding ratings for central-station apparatus, the 
loads indicated by these approximate curves have been used, 
as otherwise no strictly comparable basis would exist. This 
is not only required as a matter of comparison but is allowable 
as to the steam plant as a matter of fact; for the reason that 
the highest peaks are of such duration that they are taken care 
of by the stored energy of the rotating masses, so that the steam- 
load peaks are lower. The generator ratings are also safe. 
The true averages are: 


Average power on sub-station, kilowatts........-....+.. 802 
Average apparent power sub-station, kilovolt-amperes. .. .1 067 
Maximum power, sub-station, kilowatts.............-+-. 1 942 
Maximum apparent power sub-station, kilovolt-amperes. .2 100 
Average power on generating station, kilowatts.......... 3 222 
Average apparent power on generating station, kilovolt- 

PUTTS Ot gery de adrian A cat ea bien oer 4 028 
Maximum power on generating station, kilowatts....... .5 676 
Maximum apparent power on generating station, kilovolt- 

AM DETES ete age heh: Mee yi ee a 5 990 
This gives including losses: 
Average kilowatt output of power SEAWMOUs syersaxoueee hee = 3 510 
Average kilovolt-amperes output of power station....... 4 320 
Maximum kilowatt output of power station............. 6 520 
Maximum kilovolt-amperes output of power station..... 6 822 


The average load of the generators is 83% of rated full load. 

The maximum load of the generators is 124.5% of rated 
full load. 

The average load of the engines is 73% of the rated full load. 

The maximum load of the engines 1s 128.7% of the rated 
full load. 

These ratings are based on the approximate load curves. 


. Cost or INSTALLATION. 

The selling prices given by Mr. Berg have been used except 
as to cost of transformers, which have been taken at $6.00 
per kilowatt instead of at $4.50, on account of the decrease 
of frequency and change in size of units. 

Complete steam equipment including installation, per 


rw ae te ee eh es re = oo sien Sree $75.00 
High-potential generators, switchboards and instru- 
>" “ments, per kilowatt........5. 00-0 Feeeeeee rete 26.00 
Transformers (500-kw., air-blast), per kilowatt < 6.00 


472 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


Alternating-current electric locomotives, complete....19 000.00 
Passenger coaches* (70 seats) 020.20. o> gas ran ee nee 4 500.00 
High-pressure cables (10 000 volts) No.0, per 1 000ft.. 840.00 
High-pressure cables (10 000 volts), No.3, per1000ft.. 600.00 


Copper per lbal e22e) <2 A eae aa een 0.186 
Alternating current trolley construction, per mile.... 1 200.00 
S5-lberails, ‘per tone uh: wee et ee eee mee 26.00 
Track*constriction) perimilevie aa.) eee 500.00 


For the sake of comparison, Mr. Berg’s figures for direct- 
current motors and alternating-current motors with concatenated 
control are given. ; 

1. Direct-current motors, acceleration 1 mile per hr. per sec. 

2. Alternating-current motors, acceleration 0.8 miles per hr. 
per sec. 

3. Alternating-current motors, with small air-gap and low 
frequency, acceleration 0.8 miles per hr. per sec. 


1 2 3 
Power-house steam equipment...... $480 000 $525 000 $450 000 
Power-house electrical equipment... 166 000 260 000 169 000 


646 000 785 000 619 000 


Synchronous converter station...... 312 000 

Lranstormer Stations. 1s nese see 57 500 48 000 
_ 312 000 57 500 48 000 

17 locomotives complete........... 225 000 322 000 322 000 

68 passenger coaches... ........... - 306 000 306 000 306 000 


531 000 628 000 628 000 


Cableswd Upucatoumte. seni ty Geir: 157 000 +366 000 157 000 
Trolley and feeder copper.......... 49 000 - 31 000 49 200 


206 000 397 000 206 200 


Track material and construction.... 109 000 109 000 109 000 
Trolley construction, Vi; ..uiienes ne 23 400 31 200 31 200 


132 400 140 200 140 200 
Total cogts. shin. Steen ei $1 857 000 $2 008 000 $1 641 400 


} There is apparently an error in this item, and cables have been ac- 
cordingly calculated for same drops and losses as employed by Mr. Berg 
for his alternative plan with rheostatic control. 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 473 


Therefore the alternating-current system employing motors 
with small air-gap and at low frequencies shows a cost equal 
to 81.5% of that of the system with large air-gap and high fre- 
quency, or $366 600 less; and a cost equal to 88.5% of that of 
the direct-current system, or $215 600 less. 


PowER CONSUMPTION. 


é 1 2 3 
Average power required..........-... 3690s 2 7.0 3 510 
Kilowatt average loss...........----- 600 380 288 
PETECENT HOSS etal. Sete one wielw loose elles cokers 16.4 9.1 8.2 
Per cent. of direct-current power..... 100 114 96.2 
Per cent. of cost of direct-current in- 
SWALENRYosaUs) Iain 6 @ oeacic.s Ceo CaaOrens 100 107 88. 


In other words, while the energy consumed at the train is 
somewhat greater with the alternating-current motors, the con-. 
sumption at the central station is 3.8% less, owing to the differ- 
ence in transmission and ‘conversion losses. 

So far as this case is a criterion, therefore, there is a re- 
duction of 12% in first cost, 3.8% in power consumption, elimi- 
nation of the attendance and repairs on synchronous con- 
verters, and on motor commutators, as compared with the 
direct current, while there is a saving of 15.8% in first cost and 
a reduction of 15.8% in power consumption as compared with 
the 25-cycle, large air-gap motors. 

Compared with the direct-current system there are three 
overhead wires to be maintained instead of a third rail, and 
the expense of caring for motor-bearings to keep the rotors cen- 
tered, while compared with the alternating-current motors 
with large air-gap there is the difference in maintenance of 
motor-bearings. 

Mr. Berg assumed that 17 locomotives are required, 16 of 
which are always in service and one undergoing inspection or 
repairs. This allows about 21 days per year per locomotive 
for this purpose and makes no allowance for extra locomotives 
‘in use. If the same assumptions are made and one extra loco- 
motive is added, on account of the smaller air-gaps, the time in. 
the repair-shop will be is doubled, and as this is more than the 
ratio of the air-gaps it is more than a fair allowance to cover 
the difference in time out of service on account of bearings. 

One locomotive, however, would represent but a small part 
of the total difference in first cost, it is evident then that the. 


474 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


additional cost of maintenance would be far less than the 
interest on the difference in investment. 

In this connection the experience on the Valtellina line is 
interesting. At the time of the writer’s visit this line had been 
operating ten motor-cars and two locomotives, having four 
motors each, for about 18 months in regular service, and for 
more than a year in more or less regular, although experi- 
mental, service. 

During the entire period three bearings had burned out, two 
by leakage of water into the oil-reservoirs and one by running 
dry. In neither case were the motors otherwise injured. No 
other repairs to bearings had been made. The maximum 
wear at the end of the first 25000 miles of regular service as 
determined by the repair department, was 0.3 mm., or about 
one-third the available life of the bearings. The total distance 
that the car had run was estimated as at least 50000 miles- 
thus indicating a life for the bearings of 150,000 miles. 

For the most part the road-bed is rock-ballasted. The 
regular running speed is about 40 miles per hour, and the 
number of revolutions per .minute at this speed is 300, the 
motors being direct-connected. 

The motor-bearings are very large and massive and are 
provided with ample oil reservoirs. The three-phase motor 
construction is particularly favorable to ample bearings on ac- 
count of the large diameter and absence of commutators, the 
bearings being largely housed within the rotor. 

On the schedule here dealt with the motors would make 
90 000 to 100 000 miles per year, and assuming the same life as 
attained in Italy, the linings would require renewal every 
18 months. Obviously the linings could require renewal at 
much shorter intervals without overcoming the advantages of 
lower cost of plant and reduced operating expense shown 
above. ; 

Effect of Different Methods of Making the Kun. From Fig. 1 
it is seen that for the alternating-current run an acceleration of 
0.8 miles per hr. per sec. was employed, while forthe direct-current 
run the acceleration was about 1 mile per hr. per sec. In spite 
of this difference, however, the maximum kilowatt inputs are 
977 and 896 for the alternating-current motors and 780 for the 
direct-current motors. If the run with. alternating-current 
motors was made with an acceleration of 1 mile per hr. per sec., 
as shown by the solid curve (run No. 4) in Fig. 4, the maximum 


1905.| WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 4751 


kilowatt input would be 1086, with proportionate increases for 
higher accelerations, as, for instance, 1404 kw. for the dotted curve 
(run No. 5) in Fig. 4. The effect on the load curve is indicated 
by Figs. 5 and 6, which correspond to curve 4 of Fig. 4. The 
ratio of mean to maximum in this case is 0.46 compared with 
0.565 for the lower acceleration. Comparing the actual energy 
consumed, however, curve 4, Fig. 4, requires only 21 500 kw-sec., 


1400 


1200 


ee ee eee ee ee 
i 


400 


200 


20 30 40 


Fic. 4. 


or 187 kw. average input, as against 23 028 kw-sec., or 200 kw. 
average input, for curve 3, and 21800 kw-sec., or 190 kw. 
average for the direct-current run. . 
The high peaks thus shown are commonly taken to indicate 
the unfitness of the three-phase motor for traction purposes 
where runs of this kind are made. What they actually indicate, 
however, is that this is not the correct method of making the 


476 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


runs, and that the peculiarities of each type of motor must be 
considered throughout. 

As illustrative of this statement curves 6 and 7, Fig. 7 are given. 
In curve 6, the acceleration to half-speed is 1.32 miles per hr. per 
sec., while full speed is reached in the same time as if made at 1 
mile per hr. per sec. uniform acceleration (run No. 4). The 
total energy required is 21 565 kw~2c., and the average power 
is 187.5 kw., being therefore practically the same as for run 
No. 4, while the distance travelled during acceleration is greater 
and the maximum power less, being only 920 kw. 


Station Load Curve. Run No. 4. 
+ —- 


“OWATTS, AVERAGE = 2998 
——— a 


In curve 7, this method has been carried further to show 
how substantially the same results may be attained with three- 
phase motors as with direct-current motors. The acceleration 
to half-speed is made at 1.32 miles per hr. per sec., while from 
half to full speed it is 0.680. The maximum power required 
is 780 kw., or the same as for Mr. Berg’s direct-current run; 
the total energy is 21 764 kw., a trifle less than for the direct- 
current run; the motors take power for only 35.75 seconds 
compared with 43.5 seconds, and therefore coast 42.75 seconds 
instead of 33 seconds. Referring to the corresponding load- 
curves, Figs, 8 and 9, the average kilowatt output, not including 
losses, is of course practically the same as for the direct current 
while the maximum is 4680 kw., compared with 4 400 kw., the 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. au 


maximum kilovolt-amperes being 4940. The ratio of mean to 
maximum kilowatts (without losses) is 0.652; for the kilovolt- 
amperes it is 0.71. The actual station kilovolt-ampere out- 
puts, however, are practically identical, as shown by the fol- 
lowing comparison. 
Direct- Three- 
current. phase 


Maxi tim kilowatt, abl MOCOLrSe iit ee) see) clslels elie’ seiieiai 780 780 
Watt-hours per ton-mile at the trolley.............. 70 69 
Watt-hours per ton-mile at power-house............. 85 76.4 
Volt-ampere-hours per ton-mile at power-house...... 85 87 
Maximum kilovolt-amperes output................4% 5 65) 5 600 
IP etRGe Mi LOSSiMmry-1- Or wari spgrcMuneis | Races, Grliet a! sachet ceetekes ate 16.4 8 


Station Load Curve. Run No. 4. 


KILOVOLT \ AMPERES 
AVERAGE = 3503 

‘6000 

5000 
2 
in 
= 4000 
4 
ll 
5 
° 3000 4 
} 
_ 
x 

2000 {= 

1000 es aii = 

SECONDS Z 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 


Fie. 6: 


For this method of running the equipment is five 1 200-kw. 
generators, five 1 150-kw. engines at power-house, and four 
400-kw. transformers for each sub-station, one spare unit in 
each case. High-pressure lines are No. 1 and No. 4 cables re- 
spectively, in duplicate. Trolley-wires are No. 000. 

The loads, neglecting losses, are: ts 


Average power on sub-station, in kilowatts.........+.--: 757 
Average kilovolt-amperes on sub-station..... Bs head aePalae ah a 914 
Maximum power on sub-station. .......--++eeeeeeeeee 1 560 
Maximum kilovolt-amperes on sub-station......... Bot ia 1 660 
Average power on generating station......--.+..-+-++- 3 048 
Average kilovolt-amperes on generating Station <-casmes 3 514 - 
Maximum power on generating station..........+++-++-- 4 680 


Maximum kilovolt-amperes on generating station........ 4 940 


478 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


This gives, including losses and drops: 


Average kilowatt output of generating Stations. Sisco hs 3 320 
Average kilovolt-amperes output of generating station...3 785 
Maximum kilowatt output of generating station......... 5 400 


Maximum kilovolt-amperes output of generating station.5 600 
The generators run at 79% of rated full load at average load. 


I ae 
1000 25 ; —--+RUN 76 
eae oi D ats 7] 
Sere Pa 
aay a) ~s + RUN{ 7 — 
/ | a 
= as 
800 20 = — > = 1 un 
~ 
1 | Nas 
= | 
3 | a 
= i] | 
/ | 
aS J ! | 
15 ——: 1 
2 / } 
LS | 
2 § Le is a 
2 | | 
= | | 
400 10 \ BIE: 4 
Pah oa) 
! i 
o | ! 
v7) = | 
= | \ 
| Pi | | [ 
200 «25 ait : iieape ama: 4 
K 
| 
ft et tf tt 
! l 
! | 


Fic. 7. ; 

The generators run at 116% of rated full load at maximum 
load. 

The engines run at 72% of rated full load at average load. 

The engines run at 117% of rated full load at maximum load. 

The ratings of apparatus in this case correspond with Mr. 
Berg’s ratings for his direct-current project, which were slightly 
more liberal than for the alternating-current system. 

In the calculation of cost the same prices have been used 
as before. Without repeating the figures in detail itis sufficient 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 479 


to say that the total cost, including the same items as before, 
is reduced in this case to $1 570 000, or 78% of the cost of the 
system with large air-gap motors and 25-cycle current, and 
85% of that of the direct-current system. 

It is evident, therefore, that when peculiarities of the three- 
phase motor are considered in planning the operation the strong 
points of the three-phase motor can be made to so far compensate 
for its less desirable characteristics that its operation becomes 
in no way inferior to that of the direct-current motor, while 
in many ways it is superior. This method of running is no mere 
theoretical speculation, but is simple to realize in practice, 
being regularly carried out on the Valtellina line. Limit-switches 
are the means employed. 

Summarizing as to the above comparison, this method of 
running, with motors of 0.079-in. air-gap and 14-cycle current, 
would give the advantage of no moving apparatus at sub- 
stations, no commutators on motors, 8% average loss instead 
of 16.4%, and at a first cost of 84.5% that of the direct-current 
system, while entailing no disadvantages in the way of exces- 
sive load-peaks. Se 

With the difference in cost of sub-station operation assumed 
as $5.00 per day, and with power at 0.008 per kilowatt-hour, 
assuming average load for 18 hours per day—this represents an 
annual difference in operating cost of about $25 000, not in- 
cluding interest, available to be charged against increased main- 
tenance of bearings and of overhead conductors. That the 
small air-gaps and low frequency are warranted under these 
conditions is obvious. If with Mr. Lincoln,* we assume that 
sub-station attendance can be omitted altogether, the difference 
at $1800 per sub-station per annum becomes about $31 000. 

Experience on the Valtellina line shows that, so far as main 
line railways involving considerable distances are concerned, 
the cost of maintenance of overhead structures is not deter- 
mined by the amount of actual labor required for repairs, but by 
the necessity of maintaining a force sufficient for regular patrol- 
ling and prompt action in emergencies. The cost of main- 
taining two overhead wires is therefore not greater than for a 
single wire under such conditions. 

The method of making the run indicated in Fig. 7; that is, 


* See Electrical World and Engineer, Dec. 12, 1903, Vol. XLII, No, 24, 
p. 951. 


480 ‘WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


with a lower rate of acceleration for the higher speeds, is also 
advantageous in another respect; namely, gain in elasticity. 
Thus Mr. Berg’s direct-current run would allow 4.6 seconds 
to be made up by running up to the braking point, but by his 
alternating-current run only 1.35 seconds could be gained; by 


Station and Substation Load Curves. Kilowatt Run No.7. (Losses not included.) 


KILOWATTS, Sj 3048 

5000 
4000 
3000 
2000 
1000 

a 

te 

bE 

< 

= 

° 

a 

=x 

| KILOWATTS, AVERAGE = 757 | 
1000 - 1 za | =I 
| 
20 60 100 10 TR80 220 
1000 eal 
3 0 470 510 550 500 
2000 = 
1000 
SECONDS 
7380 820 360 900 940 980 
Fic. 8. 


raising the acceleration to 1 mile per hr. per sec. (run No. 4) 
this could be increased to five seconds at the cost of very high 
maximums at train and central station; but, by the method 
of run No. 7, 5.14 seconds could be made up and with a maxi- 
mum kilowatt input not greater than the direct-current motors 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 481 


would require. Thus in addition to lower first cost and smaller 
losses, run No. 7 makes an important gain in elasticity. 

Rapid acceleration is comparatively unimportant except 
during the period when the velocity is low and the motors are 


Station and Substation Load Curves, Kilovolt-Ampere. Run No,7, (Losses not included.) 


il KILOVOLT, -AMPERE, AVERAGE = 3614 
4000 
3000}- it Il 
2000) 
1000 u 
fe secbnos | 
7 a a a a a s ) 
§: 
z 
is IKILOVOLT-AMPERES, AVERAGE = 014 
2000] = ‘I 
| 
zn) we) T wo | 
| 
: { 
2000) 1 
1 
70 B10 Gi 
2000] 
1000) 
SECONDS. 
780 30 BaD 900 10 980 
Fic. 9. 


running in series or cascade connection; but during this period 
it should be made at the maximum rate that the tractive effort 
will permit. This is evident from the fact that during this 
time the average speed is low and the distance covered small, 
while the rheostatic losses are approximately one-half of the 


482 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


entire input. On the other hand, during the latter half the 
average speed is high, the distance which could be gained by 
higher acceleration relatively small, and the rheostatic loss 
about 25% of the input and hence smaller relatively to the 
distance covered. Thus by this method, as compared with a 
constant acceleration reaching the same final velocity in the 


EFFICIENCY AND POWER-FACTOR 


EFFICIENCY AND POWER-FACTOR 


1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 700 
Fic = all) 


same time, the watt-hours per ton-mile rheostatic loss are less; 
’ 


the distance covered greater, and the maximum input less 


while: the watt-hours per ton-mile total input are 


vhile also: less. 
This ‘1s, therefore, an important featur 


e of three-phase 

se opera- 
tion, and quite alters many conclusions based on ea 
of a constant acceleration, 


‘Owing to’ the absence of the commut 


ation 


ator, the three-phase 


ComPaRISON oF Drrect-CurRRENT, Sinc: -PHasE, AND THREE-PHASE PERFORMANCE, 
| | | Basep on Curve: oF W. I. SLicHTER. 
| TRANSACTIONS OF TH A. I. E. E., January, 1904. | 
Direct-Current—Three 25-ton cars, mul iple unit arrangement, each with two 60-h-p. 
motors. oe 
» Monophase — Three 25-ton cars, multiple unit arrangement, each with two 60-h.p. 
_ | repulsion motors. | ; ' 
3 Three-Phase—Train of 75 cars, loccinotive included, 3 motors for single, cascade, and 
420 oc | ee double-cascade arrangement. | ine ay, 5 auty 
6} 7 Traction coefficient = 9.90 Ib. per ton. Efficiency of motors, 90%, Efficiency of 
: ae beviggn <t gearing, 96%. Rotating masses ar€mot considered. Diameter of driving wheels is 
yes ys Poa 5.05 ft. for three-phase locomotive, | Length of run = 7497 ft. Time, 219 seconds. 
alta 3 | : : Ee | | 
P { i 
380 | \ q ~3T4" 
i mM eg: a »s 
360 359 
340 2 
820 
MILES PER| ts 
3004): SaeUR 296 ; 
32 eee Je See Og Si pa sere ee a 
280 3 ie : a . 9) we---—=--- DIRECT CURRENT) = — + 
' oes a a ae —+-—- ——-—— _MONOP eto, ater eae 
oe \ NZ : - : ass. ‘ fo ? @ ¥ 1. 3 , at ee : "y . a ¢3 aie : $ 260 of ¢ 
a Sa 8 a Sem ea - ‘ THREE-PHASE ge ; 


Bae 


donamaorna a2anT-aaauT ava a2and- aaoure Thasavd-roasid 40 woaisaaod | A ee 
maTHoie OW 40 eavaud uo aaead 
SO0OL isvasl,. 1A ar 10 enoitoagmaaTt 


-q.d-08 owt dthw doze jtnomogiens tia olqidlircer 12189 not-8S gia cola sche by pag iar 
; 2tosom ; Eatsinir Mage eae 
G09 ows diw dose ,jaemoeygastis. tine alg tive ,2Tk9 03-88 se1dT —sesdgonoM » - Rae sceaeig! 
 .erotomt notehrqet ih ~ Sacgrrtoi Oa Ae 
“bits obs 92889 volynia 40b-21030m § -bobuloni svitomosol ,erso BY to ats1T—-sendG-oa1d tT : - ee 
‘Jromregastts sbsses9-aldrob 
ae Yorspma  .Ge00 ziciom io vonaiiAA —.003 rq idl 0€.0 = insiniiieqo moiton1T 
at @loodw enivnb to ‘ajemeiG —botabienoo ton! ste asecemt ynitsioA —-g880 -gairesy - 
eo ~~ ebagose Cte _simiT. st VOR T == n7 to dognedt ” Sv itouronal sendq-997dt tot 3166.6 


Te eee 


oe ee 


i ss ae ee a 
ee 
a: 


A359 231M 
ez |: HUOH 


es 


. 


BA af” 


ot H 

5 pa te ¢ 4 A Sano tag Ki / ul ep 
‘rwaanyo Tosnia ~~—+—- loan coe a Sa Sera? a OR a] weit 2 

hy Sige : : 5 Re ae if ry : 
a ae IZAHIOnOM. ee es $ = eee . 3 hy / a : | bai 

Rs By pie, Wey Sie aes th petra ee ; A | ae fe 
Pac bo mam Pee ee 
ma % —- 
et 


ee ee 


er ee eer 
s 

5s 
=— 


ee re ee 


“at roca 


ee) 
WW 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 483 


motor has some peculiar features of elasticity, one of which 
is of interest in the consideration of the proper method of 
making the run. I refer to the ability to obtain a number of 
economical speeds with asimple and compact mechanical construc- 
tion and arrangement. For projects of the kind considered by 
Mr. Berg this method has peculiar advantages, and should in 
general be used, but even had motor curves been available it 
would have destroyed the comparability sought in this in- 
stance. As an example of the above méthod of running ap- 
plied in this way—and incidentally as a matter of interest in 
showing what might be expected of three-phase performances in 
comparison with single-phase—it has been thought worth while 
to include Figs. 11 and 12. ; 

Fig. 11 is based upon the curves given by Mr. Slichter*_in 
his paper read before the InsTiTUTE in January, 1904, for the 
purpose of comparing the direct-current motor with the re- 
pulsion motor. The three-phase motors used are arranged to 
give four speeds, there being three motors, mounted and ar- 
rangedsas two structures, giving economical speeds of 9.7, 12.1, 
18.3, and 30 miles per hour. They were designed by Ganz & 
Co. for rapid-transit service. 

No change whatever has been made in the run, but multiple- 
unit trains have been used instead of the single cars cited by 
Mr. Slichter. The weight of the train is 75 tons in each case. 
The distance covered is 7 497 ft., the time 219 seconds, and the 
maximum speeds are 32.48 miles per hr. for the direct-current 
run, 31.92 for the repulsion motor, and 30 for the three-phase 
motor. The comparative results are given in the following 
table. : ok 

By this plan, therefore, the results withthree-phase motors are 
‘ not inferior to the results with either direct-current motors or the 
repulsion motors, but show a total input, as compared with 
the direct-current of 91.5%, and of 96% as compared with the 
alternating current motors, while the net input is only 85.5% of 
the direct-current and 89.5% of the single-phase. 

It is interesting to note also that the maximum kilovolt- 
amperes input for the three-phase motor is the same as for the 
direct-current motor and only 104% of the single-phase motor, 
while the maximum kilowatt input is only 80% of the direct- 
current kilowatts and 91% of the single-phase kilowatts. The 


*Transactions of the A. I. E. E., Vol. XXIV., p. 61. 


484 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


ee a ee 


Direct |Monophase|Three-phase 
current Jalternating alternating 


current current 
Maximum speed miles per hour.........-+++e+ 0000055 32.48 31.92 307 7 
Average speed in miles per hour.......--.++++-++0+> 23.29 23.29 23.29 
Mime ofsacceleration: ct.sa-n tne ste ee ee ee eae HOU 62.5 35.74 
Time Of Tut With -MOtOES. vox ceed Oslo eo ase em,s eamrone ne: Hie Oe 0. 51.64 
Time of coasting. . Te ah ks Seng cine 146.8 121.54 
Time of braking. . by tiated tov anit Lene 9.7 10.07 
Average ERE EE os) on Goat late: Cieecieis ohana man eRaaRe 9 1 A .84 
Average acceleration during aetiial: lore lone, ont .541 511 84. 
Maximum energy consumption ee ces eeu ale wisn wit S's 368. 335. . 
Maximum energy mpi kilowatt-amperes...... .}420. 402. 420: -*5 
Positive kilowatts per hour.... 6.0... seseeeeeee esse of 4,32 4.11 3.94, 
Negative kilowatts per hour ....... slate .26 
Effective comparison of energy ilowstee per hott te ie 4.32 4.11 3:68’ 
“Watt-hours per ton-mile......... 22s ee ee sere ee ee ee | 36.90 RiGee 31.40, 


es 


elimination of rheostatic losses is sufficient here to permit 
of a very favorable showing, while by making the run at 
approximately constant input the peaks even of apparent 
energy do not exceed those of the other systems; 

a result which shows that in spite of its lack of variable-speed char- 
_actesistics the three-phase motor only requires to be used with 
due regard to its own peculiarities to yield results entirely 
comparable with those of the variable-speed motor, while’ re- 
‘taining all of its own advantages. 

} Curve 12 (for which I am indebted to Mr. de Kando of 
Ganz & Co.) shows a comparison of the performance’ of the 
three-phase motor and the Winter-Eichberg single-phase motor 
(based on curves of the latter published in Elec. Zeut.,* 
1903). In this case the maximum power input is only 
64.7% that of the single-phase motor in reaching the same 
speed in the same time, the distance travelled being 1.19%, 
and the net energy input only 90%. The watt-hours per ton- 
mile input during acceleration are 176.4 for the single-phase 
motor and 177.9 for the three-phase motor. 

The particularly interesting feature of this comparison js 
the relative amounts of energy which the motors have to dissi- 
pate. This is indicated by the lower curves marked K wz7, the 
total energy being 345 kilowatt-seconds for the single-phase 
motor as against 241 for the three-phase motor. The single- 
phase motors must therefore be able to radiate 43% more energy 


Sepa em LTA ee Leg se as so 7” Lh Aa oe te oe nee 
* See Electrical World and Engineer, Digest, p. 1016, Dec 19, 1903; 
also p. 1006, same issue. 


485 


J 


WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION 


1905.] 


Curreg ‘9310 ‘€06T “lrsyosq1aZ “UYI040444 917 ‘soAIng 10 
‘189 1OJOUL U04-EZg v Jo potsod ZurzIV4s OY} 1OF ‘sIOZOW eseyq-ses4L, zuer) pue oseyd-2 


SGNOODJS £6 


{ 
| 
joauveaanoay ASYANS 
| 
! 
| 


. ONIMVES FOVOSVO 


‘oas="MH "ONINWHE ONY ONILYVIS 
ONINNG ‘SHOLOW NI SASSO1 IWNYALNI 
“ADYAN] JO NOLLAWNSNOO ZAIL043553 

*ONINVYS JAVOSVO 


iv ADYANZ GalvdadNday 
"NOILdWNSNOO ADYANZ 


“S3WNVYOOTIN NITINd YVEMVHG = “d 
*GNOOFS Yad SSYLAW ALIOOTZA “A 


*SYOLOW 4O S3SSO7 TVNYSLNI *IMy 


*NOILGWNSNOO ADYENA = “MHA 


ASVHd-334dHL —————— ee 


BSVHd-2TONIS 


"My 99°LP 


40] Wott 32S) 
[Bulg S1eqyoly UseM4oq Uostre 


SGNOO03S 
i! 


ee 


SAWWVESOTI O8tt 


3 SaWWVHDONIM NI TINd HvEMVUG 


a 


QNOORS Y3d SSYLAW ALIOOTZA Ss 


g oR 


8 


siivmon S 


dwog— ZI ‘Ol 


I 


485 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June Nj 


than the three-phase motors; this illustrates the fact that the 
higher efficiency realizable with three-phase motors has its 
greatest value in the lowering of motor temperatures for the 
same ventilation, or the greater protection of the motors which 
is possible with the same temperatures. 


VALUE OF RECUPERATION. 


The practical value of the ability to restore energy to the 
line, possessed by the three-phase system, has been the subject, 
first and last, of a considerable amount of discussion, the general 
conclusion of American engineers apparently being that except 
for mountain roads with heavy traffic it is an item of com- 
paratively small consequence. Curves 3 to 7 are interesting in 
this connection. 

During the acceleration period the three-phase motor must 
run on the rheostat until full speed is reached and hence, other 
things being equal, the power input. will be greater than with 
series motors in proportion as this maximum velocity is greater 
than that at which running on the motor-curves becomes pos- 
sible. This results in greater rheostat losses. On the other 
hand, the return of energy in braking is said to be of little 
consequence because it is small, varying from a small per- 
centage up to about 45% of the stored energy of the train, 
according to rate of braking. This item will, however, usually 
be quite "comparable in magnitude with the excess rheostatic 
losses. For operation such as that shown by the curves given, 
where relatively high accelerations are used, it permits the 
method of making runs to be widely varied without greatly 
varying the total energy required. The accompanying table 
will enable the curves to be more readily compared in this 
respect. 

In considering these results it should be borne in mind that 
the maximum speed used is alike in all cases, being that selected 
by Mr. Berg, and that no attempt has been made to select the 
most advantageous speed. This isamatter of much importance, 
but was considered as being outside the scope of the paper. 
The results are therefore to be considered only as comparative, 
and as limited by the specific conditions of a definite problem. 

Thus it appears that the rheostatic losses are, for run No. 3, 
approximately 6 815 kilowatt-seconds, while for the direct-cur- 
rent run they are 3100 kilowatt-seconds.* The difference is 


* Motor losses deducted; efficiency of single motor without gears taken 
at 91%. 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION, AST | 


. i Iso I I { 4 

ad gm ee ¢ e & 5 

BCpechoient Bo. me] aCe. = nS 2 

Sey een eg) |e BiG) 3 

Hay & ae Kn kK ho & 

ASU (5) Ts So EO ees cee Be) 
eoogq, Ore oo Od OY 

9m. | 8 aw oA, on oo 50 

gee [a*2 | a2 | 4, | 22 (8 

ee we 8 “ao ars i2a] 
i oO oo a . Gc 

oe ma 5 - oO « ty Sty 2 

eid een ee tic on 8 nH 

S88 | o8Eel oe oy ge! Weg) 

Zc 8 275 So] Ard Am Ao |Aag 

ofS lo Fs a] O85 oo od on 

ZNO cad * ra Pare! ane) age 

aol es ee & & 

HMO | Sao] se mH BQ | 38 

Ond JOKES Z| On On oy) O# 

I-wesec. accelerating.....cs.s-ecse+s +] 22 766 | 22 374 | 21 776 | 21 977 | 22 507 | 21 800 
kw-sec. uniform speed..........--+-- 853 825 1095} 1500] 4063 
Total input kw-sec.........+++++.---| 23 619 | 23 199 | 22 871 | 23 477 | 26 570 | 21 800 


1 854 | -1 634 | -1 291 | -1 974 | -3 542 

21 765 | 21 565 | 21 580 | 21 503 | 23 028 | 21 800 
189 | 187.5 |187.65 |187.0 200 190 

Maximum kw. per run........+--++- 780 920 1404] 1086 896 780 

Maximum kilovolt-ampere perrun.... 823 970 | 1501 | 1149 945 780 

Watt-hours per ton-mile........-.--- 69.4 | 68.64 68.7 68.5 73.3 70 


, average alternating-current kw.. = 
0.994 10.9868 |0.9876 | 0.984 | 1.056 1 


Ratio 
6665 | 6540] 6258} 6540] 6815; 3104 
36.44 34.3 30.4 37.4 43.9 


Mcweaseey WLAN a. vee yt <0) sere tha wets eke 
Net input kw-sec......+-+-++e2--0-- 
Average kw. per run.......-----++-- 


average direci-current kw...... 
ReostaplOss aad cis, 2 outset rs 
Per cent. net stored energy returned. . 
Per cent. energy stored at beginning of 
Praline te cersie @ wietn elev on = cneveln estes 
Minimum time for run.......-+-++-- 
Maximum time saved......+.++-- 
kw-sec. accelerating......+-+++¢++00- 
kw-sec. uniform speed.......--+-++++- 
Total input kw-sec.....--.--+-2-eee: 
kwesec. braking........ 0.2 ee ee eeees 
Net input kw-sec.......-.-s eee cece 
Per cent. energy recoverable in terms 
of stored energy minus energy con- 
sumed in friction.......-.+..+-+--- 
Per cent. total energy stored in train, 
MOPUETOG tol icteta: scenes ale) erates sfeiks 
Watt-hours per ton-mile..........-+-- 


31 29.3 25.9.) 31.87 | 37.44 
90.36 | 89.42 | 87.79 | 90.93 | 94.15 | 90.86 
§.14 6.08 (heh! 4.57 1.35 4.64 
22 766 | 22 374 | 21776 | 21 977 | 22 507 | 21 113 

5 531 5924] 6624] 6150] 5 672 
28 297 | 28 298 | 28 400 | 28 127 | 28 179 | 28 113 

—4 364 | —4 364 | -4 364 | —4 364 | -4 364 
23 933 | 23 934 | 24 036 | 23 763 | 23 815 | 28 113 


44.8 44.8 44.8 44.8 44.8 


38.2 38.2 38.2 38.2 38.2 
76.17 | 76.17 | 76.50 | 75.63 | 75.80 | 89.48 


3715 kilowatt-seconds; but the alternating-current motors after 
coasting for 14 seconds still return 3 540 kilowatt-seconds leaving 
only 175 kilowatt-seconds excess in spite of the fact that the 
direct-current motors accelerated at 1 mile per hr. per sec. and 
the alternating-currént motors at 0.8 mile per hr. per sec. If 
the direct-current motors were limited in the same manner 
the three-phase motors would return considerably more than 
the difference in rheostat losses and have the added advantage 
of making the run in shorter time. 

If the runs were made in minimum time, 17.5% more energy 
would be returned by any one of them than would be required 
to counterbalance the excess rheostatic losses of the worst one. 


188 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


In making runs of this kind the motorman will usually over- 
run in order to be sure of making schedule time. “He thus coasts 
less and brakes longer, and for each second increase he adds— 
in this case 300 kilowatt-seconds—to the net energy consump- 
tion; but with the three-phase motor, for each added second of 
braking he returns 350 kilowatt-seconds. Thus the actual re- 
sults with three-phase motors in practice may be expected to 
vary less from the calculated than will the results with direct- 
current motors. 

When making this run in the least time the direct-current 
motors save 4.64 seconds and consume 89.5 watt-hours per ton- 
mile. By run No. 7, however, the three-phase motors make up 5.14 
seconds and consume only 76.2 watt-hours per ton-mile, or 
about 85% of the direct-current requirement, while in spite 
of the variety. of ways of making the run the three-phase runs 
do not differ in energy consumption by more than about 1% 
when making the run in minimum time and the worst one takes 
only 85.5% of the energy required by the direct current. 

To make the run in this way the direct-current motors take 
nearly 30% more energy than with the run made in the normal 
manner, while the three-phase motors take only from 3.5% 
to 10% more energy. The least favorable comparison therefore 
is on the normal run, and any departure from it results favor- 
ably to the three-phase motors. Thus run No. 7, for instance, 
having only a slight advantage over the direct-current motor 
on the normal run, takes 17.5% less energy for minimum 
time and saves 10% more time. The small increase of energy 
consumption for the runs when made in minimum time is a 
very interesting feature of three-phase operation. . 

_ In the normal runs as shown by the curves the effect of re- 
cuperation is less marked, but since it varies inversely as the ex- 
tent of coasting it tends to equalization of energy consumption. 
Thus the maximum difference in total input shown by the 
curves is 16%, but the difference in net input is only 7%; the 
energy returned, exclusive of coasting, varying from 11.3% 
of the total energy of the train in the case of run 5 to 31% in 
run 3, or from 13.3% to 36.4% of the net train energy. These 
results show that the recuperative braking tends to give the 
effect of coasting from full to half speed for all runs without 
necessitating the sacrifice of time involved in coasting, and in 
gefaral its importance increases as length of run and ratio of 
ma\imum to average speed decrease. It is of small. conse- 


1905.) * WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 489 


quence where runs are so long that acceleration energy becomes 
a small factor;°it becomes of large consequence where accel- 
eration is an important factor. 

The percentage of the total available energy which can be 
returned electrically varies with the rate of braking, from 40 
or 45% of the net (35 to 40% of the total) stored energy of 
the train for high rates of braking, down to zero where the train 
coasts, and the energy is all returned mechanically. Thus brak- 
ing at 150 lb. per ton, about 45% of the net and 41% of the total 
energy would be returned. by motors of good efficiency, 
being nearly the entire rheostatic loss. Mr. Berg’s calculations — 
showed 28% of the total energy returned after coasting for 
a portion of the available range, and 36% when braking from 
full speed; with the better motors afforded by smaller clearance 
and low frequency, proportionately better results, are, of course, 
secured, those shown above being 31 and 38% under the same 
conditions. 

In this connection, however, it is important to note that while 
the favorable results shown at the trolley are due to the recupera- 
tion. of energy, the discussion presupposes a density of traffic 
which, as in the present instance, will permit of its utilization. 
While therefore the usual contentions that the three phase-motor 
would necessarily prove itself radically uneconomical for rapid- 
transit service, and that it must inevitably produce a station 
load curve with prohibitive peaks, require modification in 
such cases, when the inputs alone are considered there is, super- 
ficially at least, a very different showing. : 

Thus run No. 7, which in all other respects is the most de- 
sirable, shows a total input of 23 619 kilowatt-seconds as against 
21 800 kilowatt-seconds for the direct current, or an excess of 
8% for the normal run; it is also.a trifle worse for the run in 
shortest time. The rheostatic losses here count seriously 
against the system; and, with the particular equipment used they 
would be conclusive as to the disadvantageous power relations 
were it not for the difference in transmission losses. 

The transmission system employed has. been calculated on 
the general basis established by Mr. Berg and is not quite that 
which would be indicated for maximum economy, but even in 
this case the difference in transmission losses is 8.4% in favor 
of the three-phase system so that the motors in consuming 8% 
more energy at the trolley would not: increase the power-house 
output as compared to the direct current, while the cost of the 


490 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. “{June 19. 


system would still be less by about 15%. The three-phase 
system, therefore, shows no inherent disadvantage on the 
score of economy under the conditions of rapid-transit service, 
even without taking advantage of the recuperative power, 
while with it a substantial gain is made which is not at the 
cost of any economic disadvantage. 

On roads having grades the return of energy by electrical 
braking may, as a saving in station equipment and operating 
expense, be a matter of much importance; it also saves wear 
and tear on the brake equipment. In a proposed rapid-transit 
system recently calculated by Ganz & Co., (the results of which 
they have kindly furnished me), the profile is quite irregular, the 
maximum grade being 2.97%. In this case 21.5% of the total 
energy required was furnished by recuperation on grades and 
in braking, the average station power-factor at the peak loads 
being 0.81 and the.ratio of mean kilowatt output to maximum 
instantaneous peak being 0.51, as indicated by the theoretical 
joad curve (not including sub-station and transmission losses) for 
the period of heaviest load. Since the total rheostatic losses 
in this case amounted to 10.5% of the output, more than twice 
their entire amount was returned by the motors; and the average 
energy required was only 44.5 watt-hours per ton-mile at the 
power-house, including all losses and energy for air pumps and 
yard switching. The maximum speed was 19.5 miles per hour, 
the average distance 2 970 ft., the schedule speed 15 miles per 
hour, the average number of trains 35, and the minimum 
headway 2.5 minutes. A four-speed control was employed. 

The following results of a test made on the Valtellina line 
by the writer to determine the effectiveness of recuperation 
on grades will doubtless be of interest. Owing to the official 
requirement of half speed on that section, the run was made with 
motors in cascade connection. 

For more ready inspection the results are given in tabular 
form. 

Weight of train, 125.2 tons. 
Distance run, 3.39 miles. 
Grade elevation, 329.45 feet. 
Average grade per cent., 1.845. 
Time ascending, 10.5 minutes; speed, 19.36 miles per hour. 
Time descending, 10 minutes; speed, 20.16 miles per hour. 
Energy, ascending (by Thomson. integrating wattmeier), 

43.74 :kw-hre oii , 


1905.} * WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 491 


Energy corresponding to grade, 31.1 kw-hr. 

Efficiency of motors in cascade at corresponding load, 85%. 

Hence consumed in train friction, 6.1 kw-hr. 

Train friction indicated, 7.26 lb. per ton. 

Energy, descending (by Thomson wattmeter), 18.09 kw-hr. 

Efficiency as generators at corresponding load, 83.57%. 

Apparent train friction energy, 9.45 kw. 

Train friction,* 11.2 lb. 

Energy expended in elevating train, 36.8 kw-hr. 

Energy returned in descending (total), 27.54. 

Per cent. of energy returned, 75. 

Per cent. of total energy required to ascend, 63. 

Per cent. of total energy of grade, 88.5. 

Per cent. of total energy of grade electrically returned, 58.5. 

It is interesting to note that in a paper presented, Oct. 20, 
1904, at the Electrical’ Congress .at Bologna,f by the .Italian 
engineers who made the official tests, the return of energy on 
this same grade and section of the road was reported at 54% 
as compared with 58.5 obtained in the tests made by the writer. 
The small difference is accounted for by the difference in train 
weights, the difference in efficiency as shown by the motor 
curves checking closely with the difference in load. The article 
says: 

“Tn other words the running with motors in circuit permits making 
use of 80% of the energy which, in other systems, would have to be wasted 
in braking.” . 

The fact must not be overlooked here, that wherever the 
rate of recuperation exceeds the constant losses of the system 
trains must be simultaneously running to absorb the energy, 
otherwise the whole system would tend to speed up until the losses 
equalled the energy returned. This is not a serious practical 
objection, however, as even a slight increase of speed is readily 
recognized by the motorman, and a light application of the 
mechanical brakes will reduce the returned energy to that 
which the system is able to absorb. 

The foregoing discussion indicates that in spite of the larger 
theostatic losses during acceleration the constant-speed char- 


* Meters were standardized at Milan immediately before the test. 
The discrepancy in train frictions indicates either a slight under-registry 
of meters or an increase of train friction in a train descending a grade 
and braked only at the head. 


} See L’ Electricita, Noy. 4, 1904, No. 44. 


492 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June I9 


acteristic is not without’ compensating features when the motor 
is constructed and operated with due consideration of its pecu- 
liarities. Constant speed is indeed a positive advantage as 
regards the maintenance of schedule, and the use of cascade 
regulation permits of reduction of speed on grades without in 
the least interfering with the exact preservation of the time- 
table since the reduction is by a definite and substantially con- 
stant amount. Two places are certainly not nearer together 
because there is a grade between them, or because the propel- 
ling motor is heavily loaded, and the desirability of getting from. 
one place to the other in the shortest time is, of itself, in no 
way affected by these considerations. It is also not an advan- 
tage, from the time-table point of view, that a given run should 
require a variable time by reason of change of load and that there- 
fore the schedule of runs involving grades must be laid out in 
view of the: heaviest loads if the time is to be made. From 
the traffic manager’s point ot view, speed should depend only 
upon curves and conditions of traffic; if from operating con- 
siderations the speed‘must be reduced by reason of grades, the 
safe speed over the level portions is not thereby increased and 
the speed for each portion should be definitely predeterminable, 
thus making it possible to fix definitely the amount of elasticity 
of the system allowed for making up time. 

The view usually: held in this country is, however, that 

the three-phase motor is inherently unfit for use-on roads hav- 
ing irregular profiles. The experience with the Valtellina 
road does not appear ‘to sustain this opinion, and the constant- 
speed characteristic seems again to have its own compensating 
features in a direction hitherto entirely overlooked by engi- 
neers in this country, so far as I know. 
The Valtellina line is peculiarly irregular in profile, having 
many very heavy grades, most of which are short, but one is 
3.5 miles long. It also has many curves of comparatively short 
radius. The running speed is 40 miles per hour. The train 
service is also not dense, so that all the conditions for extreme 
fluctuation of station load are present. 

Fig. 13 shows sections of the load curve taken directly from 
the record of the, Olivetti recording wattmeter at the central- 
station during the hours of heaviest load, 522 to 552 and 
757 to 8 22 p.m." (17 22 to 17 52 and 19 57 to 20 22 according 
to the Italian system of reckoning time). During these 
intervals four to six trains are running, and during the first 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 493 


there is also usually some switching going on in one of the 
vercss: 

The extreme station peaks as shown by the curves are 1.7 
to 1.8 times the average load or in other words the ratio of 
mean to maximum is 0.55 to 0.59 per cent. This remarkable 
‘result is due directly to the constant-speed characteristics of 
the motors; that is, to their dependance ‘upon frequency. The 
slip of the motors with trains running at full speed is very small; 
the energy which they take is determined by this precise rela- 
tion, being greatly influenced by ‘very small ‘variations of fre- 


7300 is = ee ge 
1700 4 i 
a = 
5 
1400}— = 37 =e 
«1300 s 
+ 1200 
2 300 L [ 
* 700 ab 
600 Ht Lh a] - 
400 — = 
300 — . —— : r 
200 — i 
100 + ech SRST = H 
2 17br. 50 min. 17hr. 45 min, 17 br.40 min. VE * y7hbr. 30 min. 17br. 25min, 
1900 Seren 
T 4 
1300 ; al im 
1300 = 
1600 
1 E 
ai E 
£1100 4 Goes 
21000 + 
2 900 
= 800 + 
700 : 
300 aril f 
400— [ee + | T 
i a] rit ; a 
re = t at 
300 i Zils 
= 20 hr.20 min, QObr. 15min. 20br. i)mine 2ohr. 5 min, 2Obr. 
Fic. 13. 


4 


quency. The sudden application of a heavy load reduces the 
generator speed, and simultaneously all synchronously running 
trains drop their loads in a greater or less degree; if the fall 
in speed is equal to the slip they cease altogether to draw 
energy. 

Since the motors usually run with a slip of hardly more than 
1% and reach their full output at 2 to 2.5%, a reduction of 
generator speed of 1% will relieve the station altogether 
of the load due to synchronously running trains, while with a 
greater fall these will momentarily return energy, all trains 
gradually resuming their loads as their speed falls to proper 
relation with the generator speed. Ina similar way all trains 


494 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


that are returning energy will have the rate of recuperation 
increased by the fall of speed. Thus all conditions tend to an 
equalization of load; the trains act like fly-wheels flexibly con- 
nected to the system, and the station peaks are thereby 
greatly modified. 

Since the stable operation of alternators in parallel is most 
easily accomplished when a considerable fall in speed occurs. 
between no load and full load, this property of the three-phase 
system may be fully utilized in practice, particularly as the 
fluctuation in lights which results will still be less than is in- 
evitable with the larger line drops occurring in direct-current 
operation. 

The effect of this equalization on the station load-curve is 
very marked, and is one of the first observations made in watch- 
ing the instruments or examining the load curve of the Val- 
tellina Central Station. It was for some time a very puzzling 
phenomenon to the writer but there is no doubt about the cor- 
rectness of the explanation. Correspondence with Ganz & Co. 
has elicited the information that the regulation, of the prime 
movers is purposely determined by them so as to take advan~ 
tage of this effect.* 


CoMPARISON OF CALCULATED RESULTS AND Run TEsTs. 


The figures as to performance given above, in the study of 
Mr. Berg’s project, are of course mere calculations and, while 
they have been made with great care from reliable data and 
are believed to be realizable in practice they are naturally 
open to the suspicion which attaches to such computations. It 
will therefore be advantageous to compare the results of cal- 
culation with those of actual tests. 

In the spring of 1904, the writer, on behalf of Mr. L. B. 
Stillwell, conducted an investigation of the performance of 
the Valtellina three-phase system. Some of the results 
of the tests are of interest in this connection. Before 
any tests were made, in fact before going to Italy, calcula- 
tions were made from the known profile, alignment, train- 
weights, and motor performance-curves for consecutive runs 
from Lecco to Colico, a distance of about 24 miles. The pro- 
file is very irregular and there are many curves. The distance 
was assumed to be made in six runs varying from 10 690 to 


Db ae eel ERIS PMP e EAS eS! PE Yi oT ee ee Se Ae 
* See also Zeitschrift des Vereins Deutscher Ingenteure, Vol. 49, No, 4, 
January 28, 1905. . 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. — 495 


31020 feet, in each case between regular. stations. Various 
circumstances conspired to defeat the intention of making test- 
runs over the entire distance thus planned, but consecutive 
runs were made on the portion from Lecco to Bellano and return, 
a distarice one way of about 15 miles. The tests were made at 
night. between the hours of regular traffic and were somewhat 
marred by extreme variations in frequency, due to the absence 
of any other load on the system, these variations being as much 
as 6% above and below normal. 

It subsequently appeared that shortly before these tests 
' were made similar tests had been made on various portions of 
the road by engineers connected with the Italian railway sys- 


18 MANDELLO-LIERNA. 
CALCULATED RUN. 


300 


+89,125 KW. SEC, 
— 4,680 «<« 


200 


METRES PER|SECOND 


KILOWATTS $ 


4 minutes 5 


H 
i 
1 
; 
! 
' 
1 
' 
' 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
t 
' 
! 
! 
! 


Fic. 14. 


tems, the results of which in part were presented at the Elec- 
trical Congress at Bologna, and are therefore available for 
comparison. . 

In Figs. 14 and 15 are given the calculated and test curves 
respectively for the run from Mandello to Lierna, which hap- 
pened to be the only one.in which the assumed and actual run- 
ning times were: alike, but even in these it will be observed that 
there are some differences in the manner of making the run. 
The calculated input for Fig. 14 is 14% greater than the actual 
for Fig. 15, and the calculated recuperation is 50% greater, 
the net watt-hours per ton-mile calculated being 55 as against 


-51 actually shown. 


496 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


SLLYMOTIM 


+ 86,870 KW. S8EC. 
yo? 


== 1,760“ 


MINUTES 5 


MAN DELLO-LIERNA. 
TEST RUN 


AMPERES 


a 


3 2 8 


a a 
SauadNV GQNOO3S Yad SAY LAW 


Fic, 15. 


1905.) WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 497 


Figs. 16 and 17 give the calculated and test results for the 
run from Lierna to Varenna, and Fig. 18 the test results for that 
between Varenna and Bellano. Therunning time in these instances 
exceeded the calculated time by 88 seconds and 36 seconds re- 
spectively. The total excess for all runs was only 14 seconds, 
but on the test runs one extra stop was made, owing to a mis- 
understanding of the motorman. The weight of the test train 
was 116 and that used in the calculations 110 metric tons. 
Owing to these variations the calculated and test results are 
not comparable in any strict sense, but they probably represent 
about the approximation of practice to theory which might ~ 
ordinarily be realized and are therefore perhaps of greater 
interest. 

Tables C and D give the results of test and calculation between 
Lecco and Bellano. 

Weight of train for calculated run = 1202 tons. 

Weight of train for test run = 127.8 tons. 


TABLE C. 


Kilowatt-seconds Watt-hours Watt-hours 


Distance Ton- at train per ton-mile | per ton-mile 
in miles miles (measured) (measured) | (calculated) 
Stations. | SS es ee | ee | 
Between 
stations | Total =F — a —_— ae = 
Lecce ero ae —.01 
4.35 555.9 | 100 800 | —3 110] 50.3 | 1.55 
Abbadia....--- 4.34 44.8 | 2.43 
eo 194.25] 45310 | —3 120} 64.6 | 4.44 
Mandello.......- 5.86 : 
3.53 451.1 85 870 | —1 760 | 52.9 | 1.06 | 58.0 | 3.04 
Peaeraanc eee 9.39 
4.02 5137 74930 | —9 030 | 40.5 | 4.88 | 47.0 2.92 
Varenna......- 13.41 
2.03 259.4 | 44360 | —8 810 | 47.6 9.44 | 50.6 | 9.82 
Bellano......-- 15.44 


Total from Lec- 1974.35] 351 270 |—25 830} 39.4 3.63 | 49.1 | 3.66 


co to Bellano. 
Actual Calculated 


Net watt-hours per HOVEMUCL, vera siete peice siete se asic 29 AG TT 45.44 


ee ee ee 


The very close correspondence of these final averages is, of 


course, accidental. 
For the return trip the test results are as follows: 


498 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. {June 19 
TABLE D. 

Distance Ton- | Kilowatt-seconds Watt-hours 

in miles miles at train per ton-mile 
Be Gllanamerteacnee na eit tice tso rors 15.44 

2.03 259.4 50 360 54.0 
VVC SIE cain 1¥tiae 5.60.01 eie o10 efeis 13.41 

4.02 513.7 83 220 | —3 990 | 45.0 | 2.15 
Wiernane sGheucd scistesls sel v/eolekareis 9.39 

3.53 451.1 71 380 | —5 730 | 48.9 | 3.53 
Maramelloanectustne cicletsetie exerte 5.86 

1.52 194.25 | 37 690 | —4 350] 53.9 | 6.23 
AD Dadiaxemtacks cee tes titers a 4.34 

4.35 555.9 84 240 | —5 930 | 42.1 | 2.96 
BECO ne oaeeae A eratuie re shine ebsites — 01 
Total from Bellano to Lecco... 1974.35 | 326 890 |—20 000} 46.0 | 2.81 
Net watt-houis perton-mile gatos celenic ol oecie wis 1e01 © nee cio) oo aoe aie oneiee ce ale eiseh ee ateee SL 
Round trip Lecco to Lecco.... 3948.7 678160 —45830 47.6 3.23 
yNetewatt-hours = pes. Gonersle a. 2).fareeaecailo cise. de eels Ay aiiqyw ysis rayayalic cee etncate citiel eee Oe 


LIERNA-VARENNA 
CALCULATED RUN 


KILOWATTS 


+ 82,329 KW. = SEC. 
—5,120 * “a 


The average results calculated for the run from Lecco through 
to Colico was 49.25 watt-hours per ton-mile for an average 
length of run of 20 400 feet, the terminal stations being prac- 


tically on the same level. 


The average for the test taken 


both ways was 44.4 watt-hours per ton-mile and the average 


length of run 16 306 feet. 


499 


RMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 


WATE 


1905.] 


OOF 


008 


O06L 


009T 


0006 


008% 


0086 


0088 


0098 


00F9 
jauLaW 


6 
006 
007 
S1L1VMONM 
SLIOA 


SAYadWy 


i. » 0€0'6 — 
‘OAS S'M 086 ‘FL + 


G  S3LANIW ¥ 


SLLVMOTIY 


“NAY LSAL 
“VNNSYVA-VNYAIT 


SLIOA 


z 


SayuadWv 


oo Os 


cs 
al 


GNOOaS Yad S3¥1L3N 


it 
Pol 


“ 
col 


oT 


ST 


Fieo lh 


500 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION [June 19 


In the paper presented at the Bologna Congress the average 
results of tests from a very much larger number of runs is 
given as 31 watt-hours per ton-kilometre (or 45.3 watt-hours 
per ton-mile), thus agreeing within 2% with the results obtained 
by the writer. The closeness of the results obtained by calcula- 
tions to those obtained by test indicates that when based on 
reliable data the calculated results will very nearly represent 
actual practice. 


VARENNA-BELLANO + 44,360 KW S SEC. 
TEST RUN ‘— 8,810 « “ 


AMPERES 


METRES PER SECOND 


KILOWATTS 


z 


MINUTES § 


In the tests made by the writer it was found impracticable 
to determine by measurement the average value of the rheostatic 
losses; this, however, is given in the paper referred to as six 
watt-hours per ton-kilometre (or 8.75 watt-hours per ton- 
mile), as determined from the regular run between Lecco and 
Colico where, in a distance of 24.2 miles, seven starts have to be 
made. It is apparent therefore that they are not a serious item 
in the operating expenses. vem 

The average station output for all purposes, including light- 
ing and heating of trains, operating air-pumps, lighting of 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE.TRACTION. 501 


stations, yard switching, and power for the shops at Lecco is 
64 watt-hours per useful ton-mile. It should also be stated 
that the Italian records of ton-miles do not include the weight 
of freight or passengers but simply the train weights. The 
power-factor is never less than 0.8 at periods of maximum 
loads. When it is remembered that the Valtellina motors 
are not modern but were designed more than six years ago, 
these results are seen to be particularly creditable. 

- The financial aspect of the operation is outside of the scope 
of this paper, but in passing it may be said that the average 
daily service is slightly under 200 000 ton-miles gross and the 
annual cost* per 1000 ton-miles of train weight (exclusive of 
locomotive weight and weight of electric equipment of motor- 
cars) is $0.265 including total cost of power-house, sub-station, 
motive-equipment, and line operation and maintenance, both > 
mechanical and electrical. 

The estimated saving as compared with operation by steam 
is $400 per mile of line per annum, or a trifle under 4% on the 
net cost of installation in spite of the low traffic density. 

For the period since the new locomotives went into .service 
the estimate is $590.00 per mile or 5.5% on the net cost. The 
total cost of maintenance of electrical equipment of rolling 
stock is $0.0135 per mile of locomotive or motor-car service. 

In conclusion, a brief reference to the new Ganz locomotives, 
which went into service early last summer on the Valtellina 
Line will be of interest. No alternating-current locomotive can 
have the remarkable structural features and advantages of the 
New York Central type, but those furnished by Ganz & Co. for 
the Valtellina Line are in many ways equally striking, and the 
results of their operation up to the present time show them to 
be particularly successful and efficient. The following table 
gives the comparative dimensions. 


N. Y. Central Valtellina 


Type Type 
Driving-wheels........--seeeece eee rteeeee 8 6 
Pony-trucks...... Akiba bIOGni ibs Opie aac 2 2 
Weight (tons 2 000 TE ow a tosebae Opi cae 95 68 
Weight on drivers (tons 2 000 lb.).......--- 69 46 
Weight per driving-axle (tons 2 000 IS) ear 17 15 
Rigid wheel-base......-.-seeeee reser ree 13 ft. 14 ft. 10 in. 


a EERE. 
*® * See Zeitschrift des Vereins Deutscher Ingenteure, Vol. 49, No. 4, Jan. 
28, 1905. 


502 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION, [June 19 


N. Y. Central. Valtellina. 


Type. Type. 
Total wheel-base.¢-. .h< ta whe epetele ols ein jole tate 27 ft. 30 ft. 
Length over buffer platform..............-.- 37 ft. 36 ft. 6 in. 
Diameter of drivers. ] sm. h eet 44 in. 62 in. 
Rated horse. powetssr ars recreate ier 2 200 1 600 


The motors of the Valtellina locomotives are in two units, 
spring-suspended from the truck-frame between axles; thus 
the entire weight is spring-supported from the truck and again 
through the truck-springs from the axles. The motor-bearings 
merely center and support the rotor, receiving none of the 
driving thrusts. The latter are taken in independent cross- 
head bearings moving in vertical guides in the truck-frame. 
The drive is by side-rods, but there being no reciprocating 
parts the whole is perfectly balanced. 

The motors swing clear of all obstructions on the truck and 
can be lowered out and replaced with remarkable ease. Each 
motor-unit consists of a high-pressure and a low-pressure motor, 
there being only one set of bearings and collector-rings, the 
whole constituting a mechanical unit throughout. An interest- 
ing feature is the location of the collector-rings entirely outside 
the gauge, protected by a steel box but accessible for inspection 
and lubrication. 

The motors are thoroughly water-proof, the windings being 
impregnated with insulating compound, and the ends sealed in 
copper sheaths soldered to the iron end-plates. This complete 
protection is necessarily attained at a sacrifice in output, but 
the weight is not extreme, being 28.5 tons for the motors, and 
35 tons tor the entire electrical equipment, including air-pumps 
and control apparatus. 

The performance is exceedingly good, and the preliminary 
tests have shown that the loss due to the side-bar drive is prac- 
tically negligible. Fig. 19 gives the frictional resistance de- 
duced from a coasting test made on one of these locomotives. 

Liquid rheostats are employed and the elimination of step- 
control is one of the important features. The gain in smooth- 
ness of control obtained is very noticeable and must be experi- 
enced to be fully appreciated. 

The efficiency of the motors is somewhat higher than that of 
the New York Central locomotives, as is indicated by the fol- 
lowing comparison. The purpose in giving such extreme values * 
is simply to illustrate the sustained efficiency of the three-phase 
motors. 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 503 


N. Y. Central Valtellina 


Type Type 
Maximum efficiency (electrical)............- 93% 96% 
TICLENC Yat) TALUS ole eltsyave ns cbarotenel=ia. = 1°) « 91.5% 95% 
ineiency at twicerating... 2. j.5.6-.--«5- 81% 90.5% 
Maximum drawbar pull (at 25% wet.)...... 34 000 lb. 23 000 lb. 
Efficiency at these efforts (approximate).... 83% 90% 
Maximum efficiency occurs at drawbar pull.. 5 600 8 800 


The Valtellina locomotives are able to slip their wheels, even 
with a fall of pressure of 30%. 

The following notes as to performance are taken from the 
report of the proceedings of the Electrical Congress, at 
Bologna. 


2 COASTING TEST WITH VALTELLINA LOCOMOTIVE. , 
6IDE-BAR TYPE, 


ae a co S 


FRICTIONAL RESISTANCE IN LB. PER TON 


~w 


30 20 10 543210 
SPEED, MILES PER HOUR 


Fic. 19. 


The tests made have shown that the locomotives come fully 
up to their predicted and required performance. Among the 
tests were the acceleration of a 440-ton train (locomotive not 
included) from rest to 20 miles per hour in 55 seconds and of a 
275-ton train up to 40 miles per hour in 110 seconds. A 250-ton 
train was started repeatedly, on a grade of 2% requiring a 
current of 190 to 200 amperes. 

In order to test the rheostats, particularly as to their ability 
to stand switching service, a 440-ton train was started at short 
intervals, 20 complete starts being made at intervals of 120 
seconds. The test was successfully carried out without any 
change in the performance of the rheostats. i 

In regular service one of these locomotives is moving a 300-ton 


504 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


train at a speed of 40 miles per hour between Lecco and Colico, 
grades as high as 1% being encountered, where the current 
taken rises to 160 amperes. Trains of 500 tons are moved 
over the same line at a speed of 20 miles per hour. 

An interesting illustration of the flexibility of alternating- 
current operation is furnished by the performance of the new 
locomotives. In one instance a train of 310 tons (including | 
locomotive) was being hauled up a 1.7% grade at a speed of 
69 kilometres per hour or about 42.5 miles per hour, as measured 
by a tachometer. The wattmeter showed 1 120 kw. and the 
voltmeters and ammeters indicated 1 220 kilovolt-amperes. At 
this point the train was about 3 km. from one sub-station and 
8 km. from the other. Since the trolley wires have an area 
of only 50 sq. mm. (between No. 1 and No. 0. B. & S gauge), 
and the regulation of the transformers is very good, this load 
was for the most part carried by one 300-kw. transformer. 
This capability for great momentary overload is of course of 
enormous importance; it is one of the great advantages that 
alternating current-systems have over the direct current. 

The contract under which the Valtellina Line was  con- 
structed contained the following requirement: 


‘ The electrical propulsion of trains will be considered satisfactory, if, 
during the first two years of complete operation under the new system, 
the difficulties encountered are no greater than are usual where steam 
is used, either as regards the maintenance of the schedule, elasticity and 
promptness in satisfying the severest demands of traffic or general re- 
liability.” 

This requirement was so far met that the Rete Adriatica 
early began negotiations to take over the system, which were 
completed and the system accepted about three months before 
the expiration of the two-year trial period 

The Valtellina line is not a trunk line but is the northern por- 
tion of the system of the Rete Adriatica and has an ordinary 
steam railroad service. It was chosen for the test of three- 
phase operation because it combined all the difficulties en- 
countered in railroad operation, particularly those with which 
three-phase motors were said to be least able to contend. The 
contract provided that in the event of failure satisfactorily to 
meet the above conditions the entire equipment, with the ex- 
ception of the power-house apparatus, should be removed 
without cost to the Rete Adriatica or to the Italian government. 
As with all new systems, difficulties were encountered, requiring 


4 
) 


1905.1 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 50: 


oO 


an extended experimental period; these having been overcome 
the operation appears to be particularly successful, and the 
system constitutes a notable achievement in the records of 
electrical traction engineering. 

In all comparisons made in this country the three-phase 
system has suffered. But it must be remembered that whereas. 
in the case of direct current a fully developed and well worked out 
system has been taken for comparison, the data as to the three- 
phase system have not only not been worked down to a practical 
basis but have been assumed without any experience whatever 
as a guide. ‘It has been taken for granted that the practical 
considerations found to be of importance in direct-current 
practice would be equally preeminent with three-phase, that. 
the same limitations apply and the same methods of operation 
should be followed. European experience seems to indicate: 
that none of these assumptions is true. Each system has its. 
own peculiarities, both favorable and unfavorable; each must. 
be designed and operated to take advantage of the one and 
to minimize the other. 

Whatever may be the future of three-phase traction, the 
conclusion seems clearly warranted that were there no other 
system, all traction business that permits a private right-of- 
way could be handled as well and as economically as at pres- 
ent, and that it could be done with a smaller average cost of in- 
stallation and at a cost of operation which would often be mate- 
rially lower than present attainments. 

There is also good reason to believe that maintenance charges 
would not exceed those now submitted to and that while such 
charges would undoubtedly be differently distributed they 
would not involve any reduction of equipment mileage. 

Eighteen years of experience have brought the direct-current 
system to a high state of development, while with only one 
case of serious working out on a large scale, the three-phase 
system is showing results which, from the standpoint of effect- 
iveness and economy, seem not inferior. ‘The evidence of 
flexibility already observed gives reasonable promise that others 
may be expected, and it will be indeed strange if some field of 
utility is not found wherein pre-eminence is attained. 


Since writing the above, Ganz & Company have kindly fur- 
nished motor-curves giving the performance of 3000-volt, 


506 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 19 


25-cycle geared motors suitable for making Mr. Berg’s run. 
They are, however, arranged for four economical speeds, the 
lower speeds being respectively 33, 40, and 66% of the full 
running speed. The motors are designed for motor-car units 
with multiple-unit control. With these as a basis, Mr. Berg’s 
run has been recalculated assuming the same train-weight 
and friction, and, as before, neglecting the inertia of rotating 
parts. The gear-loss was assumed to be 3%. The results are 
given in the table below. 
Accompanying the motor-curves was a run-curve showing 
how the run would be made with the limit switches of the Ganz 


3 


KILOWATTS 


MILES PER HOUR 


~400 


Fic. 20. 


multiple-unit control apparatus set for the schedule called 
for by Mr. Berg’s project. This curye is given in Fig. +20. 
The writer is indebted to Mr. de Kando, of Ganz & Co., for 
this courtesy. 

The acceleration is automatic; that is, for this’ particular 
adjustment it cannot be made at any greater rates than shown. 
The rates of acceleration are noted on the curve. 

The train-weight is assumed as 180 tons, the actual train- 
weight with motor-cars is given by Mr. de Kando as 163 tons 
(2 000 Ib. per ton). The inertia of rotating parts is taken at 
11% and gear-loss at 3%. The train-friction assumed is lower 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 507 


than it is customary to consider allowable in this country, being 
only nine lb. per ton at maximum speed and six, seven, and 
eight lb. respectively for the lower speeds. They are the values 
given by the accepted formulas used abroad. 

Since these results are not directly comparable, owing to 
the difference in train-friction, they have been recalculated 
on the same basis as the others. The method of acceleration 
and braking has been preserved, but a run at uniform speed 
was of course necessitated and the results are thus materially 
modified. The alteration in the run is indicated by the dotted | 
lines in the figure; the inputs have been omitted to avoid con- 
fusion. 


A. B. Cc D. E. 


1.08 1.08 0.8 0.8 i 
0.652} 0.655) 0.8 0.8 i 
20 965 | 20 340} 21 160 | 25 100 | 21 800 
1600 — 4399 5400 = 
—2954 |—4520 |—4890 |—3230 = 
19 611 | 15 820 | 20 670 | 27 270 | 21 800 
Kilovolt-ampere seconds total...............-| 24750 | 21 600 | 28 232 | 47 900 | 21 800 
169.7 137. 179. 237. 190. 
214. 187. 244, 416. 190 
D72. 555. 912. 977. 780. 


Maximum acceleration in miles per hr. per sec.. 
Average acceleration on controller............ 
kw. seconds accelerating.........-.++e+eeee> 


kw. seconds uniform speed...........-+++0-- 


Teareseconds braking: csccs cevie er be aie oe pees 


Toop mSECONGUS Total civ eicte rises erenejele elefaeicl=t) ochre 


Average kw. per run.......-...-- 
Average kilovolt-ampere run. .......-++++-++ 


Maximum kw. per run... .... cece ee eee eee 


Maximum kilovolt-ampere run per.........++. 644. 650. 975. 1140 |780. 
Watt-hours per ton-mile.......... 62.5 50.5 66.0 88. 70. 
Volt-ampere hours per ton-mile........++-++- 1309 69. 90. 154. 70. 
~Rati average alternating-current kw. 
rte average direct-current kw.......- Zonda! Wats) 0..72 0.942} 1.26 —_— 
_ average alternating-current kilovolt-amp 
Rav average direct-current kilovolt-ampere..} 1.125 98 285) 2.2 _— 


Average power-factOr.... s+ cere eer erence eee 
Power-factor at peak........+--+eees 

Average kw. at power-house (without losses)... 
Maximum kw. at power-house..........+++++> 
Average kilovolt-ampere at power-house...... 
Maximum kilovolt-ampere at power-house..... 
Average kw. at sub-station (without losses).... 
Maximum kw. at sub-station......-.--++++5+: 
Average kilovolt-ampere ‘at sub-station..°....- 


Maximum kilovolt-ampere at suib-station......| 1218] 1300] 1947}]3500]| 1600 


508 WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. _ [June 19 


The foregoing table gives the results for: 

A. Mr. Berg’s schedule and train-friction with Ganz four- 
speed, 25-cycle, 2-mm. air-gap motors and automatic control. 

B. Same as A, with train-friction and inertia of sek 
parts as assumed by Ganz & Company. 

C. Mr. Berg’s run (Run No. 3, Fig. 1) with four-speed control. 

D. Calculations made by Berg; 25-cycle, large air-gap motors. 

E. Run made with direct-current motors as given by Mr. Berg. 

It will be noted that the gain in economy by the four-speed 
control is very marked. When arun identical with that used by 
Mr. Berg is made with these motors the net energy taken is only 
76% of that found by him and 94.5% of that for the direct cur- 
rent, notwithstanding the lower acceleration as compared to 
the latter. When made with automatic control the energy 
required is only 89% and 72% respectively of that for direct 
current, even with a very much lower average acceleration on 
the controller, as compared to 126% given by Mr. Berg. The 
results given do not include transmission losses in either case. 
When these are considered the results are of course still more 
favorable. 

Since these runs assume motor-cars with multiple-unit con- 
trol, cost comparisons are not directly possible except by 
‘assuming that the cost of cars and locomotives is not changed. 
On this assumption, making calculations on the same basis as 
before (except as to transformers, which in this instance are de- 
signed for 25 cycles) the following comparisons may be made. 


A. B. Ce D. E. 
Station equipment..........4 $471000] $423 500] $619 000| $785 000| $646 000 
Sub-station equipment....... 22 400 22 400 32 400 57 000 312 000 
Cables and trolley lines...... 155 500 155 500 181 000 397 000 206 000 
Total for ponerpsson and dis- a 
tribution.................| $648 900] - $601 400] $832 400] $1 239 000/31 164 000 
Locomotives and cars........ 628 000 628 000 628 000 628 000 531 000° 


Track and trolley construction 140 200 140 200 140 200 140 200 132 000) 


$1 417 100] $1 369 600] $1 600 600} $2 007 200] $1 857 000 


Average kilowatts required...}| 2 945 2 380 3 110 4 170 3 650 
Average per cent. loss........ ih i 8.0 chee or 16.4 
F eeenee 4 direct-current 

power.. Sie ye oes 81 65 85 114 100: 
Percentage of cost of ieee: 

current installation. . ae 76.5 74, 86.5 107. 100. 


Cost. of generating and dis- 
tributing system in Be 
age of direct-current cost. 56 51.5 71.5 +106 100 


1905.] WATERMAN: THREE-PHASE TRACTION. 509 


Therefore the small air-gap motors at 25 cycles and with 
four-speed control show a great superiority in performance not 
only over the alternating-current motors used by Mr. Berg 
but also over the direct-current motors. On the same basis 
of weight, friction, and schedule and a much lower average 
acceleration, these motors take 81% of the power required by 
the direct current (at the switchboard); they have 47% of the 
average losses in transmission, and cost 76.5% for the entire 
equipment, or 56% for generating and distributing equipment. 

These results make a most interesting showing; and while 
arbitrary calculations of this kind have little meaning as to 
exact values or even as to precise ratios they are sufficiently 
comparative to indicate that when operated so as to utilize 
its advantageous features the three-phase motor is able to give 
a good account of itself in traction work, even of the character 
for which it is commonly supposed to be least fitted. 


510 THREE-PHASE TRACTION. June 20 


Discussion ON ‘‘ THREE-PHASE TRACTION.”’ 


F. N. WaterMAN: The presentation of this paper was 
prompted by the development, in the course of an investigation, 
of certain facts which indicated that the disadvantages of the 
three-phase motor for traction purposes had been very '‘argely 
exaggerated, and its advantages either underestimated or over- 
looked. To present, in concrete form, a few of the points 
raised, it seemed desirable to take a specific case, and therefore 
that was chosen which is already familiar to the INSTITUTE, 
through the medium of Mr. Berg’s paper read some years ago. 

W. N. SmitH: In my opinion the paper by Mr. Waterman 
is the most practical exposition yet presented of the results 
attained in three-phase traction. Its value as a practical 
demonstration, however, is somewhat limited by the fact that 
it illustrates the operation of but one railway, the well-known 
Valtellina line, which is apparently somewhat more favorable 
for an exposition of the capabilities of three-phase traction 
than would be a suburban or rapid transit system, such as is 
found in or about New York City, with reference to which Mr. 
Waterman opens his paper. One of the conclusions implied 
in this paper is that the engineering profession is asked to 
disregard some of the fundamental precedents of railroad en- 
gineering in order to make the peculiar limitations of the three- 
phase motor fit railroad conditions for the sake of some results 
which are claimed as advantages, but which in the last analysis 
may be of doubtful value. 

As between the direct-current series motor (or its coun- 
terpart, the modern single-phase alternating-current motor) 
and the three-phase motor, it seems to be a question of which 
motor is really the better for train propulsion: a motor whose 
characteristic is that of furnishing relatively constant power 
with speed and torque varying inversely according to the con- 
ditions of grade and load; or a motor of practically constant speed 
whose torque and power requirements vary with the train re- 
sistance due to grade and load. Heretofore, whether consider- 
ing the steam locomotive or the series railway motor, either 
alternating current or direct current, engineers have been con- 
sidering a machine of practically fixed power-capacity, in which 
speed and tractive effort vary inversely with almost automatic 
precision. With the three-phase motor, however, it is implied 
that if a train is to be hauled up a steep grade at the same speed 
at which it runs on a level, it is only necessary to call upon 
the main power-station for the extra energy required and the 
motor will do the rest. 

In my opinion this view seems to conflict with the general 
principle that the best engineering economy in designing any 
machine, whether steam or electric, is obtained by proportion- 
ing it for a certain definite average power-capacity. It may be 
assumed as a fundamental principle that only a fixed maximum 
amount of power can ever be produced from or transmitted 


x 
1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 511- 


through any mechanical appliance consisting of a given quan- 
tity of material of known resisting power to heat or to mechanical 
stress. Obviously, a motor whether steam or electrical, which 
is built to haul a train up a 2 per cent. grade, for instance, at 
the same speed at which it is to operate on a level (constant 
speed being an essential feature of the system under considera- 
tion) will have to develop or transmit from the prime mover 
three or four times as much energy as when working on a level. 
Consequently, the motor must be proportioned accordingly; 
and this requires that a railway motor of such type must be 
correspondingly larger and heavier, all because there may be 
an occasional call for power to ascend grades consider- 
ayy heavier than the average grade to be found along the 
ine. 

The inevitable result is that an equipment designed on the 
principle of constant speed and varying power, is much heavier 
than a motor designed for the production of relatively constant 
power at varying speed. Furthermore, the physical dimensions 
of the space available for mounting a motor in a truck or loco- 
motive are in practice just as important as the weight of 
equipment; and unless the motors are to be mounted well 
up above the wheels one cannot hope to get an amount 
of power capacity into the truck of a car or locomotive, in 
three-phase motors, that is commensurate with the amount of 
space available, in comparison with the present practice in the 
constant-power series motors hitherto so successful. Limita- 
tions of space in car-trucks are reached very quickly, and in- 
volve the necessity of equipping all four axles with three-phase 
motors. In the case of electric locomotives 1t becomes necessary 
to resort to parallel-rods and mechanical movements, which add 
to an electrical equipment one of the disadvantages of 
steam equipments—the complications incident to the proper 
balancing of the extra parts. The very latest develop- 
ment in steam locomotive practice; namely, the 4-cylinder 
balanced compound locomotive illustrates the complications 
which locomotive engineers are forced to introduce in order to 
steady the motion of the locomotive and save the track, while 
the absence of imperfectly balanced revolving parts has hith- 
erto been counted as one of the greatest mechanical advantages 
of electric. traction as compared with steam. 

Referring again to the: question of weight of equipment, Mr. 

“Waterman’s paper does not discuss this question in detail. 
If I am accurately informed, the concatenated system of con- 
trol requires either two sets of motors or else a motor with 
practically two armatures combined in one—all this equipment 
being used when starting, half of it being cut out and left idle 
when running at full speed. In the arrangement described in 
Fig. 11 of Mr. Waterman’s paper, that is, 3 motors practically 
combined as 2, giving 4 speeds, it is presumed that what may 
be called the primary motor is large enough to. propel a 


* 
512 THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 20 


train at full speed on a level and that the others have to be 
carried along to assist it either in starting or in going up grade, 
being idle the rest of the time. Question: are the original cost, 
and the ton-mile expense and maintenance of this extra 
machinery warranted by any compensating advantages? 

The curves in Fig. 11, one of which illustrates the perform- 
ance of the arrangement just referred to, are most interesting 
as is also the tabulated comparison of the results. In the 
last line of the table, watt-hours per ton-mile is appar- 
ently the final basis of comparison of motor performance, 
but there is no reference to the relative carrying capa- 
city of the three 75-ton trains compared in Fig. 11. This 
comparison of three trains of different types represents fairly 
well the performance typical of what is required in suburb- 
an rapid transit service, but we are left to draw our own infer- 
ences regarding ratio between dead and live load in the three 
cases. Mr. Waterman states that the 75-ton train includes a 
locomotive, although he does not particularize as to individual 
weights of cars and locomotives. It is obvious, however, that 
a locomotive and three trail-cars would weigh considerably 
more than three multiple-unit motor-cars, particularly if the 
cars are to be of equally substantial construction; and that a 
three-phase motor train weighing 75 tons would consist of a 
locomotive and not more than two trailers, which could not 
possibly carry more than two-thirds of the paying load pos- 
sible with the multiple-unit train of three motor-cars with 
which it is compared. Hence, there is the alternative of dimin- 
ishing the gross receipts by 33 per cent.—which would prob- 
ably kill the proposition at the outset from the investor’s 
standpoint—or increasing the tonnage of the train, thereby 
increasing the number of ton-miles and the watt-hours per ton- 
mile if the same rate of schedule speed is to be maintained. 
This results in increasing the capacity and cost of the equip- 
ment on the electric locomotive, and, though to a somewhat 
less extent, the power-station capacity. 

In the proceedings of the British Institution of Electrical 
Engineers, of 1902, will be found a paper by Professor Carus 
Wilson, entitled, ‘‘ Electric Traction on Steam Railways in 
Italy.”” In this paper is a table which compares the weight, 
power, and dimensions of the polyphase motor-cars on the 
Valtellina line with those of the direct-current motor-cars on 
the Varese line. At the risk of having this table set aside, as 
ancient history and entirely superseded by recent developments, 
I would respectfully invite attention to this comparison, which 
indicates with at least a fair degree of precision the tremendous 
difference in weight efficiency, and consequently commercial 
efficiency, between the series type of motor and the three-phase 
motor. 

The three-phase motor-car weighs 53 tons, the direct-current 
car 40 tons. The three-phase car is 57-ft. long with 56 seats, 


1905.] DISCUSSION Al ASHEVILLE. 513 


while the direct-current car is 52-ft. long with 63 seats. Each 
has 4 motors, of which the total maximum horse power is 
given in the table as 600 for the direct current and 300 for 
the alternating-current motors, though it may be that since 
this paper was published the power of the alternating-current 
motors has been increased; but whether it has or not, the weight 
of the 4 alternating-current motors was 15.2 tons, while the 
weight of the four direct-current motors was 10 tons, and the 
maximum speed ona level of the alternating-current. motors 
was 37 miles per hour, while that of the direct-current motors 
was 56 miles per hour. 

Therefore, it seems to me that at the very outset of the dis- 
cussion of the relative merits of the three-phase type and the 
series type of railway motor (whether alternating current or 
direct current) we are confronted with a most fundamental 
question of commercial engineering, and I think it must be 
admitted by the advocates of the three-phase system that up 
to the present time, they have not shown that electric railway 
engineers would be justified in so radically abandoning the 
precedents hitherto followed, when such an abandonment in- 
volves such serious commercial consequences. The watt-hours 
per ton-mile, as between the three-phase and the other sys- 
tems, have been shown on paper to give a relatively small 
percentage in favor of the three-phase system, but the reduction 
of watt-hours per ton-mile will not interest the business manage- 
ment of a railroad unless the ton-miles of dead load can be 
compared on a more favorable basis than seems possible with 
the facts hitherto presented. A railroad desires to carry the 
largest number of paying passengers for a given transportation 
unit, and in order to obtain the respectful attention of steam 
railroad men, electrical engineers must rather be prepared to 
demonstrate the ability of an electric system to handle a given 
number of paying passengers with the least possible expense 
per transportation unit, than to exploit a particular method 
because of an insignificant percentage gain in power and fuel 
consumption. I do not dispute the accuracy of Mr. Waterman's 
power computations, though I shall be interested in trying to 
analyze them more carefully than time has so far permitted; 
but we should not be spellbound by an artistic technical de- 
monstration which, though interesting, does not of itself show 
the maximum financial return for a given investment. 

One other question is of great importance; namely, double ver- 
sus single trolley wires. This seems to have been set aside very 
lightly, but it is nevertheless a fact that it will cost more to 
construct and maintain 50 miles of working conductor than it 
does 25. One object of all engineering is to dispense with com- 
plications and unnecessary parts unless some paramount ad- 
vantage is gained by complication (as 1s the case where steam 
locomotives are being constructed on the balanced principle in 
order to save wear and tear on the track, which on high-speed 


514 THREE-PHASE TRACTION. {June 20 


steam railroads is evidently such an item as to warrant some 
greater expenditure for motive-power maintenance to counter- 
act it). Everything points to the ultimate adoption of a 
single working conductor wherever heavy electric railroading 
is to be expected. There are complications enough with only 
one working’ conductor at points of limited clearance to con- 
vince railway engineers of the undesirability of increasing 
the complications by the addition of another conductor. ; 

The three-phase system seems to be better adapted for loco- 
motive than for multiple-unit service. While locomotives are 
doubtless desirable for long-distance passenger and freight 
traffic, they are well known to be highly undesirable for suburban 
traffic, and to the best of the writer’s knowledge have not been 
seriously considered in any of the recent developments in heavy 
suburban traction. In London they have been abandoned. 
If the three-phase system cannot compete on even terms with 
the series motor in multiple-unit traction, it cannot receive from 
railway men the consideration that would otherwise be accorded 
to it in the impending development of the electrification of the 
suburban portions of trunk lines, which is unquestionably the 
field where the problems of heavy electric traction are now 
most pressing. 

The feature of returning the energy to the line while braking, 
is brought forward as a leading argument in favor of the three- 
phase system. Mr. Waterman’s demonstrations in regard to 
this are more interesting than any which have yet appeared, 
and are entitled to careful consideration. It is a grave 
question whether its advantages are of sufficient importance 
in proportion to the entire question of economics for a scheme of 
electrical equipment involving possibly several millions of dollars. 
I have been informed that at the time this question was under con- 
sideration in London, it was found that not more than possibly 
15 per cent. of the total energy involved would be returned 
to the line by braking—this being a rapid transit proposition 
with short runs and not very high speeds. As the carrying 
capacity per transportation unit is of such preponderating im- 
portance, in a rapid transit proposition, it is not surprising 
that a slight gain of 15 per cent. in power consumption should 
be outweighed by considerations of greater weight efficiency of 
the rolling stock. The rapid transit problem is one where the 
return’of energy by means of braking might be of considerable 
advantage, provided at least 50 per cent. of it could be returned, 
and also provided that no more important consideration should 
be sacrificed to the development of this one. As it seems now, 
however, the greatest possibilities of braking are in descending 
long grades in runs of comparatively greater length than those 
commonly met with in rapid transit propositions, and I am 
yet to be convinced that the importance given to braking, even 
on long distance runs, would of itself warrant the adoption of 
the three-phase system, as opposed to the lighter and less com- 
plicated single-phase system. 


1905.} DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 515 


Cuas. P. STEINMETZ: Mr. Waterman’s paper is in phase with 
the previous paper by Mr. E. J. Berg. Mr. Berg’s paper shows 
what the three-phase motor can do under existing conditions. 
Mr. Waterman’s paper shows what the three-phase motor can be 
made to do where the constants of the system, as frequency, etc., 
are chosen, not according to existing conditions, but as the best 
values for the problem under consideration. I believe it is 
the purpose of the paper to reopen the discussion of three-phase 
versus direct-current traction, not of impressing the neces- 
sity of discontinuing the direct-current motor and choosing the 
three-phase induction motor. Too rapid conclusions from com- 
parisons with individual installations must, however, be guarded 
against, especially with an installation like that on the Val- 
tellina. road. 

There are a number of problems that will have to be solved 
before deciding on the best traction system, problems which 
have not come to the front-in the Valtellina plant. After all, 
this line is a very small one, the totai equipment, I under- 
stand, consisted of two locomotives at the time the tests were 
made. 

With two locomotives it is true that the violent fluctuations 
of power incident to three-phase traction would be very 
greatly reduced by the train slowing down when climbing a 
hill and so slowing down the generator system; but I do not 
think it would be desirable nor feasible when a train climbs a 
hill in the Allegheny Mountains to take so much power as to 
slow down the generators of the Pennsylvania Railroad system 
or of the New York Central system. So it is seen that this 
drawing upon the momentum of the train by dropping the 
generator frequency may be all right in the Valtellina rail- 
road, but it would not do on a trunk-line system. This 
naturally would make quite a difference in the record of 
tests. 

There are, furthermore, some data regarding which I would 
like to get more information. For instance, the extremely 
high efficiency 96 per cent., of the induction motor, a much 
higher efficiency, indeed, than I ever had the pleasure of see- 
ing, or have been able to get in any apparatus of this 
character that I designed. 

Now I have said that a number of problems have not been 
solved. Look. at any switchyard, for instance the New* York 
Central yard at Forty-second Street, and see the maze of tracks. 
At once there will be realized the vast problem of installing in 
such a switchyard a system of electric power supply utilizing 
a single conductor, either overhead or third-rail. Now imagine 
what is to be done to supply this yard with 2 overhead 
conductors in addition to the ground return. Personally. I 
should hesitate before accepting the responsibility of trying to 
solve this problem. It is, indeed, the great difficulty and 
the enormous complications in overhead construction or third- 


516 THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 20 


rail construction, in. switching, which I consider one of the 
most serious handicaps of the three-phase system of trac- 
tion. 

The paper says when we come down to low frequency, to 
14-cycle, and 0.079 inch air-gaps, that is smaller than railway en- 
gineering at the present time considers desirable, we can get a 
three-phase induction motor to be practically as good as the 
direct-current motor. If all that exists were swept away, and 
the reconstructing of the universe were at our disposal, at least 
in electrical engineering, all constants might be chosen to suit 
the particular problem in hand, and then possibly a low 
frequency—14 cycles—might be adopted for electric railroading. 
Unfortunately this is not the case, and in deciding on fre- 
quency, etc., the existing state of the art must be considered 
so as to adapt the requirements of the problem in hand to 
the established standards of the electrical industry. For an 
electric railway having no connection with any other electrical 
enterprise, we may choose 14 cycles. But such simple con- 
ditions never exist. With the exception of a few isolated 
instances, as the Baltimore tunnel, the New York Central, 
and the Pennsylvania tunnel, where special and_ local 
conditions were fundamental in bringing about a change to 
electric locomotion, the general trend of development is 
this: the steam railroad remains a steam railroad but trolley 
lines parallel it, first in the cities, then from the cities to 
the suburbs, and then, as high-speed lines, stretching farther 
and farther. The trolley takes away the local short-distance 
traffic from the steam railways. Electric express companies 
begin their inroads into the express business, and when the 
steam railroad wakes up to the danger and considers electrifi- 
cation, it is not merely to replace the steam locomotive 
by the electric locomotive, but the steam railway buys 
up and consolidates competing electric trolley lines, forms 
them into a network and organizes them systematically as 
feeders to the trunk-line trains, and for local and commutation 
traffic. That means that whatever system a steam railroad 
chooses for operating the main line trains and accommodation 
trains on the steam track, it must be able to accommodate the 
existing electric lines, the interurban, and the city trolley lines, 
as feeders of the main trunk line. 

Now I do not believe there is much hope of replacing the 
city trolley service by any alternating-current system, whether 
three-phase or single-phase, because for city service the direct 
current is entirely satisfactory and especially with three-phase, 
I do not think any self-respecting city would ever permit 
doubling the already sufficiently ugly overhead network of trolley 
wires. Furthermore, the troubles from electrolysis, which are for- 
midable now and very difficult to guard against, may be in- 
tensified by ahanging to a low-frequency alternating system 
because olectrolysis exists also with low-frequency, Telephone 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 517 


disturbances also become more serious with an alternating 
trolley system. This is another problem that still waits for 
solution. Before low frequency can be seriously considered, 
one must first make sure how low-frequency, 14-cycle 
synchronous converters and transformers would work, or how 
much more expensive they would be, also how 14 cycles would 
operate a single-phase commutator motor. Furthermore, how 
the existing railway plants, which are almost always 25-cycle 
generation and distribution, and which no steam railway could 
permit to exist in competition, and which no steam railway 
could replace by three-phase, 14-cycle motors, or replace the 
converters and transformers by others, could be utilized. The 
problem is very much more difficult, due to the necessity of con- 
sidering in the solution of an engineering problem not the 
particular problem alone, but its relation to everything else 
that exists. 

So the solution of each individual problem involves the solution 
of a vast number of other problems, and for this reason I do not 
think there is much chance from the engineering point of view 
to consider any frequency lower than is standard now, if such 
a new frequency does not have advantages superior to anything 
existing, vastly superior to anything shown in Mr. Waterman’s 
paper. 

C. O. Matttovx: Mr. Waterman’s paper contains the first 
complete and satisfactory data that we have been able to obtain 
concerning three-phase traction. The Valtellina line, which I 
visited twice last year, is a splendid example of the use of 
three-phase traction. The line itself presents ideal conditions 
for the application of such a system. But as I had had occa- 
sion to see other three-phase lines, I was not quite so much 
impressed perhaps as | would have been if it had been my 
first experience in that direction. In Milan, or near Milan, a 
comparison can be made between the direct current and the 
alternating-current systems. There is a direct-current (third- 
rail) line that starts from Milan and runs into a suburban dis- 
trict--the Milan-Varese Porto-Cerese line. A short distanceé 
away, at Lecco, the other may be seen (the Valtellina line). 
The two lines correspond to entirely different circumstances. 
The Porto Cerese line is a short suburban line of rapid-transit 
character—not rapid-transit as it is understood up here, per- 
haps, but certainly more rapid than is contemplated on the 
Valtellina system, which represents the conditions of what we 
would call in this country a branch line—a feeder line. The 
passenger service conditions are not exacting, and conse- 
quently a low acceleration will answer the purpose, and it 1s 
possible to adapt the three-phase system. The equipment 
itself is very well worked out. The fact that constant speed 
can be maintained, and energy recuperated, is of great theoret- 
ical interest, undoubtedly, but practically it is not always 
‘of so much importance. I was somewhat surprised to 


518 THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 20 


find that even the partisans of three-phase traction—some 
of the engineers of Messrs. Ganz & Co,—were not so 
sanguine as to the results that could be obtained with 
it or be expected from it, as Mr. Waterman himself seems 
to be. While it is theoretically true that part of the energy 
can be recovered with a constant-speed system, yet, could it 
not be done as well or better with some other system of 
recuperating energy? Would it not be more practical to 
run cars at lower speed on up grades, and do the spurting 
by coasting on down-grades, if one wants to make up 
lost time? Under these conditions all the energy which is 
being given to the car is recovered, with no transformation 
losses. This results in a pure kinetic reaction. I will not 
deny that the system has some qualities; it seems to me to be 
an idea beautifully worked out. The weak features of it seem 
to me, as they do to Mr. Steinmetz, to be the necessity of two 
lines, and more -especially the limitations of these two lines in 
regard to potential differences. I carefully investigated that 
point, and found the advocates of the system would not 
recommend any higher working line potential than 3 000 volts. 
Higher voltages than that are not to be hoped for. Now, I 
submit that before steam lines can be successfully electrified— 
before locomotives of from 1000 to 2000 h.p. can be run— 
current must be delivered to a car at a higher potential than 
3000 volts, because at lower potentials the trolley line would 
be too large and too unwieldy. Energy cannot be delivered toa 
motor by means of such large current volumes. The line po- 
tential must be raised; 6000 volts has been advocated as a 
suitable line potential, but even that is too low. It must be 
raised to 10000 or 15000 volts, or even more. Now, to do 
that, it is out of the question to attempt to use more 
than a one-line conductor, for feeding or contact line. There 
must be only one trolley wire, or if there are two, they 
must be at the same potential, and not electrically related to 
each other in the same manner as they would be in a polyphase 
system such as used on the Valtellina line. 

Another thing to be considered is high speed. With trolley 
lines suspended as they are there is a serious trouble due to 
the beating of the current collector against the wires. I noticed, 
particularly at Valtellina, that the trolley lines did swing very 
perceptibly. I am afraid that question would be a very serious 
one and a difficult problem to solve, for the “ catenary ”’ sus- 
pension system is out of the question, there being already too 
much complication, even for a single-phase line. 

The three-phase system is adapted to certain cases, but it 
seems to me that these cases are more frequently to be met 
with in Europe than here. I cannot help feeling that, all 
things considered, the cases that the direct-current motor will 
not satisfactorily meet can best be met by a monophase alter- 
nating-current system. Up to the present time there have 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 519 


been no cases of single-phase electric locomotives equipped 
with motors of relatively great size; that is, no electric loco- 
motives of such power perhaps as the latest three-phase loco- 
motives that have been put on the Valtellina line. This I 
regard as merely a question of development. ‘I am told that 
manufacturing companies have recently taken steps to bring 
out locamotives of large power equipped with single-phase 
motors. I believe that when this is done these motors will 
do practically as well in the way of efficiency as the three-phase 
system, while there will be great advantages in other respects. 
I do not look with the same feeling of confidence on the ability 
to maintain a system in commercial operation, with low cost 
for maintenance, with such small clearances. Experience 
with practical railroad men leads me to believe that many of 
them would object to it very seriously on that ground if on 
no other. They consider that the clearance of the direct-cur- 
rent motor, large as it seems compared with such cases, is 
already small enough, and that it might be increased rather 
than. decreased. 

S. M. Krintner: In regard to alternating-current elec- 
trolysis: I do not know the frequencies that Mr. Steinmetz 
has in mind in which this action would take place. I 
do know that I have recently examined pipes buried in 
the earth, pipes that had a potential of 25 volts at 25 
cycles applied to them for a period of 8 months. On ex- 
amining these pipes at the end of. that time I was unable to 
notice any appreciable loss in comparison with another pipe 
buried a short distance away in practically the same character 
of earth but not subjected to any electrical action. 

Cuas. P. SteINMETZ: I have my information from the Bell 
Telephone Co., which has made a very extensive investigation 
of alternating-current electrolysis. I was very much surprised 
at the formidable destructive results observed. 

H. G. Storr: In reading railroad papers I often note the 
great emphasis that is placed on the kilowatts per ton-mile. 
Now the electric lighting stations teach us that the cost of 
energy is not proportional simply to the kilowatts, but must 
have relation to the load-factor, that is to say, invariably 
the charge for the first hour is greater than for succeeding 
hours. Now the cost of producing a current per hour varies 
with the load-factor. Because we can save a few kilowatt- 
hours does not prove that one motor or the other is the better 
of the two. A condition to be looked at from the central- 
station point of view, is to get a good average load-factor, 
but whether the three-phase motor or the direct-current 
motor will give the better load-factor, I am not prepared to 
say. 

The recuperation of power is undoubtedly a good feature. 
I wish to place emphasis upon this point. When one system 
uses 1000 kw-hr., while another uses 1 200 kw-hr., the one 


520 THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 20 


that takes 1200 kw-hr. should not be condemned because it 
actually may cost no more to produce 1 200 kw-hr. than to 
produce 1 000 kw-hr. 

C. L. pe Muratt: Some of the ideas brought out during - 
the discussion are referred to in my own paper, but I should 
like to emphasize a few of them. 

It has been suggested by Mr. Smith that a three-phase sys- 
tem requires a considerably larger power station, if the trains 
are to run up-grade at full speed. First of all, there is no 
reason why three-phase trains should not also make use of a 
lower speed when going up grade; but even if they are made to 
maintain the same speed over the entire line, the power-station 
need not necessarily be larger on this account. With con- 
ditions as they now exist on our normal steam railways, the 
additional energy consumed by the trains when going up grade 
at full speed will in most cases not be any greater than the 
additional energy required during the period of acceleration. 
The peak caused by the grade will therefore not be higher than 
the peak caused by the starting of a train. The starting peaks 
will have to be taken into consideration when designing the 
power-station ; but it does not matter very much, whether 
peaks of the same sizes are used to take trains up grade at 
full speed, or whether lower peaks are used and consequently the 
speed on grade reduced. 

The question was raised by Mr. Steinmetz, whether a train, 
climbing a very steep grade somewhere in the Allegheny 
Mountains, might not pull down the speed of the entire 
Pennsylvania system. It is easy to see that this is not so, 
because if there is only one train using an excess of energy 
against a whole lot of trains running under normal conditions, 
then that one train may take two or three times as much power 
as it will take ordinarily and yet it will not be able to affect 
in any way the system as a whole. It is possible under con- 
ditions which Mr. Steinmetz has called favorable, when there 
are only two trains running at the same time as on the Val- 
tellina line, that one train will influence the other train to a 
certain extent. As a rule, however, the three-phase system 
will be considered only for long roads with comparatively heavy 
traffic, and it will therefore be reasonable to presume that in 
most cases several trains will be running on the level while one 
may be climbing a grade. 

The question of comparative weight of equipment can hardly 
be treated in a general manner. It may be quite possible to 
find an exceptional case where there is a very heavy and very 
long grade, so that a three-phase motor, if made to climb 
that grade at full speed, will have to be heavier than a con- 
tinuous-current motor, which is allowed to slow down on the 
grade. But the grades found on most of our railroads are 
such that the extra energy required by the motor when going 
up grade at full speed can be dissipated without difficulty, 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 521 


and the grade will therefore in no way influence the weight 
of the motor. On the other hand, it is well-known that for 
the same capacity and the same heating the induction motor 
will be lighter than the continuous-current motor. It is there- 
fore safe to say that the three-phase motor will in most cases 
prove to be lighter and not heavier than the continuous current 
motor. The actual three-phase motors already built for rail- 
way purposes bear this out in every respect. 

The criticism that three-phase motors, when used in con- 
catenation, will have one of the motors dragged along useless 
most of the time, is also misleading. The fact is of course 
perfectly true, but it is no disadvantage inherent to the three- 
phase system; for it simply means that a certain part of the 
weight of the equipment is not used continually, and exactly 
the same thing is true of the continuous-current system. The 
continuous-current motor is under a very much greater load 
when starting than when running at full speed, and it is there- 
fore also using its full weight only during a short period and 
carrying dead weight for the rest of the time. If the motor 
curves are examined it will be found that in this respect also the 
three-phase motor is superior to the continuous-current motor. 

The double-contact line is undoubtedly a theoretical draw- 
back for the three-phase system, and the only thing that 
can be stated in this connection is that there are now 
quite a number of three-phase railroads doing business, some 
of them for from six to ten years, and no difficulty has been 
met with in this respect. If you will accept a very personal 
proposal, I may say that I am willing to install and operate a 
double overhead line on whatever road you may choose, no 
matter how complicated it may be. Switchyards are no diffi- 
culty if properly treated. The Valtellina line ‘mentioned in 
Mr. Waterman’s paper has switchyards as complicated or 
more complicated than any I know of in.this country. They 
are not the same in regard to size, but in regard to complication 
they are worse, and comparing them to the New York yard 
of the New York Central, for instance, would simply mean 
multiplying the difficulties, but not increasing them. 

With reference to the highest pressure to be used on the 
contact line I do not quite agree with Mr. Mailloux. It is of 
course quite true that, if very high pressures are used, sub- 
stations may be entirely avoided. But stationary transformer 
sub-stations are easily handled, and it seems to me to be prefer- 
able to use pressures which will allow of absolutely safe and 
comparatively easy insulation, as long as the current to be 
taken is not excessive. In most cases this can be done with 
lower pressures than those mentioned by Mr. Mailloux. 

F. N. Waterman: The discussion of my paper indicates that 
jt has been somewhat misunderstood. The purpose of the 
paper is to call attention to certain interesting facts which 
indicate that the disadvantages of the three-phase motor for 


522 THREE-PHASE TRACTION. [June 20 


traction purposes have been largely exaggerated, and certain 
of its advantages have been underestimated or overlooked. 
One idea that was prominently in mind was the financial value 
of the air-gap, and the effect of European experience, which 
indicates that, with three-phase motors at least, air-gaps much 
smaller than are used here are perfectly practicable. If bear- 
ings of equal size can be employed, the smaller air-gap should 
be equally available for the single-phase motor and almost 
equally useful. 

With regard to the heating of three-phase motors; this is 
a question of internal losses, and since the efficiency of the 
motor is at least as high as that of the series motor it will not 
heat more. The distribution of the heat, however, will be 
different, and will also vary with the character of the service. 
In starting, the rotors will have greater iron losses than when 
running; although this energy has to be radiated it does 
not represent a proportionate increase in total loss because it 
represents actual torque in the motors, and hence a reduction 
of copper loss for the same starting effort. In running, the 
losses are chiefly in the primary, and occur, therefore, where 
they are most readily radiated. On the usual basis of 
rating by rise of temperature in one hour, the three-phase 
equipment will weigh less than the direct-current equipment 
by at least from 15 to 20 per cent.' 

It is contended that any motor to be useful for traction pur- 
poses must be capable of operating with direct current. In 
some cases this is true, and the Ganz Co. is now equipping two 
suburban lines with three-phase motors designed to run with 
direct current through the towns along the lines. The control 
is not complicated, and since the same rheostats and controllers 
are used for both the direct and three-phase currents the weight 
of the equipment is not materially increased. The same motors 
can operate as single-phase motors at the expense of some 
extra weight of control equipment. 

It has been said that the utility of recuperation depends 
upon the presence of other trains. This is true, as pointed 
out in the paper, provided the train returns more energy than | 
can be absorbed by the system in making good its constant 
losses. Should the rate of recuperation exceed the constant 
losses the whole system would speed up until the losses equalled 
the energy being returned. The acceleration of the train is, 
however, readily recognized by the motorman, and a slight 
application of the brakes will reduce the returned energy to 
that which the system is able to absorb at normal speed, so 
that in practice this is not a serious matter. 

Mr. Smith has criticised the side-bar drive as unbalanced. 
This is hardly germane to the subject, but a moment’s reflec- 
tion will show that it is not true, since every part has a circular 
motion and can be perfectly balanced. It is ‘only the. recip- 
Ric BAe SL ROR EET a a 


1. See article by H. M. Hobart, Electrician, London, 1904. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 523 


rocating parts of a steam locomotive that give rise to unbalanced 
conditions. The peculiar advantage of this method lies in 
the fact that it renders possible a spring support for the entire 
motor weight, and insures proper distribution of load between 
the motors. 

The statement made by Mr. Mailloux, that the Valtellina 
line is peculiarly favorable to three-phase traction is hardly 
in accord with the general understanding. The one thing 
universally agreed upon in this country is that great 
irregularity of profile and the presence of many curves requiring 
reduction of speed mark a condition particularly unsuited to 
the characteristics of the three-phase motor. I understand that 
one of the objects in view in selecting this line was to put the 
system to the severest test. The remarkable uniformity of 
the load curve and the high average efficiency indicate that 
the three-phase motor has an adaptability it has not hitherto 
been credited with. 

Mr. Steinmetz has commented on the frequency of 14 cycles 
as impracticable, having evidently overlooked the fact that all 
the calculations in the latter part of the paper are based upon 
25 cycles, the cost of the generating and. distributing system 
being only 71.5 per cent. of that for the direct current in Mr. 
Berg’s own run, while it is reduced to 56 per cent. with the run 
made in the correct manner. Low frequency is by no means 
a necessity and it was only assumed in the earlier calculations 
because motor curves for 25-cycle motors were not available. 
Even as to the low frequency, however, there is room for a 
difference of opinion where the question arising is, as it was 
in the case of the Valtellina line, the selection of a frequency 
best suited for the operation of an entire railroad system. 
Mr. Lamme has recently expressed the opinion that a large 
railroad could afford to select its frequency independently of 
general practice. 

Mr. Steinmetz has also commented on the high efficiency of 
the motors used. The actual efficiency of the motors of the 
large Valtellina locomotives is 95.6 per cent., while 96 per cent. 
is quite attainable. The results shown by the paper are not 
dependent upon such efficiencies and the calculations in the 
later portion are not based upon motor curves showing excep- 
tionally high values. A lack of time and space prevented their 
reproduction. 


Sew yeat 
Seas 


Phone exe 
ee 


- 4 lk 


ahs 
“4 ay yysORS wt 


‘ 
eRe CO 


PO Met ial. Cs fia ee ; 
PAT Be ase 


SNE hai women! Fs 


usm ° 


oe, 
TA i) Seah 


% 
oarty 


Seah) OOS Bt UND 
a a eh es Page, aS a 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS IN ELECTRICAL. 
ENGINEERING. 


BY CARL -L. pe: MURALT. 


It is proposed in the following chapters to consider the rela- 
tive advantages presented by the various electric: systems 
available, with a view to determine which, at the present state 
of the art, is best adapted to handle heavy traction on through 
lines. : 

Broadly speaking, all traction on rails can be subdivided 
into the following three classes: 

1. Street railways, devoted almost. exclusively to passenger 
traffic, operating over restricted areas, with single cars, at com- 
paratively regular and short intervals and with frequent stops, 
the maximum speed being limited by the use of the public 
highways. 

2. Rapid transit systems, comprising elevated railways, sub- 
ways, suburban, and interurban lines, operating over their 
own right of way a traffic otherwise similar to that handled by 
street railways, the main difference being the use of somewhat 
larger units, higher speeds, and greater distances between stops. 

3. Through lines, characterized by a combination of passenger 
and freight traffic, handled over great distances, in large units, 
at longer and not necessarily regular intervals, and with stops 
few and far between. This latter condition, however, is one of 
degree, and this class is meant to include through trains of the 
local as well as the express kind, but not suburban trains, which 
properly belong to the second class. 

In street railway and rapid transit systems a very high rate 
of acceleration plays an important part. Therefore these sys- 


625 * 


526 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


tems quite generally use their motive power distributed over as 
many axles as possible, either in single cars or in trains unde1 
multiple-unit control. The motors used must be capable of 
being started and stopped in rapid succession without undue 
waste of energy. 

In through line traffic quick acceleration is of less importance. 
Therefore the simpler method of concentrating the motive power 
in one or more locomotives is, and most probably will be, em- 
ployed almost exclusively. Motors in this service are called 
upon to run at practically constant speeds for long periods of 
time. 

It is quite generally recognized nowadays that electricity 
is the best kind of motive power for practically any proposition 
belonging to one of the first two classes. And more than that, 
it is quite generally taken for granted that the proper electric 
motor to be used in such instances is the continuous-current 
series motor, or perhaps of late sometimes the single-phase 
alternating-current motor of the commutator type, which 
motor, after all, is a very close kin to the continuous-current 
series motor. Whether it might not be preferable to use the 
three-phase alternating-current induction motor in some in- 
stances is not easy to say. At present the fact must be taken 
into consideration that the choice of motor is quite frequently 
dependent not so much on the motor characteristics as on outside 
circumstances, such as for instance the possibility of operating 
rapid transit trains over adjoining street railway tracks, etc. 
And it,is therefore quite likely that the series motor will con- 
tinue to be used in the great majority of cases belonging to the 
first two categories of above classification. 

This paper will therefore not ‘touch on this subject at all, 
but will consider only problems relating to traction on through 
lines. This kind of traffic has thus far been held by many to 
be outside the sphere of the electrical engineer, though it may 
prove in the end to be of even greater interest to him than 
either of the two other kinds. 

The great variety of conditions governing all practical 
railroading makes it appear inadvisable to deal with this ques- 
tion in too general a manner. It is therefore considered essen- 
tial to take an actual case, on which a detailed report was 
worked out some time ago, and to present the data obtained 
from the investigation of this specific case in such form that 
conclusions may be drawn which will apply to similar cases. 


1905.] DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. 527 


General Conditions. The conditions governing the case in 
question may be stated briefly as follows: 

From a point A (terminal city) two lines branch out, both 
now operated by steam but for which electric operation is pro- 
posed. A-B is a division, 175 miles long, of a regular trunk- 
line system. A-C is an ore road, 49 miles long. Poth lines have 
single track, except at some of the stations where a second 
track of about 3000 feet in length is installed. The total track 
mileage is 182 for A-B and 51.5 for A-C. 

There are 16 stations between A and B, more or less evenly 
distributed over the entire length, and four stations between 
Aand C. A and B are situated at about the same elevation 
above sea level, while C is about 550 feet higher, which gives 
an average grade of 0.2 of one per cent. in the direction A to C. 
The maximum grade on A-B is one per cent., and the maximum 
grades on A-C are 0.6 of one per cent. in the direction A to C 
and 0.2 of one per cent. in the direction Cto A. The maximum 
curvature on either#oad is four degrees. The gauge is normal. 

The traffic on A-B consists of eight trains per day in each 
direction, two local passenger trains stopping at all stations, 
one express train stopping at A, B, and one intermediate point, 
one express train stopping at A and B only, two local freight 
trains stopping at all stations, and two through freight trains 
stopping at A, B, and one intermediate point. The weight of 
these trains without locomotive is as follows: local passenger 
trains 125 tons, express trains 300 and 450 tons respectively, 
local freight trains 600 tons average, through freight trains 850 
tons from A to B and 1200 tons from B to A. The free running 
speed is about 25 miles per hour for the local passenger trains, 
35 miles per hour for the express trains, 17 miles per hour for 
the local freight trains, and 20 miles per hour for the through 
freight trains. 

The traffic on A-C consists of three ore trains per day in each 
direction, those going from C to A are loaded and weigh about 
3000 tons without locomotive, those from A to C are empty 
and weigh about 800 tons net. The free running speed of these 
trains is about 15 miles per hour. 

It may be interesting to note that the heaviest steam loco- 
motive now in use on these lines weighs 134 tons total, of which 
83 tons are on drivers. 

Train Powers. In order to calculate the tractive efforts, for 
which the locomotives have to be designed, it is necessary first 


528 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


of all to determine the values which are to be given to the various 
resistances opposing the movement of the trains. The following 
formulas were used to obtain resistances in pounds per ton of 
total train weight: 

Friction resistance (wind and bearings) when running on 
“level track at different speeds, Rj = 5+0.008 vy’, where v = 
speed in miles per hour. 


Values for Rj: Slow Speeds........--++-+++-+++> 5 
10 miles per hour.......-------- 6 
£5 i ee RS eects Sete 7 
LTS aE ee ease 7.5 
S0es RSS Bh oes ae 8 
Dy ey et PEE NY, eh a ay hers ete 10 
Sire Nae tas AO Roe sete ae eee 15 


Resistance due to grade, R, = 2000s/100, where s = grade 


in per cent. . 
Values for R,: on grade of 0.2 per cent........-.. 4 
Start hig teow SOT) nc ail a Che, Mae eee 
“f ret dup eaeg 8 ie RTE hey. oa aes 20 


Starting resistance, R; = aX91.2X (1+), where a = rate 
of acceleration in miles per hour per second, and p = correction 
for fly-wheel effect of rotating parts. Pp in this case was found 
to be about = 0.08, thus making RK approximately equal to 
a X100. 


Values for R,: 0.08 miles per hour per second...... 8 
0.1 Fem AR Sa Se eae So die 10 
O18 a ee thet ers A! 18 
0i3 21 OR ae ae oe ae a 


The -approximate weights of electrical locomotives for the 
proposed setvice were found to be: 40 tons for the local passenger 
trains, 75 tons for the express trains and the local freight trains, 
and 90 tons for the through freight and the ore trains. Adding 
these locomotive weights to the train weights given above, 
the tractive efforts for the different kinds of trains under various 
conditions were found to be as follows: 


1905.] DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS, _529 


Running tractive 


Weight | Speed. ff Rate of ac- Stafting 

with lo-| eee __| celeration. | tractive 
como- | Miles effort. 

tive. |per hr. On On max. | Miles per hr, On 

Tons. level. grade. per sec. level. 
Local passenger trains......... 165 25 1 650 4950 0.3 5 800 
Bxpressstraiti-buscince aes ica} ro 35 5 600 13 100 0.18 8 600 
Bsptess train Dla. were. 5) O20 35 7 900 18 400 0.18 12 100 
Local freight trains. ........ .<- 675 Live 5 100 18 600 0.1 10 100 
Through freight train, Ato B...| 940 20 7 500 26 300 Onl 14 100 

Through freight train, Bto A...| 1290 20 10 300 36 100 Ond: 19 350 
Ore; train.,A. to Cz ciel OOO) 15 6 200 16 900 0.1 13 350 
0.08 40 200 


Ore train: © t@-Aw.aevenres ce ie 3090 15 21600 | 34000 


The rates of acceleration used may seem low, but they are better 
than the rate now obtained from the steam locomotives; and 
even the lowest rate of 0.08 miles per hour per second will bring 
the ore train up to full speed in three minutes, which is perfectly 
_ satisfactory for this kind of service. The advantage of com- 
paratively low rates of acceleration lies in the fact that the 
tractive efforts required for starting are in this case but slightly 
higher than the average full speed running efforts. The maxi- 
mum possible tractive efforts, which could be obtained from 
the three types of locomotives with a coefficient of 25% for 
adhesion between rails and wheels, would be 20000, 37 500, 
and 45 000 pounds per ton respectively, which is well above the 
efforts actually required, and which would even suffice for 
starting the trains on the maximum grade with a very fair rate 
of acceleration. 

‘The power which the motors of the different types of loco- 
motives will have to be capable of giving while running at 
full speed is found by the formula: h.p. = tractive effort in 
pounds per ton xspeed in miles per hour/375, and the values 
obtained are tabulated herewith. 


A a Eee 


Average Horse power 

horse power. |on max. grade. 
Giegaly passenwer trains: . ce. cds. ccend ee cee eee ele 110 330 
Pxpress train 1... 0.25.2 oe oe lee eer ee ee eee ee 520 1 220 
epiesateain 1 eee whogk ob REDS HOOD, CLO Daniele Since Ona 740 1720 
Local freight trains..........+-se eee ce reece terete 230 840 
Through freight trains, A to B......--+-+++eree cree 400 1 400 
Through freight trains, B to Ce Rt AG OOOO Le 550 1 930 
Oreweraing A mtOn Crepes pe)-cies ~o miae em emesis os 390 680 
Pent arA te A ee 370 1 360 


530 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


It will be remembered in this connection that there is an 
average grade of 0.2 per cent. against the trains going from 
A to C and in favor of those going from C to A, which makes the 
average power taken by these trains nearly the same, although 
the power taken when running at full speed on the level is 
250 h.p. for trains from A to C and 860 h.p. for trains from C to A. 


Preliminary Considerations. It may be well to realize that 
the problem under consideration can be solved in a great many 
different ways without encountering extarordinary difficulties 
from a technical standpoint. It is not at all impossible to solve 
it by the use of a system employing continuous-current motors 
connected all in series on the constant-current plan; or by a 
system using motor-generator sub-stations along the, line, the 
motors of these motor-generators being of the continuous- 
current type and all connected in series on a constant-current 
circuit; or by any one of several other systems. 

But in this particular instance four systems only were seriously 
considered: 

1. Continuous-current series motors on the locomotives, fed 
from synchronous-converter sub-stations along the line, which 
sub-stations receive three-phase alternating current from the 
power station. 

2. Three-phase alternating-current induction motors on the 
locomotives, fed from three-phase transformer sub-stations 
along the line, which receive three-phase alternating current 
from the power station. 

3. Single-phase alternating-current motors on the locomo- 
tives, fed from single-phase transformer sub-stations along the 
line, which receive either single-phase or polyphase alternating 
current from the power station. 

4. Continuous-current driving motors, fed from motor-gen- 
erators on the locomotives, the latter receiving single-phase 
alternating current from the power station, either direct or 
through transformer sub-stations along the line. 

Actual numerical data were available only concerning the 
first two of these four systems and they were therefore worked 
out in detail, while a comparison of the characteristics of the 
other two systems led to conclusions as to their applicability 
for the case under consideration. 


Energy Consumed by Trains. The following tables show some 
figures obtained during the calculations made to find the actual 
energy consumed by the different trains during their runs be- 


1905.] DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. 531 


tween terminals. The tractive efforts and the horse power re- 
quired to haul each train were obtained for consecutive points 
of the run according to profile of road and time table. Then 
with the motor diagrams the kilowatt input at each point was 
calculated, a load-curve plotted for the entire run and from 
this curve the total kilowatt-hours and the average kilowatts 
were obtained, as’ well as the number of watt-hours consumed 
per ton-mile. 

The same rate of acceleration was used for both systems. 
In stoping, the trains were allowed to coast down to about half 
speed, when the brakes were applied so as to bring the trains 
to standstill with a rate of retardation of about 0.75 miles per 
hour per second. 

Series-parallel control was employed for the continuous- 
current motors, and these motors were geared so as to run at 
point of maximum efficiency for fullspeed. Ordinary rheostatic 
control was used for the three-phase motors, and they were geared 
so that full speed corresponded to synchronous speed less slip. 


ES SE ee a oa 


Continuous current. Three-phase current. 


Local. Passenger Train, 165 tons including locomotive. 25 miles per hour. 


eR Ne 


Rate of acceleration, miles per hr. per sec. 0.3 0.3 
Total time running, seconds..-.....+-+-+: 26 667. 26 667. 
Average running speed, miles per hr..... 23.6 23.6 
Total kw.-hr. consumed.......-.:s+e-+-+- 625,44 627.76 
entre per train mile ..4..csa+d2-ssrss 3.57 3.58 
BREE Loca period mledvicacteeeen. x Zin 2. 
Average kilowatts required running...... 84.43 84.70 


i z 


Express Trains I and II, 375 and 525 tons respectively, 35 miles per hour. 


eS C= 
Rate of ean: miles per hr. per sec. 0.18 SO) aS: 0.18 0.18 
Total time running, seconds.....---++-+-> 18 315. 18 157. 18 315. 18 157. 
Average running speed, miles per hr.....- 34.3 34.6 34.3 34.6 
Total kw-hr:-consumed......-+ 000500 e+: 2 202.4 3015.3 2162. 2 953.4 
kew-hr. per train mile ...-----+--+++00 07> 12.6 17.2 12.35 16.85 
Watt-hours per ton mile.....---++-++++-: " 33.6 32.8 33. 32.2 
Average kilowatts required running....-- ' 433. 597.8 425 585.6 


ee eee) Le 


532 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. {June 19 


6 ee aaa 


Continuous current. Three-phase current. 


Local Freight Trains, 675 tons including locomotive, 17 miles per hour. 


Rate of acceleration, miles per hr. per sec. 052 0.1 
Total time running, seconds.........++++ 39 014. 39 014. 
Average running speed, miles per hr...... 16.15 16.15 
Total kw-hr. conated eee een 1 939.5 1%46.9 
kw-hr. per train mile ......-..-+-.+--+- 11.05 11.12 
Watt-hours per ton mile...........++--- 16.4 16.5 
Average kilowatts required running...... 178.9 179.6 


Se 


Through Freight Trains, 940 and 1290 tons respectively, 20 miles per hour. 


Rate of acceleration, miles per hr. per sec. 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 
Total time running, seconds.............| 31 766. 31 766. 31 766. 31 766. 

Average running speed, miles per hr...... 19.8 19.8 19.8 19.8 
Total kw-hr. consumed.........--.++-+--+| 2869.7 3 936.9 2810.22 | 3863.8 
kw-hr. per trainamile .... 0.06009 esses 16.4 22.45 16.05 UPA S 
Watt-hours per ton mile..........2...«+ 17.5 17.4 gh wn My ae 
Average kilowatts required running...... 325.2 446.2 318.5 437.9 


Ore Trains, 880 and 3090 tons respectively, 15 miles per hour. 


Rate of acceleration, miles per hr. per sec. 0.1 0.08 Ort 0.08 
Total time running, seconds.............] 12 251, 12 345. 12 251. 12 345. 
Average running speed, miles per hr...... 14.4 14.3 14.4 14.3 
Total kw-hr. consumed.................| > 1028.87 | 1090.7 1020.53} 1115.6 
kew-hr. per train ‘mile 2.06. dee oe ee pene Z1. 22.25 20.9 22.7 
Watt-hours per ton mile..............-- 23.6 72 2375 7.35 
Average kilowatts required running... ... 302.3 318.1 299.8 325.3 


LT 


Total kilowatt-hours per day for all trains. 


4 local passenger trains...:.......+-++:- 2 501.76 2511.04 
DEXPress CLAIMG! Le esi 0 wlolsishs «ters wee aratore pals 4404.8 4324, 

2 express trains II...........+-eeeeeees 6 030.6 5 906.8 
MB JOCHL TrelohtvErainSn.aeg wud eutts ps tibet 7 758. 7 787.6 
2 through freight trains from A to B..... 5 739.4 5 620.44 
2 through freight trains from B to A..... 7 873.8 raw ON Cs 
Sore trains trom A tO Gus. .e ce) -s eeis eas 2 057.74 2041.06 
Sore trains from: C:to°A ss... ccc tee he yee 2181.4 2 231.2 
Total energy consumption, kw-hr........ 38 547.50 : 38 149,74 


Average daily load, kilowatts (24 hours). . 1 606.15 1589.57 


a 


1905.) DE MURALT:; HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. 538 


It will thus be seen that there is not much difference between 
the two systems as far as actual energy consumed by the motors 
is concerned; this result appears perfectly natural when one 
considers the fact that, while the continuous-current motors 
-are somewhat more efficient at starting, the energy consumed 
during the starting period is only a small part of the total energy 
required for such comparatively long runs, and when running 
at full speed the alternating-current induction motors have a 
higher efficiency than the continuous-current motors. Through 
the employment of cascade control for the three-phase motors, 
with its corresponding saving during starting and returning 
of energy during braking, the three-phase motors would prob- 
ably show up more favorably all the way through. But in 
any case the difference between the two systems on this account 
will be extremely small and it will hardly be more than one or 
two per cent. one way or the other. 


Line Equipment. While the amount of energy used by the 
two types of trains may thus be taken as being approximately 
equal, there is an appreciable difference in the cost of deliver- 
ing this energy to the trains. First of all the contact line from 
which the current is collected by the moving trains can not be 
of the same type for the two systems. The reason for this is 
mainly the limit in pressure imposed on the continuous-current 
system by the properties of continuous-current machinery. 
While it is’ possible to build alternating-current motors for 
practically any reasonable pressure, continuous-current motors 
have thus far been limited in most cases to a pressure in the 
neighborhood of 650 to 700 volts. This is not an absolute 
limit, however, and in the present instance a pressure of 1000 
volts was chosen, which would probably be found feasible for 
motors of the size under consideration. 

Even at this pressure the current to be collected is very heavy. 
The express locomotive will require inputs of 1450 kw., the 
freight and ore locomotives inputs of 1600 kw. At 1000 volts this 
represents currents of 1450 and 1600 amperes respectively, 
which would be still further increased by the inevitable drop 
in pressure. Such currents can not be collected with safety 
from an overhead trolley line and recourse must be had to some 
heavier construction, either in the shape of a third rail at prac- 
tically track level, or a similar rail suspended overhead over the 
center or the side of the track. With an alternating-current 
pressure of 5000 volts in a three-phase system, the maximum 


534 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


current in one phase will be 185 amperes, which could readily 
be taken from a copper overhead line of the familiar construc- 
tion. 

The total track mileage was given as 233.5. A third-rail 
equipment for this road would cost: 
About 228 miles conductor rail, 80 lb. per yard, $35 


PEP, FON Fics «fay Seaes on ae ales ae ei a $558 600.00 
Fish-plates and bolts, $65 per mile...........--. 14 820.00 
Insulators and fastenings, 120 384 at 50 cents..... 60 192.00 
Bonds, $160 per mile.ncract cacwe We ve o~ nae eo SOMBO LOD 
Cables for crossings, 9600 yards at $3...........-. 28 800.00 
Erection, $600. per mile... cme 24s ee Sls ats ed ete 136 800.00 

Total ec eid onary wee ee ae gee) aaa ee a $835 692.00 


and about. $130 000 additional if a wooden protection for the 
rail is desired. 

An overhead double-trolley line would cost: 
Copper wire, 2233.5 miles of No. 000, 15 cents 


DET, POUNC Nery tise ccs deve tao ob im im, Fale ihe sten a $177 012.00 
Wooden. poles, 12°024 Qt $6 Sine orncec fs catia pag 72 144.00 
Brackets and special insulators, 12 024, at $10.... 120 240.00 
Overhead switches;/42, at‘$80... 40.5 a net ek ce 3 360.00 
Preckion. PS00, PEL WUC ss yes ciols es < mpen eerie cOmerats 186 800.00 

TGtala: vss teat 0s ae ere eee $559 556.00 


Sub-stations. These should preferably be spaced so as to 
coincide as much as possible with the railroad stations. This 
would mean an approximate distance between sub-stations of 
10 miles. The maximum number of trains between two sub- 
stations is two. Placing these two trains in the most unfavor- 
able position and letting both take the maximum. possible 
input, the drop in third rail will be found to be about 70% 
and the drop in overhead trolley line about 15%. While these 
values are very high, they can readily be accepted as extreme 
maximums, which in all probability will be reached but on 
very rare occasions. Should smaller maximum drops be de- 
sired, feeders may be added, which would of course be very 
much cheaper for the three-phase line than for. the continuous- 
current line. It is possible to allow a greater drop in a con- 
tinuous-current system, because a reduction in pressure will 
only affect the speed of the motors and not their torque. In an 
alternating-current system, however, the drop must be kept 


1905.) DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. 535 


within comparatively narrow limits, because any decrease in 
pressure will seriously influence the torque of the motors, while 
the speed will not be affected. 

The sub-stations in either system must be dimensioned so 
as to be capable of furnishing a maximum of 1200 kw. each, which 
corresponds to the maximum load condition represented by 
two of the heaviest trains approaching the sub-station simul- 
taneously. The average load on these sub-stations is however 
much smaller; and as far as heating is concerned the sub-sta- 
tions need only be dimensioned for the square root of the square 
integral of the current required. The varying density of 
traffic and the slight differences in distance between sub-sta- 
tions, if the latter are placed conveniently near railway stations, 
result in slightly different capacities for the different sub-sta- 
tions. With a view to ease in operation it is preferable to make 
them all of the same size, and the normal average capacity per 
sub-station was found to be about 350 kw. It is easy to design 
a stationary transformer of 350 kw. normal continuous capa- 
city, which will be able to give 1200 kw. for short periods of 
time with a drop in pressure not exceeding six or seven per cent. 
The same can not be said of a synchronous converter, which 
could hardly be built for more than say 100 per cent. overload. 
It will therefore be necessary either to add storage-batteries 
to the continuous-current sub-stations or else to use synchronous 
converters capable of furnishing 600 kw. in normal continuous 
service and 1200 kw. for short periods of time. The latter alter- 
native proved to be the more economical in the case under 
consideration. The cost of sub-stations for the two systems 
thus worked out as follows: 

23 synchronous-converter sub-stations, complete, 

with step-down transformers, synchronous con- 

verters and switch gear, at $24000.........--- $552 000.00 
23 transformer sub-stations, complete, with station- 

ary transformers and the necessary switch-gear, at 

LOO Rr eee iia pte heh Segre eA a: $ 48 300.00 


Transmission Line. The high-pressure transmission line may 
be the same in both cases. The greater amount of energy 
which has to be transmitted in the continuous-current system, 
due to the greater losses in this system, will of course increase 
the drop in the transmission line to a certain extent.. But we 
have seen above that a somewhat greater maximum drop is 
permissible in the continuous-current system. The high- 


536 DE MURALT: HEAVY meat 5 PROBLEMS. [June 19 


pressure line proposed for the railroad under consideration was 
estimated to cost a total of $679 860.00, which amount would 
allow for entirely separate poles for this line. Some might 
suggest using the poles of the contact line in the alternating- 
current system. But this seems open to objections and it 
would appear to be advisable to make the transmission line 
entirely independent in either case, in order to secure the 
greatest possible safety against breakdown. The above amount 
therefore holds good for the continuous-current and the three- 
phase alternating-current system. 


Power Station. When we finally come to consider the power 
station, we find that its normal capacity will be governed by 
the average energy which has to be supplied to the trains plus 
the losses occasioned by the transmission of this energy from the 
power station to the trains. These losses are composed of the 
losses in contact line, losses in sub-station machinery, and losses 
in transmission line. The average energy supplied to the trains 
was found above to be about 1600 kw. and practically the same 
for the continuous-current and the three-phase alternating- 
current system. 

To calculate the losses in the contact line accurately would 
be an extremely tedious task on account of the constantly 
changing load conditions. But an approximate calculation 
showed the average energy lost in the third rail of the continuous- 
current system to be about seven per cent of the energy re-. 
quired by the trains, or about 7% of 1600 kw. = 112 kw., while 
the average energy lost in the overhead line of the three-phase 
system is about 2% of the energy delivered or about 2% of 
1600 kw. = 32 kw. 

The total losses in the synchronous converters are a combina- 
tion of the friction and iron losses and of the copper losses. 
The first two are practically constant and correspond to about 
three per cent of the normal capacity of the synchronous con- 
verters, or 3% of 13 800 kw. = 414 kw. The copper losses are 
proportional to the energy converted and under normal con- 
ditions will represent about two per cent. of that energy, or 2% 
of (1600+112) kw. = 34 kw. 

Similarly the transformer losses may be divided into iron 
losses, equal to about 1.5 per cent. of the normal transformer 
capacity or 1.5% of 8050 kw. = 121 kw. and into copper losses, 
equal to about one per cent. of the energy transformed, or 1% 
of (1600+ 112+414+34) kw. = 22 kw. in the continuous- 


* 


1905.) DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. 


or 
() 
“I 


current system, and 1% of (1600732) kw. = 16 kw. in the 
three-phase system. 

The losses in the high-pressure transmission line may be taken 
as two per cent. of the total transmitted energy in either case, 
though this percentage will be a trifle less in the three-phase 
system than in the continuous-current system. The energy 
to be delivered to sub-stations in the continuous-current system 
is 1600+ 112+ 414+ 34+121+22 = 2303 kw., the losses there- 
fore 2% of 2303 kw. = 46kw. In the three-phase System 1600+ 
324+121+16 = 1769 kw. have to be transmitted, making the 
losses 2% of 1769 kw. = 35 kw. 

We thus find the total average energy which has to be gen- 
erated at the power station for the movement of the trains as 
follows: 


a 


*Continuous current. | Three-phase current. 
Energy supplied to trains.....--+-++++++- 1 600 kilowatts 1600 kilowatts 
Losses in contact line.......-----2+e+e+ee- 112 32 
ee ‘““ synchronous converters.....-.-- 448 — 
& ““ step-down transformers.....---. 143 137 
e “ transmission line.........++-+++- 46 35 
lpia bats ere ean cht Cee CIE ne te cue re can 2349 kilowatts 1804 kilowatts 


Te ———————— OO 


This represents an efficiency of transmission of about 68 
per cent. for the continuous-current system and of about 88 
per cent. for the three-phase alternating-current system. 

As compared with the average consumption of 1600 kw., 
the maximum energy consumption at the trains was found from 
the time-table to be 2475 kw., occasioned by seven trains run- 
ning at schedule speed and two trains accelerating. A second 
peak in the load curve of 2130 kw. is caused by five trains run- 
ning and three trains accelerating. The efficiency of transmission 
at the moment of these maximum loads will be about 71 and 
89 per cent. respectively and we thus find that the power sta- 
tion for the continuous-current system may be called upon to 
furnish as a maximum 3490 kw., while the greatest demand on 
the power station for the three-phase system will be 2780 kw. 

Adding to these values and to those found above for the 
average load, an amount of say 500 kilowatts for switching 
service and lighting of stations, etc., the total load on the power 


* 


538 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


station of the continuous-current system will be about 2850 
kw. on the average and 3990 kw. as a maximum, and the total 
load on the power station of the three-phase system will be about 
2300 kw. as an average and 3280 kw. as a maximum. 

In the present instance the power would be bought from an 
already existing water-power plant at a certain fixed sum per 
horse power per annum. But the cost of water-power develop- 
ment is known to have been $145 per horse power and for the 
sake of comparison this figure was used to establish the first 
cost of installation for the two systems. While the generators 
and step-up transformers could be made to stand an overload 
of 50 per cent. for several hours and the electric equipment 
can thus be dimensioned directly for the average output re- 
quired, the turbines could be ovérloaded only about 20 per cent. 
and it was thus made necessary to provide for 5000 h.p. in the 
continuous-current system and for 4000 h.p. in the three-phase 
system. The cost of the power stations thus compares as 
follows: 


Power station for continuous-current system, 5000 


Hop ai S15 os ere ee $725 000.00 
Power station for three-phase system, 4000 h.p. at 
SIAR Se ed S cae a sos thee Rages ee eee $580 000.00 


In the case of steam or gas power stations, the first cost of 
prime movers would be less. But, if the cost of fuel were 
capitalized and added, the total cost would be found to be about 
the same. 

First Cost of Installation. If we now make a summary for 
the first cost of the complete installation for the two systems, 
we find: 


Continuous current. | Three-phase ct.rrent. 


— eee 


Contact: Line rice ce «apt sean Wwe! sical s ys oye $835 692.00 $559 556.00 
Swb=Statiows gis die apes picts ia ana wid, oe pb Peace sc fo 552 000.00 48 300.00 
SPANGISHION. LING ove cin tela alow of ecr aesegeraie 679 860 .00 679 860.00 
Power station as) aie g » siepebiesien oestalle sists 725 000 .00 580 000.00 

otal ss ncaa chahan ee akeielcien ae ene ON $1 867 716.00 


It will be found later on that the first cost of rolling-stock, 
including motor equipment, may be taken as being practically 
the same in either case; it is thus made apparent that the 


~~ A 


1905.] DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. 539 


three-phase alternating-current system has a very great advan- 
tage over the continuous-current system as far as first cost of 
installation is concerned. 


Cost of Operation. It is easy to see that the cost of operation 
is also far less for the three-phase system. It is not necessary 
to go into details in this respect, but it may be pointed out that 
the energy consumed will be smaller in the three-phase system, 
and the omission of synchronous converters will decrease both 
the labor item and the cost of repairs, which latter will be still 
further reduced in the three-phase system due to the absence 
of the commutator used. on continuous-current motors. 

The difference in cost would thus distinctly point toward the 
adoption of the three-phase alternating-current system. Before 
taking up the various objections which are sometimes urged 
against the employment of the three-phase motor, a comparison 
will be made of the characteristics of the two other systems 
mentioned in the beginning as being available for this work. 


Single-phase Alternating-current System. This system has an 
advantage over the three-phase system in that it requires one 
single overhead conductor only, as compared with the two 
conductors necessary in a three-phase system. But, in ‘the 
opinion of the writer, the single-phase alternating-current com- 
mutator motor, be it of the series, the repulsion or a compromise 
type, is not at all suitable for heavy traction work. 

The torque of a single-phase motor is 30 per cent. smaller 
than that of acorresponding continuous-current motor, and it is 
not constant but varies between a maximum and zero with double 
the periodicity of the line current. The mean value of the 
torque is only half of the maximum torque when slipping wheels, 
which means that in cases like the above, where the tractive 
efforts required necessitate going to the limit of adhesion be- 
tween wheels and track, a single-phase locomotive ust have 
almost twice as much weight on drivers as either a continuous 
current or a three-phase locomotive. It is true that this 
difference holds good only for motors mounted directly on the 
car-axle, and it will be somewhat less if geared and spring- 
‘suspended motors are used. 

The single-phase motor is restricted to a pressure at the 
commutator of hardly more than 200 volts. It has a lower 
inherent efficiency than either the continuous-current or the 
three-phase motor. Due to the low average flux density used, 
it will for the same output weigh probably 50 per cent. more 


540 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


than a corresponding continuous-current motor. And the diffi- 
culties of design are such that it can not, at present at least, 
be built in large sizes. It would probably be necessary to use 
six or eight motors to get 2000 h.p., and this would in all proba- 
bility necessitate a double locomotive, where with continuous- 
current or three-phase motors a single locomotive would be 
sufficient. Besides this, the single-phase motor is much better 
suited for high rotative speeds, which means that in many 
cases double-reduction gear will be required. It would there- 
fore appear that single-phase motors, as long as they are avail- 
‘ble only in the commutator type, will hardly present any ad- 
vantages for heavy traction problems. 

It is not at all impossible however that the single-phase 
induction motor may some time be so improved as to be avail- 
able for railway service. Its only drawback at present is its 
poor starting torque. A suitable condenser would overcome 
this difficulty and give the single-phase motor the same starting 
qualities now possessed by the three-phase motor. Low- 
pressure condensers are extremely bulky and unwieldy and at 
the same time costly pieces of apparatus; but there has re- 
cently been placed on the market a condenser for use with high- 
pressure alternating-currents up to 50000 volts and more. 
The capacity of a condenser increases with the square of its 
pressure, and these high-pressure condensers are therefore not 
only cheap but also very small, and if they fulfil the expecta- 
tions placed on their reliability in continuous service, the single- 
phase motor might yet play an important part in railway 
service. 

Motor-Generator Locomotives. This system using a combina- 
tion of a high- speed single-phase alternating-current motor and 
a high-speed continuous-current generator, furnishing energy 
to continuous-current driving motors, with pressure control 
according to the Ward Leonard system, is really more useful 
than is generally admitted. The question of weight which is 
often urged against this system is only relatively important 
and, while it would probably be out of the question to use this 
system for the propulsion of single cars at high speeds, yet 
it deserves careful attention whenever heavy trains have to be 
considered. As a matter of fact it will be found that it is 
principally the speed desired, which decides the question whether 
motor-generator locomotives can be used to advantage or not, 
as will be seen from the following considerations. 


1905.] DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. O41 


To start a train of given weight on the level and to accelerate 
it at a given rate requires a certain tractive effort. In order 
to be able to produce this effort the locomotive hauling said 
train must have a certain weight on drivers. Take a train 
weighing 3090 tons and an acceleration of 0.08 miles per hour 
per second, then the tractive effort will be approximately 
40 000 pounds. With a coefficient of 25 per cent. for adhesion 
the locomotive must have 160 000 pounds or about 80 tons on 
drivers. 

To move this same train at a given speed on the level re- 
quires a certain amount of power. To give this power the 
locomotive must have an electric equipment of a certain ca- 
pacity. Suppose a speed of 15 miles per hour, then the electric 
equipment must be dimensioned to give continuously 840 h.p. 

Modern, careful design will probably result in a weight of 
about 60 pounds on drivers for each horse power in a continuous 
current or three-phase locomotive, and about 100 pounds in a 
‘motor-generator locomotive. A locomotive capable of giving 
continuously 840 h.p. will therefore, if designed for minimum 
weight, weigh about 25 tons if of the continuous-current or 
three-phase type, and about 42 tons if of the motor-generator 
type. Inasmuch as there must be 80 tons on drivers to give 
the desired tractive effort, it is made evident that for this 
speed the type of electric equipment does not influence the 
weight and there is no disadvantage connected with the use 
of the motor-generator locomotive. 

Suppose however the speed were to be raised to 25 miles per 
‘hour. Then the electric equipment would have to give 2060 h.p. 
In this case the minimum weight for the motor-generator loco- 
motive would be about 103 tons, while the continuous current 
and the three-phase locomotive could still be- built within the 
80 tons necessary for the tractive effort. It is easy along 
these lines to find out whether, for any given train weight and 
speed, the motor-generator locomotive is at a disadvantage 
as far as weight is concerned or not. 

The advantages of this system lie in the use of but one over- 
head conductor and more particularly in the very beautiful 
control which it offers. Those having had actual experience 
with this type of locomotive will probably confirm that 
the starting is exceedingly smooth and does not produce any 
-peaks in the load diagram. The regulation of torque and speed 
is also the most convenient imaginable and the electric braking 


542 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


is so easy and efficient that it will probably be used in preference 
to compressed air. This system is therefore a very good solu- 
tion for heavy low-speed. freight traffic, while for a mixed 
service with both light and heavy trains and for low as well 
as high speeds its advantages as known at the present day, are 
probably not great enough to warrant its adoption in preference 
to the straight three-phase alternating-current system. 

Objections to Three-phase Induction Motor. This brings the 
discussion back to the relative advantages of the continuous- 
current and the three-phase motor, and to the objections which 
have been urged against the latter. It has been claimed that 
the three-phase induction motor is inefficient, that it weighs 
and costs more, that the small air-gap generally used causes 
trouble, that the power-factor is low, that its overload capacity 
is limited, and finally that its speed characteristics are wholly 
unsuited for railway service. Let us analyze these objections. 

Efficiency. It is necessary to distinguish between efficiency 
when running and efficiency during the period of starting. 
That the induction motor per se, running at full speed, is a 
more efficient machine than the continuous-current motor, 
will probably be admitted by all designers. The objection made 
refers therefore principally to the economy in starting under 
railway conditions. Either motor when started alone requires 
the insertion of a rheostat to reduce the rush of current in the 
armature, and both motors are equally inefficient under these 
conditions. When however two or more motors are installed 
on the same car, it is possible with continuous-current motors 
to save a great part of the rheostat losses by connecting the 
motors first in series and then in parallel. This is not directly 
possible with induction motors because such reduction in im- 
pressed voltage would at the same time decrease the torque. 
Yet by using concatenation; viz., by connecting the secondary 
part (rotor or stator) of one motor to the primary part (stator 
or rotor) of a second motor, the same result can be obtained 
and exactly the same amount of energy saved, with the addi- 
tional advantage that during the braking period some of the 
energy otherwise lost in the brakes may be recovered and re- 
turned to the line, which is not feasible with the continuous- 
current motor. ; 

It is superfluous to go into details here in this respect. Granted 
even that the three-phase motor might in a certain case be some- 
what less efficient in starting, in heavy traction problems the 


1905.] DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. 543 


energy consumed during the starting period is only a compara- 
tively small part of the total energy consumed during the run 
between two stations, and the greater efficiency of the three- 
phase motor during the rest of the run makes up for what 
might have been lost through poorer efficiency at the start. 
With other words the total energy consumed for comparatively 
long runs between stations will be pretty closely the same for 
continuous-current and three-phase motors. This was borne 
out by the careful calculations made in the case referred to above 
as will be seen from the tables showing energy consumed by 
trains. Through the courtesy of Messrs. L. B. Stillwell and 
H. S. Putnam the table below was obtained, which shows the 
results of calculations made in a case which is more or less typ- 
ical of traffic on one of the large American trunk lines. The 
assumptions made were as follows 


| Poa neo) AN ive crenan mechan tape cere 150 miles 
Numihenol Stations, mits waned. 4. 16 
Length of intervals..........-..--- 10 miles 
Nusiper Gf tracks... sei <2 es 4 
Train-weights including locomotives: 
Passenger train.....:.-..+++++0+0: 512.65 tons 
Fly-wheel effect.........---.-.++--- 41.01 * 
Breighttraitic. 662 ¢- ee yee trees 704.5“ 
Fly-wheel effect..........+---+++55 56.44 “ 
Average running speed: 
Passenger trains.........-+-+-+++:: 40 miles per hour 
SEreight trains. J. .0.+-.--+-2- +++: 20 Sep eat Finis 


One-third of trains of each kind stop only at end stations. 
Maximum traffic simultaneously on road: 
Passenger trains.......----+-+-++:: 15 
Freight trains.......----- verses 15 

Track level—no curves. 


The comparison was made using the same schedule for both 
systems and in starting the same rate of acceleration. In the 
three-phase system energy was recovered during part of retarda- 


tion. 


544 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


Continuous current. | Three-phase current. 
| 


Local Passenger Train. 


Time of 10 mile run, seconds............. 955.4 955.4 
Acceleration in miles per hr. per sec....... .318 .318 
Average running speed, miles per hr....... 37.7 37.7 
Maximum speed, miles per hr............. Slovo 47.6 
Maximum kw. required: «ccc ee sess oe els 1775.55 1 160.0 
Average kw. required (running)........... 629.77 617.5 
Total kw-hr. furnished........ SERGE 4 than 167.09 176.3 
Total kew-bre returned eg -cae<eslos a leiersi 0.00 12.4 
“L Obal ew -hreCOUSUIMEM eae crealararsiels sreleiaiats 167.09 163.9 
cw-brs Per cra Lue aremiiia cleanest siiaie asters s 16.71 16.39 
‘Watt-hours per ton-mile...5......5..-.0.. 32.6 31.8 


Through Passenger Train. 


Timie’oL 150 -mailel run. (clei biel wis) ais ssn vase ofl, 1S LiPa 2k OEE URee. 3 hr. 21 min. 3 sec. 
Acceleration in miles per hr. per sec....... 0.318 0.318 
Average running speed, miles per hr....... 44.67 44.67 
Maximum speed, miles per hr............. 61.75 47.6 
Maximum kw. required..................- 1775.55 1 160.0 
Average kw. required (running)........... 659.43 660.7 
Total kKw-hr; furnished citrine 0 2 210. 2 226.3 
“Total lew-hr, returitedss 50 ws. spers ere. ela,s boone 0.0 12.4 
Total kw-br. consumed... .,. 4/21: 2\eis/elais) ets! 2 210. 2 213.9 
ew-hr), per traim-mil6).. <<. eave uss ce wes 14.7 14.75 
Watt-hours per ton-mile................. 28 75 28.8" 


Local Freight Train. 


Time of .10 mile run, seconds..,.......... 1 851.4 1851.4 
Acceleration in miles-per hr. per sec....... 0.189 0.189 
Average running speed, miles per hr....... 19.45 19.45 
Maximum speed, miles per hr............. 24.3 22.6 
Maximum kw. tequired..... ssc. «A s< se os 712.0 419.0 
Average kw. required (running)........... 244.0 246.7 
Total kw-hr: furnished.......5...:i.s4.... 125.5 ; 131.4 
Total kw-hr, returned... io. sie ss cco use 0.0 4.5 
Total kw-hr, consumedes ss... cease west 125.5 126.9 
kw-ht; per tram-mle waite ness cmtine somes 12.55 12.69 


Watt-hours per ton-mile................. 17.78 17.96 


1905.)] DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. : 545 


ue ee an EES 


Continuous current. | Three-phase current. 


ee ee 


Through Freight Train. 


Time of 150-mile run.....-.++-++seeece: 7 hr. 9 min. 9 sec. 7 hr. 9 min. 9 sec. 
Acceleration in miles per hr. per sec...+--- 0.189 0.189 
Average running speed. miles per hr......- 20.97 20.97 
Maximum speed, miles ee La HEOOCOS Race 24.3 22.6 
Maximum kw. required.....++-+eses00> 712.0 419.0 
Average kw. required (running)......-+-+- 253.5 251.3 
Total kw-hr. furnished.....-++--+-++++++0> 1814.5 1801.9 
Total kw-hr. returned....---+-s+e2seee0> 0.0 1.5 
Total kw-hr. consumed... .+se+++- ++ 000° 1814.5. 1797.4 
kew-hr. per train-mile ....-..--+++++2 +000 12.09 11.98 
Watt-hours per ton-mile.......---- 17.16 16.9 


32 trips of 2210 kw-hr. CACH atink ears steel 70 720 

32 trips of 2213.9 kw-hr. Gecisaahoce a oes 71 200 

64 trips, 15 stops, of 167.09 kw-hr. each...- 160 406 

64 trips, 15 stops, of 163.9 kw-hr. each.... 157 800 

16 trips of 1814.5 kw-hr. each......----+- 29 032 

16 trips of 1797.4 kw-hr. each...-.-++:--- 28 600 

32 trips, 15 stops, of 125.5 kw-hr. each.... 60 240 

32 trips, 15 stops, of 126.9 kw-hr. each...- 61.000 

Total consumption, Herahniss reetaicte cle teal s sist ° 320 398 318 600 

Average daily load, kilowatts. ...--+-+20+: 13 350 13 290 
30 923 21 420 


Maximum load, kilowatts....---++-++7++* 


Ea a aera acer Waa oc 


It will be seen that these results confirm the conclusion that 
there is not much difference between the two systems as far 
as efficiency or energy consumption is concerned. 

Weight and Cost. The former is affected to a certain extent 
by design, the latter by some other considerations. Taking 
identical conditions and modern, careful design for both motors, 
then the three-phase motor will weigh only about 0.75 times as 
much as the continuous-current motor. This is partly due 
to the smaller losses in the three-phase motor, and partly to 
the fact that the distributed winding and the general con- 
struction of the three-phase motor allow it to radiate heat 
with greater ease than is the case in the continuous-current motor 
where practicaliy all the losses have their origin far from the 
radiating surface. In general, both iron and copper are dis- 


546 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


tributed to better advantage in the three-phase motor. And, 
if the selling price of both motors is taken proportional to the 
cost of production, then the three-phase motor will certainly 
be cheaper than the continuous-current motor. 


Small Air-Gap. This is purely a question of proper design of 
motor-bearings. With a large air-gap, as in the present con- 
tinuous-current motor, small bearings will be sufficient. With 
air-gaps approaching ; in. the bearings have to be designed 
more liberally. But this does not present any difficulties, and 
it is perhaps worth while noting that the rotor of the three- 
phase motor ‘leaves much more space available for bearings 
than can be found in the continuous-current motor. The fact 
that railway motors with such small air-gaps have now been 
in regular service, some as long as 10 years, without ever giving 
the least trouble on this account, is proof enough that the mod- 
ern designer need not be afraid to use an air-gap small enough 
to make a good induction motor. 


Low Power-Factor. A continuous-current system will always 
have a higher power-factor than an alternating-current system. 
But the power-factor in no way influences the actual energy 
consumed. A low power-factor simply increases the current 
flowing at any time by the addition of the so-called wattless 
current, and the current carrying capacity of transformers, 
transmission line, and generators will therefore have to be some- 
what larger if the power-factor is poor. 

A modern continuous-current plant with synchronous-con- 
verter sub-stations will have a power-factor of about 95 per 
cent. The power-factor of modern three-phase motors, while 
only about 60 per cent. at very low loads, is 90 per cent. and 
more for all loads above about one-fourth, normal full load, 
and the power-factor of the entire system at the time of maxi- 
mum current consumption will be about 80 per cent. While the 
lower power-factor will therefore increase the current flowing 
in the three-phase system by about 15 per cent., we have seen 
above that the energy required in the continuous-current sys- 
tem is about 25 per cent. greater than that in the three-phase 
system, and we thus find that even with the lower power-factor 
the current flowing in generators, transmission line, and trans- 
formers is not any greater in the alternating-current system 
than in the continuous-current system. 


Overload Capacity, This again is strictly a question of design. 
The normal capacity of any motor is determined by the heating 


1905.) DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS: 5AT 


of its windings. The overload, which a given motor will stand 
is determined in the case of a continuous-current motor by the 
behavior of the commutator, and in the case of a three-phase 
motor by the fact that at a given point the influence of the cur- 
rents in the induced part will reduce the magnetic field to zero. 

The continuous-current motor can probably be designed to 
stand an overload up to about six times the normal continu- 
ous load, which is quite sufficient for railway service. 

The overload capacity of the three-phase motor has been 
accepted by many as being about 2.5 to three times normal full 
load, because stationary induction mutors are generally designed 
in this way. This is however entirely a matter of choice and 
it is not difficult to so choose the point of normal full load of a 
three-phase motor with reference to the maximum load that 
it will give without trouble six or eight times its normal full 
load before showing any signs of approaching the maximum 
load point. As a matter of fact the maximum load could be 
made to be 10 or more times normal full load should this prove 
to be desirable. 

The general statement will hold good that either motor can 
be designed for overloads greater than required in normal railway 
service, yet the overload capacity of the three-phase motor may 
be said to be unlimited, while that of the continuous-current 
motor is restricted by the presence of the commutator. 


Speed Characteristics. It has often been said that the three- 
phase motor is entirely unsuitable for railway service because 
it lacks the so-called series characteristics. But perhaps few 
realize that these very series characteristics are distinctly un- 
suitable for problems such as the one treated above. The 
series motor will decrease its speed for any increase in load or 
decrease in line pressure, while a motor with shunt character- 
istics will run at constant speed independent of load or pressure. 

Perhaps a comparison with the conditions found in elec- 
trically-operated machine shops will serve to illustrate this 
point. There we find that for hoisting and crane work, viz., 
for work requiring frequent starting and stopping, and working 
with greatly varying loads, a series motor will be pre-eminently 
suited, Variations in speed are permissible in such work as 
long as good average speed is maintained, and the fact that the 
torque of the series motor decreases with increasing speed, and 
vice versa, will enable the motor automatically to adjust its 
speed so that the power input will be more or less constant. 


548 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


Machine tools however should be run at as nearly constant 
speed as possible no matter how much the load may vary 
from moment to moment, and we find therefore that for this 
kind of work the series motor has to give way to the motor 
with shunt characteristics, which will run at practically con- 
stant speed whether the torque increases or decreases. And this 
requirement for constant speed under all conditions is even 
more clearly indicated for the main transmission line shaft, 
from which a great variety of small machines may be driven. 
The load on this transmission will vary between wide. limits 
as groups of machines are thrown on or off, but from the moment 
the shaft is started in the morning until it is shut down in the 
evening it should run at constant speed. A series motor for 
this service is entirely out of the question. 

Reverting to railway conditions, it is found that the series 
motors will be permissible in street railway service, where. the 
work consists practically only of starting and stopping and 
where it is therefore of small importance whether the running 
speed is constant or not. In rapid-transit systems with greater 
distances between stops, it is already open to doubt whether 
the series motor presents the best solution or not. And for 
through line service, for local as well as express trains, a high 
schedule can only be maintained if the speed between stations 
is as nearly as possible constant and independent of the load— 
in other words, if a motor with shunt characteristics is used. 

The objection that constant speed under all circumstances 
will mean a varying load on the central power station is true 
enough, but the same objection holds good in the case of the 
machine shop, where the constant speed for machine tools and 
line-shaft is insisted upon even though it may cause the load 
on the power station to fluctuate. This is undoubtedly a point 
on which the interests of the electrical engineer conflict with 
those of the railway operating engineer. The electrical engineer 
wishes to have as smooth a load-curve as possible and the 
railway engineer must have constant speed if possible. In the 
great majority of cases the increase in power necessary to run 
trains up the maximum grades at the same speed as on the 
level will not be more than the power taken to start these 
trains, and, wherever there are a number of trains supplied 
from the same power station, the fluctuations reaching the 
latter will not be such as will cause any special difficulties. 
In this connection the fact may be mentioned that three-phase 


1905.) DEMURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. 549 


motors automatically return energy to the line on down grades, 
which series motors can not be made to do. The energy t hus 
gained will naturally have a tendency to smooth out the load 
curve of the power station to a considerable extent. 

As regards the ability to run any given train economically 
at more than one speed, both types of motors are exactly alike. 
The series as well as the three-phase induction motor, when 
run alone, have only one economical speed, and to get other speeds 
rheostats must be used with correspondingly lower economy. 
Several motors on one locomotive can be arranged to give more 
than one economical speed in either case. By means of series- 
parallel control two scries motors may be run at full and half 
speed, four motors at full, half, and quarter speed, with equal 
economy at all these speeds. Two induction motors can be 
connected in cascade, and, if they have the same number of 
poles, full speed and half speed will be speeds of equal economy. 
If they have a different number of poles, various combinations 
of speed are possible. Three motors with different number of 
poles will give four economical speeds, and so forth. Or two 
or more induction. motors may be combined in one motor, 
either by directly mounting motors of different number of poles 
on the same shaft, or by arranging the stator winding so that 
it is possible to change the number of poles by a change in 
connections. Thus practically any desired number of different 
speeds may be obtained, with the additional advantage that the 
rotor may be of the short-circuited rotor type, or as simple 
as any motor armature can be made. 

The point to be borne in mind in this connection is this, 
that, if any service requires more than one speed, then it is 
best for safe operation as well as for correct maintenance of 
time table to have the second or third speeds have a definite 
relation to the normal full speed, and let all these speeds be as 
constant as possible: 

Starting and Acceleration. We have already seen that in 
long distance service rapid acceleration is usually unnecessary. 
But if quick acceleration is desired it can be had from the three- 
_ phase motor just as well as from the continuous-current motor, 
inasmuch as the. maximum torque of the three-phase motor 
can be made at least as large as that of a continuous-current. 
motor of corresponding size. Given a certain maximum rate 
of acceleration, the three-phase motor will even reach full speed 
quicker than the continuous-current motor, because its torque 


550 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


is independent of speed and it can therefore carry practically 
the same rate of acceleration clear up to full speed, while the 
continuous-current motor can use the maximum rate of accelera- 
tion only up to a certain point, the point where the motor curve 
is reached, from which point on its torque decreases with in- 
creasing speed. 

More important in heavy traction work is the fact that for 
slow acceleration the three-phase motor will have a lower cur- 
rent input than the continuous-current motor. The starting 
torque is in each case proportional to the product of magnetic 
field-times current. But the magnetic field of the three-phase 
motor is practically constant, while that of the continuous-current 
series motor is a function of the current. The exact character 
of this function is dependent on the design of the motor and 
on the magnetic properties of the iron employed in its construc- 
tion. It is difficult to express this relation in a mathematical 
formula, but actual motor curves show clearly that the torque 
of a comtinuous-current series motor decreases much faster 
than the current. With other words at low current densitics 
the three-phase motor will have a higher torque per ampere 
than the continuous-current motor. 

This fact is made use of in practical operation and in at least 
one European three-phase railway system the current taken 
during starting is limited by rheostat control to a value about 
20 to 25 per cent. above full load running current, with a result- 
ing average acceleration of about 0.5 miles per hour per second. 
Curves published for some American continuous-current railways 
with similar rates of acceleration show considerably higher 
peaks in the current input. 


Conclusion. From the above it would appear that, for the 
railroad under consideration, the three-phase alternating 
current system is not only cheaper to install and cheaper to 
operate than the continuous-current system, but the three-phase 
induction motor also proves itself at least equal in every respect 
to the continuous-current series motor and superior to the 
latter on several rather important points. There remains only 
one objection to the three-phase system as such and that is 
the two overhead wires which it makes necessary. That one 
wire is simpler to install than two is undoubtedly true. But 
to judge from this that a double line is impossible, or even only 
that it will present serious difficulties, is not justified by the 
actual facts. The successful operation of a good number ‘of 


1905.| DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. . 551 


three-phase railways proves the feasibility of the two wire 
overhead line beyond doubt, and it is worthy of note that some 
of these roads have very complicated switching yards. The 
construction of the necessary aerial switches has been worked 
out with such complete success, that it is possible to stop a 
locomotive directly underneath a switch and start it in the 
same or the opposite direction without any trouble whatever.’ 
And these aerial switches are not very complicated either. 
It must of course be admitted that a double line will cost some- 
what more for repairs than a single line. Yet, it will always 
be necessary in any electric railway system to have a repair 
gang ready for emergencies, and these men will be able to look 
after two wires as well as after one. The difference in cost is 
thus limited to the difference in cost of material. And it is 
well to remember that-the cost of maintenance of contact lines 
is very small in any case, compared with the cost of motor re- 
pairs. In street railway systems the motor. répairs cost any- 
where from four to 10 times as much as the line repairs. The 
difference in cost which may be charged against the alternating 
current system on this account is therefore a small per cent. 
of an already small item and it is quite certain that this differ- 
ence will be more than counterbalanced by the greater cost 
of repairs to continuous-current motors, due to the presence of 
the commutator which has no counterpart in the three-phase 
induction motor. 

For this particular railroad the three-phase alternating-cur- 
rent system might therefore be chosen without hesitation. 


As stated at the beginning, it will be difficult to reach general, 
conclusions applicable to all possible cases. Yet by following 
the line of reasoning used above, it will be seen that the advan- 
tages of the three-phase alternating-current system may become 
somewhat less if the distances between stations are reduced and 
if trains are made lighter, while on the other hand heavier 
trains and longer runs between stations make the advantages 
of the three-phase system even more pronounced. And wherever 
there are any long grades the three-phase system presents the 
special advantage of relieving the power station by the energy 
returned from the descending trains. 

As regards traffic density, it may be said that the three- 
phase system is preferable for light traffic on account of the 
smaller first cost of installation, and for congested traffic, be- 


552 DE MURALT: HEAVY TRACTION PROBLEMS. [June 19 


cause the constant speed of the induction motor will permit 
maintenance of a high speed schedule even under abnormal 
conditions. 

The greatest advantage which can be secured in trunk line 
operation by the use of electricity in place of steam, lies in the 
practically unlimited power which can be poured into an elec- 
tric locomotive. This increased power can be used to haul 
far heavier trains than are now customary, up steeper grades 
and at higher speeds if desired. The technical characteristics 
of the three-phase alternating-current system are such as to | 
make it pre-eminently suited for taking advantage of this situa- 
tion, and its smaller cost of installation, with corresponding 
lower charges for interest, amortisation, etc., allow the railway 
company to reap the full benefit of the resulting greater economy 
of operation. 

The three-phase alternating-current motor is probably the 
most robust and thoroughly mechanical piece of electrical 
machinery extant, and it may well be hoped that it will be used 
extensively in railroad work in the future. 


1905.] DISCUSSIQN AT ASHEVILLE. 


ou 
on 
ey) 


Discussion oN ‘‘ HEAvy ELEcTRIC FREIGHT TRACTION.” 


C. O. Marttoux: Before beginning this discussion I want 
to say one word about Mr. Waterman’s comment. I did not 
think I was to be misunderstood in stating that the conditions 
of the Valtellina line favored the three-phase system. These 
conditions would possibly be considered very unfavorable in 
Europe, but in this country they would certainly be considered 
favorable, for the curves there are not nearly so severe and 
the grades are not nearly so numerous as here. This brings me 
naturally to Mr. de Muralt’s paper, and I want to state that 
it must not be forgotten that in all discussions of the substitu- 
tion of one motive power for another, it must be borne in mind 
that the existing system is not merely to be replaced by some- 
thing that does as well, but by something that does much more 
than that. Who is there that is operating electric street cars 
by electricity that is satisfied, or would be satisfied, with the 
same service from electricity that he once got from horses? 
Nobody. The advent of electric traction, bringing new 
possibilities, also increased the demands of the public. 
It increased the requirements that were prescribed for the 
electrical engineer by the railway line owners and managers. 
The difficulty is that the street railway has progressed mar- 
-vellously, and this has happened because facilities for its devel- 
opment were furnished by electric traction. The same con- 
dition prevails where electricity is substituted for steam on 


steam roads. The railroad president or manager 1s not satis- 
fied with the substitution of electricity unless the trains are 
run faster and cheaper. One of the other reasons why I men- 
tioned the Valtellina line as being a favorable case is that the 
runs are longer than would be the case in most suburban lines, 
and that the acceleration required is not so great. I need not 
dilate on that subject because if the length of the run is de- 
creased and the acceleration increased the comparison becomes 
much less favorable. 

In this country there is no case where the acceleration 
is as low as 1 mile per hr. per sec. In most cases it is between 
1 and 2 and in many cases it is above two, and even above 
3 miles per hr. per sec. But I insist that steam railroads 
will expect electrical engineers to give them something better 
than they have now, just as the street railway men looked to the 
engineer to give them more acceleration and less cost. 

On page 539 is a statement that the maximum torque 
of a single-phase motor is only one-half of what it would 
be. "Mr. de Muralt has forgotten to qualify his statement by 
the fact that this depends on the frequency. I refer to ex- 
periments made which show that while the phenomenon exists 
at very low frequency, it ceases at something like 15 periods. 
Hence, for any frequencies likely to be considered in 
actual practice, the phenomena would have very little interest. 


In reference to the fact that the energy required in starting a 


554 HEAVY ELECTRIC FREIGHT TRACTION. {June 20 


railroad is a very small portion of the whole energy, this may 
be true where the cars start slowly and make few stops, but 
it is not true where rapid transit and frequent and rapid accelera- 
tion are required. In that case the three-phase motor is 
distinctly outclassed. That motors can be designed for 
large overloads cannot be questioned, but the real point is, 
what will be the cost? In reference to the methods of obtaining 
different speeds, for instance by mounting several motors on 
the same axle, or by having a variable number of poles on the 
motors, these things are all more or less possible; but 
in introducing them it must not be forgotten that a complica- 
tion is introduced, and introducing a complication in- 
creases not only the initial cost of equipment but the cost for _ 
maintenance. Hence, while theoretically it is feasible to 
expect that.rapid acceleration can be obtained with the three- 
phase system or the induction motor, yet no one is ready to 
do it when he has counted the full cost. To my knowledge no 
acceleration has been attempted above about 1.1 miles per hr. 
per sec. with three-phase systems in practical operation. The 
other questions of input, etc., are also related to cost .and 
expediency. Several things that Mr. de Muralt says can be 
done are feasible theoretically, but have practically never been 
realized. The question of cost seems to have decided whether 
it can be done. So far as the saving of energy in acceleration 
is concerned, even the direct-current motor can still be im- 
proved if it is thought best to increase somewhat the compli- 
cation of control. One can revert to or introduce many 
features in design, windings, etc., which have, many of them, 
already been tried and abandoned for the sake of greater 
simplicity. In the case of very large motors if it is found that 
there is any advantage in doing this, it can be resorted to, 
for the sake of increasing the economy in direct-current motor 
systems. The important point is that the margin for improve- 
ment in efficiency is not by any means all exhausted, in the case 
of the direct-current motor. 

S.T. Dopp: One question,in regard to the synchronous 
characteristics of three-phase motors run in parallel: Mr. 
Waterman says that the three-phase motors he has con- 
sidered will run at full speed with a slip of 2.5 per cent. 
Take as an example, a three-phase locomotive with 4 
motors; suppose one pair of drivers were 2.5 per cent. smaller 
in diameter than the other drivers, it would follow that the 
motor mounted upon this pair would run at synchronizing 
speed and not deliver power to the locomotives. If the differ- 
ence in diameter were only one per cent. that motor would 
deliver to the locomotive approximately 50 per cent. of the 
power that any of the other three motors would deliver. I 
presume that in order to prevent such unbalancing certain 
limits in variation of driver diameters would have to be main- 
tained; that is, that no driver on a three-phase locomotive 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 555 


could be allowed to vary more than, say, 0.5 per cent. in diam- 
eter from any other driver. Such an arrangement would be 
perfectly feasible on any single locomotive, but it would be 
impossible to maintain such limits of variation on all the loco- 
motives upon a road; in other words, it would be impossible 
to operate indiscriminately any locomotive on the same train 
with any other locomotive without first checking up their 
driver diameters. As a consequence, by the use of three- 
phase locomotives there would be lost the advantage of mul- 
tiple-unit operation which has always been considered one 
of the great advantages of electric locomotive operation. 

F. N. Waterman: Mr. Dodd has raised a very important 
question, although experience has shown that it is not a prac- 
tical difficulty so far as concerns single-motor cars or loco- 
motives. 

The use of side-bar connected locomotives of course elimt- 
nates it entirely by keeping the driving-wheels the same size. 
The discrepancy that might occur in the size of driving-wheels 
on different cars would be important in ‘the use of multiple- 
unit control. This discrepancy is taken care of by providing 
as a part of the equipment a control-box by which’ the re- 
sistance of the secondaries is adjusted to bring them to a 
slip corresponding to the standard equipment. In this way 
trains can be made up without regard to the size of the wheels. 
The question is properly raised, although no attempt was 
made in the paper to mention all of the matters which would 
naturally be touched upon in a full discussion of the system. 
It was the intention to select only two or three important points, 
out of many, and treat them fully. 

I want to make one comment on Mr. Mailloux’s statement, 
that so far as he knew 1.1 miles per hr. per sec. is the 
highest acceleration ever proposed with three-phase motors. 
It is a fact that the system proposed for the London Metro- 
politan was based on 2.25 miles per hr. per sec. for the three- 
phase system and was condemned by the authorities because 
the acceleration was greater th people would tolerate. 

C. O. Maittoux: What are watt-hours per ton-mile? 

F. N. Waterman: The watt-hours per ton-mile for a three- 
phase system properly handled may easily be 15 per cent. less 
than for direct current. 

C. O. Maittoux: With an acceleration of 2.5 miles per hr. 
per sec.? 

F. N. Waterman: Yes; higher acceleration can be had 
with greater advantage, provided the maximum speeds are 
not too high. ; 

C. O. Marttoux: Referring to Mr. Waterman’s statement in 
regard to the speeds appreciated by the English people, I 
had an interview with Mr. Cottrell of the Liverpool elevated 
system last year, in which he informed me that not only was 
high acceleration appreciated by the public, but that it was 


556 HEAVY ELECTRIC FREIGHT TRACTION. [June 20 


also found to be economical, as it had greatly increased the 
traffic on his line. He informed me that the acceleration was. 
3.5 miles per hr. per sec. on the Liverpool elevated system. 

C. P. Steinmetz: The conclusions that Mr. de Muralt has 
drawn from his premises are correct. There may, however, 
be expressed some doubt regarding the correctness of the 
premises. From an engineering point of view I question 
whether all the things promised can be realized. Mr. de Muralt 
states that induction motors can be built and designed to 
have a maximum overload capacity 10 times the rated load, 
which is true. But what are the power-factor and the effi- 
ciency at the rated load, and below it? There is the difficulty. 
Design an induction motor of a maximum capacity equal to 
twice the rated load only, then there results reasonable power- 
factor and efficiency at the rated load, and below it. Increase 
the overload capacity, that means that the rated load is one- 
tenth of the maximum output and the power-factor corre- 
sponds with that underload, that is, practically vanishes. 

Furthermore, transformers can undoubtedly be built to 
carry 3.5 times the average load with 6 or 7 per cent. regula- 
tion, but what is the efficiency of such transformers? and 
incidentally what is the cost of them? I do not know whether 
Mr. de Muralt took into consideration, when he figured on the 
average efficiency and average power-factor of the system, that 
he had not to deal with the average induction motor, which 
has a maximum power-factor of 90 per cent. somewhere near 
the rated load, but with an induction motor that is rated at 
one-tenth of the maximum load. Furthermore it is true, if 
a very small air-gap is used, it is also necessary to use 
‘very much larger bearings. Unfortunately, anybody who has 
tried to design a railway motor has found that after the arma- 
ture is large enough to do the work without heating too rapidly 
and the collectors large enough to carry the current, there is 
no room left for the bearings. Railway bearings are designed: 
as they are now not because the designers are not liberal enough 
but because there is no more room. The question of room is 
the important feature in railfvay motor design and there is 
the stumbling block regarding increased liberality. 

In regard to speed, it is true that any machine-shop runs 
the machines at a constant speed and runs the transmission 
at a constant speed. In a railroad train, however, it is not so 
necessary to run at a constant speed up hill and down; 
retarding on up-grades and accelerating on down-grades is 
permissible, and it must be done for the sake of economical 
operation because there it is not the question of a few horse 
power but of thousands of kilowatts that must be taken into 
consideration. : 

As regards the return of power by the motor: this does not 
smooth out the load-factor: the return of power from the 
motor means that the total variation of power is increased; 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 557 


that is, the load-factor of the station still further impaired. 
To depend on the time-table, arranging trains so as to give an 
even load, would require that the trains always follow the time- 
table, which unfortunately, here in America, they do not always 
do. Now, as to the return.of power, if power is to be returned 
to the line there is no reason why it could not be done with 
a direct-current motor just as well. It has been proposed 
and it has been done. Where there is a four motor equipment, 
which is almost always the case, it has been proposed to use 
one motor as an exciter and the other three motors as gen- 
erators putting power back into the line. Experience shows 
that the complication incident to the controlling devices to 
return power into the line are such that the power saved does 
not warrant it. That is why the direct-current motor is not 
built to return power into the line. It may be that the three- 
phase motor is better in this respect. It must, however, be 
considered’ that the return of power is available only in con- 
catenation, because appreciable power is returned only on a 
fairly steep down-grade and there is no desire to run then 
beyond maximum or synchronous speed. The return of power 
in concatenation takes place with a low efficiency and there- 
fore is objectionable because of the heat. If a motor is allowed 
to run in concatenation, the heat dissipation must be considered 
in the induction motor and that, too, under conditions where the 
second motor is operated with an inductive secondary circuit, 
the first motor. Therefore the conditions are rather unfavor- 
able for efficient production of current, and that has been the 
stumbling block in the application of concatenation. This 
matter becomes very much simpler when one follows Mr. 
Waterman’s proposition in regard to low frequency. However, 
it is usually difficult to build a railway motor, in the limited 
space, large enough to do its legitimate work of pushing the 
car without excessive heating—without imposing still “tur- 
ther duties on the motor, by using it as generator, and so 
still further increase its heating. 

C. L. pe Muratt: I heartily support the statement made 
by Mr. Mailloux, who said that it is necessary not only 
to equal what the steam railroads are doing now, but to do 
better. This is very true indeed, but it seems to me to be 
an argument in favor of three-phase traction. In coming 
down to Asheville in the train, I read some statistics gathered 
Dy LB Manufacturer’s Record.” The article showed a 
very interesting increase in the number of tons moved per 
mile of railroad since 1890, the figures given being 65 billions 
in 1890, 93 billions in 1897, and 170 billions in 1904. At this 
rate 1911 will have 300 billions of tons, which shows that the 
railroads of our country are nearing the limit of their capacity 
and that they will have to do something to increase their carry- 
ing facilities in order to meet the growth of traffic. Electricity 
will enable them to increase the power of the locomotive, so 


558 HEAVY ELECTRIC FREIGHT TRACTION. [June 20 


that heavier trains may be used, or speeds increased, or both. 
In either case I believe that the three-phase system is best 
suited to solve the problem. 

The question of maximum acceleration possible with the three- 
phase motor is not new. During the discussion of my paper 
in May 1902, Mr. Mailloux raised: the same point and I then 
expressed my doubts as to his being the correct way 
of looking at it. To me it appears as follows: if a certain 
acceleration is wanted it is necessary to provide enough power 
in the motor to give a certain something in excess of what is 
required to overcome the train resistance. The amount of 
that power is the same whether the motor is a continuous 
current or a three-phase motor. It is therefore the maximum 
power or the maximum torque that a motor can develop 
which determines the acceleration that can be obtained 
from it. But, the three-phase motor can exert the same or 
even greater torque than the continuous-current motor of 
equal size. There isno doubt about that. Why then should 
the three-phase motor not be able to give the same or even 
greater acceleration? Mr. Mailloux at that meeting stated 
that the customary acceleration in American practice was 2.5 
miles per hr. per sec. I was then not able to say that 
such accelerations had been reached on any _ three-phase 
railroad in Europe, but I mentioned that to my knowl- 
edge rates of 1.5 miles per hr. per sec. had been obtained, and 
I thought that 2 miles could easily be reached. Since then 
I have without difficulty obtained 2.5 miles per hr. per sec., 
so that I am now prepared to say that this can be done, and 
I may add that I do not see any difficulties in getting higher 
rates of acceleration if they should be desired. 

This brings me to Mr. Steinmetz’ remark as to the desira- 
bility of choosing such high overloads for the motors. I 
agree with him, that, if a motor is designed with a maxi- 
mum capacity equal to 10 times normal load, the power-factor 
at normal load will be comparatively poor. But such ex- 
treme overloads are probably never required. What I pointed 
out in my paper was, that higher overloads may be had from ” 
the three-phase motor just as well as from the continuous- 
current motor. Whether it is desirable to use them is another 
question, and I put the word “ desirable’? in my paper with 
the idea of saying that these overloads can be had if found 
necessary. I have curves in my pocket, and more at home, 
to show that if the motor is given an overload capacity three 
times the normal full load, the power-factor at all loads is. 
very good indeed. It goes a little above 90 and stays there 
for some time, and at half load it is in the neighborhood of 85, 
which I do not think is poor. 

With reference to efficiency of transformers, it is true 
that transformers will have a better efficiency at full or 
overload than at half load. But transformers have such high. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 559 


efficiencies anyway, that, even under one-third load for instance, 
the efficiency will be very good, at any rate higher than 
the combined efficiency of the transformer and synchronous 
converter in the continuous current system. 

In regard to bearings, it is difficult to assert that sufficiently 
large bearings can always be placed in three-phase motors, 
especially if Mr. Steinmetz thinks that in some cases this may 
be impossible. I am not an expert designer of machinery 
myself, and I therefore do not wish to doubt that there may 
be cases where it is difficult to place large bearings. Yet. 
may mention that a German company has built some three- 
phase motors for direct use on a 10 000-volt circuit, which 
from the designer’s standpoint is a particularly unfavorable 
condition. The bearings could easily be placed, although 
I believe the motor was of 450 h.p., or rather larger than 
the average traction motor. It is interesting to note, that 
the bearings in these motors are brought way underneath 
the rotor, which can readily be done in an induction motor, 
whereas the commutator prevents similar construction in the 
‘continuous-current motor. Where the width is very limited, 
the collector rings of the three-phase motor may even be placed 
outside the locomotive frame, as has been done in some of 
the latest motors of another company. 

It is hardly worth while to say much on the subject of change 
of speed, because the induction motor can be made to run at 
different speeds just as well as the continuous-current motor. 

In my opinion the great advantage of the three-phase motor 
lies in the fact that it can and will maintain constant speed 
when this is desired, whereas the speed of the continuous- 
current motor is dependent on the profile of the road and 
other circumstances. From the railroad man’s standpoint con- 
stant speed is desirable. Whether it is necessary is another 
question. But some people say that if continuous-current 
motor and three-phase motor run up grades at the same speed, 
then the continuous-current motor will run at higher speed on 
the level and thus make faster time. If that: higher speed is 
permissible, however, then there is nothing to prevent the 
three-phase motor being designed for that higher speed on 
level and up the grade, and it will thus be able to make the 
schedule still faster. In a general way it is largely a question 
of taking the operating engineer’s viewpoint. If you want to 
run a railway the way he is accustomed to run it, or the way 
he will think it should be run under the changed conditions 
of electric operation, you will find that the three-phase motor 
with its maintenance of speed presents a number of advantages. 

In conclusion: if leaving out all other questions on which 
the two systems are more oT less equal, there remain two 
things; the commutator of the continuous current system, 
and the second overhead wire of the three-phase system, 
which may fairly be compared with each other as disadvant- 


560 HEAVY ELECTRIC FREIGHT TRACTION. [June 20 


ages strictly inherent to one of the two systems. To settle 
the question which of the two is worse, permit me to make 
the following suggestion: suppose the continuous-current 
motor had not yet been invented and thus far all railways 
were operating with three-phase current and had two over- 
head lines everywhere. Now, somebody comes and tells us 
that one of the two lines can be eliminated by using a contin- 
uous-current motor, but to do this it would be necessary to put 
a commutator on the motor. It will hardly be doubted that 
those that realize the enormous difference between cost of repairs 
to commutator and cost of repairs to second contact line, 
would surely cast their votes in favor of the three-phase system. 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A.1.E. E. 


CHOICE OF MOTORS IN STEAM AND ELECTRIC 
PRACTICE. 


BY WILLIAM MCCLELLAN. 


The rise of the new electric-traction engineer has been very 
rapid. Within not more than a decade men untrained in the 
old railroad systems have been called on to solve some very 
great problems in what has been called heavy traction work. 
With the new engineer has come new methods, which are due 
to the fundamental difference in the nature of the power sys- 
tems. Predetermination of power conditions is necessary in any 
railroad system, but it is especially so in an electric system. 

The steam locomotive is self-contained. In one unit is found 
the power-house, transmission system, and motor, usually for 
a very small part of the total load upon the whole system. 
If a mistake is made in estimating the amount of power re- 
quired, it is not a serious matter to correct the error. Cer- 
tainly it is in no way comparable with what would be necessary 
if a similar mistake were made in connection with an electric 
system, where the whole load is to be carried by one or two 
large power-houses, the energy from which must be properly 
distributed to the various portions of a widely-expanded area, 
and conveyed to the motors on a car moving at, say, from 20 
to 60 miles an hour. 

No engineer in the latter line of work has hesitated to adopt 
and use the valuable results of the many years of labor and 
experience on the part of the motive-power superintendents of 
the steam systems. But special attention has been necessarily 
paid to operating features that were not prominent in the older 
methods. New plans of attack have been invented: these are 


564 


562 McCLELLAN: CHOICE OF MOTORS. [June 19 


now in the trying-out process, and time alone will tell what is 
of value. 

It is hardly more than three years, however, since the steam 
and electrical engineers met on common ground. Up to that time 
there had been little real competition, so far as motive power 
was concerned, in heavy traction work. As a result, the devel- 
opment of the electric locomotive, like that of the steam-engine, 
has been a slow process. We are not ignoring what has taken 
place in the last 80 years, but are reasoning from what is going 
on just now. 

No electrical engineer, anxious as he may be to see a rapid 
substitution of electricity for steam, should fail to bear in mind 
the possibility that substantial improvement in steam locomo- 
tives is not at an end. Competition has served to awaken 
considerable dormant energy, the result of which can not be 
easily estimated. Probably more money is being spent this 
year by far-seeing men on the development of the steam loco-_ 
motive than has been spent in any other year since it was 
invented. 

In either system, the choice of a motor for a particular ser- 
vice is a very important matter. It is well known that the 
cost of power is a comparatively small part of the total ex- 
pense, but there are other reasons why the choice of a motor 
is important, and good engineering requires in any case that the 
cost of power shall be as low as possible. It must be acknowl- 
edged that neither in the steam nor in the electric system is 
the choice of a motor determined on the basis on which we 
eventually hope it will be decided. Moreover, in the electric 
system at least, we shall not see much improvement imme- 
diately, for experimental data are the necessary foundation 
therefor, and such data are lacking. 

A comparison between the old and the new is always worth 
while, and particularly so in this case. The writer purposes, 
therefore, to survey certain characteristic features of the motive 
power in the two systems, and call attention to some points 
that. seem important. : 

In Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4, will be found a collection of data 
relating to steam locomotives. The numbers in the first column 
refer to different roads, the same number standing for the same 
road inall the tables. All the important roads of the United 
States and Mexico are represented. The information was fur- 
nished the writer by officials of the roads. The meaning of 


1905.] McCLELLAN: CHOICE OF MOTORS. 563 


the ‘type’ names used in column 2 will be found in Fig. 1. 
The ‘‘ total weight ” includes the tender and engine, ready for 
the train. For purposes of comparison “ gross tractive effort ”’ 
was calculated by assigning an adhesion of }; the value as- 
sumed was not checked from the cylinder dimensions and 
steam pressure, the proper design of these parts being assumed. 
The ‘‘ net tractive effort,’ being for comparison only, was cal- 
culated on the basis of a friction loss of eight pounds per ton. 
In the 11th column is given the ‘‘ pounds of (total) engine 
(weight) per pound of (net tractive) effort.” - The writer re- 


ATLANTIC 


CONSOLIDATION 


PACIFIC 
0 OOO oa 


PRARIE 


SANTE FE MIKADO DECAPOD 
2 OQ0Q00O «| 2 GQ0O a | QQOOO os 


CO oa Q OXSKEXS) O 


MALLET 


Cla e9) 


ROCS or 


10 WHEELER 


8 WHEEL 


LOCOMOTIVE Tay Pe 


Fic. 1. 
grets that the information relative to ‘‘ maximum run ”’ is not 
more definite and complete. It will be obvious, however, 
that an enormous mass of detail would. have to be given to 
make such information of real value. 

The engines referred to in the tables do not represent all 
the types used on the respective roads. They were selected as 
modern types in each of the four classes. Apparent incon- 
sistencies are due to the different ideas the managers of the 
several roads have as to classification of trains. 

It is evident that no complete discussion of the data given 

could be made unless much more were added... The train 
ees alignment, grades, character of road-bed, etc., must 


564 McCLELLAN: CHOICE OF MOTORS. [June 19 


also be known. But sufficient information is presented to 
justify several conclusions. A glance at any column will show 
that there is little or no tendency towards uniformity. To 
appreciate the very wide variations from any common stan- 


dard, we may take the columns of “Cylinders,” © Drivers,” 
‘Per cent. on Drivers,” and “ Pounds of Engine per Pound 
of Effort.’ The figures for the two electric locomotives 


cited accord quite closely, but no general conclusions can be 
deduced from such limited data. 

The tables show, as is frankly acknowledged by motive- 
power superintendents, that there is no standard, nor demand 
for standards in locomotive practice. Some of the great rail- 
road systems of the country have attempted in a rather desultory 
fashion to arrive at a standard, but have failed. Undoubtedly 
the difficulties in the way are great, but there should be possi- 
bility for advance in this direction. It would seem as if some 
of the many types still in use must be intrinsically poorer than 
others, and might be done away with. 

The reasons why a locomotive should have a load on the 
drivers varying all the way from 30 to 90 per cent. of the total 
weight is not apparent at first sight. Every lot of locomotives 
ordered, whether built in the road-shops or by contract, has its 
designs modified to suit the ideas prevalent at the time. The 
new engines may be of the same class, general weight, etc., as 
previous ones, but numerous differences in details are sure to be 
introduced by the particular motive-power superintendent who 
is in control at the time. The only tendency towards standardi- 
zation at the present time comes from the formation of great 
systems, whereby one superintendent has a chance to put his 
ideas into practice in a large number of locomotive. This 
problem of standardizing steam locomotives is not for the elec- 
trical engineer to solve, but he has one coming that is very simi- 
lar. Much is to be learned from a study of the older field, 
where so much energy has been spent by some of the best engi- 
neers in the profession. 

It is not necessary to give here a similar list of car-motors. 
There are two companies in the field, and their types are not 
widely different, even in details of design. Not counting 
alternating-current types, each company has made about 20 
fundamental types of motor. Of these about 15 are modern. 
By fundamental types is meant, practically, types that have 
different frames and armature cores, shafts, bearings, and com- 


565 


CHOICE OF MOTORS. 


McCLELLAN 


Saree aS ee ee 


GE 


8& 
9€ 


FE 
GG 
og 


OF 


*Inoy 
aod 


sot 


quatino-7oot | g 002 29 | 000 79 Oot 000 0zg | 000 0ZE | ZF-8 
quasrimo-JooIt L 002 94 | 000 44 GL 00S E81 | 000 981 | FF-8 : 
09 [209 330S €I O00 ZZ | OOF &% (G7 000 LTT | 000 18z | Z9-9 96*0Z 
¥G [KX [SESE ta! OOF 6T | OOF 06 Iv 000 ZOT | 000 Tgz | c9-F 96X06 
¥9 yeoo 49S IL 00¢ GT | 002 9 SF 000 18 | 000 691 | c2-F 8oX6T 
os . yeoo 30S} ¢°9 00E EZ | 000 92 8Z 000 O&T | 000 491 | c9-9 86X06 
99 yeoo JOS) G8 00Z ZZ | 000 &@ &S 00 ¢T1 | 000 T6T | c9-9 9ZX0G 
19 JeO9 4905 8 00E ZZ | 006 8z £9 000 Tvt-| 00 Gas | OL-F 8E*GSG 
+S Te09 9430S 6 006 61 | 0024 0 9S 009 £01 | 000 F8I | FL°F 8X06 
g9 Teo) Or 00¢ 61 | 00E 0G GS 00¢ TOT | 000 F6T | G2-9 9ZXEZ/ST 
OSS FL 110) LI 00LZ 61 | 000 1é GE 000 GOT | 000 6E | 18-9 8Z*0G 
Ost 6 P8 ye09 4539S It 00Z LZ | OOF 8 6P 000 GFT | 000 c6z | €2-9 9G*TS 
88— 6 TZ Teod 4J0S &T 00€ SZ, | 009 9% OF 000 €E1 | 00S FEE | 69-9 9S*1S 
0246 6 €L [209 4390S §1 OOT SS | OOF 96 GP 000 ZEt | 000 8TE | 69-9 9GXGG 
9ST ra! Te09 940S 8 00€ ZG | 006 8z £9 000 TFT | 00S zz | 22-F 8ZXZZ 
LEG ys €L ye09 499S It OOF ZZ | OOF £3 OF 000 LIT | 000 28% | 69-9 9cXt6T 
68 Te0d 3370S 8T 00¢ ET. | 009 9T 0& 000 €8 | 000 622 | €2-7 92X61 
orl 8 PA T@09 4330S lal 000 %T | 008 FI 66 000 FL | 000 Z6T | 69-F PCX6T 
FST ST 08 Te09 4470S ST OOT ZI | 008 Gt 9€ 00079 | 000 SLT. | 04-F FSXST 
Ost OL G°8L Te09 9709S II 004% | 008 92 LY 000 FET | 000 €8z | 89-9 86X06 
Te09 3305 as 008 2T | 004 8T SP 00S €6 | 000 8Tz | 08-4 96X¥8T 
606 8 LiL #09 40S} 3° SZ 00E FL | 009 ST &@ 00084 | 000 9&6 GL-¥ FCX61 
96 yeoo Pree FI 008 9T | 008 ZT LE 000 68 | 000 8&2 \#89-F GEXTG 
g* Lt yeoo prey €1 006 ST | 009 FT OF 000 $Z | 000 F8T \#89-F GEXTG 
0G yeoo prey ia OOT €T | 008 €1 88 000 69 | 000 O8T |#89-F GOXFBT 
906 or 89 Te09 4370S Or 000 €@ | 000 72 0g 00¢ TZI | 000 8k | 62-9 9GX61 
“20u}INg eee | ; : 
SOT] SUOL |SIBO) ageing ' punod | “q10yq | “Wound sIOATiq | ‘SteATIg | “FYStOM 
feng Jad aura} aatpoRIy,| aAtpoesy uo uo yewoyL |sieatiq} ‘sepurfAo, 
PRT ui eee ipauyinee | eee a 4a NS sso1n) |yuao Jog| ISIOM 
NOW WAWIXVW | suryeoqy punog] ‘xorddy 


EEE 


‘MAONASSVd—T ATAVI 


‘OR'd 
‘O-A'N 
Buryjoy 
Bulow 
sulyjoy 
SurTjoy 
ure JUNO W 
utreyuno W 
ye 

ute JUNO 
ule UNO FAY 
31d 

eT 
ureyuno TW 
ureyuno WH 


vel 


ve 

apeis MOT 
veld 
Burlou 
surod 
ld 
Burou 
Buryoy 
BuTOd 
vel 


“peoy 
jo 
aqyorg 


224A 8 
a1s0g 
oye 12 
es -70) 25) 508g a: 
ouepyy ¢ 
}294M OT ¢ 
syed 9T 
Ogle d 
oUelTy ST 
orUuelTy FI 
oUeTTY ST 
yoy. OF ZT 
oye ZI - 
oye IT 
oyroeg OT 
2244. O1-6 
TVURIY 8 
UBOLIOULY L 
ueoLISWULYy 9 
12244 OL G 
uUvOLIOUYy P 
ues € 
uUeoOTIOWLYy “6 
ueoTLIOULYy vA 
ueoLlswy 6 
nso, T 


‘edAy, “ON 


—————————<$<$ = 


McCLELLAN: CHOICE OF MOTORS. (June 19 


566 


i 


29 1209 3J0S] ¢'L | OFZ 8% | 0096c | 89 00r Ze | 000 91% | 62-9 | Sex¥cz_| UFEJUNOW| | oyLoe FI 
8 98 | sz 2 | sy goog TO] 9°91 |.00L61 | 000T% | ze 000 SOI | 000 6zE | 18-4 *| 8zx0z urequnow | oNuEpY EL 
881 ia zo 9°91 | 00€9T | OOF LI | Ze 000 28 | 00022] 62-4 | 92x40 wa | HULA ZI 
eg | 091 ¢ 82 yeoo #0S}, 8°91 | OS8eT | OOSFI | ze 000% | 006 cE] 8L-4 | 9ZX6I urequnow | onuepy TT 
sb | 00% ol OL yeoo yos} «= OTs«| «OSF BI | 0OZ6I | zg 006 ¢6 | OOO E81 | 82Z-F | 9zxGz/Er | UreJUNOW | oNUeTY TI 
T'9F | 9¢I 8 qeoo yos] 6°8 =| OO 22 | 00E8z | 8g 008 IFT | 00S ZFS] 22-9 | 8zxz~ urequnow | oye OF 
681 ol Lg qeoo yos] 9'ZT | OS6 8 | 0OGOs | Ie 00¢ LOL | 009 FEE | 6Z-F | 8zx0z WI | ouEpy 6 
¢9 feo 30S] BST | 0080Z “| DOT zs | ve 004 OTT |,000 828 | 6L-F | 8zxIz wa | ouepy 8 
Le | 991 Lee | oo 1S jeoo yos] 9 OL | OS GZ | ODS 9S | 6F 009 Z&I | 000 69z | 49-9 | 8zx0z »peid MOT | [PaqM OT L 
1°63 | 092 69 yeoo yos] G'zt | OOS ZT | DOSS | 08 OS Z6 | 000 £08 |FF8-F | 8ZxEZ/EI Iq | onuepy 9 
81g | 961 cI +6 109 JS] 8ST | 000 2z | OOF 82 | IF 000 crt | oo9 ere | 2-9 | oexez Wd | oped 9 
og | OST 8 +9 1209 3J0S} 9'ZT | OS6GI | OOL ZT | OF 008 G8 | 00E 8% | 6L-F |} 8zX6I Buyjoy | wuepy ¢ 
weoo] z'FI | ose ss | O09es | BE 000 SII | 009 STé | O8-F | 9zxzz Buoy | suey F 
0S | 202 ¢ 2799 yeoo Yos] ¢°2T° | 000 ZT | OOTST | O08 000 16 | 000 86z| 82-F | 92x02 ld | onUeTY € 
1g qeoo prep] «= At s| OSS6T | OOZIs | Ie 000 901 | 000 see | 98-F | 9ZxIZ suypoy | omuepy % 
68 yeoo prey]. 91 | 0OZ6T | OOF OS | FE 000 ZOL | 000 Gog |kF8-—F | FSxXTZ Burjoy | onuepy zZ 
OL "  yeoo os} «OL =| «OS ST | OOTEI | zg 006 6 | 000€8I | 8L-F | 9Gxgz/EI WI | oUeY T 
¥'0S | 902 9 89 yeoo yos| st | OSOLZT | Oszst | oF 00z 16 | OOF 208 |FF8-F | 9zx0z Wd) $V 1 
“yee softy] suoy]sreg gee Rat ‘yIoyA | “Woy” | ‘sieauq | ‘steauq | “Wyse MW 2 “peory 
STW "png Srna: em i sats 18 peieg fae = het TOL |'sieAuq] ‘seputjAg . bear ‘ad “ON 
‘NOY WAWIXVN iit spunog| “xoiddy 


ee 
“AHONASSVd LSVA—s ATIAVL 


367 


McCLELLAN: CHOICE OF MOTORS. 


1905.] 


SI | 8zt 8é 


991 08 
og | ZIT | O0cT 
eI OST 

Z9OT | OSTT 


“rnoy 
rod | sett] SUOL] step 
SOTTTAT 


—— ll 


‘NOU WOWIXVIN 


68 yeoo yYos] 8°sr | OOF €S | 009 Fa IF 00¢ ZI 
09 yeoo yYos}] 9°OL | OSF TE | 008 CE 6F 000. #91 
ia yvoo prey] Z'OT | 002 2G | 008 8% 1¢ 000 FT 
16 yeoo 10 TO} L'9 066 8§ | 000 OF LL 000 002 
69 yeoo Wos] 1°¢ ost 9g | 000 2 06 00¢ #81 
SF yeoo OS} 9 0&6 SZ | 009 9 98 OOT S81 
63 yeoo prey] Ss 09 ZZ | 00F €z% 06 002 TLT 
HIS Tol] zor | 00c%% | 002 Sz 0g 000 92T 
+8 yeoo OS] GIL | 0Ga¢s |} O00F 9G Lb 000 ZgT 
€1°98 yeoo OS] 9°OL | OFT GS | 006 9Z o¢ 008 T&T 
yeoo OS] 9°9 OSL LZ | 00¢ 8% LL OOF GFT 
68 yeooxos}| TL | OSF Es | 00S FZ Lt 00 ZZ 
06 yeoo 4JoS}] ZIT | OS99T | OOF ZT oF 000 48 
ere yeooajos} TT | 0S6¢% | 000 gz L¥ 000 G21 
18 yeoo ¥JoS] 9°TT | 0009% | 00% 2z oF 000 98T 
1¢ yeoo WOS] 8°¢ 006 62 | 009 0 88 00¢ IST 
08 yeoo 30S} 1°¢ OSh ze | 002 € 06 000 99T 
19 e209 4J0S] ¢°6 OST ZZ | 000 i4] 00L FIT 
yeoo Hos} or | OSZ@EE | 009 FE 1¢ 000 €21 
€8 ye09 ¥JOS] ZS oss ze | 009 cr 008 SIT 
98 yeoo prepl FOL | OSSFHE | 000 9E 0¢ 000 O8T 
19 jwoo WYos| 9°zE | OSL 8s | 002 08 ar 000 TST 
*208JINS “WOH 
ayein ; punod “qJoyg | “Hoy” | ‘stat | ‘steand 
pony jad autc| aATpoery | VATJOVIT uo uo 
= = fe) ¥. S 
“28S ee a See easy Mea | aS 
DUTzeITI] 


‘THOIGMA—'S ATAVL 


000 008 
000 F&& 
000 18% 
000 296 
00 L0G 
000 SST 
00g T6T 
OO€ 8FG 
000 #82 
008 ¢9z 
002 FST 
00Z 6&¢ 
00¢ 881 
OOT ¢9z 
009 G0E 
008 ELT 
000 98T 
O0OL GIZ 
000 9€& 
008 £96 
000 6¢€ 


00G €9& 


"y819 
edOL 


“‘sr2AUq 


9ZX1G ve 
‘OS*1zZ 

9zX$0G suylod 
ZEXOE/ST | ureyunoy 
OS*Gs uleJUNO[ 
83X06 ye 
9SX1Z Bury[ow 
8ZX0G ureyunoy, 
83X0G ye] 
SSXPFE/ZS | UTeWUNOW 
8ZX9S/FEST| UrequnoW 
8ZX0Z sel 
FGX6L FEL 
82X61 apeis MO’) 
OEX1S eld 
OS*1Z Suto 
GEXSE/ ES Buryow. 
FEXIS suryjod 
8ZXCG Suro 
9ZX0Z yA 
O€XZs Buoy 
8SXZS eA 

“peory 
“repulfAg jo 
sTgoid 


]224A OT 0%. 
‘josuog 61 
insoyw LT 
OpexiN FT 
*JosuoD ST 
RSOW 8 
*‘josuog LT 
msow et 
224M OT ST 
yous OT IT 
1294 OT 
1994 OT 
y22uM OT 
y22u44 OT 
19944 OT 
*josuog 
*josuog 
*josuod 
*josuo0d 
12944 OT 
*Josuo0g 
ote dg 


aaa dt ini9inOM DAO 


‘adAT, “ON 


McCLELLAN ; CHOICE OF MOTORS. [June 19 


568 


ai 


02 
GZ 


1Z 


ST 


or 


ee | ——— |] —— 


‘Inoy 
tod 


SOIT 


611 
e81 
90T 


FOL 
L¥T 


G0z 
SET 


ost 


606 


say] Suoy] sreg 


1€ 
08 
00€T 
OOFT 
0082 
00S2 
GES | 9G 
996 
0008 
0006 


‘NOU WOWIXVN 


a IE LE Lee SSN er ee ee eee 


GL eos 40S} 9° 2 006 #9 | 006 99 OL 00¢ FEE | OOS LLF 
TO} 9°6 os ce | 008 9€ La] 000 #81 | 008 6&8 
99 Teoo 4350S) 24°8 008 FE | 000 9& 6¢ 000 O8T | 009 #0E 
£6 TSO9 9390S} FOF 000 6€ | 009 OF o¢ 000 £02 | 00¢ 2OF 
TeO9 70S) 29 OGL 42 | 009 84 LL OOF ZFI | 00Z F8I 
£6 T#O9 9430S} 9° OT 008 FE | 00 9E 6F OOF T8I | 000 698 
6S TEOD GOS TPL 008 FG | 002 9E 6g 000 I8T | 009 8FE 
Lg #09 3430S) 8° OL 00L 4% | 008 $3 8P 009 8ZI | 006 694 
oF TeO9 3530S] +'6 0g 0& | 006 TE 95 00€ 6ST | 006 88z 
18 [209 3J0S} ZIT 000 9% | 004 2z SP 000 9ET | 009 ZOE 
9¢ TEC IOS ie OF OOT Of | 00E TE 6s OOF 9ST | 009 ZOE 
FL Te0d 970S| 6°6 0¢L 86 | 006 64 &¢ 00S 61 | OOF F8z 
Pees eS er ose 4G | 009 86 OF 006 ZFI | 006 80& 
99 [309 VCS OST 000 FZ | 00% $a GP 000 91 | 00¢ ZOE 
£& Teoo preH] | ST 002 6@ | 009 0& $Y 000 &ST | 000 cgé 
os 202 3595) FL 0S0 SZ | 006 94 9F 000 TET | 000 28z 
19 TEQ9 3308] 9° ST OSL 8% | 006 0& GP 000 IST | 006 £9€ 
TZ TECOAIOS | FAOL OOF FE | 008 SE og 002 6LZT | 008 9SE 
68 TeoD) €°9 OSL SF | 006 9F G8 009 FES | 00G 28z 
*29eJING nd Broce 
mee Peet dnd gen er cp reek bag ied bles ha 
-g0e}g peal ie ae Mey ssorg) |"yUa0 Jag] IYSIOM 


Buryeoyy 


“LHOIGaAd AAVAH ANV LSVA—? ATAVL 


9S-6T 
LS-8 
£9-8 
£9-8 
69-9 
L1S-8 
£9-8 
€9-9 
96-8 
69-9 
9¢-8 
9¢-8 
69-9 
€9-9 
#89-9 
#89-9 
69-9 
Lo-8 
og-OT 


*SIDATIG 


ZEXTE/0G Buryjowd 
O&XZS ureyUnoW 
O€XZs Feld 
O&XFZ urezuno yy 
8ZX9Z/FSI| UFeJUNOW 


O&XEs 71d 
0&%ZzZ ye 
8o*61 +1 
O&XIZ apeis MO’T 
O&X1Z 31d 
8ZXZS bce 
O&X1Z Burylowy 
8ZX0Z Buryjoud 
9ZX1Z +I 
8ZXZS Bulow 
82*ZZ Burjou 
8ZXZZ ved 
8EXZS ved 


ZEXSE/6T | UreyUnOW 


PeOw 
*‘IaepuryAg a Le 


ee a ee ce ot Pe 


WIEN 2 
‘josuoD SL 
‘Josuog ZI 
OpexIW IL 

19944 OT OT 
1224 ZI 6 
*josuod 6 

MZoy 8 

*josuod) Z 
[2244 OT 9 
“JosuoD 9 
*josuog ¢ 
mnZoW F 
eye OT & 
[24M OL Z 
[2244 OT Z 
oureig T 
‘Josuog T 
ag ees FT 


‘adAT “ON 


1905.] - McCLELLAN: CHOICE OF MOTORS. 569 


mutators. Each of these types has various combinations of 
number turns of wire per slot, field-turns, gear-ratio, current, 
electromotive force, etc.. In consequence, about 100 different 
motors are proffered to the consulting engineer for his selection. 
In fact he can have almost any combination that he wants 
without the particular type selected being considered new. 
One type of motor may be made with as many as five or more 
gear-ratios, two or three numbers of turns of wire per slot, 
and several sets of field-turns. As a result, one particular 
type of motor has no less than 20 variations. The average 
number of combinations for any type is probably five. 

It may be well to state here a reason for some of these vari- 
eties of design of electric motors, varieties that have no counter- 
part in locomotive design. Comparing the motor with the 
locomotive, we have the armature corresponding to the cylin- 
ders; the combination of gears and wheels corresponding to 
the driving-wheels. The locomotive designer calculates the 
driving-wheels on the basis of tractive effort and acceleration 
only; in addition to these, the electrical designer must consider 
heating effects, a phase of the traction problem not known to 
the steam locomotive designer. The locomotive can be loaded 
until it is stalled without being materially injured; the car 
motor, however, while it can be excessively overloaded, is dete- 
riorating all the time. In a large part of car design the wheel- 
diameter is fixed; this item must be cared for in the choice of 
a gear-ratio. Some of the nicest. work in connection with the 
choice of motors is demanded by these conditions. 

‘Looking for standards in electric car motor design meets 
with little more success than with the design of steam loco- 
motives. The motor, gears, and wheels may be considered as 
equivalent to the locomotive, since the electrical engineer is 
concerned only with weight above the trucks. As shown above, 
there are many variations in the motor itself for any given 
type; that is, variations in the armature and field-turns. This 
will always be more or less necessary. At first sight, it would 
seem that there is some uniformity in gear-ratios, but the 
writer has been able to count no less than 48 gear-ratios, vary- 
ing from one, or gearless, to 4.78. To form these ratios, 60 
different combinations of gear and pinion were used. This 
entails a stock, of patterns at least, of 40 gears. For a long 
time, 33-in. wheels have been standard for the larger portion 
of electric cars. With the arrival of the heavy, car. and rapid 


570 McCLELLAN: CHOICE OF MOTORS. [June 19 


accelerations this size has been found too small, and there are 
now in use wheels of 33, 36, 40, 42, 44, 49, and 62 inches in 
diameter. It is not likely that many wheels larger than 62 
inches will be used, for with the adoption of the gearless motor, 
if it is successful on the durability test, wheels will be designed 
strictly with reference to the room for equipment required be- 
neath the car. Even if the future heavy motors are not gear- 
less, the wheels will be as small as possible, in order partly to 
prevent the lifting of one end of the truck at acceleration and 
braking. 

The standardizing of apparatus arranges itself naturally 
under two heads: desirability and possibility. From the 
standpoint of desirability there seems to be little room for 
argument, for in other lines of industry standardization has 
always reduced the cost of production. Standardization also 
means greater promptness in delivery of orders; for where 
parts are odd, either a large stock must be kept or pieces manu- 
factured as they are wanted. Moreover, in the absence of 
standard parts little stock can be manufactured in advance of 
sale; that is, for new equipment. The cost of operation has 
always been greatly reduced by standards. Repairs and re- 
placing of worn-out parts are greatly facilitated. The great 
lack of data, which we all are deploring at present, is of course: 
due to the complexity of the traction problem. Much of this 
would be removed if motors were made to vary as little as 
possible. The same motor, with a slightly different gear- 
ratio, may have much greater heating effect on the same ser- 
vice; and it only renders this problem more complex to have 
all varieties of ratio unless there is some necessary reason. 

As to the possibility of introducing standards into car-motor 
practice, there will probably be widely differing opinions. The 
problem is very much simpler for the electrical engineer than 
for the designer of the steam locomotive. The car motor is 
manufactured by two companies only. They have done by far 
the larger part of the experimental work in this line. No oper- 
ating company makes any attempt to build motors. Therefore 
the introduction of standards is comparatively easy, and with- 
out doubt much good has already resulted from this arrange- 
ment for manufacture. Whether it will remain this way, as 
the great railroad systems gradually change motive power, 
cannot be discussed to advantage now. Certainly much of the 
unreasonable lack of standards in locomotive practice is due 


1905 J McCLELLAN CHOICE OF MOTORS 571 


to the other plan, in which many companies or roads manu- 
facture locomotives. Little experimenting has been done by 
the manufacturing companies except in machine design. Every 
lot of locomotives sold has been, and still is, a partial ex- 
periment. Owing to the attitude of managers and superinten- 
dents, the locomotive manufacturing companies have never 
been able to hold the same relation to operating companies 
that exists in electrical lines. No matter what the outcome is, 
valuable lessons can be learned from a consideration of these 
relations. 

Considering the present methods for calculating the size of 
motors for a given case, it is a question whether the number 
of motor variations could not conveniently be reduced. There 
may be men who can tell to a certainty whether a gear-ratio 
of 3.24 or 3.28 is more advisable in certain. circumstances, 
but the writer has not yet met them. This is an example of one 
case only, but it indicates what might be done in several others. 
There is one feature of this work that has not received all the 
attention it requires, and that is the personal peculiarities of 
motormen. There is little use in calculating speed-time curves 
and working out a particular motor, when the motorman is al- 
lowed to work the motors under totally different conditions. The 
automatic controllers will only partly obviate the trouble for 
they can only put on the power properly; it is taking off the 
power that is serious. A motorman always has it in his power 
to cut out the drifting portion of the speed-time curve.. This 
is a small matter in elevated and subway work, where usually 
very little drifting is done, but it is vastly important elsewhere. 
It would seem, therefore, that there are several reasons why 
there should be little place for a large number of motors with 
slight differences. These are: 1. The small amount of information 
regarding operation of motors under commercial conditions, 
2. The inability to calculate closely a motor for a given project 
in spite of the skill shown in speed-time curves and the like; 
3. The fact that little or no precautions are taken, or even can 
be taken, to have the motors operated under the exact conditions 
by which they were calculated. 

It must be conceded that too much conservatism would stifle 
proper experimenting, and retard real progress. Therefore the 
writer has in view a proper attitude of mind rather than any 
rapid adoption of hard and fast conditions. We must have 
experimental work, and the more of it the better: But it 


572 McCLELLAN: CHOICE OF MOTORS. [June 19 


should be done rationally, that is, with an end in view which is 
definite. Men in authority should be perfectly sure that de- 
mands for changes in standard types are based on accurate in- 
formation, and not on prejudice, whims and the like. If this 
position is taken, especially as large systems come and increase, 
there will be no danger of the semi-chaotic condition that exists: 
in some other branches of industry. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 5738 


Discussion oN ‘‘ CHoIcCE oF Motors IN STEAM AND ELECTRIC 
PRACTICE.” 


W. E. GotpssporovucH: Mr. McClellan has brought to our 
attention a factor in the working out of heavy traction prob- 
lems. I think that the first thing the electrical engineers will 
have to do, or will have to try to get steam railroad people 
to permit them to do, is to fix upon a standard form of electric 
current and electric pressure for the service of heavy loco- 
motives. If, for instance, it were decided to deliver power 
to large electric locomotives uniformly at 25 cycles and 6 000 
volts, single phase, it would be then possible to design quite 
a variety of interchangeable electric locomotives for trunk 
line service. There are a number of locomotive systems that 
have been suggested which are equally adaptable to this work. 
If locomotives of these systems can be arranged to be inter- 
changed between different railroad systems, as the traffic on 
eastern lines increases and the western lines become electrified, 
the old locomotives can be put in service in the west and the 
electrified roads will become more or less a single inclusive 
system. I personally feel that it is useless for us to hope that 
there will be any greater uniformity in the design of electric 
locomotives than there has been in steam locomotives. 

C. O. Maittoux: I do not think that this is a paper that 
can be very extensively discussed. I think it will be readily 
conceded that the author is right when he says that there is 
not much practical difference between the gear ratio of 3.24 
and 3.28. In saying ‘that, he expressed a warranted criticism 
of the methods at present in use whereby too large a variety 
of gear-ratios is made available, thereby causing some confusion 
and difficulty in the way of keeping extra parts. But there is 
another side to the question which the author seemed to recog- 
nize when he stated: “‘It must be conceded that too much 
conservatism would stifle proper experimenting and retard real 
progress.”’ I do not believe that it is possible at the present 
time to do much standardizing in electric locomotives. I 
think it better to wait until a few electric locomotives are. 
built and operated on steam roads betore standardizing is 
attempted. 

I remember, in my own experience, the attempts which were 
constantly made by manufacturers some years ago to develop 
standard forms of generators, and the persistence with which 
I refused to accept their standards. The wisdom of declining 
to agree with the manufacturers’ wishes is demonstrated by 
the fact that since that time they have radically changed and 
improved the design of their machines. 

Any attempt to standardize a thing too early may do more 
harm than good. The fact is that things become standardized 
only when they are sufficiently developed to admit of it. Stand- 
ardization is gradually taking form in large alternators, and 
in large transformers. I do not wish to be understood as saying 


574 CHOICE OF MOTORS. [June 20 


that nothing in connection with the electric locomotive can- 
be standardized at the present time, but I do wish to be under- 
stood as saying that it is too early to standardize probably 
three-fourths of the types of electric locomotives. The state- 
ment made in the paper to the effect that no two locomotives 
are built alike, notwithstanding the fact that the building of 
steam locomotives began more than 60 years ago, is a suffi-. 
cient criterion of the difficulties met with, a measure of the 
constantly varying requirements which make it almost im- 
possible to standardize. Hence, I think that while gear-ratio 
and certain details of armature and commutator construction 
may be standardized—for they have been in service many years, 
and are more or less ripe for standardization—yet there are 
many things that cannot be standardized now. I think the 
discussion this morning showed that we are not yet prepared 
to standardize the “system.’’ Some’ believe it ought to be 
three phase, some think it should be single phase, and others 
that direct current should be used. More experience must 
be had with all of these systems before attempting to standard- 
ize them. Lack of experience with high voltages suggests 
that no attempt be made to standardize voltage. In the 
meantime gear-ratios may be standardized; and their number 
reduced. There is no necessity for a manufacturer being 
required to furnish gear-ratios so near to each other as 3.24, 
and another 3.28. We might get along with steps of gear- 
ratios further apart than those available to-day, and to that 
extent decrease the number and complexity of standard parts. 
But I think that could be done more readily by adopting a 
standard inter-axial distance, because if a fixed distance 
between the armature. shaft and the axle is adopted, 
that part is of necessity standardized since there are only 
certain gear-ratios that will fit in that combination. It would 
be almost impossible for all engineers to agree on that 
question, and it would probably be better and easier for the 
manufacturers simply to agree that. they will furnish only 
certain standard forms, and that they will adopt certain dis- 
tances between the motor axle and the gear axle; and thereby 
necessarily fix the possible number of gear-ratios by determining 
the possible numbers of teeth on the pinion and gear. | 

Cuas. P. Steinmetz: As I understand it, this paper is in- 
tended to be an appeal for standardization of electric motors, 
especially electric locomotive motors; that is, motors intended 
for heavy traction. Now, I do not agree with the writer of 
the paper in his appeal to standardize motors, but would rather 
say, ‘‘ don’t un-standardize them,’’ because the only thing that 
is in actual existence is the 550-volt motor, and, for heavy loco- 
motive traction, the gearless motor. For that, a single-phase 
commutator motor is proposed, a motor supposed to run 
on a 6 000-volt trolley, but it is not running yet, and then a 
rheostatic induction motor, supporting it on a vastly lower 


‘ 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 575 


frequency. If you want to standardize, you might as well stay 
where we are now and use what is here and what is known 
to be reliable rather than to go to new types, and so follow out 
the suggestion of the writer, unless such new types should be 
very seriously called for and become absolutely necessary. 

Now, with regard to the gear-ratio which has been complained 
of here; this is unavoidable, but really only apparent. Gear 
ratios of 3.28 and 3.24 are not different but are the nearest 
feasible approach to the desired ratio 3.25. In the gear- 
ratio the number is always odd. This is a necessity 
because, the ratio of the teeth of the pinion and the gear must 
be prime to get uniform wear, and in addition thereto the 
number of the teeth’of the pinion must be as large as possible 
to get good wear and smooth transmission. This means 
that with a certain number of teeth in the pinion the nearest 
approach to a gear-ratio of 3.25 may be 3.24, while in a larger 
motor permitting a pinion with a few more teeth, the nearest 
approach may be 3.28. This difference is, therefore, unavoid- 
able. What can be standardized are certain approximate gear- 
ratios, 3.25, 3.75, 4.25. It will never come out exactly like 
this, but near enough. . It is therefore not a question of whether 
an engineer can find a difference between 3.28 and 3.24, be- 
cause both ratios are intended to be the same. 

C. O. MattLoux: I wish to take issue with Mr. Steinmetz 
about his reference to standardizing I do not sympathize 
with the idea that things which are not standard should be 
avoided. Asa matter of fact in the present state of the art 
of electric traction as applied, or expected to be applied to 
steam and trunk lines, any system whatever should be welcomed 
with encouragement. I have expressed my opinion as being 
skeptical perhaps in regard to certain systems. These systems 
are not standards in the sense we would now understand them. 
But I would not be understood as saying that I would not 
want to see these systems introduced. If there are people 
who have sufficient money and sufficient faith in these systems 
to introduce them, I should very much like to see them tried. 
Indeed, there may be a good many good points in them that 
we know not of, and it is with these things as it has been in the 
past with many things which were supposed to be standard, and 
which have had to be modified, by reason of collateral types 
coming into existence and serving if for nothing more, to give 
valuable hints and suggestions to other systems which engineers 
have been more than pleased to appropriate and utilize. I 
think that the disposition to stop experimenting and to adopt 
standards and adhere to them too soon is capable of doing a 
great deal of harm, by retarding progress, if not stopping evo- 
lution. 

H.G.Srotr: A good illustration of the lack of standardization 
and the result of it are found in the fact that to-day probably 
no manufacturer of reciprocating engines builds two lots alike. 


576 CHOICE OF MOTORS. {tune 20 


I will give a notable instance: large engines built for the Man- 
hattan Railway Co. had just been installed, and the last one 
was not running. Nine engines of exactly the same speed 
and capacity and style were ordered—the first castings were 
made about the time that the last Manhattan engine was being 
delivered—yet when we compared the second lot of engines 
with the first lot they were radically different, and that was 
after 60 years of development of reciprocating engines and 
less than one year between the building of the two lots of 
engines. The cylinder heads were different, the cranks were 
different, and the cross-heads and valve-gears were different. 
I think it is rather hopeless to think of standardizing electric 
locomotives for another 50 years. This paper is about half a 
century ahead of time 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


he 


ELECTRICAL FEATURES OF BLOCK SIGNALING. 


BY L. H. THULLEN. 


It is only within the last decade that electricity has played 
any important part in block signaling. Previously to that 
time the only electricity used in signaling was the current 
_ from a few batteries for the track circuit, and for the operation 

of pin-valve magnets in the electropneumatic system of sig- 
naling and interlocking. During the last few years the use of 
electricity for signaling has steadily increased. Now electricity 
is the chief feature of all signaling apparatus. A brief sketch 
of the older methods of signaling will be first presented, as they 
are still in use, and therefore not without interest. 


TELEGRAPH BLOCK SYSTEM. 


~The first system worthy of notice is what is known as the 
telegraph block system, which is yet extensively used, especially 
on single-track roads. In this system the road is divided into 
sections of a predetermined length, an average section or block 
being from one to three miles long. An operator is stationed 
in a tower at the entrance of every block, and by means of 
hand-operated signals gives the engineer of an approaching 
train a clear- caution- or stop-signal, as the case may be. Under 
normal conditions only one train is allowed in a block at a time. 
The operator allows a train to enter a block only after he has 
received information from the operator at the other end that all’ 
trains have cleared that block. This information can be given 
by means of a bell-signal, or by telegraph. 


577 


or 
I 
(0 2) 


THULLEN: BLOCK SIGNALING. , [June 19 


LocK-AND-BLOCK SYSTEM. 


A system similar to the telegraph block system, but more 
automatic in its action, and not depending entirely upon the 
vigilance of the operator, is what is known as the lock-and-block 
system. In this system the machine that operates the signal 
is locked by means of a track circuit, and is unlocked by the 
operator in the block in advance when all trains have cleared 
the section. A system of bell-signals is used in the lock-and- 
block system to give notice to the towerman. 


AUTOMATIC BLOCK SIGNALING. 


The automatic block system of signaling, that does not de- 
pend in any way upon any operator for its proper manipula- 
tion, however, is coming into extensive use at the present time. 
In this system, as in the two systems just outlined, the road 
is divided into sections, or blocks. An automatic signal indi- 
cates to a train approaching a block that the block ahead is 
either occupied or unoccupied by a train. It is quite customary 
to place two signal-blades upon one post, by which two signals 
can be given, one signal showing the condition of the first block - 
in advance, and the other making known the condition of the 
second block in advance. Or one blade only may be employed 
which may occupy three positions: vertical, indicating that 
‘two blocks in advance are clear of trains; an angle of 45°, or 
caution-signal, denoting first block clear, and second block 
occupied; horizontal, or danger-signal, indicating that the first 
block is occupied. 

These signals are usually operated either by compressed air, 
or by electricity, although carbonic-acid gas is sometimes used. 
However, the electrically-operated signals are coming more 
and. more into use, and bid fair to be the signals of the future. 


TRACK CIRCUIT. 


All automatic signals are controlled by a track circuit as 
~shown diagrammatically in Fig. 1. <A is a source of electric 
energy, usually in the form of a battery of one or more primary 
cells, or a storage-battery of one cell. In the latter case a re- 
sistance of one ohm, to prevent an excessive discharge of cur- 
Tent when a train is in a block, is placed between the cell and 
the track. When storage-batteries are used they are charged 
from mains extending along the track. The cells are’ in 
duplicate, one being charged: while the other is in use: the 


1905.] THULLEN: BLOCK SIGNALING. 579 


batteries are switched in or out, either automatically or by the 
signal inspector when on his rounds. 

At the other end ofthe block is a relay that controls the opera- 
tion of the signals through a local circuit. The signals are 
generally operated by a §-h.p. motor, and 5 storage-cells each 
of 24 ampere-hours’ capacity. The energy taken to operate 
most signals is 2 amperes at 10 volts for 6 seconds. When 
the signal has assumed the normal position, the circuit to 
the motor is opened and the signal held in position by an 
electromagnet. The current required to hold the signal in 
this position is only 0.01 of an ampere. 

When a train enters a block the relay B is shunted, its ar- 
mature drops and opens the local circuit, thus allowing the 


INSULATED JOINT 


TRACK RELAY 


AMAA 


‘ iil 


Gale 


signal to move to the danger position. The signal is not cleared 
again until the train leaves that block. ; 

It is interesting to note that in a block-section 4000-ft. long, 
when the track is covered with snow, or the ties wet with 
rain, and the ballast up to the flange of the rails, the resis- 
tance between the two rails will not exceed 0.5 ohm. 

To the average engineer these pieces of apparatus seem quite 
simple, but if he stops to consider he will at once be impressed 
by the degree of exactness required to make them faultless, 
and operative under all conditions of weather and changes of 
temperature. In fact all parts must be practically perfect, 
for the lives of thousands daily depend upon the proper opera- 
tion of the signals. 

The signaling apparatus is so designed that no. probable 
events or conditions will cause a clear signal when a danger 
signal is required. For instance, all electric circuits are closed 


580 THULLEN: BLOCK SIGNALING. [June 19 


when in the clear position; any broken wires or broken rails 
will put the signal to the danger position. Also, all forces are 
always operated against gravity, no springs or other forces 
being used to put the signal at danger. Under all adverse con- 
ditions the automatic signal is therefore by far the most reli- 
able. 


SysTEM ON Boston ELEVATED R.R. 


Since the adoption of electricity for motive power on steam 
roads great changes have been made in the art of railway sig- 
naling. On steam roads the track can be subdivided into 
sections equal to the length of a block, but on electric roads 
the rails must be continuous in order to provide for the return of 
the propulsion current. At first one rail was made continuous 


ALTERNATING-CURRENT 
GENERATOR 


and the other subdivided into sections equal to the length of 
the block. A source of current was supplied to one end of 
the block, and a relay having a polarized armature was placed 
at the other end. This relay was operative only by the track 
current which was connected in opposition to the current 
traversing the subdivided rail. This system is shown diagram- 
matically in Fig. 2. It was installed on the Boston Elevated 
R.R. in 1901, and is still in use. 


More RECENT SYSTEM. 


Another system of more recent date, installed on the North 
Shore Railroad in California, and in the New York Subway, 
consists of the application of an alternating current to the 
track, and the use of a relay operative by alternating current 
only. This system is shown in Fig. 3. A-A are block- 


ae Pe aM, RDS 8 LL TOES? 
Tar 


IRE 


BLOCK FEED 


os 


WIWUL OL ~ 
AlddOS LNFBYND NI 
S10) JINVASISIY © 


a 
'« 


- 


AVITY HIVHL 
aiztuv od 


+ 


13 


WIVHL OL 
AlddS LNISHND N/ 
© SWO2 JINVISISTY 


eM 


€ 


@ 


“7 


ELOCh FEED WIRE — 


ore 
aS 
. 


TRAIN IN 


eed 


1905 ] THULLEN: BLOCK SIGNALING. 581 


sections. B-B are transformers which transform current 
from a high pressure—500 to 2000 volts—to about 10 volts 
for the track circuit. C-C are resistances placed between 
the transformer and track, and relay and track; the former to 
limit the amount of alternating and direct current flowing 
through the transformer, the latter to limit the direct current 
traversing the apparatus at the relay end of the block. 


G/L 
(lap 


CK — 


D is a relay made to operate on the Ferraris principle. This 
relay is shown by Figs. 4 and 5, in which A is an aluminum disc, 
B a laminated iron core, and C a copper ferrule which embraces 
one-half of the poles of the laminated iron core. D-D are the 
coils traversed by the alternating track-current. As can be 
readily seen, this relay will operate by alternating current only. 
Referring to Fig. 3, E is an impedance coil of low ohmic resist- 
ance, which offers a free path for the direct current, but is 
traversed by only a small part of the alternating current. The 


582 THULLEN: BLOCK SIGNALING. [June 19 


jmpedance coil is, therefore, a shunt to the alternating-current 
relay; one object of the shunt coil is to limit the direct current 
that traverses the relay, for the presence of direct current causes 
the relay to operate in a sluggish manner. As the resistance 
of the relay is quite high compared with that of the impedance 
coil, very little of the direct current will traverse the relay. 


Fia. 5. 


A LATER SYSTEM. 


In. the system just described only a small current traverses 
the sectional rail. Means more recently devised, whereby both 
rails can be utilized to a greater extent for the return current, 
are shown by Fig. 6, in which A-A are block-sections, from 2 000 
to 4 000 ft. in length; B-B are inductive rail-bonds of a few 
turns of copper conductor of about 1 000 000 cir. mils cross-section, 
C-C are transformers supplying current to the track, and D-D 
are relays operated by alternating current only, controlling the 


1905.] THULLEN: BLOCK SIGNALING. 583 


signals through the local circuit E. They are similar to those 
shown in Fig. 4. . 

The transformer is designed to have a large amount of mag- 
netic leakage when the secondary 1s short circuited by a train 
in the block, thereby reducing the electromotive force of the 
secondary and the energy absorbed at that time. 

The inductive rail-bond is shown in detail in Fig. 11., The 
bond is composed of a few turns of bar copper, and adds but 
small resistance to the track-section; in fact, the actual increase 
of resistance in a track-section 3 000-ft. long, due to the addition 
of these bonds, is only one-half of one per cent.; or in other 
words, the efficiency of the track return is 99.5 per cent. 

As shown in Fig. 5, the propuls‘on current traversing each 
rail divides and traverses the bond in opposite directions, thereby 


— RAILWAY GENERATOR 


Ve CONTACT RAIL 


INSULATION 


Fie. 6. 


neutralizing the magnetic action of the direct current; while 
the alternating current traverses the bond in ‘only one direc- 
tion, making the bond inductive to the track current. 

The question naturally arises: will the resistance of both 
rails be equal? It is not assumed that they will be, and this 
is taken care of by making the iron core of the inductive rail- 
bonds with an open magnetic circuit, the opening being .so 
large that no excessive unbalancing of the current between 
the rails will change the inductive effect of the bond. 

The effect of direct current on impedance coils, with and 
without an air-gap, is shown by curves in Figs. 7 and 8. Fig.7 
shows the same winding and iron as used in the test shown by 
Fig. 8, except that in Fig. 8 the iron core has an air-gap 
of 0.125 in. In Fig. 7, the least amount of direct current 


“will make a great increase in the alternating current. traversing 


1200 


1100 


1000 }— 


DIRECT-CURRENT AM PERES 


Z| 

BG 

LoS 

Eid aa ak [| 
me 


TTL SMG TEAMS. 6 1-7) COMO LOL ILO UD MIS PIA Fy ISIC) 118 18 el ae 
ALTERNATING-CURRENT AMPERES 


Fic. 7: 


ei 


DIRECT-CURRENT AMPERES 


SAE 


res 
EeeeeNe 


2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 2 22 2 26 2 80 32 3 3 33 
ALTERNATING-CURRENT AMPERES 


Fic. 8. 


& 
é 


1905.] THULLEN: BLOCK SIGNALING. 585 


the coil, while in Fig. 8 the direct current is increased to 600 
amperes without any material increase in the alternating current. 

From 600 amperes to 1 200 amperes, the curvature is gradual; 
beyond 1 200 amperes the curves are quite flat. The air-gap 
may be made sufficiently long to take care of any reasonable 
amount of direct current, the alternating and direct current 
traversing the coil being nearly in proportion to the opening 
in the magnetic circuit. Continuity is attained between ad- 
jacent block-sections by connections made to the middle ot 
the inductive windings. It will be seen, therefore, that the 
track-current from one block cannot extend into another block 
regardless of the impedance of the bond B. 

A relay similar to that shown in Fig. 4 is used in this system, 
the only changes being of minor importance. The electromotive 
force at the relay is a little more than one volt. In blocks 
3 000-ft. long there is a pressure of about 6 volts at the trans- 
former, the difference being due to the high impedance of the 
rail with the alternating current. 

The relay is placed at the entrance end of a block and the 
transformer at the exit end. With no train in a block, the 
energy absorbed by each block is approximately 50 watts. 
When a train enters the block at the relay end, the energy is 
seldom: more than 75 watts, and about 300 watts when the train 

is exactly opposite the transformer. As the train is exactly 
opposite the transformer but a few seconds at a time, the 
average actual energy consumed is quite small. 


LIGHT-SIGNALS. 


In the East Boston tunnel light-signals only are used, as 
shown in Fig. 9. The signals have two colored lenses; red, for 
danger; and green, for safety. The signals are lighted by two 
4 c-p., 50-volt lamps connected in multiple. The lamps are placed 
close together and in line with the lens, the focus of the lens 
being midway between the two lamps. With this arrangement 
very little difference is noticed in the action of the lenses. Low- 
efficiency lamps with a coiled filament are used; on account 
of their low pressure and low efficiency these lamps have long 
life. Being connected in multiple, both would have to be 
out at once before the signal would be out of commission; even 
then there would be no danger, as no light in a signal is con- 
sidered a danger signal. The current for the lights is supplied 
by a separate winding on the transformer. 


[June 19 


THULLEN: BLOCK SIGNALING. 


586 


Sarauasansaassarsvasareaarrasrocastlil) WME Y Biscereavecrarsrascarcsncwanassswwawasawan: 


are (a a 
CMU A_| 


Fic. 9. 


——_ ees 


So ——r 
SE GE ( ee 
ye See: ——————— ee eeseanassanaaae 
TL 5 eS TTL TELLLLI IT LIL LALLA LLL TL, VITIITIPLLLL LLL LLL LL LTTE VITITILILL ALLL LAA LAAT LL LLL LIELLLL ELL CLITITTTTTITILILL LLL 
ate R a $$$ Sr —————_———— 
SSS WA RS \ a ee es 
SS A eS \ | 


<7 


SSS 
“aaHl 


aa 


Ni 
N 
) ety 


| ly 
i 
Ny i ! 


1 
‘ Y, 
Syn ass Dp rrr TTI TT TLL LI LET TTT LI TLL TT LTT TTL PTT TTT LLP LLL LILLE LL 


A S 2 eo Sees 


SoS 


SSS 


SS 


S—SSSSSsSSSssssy 


SS 


ws 
SSS SSS SS 


SSS SS 


‘ 


Ss 


Fic. 10. 


[June 19° 


THULLEN: BLOCK SIGNALING. 


588 


ima Ens 
———E a eS 
WRN IRR AEA N 
(KK YG. =n 
————— fe 

yaw 


Via? \G5 
ML, ELA ETE iG SS 
V] sti : MRE ee fe es 3% WW 
= xi DOs F pone egmene = Sena aan SaSa ERS Lemma Se a ee ee “a Yuli 

i IVAN SS 
ae ASA W’U“bWwuuu, 


KDW} 


a mek 
t= :! 
eS WEE CSAP PERC RIT rt: Swab WZ 


CLT RN 
‘aie opin ene mae we i + 6Ce LAMM, 
l ny 


S 


VELL ELLE 


Ricsli: 


1905.] THULLEN: BLOCK SIGNALING. 589 


Electrically-lighted signals are fast displacing the oil-lighted 
ones. They were adopted on the New York Subway after very 
careful consideration, and their continued satisfactory working 
has more than justified their adoption. In an installation of 
this kind men are not required to fill and clean lamps. This 
means great saving in the cost of labor, and perhaps of lite; 
for in a place like the Subway, where space is limited and the 
trains are constantly running, it is of great importance that 
the maintenance crew be kept as small as possible. 

In the East Boston Tunnel the lamps are lighted and extin- 
guished back of the different lenses by means of front and back 
contacts on the track-relays. The contacts are made between 
platinum and carbon, as two metals could not be used on account 
of the liability of fusing. 

At this point it may be said that the layman usually believes 
that the rails of a track are less likely than any other part of 
the signal system to be struck by lightning, or to carry currents 
induced by lightning. Yet this is a condition that signal men 
have to contend with. The inductive discharge between rails is 
considerable, and numerous relays have been burned out or 
injured by lightning, notwithstanding that they were built in the 
best possible manner, and all parts tested by an alternating 
current of 5000 volts as an insulation breakdown test. 


Lone IsLaND RAILROAD SIGNALING SYSTEM. 

In the electrified subway portion of the Long Island Rail- 
road electrically-lighted signals only are to be used. The sig- 
nals are shown in Fig. 10. Four lights will be used: the two 
upper ones being the signals for the adjacent block, and the two 
lower ones for the second block in advance. The upper lens is 
red, danger; the one below, green, or safety; the upper one of 
the two lower lenses is yellow, or caution, and the lower one 
green, or safety. 

On the elevated and surface portions of this road it is planned 
to use signals of the 2-arm type operated by electric motors 
from storage-batteries of 6 cells each, the batteries being . 
charged by current taken from the third-rail through a suitable 
resistance. About 250 of these signals are to be installed. 
Current at 2000 volts and 25 cycles will be furnished the sig- 
naling system by mains extending the length of the track. 


590 BLOCK SIGNALING. {June 20 — 


-, DiscussIoN ON, ‘‘ ELECTRICAL FEATURE OF BLock SIGNALING.” 


H. G. Srorr: I am surprised that Mr. Thullen has at- 
tempted to treat such a subject in so short a paper, because 
when one sees the mass of detail entering into the improved 
signal system it seems almost hopeless to attempt to describe 
it. The amount of detail looks discouraging and the expres- 
sion of a number of our engineers (excepting the signal en- 
gineers) before the system was started was ‘‘ How will the 
trains be kept running; it is so easy to stop them and so hard 
to get them started again?’’ For instance, we start out with 
4 transmission line, a 60-cycle transmission line to the different 
sub-stations, and that was to supply ultimately, after passing 
through transformers, about 550 volts, carried to a main bus- 
bar running the whole length of the system. In addition to 
that, there are still in each sub-station motor-generator sets 
consisting of a direct-current motor operated from the bus-bar, 
and that directly connected to a small 60-cycle gencrator, 
which is held as reserve so that in case of failure of the 60-cycle 
power from the main power-house it can be supplied immedi- 
ately from the sub-station by putting in one of the small m«tor- 
generators in each sub-station and synchronizing them. These in 
turn feed into the 550-volt, single-phase, 60-cycle pair of wires 
running the entire length of the subway. They in turn feed 
transformers, and these transformers supply 14-volt bus-bars 
running the entire length of the system. In addition to that 
there is another line of storage-batteries for supplying the 
lights and they in turn are fed from the third rail at different 
points. In addition, to that there is a main air-pipe line which 
of course is controlled by the:electrically operated signal system 
between interlocking and overlapping sections. There is such 
a mass of complication and detail that it seems absolutely 
- hopeless to attempt to make any description of it. The record 
of performance of the 60-cycle relays in the Manhattan Rail- 
way system has been remarkably good. I think the actual 
record is something like 300 000 successful performances to one: 
failure, and it is improving all the time. That in itself was 
on an absolutely new system when installed in the New York 
subway. In the subway system one track rail is used for the 
return current, what might be termed the traction current, 
- and the other rail is insulated and is used only for the signal. 
service. 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Conven- 
tion. of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E, E. 


WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION ON ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 
AS AFFECTED BY MOTOR SUSPENSION AND 
DRAW-BAR PULL. 


BY Sn. DODD. 


In a locomotive propelled by electric motors the motor action 
produces a set of stresses acting between the truck-frame, 
motor supports, and driving-wheels. The horizontal effort at 
the rail-head resulting from these stresses acts against the re- 
sisting forces of the locomotive, the principal items of which 
may be considered as: 

a. The rolling friction of the wheels on the track, acting at 
the rail-head. ¥ 

b. The resistance to acceleration due to inertia of the loco- 
motive, and the resistance due to grades, acting at the center 
of gravity of the locomotive. 

c. The air resistance acting at the exposed surface, particu- 
larly at the head end. 

d. The resistance of the trailing load, acting at the draw-bar. 

The effect of the forces here discussed, including the internal 
or driving forces acting between truck, motor, and wheels, 
and the external or resisting forces, produces a shifting or re- 
distribution of the weight on the various wheels. In this 
paper an attempt is made to investigate the amount of 
this redistribution. The discussion is confined to locomotives 
drawing trailing loads, since this redistribution of weight is 
particularly effective in the case of a locomotive exerting a 
horizontal effort at approximately the slipping point of the 
driving-wheels. Some of the general limitations and con- 


® 


591 


592 DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. [June 19 


siderations applying to this particular case must be clearly 
defined. 

Stresses acting on a spring supported locomotive produce a 
compression of journal-box springs and a consequent shifting 
of the center of gravity of the locomotive and a redistribution 
of the weight on the wheels. A certain amount of redistribution 
of weight due to this cause may be assumed, but it has been 
omitted in the following discussion for the reason that it cannot 
be investigated without a knowledge of the elasticity of the 
springs. 

The resistance due to inertia assumes particular importance 
in the case of single motor-cars subjected to high acceleration. 
The air resistance also is of particular importance in single 
high-speed motor-cars. In a purely locomotive problem such 
as considered here, that is, in the case of a motor-car used only 
for drawing trailing loads, the weight of the locomotive is often 
less than 10% of the weight of the trailing load. The resistances 
due to the locomotive itself are therefore not so important 
as those due to the rest of the train, and consequently no great 
error will be introduced into our results, and their expression 
can be much simplified, by leaving out of consideration the 
weights and resistances of the locomotive itself, and by con- 
sidering the entire reaction against horizontal effort to be 
concentrated at the @draw-bar. 

Since each axle and its pair of wheels form a rigid uniform 
body they are always considered together; a reference to a 
driving-axle always is understood to include the pair of wheels 
attached to it. 

The following calculations are based on the horizontal effort 
per driving-axle. . Since all the motors on the locomotive are 
supposed to be geared so as to produce an equal torque on 
each driver, the draw-bar pull of the locomotive is conse- 
quently equal to the product of the horizontal effort per axle 
into the number of driving-axles. : 

In all diagrams, motion of the locomotive is considered to 
take place from left to right. The driving-axles are lettered 
from rear to front, so that the axle A is the one nearest the 
draw-bar and the axle D the one nearest the pilot. 

The weight of the locomotive frame is assumed to be carried 
on springs upon the journal-boxes. With a motor suspended 
in the usual way, part of the stress it exerts is transmitted 
through the axle-bearings direct to the axle and part is trans- 


1905.} DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. 593 ° 


mitted through the suspension to the truck and journal-box 
springs. Forces transmitted from the motor direct to the axle 
are referred to as increase or decrease of ‘‘ dead weight ” and 
those transmitted through the frame are referred to as increase 
or decrease of ‘“‘ live weight.”” The sign + indicates an increase’ 
of weight, the sign — a decrease of weight. 

The increase or decrease of weight on any axle due to motor 
and draw-bar actions is proportional to the horizontal effort 
per driving-axle. In what follows the term “ Distribution- 
Factor’ represents the ratio between the increase of weight. 
on any axle and the horizontal effort per driving-axle. This 
distribution-factor may be either positive or negative, a negative 
value referring to a decrease in weight. 

The alteration of weight on a driving-wheel alters the slip- 
ping point of the wheel, consequently the distribution-factor 
may also be considered as determining the variation in the 
tractive power of the driving-wheels. In other words, the change 
in the slipping point of the wheels due to internal actions can 
be easily determined by a determination of the distribution- 
factor as may be shown by the following considerations: ; 

Lo = Original load per axle. 

L = Final load due to redistribution of weights. ; 

P. = Horizontal effort per drivivg-axle at the slipping point 

X = Coefficient of traction. 

Y = Distribution-factor (may be either + or —). 

At the slipping point: P = Xl =X (LotP-Y) 

Therefore: 


Ee 


NO abe=a'y a) 


To make this more definite by a concrete example, consider 
a 4-axle locomotive with a weight of 10 tons per axle and a 
tractive coefficient of 20%. Without considering the distribu- 
tion-factor, the horizontal effort per axle is given by: 

P = 20000 x0.20 = 4 000 Ib. 

Therefore: draw-bar pull = 4x4 000 = 16 000 Ib. 

If, however, one of the axles has a distribution-factor of. 
_0.5, applying formula (1) the horizontal effort on this par- 
ticular axle is: 


pee) 000 


P= = 3 636 lb. 


m5) 


594 DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. [June 19 


*Since the maximum draw-bar pull of the locomotive is lim- 
ited by the slipping point of any wheel, the distribution-factor 
on this one wheel reduces the maximum draw-bar pull on the 
whole locomotive from 16 060 Ib. to four times 3 636 or 14 544 Ib. 
It follows from this that Y, the distribution-factor, is a qui 1- 
tity which, subtracted from the reciprocal of the tractive- 
coefficient, gives the effective or equivalent reciprocal for any 
axle from which the actual slipping point can be derived 

The distribution-factor has to be separately discussed for 
each separate design of locomotive but the symbols given in 
the following table are adhered to in the discussion of each type: 


TABLE I. 

A, B,C, D...Driving-axles, 

OA cee eby Gini t i Pony-trucks, 

Got ef aa ‘Points of support of locomotive frame on equalizer 
system. 

JFK ORAS et Truck centers or centers of equilibrium of loco- 
motive frame, 

L, M, N, O..Points of motor suspension or motor-noses, 

Pe Oe fate Horizontal effort per driving-axle, 

2a..........Length of journal-box spring, 

BD ase 2 ees Wheel-base per pair of drivers, 

Cees itr tases Distance between J and k, 

Ve Nee a oe te Length of equalizer-links, 

Hi None ke Me Height of draw-bar, 

Se eae Ue NE Ah Distance between axle center and motor-nose, 

Hep one aria Agee Height of truck-bolster, 

Da eae eae Radius of driving-wheel. 


TYPE No. 1 LOcoMOTIVE. 


Fig. 1 shows a single-truck, four-wheel locomotive with two 
driving-axles. The distribution of stresses on the wheels and 
truck are shown in the diagram; and it may be advisable in this 
simple case to discuss these stresses in detail in order to illustrate’ 
the method which has been applied to other types of loco- 
motives. It will be neted that under the headings Type No. 2 
to Type No. 5 this paper does not attempt to discuss the stresses 
in detail but simply states in a summarized or tabular form the 
results of a similar discussion. 

The action of the motor on the driving-axle A ‘and the re- 
action against the track produce:a horizontal pressure P against 


1905. | DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. 595 


the journal-box and a vertical pressure at L, the nose of the 
motor. The vertical action at L deducts from the dead weight: 
directly on the axle an amount P w/s and transfers to the truck 
frame an equal weight which is again transmitted through the 
journal-box springs to the axles A and B. An application of 
the equation of moments of forces around these two axles 
shows that the weight on L produces a redistribution of. the 
weights on A and B, in the inverse ratio of the distances of 
L from A and B; that is, it adds a live weight, P w (s+26)/2 5, 
to the axle A,and reduces the live weight on B by Pws/2s b. 

Similarly, the action of the motor on the driving-wheel B 
produces a horizontal pressure P against the journal-box and. 
a vertical pressure at M, the motor-nose. This vertical action 
at M adds to the dead weight upon the axle an amount P w/s 


2 P (w-h) 2 P(w-h) pw 


2b 
Pp w(s+2b) tpws Pws pee) 
§ 28 


ae 
230 f 


€ 
as 


Ph Feel 
Total |~ Total db 


and reduces the live weight at M by a similar amount. This 
‘reduction of weight again produces a redistribution of the 
weights on A and B in the inverse ratio of their distances, re- 
ducing the weight upon B by Pw (s+2b)/25 b and adding 
to A an amount Pws/2s b. 

The total redistribution of weight due to internal or motor 
actions is found by adding the items above acting on A and B 
respectively as follows: ae 
On A,-—Pw/st+Pw (s+2b)/2sb+Pws/2sb = +Pw/b 
On B, +P w/s—Pws/2sb—Pw (st2b)/2se =—Pw/b - (2) 

In addition to the motor action, the effect of the horizontal 
forces must be considered. The pull 2P on the draw-bar 
acts on the trucks at a height above the. track, and the force 
on the drivers acts at the journal-boxes at a height w above the 
track; this produces a couple acting upon the truck whose 


596 DODD ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. ‘ [June 19 
moment is 2 P (w—h) which tends to tilt the truck and which 
is balanced by an equal and opposite couple of the same moment 
accing at the axles, but whose arm is 2b the distance between 
the journal-boxes. 
The alteration of pressure on the axles due to draw-bar actions 
is therefore: 
On A,—2P (w—h)/2b 
On B, +2P (w—h)/26 5; (3) 
The total effect of the motor and draw-bar forces is therefore: 
On A, +P w/b—P (w—h)/b = +Ph/b 
On B,—Pw/b+P (w—h)/b = —Ph/b (4) 
The same results will be obtained by applying the same 
reasoning to any arrangement or gearing of motors on a single 
truck. Table 2 contains a summary of these deductions. 


TABLE 2. 
INCREASE OF WEIGHT ON 
" L A B M 

Bendis by 
Motors direct.......]-+P w/s -Pw/s +P w/s e —-P w/s 
SECOSS REL cee ci5's 6 +P w (s+2 b)/2sb -Pws/2sb 
Stress.at: Mo... 4.. +Pws/2sb - Pw (s+2b)/2sb 
Total motor action.. +P w/b -Pw/b 
Draw-bar action... . -2P(w-—h)/26 +2 P(w—h)/2b 

Totalinn tered ve +P h/b -Ph/b 


This result may be briefly stated by saying the distribution- 
factor is + h/b. 

Considering this result still further, we note it shows that 
the locomotive is acted on at the axles (a distance of 2 6 from 
each other) by equal and opposite forces + P h/b, constituting 
a couple whose moment is therefore 2 Ph. But h is the height 
of the draw-bar, and 2P is the force acting at the draw-bar 
in one direction and at the rail-head in the opposite direction. 
This shows that a single motor truck may be discussed as if it 
were a rigid body acted on by a horizontal effort along the line 
of the rails and a draw-bar pull at the height h above the rails. 


Tyre No. 2 Locomotive. 


This is an eight-wheel locomotive having two independent 
trucks, anc four driving-axles. The motors are supported on 


1905.] DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. 597 


the trucks, and all internal reactions due to the motors are self- 

contained in the trucks as shown in Fig. 2. The stresses of 
the draw-bar are transmitted by the truck-bolster from the 
locomotive frame to the truck. In addition to the dimensions 
discussed under type No: 1, we must take into consideration 
the dimension ?, the height of the truck bolster, and c, the 
distance between truck centers. There are three sets of actions 
to be discussed: 

1. The internal actions of the motors produce an increase of 
weight on the rear axle of each truck and a reduction in weight 
on the forward axle of the amount P w/b, as already discussed 
under type No, 1, formula (2). 

2. Each truck is acted on by a horizontal effort 2 P at the 
journal-boxes and an equal and opposite force at the truck- 
bolster; these constitute a couple that produces an increase 
in weight on one journal-box and a decrease on the other whose 


amount is 2P (w—t)/2}, as already discussed under Type No. 
1, formula (3). 

3. The locomotive body is acted on by a couple due to the 
pull of the draw-bar at a height h and the pull on the truck- 
bolster at a height t, tending to tilt the locomotive body and 
increase the weight on one truck, decreasing it on the other by 
the amount 4P (t—h)/c. These reactions are summarized in 


Table 3. 
TABLE 3: 


INCREASE OF WEIGHT ON 
i 


A af B G K D 
Produced by 
Motors.,..-..---|+P w/b -P w/b +P w/b —-Pw/b 
Bolster,..)......|- 2P (w=?) +2 P (w-t)|- 2 P (w-?) +2P(w-?) 
2b 2b 2b 2b 
Draw-bar.... (-2P ¢- h)\- —-4P (t-h)|-2P(t-h) +2 P t- h)i+4P (t-hi+2P (ih) 
¢ ¢ c c @ ¢ 


598 DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. : {June 19 


Total increase of weight at A = P @ c—2tb4+2hb)/be 
a - « «© © Ba P(2Qhb—2tb—tc)/be 
7 < «o « «Cn —P(2hb—2tb—te)/be 
- + “  «  & P= _P(te—2tb+2hb)/bc (5) 


Since / and ¢ are quantities of approximately the same amount 
and always appear in these formulas with opposite signs, 
and in combination with the same factor 2b, it is evident 
that in general the distribution-factor is determined by the 
term “tc” and that therefore its amount is chiefly dependent 
on the ratio of the bolster height to the wheel-base. 

It was said in regard to Type No. 1 locomotives that the re- 
sults there obtained were perfectly general and independent 
of arrangement or gearing of the motors, and since a type No. 2 
locomotive consists of two type No. 1 locomotives carrying a 
single platform or body, but with all internal actions self-con- 
tained in the trucks, the results given in formula No. 5 are 
also independent of arrangement or gearing of the motors. 

Some applications of these formulas, using different dimen- 
sions of locomotives, are shown. in Table 4, in order to indi- 
cate the approximate amount of variation of the distribution- 
factor in locomotives as actually constructed. These dimen- 
sions refer to locomotives actually built or designed each of 
approximately 100 tons’ weight. Dimension No. 1 refers to a 
locomotive originally designed as a type No. 2 locomotive; that 
is, with two swivel trucks on which the motors are carried. Di- 
mension No. 2 refers to a type No. 3 locomotive having four 
axles on a rigid wheel-base, each journal-box driving directly 
against the locomotive frame. Dimension No. 3 refers to a type 
No, 4locomotive with six axles, having four driving axles on a 
rigid wheel-base, each journal-box driving directly against the 
jocomotive frame and having one pony-truck at each end. 

For the purpose of comparison, the writer has assumed under 
the present head, three 8-wheel locomotives each of the No. 2 
type; that is, with two swivel trucks but having otherwise 
the dimensions of these three actual locomotives. This may be 
a little unfair to the locomotives of dimensions No. 2 and No. 3, 
but under later heads the writer has assumed the same dimen- 
sions on type No. 3 and No. 4 locomotives, so that .the results 
serve not only as a basis of comparison of different locomotives 
of the same type, but also of the same locomotive under dif- 
ferent conditions; that is, with or without swivel trucks ana 
with or without pony trucks. 


1905.] DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. 599 


Dimension No. l. 


w = 22 in. 
2b = 96 in. or b = 48 in. 
c¢ = 204 in. 
h = 34.5 in. 
tg=6357in.; 
§ = 39.375. 
DimEnsION No. 2. 
w = 21 in. 
2b = 46 in. or b = 23 in. 
¢ = 128 in. 
h = 34.5 in. 
t = 35 in. 
s = 39.375 
Dimension No. 3. 
w= 22 1n. 
Dec 2 1.01.0. = 20.10); 
c = 104 in 
h = 34.5 in 
t= 35 in 
s = 39.375. 


Applying formulas (5) to these dimensions of locomotives, 
we get the following results: 


TABLE 4. 
VALUES OF DISTRIBUTION-FACTOR FOR LOCOMOTIVES OF TYPE NO. 2 
Ren ee 
Dim. 1 Dim. 2 Dim. 3 
Wheel A 

A +0.725 +1.515 +1.335 

B —0.735 -1.53 -— 1,355 

GC +0 .735 +1.53 +1.355 

16 -—0.725 —1.514 — 1.335 


Type No. 3 LOCOMOTIVE. 

This is an eight-wheel locomotive with four drivipg-axles 
end all journal-boxes driving directly against the locomotive 
frame as shown. in Fig. 3. The motor-noses are suspended to 
- the locomotive frame, which is carried upon an equalizer system. 
The two center points, J and kK, of this system are symmetrical 


. 


with respect to the forward and rear pair of axles, / distributing 


600 DODD: ELECTRIC LOMOCOTIVES. [June 19 


its weight equally between A and B, and K distributing equally 
between C and D. 

With this type we obtain different results with different ar- 
rangement of motors, for the reason that an action having its 
origin at one driver is transmitted to the locomotive frame and © 
may not react directly upon the originating axle but may be 


Fig. 3. 


distributed to other axles which are independent of the original 
action. All possible symmetrical arrangements of motors are 
shown in Figs. 3 to 9, Fig. 9 representing gearless motors. 
Following out the same course of reasoning as above, the re- 
sults given in Table 5 are obtained. 


TABLE 5. 
Wheel TiAl tee peeks Total 
Fig. 3] A +2 Pw/c —-2P(w-h) /c +2Ph/c 
B +2 Pw/c —2P(w-h) /e +2Ph/c 
GC -2Pw/c +2P(w-h)/e | -2 Ph/c 
D -2Pw/c +2P(w-h)/c | -2 Ph/c 
Fig. 6] A +P w(e+2s-2b)/se -2P(w-h)/e |+P (we+2hs-2wb)/sc 
B -Pw(c-2s+2b)/se -2P(w-h)/c |-P(we-2hs+2wb)/sc 
GC +P w (c-2s+2b)/se +2P(w-h)/c |+P (we-2hs+2whb)/sec 
D —-Pw(c+2s—-2b)/se +2P(w-h)/c |} -P (we+2hs -2wb)/se 
Fig. 7} A —-Pw(e-2s-2b)/se -2P(w-h)/c |-P(we-2hs-2wb)/sc 
B +P w (c+2s+2b)/se -2P(w-h)/e |+P (w c+2hs+2wb)/sc, 
G —Pw (e+2s+2 b)/se +2P(w-h)/c | -—P (we+2hst+2wb)/sc 
D +Pw(c-2s-2b)/se +2 P(w-h)/c| +P (we-2hs-2wb)/sc 


Neen nn 


Figs. 4, 5, 8, and 9 give the same results as Fig. 2. 

It will be noted from this table that the results are inde- 
pendent of the motor arrangements only so long as the two 
motors on one pair of axles are both forward of the axles or 
both back of the axles. We have applied these results to type 


1905.] DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. 601 


No. 3 locomotives having the same dimensions as those dis- 
cussed under type No. 2, 7.e., assuming that in this case there are 
no swivel trucks but that the locomotive journals are driving 
directly against the locomotive frame. The application of the 
formulas of table No. 5 give the results shown in table No. 6. 


TABLE 6. 


VALUES OF DISTRIBUTION-FACTOR FOR LOCOMOTIVES OF TYPE NO. 3. 


Motor 


Suspension Wheel Dimension 1 Dimension 2 Dimension 3 
ites tp 6 ool soa A +0.338 +0.540 +0.664 
B +0.338 +0.540 +0.664 
Cc — 0.338 -—0.540 — 0.664 
D — 0.338 — 0.540 -0.664 
BB ao1G aareiensieueres A +0.634 +0.882 +0.945 
B — 0.484 =0).187 -0.175 
C +0. 484 +0.187 +0.175 
D — 0.634 — 0.882 —0.945 
Leb eels creat One A +0.042 +0.1975 +0.384 
B +1.16 +1.268 +1.5C0 
C = 1216 — 1.268 — 1.500 
D -— 0.042 — 0.1975 -— 0.384 


It is to be noted that the results given under Dimension No. 2, 
Fig. 6, or Dimension No. 3, Fig. 6, or Fig. 7, could not be ob- 
tained in actual practice. It would be impossible to obtain the 
arrangements of Fig. 6 with a locomotive of Dimension 2, having 
a wheel-base 2b = 46 in. and with a motor of length s = 39.375 
inches. 

Type No. 4 Locomotive. 

This is a locomotive having four driving-axles and two pony- 
trucks as shown in Fig. 10. The locomotive frame is supported 
at one end at the points G, H, and J to an equalizer system 
transmitting the load to the driving-wheels and the pony-trucks, 
and at the other end to a similar system. With a load L on 
one end of the locomotive, the equalizer system divides the load 
between points of support as follows: 


m 


Load atG=L77 Ty 


[June 19 


DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. | 


1905.] DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. 603 


2m 
Load at H =f dm 4k 
k+m 
tee iene dh, 6) 


This load is then distributed upon the wheels as follows: 
A=L2m/(4m+k) 
B=L2m/(4m+k) 
E=Lk (4m+k) (7) 


The center of equilibrium or center around which the load 
will turn is a point J lying at the center of gravity of the system 
G, H, and I; that is, a distance Z from H such that: 

Z =k (d+2a+k+m)/(4m+k) (8) 

Considering now the distribution of weights due to motor 
actions, it will be noted that the distribution of dead weight 
due to motors direct to the axles is the same as already shown 
in table 2, and amounts to + Pw/s. The distribution of live 
weight concentrated at J and K consists partly of internal re- 
actions transmitted from the motors and partly of the quantity 
4 P (w—h)/c due to the tilting action of the draw-bar already 
discussed. For example, a locomotive of type No. 4 having 
an arrangement of motors shown in Fig. 2 or Fig. 3; that is, 
with all motors back of the axles will have stresses concentrated 
as shown in table 7. 


TAIBIGE® (: 

ee ee a Ene GLE 

A if Bp (G K D 
Distribution of 
aond weight...... — Pw/s -Pw/s|-Pw/s —Pw/s 
Live weight...... Pw (2¢+4s)/se Pw (2c-45)/se 
Due to draw-bar.. —4P(w—h)/c +4-P (w—h)/e 
Total live weight. P(2wet4hs)/s P (2wetAhs)/s¢ 


eet re ee eee 


This live weight upon J and K is not equally divided between 
the driving-axles, as in type No. 3 locomotive, but is distributed 
between driving- and pony-axles according to formula (7). 

The resultant formulas are too complicated to state in gen- 
‘ oral terms but are fairly simple in a number of particular cases. 
The writer has applied these formulas to a locomotive of the type 


604 DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. [June 19 


No. 4 having dimensions similar to Dimension No. 3, above: 
described under type No. 2 locomotives. 


w = 22 in. 

2b = 52 in. or b = 26 in. 
h = 34.5 in. 

s == 40 in. 

m = 22 in. 

k = 45 in, 


From which by applying formulas (7) and (8), we derive the 
following: 
Weight on A = 0.331 L 


. “ B= 0.331 L 
ts “ C = 0.338 L 
* “ Z = 37.2 
“ VC 173.4 


The distribution-factor is given in table No. 8 for a type No. 4 
locomotive of these dimensions having the different arrange- 
ments of motors shown in Figs. 8 to 9. 


TABLE 8. 


DISTRIBUTION-FACTOR FOR LOCOMOTIVE OF TYPE NO. 4. FIG. 10, WITH 
DIMENSION NO. 3. 


Motor Suspension E A B C D F 

Fig. 3......,\.] +0.634 +0.07 +0.07 = 0.442 — 0.442 +0.1104 
4.. —0.1104 | +0.442 +0. 442 -0.07 =0.07 — 0.634 
Bcc -—0.1104 | +0.442 +0 .442 —0.442 = 0). 4425 +0.1104 
Gee -| 0.155 +0.702 -0.398 +0.398 - 0.702 —0.155 
ioe +0.371 -— 0.187 +0.913 -0.913 +0.187 -0.371 
Si -| +0.634 +0.07 +0.07 -0.07 -0.07 - 0.634 
oe. 


.| +0.260 +0.256 +0.265 - 0.256 — 0.256 — 0.260 


e---——_—vOnnn 


It is to be noted, however, that the motor suspension of 
Figs. 5, 6, and 7, would be impossible with a motor of s = 40 
on the short wheel base (2b = 52) of this locomotive. 


Type No. 5 LOocomorTive. 


This is a locomotive having three driving-axles as shown on 
Figs. 11 and 12. One-third of the weight of the locomotive is 
carried directly upon one of these axles, the remaining two- 
thirds is carried upon point J, the center of the equalizer system 
which transmits the load equally to the other two axles. Fol- 


1905.] DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. 605 


lowing out the same method of calculation used before and 
applying it to a distribution of motors as shown in Fig. 11, a 
locomotive of type No. 5 will have stresses concentrated as shown 
in table 9. 


ABB eo: 

A ai B 
Distribution of rt i : 
Dead weight. .| —-P w/s -Pw/s -Pw/s 
Live weight... Pw(2¢e4+3s)/sc Pw(ce-8s)/se 
Due to draw- 

Bitatg eres acs -3P (w—-h)/c 3 P (w—h)/c 
Totalion J.... P(2we+38hs) 
SC 

WUE tO: fiers. P(2we+3hs) P(2we+3hs) 

DSC 2s¢ 

Oo ae 43Ph/2¢.  - 43 Ph/2c -3Ph/e 


Fig. 12 


Reversing the direction of motion on the same locomotive, 
results in an arrangement as shown in Fig. 12. The effect of 
redistribution will. be exactly opposite to that shown in Table 9 
so that the following distribution of weights is obtained: 

Increase of weight on A, + 3Ph/c 

“ ta Fora * B,—3Ph/2¢ 
ae Se atl ET OT ae ea 

These formulas have been applied toa locomotive of No. 5 
type having the following dimensions: 


606 DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. [June 19 


DimEnsSION No. 4. 


w= 30 

s = 40 

2b = 76 or b = 38 
c=3b= 114 

h = 35 


Substituting these dimensions in the formulas given in Table 
9, the following results are obtained: 


: 


DISTRIBUTION-FACTOR OF TYPE NO. 5 LOCOMOTIVE. 


Motor Suspension. } A B C 
Bigieil srecce +0.46 +0.46 -0.92 
Bigs i2aic0n< +0.92 —0.46 —0.46 
CONCLUSION. 


From the results given in the foregoing paper, it appears that 
there is an element of uncertainty in the determination of the 
tractive effort of electric locomotives, on account of the differ- 
ent distribution of weights on drivers, produced by variations 
in motor suspension, an element which, as far as the writer 
knows, has not been very closely considered heretofore. The 
foregoing tables show the possible amount of variation in the 
redistribution of weight on the drivers in various possible loco- 
motives. To make the results more definite the writer has 
selected four types of locomotives which have approximately 
the arrangement of motors and dimensions as actually designed. 
In table No. 10 is tabulated the actual distribution-factor for 
these four locomotives. 


TABLE 10. 


ED 


Locomotive type.....ss eee ee rece ce eee ee teenies rype 2 Type 3 | Type 4 | Type 5 


Wheel and truck diagram...... 6. esses er eee eee 


Fig. 2 Fig. 3 Fig. 10 | Fig. 11 

Motor arrangement. ......0..be cece eee erences Fig. 2 Fig. 7 Fig. 9 Fig. 11 
Locomotive dimensions.:....:0.+seeeeeeeseeesee] Dim. 1 Dim. 2 } Dim. 3 | Dim. 4 
Distribution-factor, Wheel Acsss.secesvssseeee4|-+0.725 |4-0:1975|+-0.256 |40.46 

Wheel Leas sie ntotate Wipel pis Wie 6 euaicta’s relies linc wre stays —0.735 |+1.268 +0.256 |+0.46 

Wheel Cares riche eaten es ete aerate ele TOs (00 —1.268 | -0.256 |—-0.92 

Wheel) eceeata oe aie matrestenie oetererenrs cnn] oe Oca —0.1975] —0.256 
Coefficient of traction: ‘ 

Assumed actual.........00crec user ee wennens 25% 25% 25% 25% 

Bitectivaiy ke uO se Ae ee plies Toga (vee bean OE are 
Reduction in draw-bar pull......--.---. seer sees 15.5% | 24% 6% 18.5% 


1905.) DODD: ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. 607 


Assuming that the wheels actually slip when exerting a 
horizontal effort of 25% of the weight on them, the reduction in 
this weight results in a reduction of the possible draw-bar pull; 
that is, a reduction of the apparent or effective coefficient of 
traction to some value below 25%. Table 10 shows not only 
the distribution-factor but the value of this effective coefficient 
of traction, and in the last line gives the percentage of varia- 
tion in draw-bar pull due to this redistribution of weight. 
Since it appears from this that in actual cases the reduction in 
draw-bar pull may amount to anywhere from 6% to 24% of its 
theoretical value, it would appear that in the design of electric 
locomotives it would be advisable to keep in view an arrange- 
ment of motor suspension which will give the lowest possible 
value of the distribution-factor. 


608 ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES. {June 20 


Discussion ON ‘‘ WEIGHT DisTRIBUTION ON ELECTRIC Loco- 
MOTIVES AS AFFECTED BY Motor. SUSPENSION AND 
DRAW-BAR PULL.” 


C. O. Matttoux: Those who. have had to deal with such: 
problems as are considered in Mr. Dodd's paper have surmised 
that there was a displacement of weight that altered the effec- 
tive adhesion at some of the wheels. It was called to the 
attention of the INSTITUTE 2 years ago in Mr. Parke’s paper 
on braking, that such a displacement occurs, and causes the 
tilting of the trucks when the brakes are applied. There is 
also a displacement of similar character due to the acceleration 
of the car body itself, which causes a tendency to tilt the car 
body backward during acceleration, and to tilt it forward 
during retardation. Three phenomena are presented of which 
only two have heretofore been recognized. Mr. Dodd- has 
formulated the forces involved, and indicated the manner in 
which these forces operate, and given an analytical statement 
of their action and reaction upon each other. 

F. N. WarterMAN: It seems appropriate to draw attention 
at this time to the fact that the subject was called to the at- 
tention of the InsTITUTE in a discussion by Mr. L. B. Stillwell. 
in which he recited the experience of the Manhattan Company, 
He found that the front wheels on the trucks of the motor 
cars of the Manhattan trains slipped before the others, owing 
to the redistribution of weight due to the effort of the motors 
and the resistance of the train. 

C. O. Marttoux: It would be of interest if measurements 
were made by which the three different phenomena could be 
differentiated from one another. In many cases this might 
be difficult to do. I have myself had occasion very recently 
to notice the tilting of a car body due to the acceleration and 
retardation and also I have made experiments, in which the 
acceleration was measured, and have obtained charts of accelera- 
tion as a time-function. These experiments show that there 
is a tilting effect at the time of starting and stopping the cars, 
which may offset the value of the acceleration unless specific 
means are taken to eliminate the complication, due to that 
phenomenon. Even in the case of motor cars there may pos- 
sibly be some phenomenon like that mentioned by Mr. Dodd. 

ST. Dopp: Referring to Mr. Mailloux’s remarks relatively 
to the value of making tests on this subject, I would only say 
that the paper has not attempted to take up the practical 
side of this question, but has been confined entirely to the 
theoretical side. Of course, the great difficulty of making 
accurate experiments of this character is realized. Aside from 
the difficulty of obtaining, for testing purposes, locomotives of 
approximately the same capacity, but with different arrange- 
ments of motors and wheels, the variations in draw-bar pull, 
due to the variations of the actual tractive coefficient acting 
between wheel and rails are so great as to make very difficult 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 609 


any accurate measurements which could be made on variations 
of draw-bar. pull, due to redistribution of weights. 

The friction of rest between steel and steel measured by 
laboratory tests runs from 30 to 40 per cent. varying with the 
pressure between the surfaces in contact. With a weight of 
5 or 10 tons, as in a locomotive wheel concentrated on the 
surface in contact between the wheel and rail-head, there exists 
a condition of the surface in contact, which, as far as I know, 
has not been approximated in laboratory tests, and there is a” 
good deal of uncertainty as to the actual value of the friction 
of rest between such surfaces. Locomotives have been tested 
which show a tractive coefficient as high as 33.3 per cent., 
and the coefficient varies from that value down. In ordinary 
cases on successive tests, under, as nearly as can be seen, iden- 
tically the sa ie conditions, one may expect to obtain values 
of the coefficient varying from 15 to 25 per cent. With bad 
conditions of rail the coefficient will fall as low as 6 or 10 per 
cent., and with slipping wheels it falls to about half those 
values. Under such conditions it would be very difficult to 
obtain accurate quantitative experimental data on different 
locomotives of variation in draw-bar pull produced by the 
redistribution of weight such as has been discussed in this paper, 
where this redistribution would produce a theoretical variation 
of from 6 to 25 per cent. of the draw-bar pull. 


A paper presented at the 22d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I.E. E. 


LIMITS OF INJURIOUS SPARKING IN DIRECT-CURRENT 
COMMUTATION. 


BY THORBURN REID. 


In a paper read before the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELEC- 
TRICAL ENGINEERS in December, 1897, the author advanced 
the hypothesis that the injury done by sparking at the brushes 
of a direct-current dynamo was not due, as was then commonly 
supposed, to the current jumping across the gap between the 
segment and the brush, but was done while the brush was in 
contact with the segment, the copper of the segment being 
first melted and then volatilized by the concentration of cur- 
rent energy at one or the other of the segment edges. Perfect 
commutation was also defined as such a change in the. current 
in the coil under commutation that the current density over 
the contact surface between the brush and the segment would 
be constant and uniform, and that perfect commutation would 
result if the coil impedance were negligible as compared with 
the brush contact resistance. It was also shown that with 
perfect commutation the total energy developed over the con- 
tact surface would be a minimum and that every part of the 
contact surface would receive an equal amount of energy. On 
this principle the question of sparking is simply a question of 
the temperature of the segment while it is under the brush. 

In order to make this whole subject clearer and also to render 
this principle applicable to practical commutator design, it 
wili be of advantage to consider in detail what happens to a 
commutator segment while the machine is running. 

As the segment comes under the brush it receives a sudden 
accession of energy both by friction and by current. This 


611 


612 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


energy is developed mainly on the surface of the segment and 
immediately begins to be conducted away, partly down into 
the body of the segment and partly into that of the brush. 
When the segment has passed out from under the brush and 
until it reaches the next brush, energy is both conducted and 
radiated away from its surface. Thus the surface temperature 
of the segment oscillates between a maximum just as it leaves 
the brush and a minimum just before it enters under the next 
brush. 

Consider first the temperature variation of the segment sur- 
face while it is under the brush. If the commutation is perfect, 
energy is developed at a constant rate during the whole period 
of commutation and every part of the segment surface will re- 
ceive the same amount of energy. As soon as any part of the 
segment surface comes under the brush it begins to receive 
energy at the rate J? R/A per square inch—IJ being the brush 
current, R the brush contact resistance, and A the brush con- 
tact area—and its temperature begins to rise, the rise of tem- 
perature in a given time depending on the rate at which energy 
is being developed as compared to the average rate at which 
it is being transferred from the contact surface’ by radiation and 
conduction. More specifically, the rise in temperature during 
a given time is directly proportional to the difference between 
the heat developed and the amount radiated and conducted 
away during that time. As the temperature rises the rate of 
dissipation of energy also increases and the curve of temperature 
-rise is therefore convex upward, tending towards a maximum 
temperature at which the rate of radiation and conduction is 
just equal to that of development of heat energy. The time 
of commutation, however, is so short (from less than 0.01 to 
less than 0.001 seconds) that this maximum is not even ap- 
proached; it will, therefore, be sufficiently accurate to assume 
that the temperature rise of any part of the segment surface 
while under:the brush is proportional to the watts per square 
inch multiplied by the time of commutation; that is, it is pro- 
portional to the joules per square inch developed during com- 
mutation. : 

The contact energy consists partly of friction energy and 
partly of J?.R loss. The friction energy is distributed uniformly 
over the whole contact surface, and with perfect commutation 
the J? R energy would also be thus uniformly distributed; but 
with imperfect commutation as it exists in actual machines 


1905.] REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 613 


this is seldom if ever the case, the self-inductance of the coil 
under commutation causing the energy density to increase all 
the way from the front to the back edge of the segment; and 
since the energy at the back edge may under certain conditions 
be many times greater than will exist with perfect commuta- 
tion, it is essential that the law of variation of this energy 
density should be determined. 

In the writer’s 1898 paper the fundamental differential equa- 
tion of current in the coil under commutation was given as 
follows: 

The I R drop between the brush and the entering segment 
equals the J R drop between the brush and the receding seg- 
ment, plus the JR drop in the coil under commutation, plus 
the inductance drop in this coil, plus the reversal electromotive 
force—all of these pressures being given their proper signs. 
This is equation (1) in Appendix A at the back of this paper, 
where will be found the analysis by which it was integrated 
and by which the law of the variation of energy density was 
determined. Those who may wish to follow the analysis in 
detail are referred to that appendix; the general method fol- 
lowed will merely be indicated here. 

The fundamental differential equation is 


ti, = Wb tetig tat L Seis 
| (1) 
in which subscript 1 refers to the entering segment, subscript 
2 to the emerging segment, subscript b to the coil under com- 
mutation; ¢ is time reckoned from the beginning of the commu- 
tation period, i is current, is resistance, L the self-inductance, 
and E, is the reversal electromotive force due to the flux from 
the field. 

' “his equation is based on the assumption that but one arma- 
ture coil is under commutation under each set of brushes at 
any one time; that is, that the width of the brush contact sur- 
face is not greater than that of one segment plus the thickness 
of the insulation between two adjacent segments. It takes no 
account of the interior resistances of the brushes and segments, 
as these resistances are entirely negligible as compared with 
the brush contact resistance. This equation also assumes 
infinite: resistance between two adjacent segments and between 
the segment surface and that part of the brush surface not in 
‘contact with it. It will appear later that this last assumption 


614 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


is not strictly true for some cases of commutation, and for this 
reason certain modifications will have to be introduced in the 
final results. 

Assuming the contact resistance to vary inversely with the 
contact area and substituting for 7, 7, their values in terms of 
7,,equation (1) may be written, 


T ; Lore 
age! op ey ed) Atlee were? 
ere ; Tk caltn 2 eee ee 
Peru AD oe: Py la ” 
hab at Sen) TA eo 
t (T —2) 
i: en ast) 


Pisa 


in which the first term represents the variation of 2, for perfect 


f : tral E 4% 
commutation, that is, when 22 R andy are so small as 


to be negligible and the current is entirely governed by the 
contact resistances. The second term represents the variation 
from perfect commutation due to the coil resistance alone, the 
third term that due to the coil inductance, and the fourth term 
that due to the reversal electromotive force. 

In order to simplify the application of the final equations 
to practical problems, the writer has substituted for current, 
time, etc., various ratios—m for the ratio of instantaneous 
currents to full brush currents, » for the ratio of elapsed time 
to the time of commutation, e, for the ratio of the reversal 
electromotive force to the average J R drop across the contact 
surface, and p for the ratio T R/L, T being the time of com- 
mutation, R the resistance of the total contact area per stud, 
and L the self-inductance coefficient of the coil under commuta- 
tion. Substituting these values and neglecting r, as compared 
with R, equation (4) may be reduced to 


m, = n—(1— Pep) Shy veh cal} (8) 


Simple as this integral appears to be, the wrtter spent many 
days trying to integrate it before he discovered that it could 
only be integrated by means of an infinite series that was not 
capable of being expressed in any general form. The problem 
was finally solved, however, by giving to p certain numerical 
values which covered nearly the. whole range of practical work 


1905.] REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION: 615 


and made it possible to determine with sufficient accuracy for 
practical purposes the values of the curves lying outside the 
range of values thus determined. 

The equation was found to be integrable for integer values 
of p; equations (14), (15), and (17) in Appendix A show the 
integral of the last term of the equation for values of p equal 
to 1,2, and 3. Equation (18) shows how the integrals may be 
written by analogy for higher integer values of p. It was also 
found possible to integrate the equation for values of p equal 
to 0.5 or multiples of 0.5. Equations (10) and (12) show the 
integral equations for values of p equal to 0.5 and 1.5. 

It will be noticed that for integer values of p the integral 
contains a logarithmic term and for fractional values of p it 
contains circular functions, and while both these forms. of 
functions may sometimes be expressed as exponential functions 
of the logarithmic bases, the writer has not-been able to dis- 
cover any general form by means of which both sets of equations 
could be expressed. 

Returning now to equation (8), if e¢» = 0; that is, if there is 
no reversal electromotive force, the equation becomes 


io Gra aera 


From equation (1), if £,, L, and 7, are so small compared 
with the contact resistance RK as to be negligible, we have 
m, = ”, which is evidently the equation for perfect commuta- 


1—n\? p 
tion. Now making (f p) = CS) Vane dn, we have 


m,=n— (fF p) when there is no reversal electromotive force. 
(f p) represents, then, the amount by which the self-inductance 
of the coil causes the current to differ from the value it would 
have if the commutation were perfect. Equation (8) then be- 
: 1 

comes m, = n— (1—Ppépy) (FP). Now if p= = we have 
again im, = . That isg# the reversal electromotive force equals 
— the current behaves as though there were neither re- 
versal electromotive force nor self-inductance, and perfect com- 
~ mutation results. 

- Fig. 1 shows the. curves of current for various. values of 


a= when there is no reversal electromotive force, assuming 


616 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTA TION. [June 19 


the coil resistance to be negligible as compared with the brush 
contact resistance; the curves of the,left-hand side of the figure 
show the condition when the contact area of the segment is 
increasing, and those of the right-hand side the condition when 
the contact area is decreasing. The straight lines inclined at 
45 degrees to the horizontal represent the current variation for 
perfect commutation; that is, when the coil reactance is negli- 
gible as compared with the brush contact resistance. 

The wavy line crossing these 45-degree lines at their cen- 
ters shows the form of the current curve when the coil inductance 
is negligible and the coil resistance is equal to the brush contact 
resistance. It is evident that under these conditions the coil 


ices ’ 
Po | 
Entering Segment 
i =6- 


5, 


“SH f r 
— al | Fears RT 0 N#Nt 4 
a eae 4 
a RT_“0 2 i 2 4 wre 
pt as RL es 
2 Emerging Segment 


So 


Currents across segment contact surfaces in per cent of total brush current. 


Fic. I. 


resistance will have very little effect to distort the actual cur- 
rent curve; and since in any machine ever examined by the writer 
the coil resistance has never approached this value, he feels 
justified in neglecting it. The curve for = equal to 4 
was obtained by a step-by-step method from the differential 
equation, but is quite as accurate as the others which were 
obtained from the integral equations. 

_ Referring to the form equation (8) takes when E, = 0;namely, 
m, = n—(f p) and m, = 1—n+(f p), the curves of this figure 
show that (f p) is represented by the amount that the actual 
current deviates from the 45-degree line representing perfect 
commutation 


1905.] REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 617 


Fig. 2 shows the current densities for the currents of Fig. 1. 
The main interest in this. figure lies in the right-hand curves. 
It will be noticed that for all values of — equal to or greater 
than unity the current ‘density goes to infinity just before the 
segment emerges from under the brush. It was this phenom- 
enon that led Messrs. Arnold and Mie to the conclusion that 


with any values of 


equal to or greater than unity, spark- 


L 
Rae 


ing must ensue, 


=" 
——{ _—7F 
oo 


( Se GRO I ESE CA) On eLwee Bae so Omi On af ceeS 20) LO 
Current densities on segment contact surfaces in per cent of average cu rrent densities 


AiGy 2a 


That a spark will be present under such conditions seems 
probable, although, as the writer will show later, this Spark is 
not necessarily injurious nor is it certain that there will be any 
spark at all, despite the fact that the density will still reach 
infinity theoretically for all values of reversal electromotive 
force less than ae if is equal to or greater than ‘unity. 
It is also of interest that. the final values of the current densities 

te A Eka 


. aoe r 
for values of oF less than unity are equal to TR 


Sot 


L 


It was deduced from equation (8). that a reversal electromotive 


force equal to exactly neutralized the effect of the coil 


618 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


inductance and produced perfect commutation. Assuming that 
this reversal electromotive force remains constant while the 
current taken by the brushes is reduced to zero, a current will 
be produced in the short-circuited coil by reversal electromotive 
force alone. This current will be in the same direction as the 
brush current in the entering segment and in the opposite direc- 
tion in the emerging segment. Fig. 3 shows the form the cur- 
rent curves will take under these conditions, the curves of 
current in the emerging segment being for convenience plotted 
as positive although in reality they are negative. 

Fig. 4 shows the corresponding current densities; it will 
be noticed that again the current densities in the emerging 


bo 
|_| 


Entering Segme; ; Emerging Segment 
Pncr, 


Ratio of current ut no load to cygrent Twhey e, = m for various values of iG 


Fie, 3. 


segment reach infinity for all values of _—_ equal to or greater 


than unity. 

Remembering that these curves as well as those of Fig. 2 
represent the ratio of the actual current densities to the average 
current densities over the whole brush contact surface, we 


reach the following conclusions for the conditions assumed 
lr ive ; 
when r7T's equal to or greater than unity. 


1. If there is no reversal electromotive force, the current 
density will reach infinity just before the segment emerges from 


under the brush for every value of brush current except zero, | 


1905.] REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 619 


2. For any value of reversal electromotive force less than 
Jak 
ETA 
segment emerges from under the brush for every value of the 
brush current except zero. 


the current density will reach infinity just before the 


3. If the reversal electromotive force equals dads and I 


i 
have any value greater than zero, the current density at no load 
will reach infinity just before the segment emerges from under 
the brush. 
From these three conclusions we finally conclude: 


4, That when 


= is equal to or greater than unity, the 


y ‘ 
4 - pera oe oe arn she 
| 


ete 
ele 


{ if | 
{ 
i : 
Enterin 
Su 
RT 


a a et 


T ; T L 
Ratio of current density at no load to + when ¢;=— op for various values of Ry, 


Fic. 4. 


current density will reach infinity just before the segment 
emerges from under the brush for ail loads greater than zero 


load if EF, is less than and for any value of F, at no load. 


by 


From this it follows that when RT is equal to or greater than 


unity, the current density can be prevented from reaching 
infinity only by so proportioning the load and reversal electro- 


motive force that FE, = ps If then we assume that spark- 


ing will necessarily occur when the current density tends to 


620 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 
infinity, it will be possible to prevent sparking under these con- 
ditions only by causing the reversal electromotive force to vary 
Bhi 
directly with the load and to be always exactly equal to re 


since this is a condition that it is impossible to create in prac- 


| or, 
RT is greater 
than unity sparking can not be prevented at any load except 
by accident. 

Several machines whose constants the writer has examined 


tice it follows that for any machine in which 


: ; L 
commutate satisfactorily with a value of RT greater than 


unity and without movement of the brushes; it is certain that 
such a machine would run sparklessly at light loads with no re- 
versal electromotive force, or would admit of a certain range of 
load with constant reversal electromotive force without spark- 
ing. A further consideration of the curves will indicate an 
explanation of this seeming inconsistency. _ 

As the current density increases, the J RK drop across the con- 
tact surface increases until it reaches a point sufficient for it to 
cause surface leakage across the insulation between two seg- 
ments under the brush. This leakage allows the current to 
have a larger value when the contact is broken between the 
segment and the brush than would otherwise be the case, and 
the current must therefore either continue to flow across the 
segment insulation to the receding brush or must jump through 
the air, or both. Now although the current density may be 
very high, the amount of current flowing may be very minute, 
so minute in fact as not to produce a visible spark even if it 
jumped through the air, and a surface leakage across the segment 
insulation need not be either visible or audible. But even if 
there be a visible spark from this cause, it does not follow 
that this spark is injurious. On the contrary, we have number- 
less experiments to prove that it is not injurious to any appre- 
ciable extent, if at all. 

Many thousands of sparks may flash between the two points 
or knobs of a Ruhmkorff coil without any evidence of injury 
to the points or knobs. Many of you have doubtless seen the 
brilliant display of sparks on the commutator of the old Thomson- 
Houston open-circuit arc dynamo, which did little, if any, 
injury to the commutator. It is not necessary to go as far 
afield as this for examples of sparking without injury. There 


1905.] REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 621 


are, or used to be, many direct-current generators which sparked 
continuously without resulting in visible injury to the commuta- 
tor. In fact, all of our information on this subject goes to show 
that such a spark injures, not the conductor, but the insulation 
that it pierces or disrupts. The main energy of such a spark must 
clearly exist in the space across which it jumps, since prac- 
tically the whole diference of pressure exists in this space. 
When this space is filled with air, it is the air that receives 
the energy of the spark; if it is occupied by some solid insu- 
lating medium, it is this insulation that receives the energy 
and is pierced or disrupted. The lightning stroke injures only 
the insulators in its path unless the volume of current be too 
great. 
In order that the segment copper may be worn away it is 
necessary that energy be developed in the copper itself, not in 
the insulation or in the space between the receding segment 
and the brush. A reference to the curves of Fig. 5 will show 
clearly how the energy necessary to accomplish this is developed. 
Referring first to Fig. 1; the line between the two sets of 
curves represents the point at which the back edge of the seg- 
ment first comes under the brush; that edge remains in contact 
with the brush while the current has the values shown in the 
right-hand set of curves, and the current density on the back 
edge will be that corresponding to the right-hand curves of 
Fig. 2. The same is true also for Figs. 3 and 4, The electrical 
energy developed per square inch in the back edge of the seg- 
ment during commutation will then be the summation of the 
I? R losses per square inch for the right-hand curves of Figs. 
2 and 4, and this will be the maximum energy density that will 
occur anywhere on the segment. The curves of Fig. 5 show 


‘ ; : Ve 
how this energy density varies with the values of RT for 


values of the reversal electromotive force varying from zero to 


! a, the dotted curve showang, the energy density at the back 
IL 
ive of the segment at no load when & = vam 


These curves are not theoretically accurate, as it was mani- 
festly impossible that the energy density should ever reach 
infinity. They were plotted from the average of 10 equidistant 
values of n ranging from 0.05 to 0.95. The area thus excluded 


622 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


L : 
is small in any case. For ==. equal to unity the theoretical 


Fae ke 
energy density is 3.29 (see appendix A) while the curve gives 
3.15, a difference of only about 4%. 
The analysis in Appendix A also shows that the energy den- 


sity in the back edge of the segment for ae equal unity 
will be a minimum when EF, = 1.645 rape that the minimum 


energy density ratio is 0.584, and that the energy density in 


the maximum energy density to energy density for perfect com- 
mutation (rq = 2(he/ae ) for various values of the reversal 
12 R/A 


E.M.F. between er = 0 and €s = 
The dotted curve shows the maximum energy density ratio at no 


the back edge of the segment will begin to increase again if 
the value of E, increases beyond this value. The curves also 


show that the energy density ratio at no load for E, = e- 
R . 
is unity for i = 0.9. It is theoretically unity for ie 


= 1 (Appendix A). 
It will be noticed that the curves of energy density rise very 
rapidly for values of Sy less than unity until for a 


equal to 0.25 and £,= 0 the energy density at the back edge of 


1905.] REID; DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 623 


the segment is 14 times the average and for equals 0.5 


ip 
it is 6 times the average. Also the energy density at no load 


L ; 
for £, = is nearly 10 times the average for ae equal 


0.25 and 3 times the average for ne equals 0.5. Thus when 


T R/L equals 0.25 if sufficient reversal E is supplied to bring 
the energy density down to the average at full load, it will 
be nearly 10 times the average at no load. 

Although the coil inductance increases the energy density in 
the emerging segment and decreases it in the entering segment, 
the total energy of commutation is increased by the coil in- 
ductance (see Appendix A,) by an amount equal to 

GPyas 
n (l—n) 

If there is no reversal electromotive force the ratio of the 

actual total J? R loss to that of perfect commutation is about 2 


when = 151025 5 43 tor a equal to 0.5; 1.15 for aes 


equal to 1, and 1.04 for ee equal 2. It is now possible to 


apply these curves in the determination of a practical criterion 
for injurious sparking. 

The friction energy per stud equals a constant times the 
brush pressure times the number of brushes per stud times the 
speed of travel of the commutator surface times the length of 
the period of commutation; the friction energy density will 
equal the friction energy divided by the area of contact surface. 

The current watts per stud for perfect commutation equals 
the square of the current per stud times the contact resistance 
per stud. For actual commutation this quantity must be mul- 
tiplied by a factor depending on the self-inductance of the coil 
under commutation and on the reversal electromotive force. 

Consider first the case when the brushes are set at the neutral 
point and there is no reversal electromotive force. The maxi- 
mum current energy density will then occur at the back edge 
of the segment and its ratio to the energy density for perfect 
commutation can be ascertained from the curves of Fig. 5 for 


E, = 0 after the ratio as has been calculated. Adding to 


624 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMM UTATION. [June 19 


this the friction energy density, we obtain the total energy 
density at the back edge of the segment where the energy 
density is a maximum. 

Secondly, when the brushes are given a forward lead for 
generators or a backward. lead for motors, so that the effect of 
self-inductance in increasing the energy density is reduced or 
even entirely eliminated by means of the reversal electromotive 
force set up by the flux from the field, the actual maximum 
energy density will lie somewhere between that of perfect com- 
mutation and that for no reversal electromotive force, depending 


: LL : 
on the ratio of E, to FF and if the value of E, is known, 


the increase of energy density corresponding to the known 


value of fe and E, can be obtained from the curves of Fig. 5. 


L 

Thus the curves of Fig. 5 furnish a means for the conditions 
assumed of determining the maximum energy density for any 
part of the segment contact surface, and since the maximum 
rise of temperature of any portion of this contact surface while 
under the brush is directly proportional to the maximum energy 
density under the conditions of practical working a means is 
also obtained of ascertaining the maximum rise of temperature. 
Before proceeding further in this branch of the investigation, 
it is necessary to consider another condition affecting, not the 
rise of temperature of the segment while under the brush, but 
its total rise of temperature above the surrounding atmosphere. 

As the segment passes out from under the brush its surface 
begins to cool, and as the rate of dissipation and transfer of 
heat decreases as the temperature falls the rate of cooling will 
also decrease and the curve of temperature of the segment 
surface between brushes will be concave upwards, tending 
toward a minimum, the temperature of the surrounding atmos- 
phere. 

When the machine has been running long enough at constant 
load for the temperatures to have reached a stable condition, 
it is evident that the fall of temperature between brushes must 
equal exactly the rise of temperature while under the brush. 
As a corollary of this statement, all the heat energy developed 
on the segment surface while under the brush. must have left 
that surface when it reaches the next brush. Also the curve 
representing the fall of temperature will be represented by the 
temperature of the different parts of the commutator surface _ 


1905.] REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 625 


from one set of brushes to the next while the machine is running 
under load. 

If therefore it be possible to take the temperature of the 
commutator surface at various points between brushes while 
a machine is running under load, points on this curve will be 
determined together with the maximum rise of temperature of 
the segment while under the brush, and its minimum tempera- 
ture just before entering under the brush. Sufficient data are 
not available to determine points on these curves by analysis, 
but some light can be thrown on the problem by a consideration 
of the little that is known pending further experiments. 

The melting point of copper being in the neighborhood of 
2000° fahr., this temperature must be reached at some point 
of the contact surface in order that the copper may be melted 
and volatilized. That this temperature must be confined to 
an exceedingly thin stratum of the segment follows from a con- 
sideration of the specific heat of copper and the energy de- 
veloped during commutation. Taking the specific heat of copper 
as 0.095 B.t.u. per degree fahr., one joule will raise the tempera- 
ture of one cubic inch of copper 1/32 of a degree fahr. The 
maximum energy density the writer has found so far in actual 
machines is less than 0.7 joules per square inch developed in 
about 0.003 seconds; this amount of energy could raise to a 
temperature of 2 000° fahr. from say about 200°, about 0.00001 
of a cubicinch, and the heat required for fusion would reduce 
still further the amount of copper that would be melted. Some 
of this heat is also conducted up into the brush, and the whole 
rise of temperature does not take place during one commutation 
period so that it is not possible to say just how much of the 
segment may be melted at each spark, but these figures show 
how very small the amount must be. 

Although this energy is practically all developed at the con- 
tact surface, such a high temperature as this would result in a 
very rapid flow of heat by conduction down through the seg- 
ment. In attempting to determine how rapid this flow would 
be the writer was unable to find any experimental results on 
the flow of heat under such conditions. The rate of flow of 
heat through various metals (including copper) between two 
planes a known distance apart and at a constant difference of 
temperature has been determined, but the writer has been unable 
to find any data as to the rate of flow between two planes whose 
difference of temperature is constantly changing by reason of the 
“intermittent applications of heat energy to one of them. 


626 REID; DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


The use of the constants given for constant difference of tem- 
perature between the two planes gave such incongruous results 
that the writer was led to the conclusion that there was present 
under such circumstances a property similar to inertia in the 
case of the flow of liquids, or to self-inductance in the case of 
the flow of electricity. That some such inertia phenomena are 
present is also a natural déduction from the fundamental theory 
of heat as a mode of motion, since on this theory if the tempera- 
ture of a body be raised the speed of vibration of its molecules, 
is increased and time is required to overcome the inertia of these 
molecules. In view then of the lack of data on this phase of 
the subject the rise of temperature of the segment under the 
brush does not seem to be capable of analytical determination, 
but can probably be ascertained by means of the experiment 
indicated by the writer—that of obtaining the temperature of 
the commutator surface at various points between two sets of 
brushes while the machine is running under load. 

It is probable that very shortly after a machine is stopped 
the temperature of the whole commutator surface is practically 
uniform. It is certain that the subsequent rate of cooling of 
this surface is entirely too low to account for a fall of tem- 
perature of anything like 1800° fahr. between the time the load 
is shut down on the machine and the time its temperature is 
taken by thermometer, a fall of temperature which must have 
taken place during that period if the segment surface has risen 
in temperature to the melting point of copper. However, if 
the load is taken off a sparking machine and the brushes im- 
mediately raised off the commutator, there will be a very rapid 
flow of heat from the hot surface down through the segment 
by conduction as well as from the hotter portions of the surface 
to the cooler portions that will soon bring the temperature of 
the whole commutator copper very nearly to uniformity. 
After this condition of uniformity is reached the subsequent 
cooling takes place almost entirely by radiation, the internal 
thermal resistance of the copper for the short distances con- 
cerned in a commutator being but a small fraction of the ex- 
ternal thermal resistance of radiation. Consequently the 
flow of heat from the hotter to the cooler parts of the’ com- 
mutator will be many times as rapid as the dissipation 
of heat from its surface. The time required, therefore, to reduce 
the temperature of the commutator to uniformity will be but 
a very small fraction of the time that will be required to reduce 


1905.) | REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 627 


its temperature by radiation by the same amount, as the tem- 
perature of its hottest portion is reduced by conduction in the 
process of reducing the temperature of the whole commutator 
to uniformity. The rate of cooling of the commutator surface 
after the machine has been shut down furnishes therefore no 
information of value for determining the distribution of tem- 
peratures while the machine is running under load. 

The heat energy present at and near the surface of the seg- 
ment as it leaves the brush is transferred partly by radiation 
and partly by conduction. The rate of radiation will be di- 
rectly proportional to the difference of temperature between 
the segment surface and the surrounding air, but the law gov- 
‘erning the rate of conduction through the segment is, as has 
been already indicated, not so easily determined. 

It may be possible to approximate this law empirically by 
determining a series of points on the curve of temperature of 
the commutator surface between brushes. Another method 
which would perhaps be of more practical value would be to 
determine for a number of machines the energy density at 
which sparking commences and to plot from these results a 
curve of sparking limits with maximum energy densities as 
ordinates and frequency of commutation periods as abscissas. 

If we may assume the fall of temperature per second of the 
“segment surface between brushes to be constant per degree 
rise of temperature, the equation expressing the maximum 
temperature of the segment as it leaves the brush may’ be ex- 
pressed thus (see Appendix B for the deduction of this equa- 


tion): 
Po ge (29) 


in which a and b are constants, Hg the maximum joules per 
square inch developed during commutation (including also 
friction energy), 7, is the time between brushes and ¢ is the base 
of the Naperian system of logarithms. An analytical deter- 
mination of the constants a and b does not seem possible, but 
they can probably be approximated by tests on actual ma- 
chines in the manner that has been indicated; that is, by de- 
termining on a running machine the temperatures of the emerg- 
ing and entering segments, b being determined by the con- 
sideration that the difference between these temperatures 1s 
equal to b Hg, and the maximum rise of temperature being 
equal to 7 the equation can be further solved for a. 


628 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


If the exponent of e in this equation is a very small fraction 
22T>» approximates the value 1+a T, and equation (29) be- 


: lt+aT ; 
comes approximately t =} Ha ae’ or since a TJ, can 
b 


be neglected as compared with unity, equation (29) becomes 


b Hg 


aT This means that if the fall of temperature between 
b 


t= 


brushes is small, the maximum rise of temperature of the seg- 
ment surface above the atmosphere will vary directly with the 
maximum energy density times the frequency of commutation 
periods; that is, it would vary with the maximum energy den- 
sity in joules per second developed on the commutator surface 
or with the maximum watt density. In other words, the 
temperature of any given part of the segment surface will be 
nearly constant throughout a revolution, the rate of transfer 
of heat from that part would be nearly constant, and the tem- 
perature would be that necessary to transfer each second the 
average amount of heat energy generated per second. 

Again the term e 4 Te increases very much more rapidly in 
value than does its exponent. Thus for e4 Te equal to 100, 
aT, = 4.605 nearly. Thus if a T, has a value say as high as 
5, equation (29) may be reduced approximately to the form 
t= bH,. This means that almost the whole rise of tem- 
perature would take place during each commutation period 
and the temperature of the segment surface would fall nearly 
to that of the atmosphere between each commutation period. 
Considering the very small value of T;, it is probable that the 
conditions conform much more nearly to the former of these 
hypotheses than to the latter; that is, the true equation may 
approximate the form t = iil 

If experiments should prove this to be the case; that is, that 
there is no great difference of temperature between the corre- 
sponding parts of the commutator segments between two brushes, 
the problem of sparking would be merely a question of the 
maximum watt density on the commutator surface; and a 
more or less accurate criterion of sparking would be determined 
for all classes of direct-current commutating machines by a de- 
termination of the watt density that produces sparking on a 
single machine. 


— 1905.) REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 629 


_ Whatever may be the truth with regard to these hypotheses, 
the maximum temperature will depend on Hg and Ty. For 
any particular frequency of commutation periods, therefore, 
freedom from injurious sparking will depend on a certain 
maximum energy density not being exceeded, and that maxi- 
mum energy density will be the same for all machines of the 
same class and with the same frequency of commutation. 

That this critical value must be more or less inaccurate is 
a necessary result of practical conditions. The actual point 
where sparking commences is difficult to determine, and no 
two observers will agree as to this. Both friction energy and 
the contact resistance depend on the condition of the com- 
mutator and brush surface and on the force with which the 
brush is pressed down on the commutator surface. The con- 
tact resistance is also a function of the temperature. 

In “many cases only a part, sometimes a very small part, 
of the brush surface is in contact with the commutator. But 
while these conditions prevent scientific accuracy in the de- 
termination of this criterion, they do not destroy its value for 
practical work, because these imperfections are bound to occur 
in practice and the criterion finally established must be such 
as to leave a reasonable margin of safety for such imperfections 
and inaccuracies. The best method then would be to use for 
this purpose machines engaged in actual commercial work and 
then choose a limiting value which leaves a sufficient margin of 
safety. ; 

Unfortunately the data at the writer's disposal, while stating 
what machines did or did not spark at full load, included but 
a small number of machines in which the actual sparking limit 
was determined. The tests were the ordinary commercial tests 
made on the machines before they were shipped from the fac- 
tory, and no attempt was made to determine the value of the 
reversal electromotive force. 

Another, though less important, source of inaccuracy lies in 
the difficulty of calculating with any degree of accuracy the 
self-inductance of the armature coil. The comparative unim- 
portance of this source of inaccuracy is due to the fact that in 


most cases the ratio _ is so great as not to increase the 


energy density to a material extent, and a large variation in its 
value does not much change the maximum energy density. 
Considering now the conditions when reversal electromotive 


630 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


force is present, the energy density at full load will be a minimum 
Ee. rer ee 
when F, = 7» since commutation is perfect when this 


relation obtains. Any further increase in the reversal electro- 
motive force increases the maximum energy density, but trans- 
fers its locality from the back to the front edge of the segment. 
Such further increase in the reversal electromotive force also 
increases the energy density at no load and at all intermediate 
loads so thet it is detrimental in every respect. It is in fact 
customary in practice to move ‘the brushes from the neutral 
point only so far as may be necessary to prevent sparking at 
the maximum load at which the machine is required to run 
sparklessly, and no farther. If then the machine will run 
sparklessly at this load with any value of the reversal electro- 
motive force, it will do so when the reversal E reaches such a 
value as to produce perfect commutation. It is a fair assump- 
tion then that in commercial work the reversal electromotive 
force will not exceed this value. Yo 

On the other hand, sparkless commutation may be secured 
with a value of reversal electromotive force less than this critical 
value, since every increase in reversal electromotive force from 
zero to this critical value decreases the maximum energy den- 
sity, and in most cases of sparkless running it will probably be 
found that the critical value of reversal electromotive force is 
not reached. 

The minimum value of the maximum energy density is the 
value for perfect commutation, and if this maximum energy 
density is not too great sparkless commutation may be achieved 
at full load, provided sufficient reversal electromotive force be 
available. 

The actual value of reversal electromotive force that will 
allow of sparkless commutation at full load can be determined 
by means of the curves of Fig. 5 if the sparking density is known. 
Having determined the friction energy density, the remainder, 
after subtracting this from the energy density that will produce 
sparking, will be the allowable current energy density. This 
divided by the current energy density for perfect commutation 
gives the energy density ratio that must be attained by means 
of the reversal electromotive force. Find the ordinate in Fig. 5 


corresponding to the value of as for the machine, and on 


L 


1905.] REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 631 


that ordinate find the point corresponding to the energy density 
ratio already determined. If this point lies on one of the curves, 
the value of E, for that curve is the value sought; if the point 
lies between the curves, the required value of F, may be obtained 
with sufficient accuracy by interpolation. 

The dotted curve of Fig. 5 shows the energy density ratio 


ateno load tor By = =—— 
im 

= the energy density ratio at no load will be reduced in 

the same proportion. If this energy density is below the spark- 

ing limit the machine will then run sparklessly at no load as 

well as at full load. 

This is based on two more or less inaccurate assumptions: 
one that the reversal electromotive force is not affected by the 
armature ampere-turns; that is, it remains constant while the 
load changes from full load to no load; the other that the density 
of the reversal flux is uniform in the field swept over by the coil 
under commutation during the commutation period. 

The effect of the armature reaction on the strength of the 
reversal flux field is a matter of much importance. It is a 
matter that lies outside the scope of this paper and deserves a 
separate investigation. Its solution would serve to increase 
the accuracy of the method outlined above since thus the re- 
versal electromotive force and therefore the energy density at 
no load corresponding to the reversal electromotive force re- 
quired and obtained at full load could be accurately determined. 

That the density of the reversal flux is not uniform in the 
- field swept through by the coil during commutation has been 

shown by experiment, but owing to the short period of com- 
mutation the variation is not very great and. need not affect 
seriously the accuracy of equations based on the assumption 


that it is uniform. 


and if E, equals any fraction of 


“aun AAP sore 
Finally there may be cases in which the ratio mye 


small that sufficient reversal electromotive force can not be ob- 
tained to produce perfect commutation at fullioad? aAicthe 
effect of the armature reaction in lessening and distorting the 
reversal flux could be neglected, such a condition would prob- 
ably never exist in any practical machine. This again, however, 
is a question outside the scope of this paper. } 


TR 
In only a few machines have I found values of pe less: 


632 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


than unity and those were commercial machines that ran satis- 
factorily as regards sparking. On the other hand, the writer 
has found that most of the machines which sparked badly had 


values of = less than unity, in some cases as low as 1/15, 


which is evidence of the truth of the hypothesis set forth in 
his 1897 paper—that injurious sparking is not necessarily due 
to the jumping of the current from the brush to the segment 
after contact is broken, 

Occasionally in practice the reversal electromotive force is 


LC F 
made to exceed the value ee for the reason that under this 


condition the maximum energy density occurs at the front 
edge of the segment; and although the commutator may be 
and often is thus worn away at its front edge, no spark will at 
first give evidence of that fact, forthe reason that the copper 
is not volatilized; no arc is formed and the melted copper is 
merely drawn over the surface of the segment by the brush. 
Eventually, as the surface is thus worn down, the energy den- 
sity will increase until sufficient copper is melted to follow the 
brush until it leaves the segment when the current will flow 
through this film of melted copper, volatilize it and form an 
arc which appears as a spark. 

In conclusion, it will be well to consider carefully the limita- 
tions imposed upon the reasonings and conclusions contained 
in this paper on account of the approximations involved and 
the neglect of the effect of various conditions that are present 
in reality and which further study may show to have an influence 
sufficient to affect appreciably the accuracy of the deductions. 

In most machines the brushes cover more than one segment 
and its insulation, so that two or more coils are commutating 
at once; the inductance effect of one coil is thus complicated 
by the mutual inductance of an adjacent coil, the latter com- 
mutating during part at least of the commutation period of 
the former. 

Experimental investigations of which accounts have been 
published indicate that while this factor has an appreciable 
influence on the distribution of the current, it is not great 
enough to require material correction in the criterion of sparking 
that may be established by tests on machines running under 
the conditions assumed in thispaper. 


9 
1905.] REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 633 


The idea has so long been accepted that the current’s jumping 
from the receding segment to the brush; that is, the current’s 
not being completely reversed at the end of the commutation 
period, was the real cause of sparking that no attention has 
been paid to the distribution of energy over the contact surfaces. 
The problems that follow in the wake of this conception are 
new and difficult to solve. 

Probably the most difficult problem thug presented concerns 
the transfer and dissipation of heat energy from the contact 
surface both during and between commutation periods. Data 
on which to base an analysis seem to be lacking and, even if 
this were not so, the problem is sufficiently complicated to point 
to direct experiment as the only practical means of solving it. 
Since the frequency of commutation periods ranges from about 
15 to 100 per second the conditions appear to be comparable 
to those obtained in an incandescent lamp fed by an alternating 
current of a frequency low enough to cause a visible variation 
in the light. In the case of the incandescent lamp the surface 
of the filament is so large and its area for the conduction of 
heat is so’small as compared with its volume that the greater 
part of the heat is probably radiated rather than conducted 
away. On the other hand, the area of conduction in the case 
of a commutator is comparatively very great, the thermal re- 
sistance of copper is much less than is that of carbon, and the 
external thermal resistance of both carbon and copper is many 
times greater than is the internal thermal resistance. It is 
therefore probable that there would be a large variation of the 
temperature of the commutator segment at a frequency much 
higher than would cause an appreciable variation in the light 
of an incandescent lamp. 

The distorting and weakening of the reversal flux by the 
armature ampere-turns and the variation in the reversal flux 
density during commutation are also more or less uncertain 
factors in the problem, although some work has been done 
towards investigating them. 

An investigation of the temperature of the different parts 
of the commutator surface while running, and after the load 
has been steady long enough for these temperatures to have 
become stable, should tend to show the accuracy of the deduc- 
tions contained in this paper, especially if a machine with a 
low frequency of commutation periods is chosen for the test, 
and from such a test there might be deduced a criterion of 
sparking more accurate than is at present available. 


634 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 


‘ APPENDIX A. 


DERIVATION OF EQUATIONS OF CURRENT AND ENERGY AT BRUSH 
CONTACT SURFACE. 


NOTATION. 


7, = instantaneous current across contact surface of entering 
segment. 


1, = instantaneous €urrent across contact surface of emerging 
segment. 


1, = instantaneous current in coil under commutation. 
I = brush current per stud. 


t = elapsed time reckoned from start of commutation period 
of active coil. 


T = time required for reversing current in active coil. 


y, = instantaneous resistance of contact surface of entering 
segment. 


r, = instantaneous resistance of contact surface of emerging 
segment. 


ry = resistance of active coil. 


R 


total contact surface resistance per stud. 


E, = reversal electromotive force. 
L = coefficient of self-inductance of active coil. 


4 4 ise t I-R 
mM, wy gh Ad epee ot din 4 pt hindi si as Fe: 


(fj p) = difference between actual instantaneous current with 
no reversal electromotive force and the instantaneous current 
for perfect commutation. 


w, = total instantaneous watts per stud in both segments. 
W, = total average watts per stud. 
w, = instantaneous watts in emerging segment. 


Hg = energy density per square inch in joules on emerging 
segment. 


1905.] REID; DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 635 


rq = ratio of actual Hg to Hg for perfect commutation. 


Assuming but one coil commutated at a time, brush thickness 
equal to width of one segment plus width of one insulation 
between segments, and neglecting the internal resistance of 
brush and segment, we have as the fundamental differential 
equation of electromotive forces by Kirchoft’s law, 


dig 


4,7, = ty To$ty 7, +L ay 


+ EF, (1) 


and since iy = z~—1, andi,+71,=1 


2 


: : dt 
4% = ty —teithl-ni,-L +E, or 
° tb at, 
4,8 +72th) = I (r.+ eI EE, ae + E, (2) 
iB sh 
and since ES Trg PIN ore eae j 


Yb 
ee ee 2 Bie) di, 


i= aaReniTa) | TR+nf—) dt * 
t (T —1) 
T? R+1 t(T —2) i (3) 


or 


| r 
i(T-1) T-2) 5 meen. Bo. 
‘s= 71+ 7RGyIT OT) TT? Rtnt (= dt 


pti )) 
T?R + mt (T-2) a . (4) 


636 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


if = 0, wehavei,= = J — aT ype ais + Ue, (5) 
or 
m, =n — OO + nm) ey (6) 
which is to be integrated. 
Multiplying both sides by eo we have 
dm n? nto ne n? 


m 


Gn —w? Gone Pg etl ot ees 


Since the left-hand term is the complete integral of 


m, Wear dn 
and since 
n? n+l ] nP 
(asap 2" Stamp ~ > )eraaye om we have 


ne 2 n P+1 Np 
dag Wg Ween Tae TES EAT I at os 9 WGese: (7) 


MAE ds (1— pep) rs ee fa pan (8) 


or 


in which 
(l—n)? (> n? 


Rn) ae 


dn 


so that m, = n—(1—pep») (f p) andm, = (1—n)+(l — per) (fp) 
For no load from equation (5) we have 


iy =p MOE Se nm) Foris = + O- pen) GP) 


(f p) can only be integrated for all values of p by means of 
an infinite series, but for practical purposes it will be sufficient 
to integrate it for values of p = 1/2, 3/2, 1, 2, and 3 


For p= 


1905.] REID; DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 637 


Let l—n = x. Then 


Spt = fond x =~ f20-)tdx = - 


x (1 —x*)? —sin—' x + constant = — (1—n)* nt —sin—! (1 —n)4 de 


(9) 


(1 — n)* cos—! (1 —n)* — (1—n)t nt (10) 


nt 


And (fp); = 


3 
ay) 


| aaa" (1—n)-+ + 3 fo» (l—n)-4+dn 


= —nt (1—n)++4+3 nt 1 —n)+ —3 fe (l—n)-+dn 


ee Cem t 8 =m) mbt Bint (1—n)* — =e 
(fp | et 3 mt ot Bin am Ff 
(12) 

=2(1~n)~3-—" Gp); 
p=1 
tel dx d 

Let « = 1— 7 then iy n= oe ee xadx 
——— ime (1—m)+constant = —log(l1—”)—-n © (13) 
(fp), = —(1—n) — — log (1=2) (14) 


p=? 


638 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


n? ox. 20% rae “A Z 


{lee yee ah Ve —e EY lor amt (15) 


p=3 
n3 Spiral dx 3dx 3dx ied 1 
TRSTh Uae Lae: x? x 2(1—n)? 
3 3 
= 3 wmost 2 aed 
G9), = Soe aon Sloe a—9)t an 


And by analogy for integer values of p. 


(Pe = Graipa (m—? F Pe) (18) 


Total watts in both segments 


wm 2 
mM, 


n S —n 


iar ae ( “)PR (19) 


w, _ {n— (1 —Pep) GP)? , (1-n+ pep) FPP 
EMI ne n Ll=n , 


> 


1 
(i pes pp) Wee x (fp)? ; 
Lila oa ee: ih apeera yee al 
0 


Energy density at back edge of segment. 


vf 1 
Ha= | v5, ~PR m,? 
f Baerk | tp 
0 0 


I? R 2(1— pep) Fr) , A— pep)? Fp)? 


1905.] REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 639 


1 1 
PER tnx20-pe) | WPanra-pear{ EP an} 


v0 


(21) 

1 1 : 2 
T= [anes qi ~ren{ teat dn+ a—peny | Ot, dn 
( 0 (22) 


tater p = 1 


GB) 2 aig) ihe 


tq = {f j1-2¢ ( eee) oa") 


Bee ( + tog (1 —"))"t dn where € =1-pe, 


n 


| | 
= fi} aap Oy ee ee = awe ae kan (23) 


0 


log? (1 —n) = Lee Pe log (1 —n) 
ee (l—n)-—2 rag eas 


fg (1—e)*n—e I= 1692 (1—n) —2e jee dn 


nN n 


ss 2 3 4 
Since — 2¢ cece = 2¢ 1 n +5 + 5 se = +ete. 


n> n' 


1l—n 
ae 


n? 
2 (p= oe 
log? (1 n)-+2e{nter4 


rq=(l1—e)’n—-@ Fete.| 


+constant. When e,=1, e=0 and rg=1 .. constant = 0 and we 


if 1 1 
haverg = (I-e'42e{1 + tat ap tetet = C — 0) 


640 REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


4+2x1.645 e (Legendre’s values) or rg = 141.29e+e? (24) 


When ey = 0, ra = 3.29, ofa 1.29+2¢=0, e=—0.645, ¢p = 1.645 


and rg is a minimum when ep, = 1.645 and the minimum value 
of rg is 0.584 


CuRRENT DENSITY. 


ty 
4, .m 1, Ga, om 
ee we Aw Sime (25) 
A 
and 
ty 
a, =m, 
T in (26) 
-A 


No load energy density forp =1 E,=1 


log (1 — ") 


n 


(fp) =—-(1-n) ( a 


1 
21 1-— 27q1— 
al {, 4 2leC=”) adh ce ks fe Oh an 
0 


Ooo Be dn— Log og t-n)-2 EC dn 


n n 


1— 
n 


=n— 


Z log? (I—n)+const. When n=0, rg=0 and const. = 0. 


1-—n 
n 


Therefore rg = n— 


log? 1-») | = 1 (27) 


1905.] REID: DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. 641 


APPENDIX B. 


DEDUCTION OF EQUATION FOR THE FINAL MAXIMUM RISE OF TEM- 
PERATURE OF THE COMMUTATOR SURFACE. 


tm = maximum difference between the temperature of the 
segment surface and that of the surrounding. atmosphere after 
temperatures have become stable. 

t = rise of temperature while the segment is under the 
brush. +t = difference between the temperature of the segment 
surface and that of the surrounding atmosphere at any time 
reckoned from the end of the commutation period. 

t, = difference of temperature of the segment and the atmo- 
sphere just before the segment comes under the brush. 

T, = length of time between commutation periods. 

a = degrees fall of temperature per second per degree differ- 
ence of temperature between the segment surface and the sur- 
rounding atmosphere (assumed to be constant). 


—drt=artdt ee = — adt or log t = —at + constant. 
Tt 
When ¢ = 0, t = tm and constant = log tm 


t G 
“log ~ =ator ~=ée 
T t 


When t = Tp, T = T, and we have = sar Get 
2 9 


Butte. —ty= ds eae =e 
m c 
eur? 
OF Tm = Te ee | (28) 
and t, = a (29) 


642 REYD DIRECT-CURRENT COMMUTATION. [June 19 


If t, varies directly with the energy density Hg then t] = 
b Hg and we have 


e 
Tm = b Haam (30). 


03 

(08) 3 | 
? ; gu Stee 
i 


1905.) ‘DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 643 


Discussion on “‘ Limits oF INjJURIOUS SPARKING IN DIRECT- 
CURRENT COMMUTATION.”” 


Gano §S. Dunn: Mr. Reid’s paper gives usa theory to account 
for the phenomenon which I think is the best we have so far 
although to my mind it does not explain all of the facts that 
we observe. The theory that the blackening of the commutator 
bars is due to volatilization of the copper is confirmed by the 
following fact: when the sparking has not been too severe 
there is a very delicate layer of copper deposited on the under 
side of the brush which layer I have observed may be com- 
pletely removed from one brush and deposited upon a brush 
of opopsite polarity if, for instance in the case of a generator, 
the polarity of the generator be reversed. The fact that this 
layer of copper changes its brush when the current changes 
its direction, implies that the action is electrolytic, and we 
know it could be electrolytic only if the copper were volatilized. 
I cannot account for sufficient energy in the contact of the 
brush with the copper bar to produce this volatilization in the 
manner Mr. Reid points out. I have run a carbon brush at 
enormous densities on plain brass and copper rings and have 
not had such deposits. I think the deposit is the result of some 
change in the brush after the machine has started running. 
It is an old maxim with me that all new brushes are good brushes. 
Whenever new brushes are put upon machines and freshly 
sandpapered, they work well. Blackening of the commutator, 
which occurs after the machine has been running some time, I 
have always attributed to excessive action commencing at the 
edge of the brush and causing an eating back of its contact sur- 
face. The depth affected may be only 0.001 of an inch, but the 
eaten or burned area travels back under the brush until it gets 
one-eighth or one-quarter inch back and then the forces that 
cause it balance with other forces and it stops. Evidence of 
this is seen in many brushes which, taken out of the machine, 
show a perfectly polished surface at the entering edge and a 
rather dull surface at the leaving edge, these two’surfaces being 
sharply separated from each other by exactly straight lines 
parallel with the mica. These peculiar markings are also found 
on brushes, sometimes in several degrees. There will be a bright 
surface, then a dull surface, then a surface of different texture. 
I therefore think that these surfaces may indicate that the 
brush is not making such good contact at one place as at 
another place. I do not mean it is out of contact, but the 
pressure of contact may be very much lighter at some than at 
other areas. Such lighter contact might account for sufficient 
energy to volatilize the copper at that point. The reason 
why I think this is so is the result of experiments recently 
‘made with brushes of greatly increased contact resistance. 
A brush of this kind has been devised by Mr. F. W. Young, 
‘and when used on machines’ which previously performed 
as Mr. Reid has described, the phenomenon he observed 


644 LIMITS OF INJURIOUS SPARKING. {June 21 


has been absent. I attribute it to the fact that the increased 
contact resistance gained by the two extra contact surfaces 
actually prevent the excessive current density usually present 
at the edge of a plain brush, which excessive current density 
is responsible for the peculiar change of surface, whatever it 
may be. The dead brush, I believe, is a new principle in com- 
mutation. The method of getting a force which we have not 
had before to turn over our coil and its results are very inter- 
esting. 

Cuas. P. Steinmetz: Mr. Reid’s paper further extends the 
theory proposed by him some years ago that the damage done 
by commutation is to be looked for by the action under the 
brush, and not beyond the brush at the leaving point. When 
Mr. Reid proposed this theory it met with considerable criti- 
cism. Now, I believe that most engineers familiar with com- 
mutating machines are agreed that the damage by faulty 
commutation is to be looked for in the distribution of the 
current under the brush. There is, however, one quantity 
in the equation given by Mr. Reid to which I desire to 
draw attention, and that is the contact resistance per unit 
area of the brush contact. This resistance is not a con- 
stant quantity, but a variable one. It increases somewhat 
with the increase of peripheral velocity, and decreases with 
the increase of brush pressure. The most important condition, 
however, is that it varies with the current density under the 
brush and over a wide range almost in inverse proportion 
thereto. That is, the voltage consumed by the brush contact 
is approximately constant over a considerable range, and equals 
about one volt. That means that the contact resistance does 
not appear like a true resistance, but has arc characteristics. 
The voltage consumed per unit area is fairly independent of 
the current density. If the potential drop at the brush contact is 
determined as a function of the current density, it is found that 
it starts with zero, rises in a straight line, then begins to bend, 
becomes horizontal, and looks somewhat similar to a saturation 
curve. A series of equations involving and considering this 
characteristic feature of the contact resistance would be inter- 
esting. The actual condition probably will lie somewhere 
between the two conditions, a constant contact resistance and 
a constant contact voltage. 

W. L. Waters: The conclusions which Mr. Reid comes to 
in his paper appear to fit in very well with practical results. 
In practice it is found that low current density in the brushes 
is always conducive to good operation. This agrees well with 
Mr. Reid’s suggestion that it is the energy liberated per unit 
area on the commutator surface that is responsible for the 
damage to the commutator. It is also found that when a ma- 
chine sparks, the temperature of the commutator is greatly 
increased, thus showing that the energy dissipated in sparking 
;s often greater than that lost by friction and resistance drop. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 645 


So that it may easily be understood that there is enough energy 
dissipated in sparking to volatilize some of the copper. I 
hardly think, however, that Mr. Reid’s suggestion that the 
value of the expression a should be used as a criterion 
of sparking tendency by practical engineers is a good one, but 
the general suggestions otitiined in his discussion of the subject 
are likely to be useful in practical work. 

THORBURN Reip: Mr. Dunn describes a phenomenon that 
I have not noticed in my experience, that the deposition of 
the copper took place on one brush when the current was in 
one direction and on another brush when the current was re- 
versed. I hesitate to try off-hand to make the statement 
agree with my theory, but would suggest that the copper, 
in order to be deposited, must be first melted or volatilized 
in some way, and the deposition.on one brush or the other 
would then depend on the direction of the current, but after 
the copper has already been separated from the segment; in 
that way it would agree with my theory. In that connection, 
Mr. Dunn did not seem to think that there was sufficient energy 
available for melting the copper. When the ratio p=0.25 
the energy density at the receding edge of the segment is 
14 times the average, which seems to be sufficient energy to 
raise the temperature to the melting point of copper and even 
with p=0.5 the ratio was 7 for the energy density. If the 
average density would raise the temperature, say, 50 or 75 
degrees fahr. then a density 14 times as great, should easily 
raise it to the melting point of copper. 

Mr. Steinmetz’ suggestion in regard to taking into con- 
sideration variation in the contact resistance is one I had 
already thought of. The reason it was not included in my 
equations was twofold: first, because I did not know of any 
equation that would express that variation of contact re- 
sistance with any amount of accuracy; secondly, because it 
was sufficiently difficult to solve these equations when the 
contact resistance was assumed to be constant, and when it 
came to trying to express contact resistance as a variable, | 
was not able to accomplish it. However, if the law Mr. Stein- 
metz has suggested can be assumed—that the contact resistance 
is inversably proportional to the current density—that gives 
rather a simple equation that it may be possible to solve. 


In regard to the use of the ratio p, or RT’ in practical 


design, it can be used and will be used by engineers, at least 
to some extent, although perhaps not to the degree of refine- 
ment indicated in the paper. To a certain extent it is in- 
directly used now, in that the inductance of the armature 
coil is kept within arbitrary limits, determined mainly by 
experience, and it is kept within these limits simply in order 
that the ratio shall be kept down. The current density in the 


646 LIMITS OF IN JURIOUS SPARKING. [June 21 


brush contact surface is generally limited to a certain definite 
amount; the depth of the armature slots and the number of 
turns of the coil are also limited, which is the same thing as 
limiting the various values in this term p. Now, the calcula- 
tion of the self-inductance of the coil cannot be made very 
accurately in the present state of our information. It can be 
done with sufficient accuracy for practical purposes, however, 
and it seems worth while for engineers to do it, as it is not a 
complicated matter to measure the inductance with a great 
deal more accuracy than is now customary, and it will increase 
the definiteness of the commutator design greatly at a slight 
cost of time. 

Gano S. Dunn: I do not wish to attribute. wholly to electro- 
lytic effects the picking up of copper referred to in Mr. Reid's 
paper which Mr. Waters has mentioned. Copper may be picked 
up from other causes, but I did mean to point out emphatically 
that the copper on the brush is affected by the polarity of the 
current; I have made numerous observations in which copper 
has changed from a brush of one polarity to another when the 
direction of the current has been changed. This seems sig- 
nificant and tends to prove the soundness of Mr. Reid’s conclu- 
sions—that blackening of the commutator is due to some vola- 
tilization of the copper. What really happens when the brush 
gets very coppery, is that the thin film of copper suddenly 
forms at some point into a very tiny. bead, and as soon as 
this bead is formed it short-circuits the high contact resistance 
of the brush and invites the current to pass through it into the 
commutator. When this commences the commutator cuts 
and copper may then appear almost equally at the positive 
and the negative brushes. 

Cuas. P. StetnMETz: Which one of the brushes picks up 
copper,the positive or the negative? 

Gano S. Dunn: In the incipient stage when the copper 
picked up is not in the form of beads, but as though the brush 
had been slightly electroplated so that if held to the light 
it looks coppery, it is the negative brush. 

Cuas. P. StrEINMETz: That means the copper is carried in 
the direction of the negative current? 

Gano S. Dunn: It is a question of whether it is a motor ora 
generator. If it is a generator the current goes out of the 
machine at the positive brush and the deposit is on the positive 
brush, but if the current comes into the machine at the positive 
brush, as in the case of a motor, then the deposit is on the 
negative brush. 

J. N. Dopp (by letter): To the designer the subject of com- 
mutation is of great interest. In its definition it is simple, but in 
all its bearings it isexceedingly complex. Mr. Reidis I think the 
first to point out that the heat evolved causes the trouble, and that 
effort must be made in the direction of discovering the watts lost 
during time of commutation and the distribution of this energy. 


1905.]_ | DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 647 


I would, however, suggest a practical difficulty; it is with 
reference to the resistance of the brushes—the quantity. called 
R. This is a quantity of which one can say that it is impossible 
to calculate it with any degree of exactness. It varies, of 
course, with the quality, setting, and pressure of the brush, 
and with the current density, temperature, commutator speed 
and condition of the commutator surface. In looking up 
the records of identically similar machines—machines tested 
under the same conditions—I have found that the brush re- 
sistance of one machine is very often double the resistance of 
the other, and sometimes even five times that of the other. 

Moreover, after a machine is on load until thoroughly heated; 
that is to say, when it has reached stable conditions, the resist- 
ance per square inch of brush surface is not the same over 
the entire face, and the equations page 635, following equa- 
tion (2) are not correct. 

All engineers are familiar with the relation between 
brush contact surface resistance and current density. The 
resistance seems to vary inversely as the density. According 
to Mr. Reid’s paper the density may vary from its average 
value to an almost infinite value. While one cannot say that 
the resistance per square inch will vary from its usual value to 
zero, it is perhaps safe to say that it varies from fairly high 
value to a very low value.. In other words, the resistance 
between the brush and the emerging segment does not vary 
inversely as T’—t, as Mr. Reid states, but at a very much 
lower rate. The resistance per square inch of the brush surface 
may be taken as about 0.03 ohms per square inch. According 
to Mr. Reid’s paper the resistance between the brush and 
the entering segment may be said to have this resistance. The 
current density, however, between the brush and the emerging 
segment has a value much higher than the average, rising from 
the average to, as I have said, often an almost infinite value. 
The resistance per square inch of the brush contact surface 
for the emerging segment will then, according to most curves 
published, vary from the average value to an extremely low 
value. 

This will to a certain extent vitiate Mr. Reid’s train of rea- 
soning. It introduces an error fromthe very beginning; see 
page 635 following equation (2). The time during which the 
resistance is low lasts of course for only a very short time, and 
it is to be hoped that it does not seriously alter the result ob- 
tained. 

In Mr. Reid’s fundamental equation (1) pages 613 and 635, 
he gives the quantities that affect commutation, these quan- 
tities are resistance of various parts of the circuit, the current 
commutated, the voltage of self-induction, and the reversal 
electromotive force. As one always runs with the brushes 


648 LIMITS OF IN JURIOUS SPARKING. [June 21 


either in the neutral or the reverse field these strike one as 
eminently the only factors of importance. On page 633 Mr. 
Reid also brings in the effect of the distorting and weakening 
of the reversal flux by the armature ampere turns. In this 
he appears to bring in a needless complication. In other 
words, sparking is the result of too high a voltage between 
two consecutive bars. This voltage can be caused by only 
one thing; that is, the coil cutting magnetic lines. These 
magnetic lines constitute the field. This field is a result- 
ant of two fields, one due to the field winding, and the other 
to the armature winding. The sparking of the machine at any 
load may be considered as due to two causes. In the first place 
the sparking due to the external field which he has already taken 
into consideration under the title of the reversal electromotive 
force and in the second place the sparking due to the field 
set up by the armature. That is, this. latter is due to 
the voltage set up in the armature coil by the armature coil 
cutting the lines which have been set up by the current flowing 
through the armature coils. This, however, is what is meant 
by self-induction. That is, the quantities inserted in the 
fundamental equation, pages 613 and 636, are entirely sufficient. 
Stated differently, the stability factor or ratio between armature 
ampere turns and field turns for the air-gap is not a factor of 
first importance. What must be done in designing machines is 
either to keep down what is called the self-induction or reactive 
voltage, or to provide a reversing field sufficient to render it 
imnocuous. 


A paper presented at the 22d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electricad 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


THE DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 
Wits SprEcIAL REFERENCE TO MAGNETIC LEAKAGE. 


BY COMFORT A. ADAMS. 

At the last International Electrical Congress,* the writer 
presented a paper on the ‘“‘ Leakage Reactance of Induction 
Motors,” in which a new leakage element was described, with 
results of experiment and calculation. A method of calculating 
the other leakage elements was also outlined. This method, 
based upon fundamental principles, was checked by a long series 
of experimerts, and while not new fundamentally, may have 
some points of novelty in its details. In the present paper this 
method will be more fully developed and applied to the design 
of Induction Motors. The leakage elements will be expressed 
in a novel form and a new method will be employed for the cal- 
culation of the power factor. A method of calculating the ex- 
citing current will be given with corroborative data. Some new 
design constants will also be developed. 


POWER-FACTOR. 


One of the controlling elements in the design of an induction 
motor is its power-factor; but an intelligent design takes account 
of the fact that in some cases it is important to have the maxi- 
mum power-factor occur at full load, in others at less than full 
load, and in others beyond full load. This last applies to a 
squirrel-cage motor to be started at reduced pressure from a 
compensator. 

The power-factor is dependent largely upon the mag- 
netizing component of the exciting current, and the reac- 


ES —— 
* St. Louis, 1904, Section B. 


649 


650 ADAMS: DESIGN OF,1NDUCTION M: OTORS... [June 19 


tive drop of pressure due to the leakage fluxes. For any 
given value of the slip, the power-factor may be expressed in 
terms of the leakage and exciting reactances (or equivalent 
constants), or the maximum power-factor may be very simply 
expressed in terms of the “ leakage-factor ’’ (which is approxi- 
mately the ratio of total leakage reactance to exciting reactance). 

For purposes of design, the writer has developed another 
method, in which the leakage reactance e.m.fs. are expressed 
in terms of the induced or counter e.mf. E,’, Fig. 1, and 
the magnetizing current in ‘corms of the torque current (the 
effective or energy component of the secondary current). 

The advantages of this method are: the results are explicit, 
in that they enable two machines to be compared directly, 
without further reference to output or pressure, the comparison 
applying not only to the leakage as a whole but to each ele- 


ment thereof; the full-load power-factor, the leakage-factor, 
and the maximum power-factor are easily obtained by simple 
calculations, all being expressed in terms of the design constants* 
in such a manner that the latter may be so chosen at the begin- 
ning of a design, that the power-factor for any desired load will 
have its maximum possible value, for the given capacity, pres- 
sure, frequency, and mechanical limitations; or the design 
constants may be so chosen as to make the leakage reactance 
a minimum, this being in some cases much more important than 
a low leakage factor. : 
Referring to Fig. 1, and assuming all secondary quantities 
reduced to primary turns,— 
r, and r, are the primary and secondary resistances. 
x, and x, the primary and secondary leakage reactances. : 
I, and I, the primary and secondary currents, 


a nn EEE 


* See page 330. 


1905.| ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 651 


E,, the primary impressed e.m.f., 
E,’, that part of £, pate to page. the.e.m.f, ce by 
the mutual flux, 


ee ar ENE amates induced e.m.f. divided by the slip, s, 
—, the equivalent secondary resistance, 


Tous. COs 0, theworguescurrent, 

I,, the exciting current, — 

I, the magnetizing current, 

I.+n, the core loss energy current, 

i. ai thats partcot J, whichsbalances the m:m.f. of J,. 


Let 


_ Im I, % Es Sect e O ae Leth 
qn. = a Qa = Ete Vx2 fed qr, = Ek ODS ie 
Vero 
+ ——————— 
then tan 0,’ i VE ae =,’ 
1 1 ae 7. q4 


1 
7 S35 1 
q Fae Vira) 
ie Ory Val ab gi” & 


andthe power-factor =cos 0,= f 
1+ ( 


Although the calculation of the power-factor from Equation 
(1) is not a tedious operation, there are several approximations 
which are quite satisfactory for comparative purposes, ¢.g.; 


ihe 


power-factor = - 


/ zx + Im \? | 
1 ‘ai ges + Sree ge (2) 
eee, 
power-factor = : 3 (3) 
: ly Gai as Gro ai a 
N Let d- 
1 


ower — SG (4) 
power factor = Se aesceige Ti dnl : 


Equation (2) ee s results too a lope about 0. 2% or . 2% 
in a good motor; 


tig 
erat 


652 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


Equation (3) gives very close results ; 
And equation (4) gives results too low by from 0.5% to 1%, 
except in very poor motors, where the error is greater. 


DEsIGN CONSTANTS AND Output EQUATION. 


During the last six years the writer has used the following 
rational output equation. Its development is obvious, as is 
the slight change necessary to adapt it to other types of 
dynamo-electric machinery. It is, for a three-phase induction 
motor: 

K =24x10°Bvddl=k,dl (5) 
where 

K is the output in kilowatts, 

d and 1 the gap diameter and length of the core in inches ; 

B the maximum superficial gap density in maxwells per 
square inch; 

v the synchronous peripheral velocity in feet per second; and 

4 the full-load peripheral current density (ampere conductors 
per inch of periphery) due to the torque current, I,.* 

B,v and 4 may be called the major design constants, since they 
determine the general proportions of the machine. 

k, is called the ‘‘ output coefficient; ”’ it is the reciprocal of 
the ‘Steinmetz coefficient.”’ 

In metric units equation 5 becomes 

K = 2.0 x 10° Buvddl (5a) 
where v is in meters per second. 

Copper Heating Constant. 

Let m = circular mils per ampere in the secondary active 
conductors, and m, = the same for the primary. 

Then, since it happens that the hot resistance (60° cent.) of 
one circular mil inch of copper is almost exactly one ohm, 
4, 


_ is the watts primary copper loss developed under each 
1 


4 
square inch of gap surface, and = the same for the secondary. 


This will be called the copper heating constant and will be desig- 
nated by h. 


0 Ee ee ee 

* On some accounts it would be more convenient to use 4, (correspond- 
ing to J,), but on the whole 4 seems to be more satisfactory. Jr is 
so nearly equal to J; in a reasonably good motor that the difference 


(about one per cent.) may be neglected. J, is from 7% to 15% larger 
than Jr, 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 653 


The writer has used this constant for a number of years in 
connection with all types of dynamo-electric machinery, and 
has found it very convenient, since it is a rough measure of the 
heating. Its permissible value depends upon the ratio of pole- 
arc to pole-pitch, the core loss, and ventilation. 

In motors with average core losses and average ventilation, 
h, should not exceed 0.6 watts, 0.5 being a good average; with 
very good ventilation h, may reach 0.8. For the secondary it 
may be somewhat higher, since the secondary core loss is small. 
For very well-ventilated direct-current or alternator armatures 
h may be as high as 1. 

Also, 4m is the total copper section (in circular mils) per 
inch of periphery, and is thus a measure of the depth of slot, 
other things being equal. Therefore if h is to be kept constant, 
m will be proportional to 4 and 4 m to 4’; therefore the depth of 
slot will increase very rapidly as 4 increases. On this account 
there is in a given machine a fairly definite limit for 4 which 
thus proves to be a valuable design constant.* 


Slot Constants. s 

Let b” = ratio of slot-width to tooth-pitch (at gap), 
ds 
Is 


I 


depth of slot in inches, and 


l 


space-factor for the slot. 
Then 

zim 

Feae ls ea 10e 


.7854 4m 
a t= Tr WF 


4 
but As =h 


.7854 df? 
and d, = 0" 78", (6) 


where 4, h, b”, and fj; may be easily and closely approximated in 
any given case. 

It should be noted that 7; will, in general, increase somewhat 
as 4 and d, increase; and that on the rotor (other than squirrel- 
cage) of an induction motor, or on the armature of a direct- 


* Although these relations miust have been employed in a general 
way by numerous designers, the writer has never seen them definitely 


expressed. 


654 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


current machine, b” will decrease slightly as d, imcreases, €S- 
pecially on a machine of small diameter. This further empha- 
sizes the limit to 4. 


MAGNETIZING CURRENT. 


Tooth Fringing. Although the air-gap of the induction motor 
is short, there are many cases where the tooth fringing plays an 
important part. The following method of dealing with this 
subject has given excellent results. 

Referring to Fig. 2, consider a strip of gap-section one inch 
wide perpendicular to the plane of the paper (or parallel to the 
shaft), and divide this strip into three parts: one immediately 
under the tooth tip; the second extending outward from the 
edge of the tooth-tip a distance equal to the radial depth of the 
air-gap, 0; and a third extending from this last point to a point 
half-way across the slot opening. Assume that in this third 
part, the flux lines are circular as shown in Fig. 2. 

It is proposed to find the equivalent increase in gap-section 
(or in the width of the tooth-tip) produced by the permeance 
of the second and third parts above mentioned (i.e., by the 
fringing), in terms of 0. To this end the unit of permeance 
may be taken to suit the system of units employed. 

The permeance of the “ second” part of the gap-section is 
not easily determined with any degree of accuracy, but may 
be taken as approximately’ equal to 0.6; i.e., the equivalent 
average width of this portion of the fringing path is approxi- 
mately 0.6 0. 

The permeance of the “ third” part is found by an obvious 
integration. It is: 


2 ax 2 S GF 
2 oe loge = = 1.47 logy, a3 


‘and the total fringing permeance is 


= at) 
f = 0.6 +1.47 logy 53 (7) 


Tn Fig. 6 {7 is plotted against sy 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 655 


A little consideration will show that: when So is less than 2 0, 
equation (7) will not be satisfactory. This is allowed for in 
Fig. 6 by continuing the curve from the ‘point s, = 2. to the 
origin, in a straight line. 

The fringing is thus equivalent to increasing the width of 
the tooth-tip by 70 on each of the two edges which are parallel 
to the shaft. 

If the width of the actual tooth-tip be designated by %,, ae 
equivalent tooth-tip will be 


= t,+2f0 (8) 


and all calculations of gap reluctance may be made on this basis. 


| 


—8—|- — — 


See 
‘Scot 


| 


FIG, 2a Fal. a Ene. AG 


(, ) 

For rough ‘calculations, ; may be ates = 1, although in 
many cases it differs considerably therefrom. 

Sources of Error. (1) If the slots are straight, as ow in 
Fig. 2, the fringing will extend farther back on the side of the 
tooth and the'fringing permeance’ will be slightly greater than 
given by the above integration (see Fig. 2a). (2) If the slots 
are overhung by thin tooth projections, the fringing permeance 
will be slightly less than that given above (see Fig. 2B). (3) 
Whenever there are slot openings on both sides of the gap, 
there will be short periods during which j will be less than above, 
owing to the greater length of fringing path (see Fig. 2c). These 


656 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


errors are usually small and can be easily approximated for 
any given case. 

End Fringing. There is also a fringing at the ends of the 
core and in the ventilating ducts, which is of minor importance. 
For ordinary purposes, it may be taken as equivalent to an 
increase in core length equal to d for each core-end or side of 
duct; and when great accuracy is not desired, it may be neglected. 

Average Gap-Section. Consider as before one unit length 
parallel to the shaft. Referring to Fig. 3, #, and #, are the 
equivalent tooth-tips including fringing, and /, and A, are the 
corresponding tooth-pitches. Consider the average overlapping 
area per tooth of smaller pitch during a movement equal to 
one-half of the larger pitch. 


From x = 0to x = § (@,—#,) 
Overlap = 4, 


From x = } (t,—#,) tox = A,— 3 +4) 
Overlap = 4 (t,+4,) —* 


‘ From x = A,—} (t,+4,) tox = $A, 
Overlap = (t, +t.) — A, 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 657 


/ 
( (a) 4 (t, — #) 


x= AF, +t) 
(b) | (b @ +t) —<Jdx = @,-4,) ( “= 


x= $(t,-4,) 


Ae 


5} 


(c) I +4) = a, |3 | te) < i | = + | + t,)? 


Integrals 


APOE (+4) | 


@)+b)+© == 


Average overlap = = 


Average % overlap = oe = 4, a,=K, (9) 
1 “2 = 


t : 
where a, = — anda, = which may be calculated from 


ty 
1 A, ; 
equations (7) and (8). 

Thus K, = a, 4, is the ratio of effective gap-section to super- 
ficial gap-section. In calculating the superficial gap-section, 
use the gross length of core minus air-ducts. No appreciable 
reduction in effective gap-section results from the presence of 
the spaces between laminations, because these are small 
when compared with the radial depth of gap; moreover they 
are almost wholly covered by the burring of the edges of the 


core-discs. 
ar B E 
The actual maximum gap-density is then, K.’ where B is the 
1 


superficial density corresponding to the superficial gap-section 
as above. 

Peripheral Magnetizing Current Density. For general or com- 
parative purposes, it is convenient to express the magnetizing 
current in terms of the corresponding peripheral current density 
(ampere-conductors per unit of periphery). 


658 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


Let Ni, represent the ampere-turns consumed in the single 
air-gap at the point of maximum flux density ; 

0, the air-gap in inches, 

Ap, the pole-pitch in inches ; 

4m, the peripheral magnetizing current density (root mean 
square). 

Then 


and 
2Nt, = 0.9 din Ap 


This assumes sinusoidal distribution of the peripheral mag- 
netizing current density. 


FIG. 4 


ania 0.695 Bod 
» m K, Ap 


or Bo 
Am = 0.695 Se 
et aid <9 22 F (10) 


where K, is a constant less than unity which takes account of 
the ampere-turns consumed in the tron part of the magnetic 
circuit. K, varies from 0.8 to 0.9 in 60-cycle motors, and is 
in general smaller for lower frequencies, because of the longer 
flux-paths and higher densities in the iron, i 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS 659 


Where reasonable accuracy is desired, it is advisable to cal- 
culate carefully the ampere-turns consumed in the iron. 
For the purposes of this paper equation (10) will be written: 


ee ee 
KG, iso (1) 


where 7 is the frequency, cycles per second, and v is the syn- 
chronous peripheral velocity in feet per second. © 
or, in metric units— 


jo AS a oR O 
Aipoe = (ORY rene: (11a) 


all in centimeters except v, which is in meters per second. 
The actual magnetizing current in amperes is readily obtained 
from (10), or (11); it is: 


Am _ 0.695 BO 
Nie iy oe 


In = 


where N’ is the number of primary conductors per inch of 
periphery. ; 

Expressed in terms of the torque current, the Magnetizing Cur- 
rent 1s: 


et aa Kk eto (12) 


The above. described method may seem to some unneces- 
‘sarily complicated, but those who have carefully studied 
this subject will appreciate the necessity of care in making 
these calculations. After spending several weeks time in 
the observation and calculation of air-gap reluctance by 
numerous. methods, ‘the writer feels confident that with 
reasonable care in the determination of air-gap and tooth 
dimensions, the magnetizing current may be readily deter- 
mined within 5%. 

A method such as that employed by Mr. Hobart in his excel- 
lent book on Electric Motors, gives very fair results when ap- 
plied to machines with small slot openings, but falls far short 
when applied to machines with open slots. 


660 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


Comparison with Test Data. The above method of calcula- 
tion has been applied to a series of machines with a wide variety 
of slot openings and air-gaps, with the results shown in Table I. 
The stator and rotor numbers refer to the machines fully de- 
scribed in the Congress paper referred to on page 327. Allim- 
portant dimensions were measured with great care. The ob- 
served exciting current was multiplied by sim @ to obtain 
the magnetizing current. It will be noticed that the machines 
are partly of the open-slot type, where the air-gap reluctance 
is most difficult to calculate. 

The method employed to measure 0 was such as to give re- 
sults too large, which is indicated by the consistent posi- 
tive error in most of the calculations. A change in the quality 
of the iron might have shifted the above errors by three or four 
per cent.; but it would not have altered the consistency of the 
results. 

Most of the refinements of the method here recommended 
were only adopted after a careful study of the results of the 
above series of tests, in which it was discovered that the ordi- 
nary methods gave exceedingly unsatisfactory results, and that 
the introduction of some apparently insignificant refinement 
would add much to their consistency. No refinement mentioned 
in this paper has proved so insignificant that it did not add 
materially to the parallelism of the observed and calculated data. 

Had Mr. Hobart’s' method of calculating the maximum 
superficial gap density and the corresponding magnetizing cur- 
rent been employed, the errors attributed to his method in table 
I would be reduced by 3.5%. 


LEAKAGE REACTANCE. 


Slot Leakage. Referring to Fig. 4, the flux leakage per 
ampere-inch of slot is sal 


die dite ad, aed: 
) (13) 


5= 382 (5-4+7+- +H 
$ Gee iadb: tebe 
or, per ampere centimeter— 


do ied ted aera 
eo! 1:261| lee oe sae 
? : (aeaeee + poe +5) (13a) 


1 Electric Motors, by Henry M. Hobart. Whittaker & Co., London, 
1904. 


661 


ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 


1905.] 


¥ 6— “F6 “68 988° 0 Pin 8° SOL F 01 b'ST 0°88 00686 O01Z0'0 | 748°0 
PRS i G86 "88 4°0 f° 0+ 8° SIT ‘FIL €€I ZOOL | 006E% OTZ0°0 | cE9°0 
6 38 8-901 ¢°S6 180 9°8+ @° LTT ¥'IZL 6°06 ¢°OOL | 00c0E OTZ0°0 08°0 
Cr si F FOL £6 892°0 a aa 8° Gél T° 8ér 9°38T © 60L | 00696 01z0°0 | €g9°0 
Sola SeSLT €°sOl | c8¢'0 4a “SEL 6° OFT sal! 8° 96T | OSes O1Z0'O | &2ZFr°O 
cS 3l—— €° Sor O' ITT | c69°0 to ae GrST: 6° CST £° FG 9° 8zT | 00686 O1G0'O | 86¢°0 
De £901 © 96 89Z°0 Soe “OST 8°GEl £81 SPOT | 0069¢ FIZ0'0 0L4°0 
0) si ¢ Sit “got | z8¢°0 Catate L°Gsl L° vel T'Fr 9° OGT | 00966 ¥1G0°0 | 406°0 
£°O1— OcT “LOT | 269 °0 OSG ¥ PEl 6 LET 6 GG LETT | 00&LE ¥1c0°0 ¥9'0 
JE £° 96 “98 ¢98°0 ieScte GSO 8°80I 8ST 06 O0GLE 91¢0°0 | 2¢8°0 
(i 5 0°01 G66 8249°0 S:ot+ 8°SIT 0°6IT ianas 9 FOL | 00666 91Z0°0 | 86¢°0 
6 O ee Got ¢° 00T 62°0 Got FSET ¢ Sel 8° &%G Z°F01 | 00062 91Z0 0 | 492°0 
= (oe Se ¥ 99 9799 OFST 00S 00866 3I10°0 €8°0 

ic 
x ryt “$6 6 66 6 61 0°08 OOLTE STl0'O | €99°0 

= 
es 82 £38 9itG 4°09 OOGLE ITO 0 | 9€2°0 
“1011q % bd 1 at ty 1olg % ce #437 pind moe g Q Ta 

: —m qua : 
peAtesqg 4 -seddy 
SH Fs : ) 
‘GdOHLEW S.LUVAOH ‘daLVTINOTVO 


I alavis 


0&6 °0 


S69°0 


c69°0 


69° 0 


88°0 


88°0 


88°0 


06°0 


06°0 


89°0 
98°0 
760 
89°0 
98° 
760 
89°0 
98°0 
r6°0 
89°0 
98°0 
z6°0 
z9°0 


680 


Tp 


¥ T 


“ON “ON 
30j0Y | 103439 


eee Ue SIE SES SRR RReeeeeeeeeeee ores 


662 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


Equation 13 may be written— 


d, 
ps = Regs (14) 
where 
B28 (a 2 b, bs) 
Pa eet & aR emt ra parce 78 (15) 


This will be called the slot constant, and will prove useful, 
as it is fairly constant for a given type of slot (it decreases 
slightly as d, increases). 

k, varies from 1.2 to 2.5, the higher values for closed or nearly 
closed slots. 1.5 is an average value for open slots and 2 for 
nearly closed slots. 

Let N, = conductors per slot. 

Let N’ = conductors per inch of periphery. 

Then the inductance per inch of slot (conductors in series), is 


Te oN A 1G 
and the corresponding reactance 
6 hi O: Is Ne 


—_ = slots per inch of periphery. 
N; F 
/ 


N POR 
Let 6” = N b, which is the total slot width per inch of peri- 


phery. 
. 4 
Then, since nN’ = torque-amperes per conductor, the Reactance 


e.m.f. per inch of slot is 


6.28 N,nk,d 
” Ene Ss Sees 
EMes = Tos b” 4 (16) 


There will be induced in the same conductors by the mutual 
(or gap) flux an e.m.f. 


12 
Rea 
/ 2 108 


where k is the differential factor and is 0.95 for a three-phase 
motor. Then 


RvBN; 


E” = 8.05uBN,;,x10° 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 663 


and the Reactance e.m.f. of slot leakage 1s, in terms of the im- 
duced e.m.f. 


Fer gs k,d, An 
aa Ce 7k (17) 
In metric units this becomes 
k,d, An 
Ce 0.037 b” et (17a) 


Substituting d, from (6) gives 


es00612 ks Ldn 
Is = To" pAb? Ff, vB (18) 


But, k, will usually decrease and /; increase as A (and there- 
fore d;) increases, and although there is no exact relation, it 
will-be sufficiently accurate for a general analysis to write 


its A=a constant (ka). 
7s 
Then. 
EaSaeh aa 
Oca 10° hb’ vB ee 


For final calculations (17) or (18) should be used, but (19) 
gives the most accurate conception of the manner in which 4 


affects qs. 
“The total for primary and secondary is 
= .612 ea, at Ray ) an 
ds = “Jos le b,”@ | hb?) vB (20) 


Tootu-Tip or ‘“‘ZiczAG’’ LEAKAGE. 


The calculation of the permeance of the leakage path over 
the top of a slot by way of an overlapping tooth on the other 
side of the gap is, in the general case, a complicated process ; 
but it will be sufficiently accurate for all practical purposes 
to consider the case where the tooth-pitch is the same in the 
primary and secondary, and then to apply it to any other case 
by substituting the average tooth-pitch of that case. 


664 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


Referring to Fig. 5, t, is the primary tooth tip plus the fringing, 
t, is the same for the secondary, i is the common tooth pitch, 
and x is the displacement of the center of the secondary tooth 
from the center of the primary slot opening. 

Consider the series permeance from ?, to ¢, and back to the 
next primary tooth-tip, neglecting the iron* part of the path. 
This permeance takes account of the total tooth-tip leakage prt- 
mary and secondary. 

Consider one inch of core length parallel to shaft. 

The left hand overlap is 


fear) he 

Bi reese ye, 
ee WE = 
— —_—_— — 


The right hand overlap is m+x 


and the series reluctancef is 


n) ee ee 2mo 
318 (5 +5—)- 313 (34) 


The series permeance } is then 


* The saturation of the tooth corners may introduce quite an appre- 
ciable reluctance and cause the above method of calculation to give too 
large a value of the tooth-tip leakage. 


+ These are expressed in units corresponding to the ampere-turn. 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 665 


Desi d 
3.2 
and its average value is 
x=mM 
o: = os = for- Vd 6 se O18 i 
x=O0 


| ¥] 
SEEeCeeEEeS Cy 
2 a 


zs 


rH 


HE 


He 


nll 


Fd 
fh T] 
ae it Ht 


aH 
sEirtEE So. 


But 


and therefore 


Aer Geis) VN A 
Geeta (5) aA (21) 


This is the flux linkage per ampere-inch of slot. 


In Fig. 7, A is plotted against se, the average value of 


666 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


the per cent. exposed iron, including fringing. On the same 
sheet, K, is plotted against V/ a, as which is nearly equal to 
nee, when a, and a, differ but little. These curves will 
prove very useful in analy zing the effect of a change in slot 
opening. From the standpoint of magnetizing current, K, (and 
therefore a, and a,) should be as large as possible ; ane from 
the standpoint of tooth-tip leakage, A (and therefore a, and a,) 


eae i 
ae Heat 


TL fe 


oe, ee 


Hi Lge Saal al ie 


sees eee ceee = 
| — one) 
Ty 


4 ae iqitie aa 
ees 
By ei ett At rant tle 
tHE it RNA | iit iat tt 
Hie aaa eat ie ae 
HULuete tate ee ieeuia 


should be as small as possible. There is for each case a best 
value of a, and a,. 
When the tooth-pitches of primary and secondary are not the 
same, their average value may be substituted for A in (21). 
The tooth-tip inductance per inch of slot (conductors in 
series) is then 
Lf = ¢;N310* 


the corresponding reactance 


x” =2rndN21V 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS 667 


and the reactance e.m.f. due to the torque current 


pee aN 2 A 


Hes oe oS PE 
ene Tips 5 
But We aed 
N, A 
, 22 AN n® 
5 Le x, = 10° D A 


The e.m.f. per inch of slot induced by the mutual flux is 


EY = 8.05uB N,160° 


and 
Ty x, RE ALA 1 
Pome ieae * (22) 
6u 
But- A= where NV, = slots per pole 
N sp 
f 4v A 
. . at aa 28.1 NB SST Nee? (23) 
or, in metric units 
Av A 
Cc B SUNG, (23a) 


' As noted on page 342, this takes account of the total tooth-tip 
leakage, primary, and secondary. 


Co1L-END LEAKAGE. 


Designate by $+ the equivalent flux per ampere-inch of free 
length or coil-end, where ‘‘cotl-end’’ is understood to includ: 
all the conductors of a phase-belt-bundle, or the conductors per 
pole per phase. 

For a given shape of coil-end, ¢; depends largely upon the 
ratio of the pole-pitch to the diagonal of the section of a coil- 
end, and is approximately proportional to the logarithm of 
that ratio. But for a given type of winding and a given number 
of phases, this ratio is fairly constant, and its logarithm still 
more nearly a constant. 


668 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


A method of calculating ¢; was outlined in the Congress paper 
referred to on page 327. In this method ¢; cannot be expressed 
in a simple manner without the introduction of empirical con- 
stants, and as ¢j; itself varies so little, it may for our present 
purpose be taken as a constant. 


Let Ap = pole-pitch in inches, 
then Ap = 60=n 
Let ks = Ap =i 


and kj = ratio of free length (per conductor) to pole-pitch. 


ida ce ae 


‘hase! Be ly ee te - 


\ mg erst sa 
oe Hi 
o ty pen Pile ae Au 
Ce ae er phan 
a Te a ae Hifi 


zeae 
4 


Then k, k; = ratio of free length to active length, 


Th 4 
N’ dp 
3 


and = conductors per phase belt. 


- Inductance per free inch of belt (conductors in series) is 


N” Ag 


b} 108 


The corresponding reactance is 


12 Ay? 


oar 108 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 669 


But for every inch of active belt there are k, k; inches of idle 
or free belt, therefore the reactance of the free belt per inch 
of active belt is 


+ N” 7s 


9 10° 


xp" = 2 an hs ks 


Diba f= iz = torque amperes per conductor. Therefore the 
corresponding reactance e.m.f. for free length, per inch of active 
belt, is 


I, x7" = 2x0 hy} ks 2 ae tos 
The e.m.f. induced in one inch of active belt by the mutual 


flux is 


E” = 8.05 a _ = 
and ; 
ann at = 0.26 py kj ae oat (24) 
K x10" 


But 4,=6v+n, l= SW a rey eS (See equation 5) 


720 uv 


and d = where r = synchronous rev. per min. 
j mXYr 


51.7 Are 
Tha “Tos “FPF rn (25) 
or 
0.86 Lup 
Chas EPL Sia (26) 


where p is the number of pairs of poles. 
In metric units (25) is 


Pern (25a) 


670 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


where os = flux per ampere-centimeter, 7 = revolutions per 
second and v = peripheral velocity in meters per second. 
For primary and secondary (25) becomes 


51.7 Ao 


Qf = jor fn on + Pa Pt) Reg (27) 


BELT LEAKAGE. 


This has been completely expressed in the Congress paper 
already referred to; for a three-phase motor, it is, in English 
units 


Tog Av 
tn = EEF = 008 he KK Sn es) 
or, in metric units 
ts 4v 
dr = 0.0985 ks K 1 RK, 3 n B (28a) 


where k, is a constant depending upon the number of slots per 
pole (see Fig. 8). 

It should be remembered that these equations include the 
total belt leakage, primary and secondary. 

It will be noted that equation 28 is of the same form (as re- 
gards the major design constants) as equation 23; but this was 
to be expected, since these two leakage elements are of the same 
nature, the one (tooth-tip leakage) taking account of the leak- 
age over the individual slots, which does not link with any of 
the opposing current; while the other (belt leakage) takes account 
of a similar flux which links with equal portions of both primary 
and secondary currents, 


SuMMARY OF RESULTS. 


Assembling equations 12, 20, 23, 27, and 28, and abbre- 
viating the coefficients, 


0116) Bow = bon 


In = Ke do de (29) 
_ 0.612 (Ras i ago \ de b an 
I= Tor \n bh, b")/ vB” vB (30) 


28.1 A A 
am = 94 + Ge = ( ) Me fe 


Noh Ttie ets 3) oh mea oem) 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 671 


0.517 Avs A? v8 
t= ae (Fi Pir + Rip a) Pa gem 32) 


or, the total reactance e.m.f. due to the torque current, is (in 
terms of E,’) 


4n v 4v3 
Gt Gta tans (WIE tems tag) (33) 


A very interesting fact here brought out is, that of the four 
leakage elements, three (q;, gg and q;) are inversely proportional 
to the frequency. A careful study of these equations will yield 
numerous other interesting relations, some of which will be 
developed in connection with the analysis which follows. 

Referring to equation 4, it will be remembered that g,, and 
dz2 applied to the total primary and secondary currents, whereas 
qz applies to only the torque current. On this account, the 
substitution of q; for gz,+4z2 in equation 4 will give a larger 
value of power-factor and will a little more than neutralize the 
error due to the approximation of equation 4. We then have 
approximately 


1 
parent cles a ene (34) 
which will do very well for purposes of comparison. Moreover, (34) 
applies not only to full load, but to any load, 4 and K being 
altered accordingly. The only point in the development of 
arty of the above equations, at which full load conditions were 
assumed, was in connection with qg;, when the constants h and 
m were introduced, and although it would be possible to adjust 
these to suit the load, it will be more satisfactory to obtain 
qs from equation 17, whenever less than full load is considered. 
For the present consider full load only. 

A rough inspection of (29) and (83) will show that in general 
they are affected reciprocally by the major constants and by 
6, and that an increase in the one means a decrease in the 
other. There is evidently therefore a particular value for each 
constant or a set of values for them all which will make q,,+ q, 
a minimum and the full load power-factor a maximum. 
If a particular machine be considered, rather than the choice 
of constants for a machine as yet undesigned and of which the 


672 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


dimensions are considered as variables, equation (33) may be 
written—see equations (17) and (24) 


ri, STE kay ayy (ae We 
qs. = 78 ( po ee ) An + (Fer +008 Ki Ks) BG, 


Av 
+ 9.36 (ki, bis + Kin Pte) BaT (33a) 


where q, is directly proportional to 4, i.e., to the load; but as 
dm is inversely proportional to 4, there is a particular value of 
4 and of the load which makes dm+Qz @ Minimum and the 
power-factor a maximum; moreover, this is obviously the value 
which makes gm = dz. If then in any given motor, dm is greater 
than g, at full load, the condition of equality will be reached 
at overload, where will be found the maximum power-factor ; 
and if g; is greater than qm at full load, the maximum power- 
factor will occur at underload. 

Thus when gm and gz are known for full load, it is immediately 
apparent whether the maximum power-factor occurs at under- 
load, full load, or overload; moreover, the per cent. of full load 
at which the maximum power-factor occurs is easily shown to 
be 

Gm 
Na: 


Tue ‘* LEAKAGE-FACTOR.” 


If the ‘ leakage-factor ’ be desired, it may be obtained as 
follows: 
Let x = x,+x, = total leakage reactance, 


Tx Tae! 2.0 fe. 
c=po> and* = q:z = dx —_ 
de es ip Set K 
- ee P j eae 
The exciting reactance 1s ¥) = >— and. J. es) Ln There- 


Im 


fore %») = — 


and the ‘ leakage-factor’’ is approximately 
m T 


x 
O° et a Se (35) 


x9 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 673 


For this purpose, gz is most convenient in the form of equa- 
tion (33a). 


Pe EE A 
= 7 (textes Pedal) de, (28 ’ 
: ( b,” b” JuB” \Ne ee 5B 


* 


4 
+ 9.36 (ki, Pi =F Ri» Pj2) ear 


Let Rs ds, Reso ds» 
by”. a5 be ae > 
and (kj, pit kis Pia) =F 
Then 
0.0905 S n? 3.26 A 
pe 0.0035 ba 


o= dm QIx = EG v2 Kak NG 


6) 
+ 1.085 ie aE 
but 
mn 36 
ee 
and 
3.26 0 Ae a) A 
ES aaa (s Te Sere ate i) + 0.0035 kp (36) 


In metric units this is 


3.26 0 Tigumo A 
oS K, K, (s de ar eats a a Na7) +0.0085 Ry (36a) 


where S and F are also in metric units. 

S varies from 6 to 12 for nearly closed slots, and from 4 to 10 
for open slots. F varies little from 3. 

K,, S and A are all smaller with open slots, K, decreasing 
more than S but less than A. There is thus for each case a 
best percentage of slot opening and corresponding values of 
kK, ogand A, usually K, and A should be given their maximum 
values. e 

The only way of changing A, (for a given frequency) is by 
changing v, but other things being equal, / is inversely propor- 
tional to v? and therefore to A,’. There is thus a fairly critical 
value of v (and therefore of Ap), and o will increase rapidly 
if v departs much from that value. 


674 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


Equation (36) is a rational formula for o, and takes into 
account all important elements of design and gives excellent 
results; although the writer prefers the treatment which in- 
volves gm and q, explicitly. 


EXAMPLES. 


As examples, there have been chosen the two motors in 
Hobart’s “‘ Electric Motors,’ of which complete data and test 
results are given. 

All the constants entering into the equations employed, are 
here given and may be easily checked by referring to the data 
given in Hobart’s book. 

The two motors are: a 100-h.p., 500-volt, 500 rev. per min.. 
50-cycle, Westeras motor, and a 500-h.p., 5000-volt, 100 rev. 
per min., 25-cycle Alioth motor. They will be referred to as 
A and B respectively. 


A B 
Prince constant | PCD Mere oe 0.6 0.51 
Teck one 4s San mare sis 0.6 0.34 
F ms i eras eos sin eae 0.922 0.942 
Equivalent tooth-tip., Zo at eee ee c.9 0.94 
Equivalent % exposed iron, K,............-. 0.83 0.885 
Tooth-tip-constant, Al. ).2 a. sis v6 - sees 0.36 * 0.415 
Equivalent length of armature = gross length 
of core minus ducts plus fringing (inches).... 13.35 29.6 
Radial depth Of pap, 0.9.55 4540s n0n sone 0.959” 0.0689 
Irom constant; A gincie ges one he Ree weeewn 0.90 0 88 
Maximum superficial gap density, B (computed 
from COUNTEr-C.1 tok ccc cecer > ieee nee Oe ee OOOU 18800 
Synchronous peripheral velocity, v, ff. per sec... 75. 51.3 
Frequent,’ H.cukes vas vx mung some ype areas 50. 25. 
Peripheral torque-current density, Pe eats oe 480. 460. 
Sieh eonstant Jeu: te ie: emery ane es 1.56 1.6 
(Bgge sick « cx Coa te tarecae eames 1.66 2.33 
Depth of slot inches A sNse Maen eek .985 2.24 
Soath aire ay eee 846 0.866 
% breadth of slot bss Pe ety ae, ree io, 685 0.625 
Ar sib Kissy ai ym Somer aint CR SRS = .62 0.53 
Negpyes ccc ceeencccsceveeencee 15. 15. 
Slots per pole 4 Nspo.e see cece ee cece et eee 18. 24. 
Average Nogpy..... = 16.5 
spio dhe» sons Nise hls d 19.5 
Belt constatit,“knt itso: © omer eee 123 ae 
Tdle-sactive wire, (Rf -- /efy)ic= Aaa ecrepaiels Ld 1.5 


Maxwells per ampere inch of free length of phase- 
belt. bundle, Gp, = Pfs. Jowne vie eee eee i i 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 675 


CLS ELFE a1 035) 8)) Gok ea ne 74.6 373. 
LEM DCL IMA tae Te teyateee ears ck a selcotene cal al su aiere We eiecsp ty sss 500. 100. 
PE ee OTe NEE GeLS ehenezel sreratcheter sear os 0.240 0.204 
Gmicouserved rom fy sin. 04) Decco cette 25-0 0.234 0.194 
Seine Cred teeeeaeistaetsusiete cares 6 ioc 0.0593 0.0892 
Dp Voraysea alee cot oy «for raue Fo foro 8 Bvelle wo) rete 0.0430 0.0428 
Op Samegorts es (ssterar as lolatefoniel aOusue sore elas 0.081 0.0477 
Yop = As QUite tf. ooccessercecs 0.183 0.18 
Tau ype Ucn sla dstiote is is 7s «e's elelles.« 0.423 0.384 
Full load power factor = ee ba Maps beeoet 0.922 0.933 
d V1+¢ 
Observed full load power-factor.............. 0.92 0.935 
Maximum power-factor as calculated by Hobart 0.895 0.922 
Approximate leakage-factor, gd = QmQye-+++++ 0.044 0.0367 
Corresponding maximum power-factor = i = 2 0.9185 0.932 
Leakage-factor as calculated by Hobart....... 0.058 0.042 


ConDITIONS FoR Maximum Powpr-Facror at Fut Loap. 

It will be interesting now to investigate the values of the 
design constants which make the power-factor a maximum 
for any given type of machine. 

The total quadrature component is approximately 


Bon Ln dv neue 
d= dm t+ Q2= a Ae eee ae trea cere (37) 
and | ik 
power-factor = Cieag (38) 


It is thus necessary to study the conditions which make q 
a minimum. ; 

The quantities entering into equation (37) may be divided 
into several classes: K, u, and r are ordinarily to be classed as 
specifications; B, v, and 4, will be termed the major design 
constants, since they together with the specifications completely 
determine the general proportions of the machine; the remainder 
may be called minor design constants, (since they have to do 
with the details of design), although they are none the less im- 
portant. ' 

The problem is then to so choose these various constants 
that q will have the lowest possible value consistent with a 
reasonable first cost, heating, efficiency, regulation, and mechan- 


ical and electrical reliability. 


676 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


These latter considerations place certain limitations upon the 
constants (major and minor), which limitations will be consid- 
ered at each step, as far as possible in a broad treatment of this 
kind. 

Unless otherwise specified the machines considered will be of 
the wound rotor type. : 

The Best Value of 0. 

dq _ Bn Av 1 


do Y v n 


O mt -\24 
Tuer an (39) 


Ge ey P20! 
0.116 (ae 

K, varies only moderately in different machines and may 
be taken = 0.88; assume slots closed and K, = 1.0; then 
A = 0.52 (see Fig. 7); take n = 30 and v = 60; then A, = 12 in; 
Nsp (average of primary and secondary) may be 15 and ky = 
1.35; take 4 = 400 and B = 20 000. 


Then =i — 0.763 and 6 = 0.035 in. 


| 
: 


where 


= = + 0.03 kp Ky K.) 


This is not at all an impracticable air-gap from the mechan- 
ical standpoint, even for a machine of moderate size, and is 
considerably larger than mechanically necessary for small ma- 
chines. 

With open slots, AK, and A would both be smaller and 0 
would’ probably be below the mechanical limit; but as the 
minimum is a flat one, a moderate increase in 0 will not increase 
the total q by any considerable amount. 

With higher frequencies the best value of 3 is usually below 
the mechanical limit, but with very low frequencies, such as 15 
cycles per second, it is easily within that limit in many cases. 

Substituting (39) in (37) gives as the minimum of q 

An be 


: Quine =2/ac + b-—= + dy (40) 


A further reduction in g may obviously be brought about by 
decreasing 4 or by increasing B; but either of these changes 
involves a reduction of 6 (equation 39) which may carry it below 
the mechanical limit. 


1905.] ADAMS. DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 677 


As v enters in numerator and denominator in (40), there is 
a particular value of v which makes (40) a minimum. It is 


. 3 < b nevis ‘ 
qmin, 3 a B (41) 


Thus the best value of v varies slowly for moderate changes 
in the other constants. 

This value of v will usually be found too low for a reasonable 
veiue of the output coefficient k,, and so low that when sub- 
stituted in (39) the resulting value of 0 will be below the mechan- 
ical limit; but under these conditions the last term in (40) is 
usually so small that a considerable increase in v does not seri- 
ously increase the total g, although the last term in (40) may be 
doubled or trebled. 

The Best Value of B. Assuming now that the conditions 
are such as to place the choice of air-gap on a mechanical 
basis, it will be interesting to investigate the effect of changes 
in the major constants. 

The value of B which makes g a minimum is obtained in the 
ordinary manner by placing the first derivative of (37) with 
respect to B equal to 0. » It is 


dq on 1 An <2) 
pee oo mB! (6 Vv Seri y 
and 
Sige C ve 
B amin = 44) oO a a’ On (42) 


Supsiituting this in (37) gives as the minimum value of q¢ 


’ F SA n? A v3 
nn = 2 sla (ob eae (43) 


As 4 enters only in the numerator, it is desirable from the 
standpoint of power-factor to reduce it; but this means a more 
than proportional reduction in Bmin, (see equation 42) and 
therefore a reduction of the output coefficient k, more than 
in proportion to the square of 4. 4 will therefore have a fairly 
definite lower limit depending upon the relative importance 
of power-factor and first cost. 

On the other hand, the larger 4 the larger B gmim and the 
larger k,. When the power-factor is of relatively small import- 


673 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


ance, the upper limit of 4 is determined by the heating. This, 
in fact, is the average condition, since the gain in power-factor 
made by a reduction of 4 much below the heating limit, is 
usually, small in comparison with the sacrifice in the output 
coefficient. 


The Best Value oj v. 


oq eAm 
dase eee vu av 
du matt 54 n? OI Rd 
a(c+s 2 ) 
and 
ae oe DabborK ni 
eens 3diVcv + bond (44) 


~ This ‘3 not a complete solution but is easily applied to numer- 
ical problems, since a considerable error in the value of v assumed 
for the denominator makes a comparatively small error in the 
resulting approximate solution. 

It is clear that vomm.n increases with 7, K and, and de- 
creases as 4 increases. 


APPLICATIONS. 


In Figs. 9, 10, 11, and 12, are shown the results of applying 
equations 42, 43, 44, and 5 to three machines of 10,-100,- and 1000- 
kw. output respectively, it being assumed that they all have 
nearly closed slots, and four slots per pole per phase. This 
last would not be the case in the larger machines with higher 
v. The air-gap is taken from the following formula: 0 = 0.012 
%/k.wW. This gives rather shorter gaps for large machines 
than is common practice, although within mechanical limits. 
The other constants would correspond to a moderately good 
high voltage motor, and might be considerably improved for 
low voltages, especially on the larger machines. 

Some of the peripheral velocities on the large machines are 
considerably beyond modern practice, but although the v mini- 
mum is sharp for large values of 4, with moderate values of 4, 
a moderate change in v may be made without seriously in- 
creasing g. It is obvious that it is the last term in equation 37 
(which represents the coil end leakage) that sets the upper - 


679, 


ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 


1905.] 


“000% 


0002 _, 


000% 


hoz 0 0006  _—000z 


0” DOU 
PA ooz=v 097% aes AT 


2v 
oot 
og? 


eA 
4 
6, 
1 ¥ 


RY 


680 


ADAMS: DESIGN OF I NDUCTION MOTORS. 


» 
4\ 4) = feel! 


XJ 


S. 
Sp 


i=) Ss 
© + 


°o =) 
_ So 
- =-= 


Bie 
PREARASERETT 
i a a NUD PNY 


[June 19 


ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 68) 


1905.] 


|| é 
pare 


ee 


Aer 
\ 


leieles 


682 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


Ra : 
2 
" - 


ed (Gea NS 
a 
i aE EE SIS 
San Geen 
teal fal Se lee eh 
PRR RRM yams 
oo \ 
ie a AEN! 


1905.] ADAMS: DESIGN. OF INDUCTION MOTORS. 683 


limit of v. The B minimum is a relatively flat one and will 
allow a moderate variation in B. 

The k, curves show clearly the limitations due to the first 
cost, since the latter is roughly inversely proportional to ky, 
and the g curves the power-factor limitations. 

Taken as a whole, the curves bring out clearly several im- 
portant points: the advantages of large rev. per min.; the 
comparatively narrow range of 4, (for any given m and rev. 
per min.), within which the power-factor and first cost are 
both acceptable; the lower peripheral velocity which accom- 
panies low frequency checks the otherwise increase in pole- 
pitch, which thus increases only slowly as the frequency, de- 
creases; and the fact that the relatively large value of 4 required 
in low frequency motors on the score of first cost partly offsets 
its natural advantage in the line of power-factor. A study of 
the curves of Fig. 12 will be interesting in this connection, as 
they show the possibilities in the design of high-frequency mo- 
tors. 

The curves are not to be regarded as exact, since they corre- 
spond to certain assumed constants wich may be considerably 
stretched in any particular design; but it is believed that this 
method of analysis is sufficiently inclusive of the important 
elements affecting leakage, to make the results useful in showing 
some of the limitations of induction motor design, and it is 
hoped that it may also serve as a step in making the design of 
this class of machines a little less empirical. 

Effect of Open Slots. The effect of open slots is to decrease 
K, and A, and therefore to increase a and decrease ¢ (equation 
37) and b. This will bring about an increase in v (equation 44) 
and a decrease in B (equation 42). 

Example. Take as an example a 10-kw., 60-cycle, 1200- 
rev. per min. motor. Let 4 = 500. 0 = 0.0258. 


Referring to Fig. 7, it will be apparent that reducing | 5 7 


below a certain point (0.7) does not save much on the score of 
tooth-tip leakage, “ A,’ while it does decrease kK, and increase 
the exciting current very considerably; neither would such a- 
change reduce the slot leakage materially. But with a, = 0.7, 
straight sided slots would be very wasteful of winding space and 
give a large slot-leakage. Therefore if the primary is to have 
straight slots for form wound coils with a, = 0.6, the secondary, 
of lower pressure, could be bar-wound with more nearly closed 


684 ADAMS: DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. [June 19 


slots say a, = 0.9; then K, = 0.54 and A = 0.13. The same 
end could be obtained by overhanging the slots only slightly 
on both primary and secondary, although this might involve a 
loose formed coil slipped through the opening, one or more wires 
at a time. This has the advantage (over straight slots) of a 
considerably larger possible b” and less slot leakage, despite the 
overhanging tooth. 

With.the above constants and K, = 0.88, we have (see equa- 


tion 37) 
a = 0.244 
b = 0.01 
c = 0.0253+0.0213 = 0.0466 
d = 1.53 x10* 


From (44), (42), etc., the following values have been calcu- 
lated. These are tabulated with the corresponding values for 
a similar machine with nearly closed slots, from Fig. 9. The 
latter will be labeled ‘‘ A,’”’ and the former “ tet 

4 uv B ky Im Ix e DA: 


“A” 500 56 28300 0.19 0.218 0.315 0.533 s8.3 | Bot near- 
: ly closed. 


“B” 500 58.2 16300 0.114 0.211 0.317: 0.528 88.5 
2G OOO LO 22600 0.19 0.244 0.421 0.665 83.3 

Thus it is possible to get as good a power-factor with open as 
with closed slots, but at the expense of weight, size, and first 
cost; or, in order to raise k, for the open slot machine to equality 
with that of the nearly-closed-slot machine, it is necessary to 
sacrifice the power-factor, the quadrature component q being 
26% larger in the latter case (Row “C”’). 

Squirrel-Cage Motor. The effect of a squirrel-cage secondary 
is to reduce the secondary slot leakage slightly; to increase the 
secondary slots per pole and therefore to reduce c; and to reduce 
kj,, the equivalent idle length being relatively small. 

This paper, together with that mentioned on page 327, are the 
results of a very large amount of experimental work and calcu- 
lation, and although the results are in some respects incomplete, 
the method has proved so satisfactory in dealing with widely 
differing types of induction motors, it was thought that it might 
prove useful to others interested in design problems. It is with 
this hope that this paper is presented. 

The writer wishes here to express his appreciation of the kind- 
ness of Dr. A. E. Kennelly and Mr. G. A. Anderegg in reviewing 
this paper. 


| Open slots. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE 6385 


Discussion on ‘‘ A Stupy IN THE DESIGN oF INDUCTION Mo- 
TORS.” 


W. L. Waters: The main point in Professor Adams’ paper, 
that strikes the practical designer is that the calculations are 
made with such exactness. Practical design is at best 
only an approximation, as the quality of material and the actual 
dimensions obtained in the shop vary in different machines. 
An important example of this is the dimensions of the air- 
gap in an induction motor. With the small air-gaps required 
in such machines, a variation of 25% among a number of 
machines sent through the shop at the same time, is not by 
any means uncommon. 

I hardly think that Professor Adams emphasized sufficiently 
the difference between the open and closed slot in an induction 
motor. The difference in the magnetizing current and leakage 
factor is from 20% to 50%; this is the reason why manu- 
facturers have to a great extent done away with the open 
slot and have sacrificed the advantage of using form-wound 
coils. 

I think Professor Adams’ method of calculating the leakage 
of an induction motor is much too complicated for practical 
work. An experienced designer can make a conservative guess 
that will probably be more accurate than any possible cal- 
culation. But in any case I think that the question of power- 
factor will not be so important in the future as it has 
been in the past. The difference between a power-factor of 
93% and one of 88% makes all the difference between an 
expensive and a cheap design of motor; and at the same time 
it has practically no other effect on the generator and system 
than that of reducing their capacity about 5%; because, as 
regards the inductive effect on the system, there is practically 
no difference between 100 ampere load at 93% power-factor 
and 100 ampere load at 88% power-factor. -1 think, in the 
future the competition in induction motor manufacture being 
much more severe, the manufacturers will have to take into 
consideration every feature that tends to cheapen the design 
of such machines. 

C. P. Sternmetz: I do not agree with Mr. Waters that 
this method of calculation of the leakage is too complicated for 
practice, because in practice such a method is used, except 
that every operation is not gone through separately, but 
inserted in a formula, which is still further abbreviated 
when fixed types of apparatus are under consideration. 
But the calculation is actually done by the principles stated 
here. I would like to say further that it is material whether 
the power-factor is 93 or 88 per cent. It is true that it is only 
a difference of 5 per cent.—and if the motor is always run 
at) full. load, .5 -peteccent., more oT less, would perhaps 
not matter—but the motor of 93 per cent. power-factor at 
full load will have a power-factor of 85 per cent. at an average 


686 DESIGN OF INDUCTION MOTORS. © [June 21 


load that varies between full load and one-third load; while a 
motor at 87 or 88 per cent. power-factor at full load goes 
down into 50 per cent. power-factor at the average running 
load. It is not the full load conditions, but the average run- 
ning conditions, that count. This is fully recognized in the 
alternating-current transformer, where at full load the core loss 
does not matter so much, but transforiners are not run at 
full load, but at average load, and then any increase of core 
loss, which is a constant loss, is very sefious in lowering the 
all day efficiency. So on average load the wattless current 
counts a good deal more than it appears from the full-load 
value. 

Comrort A. Apams: Mr. Stanley’s question can best be 
answered by referring to the examples given on pages 674-675 
The several leakage elements when expressed in per cent. of 
the total leakage, are: 


nnn ee EEE TEESE EEEEEEEESEENNT 


Tooth-Tip Coil-End 

Slot Leakage Leakage Belt Leakage Leakage 
qs q: qn Gi 

100 — 100. 100° — 100 =—— 

Motor qx qx qx qx 
A 32.4 13.2 10.2 44.2 
B 49.6 12.4 11.4 26.6 


The large coil-end leakage for A is due to its high periph- 
eral velocity, and the large slot leakage for ‘‘ B”’ is due to its 
very deep slots. 

The belt leakage for A is unusually high for a 50-cycle 
motor; this is due to the high peripheral velocity. : 

The tooth-tip leakage is low for both machines, because of 
the large number of slots per pole, due to the large pole-pitch; 
this in turn is the result of the high peripheral velocity in 
A and of the low frequency in ‘‘B.” In this connection it 
should be noted again that the equations upon which are based 
the curves of Figs. 9 to 12, do not take account of this rela- 
tion between v, n, and Ns,, but assume Ns, constant. 

Referring now to Mr. Waters’ remarks, consider first the air- 
gap and the calculation of the magnetizing current. Assuming 
that variations of 25 per cent. do occur in the air-gaps of a set 
of similar machine built at the same time from the same design, 
the speaker cannot appreciate the point of view from which 
it appears that a saving of 10minutes in the design of a ma- 
chine is sufficient to warrant the addition of a 15 per cent: 
calculation error to the above possible 25 per cent. construc- 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 687 


tional error. The cry of ‘‘ too complicated for practical work” 
is only rational when the gain in accuracy is negligible, since 
the practical designing engineer is the one above all others who 
cannot afford to be inaccurate. ; 

As Mr. Steinmetz has pointed out, the above equations will 
be much simplified when applied to a particular type of ma- 
chine, and if the work is properly systematized, the extra 
labor of calculation is negligible. 

Referring to the relative merits of open and closed slots, Mr 
Waters will find, by examining more carefully the example 
given on the last page of the paper, that the machine ‘‘C”’ 
which is figured on the basis of the same first cost as ‘‘ A,’’ has 
a leakage factor (@mqz), just 50% greater than that of ‘‘ A’’. 
What was said in this connection, is that a machine with wholly 
open slots on the primary, or with half open slots on both 
primary and secondary, can be designed with the same power- 
factor but at greater first cost; such a one is machine “ B”’ of 
the example referred to. 


7 = 


A paper presented at the 2ad Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electricat 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A.I. E. E. 


LIMITATIONS IN DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINE DESIGN. 


BY SEBASTIAAN SENSTIUS. 


The purpose of this paper is to present a system of design, 
not based upon the cut-and-try method associated with the 
use of an output constant, but directly upon general experi- 
mental data and the commercial guarantees of the machine; 
and to deal with the limitations imposed upon the develop- 
ment of large machines by the quality of brushes obtainable. 

The author hopes that the paper may contain information 
of value to the consulting engineer, particularly in the way 
of preventing the introduction of impracticable requirements 
into specifications relating to direct-current dynamos. 

The problems involved have not been attacked from the point 
of view of the physicist, but from that of the engineer. They 
are considered under the following heads: 

Reactance Pressure: 1. Reactance pressure of the single- 
commutator machine; 2. Reactance pressure of the double- 
commutator machine. . 

Commutator and Brush Sparking, Spitting, Glowing, and Pick- 
ing up Copper: 1. Probable causes, 2. Experimental data. 

Designing an Armature. ; 

Conclusions: 1. Discussion of the formulas; 2. Limiting sizes 
of direct-curent machines; 3. Note on direct-current turbo- 


generators. 
REACTANCE PRESSURE. 
§ 1, Reactance Pressure of the Single-Commutater M achine: Fig. 1 
represents the position of the armature coils undergoing commu- 


689 


896 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. [June 19 


tation, with reference to the field-magnet poles. Assuming an 
armature-coil pitch of 180 electrical degrees, it is seen 
that the lines of force set up in the embedded portion by 
the ampere-turns of one coil are interlinked with the em- 
bedded part of the other coil. Thus if a is the number of lines 
per unit length set up in and around a slot by one ampere-turn, 
then 2a will equal the lines per unit length per ampere-turn 
interlinked by mutual induction with one embedded side of the 
coil under consideration. Let 

a = lines per ampere-turn per embedded unit length, 

b = lines per ampere-turn per free unit length. 


Fig. 1. 


p = pairs of poles, 
= diameter of armature. 


axial length of the pole-shoe, 


4 P = approximate length (per turn) of the free ends, 
t = number of turns per armature coil; 


then, the total lines per ampere-turn interlinked with the coil 
will be 


2APxK2a+4Pxb =4P (Aat+bd); 


hence, the coefficient of self-induction per coil is, 
4P (Aa+b) #?. 10% henries. 


1905.] SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 694 


In a 2 p-polar armature with 2 p, circuits the number 


of coils short circuited in series under one brush is equal to 5 
1 


coils, assuming that the width of the brush equals the width of 
one commutator segment. 

The total coefficient of self-induction L of the coil short cir- 
cuited by one brush thus becomes, 


L= se x(at+b) xP# x1C? henries (1) 


Assuming that the reversal of the current takes place at a 
constant rate (as a linear function of the time of commutation), 


we oo for the rate of reversal of the current from + > 
1 
tO. in the time 7: 
2 Pr, 
I ve 
2 Gis :T=—, 
2p, Ll Py 
in which J = total current of the machine, 
5 = current per conductor, 
a 1 


T = time of reversal or commutation, 
The reactance pressure v is 


if. 


=L 
Bet ps 


x 168= . X lat bas XPPXIC — 2) 


The time of Eopmaneation is the time required for the com- 
mutator to move the width of one brush. Since the brush has 
been assumed to be of the same thickness as a commutator 
bar, the time of commutation becomes, 


60 60 
Ss poate 3 
is 2psN ~ SN @) 
where 
s = number of coils and number of commutator segments per 
pole. 


S = 2ps = total number of commutator segments. 
N = number of revolutions per minute. 


692 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. [June 19 


If a brush covers more than cne bar the reactance pressure 
is increased directly as the number of coils short circuited ; 
but owing to the increased time now allowed for commutation 
the reactance pressure is decreased; in short, the effect, is com- 
pensatory. 

Combining (2) and (3), v becomes 


2psN Pp I 
pan nines KAA +O) MIP KR 4 
7G os (Aa+b) P, (4) 
or 

SN eure, rhe - 

eae xp x (A a+b) x xP PRA; 


and writing 1 for A P = armature length, 


b 
Oh Fi 
uae pad 
gel coaummacnen i Ray ee hal tt | 
SEPPAER TET ee (5) 


This formula is undoubtedly familiar to designers. It is 
convenient for determining the reactance pressure of armatures 
that have been already designed, but it is of little use in pre- 
determining new machines. To fill this want the following 
transformation of formula (5) has been devised: Assume that 

E = generated electromotive force, 

F = flux per pole, 

B = air-gap induction at the pole-face, 

= percentage of the pole-face embrasure, 
O = EI = generated power, 


ae al = pole-face area, 
then 
x D 
Shoat pet B 
id Pan 
E=FS.2t P, 60 108 
tie ip ot a} 
ia, =. .t.DB.108. 
PA Pore @) 


Dividing (5) by (6), 


1905.] SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 693 


vu _ 1.26 BN Pua Lt 
id 26 Te ee 
: (0+ 7) pene 
and finally, 
Wd 1.26 b Pp Oi 
: e (a+ dosha (7) 


fig: Q, 


§ 2. Reactance Pressure of the Double-Commutator Machine: 
There are two varieties of double-commutator armatures, first, 
the double-commutator armature with two independent wind- 
ings, each connected to a separate commutator ; secondly, the 
double-commutator armature with one winding connected to 
two commutators. 

The Double-Winding Armature: Fig. 2 represents the position 
of the short-circuited coils. As before 

¢ = number of turns per coil, 


ut 


604 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES.. [June 19 


J’ = the total current per commutator. 
The coefficient of self-induction of one coil is 


ee 2 
Lied eT . 10° henries (1) 
/ 
The current commutated in one coil is Ip ; 
a 1 


Two coils are simultaneously under commutation. The 


’ 


: ii 
total current commutated then is 2. 2p - and the reactance 
1 


pressure per coil 


1.26 ( -.) Dp at 
or v= 1G =) Sy 
a BD. 
which is the same as (7). 

Whether the two commutators work in series or in parallel, 
the total current commutated remains the same, and thus the 
reactance pressure remains unaltered. 

If the commutators, working on different circuits, deliver the 


currents J, and J,, then the total current commutated is ee 
1 
and the reactance pressure is 
41226 b p 1,+T7, 
acter (0+5)-£-95 * (8) 


Tf one winding has ¢, turns, the other ¢, turns per coil, 
and if the currents on the commutator are I, and J,, the internal 
electromotive forces E, and E,, the result is: 


Stel s2G b\ ep Litlit 
Dy Paes (a+ 7) sone Te iy oF (9) 


1.26 b\ P s(t) 
(a+ eta a aes (9a) 


1905.] SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 695 


Or, if the pairs of circuits are different on the two windings, 


n= 


It | 

1.26 b ~ (5) 5 
pe -(@ + Pas -Ln (10) 
From formula (9) it is seen that in case commutator No. 1 
does not deliver any current, just the same there is a reactance 
pressure of the short-circuited coil belonging to that commu- 


tator, 
eek 26 bu Vecpee lt; 
Cie Bares (a+ ). 2.33.4. 


so that sparking may occur even on the non-loaded comm» 
tator. 


Fig. 3. 


The Single-Winding Armatur:: The reactance voltage between 
the terminals of the short-circuited coil does not depend upon 
the current collected by the brush, but merely upon the current 

ih 

2p 


sia | 


to be reversed in the coil; now, referring to Fig. 3, the 


696 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. [June 19 


reactance pressure in this position would remain the same if 
the current were collected on only one side of the commutator, 


thus: 


ja Late ee 
aga . , . : . B D 
which is the same as (7). 
Given the output and the number of turns per coil, the use of 
two commutators will not therefore decrease the reactance pres- 


sure. a 
In case of commutation in a non-neutral position of the coil, 


Fic. 4. 


the electromotive force generated in the coils is short-circuited 
by the cross-connector C of the brushes. This phenomenon is 
practically independent of the load; depending upon its magni- 
tude, it might cause burning of the brushes and disturb com- 
mutation. - 


CommMuTATOR AND BrusH SPARKING, GLOWING, SPITTING, 
PickING uP COPPER. 

§ 1. Probable Causes: These phenomena offer a great field for 
speculation. Nothing definite is yet known about the causes 
that produce them; for this reason the writer will limit himself 
to stating when they are likely to take place, the statements 
being based on his experience with a large number of machines. 


1905.] SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 697 


Sparking: Bright, white sparks usually can be traced to a 
too-high reactance pressure. This kind of sparking does not 
seem to be harmful to the commutator. 

Glowing: Glowing of the brushes appears when the armature 
ampere-turns per pole, and therefore the armature reaction, 
exceed a certain limit; this glowing increases with the pole- 
pitch. The armature reaction may be caused by the working 
current, and in addition by unbalanced currents going from one 
brush-stud to other brush-studs of the same polarity. In a par- 
ticular case the ammeter registered at no-load 300 amperes 
between brush-studs of the same polarity, whereas the full-load 
current was but 500 amperes. 

Spitting: This phenomenon seems to be the combined effect 
of high reactance pressure and considerable armature reaction. 
The sparks become yellow or greenish, small explosions (spit- 
ting) take place under the brushes, causing carbon particles to 
escape into the air; the commutator loses its glassy appearance 
and becomes blackened. 

Picking up Copper: The picking up of copper at the contact- 
surface of the brushes has received scant consideration in tech- 
nical publications. The author does not possess any definite 
data concerning this phenomenon. Experiments are now 
in progress which thus far only show that probably in 
most cases the picking up of copper is not due to electrolytic 
action, but simply to the polishing action of the brush con- 
tacts. This is possible only if the brush material has a much 
greater hardness than the commutator copper. And_ since 
copper becomes softer at higher temperatures, we should, 
therefore, take current densities and brush pressures at the 
contact surface such as to keep the commutator as cool as 
possible. 

It is within the ability of the designer to prevent commutator 
troubles of the kind described; it can be done by taking con- 
servative values for the reactance pressure, the armature reac- 
tion, the current densities at the brush contact, and the periph- 
eral speed of the commutator. Below are given data obtained 
from tests for average conditions of brush shifting, mechanical 
accuracy in assembling, etc. 

§ 2. Experimental Data. The Reactance Pressure: According to 


698 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. [June 19 


Hobart* the average number of lines of force set up per ampere- 
turn per embedded unit length jn slots, with a ratio of depth to 
width not exceeding 3.5, equals 4 lines per centimetre per 
ampere-turn, or 10 lines per inch per ampere-turn. The num- 
ber of lines set up in the free ends equals 0.8 lines per centimetre 
per ampere-turn, or 2 lines per inch per ampere-turn. We 
have, in inches, 


AD eee (11) 
b 0.2 
a+S=10(1 +2). 


In modern machines 4 varies between 0.9 and 1.4 causing 
2 
(1 + =) to vary between 1.222 and 1.143, with an average of 


1.18. Hence, contrary to the statements made by Hobart, the 
self-induction of the end-connections influences commutation 
only to a limited extent. 

Substituting .(11) in (5) and (7) we obtain the general for- 
mulas: 


Qs2\or Palak! Ages aia 
v = 0.067 (1 02) fin iw ; 
+): p,: 100p,.10°.100'100°* (2) 


V= 


12.6 Wo\" 2 Or 
1 —).— .—_— 
qi ( c4 ;) ?, BD (13) 


which gives for series windings: 


(2s wares 
OORT LT es Phen ee 
i ( - -) 100° 10° 100° 100 °* (14) 


* “ Electric Motors,” by H. M. Hobart. Whittaker & Co.,N Y., 1904, 
page 42. 

“Modern Commutating Dynamo-Machinery,”’ with special reference to 
the commutating limits. Paper read by H. M. Hobart before the Int. 
Eng. Congr., Glasgow, 1901. Journal of ProcrepinGs Inst. E.E.. 1901 
vol, xxxi., also Engineering, London, Feb. 14. 1902. 


1905.] SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 699 


>) 
i256 (1 ai 2) : 
a 7 Ot 


v= oe (15) 


roughly % 


and for parallel windings: 


t? 


= 0.067 {1 thal (pc So ay ely. : 
i ( * A 100 p' 10° 100° 100 © (14a) 
12.6 
(+93 
= A Ot 
v= 
5 eS Bat) (15a) 


roughly = 


In the above formulas 

Armature-coil pitch = 180 electrical degrees. 

v = reactance pressure. 

v, = spark pressure = the value of the reactance pressure 
when self-induction sparking begins. 

D = armature diameter. 

] = gross iron length = iron length + insulation. 

p = pairs of poles. 

p, = pairs of circuits. 


A= = with an average of 1, 1. 


I = total armature current. 
N = revolutions per minute. 
{= number of turns per coil. 
S = number of commutator segments = number of armature- 


coils. 
a = average pole-face enclosure. 


gD 
uration” 

At the point of almost sparkless operation the spark pressures 
of more than 30 machines, calculated by formula (12), gave the 
following averages: : 

v; = 1.6 — (estimated) National graphitized brush : 


B = induction at the surface 


= 2.5 — Partridge brush. 

3.2 — National Colusabia brush. (16) 
— 34—Le Valley Vitae brush. 

— 3.8—Dixon pure graphite brush 


700 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. _ [June 19 


For sparkless operation, we evidently must have 
vu <Us (17) 


The limits given apply to generators with a maximum brush- 
shift of 10% and to motors with practically no brush-shift. 
The limits are the same for small as for large machines, machines 
varying from 0.3-kw. to 2500-kw. capacity. 

Brush-Contact Density. To minimize the picking up of cop- 
per, the maximum densities at the brush-contacts should be: 


Maximum density = 55 amperes per sq. in. National ) 
graphitized 

35 amperes per sq. in. Partridge. 

27 amperes per sq. in. National 


Il 


Columbia (18) 
= 25 amperes per sq. in. Le Valley 
Vitae 
= 22-25 amperes per sq. in. Dixon 
graphite. 


The maximum density for the National graphitized brush is 
still doubtful. The author does not possess conclusive experi- 
mental dxta concerning it. 

Armature Reaction. The maximum permissible armature 
reaction was found to depend upon the pole-pitch, therefore 


upon the value of 
For 
1Gan.e< ite 15 in. 
i 
I 


Ss 
5000 < 5p, 2p < 6500 ampere-turns per pole (19) 


Definite limits for smaller values of > are still lacking: 


tia 15 in. should be taken as a maximum. 
The following experiments are pertinent to the subject, and | 
of interest at this point: 

Two 45-in. by 12-in. armatures A and B, were wound for a 
6- and an 8-pole frame. A had 8000 ampere-turns and B 
5 750 ampere-turns per pole. The percentage of pole-enclosure 
on both was nearly the same, and also the speed and pressure. 


1905.] SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 701 


The inductive sparking on B was less than on A. Spitting and 
glowing were observed only on A, and after a 10-hours’ run A’s 
commutator was badly marked and blackened and some of its 
brushes were eaten away. On the other hand, B’s commutator 
was bright and glossy and its brushes showed a smooth contact- 
surface. 

A third armature 45-in. by 15.5 in. was wound for 7 800 
armature ampere-turns per pole. This armature was of the 
same general mechanical structure as armature called A. Spit- 
ting and glowing were absent, and the commutator was in good 
condition. This is unusual; it does not affect materially the 
relations shown in equation (19). 

Commutator. To prevent chattering of the brushes the per- 
ipheral speed of the commutator should be kept below 3 600 
ft. per min. To insure a well-balanced collection of the 
current, the length of the commutator bar should not exceed 18 
inches. 

If the above considerations fail to throw light on some com- 
mutator troubles, it must be remembered that the mechanical 
construction of the machine also affects commutation. In order 
to show how many énditions affect commutation the writer 
quotes the following list, published by H. M. Hobart*: 

1. High ratio of pole-arc to pitch, which results in too narrow 
a commutating zone. 

2. A number of commutator segments for multiple windings, 
not of a multiple of the number of poles. 

3. Inequality of the air-gap. 

4. Inequality in the material of the magnetic circuit. 

5. Unsymmetrically assembled commutator bars. 

6. Unsymmetrically assembled brush-gear. 

7. Unsuitable type of brush-holder. 

8. Incorrect brush tension. 

9. Inexact alignment of brushes. 

10. Insufficient brush surface. 

11. Brushes not suitably bedded. 

12. Unsuitable quality of carbon brush. 

13. Hard mica segments. 

14. Soft commutator segments. 

15. Insufficiently rigid machine foundations. 

16. Insufficiently rigid shaft. 
re 


*In the paper mentioned befcre. 


702 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. [June 19 


17. Insufficiently rigid commutator construction. 

18. Eccentricity of the commutator. 

19. Insufficiently clean commutator surface. 

20. Inequality in angular speed of the prime mover. 

21. Too large lag of the current in the short-circuited coil. 


DESIGNING AN ARMATURE. 

Rating. 200 kilowatts, 600 volts, 575 revs. per min. 

Guarantees. A sparkless operation at full load, and a maxi- 
mum temperature rise of 35° cent. on any part of the machine. 
A fairly good commutation at 150% load, and after a 2-hour 
run no part of the machine.shall have a temperature rise of 
more than 55° cent. above the room temperature. : 

Preliminary Design: Assume the use of Le Valley Vitae brushes 
for which 

Ue = 0.4 

In order to obtain almost sparkless operation with an overload 


of 25% the reactance pressure must be os 2.7 volts. 
With B = 60000, v = 2.7, a = 0.72, i 1, and a multiple 
winding, we obtain from the approximating formula (15a) 


15 200x1 
BE eae el A 
D =a ga ave ee 


Take D = 25 inches. At full load the end-connections 
¢ fe} 
should have a temperature rise of not more than oo = 25° 


cent. With a peripheral speed of 3750 ft. per min, the 
maximum number of ampere-turns per inch of the circumference 
is, for 25° rise, about 325 ampere-turns per inch. The total 
number of ampere-turns then is 7X25 x325 = 25600. As 
long as the frequency is kept below 25 or 30 cycles, there will 
be no trouble in limiting the temperature rise of the embedded 
part. 

The problem arises whether to make a 2-, 4-, or 6-pole arma- 
ture. With a 6-pole multiple winding the current per conductor 
will be 55.5 amperes and the number of bars 460. Assuming 
a minimum segment-pitch of 0.19 in., we obtain a 28-in. commu- 
tator with a peripheral speed of 4 200 ft. per min., which is pro- 
hibitive. A 2-pole armature would give 12 800 ampere-turns 


1905.] SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MA CHINES 703 


per pole, which is also prohibitive. We therefore have to make 
it a 4-pole machine. The current per conductor being 83.5 
amperes, the number of commutator-bars will be about 308, ° 
giving with a 0.19 segment-pitch an 18.5-in. commutator and 
a peripheral speed of 2 800 ft. per min., which is permissible. 
An armature reaction of 6 400 ampere-turns per pole is rather 


high (see equation 19). Since = 12.5 in.,. we make the 


reaction about 5500 ampere-turns. Now we wish to have: 

Three coils per slot—a number of slots, divisible by the num- 
ber of poles—a number of bars divisible by five or six (for 
cross connecting every fifth or sixth bar)—a brush with a 30- 
degree bevel and covering only a little less than either three or 
two bars per stud—a commutator with a maximum peripheral 
speed of 3 200 ft. per minute and a maximum face of 15 in. 
These considerations lead to 84 or 88 slots and to a 0.625-in. 
or a 0.563-in. brush thickness. 

Assume the following: 84 slots, 252 bars, 0.625-in. brush 
thickness, 19-in. commutator diameter and 12.5-in. commutator- 
face. 

Final Calculation: Estimate the armature drop at 20 volts. 

Induced pressure = 620 volts; number of coils = number of 
bars — 202; 

Turns per coil = 1, multiple winding; 

84 slots 0.4 in. by 1.45 in. with sticks; 

6 conductors per slot each 0.075 in. by 0.5 in.; 

Pole-face enclosure =72% — width of top of tooth =0.535 in.; 

Width of root of tooth = 0.425 in.; 

6 brushes per stud each 0.625 in. by 1.75 in. (equation 18) ; 

Commutator 19 in. by 12.5 in.; 

Le Valley Vitae brushes with 30-degree bevel. 

With a maximum induction at the root of the tooth of 150 000 
lines per square inch and a = 0.72, the flux per inch of iron 
length = 960000 lines, The flux required to generate 620 
volts is 12.8 megalines. The armature iron length then is 


rae =13.25 in. Allowing 10% for insulation between the lam:- 


0.96 
nations makes the gross iron length ss = 14.75 in., approxi- 


mately 15 in. Allowing three ventilating ducts between the 
the lamination and two at the ends, each 0.5-in. wide, 


makes the total armature length 17.5 in., and the pole-shoe 


704 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. [June 19 


axial length 16 in. The induction of the pole-face becomes 
56 700. Summing up 

Meee i122 P= 2ehy ees te 333 amperes; / = 15 in.; 

S = 252; t = 1; N = 575 rev. per min.,O = 620 by 333 = 
207 kw. 

D = 25 in.; vs = 3.4; @ = 0.72. 


12 800 000 x4 


B == X25 X0.72 X15 


= 60.7 x 10* 


0.2 333 15 575 252 


and as a check 


2 2 
oe 12.6 (1+ °-*) fe BOE 2.32 


0:72" 1.2)°60.7 x25. see (15a) 


The maximum load with almost sparkless commutation is 


Us 3.4 Ee 
on x 100 = 3.82 x 100 = th Co 


Armature reaction = 5 250 ampere-turns per pole. see (19) 


With an armature inside diameter of 10 in., it will be found 
by calculating the watts per square inch on the armature 
surface that the heating effect is within the specified limits. 
0 s 0.037, 
which is fairly high, considering the size, the pressure, and the 
guarantees. 


The Kapp output factor defined by 


CONCLUSIONS. 


§ 1. Discussion of the Formulas. The Armature Reaction. 
For peripheral speeds ranging from 1 500 ft.) pers. mite 
to 7000 ft. per min.; for a coil depth (not slot-depth) 
of 1.25 in, and a temperature rise of the end-connections 
not exceeding 25° cent., the number of ampere-turns per 
inch of armature circumference varies as a straight line 
from 260 ampere-turns per inch to 400 ampere-turns per 


oa 


1905.] SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 705 


inch. The maximum permissible armature reaction being about 
6 500 ampere-turns for really good operation, therefore the maxi- 
mum pole-pitch falls between 25 in. for the slow-speed and 17 
in. for the high-speed machines. 


. D 
The maxima values of — become 


Lins >< 16 in, 


for machines of large outputs. 
The Volt-ampere Density of a Brush. From formula (16) we 
have 
ve = 1.6 2:5 B12 3.4 3.8 


from formula (18) the densities are: 


d = 55, 35, 27, 25, 22 to 25 
v;d = 88, 87.5, 86.5, 85, 85 to 95 


with an average of 
uv, da = 87 volt-amperes per square inch (20) 


Conclusion 1. The volt-ampere density v,d or the product 
of spark pressure and maximum permissible current per square 
inch of contact surface, is the same for all carbon brushes. 

As will be seen later, the volt-ampere density enables us to 
determine the largest size of direct-current machine that can be 
made. 

The Reactance Pressure. The reactance pressure for multiple 
windings was found to be 


12.6 On Ost 
Jee bb oe “Sata (see 15a) 


It may seem rather strange that the reactance pressure should 
be a function of the product a.B.D. It simply means that the 
larger a.B.D., the larger will be the flux, the fewer the commu- 
tator bars, the longer the time of commutation, and the lower 
the reactance pressure. 

Assuming a = 0.72, 4 = 1.1, as an average, we have 


Ot 
v= 21.B 


706 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. [June 19 


Conclusion 2. The reactance pressure of a machine of given 
output diameter, gap induction, and turns per armature coil is 
entirely independent of its speed and practically independent 
of its armature length. 

In large machines ¢ usually equals 1 and B maximum equals 
65 000 lines per sq. in. 

Substituting this in the last formula and ‘assuming v; = 3.2 
we obtain 


O—kilowatt . 
Dim = Sars inches (21) 


a formula, very useful both for designers and consulting engi- 
neers. 

Conclusion 3. At the point of almost sparkless operation 
(with Columbia brushes), the armature diameter equals one-tenth 
of the kilowatt output: this applies to self-inductive sparking 
only. 

To guard against spitting and glowing, and in order to keep 
the size of the machine down we should have sas 2 15, or sub- 


P 


stituting in (21). 
> O—kilowatt 


No. of poles = a5 (22) 


Since a depends upon the degree of ventilation of the arma- 


ture, it follows that as the ventilation increases the number of 
poles increases. 


_— - § 2. Limiting ‘Sizes of Direct-current Machines. 
Equation (21) seems to indicate that the maximum output 


of a machine depends wholly upon the largest permissible arma- . 


ture diameter. That this is not so will now be shown. 


Let. w = width of brush. 
mow! b = axial length of brush-contact. 


I 


I 


I being the total current, = is the current per stud and 4 

1 ee Soe ee ; A Ww 
the current density at the brush-contacts. Assuming this 
density to be the maximum that the brush can practically 
stand, we get from formula (20) 


1905.) . SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 707 


if 
pwob U; = 87. 
And remembering that 
nt 2 21 O8 
” BD 
we have 
1. | we ED 
Pp ete te. 
or 
O 5 wb D ae 
O max. =f .B. OX VE (23) 


This formula contains the following factors: 
Limiting the reactance pressure and the picking up of copper: 


v,d=87. 


Limiting the length of the commutator, b. 
Limiting the armature reaction and the heating of the end- 


connections, os 


To get an idea of the maximum output, we will assume the 
limits to be 


wes 0-75 in. to lin; b= 16 in.; t= 1; B =-60.000; 3° 
13 i.) pence 
O ee 
oe max. = 6.7\/E£ kilowatts 
J inax, = 812 — amperes * 
P nyse 


Conclusion 4. The maximum output per pair of poles increases 
with the square root of the pressure, and the current per stud 
is inversely proportional thereto. This is in agreement with 
Hobart’s contention that the building of large high-voltage 
machines offers less difficulties than the building of large low- 
voltage machines. 

He also states. that there appears to be no_ practical 
difficulty in the way of making 1 500-volt machines, or machines 
of even higher voltage. Basing the electrical design only upon 


708 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. [june 19 


the reactance pressure, as he does, will lead to this conclusion. 
See equations (15a) and (21). 

The writer’s experience is that the effect of the armature 
reaction may not be overlooked. Assuming 6 700 armature 
ampere-turns per pole as a maximum, the number of commutator 
bars per pole from equation (24), becomes 24/f and the pres- 
sure per bar 0.5 /f. The brush-pitch will not be more than 
18 in., assuming a smallest bar thickness of 0.2 in. The largest 
number of bars per pole is 90, also equal to 2 WE. From this 
we obtain 2 000 volts as the maximum pressure at the maximum 
output. This output would be 6.7 4/2 000 = 300 kw. per pair 
of poles. 
| The current = 150 amperes per stud, the reactance pressure 
equals pA lace " are 1 «about 8. No brushes are available sus- 
taining a spark-pressure of 8 volts. 

Difficulties are encountered even with 600 volts. In this 
instance, maximum output per pair of poles = 6.7 /600 = 
165 kw.; the current per stud = 275 amperes, the reactance 

21x 165x 1 

60 x 13 
there are at present no brushes sustaining a spark-pressure of 4.5 
volts. Thus, in order to obtain the maximum output per pair 
of poles, at any pressure E, the spark-pressure of the brush 
must be approximately 


pressure equals = approximately 4.5. As before, 


; > 21x6.7VE 
Vv == = 
: 60 x 13 0.18 VE (25) 


From the above we derive that Le Valley Vitae brush is adapted 
to pressures up to 350, and the Partridge brush pressures up to 
190 volts; this applies to the maximum output per pair of poles 
only. At present the high cost of graphite brushes practically 
prohibits their use. The table below contains data for the 
largest commercial machines that can be built to meet the rigid 
guarantees applicable to smaller machines, considering the 
brushes that are available at moderate prices. 

The assumptions have been made that 

a, the engine manufacturer purposely avoids building engines 
with speeds lower than 75 rev. per min. b, the peripheral speed 
of the commutator has reached its limit; c, the brush-pitch is, 


1905.] SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 709 


LIMITING SIZES OF DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES 


D - 

2 Full Load: Temperature rise below 35° cent., sparkless, no glowing nor spitting: no 

2 picking up of copper. 

3 Overload, 25% almost sparkless. 
Pressureanimen sis jae cceoraietere ss 125 300 600 

| Output in kilowatts..........] 1 175 1 800 1 450 

5 RE va PEL VED sere eters: s/oie) sisi aoe 75 75 75 
Aga pEreS maces aereie correo cli 9 400 6 000 2 420 

af ieee Diameter.......... 230 in. } 240 in. 180 in. 
Length of Laminae........... 5. 75 in. 8.25 in. 11.5 in 

3 NGS OL, OLOES tee iarie is case lelares 494 ‘ 560 600 

Z| No. of Poles...-...-..+.20+-- 38 40 30 

g Diam. per pair of poles....... 12:1 in. 12 in. 12 in. 

E Arm. ampere-turns per inch... 340 338 345 
Commutator Diameter........ 155 in. 155 in. 155 in. 
INV HIG ie SALON smeinc tele shea 988 1 680 2 400 
Tees pressure at 100%.. 2 2.72 Dae 
Reactance pressure at 125%. . 2.5 3.4 3.4 
URAL be emdetecnd age dea aM PS 6 350 6 500 

# 00% bake i ee ag ad : 35 Partridge |25 Le Valley Vitae] 24 Le-Valley Vitae 

4 Brushes per stud 30° bevel.... (8) in. by 13 in.|(8) } in. by 1} in. |(6) 9/16 in. by 1} 
Commutator Face.........+-- 16.5 in. 16.5 in. 12.5 in. 
Peripheral Speed of Comm....| 3 040 ft. min. 3 040 ft. min. 3 040 ft. min. 
Kapp 's output constant....... 0.0515 0.0505 0.052 


I 


for the low-voltage machines, the smallest possible with reference 
to the thickness of the brush and the heating of the commu- 
tator. The author wishes to call attention to the moderate 
armature reaction combined with the high output constant, 
which shows that these factors are not always antagonistic. 

The generators presented in the table are not intended to 
pass for commercially perfect machines ; indeed the 125-volt 
and the 300-volt generators would prove financial failures. 
They are, however, well to illustrate the effect of overload guar- 
antees on the price of large units. In the 125-volt generator 
i equals 0.475. Keeping the cylindrical colume D’/ constant 
let us see how a variation of J affects the design. 


710 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. [June 19 


2 ee ee 


Aras Tiyan. 0.475 | 0.625 | 0.845 0.99 | 1.175 

Des", ea ves 230 in. | 210 in. | 190 in. | 180 in. 170 in. 
ESE en nS ts eee 5.75 in.| 6.9 in. | 8.4 in. 9.4 in. | 10.5 in. 
Uae aca y 3 oer 2.00 2.04 PEAY, 2.16 2.23°-- 


Guar. spark-| 9 i Oo 12 

pantie | 125%, 125% 125% 125% 5% 
Spark-limit, =| 125% 122.5% |118.5% }115.5% 112% 
Deficiency = 0% 2.5% 6.5% 9.5% 13% 


Deficiency =| 07 | “070 "et 


I 


As the table shows, allowing a deficiency of only 2.5% 
decreases the diameter by 9.5%; and by allowing 9.5% 
the reduction in diameter is 27.5%, which means a con- 
siderable saving in the ‘cost of manufacture and erection, 
and an increase of the efficiency. Ina lesser degree the 
same may be said of the 300-volt and the 600-volt: generators. 
We will now show in a general way how A affects the reactance 
pressure when the cylindrical volume D*l of an armature is 
kept constant. ; 

According to Kapp*, the relation of output, cylindrical vol- 
ume, and speed can be expressed by the formula 


O=qxD?xl XN watt. (26) 


in which q is the output factor, and fairly constant for large 
machines. 
For our purpose, we prefer the form 


O=q¢.D.1.— 
1 _* [qin = 
EN g * ise 


and substituting (27) in (7) 


_ 1.26 i \ee ee aarig ten 
Uh wsherece (a+ va ried i —_——— 


Fora=10,b=2 

Rie e ee |e qN 

Creihy aN wae 

a nc nn ne ee Le er er ene 
*G. Kapp.—Dynamo Construction, Electrical and Mechanical. = Lon- 

don, 1900 ’ : ; 


2 
v= (14-7) V7 x 


1905.] SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. 7 lat 


keeping 


T2e6 pee * (GaN 
ml Sepi eee Nee? 


= C¢, aconstant, 


and 
Chae 


In Fig. 4 is given the curve for equation : 


rhe 
ie (: ‘= =) ne, (27b) 


Between A= 0.5 and A= 1.4, the curve is nearly a straight 
line. A in practice never falls below 0.7; thus we may write 
with sufficient accuracy 


ee oy ad Re 
= 22 ——- e . 3 
Uv - (1+0. i) BPE > (28) 


which means: a large change of J effects the reactance pressure 
but very little; on the other hand, such a change reduces or 
increases the cost of the machine considerably. Whenever 
possible we should take A between 1 and 1.3. 


§ 3. Note on Direct-Current Turbo-Generators. 

The writer desires to compare in a general way the commuta- 
tion of slow-speed generators with that of the high-speed gen- 
erators. To understand the difficulties confronting the designer 
of turbo-generators we have to refer to the approximate react- 
ance pressure equation: 


Ot ! 
vy =21 BD 
Let us consider a 1 500-kw. generator, running at 1 S800 rev. 
per min. The number of turns per coil cannot be less than jhe 
the number of poles 4; the induction in the air-gap approxi- 
mately 45000 lines per sq. in.; the peripheral speed of the 
armature approximately 14 000 ft. per min., and the diameter 
35 in., from which 


1500 x1 
vy = 21 45x35 = 20 volts. 


712 SENSTIUS: DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES. [June 19 


Since only copper brushes can be employed, and since the 
spark-pressure of copper may be estimated at about 1.2 volt, 
on the basis of the reactance pressure alone commutation of 
this generator is 20/ 1.2=17 times as difficult as commutation 
of a slow-speed generator. Adding to this the high peripheral 
speed of the commutator (between 7 000 and 10 000 ft. per 
min.) and an armature reaction of about 12 500 ampere-turns 
per pole, corresponding to 450 ampere-turns per inch of armature 
circumference, some idea may be gathered of the difficulites 
encountered. To summarize, these difficulties are, from the 
standpoint of commutation: 

a, excessive reactance pressure, b, high peripheral speed of 
the commutator, causing chattering of the brushes, c, high 
armature reaction. 

Objections a and ¢ can be overcome, for any practical speed, 
by compensation, and compensated machines can be propor- 
tioned for good commercial operation. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 713 


Discussion on ‘“‘ Limitations IN Direct-CURRENT MACHINE 
DESIGN.”’ 


Gano S. Dunn: Fourteen years ago or so, when all genera- 
tors were small and about the time when Mr. Parshall was at 
work upon the 1 200 kw. machines for the Chicago World’s Fair, 
he stated as a law what Mr. Senstius has just put in excellent 
form; namely, that the amperes per pole in a direct-current 
generator were a limited quantity. While I agree with the 
general method by which Mr. Senstius arrives at his limita- 
tions, I do not agree with the actual values of the limitations 
which he reaches. For instance, his value of 1175 kw. 
for a 125-volt machine is too high; 1800 kw., for a 300-volt 
machine, seems about right, and 1450 kw. for a 600-volt 
machine is altogether too low. I should like to ask Mr. Senstius, 
if he is free to speak upon the subject, how he harmonizes 
his limit of 1800 kw. at 300 volts with the existence and 
good operation of a certain 3600-kw., 325-volt direct- 
current generator in Cincinnati. It would seem that the con- 
clusions which he reaches in his paper are not confirmed by 
' that machine. The fact that there is a limiting size for direct- 
current machines, particularly in the lower voltages, ought 
to be better known than it is- Manufacturers are constantly 
receiving inquiries for generators of these lower voltages sev- 
eral times larger than it is possible to construct. 

W. L. Waters: I agree with Mr. Dunn in his remarks on 
the limitation of maximum size of direct-current generators, 
as given in the paper by Mr. Senstius. I think his limitation 
of size of a 600-volt generator is considerably too low. There 
are some 2 700-kw., 600-volt machines in Boston which run 
very well, and I think it feasible to build 4 000-kw. or 5 000-kw. 
generators with that voltage. 

Mr. Senstius takes his reactance voltage formula as a basis 
for estimating the maximum possible size of a machine that can 
be built, but this formula is not accurate when used within wide 
limits. If it is found that a certain machine at a given speed 
will just commutate 100 amperes and the speed then be doubled, 
it should, then, according to Mr. Senstius’ formula, commutate 
only 50 amperes; but by actual test it is f und that it will 
usually conmutate about 75 amperes. The limiting current 
that can be commutated by any machine is not directly pro- 
pottional to the time of commutation. This is an experimental 
result, and from which it is found that a much higher 
reactance voltage is allowable in large machines than in small, 
the reason being that the frequency of commutation 1s much 
higher in large than in small machines. 

I have always regarded the picking up of copper by the brushes 
on the commutator as a purely mechanical operation, due to 
the employment of either too soft commutator bars, or too 
hard brushes, or too heavy a tension on the brushes, and I 
heard for the first time to-day the electrolytic explanation 


7i4 DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINE DESIGN. [June 21 


from Mr.-Dunn. I cannot express any opinion as to its accuracy, 
but I know that very often it is possible to stop the picking 
up of copper by weakening the tension of the brushes or by 
using a softer grade of carbon. 

Cuas. P. StetnmETZ: I believe the value of Mr. Senstius’ 
paper lies more in the discussion regarding the limitation of - 
direct-current design, which it brings before us, than in the 
given numerical values. I should greatly hesitate to accept 
the deductions arrived at in the paper, for the reason 
that, in endeavoring to cover such an enormous field as the 
direct-current commutating machine, it is more or less unavoid- 
able, in the conclusion, to draw deductions and express them 
more broadly and generally than warranted by the facts, or 
than by the premises on which the conclusions are based. 
As the result thereof there are in successful commercial 
operation machines which are far outside of the limits given 
in this paper. For instance, the Mohawk type of loco- 
motive, which was discussed yesterday, has an armature reac- 
tion several times higher than the limits given in this paper. 
Many steam-turbine generators and synchronous converters 
have commutator speeds and general commutator constants 
far out of the limits of the range considered in the paper, 
and they are successful. If I remember right there are several 
5 000-hp.. commutating machines running successfully in 
Chicago, at 250 volts. Hence the deductions are expressed in 
this paper more broadly than warranted. 

To illustrate, the first equation on page €€1 that of self- 
induction of commutation, is correct for only one particular 
type of armature winding, that is a full-pitch winding, which is 
practically feasible only with multiple-wound machines, or 
machines having just as many circuits as poles. In the matter of 
fractional pitch winding, regarding which I may refer you to Mr. 
Lamme’s paper of a few years ago, this equation does not 
apply, since in a fractional pitch winding the reversing flux of 
commutation does not surround two armature coils, since they 
do not lie in the same slot, as assumed in this paper, but in 
different slots. In this case—which is most common in larger 
machines—the equation would have to be modified by replacing 
the factor 4 by 2, and the term b with 2b; that is, the in- 
ductance will be more or less essentially reduced. Now in all 
series multiple-wound armatures, or armatures haying a num- 
bet of circuits different from the number of poles, the number 
of slots on the armature is practically never divisible by 
the number of poles, and in this case therefore strictly full 
pitch winding, that is, winding where the coil has a spread of 
180 electrical degrees, is not feasible, and with such windings, 
therefore, the coils that commutate simultaneously cannot 
be in the same slot, and this formula of inductance cannot: 
apply. Furthermore, practically » always, the commutator 
brush covers several commutator segments, and for reasons: 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 715 


of design several coils are enclosed in the same armature slot, 
that is, the number of armature slots is less than the number 
of commutator segments. That means that no armature coil 
is in a slot by itself, but in the same slot in which it lies there 
are other armature coils which are partly or wholly short- 
circuited by the brushes and therefore form a short circuited 

“secondary to the coil which enters or leaves commutation, and 
essentially modifies or reduces the self-inductance so that this 
formula of induction as given in the equation is not even ap- 
proximately correct. 

What I desire to show is that the general deductions of the 
paper must be in detail further discussed and investigated safely 
to draw conclusive results therefrom. So, for instance, the data 
on the permissible maximum current density of brush contact on 
page 700 are exceeded by many good machines and can safely be 
exceeded. The maximum average density of the brush contact 
has as a rule no direct bearing on the commutation. The actual 
maximum density or density at.the edge of the brush contact 
surface as discussed by Mr. Reid in his paper is important. 
With perfect commutation the maximum density at the brush 
surface may be equal to the average density, while with im- 
perfect commutation it may be several times higher. Since the 
actual maximum density on the brush surface is of importance, 
the permissible average density may be higher or lower, accord- 
ing to the character of commutation. Furthermore, in con- 
sidering commutator brushes, the character of the brush and 
of the machine enters as of essential importance. For instance, 
low resistance graphite brushes may be superior and carry 
much larger currents per square inch area in one type of ma- 
chine, while in another type of machine they may be entirely 
inoperative, anda brush of higher resistance would actually 
carry far more current sparklessly than a graphitized brush. 

_ The reverse may be the case under other conditions. What 
I desire to call to your attention is that all such very general 
deductions require further special investigation before being 
applicable for an individual designing case. 

SEBASTIAAN SENSTIUS: I may say to Mr. Dunn that I have 
not seen a single machine yet, of 1 500 kilowatts, that as re- 
gards sparkless operation, can be compared with smaller ma- 
chines. It seems to me, the operating engineer requires of 
small units much better sparkless characteristics than of large 
ones. Experience justifies this. 

I have seen a number of large generators with cylindrical 
and also with disk-type commutators. Several of these spark 
at three-fourths load and at even less, but the commutators 
remain in a satisfactory condition. I am not able to give rea- 
sons for this. Now in the case of the large generators in Cin- 
cinnati, made by different companies, they all spark and the 
operators have a good deal of difficulty in adjusting the brushes 
in such a way as to have them operate more or less satisfactorily. 


716 DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINE DESIGN. [June 21 


The limiting sizes of direct-current machines, given in the table, 
are designed to require but one single adjustment of the brushes 
and such an adjustment, that there will not be any sparking at no 
load, at full load, and at 25 per cent. overload. As regards 
the large machine ‘of 2 700 kw. in Boston, I would like 
to know, whether that machine was actually sparkless without 
readjusting the brushes? 

W. L. Waters: Practically sparkless. 

SEBASTIAAN SENSTIUS: With the brushes adjusted at no load? 

W. L. Waters: It carried 4000 kw. with no appreciable 
sparking. 

SpBASTIAAN SENSTIUS: The actual time of commutation 
certainly is dependent upon different factors. It depends 
largely upon the field in which the current is commutated. 
But this cannot be taken into account in the formula, which 
is for average conditions only. As regards the time of com- 
mutation being dependent upon the number of bars short 
circuited, I have said at the top of page 692 ; 

“Tf the brush covers more than one bar, the reactance pressure is 
increased directly as the number of coils short circuited, but owing to 
the increased time now allowed for commutation, the reactance pressure 
is decreased; in short, the effect is compensatory.” 

Now, about the maximum density of the brushes, Mr. Stein- 
metz applied it to the sparking of the commutator, whereas | 
meant to apply it only to the picking up of copper. I know 
gome instances of. pure graphite brushes having a density 
something like 50 amperes without causing the machine to 
spark, but my experience has always been that there would 
be a collection of copper at the contact surface. About a 
month ago there was a remarkable case of a generator, where 
we tried two kinds of brushes; one extremely thin, something 
like 2in., and the other 3 in. Just because, as I believe, 
the density of the thin brush was very high, the collection of 
copper was something tremendous; with the ~ in. brush, 
there was hardly any copper collected, the commutator was 
in fine condition, the contact surface was very bright, 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS AND MOTOR- 
GENERATORS. 


BY W. L. WATERS. 


At the present time the alternating-current motor in a motor- 
generator set of 100-kw. capacity ,or more, is practically always 
a synchronous motor; an induction motor is rarely used for this 
purpose. The reason for this is threefold: the lagging current 
taken by an induction motor makes the motor undesirable at 
the end of a long line; from an operating standpoint the mech- 
anical construction of an induction motor makes it less reli- 
able than a synchronous motor; and the cost of induction 
motors has heretofore been considerably higher than that 
of synchronous motors. The usual objections to the synchron- 
ous motor—that it has a low starting torque and that it re- 
quires external excitation—do not apply to the case of a syn- 
chronous motor used in a motor generator set; a high starting 
torque is unnecessary in this case, and there is always some way 
of exciting the motor whether it is coupled to a direct-current 
or to an alternating-current generator. Thus it has become 
standard practice to use synchronous motor-generator sets in 
all sizes except where the output is too small for a standard 
synchronous motor. This being the case I shall only consider 
synchronous motor generator sets in addition to synchronous 


converters.* 
Motor-generators and synchronous converters can be dis-° 


te 5 * SS 29 ee SS ee 
* As defined by the Committee on Standardization: ‘‘ A converter may be either: * * * 
* (b) A synchronous converter, formerly called a rotary converter, converting from an alter- 
nating to a direct current, or vice versa. * * See TRANS. A. I. E. E., Vol. xix, 1902, 
p. 1077. Synchronous converters are still perhaps most often termed rotary conver- 
ters’’ by engineers, and, for brevity, they are frequently referred to as ‘* rotaries, and 
sometimes simply as ‘‘ converters.’ Following the definition prescribed by the Committee 
on Standardization, the term “ synchronous converter" 1s generally, used in this paper, 
although the shorter term “ converter” is frequently employed where its use can cause no 


doubt as to what kind of converter is meant.—[Ep1cor. 


717 


718 WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. [June 19 


cussed from two points of view; that of the operating engineer, 
or that of the designer and manufacturer. As the operating | 
point of view is probably most familiar to engineers, that will 
be considered first. 

The main points that concern the engineer when installing 
transforming machinery are its first cost and reliability and 
flexibility of operation. Incidentally, the efficiency of the 
outfit, the floor space it occupies, and sundry other things 
have tc be taken into consideration. The cost of a motor- 
generator or of a synchronous converter, or rather the price at 
which it is sold by the manufacturer, depends upon the output 
and speed, and incidentally upon the keeness of the competition 
among the firms that are trying to obtain the business. The 
choice of speed for either machine usually being left to the 
manufacturer, it is as high as is consistent with good mechanical 
and electrical design. The following table gives speeds that 
may be regarded as more or less standard for such machines 
for different outputs, frequencies, and pressures. 


25 CYCLES. 
KILOWATTS MOTOR-GENERATORS SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS 
250 volts 600 volts 250 volts 600 volts 
250 750 rey. per min. 750 rev. per min.| 500 rev. per min. 750 rev. per min. 
500 500 ss 500 = 300 se 500 c 
1 000 250 fe 250 * 187 ." 250 % 
1 500 214 + 214 s 150 “ 214 . 

2 000 «|. 187 “e 187 ~ 125 nie 167 SN 
nnn nee EEE ESSE a sass anaeaennnSn 
60 CYCLES. 

——— eee 

MOTOR-GENERATORS SYNCHRONOUd CONVERTE 
KILOWATTS |- Te 
250 volts 600 volts 250 volts 600 volts 
250 720 rev. per min. 720 rev. per min.] 720 rev. per min. 900 rev. per min. 
500 * 614 . m3 514 * 450 ‘S 600 - 
1 000 240 oy 240 a 225 ti 300 +e 


ae 


In comparing the cost of motor-generators and converters 
it may be assumed that it will always be necessary to use trans- 
formers with the latter in order to get the comparatively low. 
alternating-current pressure required. With motor-genera- 
tors, on the other hand, the motor can be wound to take the 
high-tension current direct without the interposition of trans- 
formers, unless the line pressure exceeds 15 000 volts. In esti- 


1905.] WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. 719 


matin the costs of motor-generator sets it is assumed that no 
transformers are necessary. 
_ In general, any table of relative costs of motor- Generator and 
synchronous converters should be accepted with a certain amount 
of reserve. Each individual installation should be considered 
by itself and the costs of the various items compared. The 
cost of the switchboard and cables should also be considered; 
in this respect the motor-generator is usually much cheaper 
than the converter. 

The following table gives the cost, efficiency, and the floor 
space needed for synchronous converters and motor-generators 
of different outputs. The converters are assumed to operate 
in connection with three single-phase, 6600-volt trans- 
formers. The motor-generators are assumed to run on 
6600 volts without transformers. The efficiencies are the com-. 
bined efficiencies of the sets—converters and transformers in 
the one case, and motors and generators in the other. In the 
case of converters, under the head of cost and floor- -space, 
the first figure refers to the converter and the second figure 
to the transformers. 


500 KILOWATTS, 600 VOLTS, 25 CYCLES. 


i 


SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTER MOTOR-GENERATOR 


(GleSinnodoocOnnonons $4500 +2700 =$7200 j $9000 
Efficiency 1.25 load 91.5 88. 
1 ai 91.5 87.5 
es O.7oes 91.0 85.5 
0.05 “ 88.5 81.0 
ic Sipe Ia ee Bn 
Floor space.......-. 60-+50=110 sq. ft. 85 sq. ft. 


a 


500 KILOWATTS, 600 VOLTS, 60 CYCLES. 


a a 


SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTER MOTOR-GENERATOR 


(Qesiereaaucucce did $4700 +2300 = $7000 $8700. 
Efficiency 1.25 load : 90.5 88. 

eh} eboie 90.5 eS 

stein O2 501 89.5 85.5 

+ 0:50 = ' 86.5 81. 
Floor space.....+.+- 70+50=120 sa. ft. 90 sq. ft. 


ee 


720 WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. [June 19 


1500 KILOWATTS, 275 VOLTS, 25 CYCLES. 


SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTER MOTOR-GENERATOR 


| 


COSt seis tiv oe raisin ot $18 000+6 300 = $24 300 $21 000 
Efficiency 1.25 load | __ 93.5 90.5 
e 1 a 93.5 90. 
cs 0;75iae 92.5 ~ 9 88. 
¢ 0.50," 90.5 85. 
es ee 
Floor space.......+- 240+125 =345 sa. ft. 320 sa. ft. 


en nnn Ean 


These are the selling prices free on board at the factory, and, 
therefore, do not include freight or cost of erection. They do 
include, however, all necessary rheostats and shunts, but not 
induction regulators for the converters. 

In all three cases it will be noticed that the combination of a 
synchronous converter with transformers is the more efficient, the 
difference in efficiency being about 3% at full load and about 
6% at half load. The value of this difference in efficiency has 
to be decided in each case by the cost of producing the extra 
kilowatt-hours. In a water-power plant the efficiency is an un- 
important feature, in a steam plant, where the cost of fuel is 
high, it may be quite important. 

The floor-space taken up by a synchronous converter and its 
transformers is about 25% greater than that taken up by a two- 
bearing motor-generator set. The floor space is only of im- 
portance in the case of a sub-station in a city where real estate 
is valuable; in such cases the transformers could be placed in a 
gallery over the converters. As the converters themselves. 
only take up about two-thirds the floor-space of a motor- 
generator set the advantage would, with this arrangement, be 
in favor of the converters. 

The relative desirability of synchronous converters and motor- 
generators from the operating point of view depends upon the 
question of their reliability and flexibility of operation. As re- 
gards flexibility, the motor-generator is, of course, by far the 
better. With motor-generators the power-factor of the motor 
may be adjusted to unity, or, if desired, a leading current may be 
introduced into the line without affecting the operation of the 
motor. The voltage on the direct-current side may be adjusted 
within wide limits either by use of the shunt rheostat, or by 


~ 1905.) WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. 721 


compounding. Neither of these adjustments can be applied 
conveniently to a converter. 

In a synchronous converter the ratio of the voltage on the 
direct-current side to that on the alternating-current side is 
practically constant; that is, any drop or rise of voltage on the 
line affects proportionally the direct-current voltage of the 
converter. In trying to regulate the power-factor of the con- 
verter or to introduce leading or lagging currents into the line 
by varying the field strength one is liable to alter the alter- 
nating-current voltage at the end of the line, and hence to 
affect the direct-current voltage of the converter. Variation 
of the shunt current within wide limits is also objectionable, 
because it sometimes has a tendency to produce hunting. 

Theoretically a synchronous converter can be compounded 
or over-compounded, or rather the line can be over-compounded, 
producing the same effect as if the synchronous converter were 
over-compounded. This may be done by introducing an arti- 
ficial self-induction into the line, and producing in the line, 
by means of a series winding on the converter fields, a leading 
current approximately proportional to the load on the converter 
This leading current will boost the pressure of the line because 
of the self-induction present. This compounding is, however, 
at best only a rough method and can only be used on systems 
in which exactness of pressure is not important. It is some- 
what difficult to adjust the self induction and the series winding 
to give the required compounding. The power-factor of the 
converter and that of the system are varied within wide limits 
as the load varies. And a change of pressure on the line affects 
all other machinery on the line, so that the cases are limited 
in which this method can be used to regulate the direct-current 
voltage on a converter. 

A method of voltage control with synchronous converters is 
used on some of the Edison systems. An induction regulator 
is inserted in the alternating-current circuit between the trans- 
former and the converter, and is usually controlled from a 
switchboard by means of a pilot motor. Such a regulator 
increases the cost of the apparatus about 20%, decreases the 
total efficiency about 1%, needs about one-third the floor space 
that the transformers require,and adds to the complication of 
the system. Usually, therefore, the necessity for employing an 
induction regulator is a strong argument against the use of 
converters in such an installation. 

A synchronous converter is more liable to hunt and to flash- 


722 WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. [June 19 


over, .and is ‘a somewhat more complicated: piece of apparatus 
than a motor-generator set.. On the other hand, a synchronous 
motor wound for a pressure of over 6 600 volts is not so reliable 
as a transformer wound for the same pressure. Generally 
Speaking, from the point of view of reliability of operation, 
there is little choice between 25-cycle converters and 25-cycle 
motor-generators, although in a 60-cycle installation the ad- 
vantage is decidedly in favor of the motor-generator. There 
is no doubt that satisfactory 60-cycle converters can be made 
up to 600 volts, but their design is so much more difficult than 
that of 25-cycle converters that it is natural they should re- 
quire more attention than motor-generator sets. 

Motor-generators have another advantage over synchronous 
converters in that the former are not so liable to hunt as the 
latter. Of course, hunting can be prevented, but not without 
usually introducing some corresponding disadvantage; for ex- 
ample, dampers may be placed on the pole-faces, but with the 
disadvantage of causing some loss in efficiency; or sub- 
stantial uniformity of engine speed may be obtained at the 
expense of a heavy fly-wheel; finally, to insure the small 
line-drop that is usually found necessary for the reliable 
operation of converters in parallel is a matter of considera- 
ble expense for conductors. Synchronous motors are not 
nearly so liable to hunt as converters, and the conditions 
that are good enough to insure the proper operation of 
alternators in parallel are usually all that are required to pre- 
vent hunting in synchronous motors. ; 

From the operating engineer’s standpoint, a motor-generator 
is preferable to a synchronous converter in almost every respect 
except as to efficiency and cost; and even as to cost a motor- 
generator is decidedly the cheaper for low voltages and large 
outputs. Consequently, when comparatively cheap medium- 
size units are wanted, and if close voltage regulation is un- 
important, synchronous converters are used. But when large 
units are desired, and the voltage regulation is important, as 
in incandescent lighting, motor-generators are employed. This 
applies to both 60 and 25 cycles. 

Heretofore the writer has referred mainly to synchronous 
converters for transforming from alternating current to 
direct current. In regard to inverted converters; that 
is, converters for transforming from direct current to alter- 
nating current, almost the same remarks apply. In addition, 
inverted converters are subject to another disadvantage— 


-1905.] WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. 723 


the power-factor of the load on the alternating-current side 
affects the magnetic flux, which, in turn, affects the speed and 
frequency of the converter. A heavy inductive load on the 
alternating-current side tends to make the converter run away. 
This, of course, can be prevented by a speed-limit device, or 
by separately exciting the converter from an under-saturated 
exciter driven from the converter, or by making the armature 
of the converter very weak in comparison with its field magnet. 
But none of these devices can keep the speed absolutely con- 
stant under these conditions. And when the speed varies it 
causes the. speed of all. induction motors and synchronous 
motors on the line, fed from the converter, also to vary, 
which is highly objectionable. This, combined with its other 
faults, makes an inverted converter in many instances less 
desirable than a motor-generator. 

Generally speaking, the higher the ieeed of a machine the 
less is its cost, so that it is to the interest of the manufacturer 
to run’at as high a speed as possible. The possible speed for 
an alternator is limited only by mechanical considerations. The 
maximum speed at which a direct-current generator or a syn- 

- chronous converter of a given output can be run is limited by 
sparking. Given the approximate speed at which a direct- 
current machine will run, the number of poles that the machine 
should have is fixed within narrow limits by sparking and 
cheapness of design. As the number of poles and speed deter- 
mine the frequency of a machine, it is easily seen how the choice 
of speed at which a converter of given output, frequency, and 
voltage may be run is limited. 

Suppose.a 1 000-kw., 25-cycle, 600-volt converter is to be 
designed: to insure the cheapest machine: the number of poles 
must be as few as possible so that the speed can be high. There 

‘ are 1670 amperes to commutate; this, to a great extent, deter- 
mines the number of poles. On laying out the design of the 
machine, it is found that 10 poles will suffice, but that 12 poles 
will be better. Let 250 rev. per min. be decided upon. As- 
suming a pole-pitch of 21 in., we obtain en armature diameter 
of 80 in., 24 slots per pole, two coils per slot, and a length of 
armature core of 13.5 in. The slots are comparatively narrow, 
only 0.4-in. wide, so. that solid pole faces can be used. This 
makes a very good machine. Fig. 1 shows a 1 000-kw. con- 
verter of similar design to that just described. 

If a 1000-kw., 600-volt motor-generator is to be designed, 
the number of poles on the direct-current generator can be taken 


* 


724 WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CON VERTERS. [June 19 


care of, and the speed may be made as high as is consistent 
with good commutation. The speed may be as high as 300 
rev. per min., but, just as in the case of the converter, a better 
machine would result if the speed were kept down to 250 rev. 
per min. Twelve poles is the correct number, and as a some- 
what better sparking constant is wanted than in the converter, 
the armature is built with a slightly larger diameter. An arma- 
ture of 86-in. diameter, with 16 slots per pole and three coils 
per slot is satisfactory. The width of slot is not limited as 


Fic, 1.—1000-kw., 600-volt, 25-cycle, 250-rev. per min, 
Synchronous Converter. . 


laminated pole-faces are to be used. This gives an armature 
length of 10.5 in. This also makes a very good machine. 

This is one instance in which we find that the synchronous 
converter and motor generator will run at the same rate of 
speed and have the same number of poles. Of course, in this 
case, the cost of the converter and transformers will be con- 
siderably less than the corresponding motor-generator set. 

Suppose, on the other hand, a1 500-kw., 275-volt, 25-cycle 
machine is to be designed. It is found that the minimum 
number of poles for a direct-current machine of this output 


* 


1905.] WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. 725 


and pressure is about 20. This gives a 20-pole converter at 
150 rev. per min.,-and an armature 130 in. diameter, 13 in. 
long, 24 slots per pole, one coil per slot. 

The corresponding generator for the motor-generator sct 
may be run at 214 rev. per min. by making it with 20 poles. 
This gives: armature 120-in. diameter, 9.5-in. long, 14 slots 
per pole, two coils per slot. In this case the cost of the motor- 
generator will be considerably less than that of the corresponding 
converter and transformers, simply on account of higher speed 
at which the motor-generator can be run. 

Speaking generally from the designer’s standpoint, there is 
not much to choose between the difficulty of designing a syn- 
chronous converter and that of designing a direct-current 
generator of the same output, speed, and voltage.. The design 
of a converter is subject to more limitations than that of a 
direct-current generator. The number of commutator seg- 
ments per pair of poles must be divisible by the number of 
phases, and the number of slots per pair of poles should also 
be divisible by the same number. The relative dimensions of 
the slot and air-gap are limited by the fact that eddy currents 
must be avoided in the solid pole-faces or copper dampers, 
which are usually employed to prevent hunting. On the other 
hand, however, the absence of armature reaction in a synchron- 
ous converter, is considerably in its favor as regards sparking 
when the machine is running with fixed brushes. 

Investigating the conditions at the point of commutation in 
a direct-current generator by means of a pilot-brush when the 
machine is running at its full rated output with brushes 
set in the normal position, it is generally found that resistance 
commutation is taking place; that is, that the brushes are ad- 
vanced just far enough for the armature field to neutralize the 
direct field due to the magnets at the point of commutation. 
Now as the load on the machine is increased, the increased 
armature reaction causes the resultant field at the point of com- 
mutation to become of the opposite sign to that which would 
be required for perfect commutation, thus tending to make 
the brushes spark. At the same time the increased current, 
which has to be commutated, also has a tendency to make the 
brushes spark unless the resistance of the brush contact is suff- 
ciently high. Assuming that the maximum current is being 
taken out of the machine that the brushes could commutate 
by the varying resistance of their contacts if they were in a 


726 WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. [June 19 


zero resultant field, any increase of load on the direct-current 
generator will cause the brushes to spark, for two reasons: 
first, because of increased armature reaction; secondly because 
the current becomes too great to be taken care of by resistance 
commutation, even assuming no armature reaction. 

In a synchronous converter, on the other hand, the armature- 
reaction effect is not present, and the brushes may be assumed 
at all times to be either in a neutral field or in one that is help- 
ing the commutation. The result of this is that a direct-current 
machine run as a synchronous converter will carry, as regards 
sparking, heavier overloads with fixed brushes than will the 
same machine used as a generator. The sparking does not 
seem to increase so quickly in a synchronous converter as the 
load is raised. The result of this is that the sparking-constant 
in a converter is usually permitted to be about 25% higher 
than in a generator, under which circumstances asynchronous. 
converter may run at a lower peripheral speed and with a longer 
armature core than the corresponding generator. 

There being no resultant armature reaction in a synchronous 

converter some manufacturers design such machines with a 
high armature reaction and low volts per commutator-bar ,; 
that is, with a strong armature and weak fields, the idea being 
to save material in the construction of the machine and to 
lower its cost. This saving in cost however is not so pronounced 
_as one might think at first sight, as the labor is increased quite 
materially when the number of coils on the armature and the 
number of bars on the commutator are increased. In addition, 
a strong armature is not conducive to good operation in a syn- 
chronous converter; it tends to make the brushes flash badly 
or even to flash over when starting from the alternating-current 
side, and it reduces the synchronizing power of the machine 
and tends to make it flash badly when hunting. Considering the 
question from all points of view, it is usually found that it is 
best to design synchronous converters with about the same 
armature reaction and volts per bar as the corresponding direct- 
current machines. 

The copper loss in the armature of a polyphase synchronous 
converter is usually considerably less than in the case of the 
corresponding direct-current generator, so that such converters 
are sometimes designed with a much smaller cross-section of 
copper than would be used in a generator. This is bad prac- 
tice. The copper loss in a sytichronous converter armature is 


1905.] WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS: 127 


not equally distributed, the loss in the bars nearest the collector 
leads being usually muth greater than in those midway be- 
tween the leads. And although the difference in temperature 
at the end of a temperature run cannot generally be detected 
by a thermometer, the difference is very appreciable in the 
case of sudden overload at a low power-factor. And cases are 
on record where the armature bars connected to the leads in a 
large converter have been fused before the other bars got dan- 
gerously hot. For railway work the section of the copper in a 
converter armature ought to be at least equal to that in the 
corresponding generator. 

As regards heating, six-phase synchronous converters have a 
slight advantage over two- or three-phase converters. But 
six-phase machines call for such extra complications in the cables 
and switchboard that they are seldom employed. In any case 
a six-phase converter may have to operate three-phase at some 
time, so it should be designed simply as a three-phase machine 
with three extra collector-rings. This being the case, the re- 
marks before made in regard to the section of the armature 
copper and heating of conductors also apply to two- and to three- 
phase machines. 

An important feature in the design of the armature of a 
synchronous converter is often overlooked, and that is equality 
or balancing of the phases. If the windings of the different 
phases on a converter armature are not all exactly equal and 
not all placed on the armature in an exactly similar and sym- 
metrical position with regard to one another, then the phases 
will be unbalanced, with the result that the load will not be 
balanced among the phases and that there will be a greater 
tendency to hunting. If the three ammeters in the three 
phases of such a rotary are watched the load can be seen changing 
from one phase to another. 

This is the reason why synchronous converters Sate series 
wound armatures are usually unsatisfactory. It is often im- 
possible to balance the phases. A 6-pole, three-phase converter 
with a series wound armature with 224 coils, must have the 
rings connected to coils 1-26-51. An 8-pole three-phase con- 
verter with a multiple-wound armature with 520 coils, must 
have its rings connected to coils 1-44-86. The phases of both 
these armatures are unbalanced. To get the phases perfectly 
balanced the number of commutator bars. per pair of poles 
should not only be divisible by the number of phases but the 


728 WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. [June J9 


number of slots per pair of poles should also be divisible by the 
same number. The reason for this is that to get the different 
phase windings all symmetrically and similarly placed on the 
armature all the coils that are connected to the phase leads 
must be in the same relative positions in their slots. 

Synchronous converters are more liable to hunt than syn- 
chronous motors. Generally speaking, conditions of operation 
and design that will enable two alternators to run satisfactorily 
in parallel without hunting will also enable one of them to run 
satisfactorily as a synchronous motor when driven by the other 
machine under the same conditions. A single converter driven 
from an alternating-current system will not operate under 
given conditions quite so well as regards hunting as a motor- 
generator. The armature reaction of a synchronous converter 
is considerably higher in proportion than that of a synchronous 
motor. Therefore, its synchronizing power is less and the fact 
that the direct-current side is so intimately connected to the 
alternating-current side makes it peculiarly sensitive to hunting. 

But the main difficulties with converters in regard to hunting ~ 
are experienced when two or more converters are running in 
parallel on the ‘same alternating-current system and feeding 
into the same direct-current system. These difficulties are 
especially marked when the converters are running in parallel 
upon the same alternating-current and the same direct-current 
-bus-bars. Under similar conditions motor-generators are no 
‘more sensitive to hunting than under the conditions of singly 
operated units. But the difficulties with converters are often so 
serious that operating engineers have found it necessary to 
insist that manufacturers provide all such machines with damp- 
ing or anti-hunting devices. 

Artificial damping devices of various types and forms have 
been tried, but the only one in use at the present time is a 
heavy grid of cast copper imbedded in the pole face. Another 
construction now in use for accomplishing the same result 
consists in solid pole-faces so shaped, and with the armature 
slots and air-gap so proportioned that eddy currents due to 
the teeth are avoided. As far as can be seen from practical 
operation, these two methods of preventing hunting seem 
equally effective. They both enable converters to be run in 
parallel satisfactorily, so long as the variation in speed of the 
engines and the pressure drop in the feeders is not excessive. 

As regards the relative effects of a copper-grid damper and a 


1905.} WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. 729 


solid pole-face upon the efficiency under working conditions it 
is difficult to speak within any degree of accuracy, so much 
depends on the uniformity of speed of the engines; but it is 
probable that there is often a constant loss in the copper-grid 
damper, as it is sometimes applied, with large armature teeth 
and small air-gaps. 

Solid pole-faces call for a larger air-gap or smaller slot, which 
in turn demands more coppet on the magnet. This is especially 
the case in 60-cycle converters. On the other hand, from a 
mechanical point of view it is a nuisance to have to fix auxiliary 
copper grids or dampers on any pole-face. The cost of the 
dampers is not insignificant. Generally speaking, then, there 
is little choice between solid pole-faces and auxiliary dampers, 
so it would perhaps be best to advise the use of solid pole-faces 
in all cases, as they are simpler and more mechanical. 

Though synchronous converters have been used for quite a 
number of years yet their detail design seems to have received 
less care than has been given to generator design. A converter 
in a sub-station carrying a street railway load is usually sub- 
jected to pretty rough treatment, and consequently should be 
of robust design. All parts should be as accessible as possible 
in order to facilitate repairing. 

Two features in the design of converters that are often faulty 
are the alternating-current collector gear and leads, and the 
starting resistance used for starting from the direct-current 
side. The alternating-current end of the machine is often de- 
signed similarly to the old revolving-armature alternators; that 
is, the leads are strap-copper soldered to the armature con- 
ductor and fixed to the armature end-plate with cleats. The 
collector-rings are mounted solid upon the shaft and separated 
and insulated by fiber or wood discs and bushings, the leads 
being imbedded in this insulation where they pass through or 
are connected to the rings. 

This construction is shown in Fig. 2. It is unsatisfactory for 
heavy railway work. Solid copper leads cleated to the arma- 
ture end-plates are liable to break due to vibration, and soldered 
joints are liable to melt under over loads. Collector rings 
mounted solid on the shaft are liable to break down due to 
warping or cracking of the insulation and to get hot on over- 
loads due to poor cooling facilities. And when the rings are 
insulated by wooden discs projecting between the rings they 
cannot be easily turned off when they become cut or grooved 


730 WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVER TERS. [June 19 


by the metal brushes. The most substantial construction is 
to use cable for the leads and to connect them to the armature 
winding by special lugs riveted: and silver soldered to the arma- 
ture conductors. The rings should be carried on arms pro- 
jecting from a cast-iron spider and should be freely open to 
the air all round for cooling, and be easily accessible for turning 
off whenever they become grooved or uneven from wear. In 
fact they should be designed exactly like the collector gear of 


© 
© 
» 
* 
~ 
a 
. 
® 


Fic, 2.—Synchronous Converter Armature and Collector Rings. 


a revolving-field alternator. When this construction is adopted 
a temperature rise of over 10 degrees is rarely attained on nor- 
mal load. Such collector rings are shown in Fig. 3. 

Regarding a starting resistance for starting a converter or 
a motor-generator from the direct-current side, it is often for- 
gotten that. starting such machine. is a much more’ severe 
operation than starting a motor. A converter or a motor- 
generator has to be run up to speed. and: then synchronized 


1905.] WATERS. SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. 7 


Oo 
par 


and when synchronizing the speed has to be exact. If the pres- 
sure on the direct-current system is varying, it often takes 
several minutes to synchronize a machine, and if it is varying 
suddenly the speed can only be adjusted by means of the start- 
ing resistance because shunt control is not quick enough. Start- 
ing resistances for converters or motgr-generators should be 
designed so that the last steps can be kept in circuit-for at least 
five minutes without overheating. An oil-cooled starting resist- 
ance that has been designed for this work is shown in Fig. 4. 
The resistance coils are of iron wire supported on porcelain insula- 
tors and connected to heavy brass terminals. The resistance is 
designed so that the temperature rise of the oil will be 150° cent. 


Fic. 3.—Collector Rings for Synchronous Converter. 


in five minutes with all the coils carrying their maximum rated 
current. This type of resistance gives excellent results and has the 
additional advantages of being quite cheap and almost fireproof. 

The usual starting switch, with overload and no-load release, 
is neither necessary nor desirable for synchronous converter 
work; it is too complicated and expensive and not reliable 
enough for such work. A standard multiple-contact switch is 
all that is required. Such a switch requires very little space 
and may be mounted on the converter panel. 

This paper has not been written with the idea of advocating 
the use of synchronous converters instead of motor generators, 
or vice versa, but more with the idea of comparing them gen- 
erally, their advantages and disadvantages, and of pointing 


732 WATERS: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. [June 19 


out some of the characteristic features of each machine. The 
question as to which type of machine ought to be used in any 
given case can only be decided after every feature of the situa- 
tion has been ‘duly considered. Broadly speaking, however, 
the tendency to-day is toward motor-generator sets in lighting 
systems and synchronous converters on traction systems. 
This seems to be perhaps the most rational conclusion. 
Motor-generators and synchronous converters, all things con- 
sidered, are really considerably more difficult to design and 
huild than’ the ordinary standard engine-type generator. They 


ee 
SS 
oS) 
S 
SS 


Ht 


Hi i 


Fic. 4.—Starting Resistance for 1 000-kw. Motor-Generator Set. 


are high-speed machines and usually run in sub-stations where 
the conditions of operation and the supervision are not of the 
best. The question of their reliability in continuous operation 
should therefore receive the most careful consideration from the 
designer and manufacturer. Suggestions and criticisms from 
operating engineers are of the utmost value to the manufacturers, 
and should always be welcomed and investigated to see whether 
or not they contain features valuable enough to warrant the 
alteration of standard designs. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 733 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘ SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS AND MoTOoOR- 
GENERATORS.”’ 


Gano.S. Dunn: [am very glad to see that motor-generators 
are beginning to get their due. When synchronous converters 
were first brought out their theoretical and apparent advantages 
were so great that too much attention was paid to them and it has 
taken us a long time to recognize the very great advantages that 
motor-generators possess. The relative costs that have been 
pointed out by Mr. Waters to-day, which were also pointed 
out by Mr. Eglin in a paper before the St. Louis Congress, and 
by Mr. Stott and others, are having the effect of drawing more 
attention to the availability of motor-generators. As I look 
at the tables on page 719 and especially with reference to the 
500-kw., 600-volts, 60-cycles comparison, I see the motor- 
generator, costing under those conditions only 5 per cent. 
more. I would like very much if Mr. Waters would define 
what he means by the word ‘‘cost’”’ in this table. There are 
so many things that may be included or excluded that the 
simple word alone does not give any information. He speaks 
of the motor-generator costing 20 per cent. more than the 
synchronous converter. Does that include any regulating 
device for the synchronous converter, also does it apply to 
machines set up or simply f.o.b. at the station; also are both 
machines three-phase? 

It is often objected when motor-generators are proposed 
for railway load, that the fluctuations on the direct-current 
end are so serious as to interfere to a dangerous extent with 
the excitation of the synchronous end by the direct current, 
and therefore it is considered by some that a separate exciter 
driven by the same machine, is required. Of course if this 
separate exciter is required, it adds to the cost of the motor- 
generator as compared with the cost of the converter. I should 
like to have an expression of opinion as to what effect the 
fluctuating of the railway current has upon the excitation of 
the motor-generator. Whether these fluctuations are, after all, 
serious enough to throw the tide. in favor of converters, or to 
make us feel that we ought always to use a separately excited 
synchronous motor. 

F. G. Proutr: I do not quite agree with Mr. Waters in 
his elimination of the induction motor as a factor in motor- 
generator sets of large sizes. Where motor-generator sets 
are to be located in central-stations, it seems to me the in- 
duction motor is in every way preferable to the synchronous 
motor, and as nearly all lighting and power companies are now 
taking up induction motor loads in sizes varying from two to 
200 h.p., a large number being of 50-h.p. capacity, it_ would 
seem as if a large number of these motors would be just as 
objectionable as a station load as several large motor-generator 
sets equipped with induction motors; the only objection in 


734 SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. | {June 21 


either case being the bad power-factor of the induction motor 
load and its effect on the general regulation of the system. 

The first thing to consider in any central-station equipment 
is to have it as nearly as possible proof against harm from 
careless or unskilful operators, because continuous operation 
is, after all, of greater importance than efficiency. Apparatus 
that it is practically impossible for operators to get out of order 
present as nearly ideal a condition as can be obtained, and it 
can be said more truthfully of induction motors than of either 
synchronous converters or synchronous motors that they fill 
the conditions ideally. 

The question of power-factor is only one of the many points 
that should be considered, and even with a synchronous motor 
outfit, there are very few occasions where the power-factor 
is actually unity, while with induction motors there is a good 
power-factor on anything over half load, and on light loads, 
even though the power-factor be low, the current taken by the 
motor is so small that the actual results, as far as regulation 
goes, will be much the same whether the induction motor be 
run on heavy load with good power-factor, motor taking large 
amount of current from primary generator, or with light load, 
and small amount of current from primary generator, at much 
lower power-factor. 

From considerable experience with induction motor-generator 
sets of as high as 500-kw. capacity, and from experience in 
operating large number of induction motors on a distributing 
power service, my opinion is that the induction motor, from 
the standpoint of the central-station operator, ould be used 
in a very large number of cases in preference to the synchronous 
motor for driving motor-generator sets. 

Cuas. P. Sreinmetz: Lagree with Mr. Waters in his preference 
for the motor-generator over the converter for 60-cycles, I 
also agree with his preference for the synchronous converter 
over the motor-generator for small 25-cycle units. But I 
cannot see why, for large 25-cycle machines, the synchronous 
converter should not also be preferable, except perhaps in 
special cases. The reason why Mr. Waters and I disagree on 
this point may possibly be due ‘to difference of opinion regarding 
the designing constants of the synchronous converter. I do 
not agree with Mr. Waters that in synchronous converters 
low armature reaction is preferable. My experience has led 
me to the opposite conclusion, that high armature reaction 
ss desirable. The advantage of high armature reaction is not 
the smaller size of the machine, which is offset by the copper 
on the armature being much more expensive than on the field, 
but the greater stability. A machine with extremely low 
armature reaction it is practically impossible to operate without 
serious surging, while high armature reaction reduces the 
tendency to surging. This I consider as one of the main reasons 
why a 60-cycle converter is not as good as a 25-cycle converter, 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 735 


because it is not possible with the limited pitch of 60-cycles 
to get as high armature reaction as is possible with 25 cycles. 
Both types of machines, converters as well as synchronous 
motors, occasionally hunt, but synchronous motors are prac- 
tically always provided with some anti-hunting device in the 
field poles, while synchronous converters nowadays are prac- 
tically not so provided. Only in special cases are anti-hunt- 
ing devices used nowadays. The reason is the higher 
armature reaction of the converter feasible by the use of 
higher current densities in the armature which gives the 
synchronous converter a stability which the synchronous motor 
does not share to the same extent. The higher armature reac- 
tion and lower mechanical momentum, and thereby reduced 
tendency to surge, are the main reasons for utilizing in con- 
verters the high nominal current densities which are per- 
missible due to the two currents neutralizing each other more 
or less completely, but not to the attempt to save copper. 
In the converter there obtains the stability of high armature reac- 
tion, without the distortion of the field, since magnetically the 
alternating-current and direct-current armature reactions neu- 
tralize one another. The result is that a synchronous converter 
can carry an overload without appreciably dropping its voltage, 
which no direct-current generator, designed with equally con- 
servative constants, can carry. Therefore, the overload capa- 
city of the synchronous converter is higher, and I doubt whether, 
by any other means, automatic regulation of voltage could 
be secured as perfectly as by the standard system of long- 
distance railway transmission by means of a series of sub-sta- 
tions with over-compounded synchronous converters con- 
trolling the transmission-line voltage by the effect of current 
lead and lag on reactance, or as it is called, by phase control. 
L.C. Marsure: The most probable explanation for the general 
preference of European engineers for the motor-generator may 
be found in the fact that a frequency of 50 cycles has been 
more or less standardized in Europe, while in this country 
25 cycle current is used in all railway and power work. 
Our experience with 60-cycle converters substantially agrees 
with that of European engineers with 50-cycle apparatus of 
this description. Particularly does this apply to railway con- 
verters in which, on account of the high voltage, the number 
of commutator bars has to be large, although the distance 
between adjacent poles and, therefore, adjacent brush holders 
is small. This naturally results in thin segments, high voltage 
between segments, and a tendency to flash over. It seems 
that this point has been overlooked when Europeans speak of 
American practice in the use of converters, and when they 
state that converters always spark. . 
- Referring to the superiority of the motor-generator due to 
the possibility of regulating its direct-current voltage by 
means of the field excitation. As far as city railway work is 


736 SYNCHRONOUS CON VERTERS [June 21 


concerned, where the variation of load is small due to the 
fact that the individual cars are small compared with the 
capacity of the sub-station, there seems but little necessity 
of providing special means for keeping the direct-current 
converter voltage constant under varying loads. A light car, 
weighing in the neighborhood of 15 tons and fed from 500- 
or 1000-kw. converters, will naturally affect the conver- 
ter voltage but little when starting up. This is different 
with interurban roads operating 30- or 40-ton cars from 300- 
or even 200-kw. converters, but here automatic regulation can 
be obtained by means of reactive coils and compound winding. 
In respect to hunting, Mr. Waters states, on page 728: 


“The main difficulty with regard to hunting is experienced when two 
or more converters are running in parallel on the same alternating-cur- 
rent system and feeding into the same direct-current system.”’ 


No difficulty should be experienced operating converters in 
parallel in this way as long as they are fed from independent 
banks of step-down transformers. Two converters in the 
same station will hunt in synchronism; that is, their speed 
will increase at the same time and will decrease at the same 
time, showing that the parallel operation is not the cause of 
the hunting. This fact was demonstrated very clearly in some 
tests made a few years ago.! Round disks with black and 
white sectors were fastened to the ends of the shafts of two 
converters located in the same station and were illuminated 
by alternating current arcs connected to the system supplying 
the converters. Obviously, as long as a converter is entirely 
in synchronism; the different sections will appéar stationary 
provided the number of black and white sections is properly 
chosen, while as soon as it begins to hunt, the sections will 
move back and forth. In this way it was observed, that no 
hunting occurred between the two converters, but that they 
always hunted absolutely in synchronism. 

The following explanation of the phenomenon seems reason- 
able. Hunting can not occur when the synchronizing power 
(the tendency of the cross currents flowing between machines 
out of synchronism to pull them into synchronism) is suffi- 
cient. With small resistance between machines, naturally 
the cross current will be heavy and, therefore, the tendency 
to hunt is slight; while with a large resistance between machines 
much smaller cross-currents will be caused by a certain 
angular displacement between the two armatures, so that, 
other things being equal, the danger of hunting will be 
greater. Hunting between converters in the same station, 
seems, therefore, improbable. It may be that the difficulty 
Mr. Waters has found in running converters in parallel was 
due to the fact that when he put the second machine in par- 
allel and increased the total load, the drop between the main 


1. Tests conducted by Mr. John B. Taylor. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 737 


station and the sub-station was increased so much that the 
converters at the sub-station hunted with generators at the 
main station or with converters in another sub-station. No 
difficulty, however, should be expected from the fact that the 
_ two machines are operating in parallel. 

H. G. Stott: A paper read by me before the INSTITUTE 
in March, 1901, contained a number of similar comparisons to 
comparisons given in Mr. Waters’ paper. The efficiencies cor- 
respond quite closely in the two papers. I found that the 
costs, including all the different regulating devices, such as 
induction regulators required on a synchronous converter, 
brought the synchronous converter up to practically the same 
point as the motor-generator, and so I think they are about 
even on that point. I would like to call attention to the fact 
that a fluctuating load can be got from a synchronous converter 
without affecting the power-factor, and this cannot be done 
with a motor-generator. The reason is this: with a motor- 
generator set a fluctuating load on the direct-current generator 
changes the power-factor and a sudden increase in the load 
decreases the power factor, and that demagnetizes the field 
of the generator, so there is perhaps at least double the fluctua- 
tion repeated back on the generator. That effect is very 
marked. Now by using the compound winding on the synchron- 
ous converter and adjusting it to the proper point, the power- 
factor at the power-house and at the sub-station, under any 
condition of load from zero to full load, or any overload, can 
be held at unity, which in itself is a very important factor in 
the regulation. 

Morcan Brooxs: I would inquire of operating engineers 
whether motor-generators are not more satisfactory than 
synchronous converters under abnormal conditions, such as 
a short circuit on a street-railway feeder? That is, whether 
by using a motor-generator we may not rely upon the circuit- 
breakers to confine such trouble strictly to the direct-cur- 
rent side, and so prevent a complete shutdown, which I under- 
stand has sometimes resulted with converters from a com- 
paratively small initial trouble. 

PresIDENT Lies: In the operation of synchronous con- 
verters in large systems, it has been found necessary to 
provide synchronous converters with speed-limit devices, to 
guard against disaster to the converters when a_ short 
circuit occurs. In a large system with which I am famil- 
iar, two or three converters have been wrecked, owing to the 
absence of such devices. The speed-limit devices that were 
available when this system was first put in operation were — 
crude and unreliable, so that a special type of speed-limit 
device had to be developed, using as a basis the Schaeffer and 
Budenberg tachometer. When a violent short-circuit or other 
disturbance came on the system there was a tendency on the 
part of the operator to disconnect the converters, partly from 


738 SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTE RSa [June 21 


fear that if that were not done they would run away and be 
wrecked. It has been found that the operation of the improved 
speed-limit devices has not only saved converters in a number 
of cases, but has also given the operators such confidence that 
they have allowed the converters to remain connected with 
the system and to follow up the fall and rise of voltage without 
fear of disaster. Under these conditions converters have 
given good results, but it has also been found necessary to apply 
devices to prevent hunting when the system is lightly loaded. 
Under conditions of heavy load, with several generators in 
parallel, the necessity for anti-hunting devices disappears, and 
we have found on a large system there is no difficulty with 
parallel operation. One of the effects on a large system, 
when a heavy short circuit occurs, is to burn the commutator 
and collector brushes; in several cases the short circuits 
have been so violent as to produce quite serious effects on 
conductors that were near together and carrying heavy currents. 
When the short circuits occurred the series copper connectors 
of the storage batteries would momentarily carry large amounts 
of current, 10 000, 15 000, 20 000 amperes, and the result has 
been in several cases to force the copper bars out of their sup- 
ports, break the insulators in which they were held, and throw 
the bars half way across the room. It has therefore been found 
necessary to provide against the repulsion which takes place 
in contiguous copper conductors, when carrying heavy currents 
due to short circuits by extra bracing and clamping of the 
conductors. 

Gano S. Dunn: Were the three or four converters you 
describe, wrecked when acting as inverted converters? Was the 
short-circuit that caused the wreck on the alternating-current 
side or on the direct-current side? 

Presipent Lies: As a general thing the short circuit 
is on the alternating-current side and in almost all cases 
it is due to mistakes of the operators. In a case that oc- 
curred several years ago, which completely wrecked a con- 
verter, stripping the winding, and wrecking the commutator, 
two parts of the system were operating from independent 
sources of current supply, one from an equipment of large 
capacity and one of small capacity. On a distant part of the 
system an operator by mistake threw the two sources of supply 
together without synchronizing, or without voltage adjustment, 
with the result that a converter not equipped with speed-limit 
device at a distant part of the system was wrecked. 

L. C. Marsure: It would be interesting to learn if any 
of the members know of the runaway of a motor-generator 
under such conditions. If the generator is compound wound, 
it would seem as if the danger of such an occurrence would exist 
for reasons similar to those that cause compound converters 
to run away, although, of course, in the case of a converter 
an alternating-current short circuit on the line might result 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 739 


in a strong lagging current, which, by weakening the field of the 
converter would tend to increase the speed more than would 
be likely with a motor-generator. The possibility of a run- 
away, however, seems to exist with a motor generator set also. 

Cuas. P. Steinmetz: A synchronous converter, as long as 
it is connected on the alternating-current side with an alternating 
system of a power, large compared with the power of the syn- 
chronous converter,cannot run away under any conditions whether 
the current reverses or not. But if it disconnects from the alter- 
nating side, then it may run away, and the motor-generator 

set, whether a synchronous motor or an induction motor, will 
do the same. A motor-generator set disconnected from the 
alternating side and fed from the direct-current system into 
which it connects, may run away probably quicker than the 
synchronous converter, because the direct-current generator 
probably has a more powerful series field than the converter, 
and this series field reverses and demagnetizes. However, with 
a reverse-current circuit-breaker on the direct-current side, 
no running away is possible in either case, except by a failure 
of the circuit breaker, and against this a speed limiting device. 
must guard. ¥ ; 

L. C. MarBurc: [I have made observations recently that I think 

may be of interest in connection with the operation of 60-cycle 
converters run alternately from a three-phase generator and from 
a 600-volt direct-current generator. I have run the converter 
on a railroad circuit carrying a locomotive that had a capacity 
very much larger than the converter itself. I have seen the 
circuit-breaker operate on the direct-current end of the converter 
at 350 amperes while, when the load of the rotary is 362, the 
converter was held absolutely steady up to that. The converter 
is provided with a reactive coil and series winding. I -have 
been able to set the power-factor, what I call the minimum 
. average load, at about 85 or 90 per cent. I had to take that 
by observation. I did not have a power-factor indicator. I 
found the regulation excellent. Not having engine power 
behind it, I did not get the regulation desired. 

Speaking of inverted converters with inductive load, I would 
like to ask Mr. Waters where he thinks that danger of running 
away wouldoccur? I have had it up to one-third load-on incan-_ 
descent lighting and have put in an arc system with low power- 
factor, and have been unable to notice any increase in speed 
of the converter or any fluctuation in voltage at all. Up to 
what point that would be the case I have not been able to deter- 
mine, but up to one-third or one-half load I have been unable 
to notice any variation in voltage whatever, whereas the same 
load on an alternating-current generator not provided with 
an automatic generator regulator would have to regulate by 
hand very rapidly. Bg 

In connection with the speed-limit device which is a speed- 
switch on the alternating-current end of the converter set 
for an excess speed of 300 rev. per min., or 1200 revo- 


740 SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS. [June 21 


lutions on the converter, we have not had it go above that. 
The increase in speed is not appreciable. 

Gsxo S. Dunn: Dr. Steinmetz’ remark that the motor- 
generator would run away as soon as the synchronous converter, 
seems to me not strictly correct. ~ It would take more kilowatts 
in the short-circuit on its alternating ‘side to make the motor- 
generator run away than the converter. For instance, an induc- 
tive short circuit involving very few kilowatts on the alternating 
side of the converter would cause demagnetization of its field 
sufficient to make it run away; but a similar short circuit on the 
alternating side of a motor-generator would cause so small a back 
current to flow through the series fields of the direct-current 
side that the speed would be increased only a little and there 
would not be a runaway and a wreck. 

The motor-generator would also be more likely to burn out a 
short-circuit on the alternating side and save itself than would 
a converter. 

W.L. Warers: The costs given in the table are selling prices 
f.0.b. at the factory, and include the necessary rheostats or 
shunts, but do not include induction regulators. If induction 
regulators are included, then as Mr. Stott has said, there will 
be practically no difference between the cost of a motor con- 
verter outfit and a motor-generator. 

In regard to the necessity for a separate exciter for a motor- 
generator when the load on the direct-current side is fluctuating 
very quickly: the only effect of the fluctuating load would be 
to cause the direct-current voltage to vary somewhat, which 
would vary the excitation of the synchronous motor. This 
means that the current in the alternating-current lines would 
also vary. But under ordinary circumstances there would be 
absolutely no danger of the motor falling out of step, so long as 
the voltage on the direct-current side did not vary more than 
40% or 50%. 

I agree with Mr. Steinmetz that the synchronous converter 
is more capable of carrying overloads than is a motor-generator. 
And as I have remarked in my paper, I also think that the 
application of synchronous converters is confined more to trac- 
tion installations where they have to carry heavy overloads 
and where exact voltage regulation is not of importance. 

In regard to converters running away, the only machines 
that can run away are those with compound field winding. 
A shunt-wound motor-generator or converter cannot run 
away, and as the tendency nowadays is towards shunt windings 
for generators, I cannot see that this danger is very serious, 
at any rate in the case of motor-generator sets. Of course in 
an inverted converter with shunt windings, an inductive load 
on the alternating current side will cause the speed to rise and 
the extent to which the speed rises is merely a question of 
the design of the machine. Usually, however, the synchronous 
converters can be designed so that the rise in speed is not 
serious and can be taken care of by a speed-limit device, 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N.C., J:2ne 19-23, 1908. 


Copyright 1905. By A.I. E. E. 


A NEW INSTRUMENT FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF 
ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 


BY EB. BF. NORTHRUP: 


The instrument and methods of measurement described in 
this paper were developed to meet the frequent need of means 
for easily and accurately calibrating alternating-current instru- 
ments—ammeters and voltmeters, whatever their capacity; 
also to suggest an inexpensive method of measuring with 
high precision very large alternating currents regardless 
of their wave form or frequency. Incidentally the instrument 
and methods should prove sufficient for the accurate measure- 
ment of currents of very high frequency where ordinary methods 
would not be applicable. 

A further object kept in mind was to make it possible to 
utilize an installation of a direct-current potentiometer outfit, 
to measure alternating currents and pressures with nearly equal 
facility and precision. 

The instrument and the methods of using it have been success- 
ful because the following important features have been realized: 
(a) It is used as a zero instrument, and does not depend upon 
any calibration or determination of any constant of the instru- 
ment; (b) it operates with extreme sensitiveness, and being per- 
fectly ‘‘ dead-beat”’ is adapted to work with fluctuating cur- 
rents; (c) it may be used with or without low-resistance shunts, 
when used with them, it has an unlimited upward range of cur- 

‘rent measurement; and when used without thei, its lower 
range is down to from two to five milliamperes; (d) as the opera- 
tion of the instrument depends upon the heating effect of cur- 
rents, it is wholly independent of wave-form and frequency. 


741 


742 NORTHRUP: MEASUREMENT OF [June 19 


The cuts and descriptive matter in the following pages de- 
scribe the instrument clearly. Referring to Fig. 1, two small 
wires, A B, of No. 33 hard-drawn silver wire when shunts are 
used, lie parallel to each other at a distance of 0.158 in., being 
held near their extremities by ivory clamps, CC. Each of the 
ends of the two wires are connected to binding posts through 
the medium of heavy leads and soldered joints. 


/ SOLDERED 


i fh 
Gi (trmt 
yet 


Breet; 


One face of a small circular disk of ivory, D, rests against the 
two wires at their middle point, a 0.5-in. circular mirror being 
fastened to the other face. Fastened at the center of the ivory 
disk, and half way between the wires, when the disk is in posi- 
tion on the wires, is asmall hook. To this, through the medium 
of a thread, is fastened a small adjustable spiral spring. The 
small ivory disk maintains its position by friction and the ten- 


w 


1905.] ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 7A: 


sion of the spring. The wires bend back under the tension 
of the spring about 0.875 in. from the vertical. The ivory disk 
does not rest directly upon the wires. but bears upon each wire 
through the medium of a small agate stud shaped like the head 
of a screw, each wire being in the slot of the agate stud which 
rests upon it 

The two ivory clamps holding the wires near their upper 
extremity are made separately adjustable in a vertical direction 
by means of thumb-screws which pass through the hard-rubber 


Fic. 2, 


top of the instrument. Springs ss prevent lost motion when 
the ivory clamps are screwed up or down. 

The arrangement of parts above described is sanooried by a 
brass frame and a circular hard-rubber top. This frame drops 
into a circular nickel-plated brass case. (Fig. 2). The case has 
a window in it directly in front of the mirror on the small ivory 
disk. Fig. 2 shows clearly the arrangement of parts and the 
appearance of the instrument. 

By means of the adjusting screws the tension of the two wires 


744 NORTHRUP: MEASUREMENT OF - [June 19 


may be so adjusted that the plane of the mirror will be vertical 
to a line drawn in the direction of the spring which holds the 
mirror against the wires. Now if any elongation eccurs in the 
wire on the right, that side of the mirror will be drawn down 
or back by the spring, or a deflection to the right is obtained. 
Likewise, if an elongation takes place in the wire on the left, 
the mirror will deflect to the left. If, however, an exactly 
equal elongation occurs in both wires at the same time, the plane 
of the mirror will not tilt but simply move back keeping parallel 
to itself. 

If the mirror is observed with a telescope and scale, say at a 
distance of one meter, very minute angular deflections of the 
mirror will be easily observed, while a sinking back of the 
plane of the mirror away from the scale will not be observable. 

Now if an alternating current of unknown strength be sent 
through the wire A, the wire will elongate, deflecting the mirror 
toward the left. Pass an adjustable direct current, which can 
be measured, through the wire B, until the deflection is reversed 
and brought back to zero on the scale. If when the deflection 
is zero, and certain precautions to be stated later have been 
observed, the strength of the direct current is known, the strength 
of the alternating current will also be known; for it is exactly 
equal to the direct current. This, however, is on the assumption 
that equal currents through the wires A and B produce equal 
elongations of the wires. Previously to comparing the cur- 
rents, connect the wires A and B in series, and send a current. 
through the circuit; if under these conditions the mirror be not 
deflected at all, or only slightly, it proves that the two wires 
are practically equally elongated by the same current strength. 
The limit of this possible small deflection may be taken as the 
true zero of the instrument. If this zero is maintained under 
working conditions, it means that the strength of the alter- 
nating current in the wire A, is equal to the strength of the 
adjustable and measured direct current in the wire B. 

The instrument, however, if limited to such currents as eould 
be passed directly through its wires, would have comparatively 
little value. We shall show how it may be used with shunts 
so as to measure alternating currents, however large. 

The arrangement of the complete circuits for measuring a 
large alternating current, for the purpose of calibrating an alter- 
nating current ammeter, A, is shown diagramatically in Fig. 3. 
An important accessory to the instrument is a quick-acting 


nr 


1S05.] ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 7A 


double-throw switch, marked S in the diagram. W, and Wg 
represent the two wires of the instrument and m the mirror. 
R is a low-resistance shunt, preferably of manganin, having a 
negligible temperature coefficient, furnished with tap-off points 
_¢ and d, between which the resistance R has previously been 
determined. The ammeter indicated in the diagram will 
measure from one to two amperes of direct current; r, is a slide 
wire resistance along which a slider p may be moved, thereby 
varying the pressure difference at a—b from zero to the value 
of the electromotive force of the storage-battery. 

The points a, b, on the direct-current side of the circuits 
have leads attached to them which go either to an accurately 
calibrated direct-current laboratory standard voltmeter, or to a 


STORAGE 
BATTERY 


VOLTMETER OR 
POTENTIOMETER 


potentiometer. It will appear later that except for the highest 
possible precision it is more convenient to employ the standard 
voltmeter, but assume for the present that a potentiometer is 
employed to give the potential difference between a and b. 

When the instrument is installed a permanent adjustment of 
the resistances, at any convenient temperature of the wires and 
leads, must be made as follows: (see Fig. 3.) 


The resistances, 9 to 10 = 7 to 8, 
10 to 1+-9to 5 = 8to 4+7 to 2 and 
2toct4tod = 3toa+6tob. 


Thus while this gives the over-all resistance from a through 
the wire Wz to b equal to the over-all resistance from d through 


746 NORTHRUP: MEASUREMENT OF [June 19 


the wire W, to c, the different portions of the circuit must be 
matched in resistance as stated above. 

It will be observed that if the switch S is closed on the alter- 
nating-current side the two wires W, and Wy, are thrown in 
parallel, that the two parallel-connected circuits have the 
same resistance, by construction, and that to these parallel 
circuits at the points 2 and 4 is applied the same potential 
difference, this potential difference being the drop on the low 
resistance R carrying the alternating current. The drop over Kk, 
inasmuch as it is a low resistance, is only slightly lowered 
by being shunted by the two wires of the instrument 
and their leads, and this lowering of the potential is not 
appreciably greater when the two wires in parallel shunt 
the resistance R than when only one wire with its leads 
shunts this resistance. Disregarding the slight lowering of the 
potential, which, as will appear later is of no consequence, we 
observe that both wires will now have passing through them 
equal currents, each current being nearly the same as would 
pass through the one wire W, if the switch S were open, and 
only this wire could receive current. 

With the resistances of the parallel circuits correctly adjusted 
to equality, both wires will get equal currents, both will elongate 
equally or very nearly so, and the mirror m, instead of rotating 
. will move back, maintaining its plane parallel to the position 
which it’ has with no current passing. 

When the switch S is thrown to the direct-current side, the 
potential drop over the resistance R is now applied to the wire 
W, only; and the direct potential difference between the points 
a and b is applied to the wire Wy. This drop between a and b 
can be varied by the slider » and measured by a voltmeter or 
potentiometer applied at a, b. The ammeter gives the current 
taken by the wire Wg. 

The shunt resistance R may be designed to carry any current, 
however large. The same resistance R, or a combination of 
resistances, may be designed with. several tap-off or potential 
points, so that the instrument may always have approximately 
the same potential applied to its alternating-current side, what- 
ever the strength of the current to be measured. This potential 
drop is best made between 0.25 and 0.5 volt. The necessary 
drop of potential being so low, the energy dissipated in the shunts 
is small, and therefore they may be of very moderate size. It 
is also easy to make them practically non-inductive. 


1905.} ‘ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 747 


Consider now the circuits to be arranged as above described, 
and that a standard voltmeter is used, calibrated to give a full- 
scale deflection for about 0.75 volt, to indicate the direct poten- 
tial between a and b. Then proceed to take measurements to 
calibrate the alternating current ammeter A, (which may have 
any current carrying capacity whatever above one ampere), as 
follows: 

A shunt R and tap-off points are first so placed that when the 
ammeter reads a full-scale deflection, the drop on the shunt R 
from ¢ to d, varies from 0.25 to 0.6 of a volt, but preferably 
0.5 of a volt. If the ammeter is known to read approximately 
correct, and since the value of R is known, we can gradually 
increase the current through the ammeter and shunt resistance 
until the proper potential drop is obtained; that is, the 
drop that will properly sensitize the  alternating-current 
instrument. If, however, the ammeter gives no guide to 
the true value of the current, the switch S may be left 
in its open position; the alternating-current instrument 
can then be read as a deflection instrument. In this case the 

- current through & should -be increased until the alternating- 
current instrument deflects to the end of the scale, when the 
drop over R’ will be about right for the condition of good sensi- 
tiveness. 

The adjustment being made, the switch S is closed on the 
alternating-current side, when the alternating-current instru- 
ment will take a steady zero position; and if carefully made 

_ and adjusted, exactly the same zero position as when no current 
is passing. 

The zero position is now carefully noted and the switch S is 
then thrown to the direct-current side. The instrument will 
at once deflect until by moving the slider p the direct potential 
between a, b, balances the alternating potential between c, d, 
when the instrument will return to zero position. This adjust- 
ment can be made with great exactness, say to within 3%. 
The switch S may now be thrown across the alternating-current 
and the direct-current side, alternately, to prove that the adjust- 
ments have been correctly made; this will be the case if no per- 
manent deflections result. The voltmeter is read, also 
the direct-current ammeter, and the alternating-current am- 
meter A being calibrated. These readings give all the 
data for making a very exact calibration of one point 
on the scale of the ammeter under test. Other points on the 


748 NORTHRUP: MEASUREMENT OF [June 19 


scale can be similarly taken by varying the alternating current, 
and also the shunt resistance R. Inasmuch as, by varying this 
latter, we can read a small current with the same precision as a 
large one, the low points on the scale of the instrument under 
calibration can be determined with as great precision as the 
high points. 

In practice the direct-current ammeter is omitted. A pre- 
liminary set of readings is taken to determine its indications 
corresponding to the different potentials that may be produced 
between a and b. With a given instrument and set of working 
wires and leads and voltmeter, the current in the circuit p 6, 
Fig. 3, is a function of the potential difference between a and b. 
This function may therefore be found by trial and plotted as a 
curve. This having been done, it only becomes necessary in 
calibrating an ammeter to take readings, in addition to the 
instrument being calibrated, of a voltmeter, and the zero posi- 
tion of the alternating-current instrument. The expression 
which gives the value of the alternating current C through the 
ammeter A is 

r—kR 


Ca= Ete =KEt+f) (1) 


where r is the resistance of the voltmeter, R the value of the 
shunt used, E the potential read on the voltmeter, and c the 
current in the circuit p. K is a constant, and as ten values of 
R will cover all currents from 1 to 1000 amperes, the values of K 
can be calculated once for all. Furthermore, by properly 
choosing the values of R, K can be made to assume the con- 
venient values 10, 100, etc. /f (£), the function of EF, is readily 
taken from a curve and added to the product K E. f (E£) is 
usually small compared with K E and need not be accurately. 
known. 

Formula (1) is obtained as follows: 

Calling x the resistance of the circuit from ¢ to d, Fig. 3, 
through the wire W,, we shall also have the resistance from 
a to b through the wire Wz equal to x, when it carries a current 
equal to that carried by W,. This assumption is sufficiently 
correct in practice, for the two circuits are adjusted to be equal 
in resistance at the temperature of the room, and as the two 
circuits are constructed of precisely similar wires, the equality 
of their resistance will be closely maintained when warmed by 
the passage of equal currents. We then have. 


1905.] ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 749 


ae 
a 
qs 
+ 
©) 


where E, is the drop from ¢ to d and C’ is the current through 
W.. 

Now when the alternating-current instrument is balanced, 
E, = E, where E is the electromotive force read on the volt- 
meter. . 

Calling C, the current through Wa, when the instrument is 
balanced, C, the current through the voltmeter, and C the 
current through the ammeter, we have C = C,+C,; 


but r being the resistance of the voltmeter es = =, 
2 
h ER Se 
ence Tyla haere 
E E 
Also San Oa emir aay 
which gives Cy; = O Moai 


When the instrument is balanced equal currents flow through 


the wires W, and Wg, hence C1 = C, and we have 
* 


E ee ee ae 


Ca iy T +R 


r—R 


So K, a constant, and C is a function, j E), of E, so 


we can write 


Cam lek tp (4): 


Sel r : pg es 
Dividing numerator and denominator of the expression TR 


by r we pace 


which is equal to + when + is infinite; therefore if a potentio- 


750 NORTHRUP: MEASUREMENT OF [June 19 


meter be used tc read the potential at a, b instead of a voltmeter, 
the value of C,q is 


C= BtC=-Zti® (2) 


Here 7,(£) is the function that c is of E, when no current is 
shunted through a voltmeter, and, as in the use of a voltmeter, 
it may be determined by trial, and plotted as a curve. 

It is possible to measure E more accurately with a potentio- 
meter than with a voltmeter, and the alternating-current in- 
strument is at least four or five times as sensitive in its indica- 
tions as a large laboratory standard Weston voltmeter. It is 


therefore desirable, where great precision is required and the 
alternating current being measured can be held steady, to use a 
potentiometer instead of a voltmeter. For all ordinary calibra- 
tion purposes, however, the latter instrument is quite sufficient, 
and easier to read. If the current to be measured is less than 
about 1.5 amperes, it can be passed directly through the instru- 
ment, no shunts being required. 

For the measurement of small currents a modification in the 
connections and method of measurement is desirable. We have 
found the connections shown in Fig. 4 to be most convenient 
for this purpose. 


1905.] ALTERNATING CURRENTS. DL 


In this diagram A, is any alternating-current instrument to 
be calibrated that does not take more than 1.5 or 2 amperes, 
and Std. is any form of standard instrument that will accurately 
measure a small direct current. Now when the switch S is 
thrown to the side Ser., the wires W, and Wz, are so connected 
that the same current from the cell B will pass through them 
in series. This current may be regulated by the rheostat R,. 
When the switch is thrown to the side Pa’l the alternating 
current will pass through the wire W, and the direct current 
through the wire Wg. 

With the switch in the position Ser. the differential ze1o of 
the instrument is noted. This zero, by careful construction and 
choosing of the working wires, may be made to differ not more 
than a fraction of a scale division from the no-current zero. 
The switch is now thrown to the position Pa’l,and the rheostat 
R, isadjusted until the instrument shows no deflection from the 
zero position found when the switch was in the position Ser. 
The switch may now be swung from side to side once or twice, 
the rheostat R, being more finely adjusted until there is not the 
slightest deflection. The value of the alternating current; that 
is, the square root of its mean-square value, is now equal to the 
direct cur--:t as read by the standard instrument, Std. The 
accuracy of this comparison can be made very great. If the 
alternating current is perfectly steady for a period sufficient to 
read the instruments, an accuracy of a 3); of 1% is not too 
much to expect if the current being measured has a value 
which is such as to give the instrument a good sensitiveness. 

If it is required to read very small currents, it becomes neces- 
sary to change the wires in the instrument, using finer wires 
suited to give the necessary sensitiveness, which is always 
obtained if, when passing the current to be measured through 
one wire only, the instrument gives nearly a full-scale deflection. 

The following analysis will assist in a proper understanding 
of the most suitable circuit arrangement and wires to use for 
different kinds of measurements and current values. 

Referring first to Fig. 5a, let a-p-b be the no-current position 
of one of the wires viewed from the side, that is, along a line 
perpendicular to the normal to the face of the mirror, and to 
the wire. Let Fig. 5b represent the two wires viewed along a 
line normal to the face of the mirror. For small deflections 
the angle 0 through which the mirror turns when the wire ab 


expands will be 


752 NORTHRUP: MEASUREMENT OF [June 19 


Oy Fez) 
0 (3) 


d being the distance between the wires and X,—X, the distance 
that the expanded wire moves back under the tension of the 
spring. 
Taking the meaning of the symbols to be as shown in the 
diagram, Fig. 5a, we have 
t,—%) = (l2—P)§— (2-2) (4) 
This equation does not lead to any simple expression, and 
shows that the instrument does not follow any simple law when 
used as a deflection instrument. Equation (3) shows that the 


b bd 
Fic. 5a. Fic. 5b. 
sensibility will decrease in direct proportion to the distance 
separating the two wires. 

We shall now determine the best kind of wires to employ 
when the instrument is used with shunts, and also when the 
entire current is to be sent through its wires. | 

Let 01, be the increase in the length of the wire per unit of 
length due to the increase in its temperature produced by the 
flowing of the current. If J, is the length of the wire, 01 = 
O1,1, is the total increase in the length of the wire. 

Let T = t,t, be the increase in the temperature of the wire 
above its surroundings, ¢, being its temperature with no current 
and ?, its final temperature with current flowing. 


1905.] ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 753 


We will then have, if 4 is the coefficient of expansion of the 
wire, 


dle Tl, A (5) 


T will reach a steady state when the rate at which heat is 
generated in the wire equals the rate at which it is dissipated. 
In the absence of experimental data, the most reasonable 
assumption to make in regard to the rate at which heat is dissi- 
pated from the wire is that the rate is proportional to the 
difference of temperature (t,—?,) and to the exposed surface 
of the wire. Heat will be generated at the rate, c? r, when c is 
the current in the wire and r is its total resistance. 

Therefore, when the temperature is steady, 


Cr=kxl,d (t;—4,) 


Where k is a constant, and d is the diameter of the wire. This 
relation may be written in the more simple form 


Cried let e+ (6) 


C Y 


id 


or T« 


Substituting this value of T in (5) we have 


dla aes (7) 
Since 7 © ules p being the specific resistance of the material 


from which the wire is drawn, 


dOlbecomes, dle — C* = current formula (8) 


This expression for the elongation shows that when the cur- 
rent is passed directly through the wire to obtain the maximum 
effect with a given current and wires of given length, wires of 
high specific resistance, large coefficient of expansion, and 
small diameter should be used. Kruppin wire 0.025 mm. 
diameter, 387 ohms to the foot, has been used with great success, 
and will give deflections of several scale-divisions with two to 
five milliamperes. The deflections are astonishingly quick, tak- 
ing place in about } second, and the return to zero is accurate 
and dead-beat. 


754 NORTHRUP: MEASUREMENT OF [June 19 | 


If the instrument is to be used with a shunt, only a certain 
limited electromotive force, E, can be applied to the terminals 
of the wires. In this case wires of entirely different character 
need to be employed. For we have 


= 72 
eke 
os ly’ 0 


2 


Putting this value for c’ in (8), we have 
dla ~~ E? = electromotive force formula (9) 


Here it is seen that the diameter of the wire should be large 

and its specific resistance low. Experiments show that if the 
diameter be made too great the instrument becomes too sluggish 
in its movements, creeping back slowly to its final zero. There- 
fore it is desirable to’ keep down the diameter of the wire, and 
obtain the necessary sensibility by choosing A large and p small. 
As the result of many trials, using wires of different sizes and 
materials, such as copper, manganin, brass, steel, phospho.- 
bronze, platinum, and silver, it is found that No. 33 hard-drawn 
silver wire gives the best and entirely satisfactory results. An 
electromotive force of about 0.5 of a volt applied to the ter- 
minals of a No. 33 silver wire gives a full scale deflection at a 
meter distance, the wire getting just perceptibly warm. 
' By means of equations (8) and (9), and knowing the sen- 
sibility that is obtainable with any one wire, and the constants 
A and p, one can calculate pretty closely the sensibility that can 
be obtained with any other wire of any diameter d. 

Experimental instruments were constructed and tested before 
the final form illustrated in this paper was designed. The ex- 
periments were continued over a period of three months; many 
arrangements were tried that cannot be here described, although 
some interesting phencmena were observed. Many difficulties 
were at first encountered, due to improper construction, but in 
the final instrument these were entirely overcome. As now 
constructed it is very simple to adjust and use. At first it was 
thought that to insure a uniform action of the wires it woulc 
be necessary to fill the case with a thin transparent oil. The 
instrument works well with the wires in oil, but on account of 
the great rate at which oil dissipates the heat, a much greater 


1905.] ALTERNATING CURRENTS. (635) 


current is required for a given deflection with the wires in oil 
than when in air. 

Ordinarily the instrument is used with the wires in air; but 
if the instrument is to be used to measure a current passed 
directly through it that is somewhat too great for its capacity 
with a given pair of wires in air, its capacity can be greatly 
increased without changing the wires by simply filling the case 
with kerosene oil, the case being constructed oil-tight for this 
purpose. 

The following are a few-sample measurements made with 
the instrument. Experiments on the measurement of direct 
currents were made, some of which are here given, because 
direct currents could be accurately measured by passing them 
first through a standard low resistance, the drop in which 
could be read by a potentiometer, and thus give an accurate 
_ check on the results obtained by the alternating-current instru- 
ment. 


Example I. Direct current passed through the resistance 
ax (Big. 2), 


(1) True value of current = 409% ' 

R=0.1 2, current measured = 7.093 error=0.056% 
(2) True value of current = 7.392 

R=0.1 2, current measured = 7.392 error=0.000% 
(3) True value of current = 50.920 

R=0.01 2, current measured = 50.928 error=0.016% 


Exampte II. Alternating current passed through resistance, 
R, and measured by a 100-ampere Kelvin balance; R = 0.012. 


(1) Current by balance = 49.92 

Current by instrument = 49.90 Dif. =0.050% 
(2) Current by balance = 49.460 

Current by instrument = 49 .498- Dif. = 0.077% 


The last results, as far as the alternating-current instrument is 
concerned, could have been made still closer. But as the cur- 
rent. was not steady, and the Kelvin balance not a dead-beat 
instrument, it could not be read with certainty closer than 44% 
to 75%, a fact which incidentally shows the superiority of the 
alternating-current instrument for making accurate calibrations. 

ExampP.LeE III. In this experiment, a direct current was first 
passed through a standard resistance and measured by a potentio- 
meter; it was then passed through a commutator that changed 


756 NORTHRUP: MEASUREMENT OF [June 19 


it into an alternating current. The alternating current was 
then measured by the instrument, the resistance R being 0.1 2. 

The results were as follows: 

The current, when direct and as measured by the potentio- 
meter, was 8.365 amperes. 

The current alternating, and as measured by the instrument, 
was 8.359 amperes. 

The per cent. difference being thus but 0.070%. 

In order to prevent sparking at the commutator segments, 
two condensers of one microfarad capacity each were connected 
across the circuits. This had the odd effect of making the 
alternating current appear about one per cent. higher than the 
direct current, due to surgings set up in the circuits, which the 
alternating-current instrument took account of and measured, 
but which the potentiometer failed to show. This experiment 
very forcibly illustrates the power of the instrument to measure 
the entire current flow in a circuit. 

Examp.Le IV. The instrument was fitted with Kruppin wire, 
0.025 mm. diameter, to make it sufficiently sensitive to measure 
the current from the high-pressure winding of a 7-inch induction 
coil. At first great difficulty was encountered due to the inter- 
mittent character of the induction coil discharge, the mirror 
rapidly oscillating from side to side in an irregular manner. 
This difficulty was readily overcome, however, by placing back 
of the mirror a brass strip about 0.063 in. thick, 0.75 in. wide 
and 3.5 in. long, with its greatest length at right-angles to the 
instrument wires. The strip was supported from a hook a few 
inches above it by a fine thread. The case of the instrument 
was filled with kerosene. Thus great inertia and damping were 
obtained, and it was easy to get a fairly accurate measure of the 
mean value of the induction-coil current, which was about 30 
milliamperes. 

It should be easy to obtain with the aid of this instrument 
an accurate measurement of the currents of a high-frequency 
coil, or the high-frequency currents now being used for many 
experimental purposes, that are produced either by special high- 
frequency dynamos, or by interrupted electric arcs. 

It may be remarked finally that this instrument has the fol- 
lowing useful features: it is inexpensive as compared with a 
Kelvin balance or with the Siemens electrodynamometer, 
which, when constructed for measuring large currents, is very 
costly to make and to calibrate. It is simple and easy to 


I 
Or 
“NI 


1905.] ALTERNATING CURRENTS, 


understand and manipulate. It is not delicate, and is unin- 
fluenced by the proximity of iron or other ordinarily disturbing 
influences. Unless very accurate results are required, it is easy 
to substitute a pointer for the mirror, and thus make the in- 
strument portable. It is not affected by ordinary mechanical 
vibrations. If any injury happens to the working wires, they 
can be quickly replaced. 


758 A NEW MEASURING INSTRUMENT. [June 21 


Discussion oN ‘‘ A NEw INSTRUMENT FOR THE MEASUREMENT 
or ALTERNATING CURRENTS.” 


E. F. Norturup: Before speaking directly on the subject 
of this paper, a few general remarks may not be out of place. 

Electrical measuring instruments may be divided into two 
classes, which for convenience I shall call primary and secondary 
instruments. The secondary instruments usually give their 
indications by means of a pointer or by dials. This class of 
instruments answers certain requirements that are not called 
for in the primary instruments. The secondary instruments, 
voltmeters, ammeters, and the like, should, as a rule, be 
robust, giving their indications directly, but not necessarily 
with a high precision. The primary instruments, potentio- 
meters, the instrument which is the subject of this paper, 
and the like, are used to calibrate the secondary instru- 
ments. They do not necessarily need to be portable and 
often it is not required that they be direct reading, or specially 
convenient as they are generally used in a laboratory. It is 
very essential, however, that they be accurate and give precise 
indications. 

But these primary instruments must, themselves, be calibrated. 
In calibrating them reference must be made to the concrete 
standards of resistance, capacity, self-induction, etc. The 
trustworthiness of the commercial instruments rests upon the 
accuracy of the primary instruments, and these in turn upon 
the precision of the concrete standards available. It is a. 
very fortunate circumstance for engineers that there is now at 
Washington the National Bureau of Standards, a bureau that 
furnishes all instrument makers manufacturing primary instru- 
ments with entirely reliable certificates for the values of the 
concrete standards of resistance, capacity, self-induction, etc. 

The interest of engineers in general in the primary instru- 
ments must rest upon the value of these instruments as ,a 
means of accurately calibrating the secondary instruments 
which they use. These primary instruments now have an 
added value to the engineer, as the instrument maker is now 
able to obtain. concrete standards from the National Bureau 
at Washington, standards which a few years ago could only be 
obtained from abroad. 

H.G. Storr: Is there not a slight twisting due to electro- 
dynamic action of the two currents in the sides of the instru- 
ment? It seems to me that there must be an attraction or 
repulsion as the case may be. In determining the zero point by 
putting the alternating current through both wires in multiple 
and afterwards using it with alternating current in one wire 
and direct in another, would not the impedance be changed 
under those conditions? 

F. N. Waterman: In the use of hot-wire instruments the 
time required to heat and cool has been a very troublesome 
feature in the reading of varying currents. I would like to 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 759 


ask Mr. Northrup whether the very low temperature at 
which this instrument is operated obviates that difficulty, and 
if so, why we could not have a rough-and-ready instrument 
accurate up to one-half of one per cent. for commercial purposes 
in which the great inconvenience of the time-lag would not exist. 

H. W. Fisuer: From the construction of the instrument, I 
think it would be difficult to have very much insulation between 
the wire carrying the alternating current and that carrying the 
direct current; therefore the difference of potential between 
said wires should be small; and how can the instrument ‘be 
used to measure very high voltages? 

E. F. Norturup: Referring to Mr. Fisher’s question, do 
the wires have to have the same resistance, I would answer, 
no. They can differ quite a good deal in resistance, but if the 
resistance of the two wires are different then when the two 
wires are joined in parallel, the instrument will not give the 
same zero that it has with no current passing. This does not 
make the slightest difference, however, in the accuracy of the 
measurements; and it is rather a convenience than a necessity 
to have the wires of equal resistance. It is, however, perfectly 
easy to give them the same resistance, likewise the lead wires, 
in the manner indicated on page 745. There are two portions 
of the circuit that must have the same resistance. - Referring 
to the figure on page 745 the lead wire from a to 3 plus the 
lead wire from b to 6, must equal in resistance the lead from 
2tocplus4tod. These resistances are permanently adjusted 
by the maker. 

In making high voltage measurements with the instrument 
it would be desirable to ground one side of the alternating- 
current circuit in such a manner that the instrument itself 
would not be subjected to the high potential. The potential 
drop can be made to take place over a high resistance before 
the instrument is reached. We have not in our laboratory 
facilities for obtaining very high voltages, and the measurement 
of extremely high voltages has not been actually tried. Every- 
thing else stated about the uses of the instrument has been 
carefully tested by experiment. It is believed, however, that 
the practical and successful application: of the instrument to 
the measurement of very high potentials could be made. 

The instrument was used to measure the current from a high- 
frequency coil. . The high-frequency current jumped a 2-in. air- 
gap before it passed to the instrument. It then went through 
one wire and back to the coil. The deflection which was pro- 
duced by this current was noted. The high-frequency current 
was then replaced by an adjustable direct current. This was 
varied until the same deflection was obtained as the high-fre- 
quency current gave. The particular current measured was 
76 milliamperes. The current given by a large induction coil 
was also successfully measured and was found to be about 37 
milliamperes. 


760 A NEW MEASURING INSTRUMENT. [June 21 


A large number of experiments have Been made to determine 
the action and value of the instrument when used as a deflec- 
tion instrument. It can be used in this way with a fair degree 
of accuracy, but it is necessary to calibrate the scale because 
the instrument does not follow any regular law precisely in its 

‘deflections. With very fine wires the deflections are very 
rapid, a full scale deflection occurring in about one-third of a 
second. 

In regard to Mr. Stott’s question, as to whether the instru- 
ment has any twisting moment: there is no twisting moment 
but when direct current is passed down one wire and alternating 
current down the other wire, there is a slight tendency, if 
the currents are abnormally large, for the mirror to be set into 
a fine vibration, slightly blurring the scale. This is sometimes 
somewhat annoying, but in nowise affects the accuracy of 

uickness of the measurement. There is at the zero of the scale 
a small black disk, and if the mirror vibrates this disk changes 
into two overlapping discs and it is easy in setting to zero to 
note when the cross-hair of the telescope crosses the intersection 
of these overlapping discs, which is the zero that would be 
seen if the scale were not disturbed. This blurring of the 
scale does not occur, however, with such currents as are nor- 
mally used in the wires. The force of the spring drawing the 
mirror against the wires is several ounces and the system is 
quite substantial. 

In regard to the impedance of the leads and instrument 
wire it may be stated that these are practically non-inductive. 
The current enters by one path and returns by another not 
anywhere far removed from the first. The effect of the in- 
ductance was proved to be negligibly small by very careful 
experiments: in which the instrument indications were com- 
pared with those of a Kelvin balance. The only limitations 
to the test of accuracy of the instrument were found in my 
ability to read accurately the Kelvin balance. This instru- 
ment not being a dead-beat instrument is continually oscil- 
lating with fluctuating alternating current. 

Mr. Waterman asked in regard to the time-lag. The deflec- 
tions are rather rapid. If the current is fluctuating it is easy, 
as the instrument is dead-beat, to catch the precise moment 
it passes the zero point and read the alternating-current instru- 
ment being calibrated at that moment. If the current is very 
fluctuating it has no definite value to measure and no instru- 
ment will measure it. Ordinary commercial circuits, however, 
are suitable for making calibrations with perfect ease. 

One application of the instrument should be especially men- 
tioned and that is its adaptability to determine the ratio of 
transformation of a series transformer in which the primary 
is carrying a very large current, as 4000 amperes, and the 
secondary a small current, as 5 amperes. The ratio can be 
very accurately determined by the instrument. 


te 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Can- 
vention ofthe American Institute of Electrics} 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


EDDY CURRENTS IN LARGE SLOT-WOUND CON- 
DUCTORS. 


BY A. B. FIELD. 


The object of the present paper is the discussion of the more 
important causes of eddy currents in heavy conductors carrying 
alternating currents and surrounded on three sides by iron. 

In the case in which the slots are in the periphery of a circular 
core, and there is a more or less radial field rotating relatively 
to this core, as in direct-current armatures, stators of alternators 
and induction motors, potential regulators, etc., the causes of 
the eddy currents may be conveniently divided into two gen- 
eral classes comprising: 1, those involving dire¢tly the current 
in the conductor itself, or in conductors in the same slot; 2, those 
involving magnetic flux due directly to external agencies. 

The latter will, in some instances, produce results of con- 
siderable magnitude, but it is the first-mentioned group that 
is most generally productive of serious eddy currents, and 
this one only’ is considered in the present paper. In many 
types of apparatus the two are characterized by giving rise to 
losses which are, respectively, proportional to the square of 
the load, and nearly independent of the load. Hence the first 
losses are generally grouped in a vague way under the title 
““Load Losses ’’ along with many other much more obscure, 
and often less important, ones; and on account of the difficulty 
of estimating and measuring them, they are generally omitted 
in giving and checking efficiency guarantees. 

The existence of this cause of heating is recognized in a 
general way in designs, and various methods of stranding, 
laminating, or interweaving the conductors adopted. The 
writer believes, however, that on account of the somewhat com- 


761 


762 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 21 


plicated way in which frequency, and the slot and conductor 
dimensions, are involved, it is advantageous for the designer 
to have detailed information at hand, and for this reason ven- 
tures to put forward the approximate curves below; they may 
be of service to those who have not prepared similar curves for 
themselves. 

As regards the magnitude of the effects, it is not at all un- 
common. to find commercial apparatus, even of modern type 
and of low frequencies, in which the eddy currents under dis- 
cussion increase the J?.R loss in the active part of the con- 
ductor to several times that due to the load current; while 
60-cycle alternators wound for low, or fairly low pressures may 
frequently be seen, in which this eddy-current loss in the active 
part of the outer layer of conductors considerably exceeds the 
load-current loss. The increased demand at present arising 
for high-speed, large-output alternators for steam-turbine 
work, where deep slots are necessarily involved, renders the 
matter of increasing importance. 

On the other hand, it should be observed that a com- 
paratively large percentage of the mean length of turn is taken 
up by the end connections in alternator and similar windings. 
Hence an additional loss equal, say, to the load J? R in the 
active part of the outer layer of conductors of a two-layer 
solid-bar winding, and to 13% of this in the inner layer, will 
generally increase the total J’ K loss only 20-40 per cent. 

Again in some cases it may be very desirable from other 
points of view to use a solid conductor of considerable depth, 
and be good policy to put up with fairly heavy eddy currents 
for the sake of simplicity. In all such cases, however, it is well 
to know roughly the extra losses involved. 

A short consideration of the matter will show that the eddy 
currents under discussion are produced by flux crossing the 
slot transversely from tooth to tooth through the body of the 
conductor, and that they take an elongated form, tending to flow 
along the top edge of the conductor throughout the length of 
the core, and return along the edge nearer the slot-root. The 
eddy currents themselves will produce magnetic flux which 
will react upon the whole system of currents, and the net result 
in the conductor will be a current varying in density and phase 
at different depths. It will also be seen that the density of 
transverse flux at any depth is practically determined by ‘he 
slot-width and total current in the slot below the transverse 


1905.] FPIELD> EDDY: CURRENTS. 763 


path considered; and that generally the tooth saturation, even 
when carried high up, will have quite an insignificant effect. 
This is due in large measure to the fact that the flux, which is 
responsible for the saturation of the teeth, passes down both 
teeth in the same direction. Under actual working conditions 
the transverse flux will combine with the main flux in an obvious 
way, but the above considerations will still stand. 

The results given below have been worked out on this basis, 
and taking a straight path across the slot for the transverse 
flux. Actually the flux will bow outwards slightly at the top 
of the conductors, and hence in the case of wide slots the current 
density here will be a little less than given, and the loss also a 
trifle less. We are not however interested in knowing the losses 
to an accuracy of a few per cent. 


In order to assure ourselves, in a rough and practical way, 
of the order of magnitude of these effects, without any analysis, 
let us consider the case of the two-layer, low-pressure winding 
shown in Fig. 1. where the conductor consists of three 0.1-in. 
by 0.6-in. strips and the slot is 0.5-in. wide. Suppose we have a 
load current flowing corresponding to a density of 1 000 amperes 
(root mean square) per square inch, then omitting any dis- 
turbance of the uniform current density, we have for the current 
enclosed by the magnetic path indicated in the figure, 270 am- 
peres.. This would correspond to a magnetic density across 
the centre of the conductor of 3.192 x 270/0.5 = 1720 root mean 
square lines per square inch. Taking this as the average den- 
sity across the upper conductor, we have a total flux through 
the 0.6-in. depth, per inch length axially, of 1030 lines. With a 


764 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 21 


frequency of 60 cycles, this will tend to produce a difference 
of potential between the top and bottom edges of the solid conduc- 
tor of 3.9 X 107 volts per inch length. Now the R drop due to 
1000 amperes per sq. in. is approximately 7x10-4 volts per 
inch, so we see that this induced voltage would be balanced 
by a difference of current density between the two edges of 
5.57 times the nominal density in the conductor. 

The actual state of affairs, taking into account the changed 


{ical dolce Helv ahaa 


Seabee’ 2g 
St eyo 


PHASE OF LOAD CURRENT 


Z Ys <Q 


NOMINAL DENSITY 


CURRENT DENSITY 


NOT TO SCALE. SEE FIG, 1- 


Density and phase of current in solid conductor at 60 cycles. Slot, 0.5in. wide. Conductors 
: 2-3(1in. by .6in.). ; 


Fig. 2 


magnetic distribution corresponding to the modified current 
distribution is, of course, considerably different from this simple 
result. It isshown approximately in Fig. 2 where the resultant 
root mean square current density at various points of the cross- 
section of the outer conductor is plotted as a curve. A second 
curve has been drawn to show at a glance the way in which the 
phase of the current varies from point to point, the durection 
of this curve indicating the phase; 1e., a tangent drawn at any 


1905.] FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. 765 


point to the curve, directed as shown by the arrow-head, may 
be taken as indicating the direction of the clock-diagram vector 
representing the current density at that point in the conductor. 


H 


Ei ea 


33 


13 


PHASE OF LOAD] CURRENT. 


SLOT '% WIDE 


CONDUCTORS 2-1'%) x if 


IN SOLID CONDUCTORS AT 25.~~ 


DENSITY AND PHASE OF CURRENT 


INNER-CONDU®TOR 


) oo R YU 
"ALISNSG LNAYYNO ] 
Fig. 3 


We see from these curves that, with a load current corresponding 
to 1000 amperes per square inch, the resultant density at the 
inner edge is approximately 2120 amperes per square inch, lag- 
ging 81° behind the mean current, and at the outer edge 3 160, 


766 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 21 


leading the mean—or actual load current—by 57.5°, so that 
there is a difference of phase of 138.5° between the current at 
these two places in the conductor. At a depth of 47% the 
current is in phase with the load current. 

Similar curves for 25 cycles are given in Fig. 3 for the case 
of two 14} in. by zg in. conductors in an }} in. slot (Fig. 9), a 
combination of some historical interest as having been used, 
the writer believes, 10 years ago in the first Niagara 3 500-kw. 
generators. The arrangement used a few years later in the 
extensions is shown in Fig. 10 and entails considerably less 
loss although the conductor is 2 in. deep, on account of the 
use of a single layer only. In the still later machines, installed 
in the second power-house, pressed stranded conductors were 
used. Referring to Fig. 3, the very large effect of the eddy 
currents in the outer conductor will be observed, the current 
density nowhere being appreciably below the nominal density. 
and rising to as much as five and a half times this at the outer 
edge. The total loss in the active part of the outer layer here 
amounts to approximately six or seven times that due to the 
load current only; it would actually be diminished by removing 
say, 70% of the metal of this conductor, although the resulting 
maximum temperature rise might be greater. That such ex-- 
cessive losses can be dissipated, even from a 30-in. to 40-in. 
armature, without prohibitive temperature rise, will be found 
when it is remembered that the thermal conductivity of copper. 
allows of the transference of heat at the rate of about 10 watts 
per square inch section for a temperature gradient of 1° cent. 
per inch. The resulting conduction to the end-connections 
largely assists the other dissipative actions at work. Some al- 
lowance was made in calculating the above curves, for the 
1-in. ventilating ducts in the core. é 
__ Before considering the matter analytically it may be well to 
give in general terms the results obtained, and some examples 
of their application, together with a few of the more common 
means of overcoming the troubles. 

It was pointed out above that within the limits of prac- 
tical accuracy the density of transverse flux depends only on 
the width of slot and the total number of ampere-conductors 
behind the point considered, and hence it is possible to construct 
curves for solid conductors, giving the J’ R factor in terms of 
an extremely simple quantity involving only the frequency, 
depth of conductor, and the ratio of total net copper thickness 


1905.] 


Ww 
me 


VALUES OF K 
ers 


_ 
ie.) 


1.7 


i 


1.0 
0 


FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS 


VALUES OF af 
Digi? tate 2-0 


1,9) 1.8 


1.7 


1.6 


1.5 


767 


14 


5 6 uy, 8 
"VALUES OF af 
Fig. 4a 


1.0 


768 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 21 


- WALUES OF af 
ea eee SW 


. iy F 1. i 1.6 1.5 1 
pee Score sf 
ane pe eis Merde OBS 
II 


CEH 
betes ee ts 
a Let tt 
tee 
= pa a ae 
tee 
> ee 
AOR EECELE 


Cer 
Pe 
sie 
eS Se 
ae 
an 
alk 
Wa 


Ae 
UWA an 
DO GE aA 
VALUES OF af % 
Fig. 4b 


1905.] FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. 769 


measured across the slot to the slot-width, a quantity which is 
calculated for any case in a few seconds. It is further shown 
below that the same curves, with a slightly different interpreta- 
tion, are immediately applicable to various other windings in 
every-day use, in which the eddy currents discussed take the 
form of cross currents between the strands of a stranded con- 
ductor. The results are not applicable to the case of a direct- 
current armature conductor, where the interval between re- 
versals is so long in comparison with the time of reversal; in- 
deed, in this case the eddy currents due to the main field are 
likely to be of more interest than the commutation ones. 

The curves are given in Fig. 4 and reference must be made 
to the analysis for their full significance. The ratio of actual 
to nominal J? R loss is represented by the ordinates (K); the 
abscissas correspond to the quantity denoted by a f where 
f = depth of conductor in centimetres (if a laminated con- 

ductor take the gross depth). 

a= 0.145./~ 7,/r, 

¥, = practically unity for solid conductors, and. for laminated 
conductors is generally equal to the ratio of half the mean 
length of turn to gross length of core. 

r, = for solid conductors, the ratio of net copper measured 
across the slot, to the slot width, and for laminated con- 
ductors generally the same multiplied by ratio of net to 
gross conductor depth. 

Counting the number of layers of conductors from the bottom 
of the slot upwards, we refer to the curve drawn for a value of 
m corresponding to the layer in question; i.e., m = i for the 
bottom layer, m = 2 for the second, and so on, and obtain a 
value of K by which the J? R loss due to the load current must 
be multiplied to give the total J? R loss in that part of the 
winding. 

For a bar winding with laminated conductors, the value of 
K applies for the length of conductor between points at which 
laminae are connected together. For a winding with laminated 
conductor in which the strands are continued from layer to 
layer, and only joined together at the beginning and end of the 
coil, we obtain a value of K applicable to the whole coil by 
referring to the curve drawn for m = 0.5+half the number of 
layers per slot, if the winding is one in which there are twice 
as many slots as coils. For the case in which each slot carries 
parts of two coils, one above the other, we take instead the 


770 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 21 


curve for which m = 0.5+one-quarter the number of layers 
per slot. The distinction between these two cases is explained 
more fully later. For a one-layer winding in which the con- 
ductor is twisted over in the middle of the coil (e.g., Figs. 11, 
13) we take m= 1 but refer to a point corresponding to 
0.5 a f instead of a f, and so on. 

It is interesting to note the effect of splitting up or lami- 
nating a solid-conductor winding. In general this diminishes 


[| 
ll) 


Fig. 5 Fig. 6 

FIG. 5. FIG. 6. 
Slot 0.65-in wide Slot 0.65-in. wide. 
Conductors 2-3 (0.14 in. by 0.75 in.) | Conductors 2-15 (0.144 in. sq.) 
Bar wound. 60 cycles 25cycles | Bar wound. “60 cycles 25 cycles 
K for top conductor 5.9 2,1 K for top conductor 2.0 1,18 
K for bottom conductor 1.6 1.14 K for bottom conductor 1.13 1.02 
K for whole coil 2.1 1,25 K for whole coil 1.56 1.10 


the loss in the active part, increases it in the end-connections, 
and diminishes the total loss of the half turn; but in some ex- 


treme cases the total loss may be increased by such lamination 
instead of decreased; e.g., in a winding in which the gross core 
length is 40% of the half mean length of turn, the total loss of a 
first- or second-layer conductor is increased by lamination if 
a fis greater than 3. Such increased losses at first sight appear 
paradoxical but a moment's consideration will show that they 


1905.) FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. 771 


Fig. 7 


FIG. 7. 
Slot 0.65-in. wide. 
Conductors 2-15 (0.144 in, sq.) 
2-turns-per-coil winding 
60 cycles 25 cycles 
K for whole coil 1,45 1.08 


Fig. 8 


FIG. 8. 
Slot 0.65-in. wide. 
Conductors 2-15 (0,144 in. sq.) 
1-turn-per-coil winding. 
60 cycles 25 cycles 
K for whole coil 1.13 1.02 


772 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 21 


are to be expected. A somewhat similar case is to be found 
in the increased loss that may occur in a mass of iron, subject 
to an alternating magnetomotive force, if the iron be lamin- 
ated instead of solid.* 

Again, if a given total depth of copper per slot is to be em- | 
ployed it will in all practical cases involve less loss to adopt a 
two-layer than a one-layer arrangement (not necessarily a less 
temperature rise), but in extreme cases this becomes reversed. 

It should also be pointed out that for large values of @ f, 
say over two or three, the J’ R loss is practically proportional 
to ./~ (as in a large class of other eddy current phenomena), 
and to f the depth of conductor; but for the cases within every- 
day experience, where a / is much smaller, these quantities are 
involved in a more complicated way, and a slight increase of 
conductor depth may mean a largely increased loss. 

As illustrations, a few diagrams are given below, in Figs. 5-11, 
of slot and conductor arrangements, with the corresponding 
approximate J? R factors, both for the active part, and for 
the whole winding (assuming a ratio of active length to half 
mean turn length of 0.4 in Figs. 5-8.) 

With regard to the methods of eliminating these additional 
losses, many are self-evident. Where the ratio of depth to 
breadth of conductor is not too great, pressed stranded conductors 
of the usual well-known type may with advantage be used. 
Conductors of this class have generally a net copper cross- 
section of 75 to 85% of their gross cross-section, according 
to the extent’ to which they have been compressed. It will 
be noticed that if a concentrically stranded cable be the basis 
from which the conductor is made, the conditions are little better 
(from our present point of view) than obtain with a laminated 
conductor twisted over in the middle of its length. As already 
stated, such a twisted conductor, in a single-layer winding, has 
the same J? R factor as an untwisted one of half the depth; 
but this halving of the effective depth will generally be found 
in practical cases to reduce the eddy losses from a very serious 
quantity to entirely negligible dimensions. For the second 
and successive layers, of a multiple-layer arrangement, the 
twisted or pressed stranded conductor is very much better than 
an untwisted one of half the depth. In many practical cases 


* Journal Inst. Elec. Eng., London, Vol. 33, “ Eddy currents in solid 
and laminated iron masses,’ by M. B. Field 


1905, FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. 773 


of two-layer windings using a pressed stranded conductor, it 
will be found satisfactory to leave the lower conductor solid, 
the losses in this layer being comparatively slight, even when 
excessive in the top layer (see curves). 

For conductors having a large ratio of depth to breadth, 


Fig. 9 Fig. 10 
FIG. 9. \ FIG. 10. 
“Slot 0,687-in. wide. Slot 0.406-in. wide. 
Conductors 2-1 (1.344 by 0.4375 in ) “F | Conductor 1 (2 in. by 0.2185 in.) 
Bar wound. 25 cycles 25 cycles 
K for tep conductor 6.6 K for active conductor Deh 
K for bottom conductor 1.7 


which would be difficult to form in the way described above, 
a woven tube or stocking of fine wire, closed flat, has been 
used by W. S. Moody. Such a conductor has the disadvan- 
tage that it changes shape if subjected to tension. A sim- 


774 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 21 


ilarly shaped conductor, but with a simple lay and having a 
soft idle core, has been proposed by C. A. Parsons (U. S. Patent 
782 463), in connection with direct-current turbo-generators. 
The primary object here appears to be the reduction of the in- 
ductance of the bar by increasing its perimeter—and hence. 


E mitt 
: [001 


Bese 


FIG, 11. 
Slot 5.25-in. wide. 
Conductors 7-19 (0.27 in. by 0.10 in.) 
7-turns-per-coil winding. (rg == 1.87) 


60 cycles 25 cycles 


K tor whole coil (untwisted conductor) 2.5 1.5 
K for whole coil (twisted conductor) 1.3 1.05 
K for equivalent solid conductor (act: part) 3. 2 2. 

K for ditto (whole coil) 2.2 1.53 


improvement of commutation—but with such an extended 
conductor it becomes necessary to strand to avoid eddy currents. 
The soft core here doubtlessly tends to prevent deformation 
to some extent. 

A neat conductor has been developed by E. D. Pries 


1905.] PEED AED DY “CURRENTS, 775 


for use more particularly in railway-motor armatures, to avoid 
the eddy currents produced by the working flux which enters 
the slot-mouth. Fig. 12, reproduced from the patent drawing, 
shows the construction. The conductor is formed from a single 
strip split longitudinally for part of its length, the two halves 
being then transposed for half the core length and crushed 
into one another at the crossings, so that the completed con- 
ductor takes up only the same space as the original strip. The 
two parts are separated by a small piece of mica at the crossings. 
Such a conductor would probably be too expensive for general 
use in alternators. - 

In the case of a bar winding, two conductors deep, some 
improvement is achieved by using a laminated conductor, the 
losses being diminished and distributed over the end connec- 


Fig. 12 


tions as. well as the active length (compare Figs. 5 and 6). A 
still greater improvement results if the stranding be continued 
between the top and bottom layer (Fig. 7). or better still if the 
conductor be twisted over between these layers (Fig. 8). This 
last case would generally be used, rather than the previous 
one, and corresponds to a half-formed bar winding; it is un- 
necessary (from the point of view of the present discussion) 
to keep the strands insulated further than throughout the 
complete turn length; i.¢., the connecting clip may join con- 
ductors together, all ahr at once. 

In Figs. 13 and 14 are shown two types os winding hich 
Moody has used for low-pressure ‘‘ reactances,’’ where excessive 
losses would occur in solid strips; the section of the coil shown 


a 


776 FIELD: EDDY GURRENTS, [June 21 


in Fig, 13 has already been given in Fig. 11. Forsucha winding, 
a conductor 20 strands or so high and measuring over-all some 
2.25 in. by as little as 0.25 in. may be comparatively easily 
wound directly on a former, the whole conductor being twisted 
over in the middle of the winding as shown in the figure. By 
a varnish and japan treatment the strands may be conglomerated 
to form a rigid conductor.. In the case in which a similar 
two-layer winding is required, both layers may be wound at 


Fig, 13. 


once and so connected together strand by strand as to produce 
the same result as the previous twist, see Fig. 14. In all these 
cases in which any type of stranding is adopted, it is advisable 
to pay somewhat more attention to the mechanical support of 
the conductor, particularly the end-connections, to prevent 
distortion under excessive loads and short circuits. 

The above remarks are not intended in any way as a com- 
prehensive account of the methods in general use, and proposed, 


1905.] FIELD; EDDY CURRENTS. 777 


for obviating eddy currents, a few examples only being cited. 
There is another aspect of this subyect deserving a little 
attention. In estimating the (leakage) reactance of armature 
windings and the like, it is usual to take into account the flux 
crossing the slot, below the top of the coil, by a term involving 
one-third the depth of the winding, which is approximately 
correct for a coil wound with small conductors. In the case 
of deep solid conductors, however, the effective crowding of 


Fig. 14. 


the current to the outer edge materially changes this. The 
modified value of the reactance may be calculated from the re- 
sults given later, but as the matter is not of much practical 
importance, on account of the small proportion of the whole 
reactance which is dependent on this slot flux, and the futility 
as some hold—of attempting to calculate the whole reactance 
at all, no general formulas have been given. A numerical 
example will, perhaps, be the best illustration. 


7738 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. {June 21 


Taking the exaggerated case of Fig. 9 (25 cycles), we find that 
that part of the reactance, per unit length, which is due to flux 
penetrating the conductors, is reduced 29% by the effects in 
question; that part due to other flux is unchanged. The 
actual distribution of current in the various cases, and the 
derivation of the results already given, will now be considered 
in a little more detail. Sie 

There are several different types of winding which require, 
to some extent, independent treatment. There is, first, the 
case of one or more layers of conductors per slot, the current 
being free to distribute itself differently in the different layers; 
e.g., windings with solid conductors, or laminated-bar windings 
in which the laminae are all joined together at the bar-to-bar 
connection. In other cases the stranding* is continued from 
layer to layer, so that the current in the strand of one layer 
is necessarily the same as that in the corresponding strand 
of the other layers; and we then have a further distinction 
according as the order of strands is retained or reversed in pass- 
ing from the layers of the upper half of the slot to those of 
the lower half. In all cases we take the load current in all the 
conductors of any one slot to be in the same phase, and to be 
represented by a sine function of the time. 

' Consider, then, the first case mentioned above, and a slot 
measuring a by b centimetres, and carrying layers of conductors, 
i.e., reckoned in the direction of the depth of the slot (Fig. 15). 

Using the ampere, volt, centimetre, second, and corresponding 
units, let 

X, x = distance measured in the direction of the depth of 
the slot outwards. 

' (The large letter is used for general relations, the small one 
in connection with the individual conductors.) 


* The type of stranding referred to here, and throughout this paper 
except in connection with “‘ pressed stranded conductors,”’ is that shown 
in Figs. 16, 17. That is to say, the strands are not twisted or woven 
together at all within the active length of the conductor, It should also 
be noticed that the laminating of the conductor is not to be taken as 
affecting the number of “ layers,’’ but that the term “layer’’ is here 
used to denote a conductor or group of strands which together carry a 
definite total current, the ‘load current;”’ 7.¢., the integral of current 
density taken over the cross-section of the group is equal to this load 
current, The number of conductors side by side in the slot is of no con- 
sequence as regards the eddy currents under consideration except as far 
as it affects the value of r,; (below). The figures are ali drawn showing 
one conductor wide for simplicity. 


1905.] FLECD SE PDYSCURRENTS. 719 


7} = gross depth of each conductor. 
n = number of layers of conductors per slot 
ns = net copper section per slot. 


n= 7 or in the case of solid conductors, r, represents the 
ratio of net copper measured across the slot, to the slot-width. 

r, = the ratio of half the length of the eddy current path, 
to the length of the activey part of the conductor included within 
this; z.e., for solid conductors r, may generally be taken as 
unity, and for laminated bar windings as equal to the mean 
length of turn divided by twice the gross length of core, and 
so on. 


Fig. 15 


A = net current density at any point of the conductor (in- 
stantaneous value). 


4, sin pt = nominal current density in the conductor 
seater: ; Ag 4s: 
(i.e., ignoring eddy currents), so that awed is the nominal root 


mean square current density. 

4, = root mean square value of 4 (the mean with regard to © 
as well as time). 

+ The ‘‘active’”’ part may generally be taken as equal to the gross 
length of core between clamping heads, including ventilating ducts, 
the presence of the ducts being similarly ignored in considering the 
length of eddy current path. 


780 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTs. _ {June 21 


p = specific resistance of the conductor material. : 

V = electromotive force (instantaneous value) induced in the 
strand (or in an imaginary strand) at X by the transverse flux, 
per unit length of conductor, across the slot. V is measured 
positively in the same direction as the current. 

B = transverse magnetic induction at X (inst: value). 

K = ratio of actual to nominal, J? R loss in active part of 
conductor. 

On the hypothesis that the transverse flux, which would be 
produced by the current in conductors of the slot in question 
in the absence of other magnetomotive forces, would pass straight 
across the slot, and that the effective reluctance of the iron part 
of the magnetic circuit be small in comparison with that of 
the air part, we have for the actual conditions, and for the 
type of conductor under consideration: 


d 
x WV —11e4) = 0 
and 
dV Deere ee he oer 
gle 10pm 108 4 ary oe 
Or, eliminating V 
b@P4_,d4 
Did tasted (1) 
where 
a = 102 x pls = 0.021 —* for copper at 45° cent. 
2 2 


The current density in the m‘* layer, situated at x = 0 to 
x = f will therefore be of the form: 


A=6,e** sin (pt—a x+p,—=) +, eo ain (ptt ax 1 p,-4) 
(2) 


subject to the two conditions 


f 


f {ste dysin ps @) 


0 
and 


1905.) FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. 781 


dd d Pe yae 
Bae eee) Car), 
=4710°r, (m—1)f p4,cos pt (4) 


Inserting in the above the value of 4 (equation 2), we have: 


—38,sin (pt+f,) +0,sin (pt+8,) = 2a (m—1)7f 4, cos pt 
or 
6, cos 8, —0, cos B, = 0 (5) 


6,sin B,—0,sin B, = —(m—1)A (6) 
where A has been written for \/ 2 a f 4, 
And similarly from (3) 
nf gafdAysin pt = 0,e“F cos (pt—af+f,) —0d,e*h cos (pt 

+af+B.) 
Siz —3d,cos (pi+f,) +0, cos (ptt /’ } 
ene in conjunction with (5) and (6) 
3,008 (8, — af) 9, 0s (8, + @f) = (2 

:. 8,sin (8,-af)— ) Be Leon A. (8) 

where 0, has been written for 0, e-* 


and 0, has been written for 0, e/ 


To obtain the total 1? F loss in the conductor we require the 
mean 4? value, viz. 


27 t 


‘jaa ed 
oni di {a dx 


0 0 


and calling this value 4,?, shall have, as the ratio of total to 
nominal J? R loss in the conductor under consideration. 


A? 
K = 275 


From -(2) we have 


782 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 20 
At = £6 ¢7"* [1 —cos 2 (p t—ax+f, -4)] 
a\7 
+40; esl 1—cos 2 (> t+tax+t , sor )| 


+3,0, | —sin (2 pt+P,+8,) +cos (2 ax+,—B,) | 


Hence, dropping terms having zero mean value, we obtain from 
the remainder after integration: 


A?i= [(0,6,+06,0,) sinh af +206,0,sin af cos(af+8,—8,)] (9) 


We can obtain the value of this expression without the labor 
of solving equations (5), (6), (7), and (8), for 8,, 82, 0,, 62, etc., 
and substituting their values, by the following elimination. 
By squaring and adding the four equations (5) to (8) we obtain 
(10), and by multiplying together each side of equations (5) 
and (7), and similarly (6) and (8), and adding, we have equation 
{11) below: 


(0, 0,+0,0,) cosh a f —20,0, cos af cos (af+f,—8,) = 
(m? —m +4) A? (10) 


(0,0,+0,0,) cos af —20,0, cosh af cos (af +8,—),) = 
(m? —m) A? (11) 


The three equations 9, 10, 11, now involve the six quantities 
O, 0, 05 O 8, B, in the same way, we can therefore immediately 
eliminate these, obtaining: 


—2afd4;? sinh a f sin a f 
(m? —m-+4) A? — cosh af cos af = 0 
(m? —m) A? — cos a f cosh a f 


Or 
A? 2 af (cos* a f — cosh? a f) = 
= A? (m?—m) (sinh @ f cos a f+sin a f cosh a f) 


— A? (m? —m + 3) (sinh a f cosh a f +sin a f cos a fy’ 


1905.] - FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. 783 


The ratio of actual to nominal /° R loss is thus given by the 
equation 


4 wd (m’—m) (coshaf—cosa7j) (sinha j-sinef) + (sinh2a f +sin2af) 
af cosh 2 af —cos 2a f ne. 


(12) 

This equation gives an interesting set of curves which have 

been plotted in Fig. 4 for several values of m. The curves at 

small values of af cross the corresponding members of the 
family 

. K = af[2 (W’—m)+1] 
and for larger values reapproach these straight lines and follow 
them to infinity, oscillating backwards and forwards across 


Fig. 16 


them, but keeping so close as practically to coincide with them. 

The curves corresponding to m = 1 and m = 2 are the two 
cases perhaps most commonly useful, corresponding to the 
inner and outer conductors respectively of a two-layer winding. 
The curves however for higher and fractional values of m have 
also been given to cover the cases of other types of winding 
and applications. For any negative value of m say —m,, we 
take the curve corresponding to m = 1+m,, which is evidently 
identical with the —m, curve. — 

The value of K so obtained is to be applied only to that part 
of the conductor in which the eddy currents exist; for solid con- 
ductors this may generally be taken as a length equal to the gross 


\\ 


784 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 21 


“Jength ‘of core, including ventilating ducts, per half turn of 
winding, the remainder having normal loss. For a laminated 
, bar winding in which the laminations are connected together 
only at the bar-to-bar connection, K will refer to the whole 
/winding, but its value will be less than for the case in which 
the laminations are joined together immediately at the ends of 
the active portion, on account of the increased value of 1. 

We now come to the cases in which a stranded (laminated) 
conductor is used, wound up into a coil, so that the same strand- 
ing is continued from layer to layer. In such a winding the 
current in the conductor of one layer is no longer free to so 
distribute itself throughout the section of that conductor as 


to cause the rates of change of electromagnetic and J R electro- 
motive forces to balance per unit length, or per conductor 
length, since the current in any strand is restrained to take 
the same value throughout the whole coil. 

There are two principal cases, exemplified by Figs. 16, 17, 
and corresponding generally to windings in which there are (1), 
half as many coils as slots, and (2), the same number of coils 
as slots. The distinction between the two cases is due to the 
fact that the conductor is twisted over between the two straight 
portions of the coil in the latter type of winding, while no such 
twist occurs in the former; this is indicated in the figures by 
the numbering of the strands. 

Consider first the case of an u layer per slot coil wound with 


1905.] FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. 785 


a well stranded conductor, the strands being joined together 
at each end of the coil, and appearing im the same order in all 
the layers, see Fig. 16 (the figure shows three layers). 

The density 4 will here be a periodic function of X and, with 
the same notation as before, we have at once: 


g=n -1 
dV ; 
> (Fy) 4 Sin pus ee = 0 between x = 0 andx =f (13) 
q=0 a 
and 
&2V Rie Me a dd 
Wee GO Ailes de. (14) 


where A is the distance between corresponding strands in con- 
secutive layers. From (14) we see that d?.\V/d X? is a periodic 
function of X, since 4 is so, and hence as would be expected, 
the fundamental equation obtained from (13) and (14) is the 
same as for the simple case (equation 1), and the limiting con- 
ditions are: 


At x= 0 


T, 1” p (32). =Aig~ tar, A igen Sei ae 


+(n—1) t = (7 4, sin pi) =10%4 nnn (n—1)/2 pf d,cos pt 


(15) 


and 
t 


A \wdne d,sin'pt r 
j (16) 


0 


Comparing these with equations (4) and (3) respectively, 
we see that the solution for this case will be the same as for the 
original one with a value of m equal to our present (n+1)/2; 
that is, to obtain the value of K for the entire coil we refer, 
in Fig. 4, to the curve drawn for this value of m. 

Take next the case indicated in Fig. 17 (four layers shown), 
in which there are again n layers per slot, but in which the orden 


786 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 2% 


of the strands in the lower n/2 layers is the reverse of that in 
the remainder, so that the current distribution in half the slot 
is the optical image of that in the other half. 
We have here in the same way as before: 
q=% -1 
< (4+) ch sy) ap hae 
= AX Jar qa dX J» -x-qX of yee dx 
q-0 | t 
between x = Oandx = 7 (17) 


which together with 


eV f. dd 
ax = 10 4m 


gives the same fundamental equation (in x) as originally (equa- 
tion 1), but the limiting conditions are now: 
Atx=07 


° 


dd . 
rane (2) a 10° 4a7,[J1+2+ Pyrie (n/2—1)} = 


{n+ (n— Lycos + (0/241) 2 dysin pa] 


dd n+2. 
ro p (Sz)... =—10°427r, pr }p4, cos pt (19) 


And 
f 


+3 dx = d,sin pt 
gf (20) 


0 


We therefore use the curve (Fig. 4) drawn for m= (— +2) /4 
or, as this is a zero or negative quantity, m=(n+2)/4, and 
obtain a value of K which applies to the whole of the copper. 

Many other cases occur in practice which we cannot enter 
into here, they can generally be approximately handled in a 
similar way to those indicated above, arbitrary allowances be- 
ing made when necessary, according to the extent to which the 
conditions differ from our hypothetical ones. 


1905.] FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. 787 


In the above, the /? R losses have been determined without 
solving the equations for the general distribution of current 
in the conductors. In some practical problems however it is 
of value to gain an idea of the actual distribution, and therefore 
the values of the constants in equation (2), to satisfy the boun- 
dary conditions (3) and (4), are given below, the algebraical 
work being omitted. The solution is immediately applicable 
to the other types of winding discussed above, by inserting the 
proper value of m as described in connection with the J? R 
estimation. 

The solution is given by equation (2) with the following 
values of the constants: 


5 : VetVy : 
0,= afd, cosh 2 a f —cos 2 a f 


ante _ y,cos af, sinh a} +y3sin-a 7. cosh a f 
an1 = y, sin af. cosh a f—y, cos af. sinha f 


ad 


_ where 


y, = (m—A) etFeosaf—m 


V3 = (m—1) ef sin af 


and 0, 8, are obtained from these expressions by reversing the 
sign of a. 

As an illustration the curves already given, Figs. 2, 3, may 
be referred to. The phase curve is plotted with ordinates 
equal to 


x 


fousas 


0 


where ¢ is the angle by which the actual current at any point 
of the conductor leads the load current. Hence the direction 
of this curve at any point indicates the phase of the resultant 
current there. 

In conclusion the writer would point out that although in 
this paper he has confined his attention to the one case of 
eddy currents in slot-wound conductors, he recognizes that in 


788 FIELD: EDDY CURRENTS. [June 21 


some cases, especially where several conductors connected in 
parallel have to be arranged side by side in the slot, very con- 
siderable cross currents may be produced by the working flux 
entering the slot depthwise, unless suitable precautions be 
taken. He regrets that at the present writing he is unable to 
offer any test results confirming or otherwise the views put for- 
ward, but the few tests he has made, while confirming generally 
the results of calculation as to the order of magnitude involved, 
are not sufficiently detailed to warrant quotation. 


A paper presented at the 22d Annual Conven 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


SE ei ee a ae 
Copyright 1905. By A.I. E. B. 


WATER-POWERS OF THE SOUTHEASTERN APPALA- 
_ CHIAN REGION. 


BY FREDERICK A. C. PERRINE. 

Three great mountain ranges run north and south through 
the United States, dividing it into distinct territories. They 
are the Appalachians, the Rockies, and the-Sierras. Each of 
these ranges has its distinguishing characteristics and deter- 
mines the character of the country in its neighborhood. Their 
influence is determined by their form, and by the climatic con- 
ditions to which their elevation and location contribute. 

On the west side of the continent the Sierras rise from a 
high plateau on their eastern side, and descend on their western 
side sharply, almost to the level of the sea, enclosing with the 
Pacific Ocean a country of great fertility and marked by equa- 
bility of climate. 

The rainfall on the plateau to the east is very small and 
irregular, and, in consequence, on that side few rivers are fed 
by the run-off from the Sierras, such rivers as there are often 
sinking into the sands of the desert and never reaching the ocean. 

Between the Sierras and the Pacific the rainfall is more plen- 
tiful but occurs in periods distinctly seasonal—a period of 
at least three months in the summer yielding no important 
amount of precipitation; in consequence, although many of 
these peaks rise to great heights, comparatively few of them 
are snow-capped. 

The rivers which they feed are steep in slope, and rapidly 
deliver the run-off with great variation of flow between the wet 
and the dry season. By reason of their sharp descent, these 
mountain rivers afford many sites for power-plants of exceed- 
ingly high heads, and the glacial valleys lying high among the 


789! 


790 PERRINE: SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. [June 22 


peaks afford locations for storage-reservoir sites which may 
be used to supplement the low run-off of the dry season. 

While the Rockies are not so steep as the Sierras, they are 
as high orhigher; and, rising from high plateaus on both sides, 
they form a wide rugged backbone to the Continent. 

The rainfall on these mountains is not great, but the cold- 
ness of the climate of that region tends to hold back the winter 
rains and to give a more regular run-off from the year’s rainfall. 

Many of the rivers are of sharp descent while many others 
flow through great mountain valleys which afford opportunities 
for reservoirs with high dams. 

While the rainfall in the Rockies is abundant, that in the 
surrounding regions is small and, in consequence, the streams 
of the Rocky Mountain region are largely employed for irrigation 
purposes, as a result the conflicting interests of water-power 
development and irrigation often interfere with the employ- 
ment of the water for power purposes, particularly as the mini- 
mum run-off is during the winter months and the maximum 
in the summer, when the water is most useful for irrigation 
purposes, and, therefore, is not available for storage. 

The Appalachian Mountains are neither as high nor as rugged 
as either of the two ranges before mentioned; indeed their 
tops are approximately on a level with the plateau between 
the Rockies and the Sierras. Most of them are rounded hills, 
covered with earth and vegetation to their summits, and none 
of them reaches up to the snow line; they form, however, the 
fountains for watering the fertile plains below, which on both 
sides lie at their base. 

The chain extends from Maine to the Gulf, and comprises 
the White and the Green Mountains of the north, the Adiron- 
dacks and Alleghenies in the Middle States, and the Shenan- 
doah, Greenbrier, Blue Ridge, Black, and Great Smoky moun- 
tains of the south, with many auxiliary ranges. In the States 
of Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina, they lie massed 
on the western border, and about the northern border of Ala- 
bama and Georgia, and form the eastern boundary of Tennessee, 
Kentucky, and West Virginia. In consequence of their location 
they form an important element in the life and industries of 
each one of these states, which for fertility have been renowned, 
and no unimportant element in their fertility is due to the 
water that flows from the mountains. As in the past the 
agriculturists of the south have blessed the waters, so to-day, 


1905.) PERRINE: SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. 791 


and in the future, the manufacturers of the south will praise 
the mountains for the waterfalls furnishing power and forming 
one of the most important elements in the rebuilding and new 
developmetit “of the Southern States. 

In this paper the writer has confined himself to the con- 
sideration of the powers in the states of Virginia, North Carolina, 
South Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama, since in these states the 
most wide-reaching effect seems to wait upon the development 
of these waters. 

Here are the cotton fields, and here are springing up the 
great cotton factories. The people of these states have most 
thoroughly grasped the importance of the problem, and are 
showing the greatest results from the developments they have 
so far effected. 

To the west of the mountains some of the best water-powers 
of the whole region are found and for some of them there is an 
abundant market. The region is indeed well worthy of study, 
but, as it is the study of a region separate and distinct in most 
of its characteristics from the country to the east and south 
of the mountains, one may be pardoned for not attempting 
its study at the present time, and may be allowed to consider 
only the country through which we have recently traveled, as 
far as Asheville, without it being assumed therefrom that, either 
for engineering or commercial reasons, the western region is 
less worthy of development. 

On account of the physiographic characteristics, which have 
already been touched upon, this region is preeminently a water- 
power country. The rainfall over its entire extent is in no 
part less than an average of 35 in., increasing to 60 in. 
in the mountains. This precipitatior: does not occur in a wet 
season of limited duration, but is well distributed throughout 
the year. The soil itself is generaily porous, and for those 
streams from the head waters of which the forests have not 
been cut the rainfall is retained, and neither the floods nor 
the low waters are as serious difficulties as are encountered in 
the middle states. 

Ice and snow are not important elements in the problem, 
which is not only a condition favorable to hydraulic develop- 
ment, but also to the problems of transmission-line maintenance. 
‘The rivers draining this territory fall rapidly to a well-de- 
fined fall line where they enter the plains along the sea-coast, 
and in some cases become navigable; above the fall line they 


792 PERRINE: SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. [June 22 


present many opportunities for power development, of high 
head in the mountain region, and of low head between the 
mountains and the fall line along which portions of their course 
they flow over many rapids which in that region are called 

“ shoals.” The greatest difficulties to be encountered are those 
due to lightning storms, which are frequent and severe over the 
whole territory and present a serious problem to the designing 
engineer. 

On account of the generally loose character of the soil through- 
out almost the entire territory the rivers carry immense quan- 
tities of silt, which must be considered in planning canals and 
other hydraulic work. Commercially the fact that southern 
industries ‘rarely operate more than 11 hr. per day requires 
a most careful study of the opportunities for storage, which 
will enable the full use of the river during this working period 
of each day. There are few locations presented in this region 
for storage-reservoirs sufficiently large tc enable the full use of 
the average yearly run-off. 

The most serious commercial problem present in this region 
is that of competition. On account of the abundance 
of water and the number of power sites, there are few, 
if any, powers in the entire region so situated as to be immune — 
from dangers of competition from powers of equivalent cost 
of development and equal accessibility to the market. 

“This condition seems to require in this region, more than in 
any other part of our country, the development and distribution 
of the powers from many plants under one common manage- 
ment. If attacked in this manner the solution of the water- 
power distribution in the Southeastern Appalachian region offers 
great opportunities of commanding success, and by duplication 
of plants reduces the necessity for duplication of lines and 
tends to make the power more useful and reliable. 

Such a procedure also tends to aid in the solution of another 
problem presented by the long period of minimum flow common 
to the rivers of this region. While the period of minimum flow 
is long, the steadiness of a flow 50 to 100 per cent. above the 
minimum may be generally depended upon for certain seasons 
of the year, and in the successful plant this excess flow must 
be utilized. . 

The manufacturers of the south, as in New England, have 
for many years been accustomed to appreciate the value of 
water-power to their steam plants, and of the steam plant as 


1905.] PERRINE: SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. 793 


an auxiliary to the water-power; in consequence, a market 


ca 


for power beyond the amount of the minimum stream-flow is 
readily obtained, and should always be considered in planning 
for developments in this territory. The particular importance 
of this will appear as we proceed to a study of the different 
drainage areas, and realize that a great proportion of the 
plants in this territory are constructed directly at the dam- 
site, with little or no canal or penstock construction re- 
quired, and entailing little expense for the development of 
excess power except the actual cost of the machinery and its 
foundations, with the necessary covering roof for including it 
in the power-house. 

The principal rivers of the Southeastern Appalachians, whose 
drainage basins need to be considered in studying the water 
power opportunities offered, are the James, Roanoke, Staunton, 
and Dan Rivers, in Virginia; the Cape Fear, Yadkin, and Ca- 
tawba, in North Carolina; the Catawba, Broad, Saluda, and Sa- 
vannah, in South Carolina; the Oconee, Ocmulgee, Flint, and 
Chattahoochee Rivers, in Georgia; and the Talapoosa, Coosa, 
Tuscaloosa, and Tombigbee Rivers, of Alabama. 

Each of these rivers has many tributaries of importance, 
and in the enumeration of the rivers in this region a difficulty 
is presented by the fact that some of them change in names 
as they flow from source to mouth. For example, the Catawba 
river of North Carolina is the Wateree river of South Carolina, 
and flows into the ocean after its junction with the Congaree, 
as the Santee; similarly, the Mobile river of Alabama is formed 


by the junction of the Tombigbee and the Alabama, and al- 


though the former retains its name to its source, in spite of 
being joined by the Tuscaloosa, the Alabama above Montgomery 
becomes the Coosa, and the Talapoosa and the Coosa at Rome 
split into the Etowah and the Coosawattee. 
The northernmost region that we have selected for study is 
the drainage basin of the James river, having at Richmond an 
area of about 10.000 square miles. This river gathers its waters 
from streams flowing northeasterly and southwesterly among 
the Allegheny, Shenandoah, and Blue Ridge Mountains and, 
carrying them entirely across the State of Virginia in a general 
easterly direction, empties them into Chesapeake Bay. The 
fall line is not reached till at Richmond, where there is an abrupt 
descent of 84 ft. to the tide level just below the city. The 
James drains an old well-cultivated portion of the country, 


794 PERRINE: SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. [June 22 


having an average rainfall of about 41 in., and varying from 
35 to 45 in. 

The minimum run-off, which is as low as 0.20 sec-ft. per 
square mile, generally occurs in October and November, and 
the maximum, which reaches about 20 sec-ft. per square mile, 
occurs generally in the months of February, March and April. 
The average run-off falls to about 0.25 sec-ft. and an average 
run-off of not more than 0.35 sec-ft. may be expected during 
three months with considerable regularity. 

Toward the head waters the variation of flow is even greater 
than nearer the mouth, on account of the fact that the moun- 
tains here are low and little snow falls upon them, and, further- 
more, these mountains are largely denuded of their trees. 

The average fall of the James from Richmond to the head 
waters is nearly five feet to the mile, or about 4.25 ft. per mile, 
excluding the sharp fall at Richmond; in consequence of this 
rapid flow, exhibiting many opportunities for power develop- 
ment, as the fall is uniformly distributed along the river. 

The Roanoke river, which empties into Albemarle Sound, in 
North Carolina, drains the western portion of Virginia south of 
the watershed of the James, and at Clarkesville, Va., is formed 
by the Staunton and Dan rivers. These two rivers rise in the 
Blue Ridge Mountains, the Dan lying altogether to the east of 
the mountains, while the head waters of the Staunton cross 
the eastern range in a gap and penetrate into the interior val- 
leys, being in that portion of its course called the Roanoke. 
The Roanoke crosses the fall line of North Carolina at Weldon, 
120 miles from the mouth of the river, where the total drainage 
area of the watershed is about 9000 square miles. Near Weldon 
there is a sharp fall of over 100 ft. in less than five miles; other- 
wise, both the Staunton and Dan rivers flow with insignificant 
grades till near their headwaters. 

The rainfall along the upper Roanoke and the Staunton 
averages about 46 in., and along the watershed of the Dan 
about 47 in. In spite of this very satisfactory rainfall 
and a satisfactory distribution through the year, the run-off 
from these rivers is very variable on account of their draining, 
principally table-land and receiving little from the mountains. 
The minimum flow falls as low as 0.16 sec-ft. per square mile, * 
while the maximum rans up to about 10 sec-ft. The floods 
are of great moment along these rivers on account of the sud- 
denness of their rise, 


1905.) PERRINE: SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. 795 


A run-off as low as 0.30 sec-ft. must be contemplated at any 
time between June and November, and a greater average flow 
than 40 sec-ft-. cannot be expected during three months, 
although the run-off from the Satunton is heavier per square 
mile than the run-off from the Dan, apparently on account 
of the greater drainage from mountain territory. 

South of the Dan river basin the Cape Fear river drains a 
region in the centre of North Carolina, flowing to the southeast 
and entering the Atlantic near Wilmington. Although the 
watershed of the Cape Fear is principally covered with clay and 
sand and comprises pine and oak forests and agricultural land, 
and in spite of the fact that there are no great falls in its course, 
except at Smileys Falls, about 20 miles above Fayetteville, 
where it crosses the fall line and reaches the level of tidewater, 
still it is one of the most completely developed power rivers 
of the south. 

The rainfall over this watershed averages 50 in., the 
greatest fall being in the spring and summer; these being the 
growing seasons and the territory largely agricultural the total 
run-off is small and is particularly low in the fall when it has 
gone as low as 0.07 sec-ft. per square mile, with a monthly 
average run-off of not more than 0.12 sec-it. Indeed for 
the last six months of the year an average as low as 0.3 
sec-ft. must be allowed for. 

On the other hand, as in all such regions the floods are very 
severe, running from as high as 15 sec-ft. in May to 20 
sec-ft. in January. That a stream with these difficulties 
to be encountered should have been so well developed shows 
plainly the importance of a ready market in problems of power 
development, and the effect of even an unreliable water power 
in developing manufacturing in a country where the conditions of 
market, raw material, and satisfactory labor are favorable. 

The Yadkin river of North Carolina, or the Great Pedee of 
South Carolina, drains above where it crosses the fall line at 
Cheraw, S. C., a territory of about 9700 square miles. This 
river flows from the base of the Blue Ridge Mountains in North 
Carolina to the Atlantic near Georgetown, S. C. At first it 
flows for about 60 miles in a northeasterly direction almost 
parallel to the Blue Ridge Mountains, from which many streams 
come down to augment its volume. At the northeast corner 
of Yadkin County it turns to the south and crosses the state 
into South Carolina; soon after entering this state it runs over 


796 PERRINE: SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. [June 22 


its rapids at the fall line and reaches the level of the tide. Ex- 
cepting in the rapids at Cheraw and at the Yadkin Narrows 55 
miles above, there are no important falls, though there are on 
the watershed a number of opportunities for development by 
high dams forming storage reservoirs. The rainfall in the 
mountain region along the headwaters of the Yadkin averages 
in excess of 55 in., but over the greater portion of the water- 
shed it amounts to about 46 in. The distribution of the 
rainfall is similar to that in the Cape Fear region, but as the 
river drains a greater proportion of mountain territory the 
run-off does not fall relatively as low, the minimum record 
being at the rate of about 0.25 sec-ft. per square mile. 
For the average year the run-off is at a rate no lower than 0.32 - 
sec-ft. and the average for the minimum months is not less 
than 0.4 sec-ft. The floods are exceedingly severe, fre- 
quently running as high as 30 sec-ft.; they have been re- 
corded as high as at a rate of 38 sec-ft.; but they are of 
short duration, being largely over in about 48 hours and few 
monthly averages rising above 5 sec-ft. per square mile. 

The course and drainage area of the Catawba are much 
similar to those of the Yadkin. Like the Yadkin it changes 
its name on entering the state of South Carolina; there it is 
called the Wateree. From its source, running northeasterly, 
it receives numerous tributaries from the Blue Ridge Mountains 
and then turns almost south delivering its waters into the 
Atlantic through the Santee. Near Camden, S. C., it crosses 
the fall line; just above are not only the customary rapids but 
a few miles farther north one of the most remarkable power 
sites in the South, a total fall of over 150 ft. being available 
for development. 

The fall. of the river is not so gradual as the Yadkin but con- 
centrated in falls many of which are available for developments 
of considerable size. The drainage area at Camden is about 
5 000 square miles; in the upper half of this territory the ¥ainfall 
averages about 50 in. and in the lower half about 45 in. 
Almost the whole territory is heavily wooded and in consequence 
the run-off is comparatively uniform, never having been found 
to fall below a rate of 43 sec-ft. in the upper half of the 
drainage area, or about 0.35 sec-ft. over the whole. As 
the minimum is large so also is the flood flow which on several 
occasions has risen to a rate of 50 sec-ft. The minimum 
flow may be expected at any time from July to November 
and the maximum in the spring months. 


1905.) PERRINE; SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. 797 


West of the watershed of the Catawba lies the Broad river. 
This river rises in the Blue Ridge mountains a short distance 
east of Asheville and flows in a southeasterly direction to 
Columbia, where it joins the Saluda to form the Congaree. 
The latter flows into the Wateree and forms the Santee. Unlike 
the two previous rivers, there is no branch running parallel to 
the mountains, but in the upper part of its watershed the tribu- 
taries spread out fan-like and deliver the headwaters to the 
main river at about the point where it crosses the South Carolina 
border. There is no point at which the Broad crosses the fall 
line but it lies altogether in the uplands. The slope, however, 
is great, averaging about 4.5 ft. per mile for the total length 
140 miles from its mouth. A number of favorable opportunities 
are presented for development, notably near Alston, S. C., 
and near Gafiney, S. C. The drainage area at Gafiney is ap- 
proximately 2 000 square miles and at Alston about 4600 square 
miles; the total drainage area of the watershed is about 4900 
square miles. On the northern portion of the watershed, 
which lies in North Carolina, the rainfall is in excess of 55 in. 
annually ; in that section of the watershed lying south of Gaffney 
the rainfall is about 46 in. The soil over the watershed 
is generally sandy and a large portion is wooded; in consequence 
the run-off is well distributed, not having been found to fall 
below 0.35 sec-ft. per square mile, and probably not so 
low in the northern portion of the watershed. The floods com- 
monly rise to 25 sec-ft. per square mile and must be ex- 
pected up to a rate of 30 sec-ft. The dry season is gen- 
erally in the summer or fall, though a rate of 0.5 sec-ft. 
must be expected in any month except during the spring. 

While the watershed of the Saluda directly to the west of 
the Broad is similar in character to that already described, 
still, on account of its relatively greater length in proportion 
to its width, the reliability of the water flow is not so great. 
With a total length of about 135 miles the area of the watershed 
is only about 2000 square miles; in consequence, neither the 
maximum flood rate or the minimum run-off rate is as high © 
as on the Broad. In the upper half of the drainage area the 
annual rainfall is about 53 in. per annum and about 45 
inches in the lower half. A minimum run-off of 0.28 sec-ft. 
per square mile has been observed though it probably falls 
as low as 0.25 sec-ft., and a run-off no greater than 0.4 
sec-ft. must be contemplated during the last half of the 


798 PERRINE: SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. [June 22 


year. The maximum which rises to about 20 sec-ft. per square 
mile may occur at any time from January to July. 

The Savannah river, which at Augusta drains a territory of 
about 7 300 miles located almost equally in South Carolina 
and Georgia, promises to become the source of some of the most 
important water powers in the south, not only on account of 
the fact that the stream flow is good and the shoals well adapted 
to development, but more particularly on account of the favor- 
able economic situation of the water-power sites. The terri- 
tory.on both sides of the river is an important cotton-growing 
section and its adaptability for mills has been well proved; in 
fact, Augusta, Ga., is the largest cotton manufacturing city 
in the whole south. The industries of that city have been 
built up about a 50-ft. fall in the Savannah, at that point where 
the river crosses the fall line. The minimum flow at Augusta 
is about 0.30 sec-ft. and at Calhoun Falls 40 miles above 
where the drainage area is 2700 square milés it is about 0.35. 
sec-ft. The maximum flood rate is about 25 sec-ft. per 
square mile. A monthly average must be expected as low 
as 0.50 sec-ft., and this average minimum may be expected. 
for from four to six months of each year. The minimum may 
occur in July, October, or November, and the maximum during 
the first six months of the year. 

The middle portion of the State of Georgia is drained by the 
Oconee and Ocmulgee, which, at Milledgeville and Macon re- 
spectively, cross the fall line—a territory of about 6 000 square 
miles. These two rivers are very much alike in origin and 
character, rising in the southernmost extension of the Blue 
Ridge mountains, where the mountains become flat, rocky 
hills gradually sloping off to the fall line. The rivers are com- 
paratively steep and present a number of opportunities for 
power development. The flow in these rivers is comparatively 
low, often during several months of a year falling to as low as 
0.2 sec-ft., and a rate as low as 0.1 sec-ft. is probably 
reached, though for the northern portion of this watershed 
this rate of minimum run-off is approximately doubled. The 
low flow generally occurs in the late summer or early fall. The 
maximum flow of 20 sec-ft. occurs in the spring. 

To the southwest lies the drainage area of the Flint river 
which crosses the fall line at Albany and follows the Blue Ridge 
mountains practically to the end in a rapid flow. The run-off 
falls to about 0:20 sec-ft. and rises to about 15 sec-ft. 


1905.) PERRINE: SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. 799 


maximum. Although the maximum run-off is not at so high 
a rate as other streams still they are formidable elements in the 
engineering problem. This river presents the anomaly of fre- 
quently being at its lowest during November, a great disadvan- 
tage in a power river, as the yearly load curve of most industries 
is generally rising at that time. 

The last four watersheds described headed in the Blue Ridge 
mountains which run southwest through Georgia. Across the 
mountains and running parallel to them is the watershed of 
the Chattahoochee river which runs rapidly down between 
the lower extensions of the Blue Ridge and Great Smoky moun- 
tains; in consequence of being located almost entirely in the 
mountains it presents many desirable characteristics as a power 
stream. The minimum run-off which occurs in the summer 
falls to a rate of 0.25 sec-ft., but a rate not exceeding 0.4 
sec-ft. must be expected for more than one month during 
the latter half of the year. The flood flow which occurs in 
either December of the spring months amounts to about 20 
sec-ft. 

To the west of this territory lies the great drainage area of 
the Mobile watershed covering practically the whole of the 
state of Alabama, and extending into the northwestern corner 
of Georgia and the northeastern corner of Mississippi. “The 
greater portion of this watershed is niountainous and well 
wooded; in consequence there are many valuable water-power 
sites. Some of the highest heads available in the eastern states 
are to be found in this territory. 

Commercially, the development of the coal and iron mines 
and the types of manufacturing to which these raw materials 
give rise have furnished opportunities for the power market, 
though the presence of coal mines renders caution necessary 
in the selection of sites for development. 

In this watershed there have been reported sites for power 
development aggregating 150000 h.p., many of the sites 
being within close competitive distance of one another. Al- 
though the country is mountainous, still it is so far south 
that these mountains carry no snow and the evaporation is 
high; hence the minimum rate of run-off is never high. Certainly 
a minimum rate of 0.2 sec-ft. per square mile will be found 
in any important Alabama river. The flood flow tends to be 
a maximum at about the rate of 20 sec-ft. per square mile. 

In this short review of the water powers of the southeastern 


800 PERRINE: SOUTHEASTERN WA TER-POWERS. [June 22 


Appalachian region an attempt has been made to convey some 
impression of the wide distribution of water power in this 
territory. Already the development of a few of the available 
sites has had a powerful influence on the commercial life of the 
“South, and in the contest for industrial supremacy which is 
continually being waged between sections of our country the 
ready availability of water power in the South is certain to 
play no unimportant part. The conditions, it must be observed, 
are in all respects different from the conditions in other sections 
of the country. There is no location which can command the 
field, and within a comparatively short distance of each plant 
there is another location which may be developed and probably 
offer competition. The minimum flow is everywhere small 
and the floods heavy, varying from 75 to 150 times the mini- 
mum. But, on the other hand, a class of manufacturers are 
at hand who appreciate the value of water power even when 
it is variable, and are accustomed to providing themselves with 
steam auxiliaires for allowing the use of surplus water power. 
These conditions are on the whole favorable to the development 
of water power on a large scale, but point to the necessity for 
effective management and a comprehensive plan for the develop- 
ment of a section of territory rather than of a single power. 
With efficient business management and careful engineering 
we may expect the water powers of the Southeastern Appalachian 
region to prove to be one of the most valuable assets of that 
wealthy section of our country. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 801 


Discussion ON ‘‘ WaTER-POWERS OF THE SOUTHEASTERN AP- 
PALACHIAN SYSTEM.” 


Ratpow W. Pore: One of the chief considerations in the 
transmission of power is a market. There is plenty of power 
available at many points where there is no place to which it 
can be economically transmitted to meet a commercial de- 
mand. This necessitates the development of industries to utilize 
the powers. Many railroads, especially through mountain dis- 
tricts, follow streams. In 1892, when I was at Denver, at 
which time we had not thought very much about operating 
railroads by electricity, it appeared to me that there was power 
going to waste along the line of railway up the Clear Creek 
Canyon, that would operate the whole system. Coal was brought 
from Utah, possibly 500 miles. 

Having in view that the object of transmission is to convey 
power to a market, here the power is developed right along- 
side of the market, and the day has already arrived when 
there is talk of operating trunk lines by electricity. A few 
days ago I made a trip through western Massachusetts from 
Great Barrington, and the same thoughts occurred to me re- 
garding the Housatonic River, which parallels the road for 
about 60 miles. Part of this power is now being transmitted 
to the Naugatuck Valley, 20 miles away. I think that is doing 
the wrong thing with the power, not only for the reason that 
it is a misuse as far as the valley is concerned, but it is causing 
serious trouble for the telephone companies. This is of such 
importance that a corps of telephone engineers made experi- 
ments at the power-plant with the high-tension current to 
see what could be done to eliminate the troubles. It 
may be said that there is not enough power to operate the 
railroad at all seasons of the year. While that might be true 
as far as both freight and passenger service are concerned, 
there might be sufficient power to operate the passenger 
trains, and consequently there would be a reserve of loco- 
motives all the time, in the freight service, which could 
be used for the passenger trains when the power was not suffi- 
cient for the latter. While this might be a temporary return 
to the existing evil, it would not be so bad as it is now. Con- 
ditions would be improved, and as will be seen at once, the 
problem of reserve power, which is one that is encountered 
by almost every factory in New England operated by water 
power, would be met. 

I think there is hardly a mill in New England, operated by 
water power, that does not have a steam plant in reserve; and 
the steam reserve on a railroad fits in very nicely for the 
purpose stated above. In fact, now that there is a possibility 
of operating railroads by electricity, this appears to be the 
natural course of development. Here is a water power running 
alongside a railroad, and here is the market right at hand, 
and it is for the electrical engineers to develop and apply the 


* 802 SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. [June 22 


power of the one and for the railroad managers to obtain a 
pecuniary reward for the undertaking from the other. 

E. Wapprett: Among the industries of the Southern 
States, Dr. Perrine mentions the cotton factories. Their growth 
has been something unprecedented; in a recent circular the 
Southern Railway states that there are more than 1 000 cotton 
mills located along its lines. The adjunct to the cotton mills— 
the finishing plant—is however not found in the South; conse- 
_ quently the product of the mills is sent North previous to mar- 
keting. The clear and pure water necessary for finishing is 
to be had in the mountains, and doubtless in the near future 
this important branch will be added to southern industries. 
The absence of anchor ice in the southern streams is an 
important feature and is conducive to better service than in 
localities so troubled. 

Two classes of power are generally furnished by southern 
power companies, the regular day service, and secondary 
power available during the night; the latter is sold at a much 
lower rate but tends to raise the load-factor of the plant. 
In the majority of cases in the South the practice of working 
in harmony with existing city plants has been resorted to by 
_ distant powers entering a town; synchronous converters are 
installed, and the benefit is mutual, the local company getting 
a low rate and the water company a steam auxiliary. 

The question of labor and capital is not paramount in the 
South as elsewhere, and the class of labor to be had is superior 
to many other localities. 

In the past the difficulty experienced in financing southern 
enterprises has handicapped to a large extent the southern en- 
gineer, the problem has been not the development of a power 
in the most desirable manner, but in the cheapest way possible. 

L. S. Ranpotpn: There are two points which Dr. Perrine 
has not mentioned, although he has covered the ground very 
thoroughly. One is the time of the occurrence of the minimum 
rainfall, which sometimes comes in winter, in some years in 
January and February; occasionally it comes late in the summer, 
sometimes early in the summer. At other times there is an 
exceedingly uniform distribution throughout the year. 

Another point is that there are excellent sites well back 
in the mountains. Dr. Perrine refers to the fall-line through 
Richmond and Danville, etc. There are a decidedly greater 
number of sites for water powers in the western section well 
up in the mountain ranges, as at Roanoke, Freeze, and many 
other places. 

In regard to anchor ice, some figures in regard to tempera- 
ture may be interesting. Along the summits of the mountains 
there is during two or three months in the year considerable zero 
weather, but where power-plants can be built. zero weather 
seldom lasts more than 24 hours, rising in the middle of the 
_day to 14, 15, and 30 degrees, going to zero at night, and 


19€5.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 803 


keeping this up for a week at a time. This gives little or 
no trouble with anchor-ice. 

A. M. ScHoen: The question of southern water powers ap- 
peals very strongly to all electrical engineers in this part of 
the country. We have long looked forward to the day when 
streams in the South might be developed and the energy that 
has so long lain latent put into service. It was some 12 or 13 
years ago when I first had occasion thoroughly to look over 
electrical industries in the South and at that time but little 
headway had been made in developing the water powers in 
this section. Since that time, however, thousands of electrical 
horse power have been put at the service of man, and the in- 
dustries of the South have profited accordingly. There are 
transmission lines extending as far as 30 miles from the gener- 
ating plant to the points where it.is utilized, and other high- 
tension, long distance systems are constantly being promoted. 

In this connection, if I am not out of order in referring to 
Mr. Waddell’s paper, which, it seems to me, is closely allied 
with that of Dr. Perrine, the most serious question to-day is 
the denudation of the water-sheds of their forest growth, and 
in consequence the sweeping away of the natural barriers and 
storage reservoirs which nature has erected to regulate the 
flow of the streams. This removal of the forests from such 
places tends to destroy entirely the efficiency of these powers. 

I regret very much that Dr. Perrine did not present in his 
paper a comparative statement showing the difference between 
the high and low water marks and the periods of drought and 
freshet of to-day and say of 10 or 15 years ago. Had he looked 
into this matter I think he would have found that there has 
been a very decided change in these periods and that the normal 
conditions of the streams to-day show a difference totally un- 
warranted, considering the time which has elapsed. 

It seems to me that this, as a national body of electrical 
engineers, should go on record in some way in regard to the 
constant destruction of the forests and the resulting injury to 
the reservoirs provided by nature to hold in abeyance the 
-water which comes from the rain and snow, and thus 
keep the water powers in normal condition. I believe in many 
instances it will be found to-day that the normal condition of 
many streams will not remain more than three or four months 
out of the year, the remainder of the time the condition being 
that of either flood or drought, and the future promises that 
these conditions will augment rather than decrease. 

F. A. C. Perrine: Mr. Randolph has called attention to 
the fact that some of the streams have their minimum flow 
in the winter, stating that sometimes the minimum is in 
December and January. I have in mind one river in the South 
-that has this characteristic; it is the Flint River of Georgia, 
which has its minimum flow in November, but I have been 
unable to ascertain any river in the South that has its minimum 


804 SOUTHEASTERN WA TER-POWERS. [June 22 


flow later than November. here are some rivers that have 
a low flow in December and January, but none, so far as I know, 
that then have absolutely minimum flow. 

Mr. Randolph has also called attention to the fact that on 
some of the water-sheds the minimum flow is uniformly dis- 
tributed, and that on some itis not. This is true, but engineers 
should be cautioned against understanding by this statement 
that the run-off which is useful for water power is proportionate 
to the distribution of the rainfall. With a uniform rainfall 
throughout the year, there is a uniform run-off. On the con- 
trary, dry summers and wet falls and springs produce a uni- 
form run-off. If there is a uniform rainfall there results a 
minimum run-off in the fall; for the reason that if it is dry late 
in the spring and during the summer, the vegetation is partly 
killed and is not so vigorous and does not use so much of the 
water, and there is a greater proportion of the run-off in the 
fall when the water is otherwise low. It may be expected 
that the run-off from a river will be uniform during a year 
when the rainfall is heavy in the early spring, light in the 
late spring, almost absent in the summer and heavy in the 
fall. Whereas during a year when the rainfall is uniformly 
distributed there will be an extremely low run-off during the 
fall, because the vegetation during the summer has used up 
the water. This can be seen not only as regards individual 
years, but as regarding some of the territories which have 
the worst average of run-off, they having actually the best 
distribution of rainfall. 

CarL Herinc: The papers and discussions at this session 
have shown us the great value of water power development in 
this region and I therefore think the present a very good oc- 
casion for the InstiTuTE to consider the following resolution: 

Whereas, the destruction of the forest growth on the water- 
sheds and the consequent impairment of the natural storage 
capacity promises to injure seriously the water power possi- 
bilities of the streams finding their sources therein; and 

Whereas, the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGI- 
NEERS recognizes the serious loss to the electrical interests of 
the community which might result therefrom; therefore 

Be it Resolved, that it is the opinion of the AMERICAN INsTI- 
TUTE oF ELEcTRICAL ENGINEERS that all practicable means 
should be adopted for the preservation to all such locations, 
of the integrity of their natural resources for the development 
of their territory. 

And further, Be it Resolved, that a committee be appointed 
by the President for the collection of information concerning 
this matter. And a recommendation to the INSTITUTE of such 
action for the dissemination of information concerning the 
attitude of the InsTiruTE on this subject as may seem 
desirable. 

F. A. C. Perrine: I second the motion. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 805 


PRESIDENT LigB: You have heard the motion; it is now- 
before you for discussion. 

F, A. C. Perrine: This is an exceedingly serious matter, 
not only for this region, but for all parts of the country; 
not only on account of the destruction of our forests, 
and its influence on our power streams, but on account of the 
futility of the methods that have been used by our govern- 
ment, and the Department of Agriculture as representing that 
government, for the preservation of such interests. The diffi- 
culty due to the destruction of our forests, and ali our 
other natural resources dependent thereon, is fundamental 
and requires broad treatment. The only solution that has 
been offered by our government is a very feeble attempt 
at the establishment of small territories in which it is sup- 
posed that no indiscriminate wood cutting can be carried 
on. But all of these territories are, in spite of the fact 
that they are established as forest reserves, laid open 
to.the danger from forest fires, which is far worse than the 
direct danger from the lumberman. It is an incidental danger 
to lumbering, and the fact that our government allows such 
injudicious methods of lumbering as to leave the whole 
country cut over subject to danger from forest fires is a 
disgrace not only to our national Department of Agriculture, 
but to the government of every state in the Union. If 
this resolution should be transmitted to the Department of 
Agriculture, it ought equally well to be transmitted to the 
legislature of every state in the United States; for it is absurd 
that the jurisdiction over the lands which are not excepted as 
forest reserves should remain under the states which will allow 
conditions resulting in forest fires able to spread to and to de- 
stroy the infinitesimal reservations separated out for federal 
control. The whole question, is one of the utmost im- 
portance not only to the water power resources of our 
country, but to the development of many of our other resources. 
We are destroying one of the greatest of our natural sources 
of wealth without any adequate compensation and without 
any protection for it. ere 

I think that the Instirute should go on record at this 
time as protesting against this condition. I do not think 
that the InstiruTE should by implication indorse the methods 
that have been used, but in a dignified way should call atten- 
tion to the fact to all people, not only to the federal govern- 
ment, but to the state authorities and to individuals, that we 
are ruthlessly destroying these natural resources, and such 
methods as are being used at present are inadequate for their 
proper protection. 

PRESIDENT LieB: Under the original motion no further 
action would result, excepting that possibly communities and 
localities, in pressing their own case, might use the INsTITUTE’s 
resolution in calling the attention of the authorities, either 
state or national, to the matter. 


806 SOUTHEASTERN WATER-POWERS. [June 22 


Gano S. Dunn: Iarise to indorse those resolutions and to say 
that we have had a larger convention than this and we have 
had conventions differently located, but I know that this one 
will go down in the history of the INsTITUTE conspicuous for 
the warmth of. good feeling and hospitality with which we 
have been surrounded. 

We have met here and been entertained by the corporations 
and individuals whose names have been read in a way that has 
shown the genuine pleasure they have taken in doing itinift 
is but little that we can do in thanking them, but I am sure 
in seconding these resolutions and in giving my own personal 
thanks to the committee and to the others, I am but poorly 
expressing what is in the mind of everyone. We shall go back 
feeling that we have left many friends in the South and that 
now traditional Southern hospitality means an altogether new 
thing to us. 

I wish to offer an amendment to the original resolution, 
following right on with the clauses that Mr. Hering read, 
the clause to the effect that a committee be appointed to see 
to the proper dissemination of this resolution. 

Cart Herinc: I accept the amendment as an original 
proposer. 

F. A. C. Perrine: I accept the amendment as seconder. 

Motion to adopt the resolutions as amended put to vote and 
unanimously carried. 

[The amendment appears as the last clause in the preceding 
resolutions}. 


ATES FALE I AO NT OA TO OE 


. a 
, : s,>'Th ve 
i AE Se Ie ae 
re , : d 
. tt tb ai oy 
wine TIRE NSS Te - Oe 
"ye pt i A = , v Be ? 
. nie” eR ‘2 


a 
Janes Soa ea og 
te mee” a hs Ay 


ater as ‘ 
r sahen 7 


i a I i a 


weve < 5 
Bn eee 


ape ai tt PSA EA NOTE AER 


oe 


Fic. 1.—(Nunn) Birds-Eye View of Niagara Falls, Showing Caffadian Power Developments, 
mt aly ee For ‘: cd esas y ea See ia SAYS spe tat “ f. ‘ bid s | " “ tas. a 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. 1. E. E. 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ONTARIO POWER CO. 


BY P. N. NUNN. 


The development of electrical power at Niagara Falls has 
long attracted widespread attention and interest. Since the 
first installation upon the American side descriptions and dis- 
cussions of its works and methods have been granted a con- 
spicuous place in technical records and scientific press. It is 
not so well known, however, that four other developments, 
each larger than the pioneer, are now drawing or preparing to’ 
draw power from Niagara River. These differ so widely and 
so apparently as to type and character and express such differ- 
ences of conception and method as to suggest even to the 
casual visitor a doubt as to unity of purpose. It seems fitting 
therefore at this time, when the largest of these is about to 
enter the active field, to present before the InstiruTe, and 
through the channels of its PRocesp1ncs to the technical world, 
‘a statement of the purposes which have obtained and of the 
considerations which have led to so fundamental a departure 
from the type of construction hitherto characteristic of Niagara 
Falls, as well as briefly to describe a few features which may 
prove to be advances in the art of power-plant design. 

Standing upon the upper steel-arch bridge and facing the 
Canadian falls, one may observe at the foot of the cliff forming 
the right-hand wall of the gorge, a long but unobtrusive build- 
ing, its farther end obscured by spray from the great cataract. 
It is of modest though massive design and its colors almost 
blend with those of the overhanging cliff. This is the power- 
house or generating station of The Ontario Power Company. 
To the right, high above and behind the power-house, upon 


807 


808 NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. [June 19 


the bluff overlooking both gorge and cataract, may be seen 
another great structure, less massive but more ornate, which 
on account of its commanding position is by far the most prom- 
inent landmark of the Canadian side. This is the distributing 
station of the same company, from which the power generated 
below is controlled, measured, and transmitted. Away to the 
left, around the bend of the river and hidden by the trees of 
Goat Island, are the walls, abutments, and buildings of the 
intake and head-gates through which the water from Niagara 
River is diverted for use below. In the park between these 
extremes, seen just beyond Horse Shoe Falls, stands the power- 
house of The Canadian Niagara Power Company, while to its 
left another power-plant, that of The Electrical Development 
Company, is rapidly building. 

From the head-gates of the Ontario company three great 
steel-and-concrete tunnels or conduits beneath the surface of 
the park, will convey nearly 12 000 cubic feet of water per sec. 
to the top of the cliff above the power-house. Thence it will 
pass through 22 steel penstocks in shafts and tunnels down 
and out through the cliff to an equal number of horizontal 
turbines in the power-house below. From the generators the 
electrical cables turn back through tunnels to the 22 banks of 
switches, transformers, and instruments of the distributing 
station above and to the transmission lines beyond, completing 
an equipment for more than 200 000 h.p. 

The intake-works for the entire 200000 h.p. are now fin- 
ished. One of the three main conduits is completed, while 
for the second and third, portals and head-works have been in- 
stalled and a portion of the excavation made. Six of the 22 
penstocks are already in place within their shafts and tunnels 
and two others are building, while the power-house is nearly 
prepared for the concomitant apparatus. The distributing sta- 
tion is completed for the switchboard of the entire 22 units, for 
the transformers of 8, and for other apparatus of 14. As to 
equipment, the coming month will witness one complete unit 
being operated, a second being tested, a third being installed, 
and a fourth being completed at the factories, with other units 
to follow as equipment of such size can be manufactured and 
installed. 

The purposes and methods followed in the developrrent of 
the pioneer plant and the environment and natural conditions 
at Niagara Falls have become so well known that interest in 


‘sHIOM oxe}UT s,Aueduiog o1reyuG jo uUvIG—’§ “91g 


‘amponsyG-ayVH YSnosyy uoryeg—"g ‘OI —“BSNOFY-tWoasog Ysnory} woroeg—'g “Ol ‘ayequy Ysnory} woIjeg—'F ‘SI 


6 


Net tras st is, 
ae Nw RENT BC BE Ua 


eS 

tee (S 

Be 

t-< of 

ee 

é : 
Bs 


1905.! NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. S11 


this younger development necessarily centers in its salient features 
or in those most likely to represent advance inengineering. The 
more important of these are the arrangement of intake-works, the 
design of main conduit and spillway, the horizontal-shaft units, 
the symmetry of arrangement, the centralization of control, and 
the protective isolation of apparatus. 

The intake-works have been located and designed with 
especial reference to the ice difficulties which have been the 
limiting factor in the success of Niagara power. Cake-ice in 
enormous quantities floats down for weeks at a time from the 
Great Lakes, and mush-ice is formed in the turbulent rapids 
primarily by the freezing of spray and foam and secondarily by 
the disintegration of cake-ice. To avoid the latter the intake 
is located in the smooth but swift water just above the rapids; 
to exclude the former the following features have been intro- 
duced. A long and tapering forebay protected at its entrance 
by the main intake terminates at its narrow, down-stream end 
in a deep spillway. Upon the river side it is enclosed by a 
submerged wall, while the other side adjacent to the spillway 
is occupied by the main screen structure leading to the inner 
bay and to the portals and head-gates of the three conduits. 

The intake, nearly 600-ft. long, stretches across the inlet or 
bay at Dufferin Island, almost parallel with the current in the 
river. Throughout its length a concrete curtain-wall extends 
down 9 ft. into the water, here 15-ft. deep, so that the gate 
openings beneath admit only deep water, and this at right angles 
to the swift exterior surface flow which, sweeping the full 
length of the curtain, carries the floating ice to the rapids 
beyond. At the main screen this operation is repeated. This 
structure, 320-ft. long in 20ft. of water, lies across the entrance 
to the inner bay and parallel with the direction of flow in the 
outer bay. Again a curtain, formed by the front wall of the 
enclosing superstructure, admits to the screens only deep water, 
here also at right angles, while it excludes ice with the surface 
currents maintained through the forebay by a voluminous spill 
of surplus water. 

At the gate structure, where the water is 30 ft. in depth, 
the tapering portals leading to the electrically operated Stoney 
head-gates are protected with wide-mesh screens which are also 
enclosed and safeguarded by a curtain carried by the front 
wall of the gate-house. The bay in front of the curtain com- 
municates with the river by an ample ice-run. Substantial 


812 NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. [June 19 


concrete buildings shelter both head-gates and main screens. 
In each case an open canal between curtain and screen spills 
into a gravity ice-run emptying into the river. Both buildings 
are supplied with steam for heating and thawing from an under- 
ground boiler-plant situated in the common abutment. 

Thus the water before entering the conduits must pass in 
succession three automatically selective steps, each excluding 
surface water and its floating ice; and two screens, each behind 
ice-runs in heated buildings containing live steam for emer- 
gencies. Serious trouble is not believed possible while these 
provisions are maintained with reasonable care. 

Screen frames are removable by an electric crane for cleaning 
and changing. On account of its location in the public park, 
the top of the long, narrow screen house, approached at either 
end by broad steps and landings, is finished as a promenade. 
From this point of vantage one may have a superb view of the 
upper rapids. The islands and channels made in the course 
of this work give great opportunity to make this portion of the 
park most picturesque. 

The height of the water in Niagara River, and therefore 
the volume here available, is dependent upon the surface ele- 
vation of Lake Erie, the erosion of the river bed, and such tem- 
porary causes as ice gorges, storms, etc. From calculations 
based upon comparative observations extending over a number 
of years and upon government reports of Lake Erie levels for 
nearly 50 years, the elevations of the intake have been so 
selected that at extreme low water and most adverse conditions 
a full supply of water should be secured. 

The main conduits are of 0.5-in. riveted and reinforced steel 
imbedded in concrete, 18 and 20 ft. in diameter, 6 500-ft. long, 
and are buried within the rock and soil of the public park. 
Through them the water flows at a velocity of approximately 
15 ft. per sec. Just beneath the top of the cliff behind the 
power-house, within a long underground chamber, the arched 
roof of which supports the conduit above, 9-ft. diameter branches 
pass from the under side of the conduit through gate-valves 
and become the penstocks, each supplying water at 10 ft. per 
sec. to a single turbine. Each penstock has two expansion 
joints, a massive thrust anchorage in the power-house founda- 
tions, and an automatic relief-valve and a stone-catch dis- 
charging into the river. The 9-ft. valves are electrically oper- 
ated under distant control from the power-house below, and 


813 


: POWER DEVELOPMENT, 


NUNN 


1905.] 


“IOATY CICBEIN PUL ITY BAL] UO s[aAoT JayeM oATVL[OY— py “Ol 


JO}SM AO] OUIOT}Xo opqeqory™ 


‘elo 


“18 


E 
S 
4 
Ss 
ee 
26 
aol sreok OT ‘ZOGT-268L 
go tuour L[y}TOU yseMoT 
io g°. aaysnyour *ZOGL-SG8T 
Wa e tog STBOL OT 10y Uuuddyyy yx [oaoT wuoyT 
4 &. 
g 3 +. sreak OT ‘uvem 4[q}u0mryeqsty 
g Pls +] 2 
Y + ~ E ae z99 
Q Ie mel LIS zs, 6S 
zoatr taddn wo iY] qoaga pura oo Ky mia lz 5 <a + es 
qoyo Paya o1quqorg orqeqorg is cS eg = ze 3 | 3 
= ‘eS, 2 5 3 ane eng 
Sig s\e A 
it An mle 5 g 
ry a5 5 Ills f 
In ‘Se H a |\3 HS 
i> g ae +99 
Lo a. 
¥ 
VME a 9 
IV JAI 22039, 20}22A1, 7 688T ‘OT “Uee s a TOFU YSTY ouTerzTe ofquqory 
BL 39 PAYA 
edney Z ‘ON esney edney oyeyng esnvy 
LSIW SH1L 40 CIVN SYV.LNI GNVISI Nidsd5NG aluWa 3yxv1 VAMVddlHo _- 


‘UOIJOR.I4SUOD SulInG suol}e1s Surnqisia pur 3u1jeisus7)—'g “O1g 


2S anys endpanalae 
<a 


f Shp eer rey vex 


1905.] NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. 815 


are so constructed that all working parts may be removed for 
attention while the penstocks are in service. 
The spillway at the end of the conduit, to prevent water- 
hammer in case of sudden loss of load, is little more than the 
enlarged and elevated end of the main conduit equipped with 
an enclosed weir and underground discharge. Its peculiar 
features are its adjustable weir and helical discharge-tunnel 
which, after a steep initial pitch in the taper from the weir, 
follows a uniform grade and symmetrical curve while circling 
about to reach the river, thus preserving a smooth unbroken 
water column of highest velocity and least expenditure of 
energy. The purpose here is to prevent erosion, restricted 
flow, and excessive air-suction, the latter on account of the’ 


a Eas 


Fig. 9.—Sectional Detail through Generating and Distributing. Stations. 


danger of formation of ice from spray under forced circulation 
of air. : | 

The generators are of conventional horizontal-shaft type, 
three-phase, 25-cycle, and deliver 12000 volts at 187.5 rev. 
per min. The turbines are of Francis or inward-flow type, 
double, central-discharge or balanced twin turbines designed 
to deliver 12000 h.p. under 175-ft. head. Their shafts are 
24-in. maximum diameter and each carries two 78-in. cast-steel 
runners of ‘‘normal” reaction. Housings are of reinforced 
steel plate, 16 ft. in diameter, spiral in elevation and rectangular 
in plan. Gates are of the wicket or paddle type, and the ro- 
tating guides forming them are carried by shafts which project 
through stuffing-boxes to an external controlling mechanism, 
thus freeing the casings from the objectionable interior gate- 
rigging and leaving their approaches to the guides symmetrical 


816 NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. {June 19 


and open. While the velocities in housings and draft-tubes are 
high, corresponding losses are avoided by nicely modulated 
changes of both velocity and direction and by symmetrical 
and liberal curves free from abrupt angles or obstructing pro- 
jections. 

Of the 175-ft. head, 20 ft. is in the 10-ft. diameter draft- 
tubes, because the floor of the power-house has been elevated 
26 ft. above mean water level to provide for the excessive varia- 
tions to which the water in the gorge is subject. While bearings 
are self-oiling, all are equipped with water-cooling system, 
and for still greater insurance a piping system for the changing 


Fic. 10.—Main Conduit During Construction. 


of oil has been so connected that in emergency it is instantly 
available for forced lubrication. Believing that disorders of 
bearings and journals, like those of people, are usually the 
culmination of gradually increasing ailment, each bearing is 
supplied with an automatic record-making thermometer pro- 
viding the superintendent with a daily record, not only of the 
temperature of the bearing but also of the temperament of the 
attendant as well. 

Although entirely feasible to use the vertical-shaft turbine 
and although restricted space at the power-house requires 


Aemyidg [eorex pue roqurey) aateA ysno1yy uoryseg— {IT ‘91g 


818 NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. [June 19 


greatest floor economy, nevertheless horizontal units are em- 
ployed on account of their freedom from step-bearings, their 
higher efficiency, and their greater accessibility. While step- 
bearings in certain places are entirely successful, as long since 
proved by screw propellers and more recently by vertical steam 
turbines, yet at best they entail much auxiliary apparatus 
requiring especial care and frequent adjustment. With high- 
head turbines they have an uncertain record to be shunned 
wherever continuity of service is essential. 


Fic. 11b.—A 9-{t. Penstock Valve. 


To reduce load upon the step-bearing, the vertical unit iS 
usually of highest permissible speed. While efficiency at the 
generator is favored by this high speed, the effect upon the tur- 
bine is diametrically opposite and “usually many times greater. 
This is because highest efficiency and durability seem to require 
“normal” reaction—a radial relative direction of bucket 
entry—and narrowly limited relative dimensions of runner. 
At such reaction peripheral velocity of runner (the components 
of which—diameter and rotation—are inversely proportional) 
is fixed by head. At such relative dimensions power is pro- 


‘QUIGIN |, [BIUOZOP JO [reJaq UoHoag—'I “O1Y 


820 NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. [June 19 


portional to square of diameter; hence, inversely proportional 
to square of rotation. Increase of rotation, therefore, means 
disproportionately great decrease of power or abandonment 
of ideal reaction and relative dimensions. When carried to 
the extremes usual with vertical units, it results in inefficiently 
high reaction and reduced area of discharge, unfavorably abrupt 
changes of direction in buckets, and a wastefully distorted and 
overworked wheel. To such an extent is this distortion carried 
to meet special conditions that it is rare to find a high-head 
turbine possessing nearly the efficiency or durability possible 
if correctly proportioned. In the present case the speed selected 


Fic. 12b.—Detail of Gate and Mechanism. 


permits almost exact ‘‘normal ” reaction and ideal proportions 
without sacrifice at the generator. 

Gratifying accessibility has been obtained by compact ar- 
rangement of generators and turbines with ample clearances 
and good light, upon the main floor of the station and in full sight 
not only of the immediate attendant but also of the chief oper- 
ator from his post upon the gallery above. As explained, the 
entire gate-rigging is external, therefore accessible for lubrica- 
cation, adjustment, or repair. Excepting runners and gates, 
every moving part is in plain sight and, by the ready removal 
of a single ring, even the guides themselves are exposed for 
cleaning or replacing. This arrangement, in strong contrast 


1905.] NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. 821 


with that of the vertical type with its several floors, intervening 
stairs, and dark corners, will, it is believed, appeal to every 
power-house operator. 

In the general arrangement of the works, symmetry and 
centralization of control are predominant characteristics. The 
generating and distributing stations are parallel and nearly 
600-ft. apart with 260-ft. difference in elevation. On account 
of limited space the generating station is but 76-ft. wide, though 
when completed it will be nearly 1 000-ft. long. Down the 
center of this building, side by side in a single row, stand the 


lic. 13.—A Turbine Runner, 


generating units with turbines next their source of supply. 
The space between them and the rear wall is occupied by a 
gallery upon which stands the row of oil-pressure governors, 
each almost over the end bearing of its turbine. 

The distributing station, wider and shorter than the power- 
house, is divided into three longitudinal bays or five main 
sections. The narrow front bay contains the switches, bus- 
bars, etc., at generator pressure; the wider rear bay contains 
those at transmission pressure. Between these stretches the 
main middle bay divided transversely by a three-floor switch- 
board-section into two long transformer-rooms. The project- 
ing central section provides space for operating offices. Along 


822 NUNN: POWER DEVELOP: LENT. {June 19 


the center of these two rooms the transformers stand in groups 
of three corresponding in position and capacity to their re- 
spective generators. Thus similar apparatus is arranged in 
rows parallel one with another and with the generating units. 
At the generating station three inclined cable-tunnels, one 
already built, carrying clay ducts, begin at the rear wall beneath 
the gallery and extend up through the cliff and, as standard 
subway, on to the distributing station. The main cables, 
except as diverted by these tunnels, follow the shortest and 
most direct routes from generators to transformers. They do 


Fic. 14,—Swivel-Gates, Exposed by Removal of Cover Plate. 


not converge for the accommodation of switchboard at one or 
more centers where congestion, which in many installations 
causes the most disastrous accidents, prevents separation or 
adequate insulation. On the contrary they are laid quite re- 
gardless of switchboard, the switches and instrument tran- 
formers of which are then placed as required by the cables. 
Unit values, corresponding to the generators in capacity and 
position, are maintained throughout. Thus each generating 
unit has its individual cables, switches and switchboard, section 
of bus-bars, transformers, interrupters, and high-pressure 
switches complete to the transmission, enabling independent 


1905.] NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. 823 


operation as an isolated power-plant or, through the selector 
switches and duplicate sectional bus-bars the operation of all 
units in any combination of groups as readily and perfectly 
as their operation in parallel. To this end a unit length of dis- 
_tributing station of similar relative position is devoted to the 
circuit and apparatus corresponding to each generator. 

From the above it may be seen that the arrangement is in 


SN 


sissiseisiis! \ . (Sieisisiserereisis| 
ee Pee eee 


Fic. 15.—General Plan of Generating and Distributing Stations. 


parallel courses; that like apparatus is arranged in ‘TOWS or 
courses parallel with the long axis of the generating and dis- 
tributing stations ; that the main circuits and the unlike apparatus 
performing the successive functions of these circuits form 22 
courses transverse to the same, and that the courses of the two 
directions form, as it were,‘a rectangular or checker-board 
figure covering an area nearly 1 000-ft. square. The arrange- 


-uorrig SuTyerauen Yysnosyy UoLoeS—'9T “ONT 


pen + Wagar ey 
ey ‘ went 


wr 
4 


4 


| 
I 


iT 


aos 


1905.] NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. 825 


ment of these courses in logical sequence provides the short 
and direct route for the main cables previously mentioned. 
Such symmetry of arrangement, while difficult to attain ina 
crowded plant or at points of congestion, is of marked value 
- in emergency, especially in a plant of many units, and becomes 
vital when the units are of such dimensions that the accidental 
crippling of one costs the output of many smaller plants. 
Where the cable tunnels commence, the power-house and 
gallery are widened toward the cliff. Immediately above the 
tunnel entrance are the main generator switches, and on one side 
the duplicate turbine-driven exciters and their governors, and 
on the other the motor-actuated main field rheostats. In front 
of the switches are a few panels of switchboard carrying exciter 
trheostats and switches, controls for actuating penstock valves, 


Fic. 17.—Section through Transformer Room, 


and the necessary circuits and apparatus for a limited local 
distribution. Relief-valves and small drainage-pumps are the 
only operating machinery beneath the main floor, while upon. 
it, in addition to the generating units, there are only duplicate 
electrically driven pumps supplying the storage-tank and trans- 
former cooling-coils at the distributing station. For air circula- 
tion and ventilation and to avoid dampness from spray as well 
as to insure cool generators in hot weather, a cold-air supply 
to each generator is provided from a sub-floor chamber com- 
municating with external shafts and heated air escapes through 
large roof ventilators. 

At the distributing station the low-pressure bay contains 
upon the main floor the 12 000-volt automatic oil circuit-breakers 


826 NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. (June 19 


in double column and, in the chamber beneath, on the sec- 


tional duplicate bus-bars and their immediate connections. 
In the transformer-rooms the transformers stand in pits six feet 
below main floor level, and parallel with them adjacent to the 
high-pressure bay are corresponding pits for static interrupters 
or other protective apparatus. Beneath both and between 


Fic. 18.—Plan of Central Portion of Distributing Station. 


their foundations are accommodated the several systems of 
water-, oil- and drain-piping, and the main cable-ways to the 
transformers above. Each transformer is fitted with a record- 
making thermometer giving the continuous history of internal 
economy. 

The switchboard section occupying the center of the dis- 
tributing station has four floors of which the basement serves 
as a center for the piping systems and gives room for conduits 


f 
a 


ai 


ee 


1905.] NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. 827 


and cableways for wiring. On the main and the mezzanine 
or gallery floors, marble slabs carry record-making and inte- 
grating instruments, terminal boards with fuses for the control 
cables, and other adjuncts of the switchboard above. Upon 
the upper floor is the switchboard and control-chamber, and 
here instrument-stands and control-pedestals supplant both the 
conventional marble slabs and the later bench-board. Each of 
the 22 instrument-stands, which are arranged approximately in 
a semicircle about a central point, corresponds to a definite 
unit, carries nine indicating instruments, and faces its 12-point 
control-pedestal. Doors upon the four sides lead to balconies 
in the four other divisions of the building of which this room 
is the center; those at the sides to balconies extending the full 
length of the transformer-rooms. 


psig 
i i] e 
t SORIA ri 


Fic. 19.—Section through Control Chambers, 


Centralization of responsibility and authority, at defined 
points within the immediate personal care of a minimum num- 
ber of chief operators, is, next to simplicity of arrangement, 
the prime requisite of efficiency of organization and of economy 
of operation. It is frequently possible so to arrange small 
plants of a few units as to centralize ata single operator, but 
with a plant of this scope that result is manifestly impossible. 
Two alternatives are then open; the division of the plant into 
several parts, each about its sub-center constituting virtually 
a complete plant in itself and the whole dependent upon success- 
ful cooperation for unity of result; or classification and centrali- 
zation of responsibility according to kind. In this case the 
latter has been adopted, and notwithstanding that the number 


‘uorjeyg Buyyesousy Jo worjoag ysIty—UPId—'0G “ON 


Bae 


2 


1 
at 


EL 


: = 
faa ial 
——— 


= 
——— 
TS 
a 
oe 
feel 
eo 
= 
= 
acea 
= 
i 
rE) 
== 
rT 
= 
a= 
[J 
a a 
feat 
a ae 
= 
= 


Naa 
am CUISCUS HEI El 


AHA HAA HAA: =: 
HOO OA s:-s 
ie 
Noten 
Heo 


Fic, 21b. 


Fic. 21a. 


Compartments and Barriers. 


Cable Bell, 


830 NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. [June 19. 


of units and aggregate of power involved have opposed high 
merit in this respect, a promising result has been obtained. 
The concentration within a single room of all instruments 
and control—the brain of electrical operation—provides the 
operator in a quiet and secluded place both full information, 
and perfect control of every electrical circuit and situation of 
the system, and enables him to stop, start, regulate, or syn- 
chronize each unit; to throw its output through its transformers 
to its transmission as if from a complete isolated plant or to 
throw it upon either bus-bar while supplying its transformers 
from the same or the other bus-bar. The location of this room 
high up at the geometrical center of the distributing station 


(ERCoa) ECE IBREEEE 
IDdpavepapene bt It 7 i | 


| itt Ks it 
cia i 


il 


Sth eae ee. = 


Fic. 22.—Front and Rear of Bus-Bar Structure and Switches. 


places the operator at a point of vantage surrounded by four 
classes of apparatus. Thus located he may with few steps 
survey his entire field; look down upon switches, bus-bars, and 
arresters of the high-tension; see at a glance every low-pressure 
switch, or watch trouble in either transformer-room. 

At the generating station the corresponding vantage-point 
is the gallery, where on one side the operator has the motor- 
driven rheostats and a few paces distant the commutators and 
governors of the exciters, and on the other side in plain sight 
the row of main governors with their adjuncts; while from the 
little switchboard before him he has electrical control of pen- 
stock gates and, when necessary, manual control of turbine 
speeds, exciter pressure, and field charge. Moreover from this 


1905.] : NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. | 831 


position he can see all generators and turbines and, by signal 
at least, can direct his assistants; little, in fact, is likely to call 
him to the main floor unless it be an occasional refractory 
journal or collector brush. 

In accomplishing the centralization of switchboard simul- 
taneously with the broad and symmetrical distribution of main 
circuits and switches already described, distant electrical meas- 
urement and control have necessarily been employed to an 
unusual extent. Pressure and current transformers, essential 
to the many instruments and relays beyond those necessary at 
generating station and high-pressure room, are mounted in the 
bus-bar chamber. The innumerable and long conductors, 
necessary to extend over the intervening distance from those 
to the many instruments of the switchboard and to convey back 
the power from relays and control-buttons to automatic 
switches, have been gathered into substantial cables and laid 
in metal conduit. 

The basement of the central bay along the side next the 
low-pressure side forms a wiring-chamber supporting a railway 
track upon the main floor above. Through this wiring-chamber 
transverse to the general direction of the main cables and open- 
ing at its center into the control section, these cables and those 
for both continuous and alternating current local service are 
carried into the basement beneath the control section and, 
rising through the recording floors, end at terminal boards 
below their respective instruments and relays. Carried thus 
far, distant control has been still further applied by the use 
of motor-driven rheostats for both generators and exciters, 
electrically operated circuit-breakers for field circuits, and speed- 
controllers for governors whereby, as previously mentioned, 
turbines may be started, stopped or regulated from the control 
chamber as well as from the gallery at the generating station. 

The isolation of electrical apparatus and conductors by in- 
combustible walls or barriers ageinst spread of oil or arcs, for 
protection from fire and from each other, is of importance pro- 
portional to the power and investment involved. Neglect of 
this precaution has caused many of the most disastrous elec- 
trical accidents and has recently taught several bitter lessons. 
Some rather extreme measures here taken for its more com- 
plete application may be of interest. The five sections or 
rooms, heretofore mentioned, forming the distributing station, 

are of concrete-and-steel fireproof construction, separated by 


832 NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. [J une 19 


full-height masonry walls with intervening air-spaces. No 
windows and but few doorways (these latter protected by fire- 
proof doors generally closed) penetrate these walls. 

The transformer-pits already mentioned, each containing a 
bank of three transformers, are isolated and extended to a 
height of 23 ft. by masonry fire-walls. Each individual trans- 
former is in a boiler-iron casing designed to withstand 150 lb. 
per sq. in. explosive pressure. Each case communicates through 
an 8-in. pipe from its top with a special drain for free vent in 
case of accident, as proposed before the INsTITUTE some time 
ago; but here the supply is cold oil instead of water as then 
proposed. With these precautions it is believed that the 
transformers have been surrounded with an environment un- 
precedented as to safety. 

The power from each generator is conducted to its switch 
through three single-conductor braided cables carried by line- 
insulators and isolated by shelf-barriers in a subway beneath 
the floor. From the switches the three conductors pass to a 
bell chamber where between individual barriers they are united 
into two parallel three-conductor lead-covered and armored 
cables before entering the tile ducts of the cable tunnel. Around 
the few bends at manholes each cable remains always within 
its compartment, between horizontal or vertical barriers as re- 
quired. At each point where a circuit enters the distributing 
station, a mamhole maintaining the same segregation and com- 
municating with the bus-bar chamber is provided for the change 
from three-conductor to single-conductor cable. After entering 
the building the cables pass between vertical barriers as before, 
beneath and through the floor to the switches above. 

Bus-bar structures are composed entirely of concrete with 
mortised reinforced-concrete shelf-barriers between bus-bars. 
Connecting leads pass through the wall forming the center of 
the structure, and thence in compartments formed by vertical 
barriers of the same material, directly up to the switches above. 
Instrument transformers are also installed within similar in- 
dividual compartments and these whole structures like those 
of the switches are closed by fireproof doors. Control cables 
are laid in metal conduit throughout their courses except in 
the wiring-chamber beneath the track where they are arranged 
upon metal shelf-pans filled with dry sand into which connecting 
conduits dip. 

Of the features here presented, it is believed that the type 


1905.] NUNN: POWER DEVELOPMENT. 833 


of intake, the symmetry of arrangement, centralization of con- 
trol, and almost perfect isolation of apparatus represent, to 
some degree at least, distinct advances in power-plant design; 
and while few works of such dimensions may be built for many 
years, if ever, it is possible that in a way some of the purposes 
and methods thus briefly presented may, until superseded by 
the next advance, be of some service as suggestions to other 
designing engineers of similar works. The unusual, even enor- 
mous volumes, both of water and of power, involved not only 
in the individual units but also in the aggregate, have presented 
new problems heretofore unprovided-for in standard sizes of 
apparatus, thus necessitating the development of larger ca- 
pacities and the creation of new types. Hence the work of 
designing and building has been burdened with incessant test, 
re-design, and adaptation unknown in more conventional 
engineering. Therefore, it is believed that upon no similar 
work in this country, since that of the Niagara Falls Power 
Company years ago in the infancy of electrical power, has de- 
volved such a burden of investigation, invention, and original 
design. 

It has been suggested by an officer of the InstiTuTE that any 
account of this work would be incomplete without mention of 
those mainly responsible for it. Justice to allis here impossible, 
but afew may benamed. Mr. O. B. Suhr has from the beginning 
been in charge of the engineer corps and to him is largely due the 
harmony of design. Mr. V. G. Converse, Mr. C. H. Mitchell, 
and. Mr J. B. Bailey are chiefs of the electrical, mechanical, 
and field departments respectively, and Mr. J. R. Harsch of 
the clerical work of the engineers. But more than all else in 
the establishment of this great and daring enterprise stands out 
the attitude maintained toward their engineers by Messrs. J. J. 
Albright and Edmund Hayes, the originators and majority 
owners, who, in strong contrast with the harassing interference 
by which uninformed investors frequently spoil the best efforts 
of engineers, have in this case given not only absolute freedom 
of action but also steadfast support. 


834 ~ POWER DEVELOPMENT. {June 22 


Discussion oN ‘‘ THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ONTARIO POWER 
Cie 


Gano S. Dunn: On page 812 of Mr. Nunn’s paper, he 
assumes from calculations of Lake Erie’s level for nearly 50 
vears that the elevations of the intake have been so selected that 
at extreme low water and most adverse conditions a full supply 
of water should always be obtained. While he has been speak- 
ing, it has occurred to me to inquire what view the promoters 
and owners of this great development at Niagara Falls take of 
the possible withdrawal of the water at other places, such as the 
tapping of the great lakes at Chicago. The outlet of the great 
lakes, it is well known, used to be at Chicago, and thé divide 
there is only 14 or 15 ft. high. Recently with the reversal of the 
flow of the Chicago River to give that city a deep-sea waterway 
and a pure water supply from the lake there has been taken 
out of the great lakes and consequently robbed from Niagara 
about 8 per cent. of the water that formerly went over the 
falls; and the Chicago people are talking of making still greater 
withdrawals of water from the lakes. There is a great induce- 
ment to do this, because in addition to other uses the water 
already taken is furnishing 40000 h.p. The question 
is more than a State one, since it is outside of the territory 
of New York: it is an international one. I should like to know 
what view the engineers take of the possible diversion of this 
water which would make the levels much lower than would 
be necessary to run the plants. 

W. E. Gotpssporoucn: One thing that has impressed me 
particularly in connection with the description of the new 
plant at Niagara, is the fact that one man apparently can 
supervise and control the commercial delivery of 200 000 h.p. 
A line drawn from the upper end of Goat Island out 
into the center of the stream indicates the possibility of a 
wall being constructed in such a position as to deflect somewhat 
more than one-half of the water of the Niagara River over 
toward the American side, thus giving the Americans the 
greater share of the available water. In considering the 3 
installations on the Canadian side, the company that Mr. Nunn 
represents has evidently looked well to the future in establishing 
their intake so far up stream. With the wall that 1 mention 
thrown out into the river, any water passing the extreme end 
of it will necessarily have to distribute itself over the whole 
bed of the river, and I question whether or not the 2 power 
plants that are situated further down stream on the Canadian 
side might not if such a wall were built, be left with little or no 
available source of water supply. Of course this all depends 
upon the actual head conditions that prevail, regarding which 
I am not advised, but concerning which Mr. Nunn may be 
able to enlighten us. 

H. G. Srorr: I think from the slight knowledge I have of 
the operation of water power plants, that the most interesting 


1905.] DISCUSSION AL ASHEVILLE. 835 


feature of the future will be whether the provisions made in 
the intake, the forebay, the spill, and the screen-way, will 
take care of the ice. That is the great trouble with nearly all 
our Northern water powers, as the cost of keeping ice from the 
power plants is probably equal to the entire operating expenses 
per annum. That gives an idea of what a problem it is 
for about 3 months in the year. The chief point of differ- 
ence between the plant described by Mr. Nunn and that of 
the Niagara Falls Power Co. is the location of the generators. 
The generators here are located at the bottom, practically 
at the water level, whereas in the plant of the Niagara 
Power Co. they are practically on the ground level and connected 
to the*water-wheels by long vertical shafts. Otherwise the 
switchboard apparatus and diagrams are now approximately 
standard work with some particulars, perhaps, a little in ad- 
vance. 

P.H.Tuomas: This paper affords an opportunity of studying 
the general tendency in the development of our large water-power 
plants. The engineers who laid out this system have had the 
benefit of the designs and experience of the Niagara Falls Power 
Co., as well as wide experience of their own in high-tension work, 
and it may therefore be assumed that the differences bétween the 
plans of the old company and those of the new indicate the direc- 
tion in which development is tending. The most notable step 
taken is the isolation of units and the subdivision of the plant 
into what is practically a series of small plants, any one being 
able to operate in spite of accidents to the other. For instance, 
instead of carrying all cables through a single duct, or placing all 

_ transformers in a single room, under which arrangement an acci- 
dent to one is likely to interfere with the operation of all, the 
generators, cables, transformers, and switches are installed in, 
isolated groups. It is conceivable that the utter destruction of 
a third of the plant might not render unserviceable any con- 
siderable portion of the remainder. 

C. A. GreentpcE: In central New York there is a small 

_ plant of 7 500 h.p. operating under a heap of 265 Eee ne 1Out 

turbines are of the vertical-shaft, outward-flow, reaction type, 
direct connected to revolving-field, 60-cycle generators. With 
the exception of Niagara Falls this is the only installation of 
this kind in the country. Five-eighths of the weight of the 
revolving parts are supported by the water pressure, and the 

remainder. is carried by a flat step-bearing through which 4 

gallons of oil per minute are circulated under a head of about 

30 ft. During the last 3 years this plant has been in almost 

constant operation with an average load for 1903 of 65 per cent., 
and for 1904 of 70 per cent. of the rated capacity. Thus far 
the step-bearings have given no trouble; in fact there has been 
little occasion for examining them. ge 

The first wheels installed were of foreign design, but after 
being in. operation for about a year they proved unsuitable 


Ct on 


836 POWER DEVELOPMENT. [June 22 


and were replaced 2 years ago by wheels of American design. 
Although they have been in almost constant operation the tool- 
marks are still visible, proving that under this head a vertical- 
shaft reaction turbine can be worked satisfactorily. The only 
place where any wear takes place is in such ports as have been 
partly clogged by pieces of wood, which causes a high velocity 
in the open portion. These wheels showed on test an efficiency 
of at least 76 per cent. at full gate. For driving the exciters 
the reaction-type of turbine has not proved satisfactory, because 
of the small size of ports, and turbines of this kind have been 
replaced by impulse-wheels of the Gerard type. With these 
wheels a roller step-bearing is used, which under 24-hr. test 
without oil has showed an increase in temperature of only 16° 
fahr. 

P.N. Nunn: Ithas been said upon excellent authority that 
the rights now granted to use water from Niagara River involve 
about 25 per cent. of the normal flow. Less than half of this 
amount has so far been utilized. The variation in flow from 
week to week, sometimes from day to day, is nearly 40 per cent., 
and that variation is hardly noticed by tourists. If 40 per cent. 
variation. does not materially injure the scenic effect, an ad- 
ditional 25 per cent. for power purposes cannot be very serious. 

The collecting wall, which it has been suggested should be 
built from the head of Goat Island, need not materially affect 
the Canadian power-plants, because there is a natural trend 
of the river directly toward the intakes of those works which 
seems to become more pronounced each year, 

While the works of the Ontario Power Company have been 
built very substantially, yet it can hardly be said that they 
have been built for all time. Scientific progress has been such 
for the last 50 years that there is no assurance that electric 
plants will be in existence 200 years hence, or that water-powers 
will be needed. 

While the general arrangement of the plant is such as to enable 
operation with minimum attendance, and while the distant 
control has been so arranged as to centralize in one chief elec- 
trical operator at the distributing station the responsibility 
and control of electrical conditions throughout the entire plant, 
it does not follow that this operator will never need assistance. 
Moreover, the mechanical operator at the generating station, 
while. free from all electrical manipulation, will always require 
sufficient assistants to maintain perfect mechanical conditions. 

The difference in the location of the generators, mentioned 
by Mr. Stott, is perhaps a controlling factor in the whole design; 
and it is possible that the necessary departure from conventional 
lines of development has materially contributed to the general 
result by requiring distant control and more liberal room at 
the distributing station. 

There has been no purpose in the paper to disparage the 
turbines of other plants. Vertical wheels may be made entirely 
satisfactory. The purpose has been to point out the greater 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 837 


difficulties and dangers incident to the use of vertical wheels, 
both in efficiency and operation. The conditions at Trenton 
Falls are unusually favorable; the head is high and the units 
are small. Results would have been different had units several 
times larger been employed. 

Puitip P. Barton (by letter): The relative importance 
ascribed by Mr. Nunn to the structures erected at the head- 
works for the protection of the plant against ice indicates that 
this subject has received careful study by the engineers of 
the Ontario Power Company, The ice problem is one that 
has been encountered by the writer every winter for a number 
of years, and for this reason he has been especially interested 
in the solution proposed by the engineers of the Ontario Power 
Company. As stated by Mr. Nunn, the Niagara River is filled 
for many weeks every winter with floating ice. The forming 
of the material designated by Mr. Nunn as “ mush-ice,’” and 
which is also in various forms elsewhere designated as anchor-ice, 
frazil, or slush-ice, is not confined to the rapids. It is formed 
in the upper river and in Lake Erie whenever the temperature 
drops several degrees below the freezing point, and whenever 

there is a snow fall of any magnitude. This material floats 

down the river in great masses and penetrates wherever water 
flows with any considerable velocity. It is only in compara- 
tively still water that it remains at the surface. It is the 
opinion of the writer that the safeguards provided by the On- 
tario Power Co. will protect quite effectively against floating 
cake-ice; but his experience with Niagara ice conditions cautions 
him to beware of predicting the probable efficacy of these works 
with respect to slush-ice. He is inclined to believe, however, 
that little trouble will be experienced from this source in pro- 
ducing amounts of power that are likely to be delivered com- 
mercially from this plant for some years to come. If trouble 
does develop, probably it will be most serious during northeaster- 
ly storms when the wind forces floating ice towards the Canadian 
shore, and at the same time lowers the water in the river by 
driving it towards the west end of Lake Erie. 

In general, it seems likely that the power developments on 
the Canadian side of the river will have less trouble from ice 
than those on the American side, for the reasons: (1), that the 
prevailing southwesterly winds tend to force all floating ice 
towards the American shore; (2), that the greater depth and 
velocity of the water sweeping past the intakes of the Canadian 
plants afford a far better opportunity to divert and get rid of 
ice that may be encountered. In the plans for the Canadian 
power developments, the ice problem has been recognized from 
the outset as a serious factor, and all of these plans embody 
well considered provisions for meeting the ice conditions that 
are expected to arise. The adequacy of these provisions will 
depend largely on the correctness of the assumptions made 
as to the conditions of the problem. On the American side of 
the river, the ice conditions affecting the plants of the Niagara 


838 POWER DEVELOPMENT. [June 22 


Falls Power Company could not be foreseen when the plants 
were located and no plans for dealing effectively with them were 
carried out until the actual problem was developed in concrete 
form in the commercial operating of the plant. Probably 
much useless expenditure was thus avoided. However this 
may be, the actual solving of the ice problem of the Niagara 
Falls Power Company has been a process of carrying out year 
by year plans and methods suggested by experience as best 
adapted to meet the conditions known to exist. The result 
of this process has been that for a comparatively small expendi- 
ture methods of protection against ice in and about the intake 
of the Niagara Falls Power Company have been adopted 
that have brought about almost complete immunity, for 
several winters past, from interruptions of service due to ice. 
This period includes the severest winter on record for many years. 

The primary causes of the ice difficulties experienced at the 
plant of the Niagara Falls Power Company were: (1), the absence 
of any effective means of disposing of ice that might come 
into the inlet canal and, (2), the shallowness of the river over 
a considerable area adjacent to the canal entrance. An exten- 
sive field of solid ice always forms in the river adjacent to the 
head of the canal, and accumulations of slush-ice drawn under 
this ice field by the water flowing into the canal formed ice 
jams, which, if left undisturbed, restricted seriously the flow 
of water into the canal. The opening of channels through these 
jams resulted in filling the canal and forebay with ice that 
could not readily be disposed of, and it therefore clogged the 
turbines and at times seriously diminished their output. 

The construction of a vertical shaft at the lower end of the 
canal, leading to the discharge tunnel and equipped at the 
top with a weir gate opening from the canal, provided a very 
efficient spillway for disposing of ice and has effectively over- 
come the first difficulty. The second has been relieved by 
judicious dredging in the river adjacent to the canal entrance. 
Suitable barrier and deflecting booms, moreover, have been 
constructed in the river. These measures, with the applica- 
tion of methods of handling the ice situations that arise from 
day to day, developed by experience, have resulted, as stated 
above, in almost complete immunity in recent winters from 
interruptions to service due to ice, and in reducing to a com- 
paratively small amount the annual cost of handling the ice. 
Their success, with the plant loaded to 80 per cent. of its 
ultimate output, encourages the belief that with very small 
additional expenditure for protective measures, the constantly 
increasing and ultimate load of the plants can be carried with 
a degree of continuity equally satisfactory. 

The solution of this ice problem, it will be observed, is being 
worked out by meeting conditions actually experienced. The 
results of a Sdlution devised and carried out before the local 
conditions have been developed by actual ‘éxperience will be 
awaited with much interest. ee eae FRE eG 


A paper presented at the 2d Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Coppright 1905 By A. I. E. E. 


A NEW CARBON FILAMENT. 


BY JOHN W. HOWELL. 


I have the pleasure of presenting to you some data on a 
new carbon filament, which has characteristics so differing 
from those of any previously known filament as to seem to 
indicate that it is a new form of carbon. Beside being very 
interesting on account of its physical characteristics, this 
filament is of considerable value on account of its much better 
life or efficiency, as compared with the carbon filaments here- 
tofore known. This new filament is the result of work done 
in the Research Laboratory of the General Electric Company, 
and in the laboratory of the Lamp Works, at Harrison, N. J. 

In briefest outline, the new characteristics of the filament 
may be said to be due to the proper application of excessively 
high temperatures to the ordinary carbon filament. The value 
of the product is determined by the conditions under which 
the high temperatures are applied. 

It is well known that an ordinary incandescent filament in an 
evacuated lamp may be heated to excessive temperatures by 
the application of high current without producing any bene- 
ficial change in the filament. To produce the effects described 
in this paper the heat is externally applied to treated filaments 
at atmospheric pressures. The simple application of the high- 
est attainable temperatures to the plain carbonized cellulose 
fibre, 7.¢., the so-called ‘‘ filament base,” is incapable of 
producing any considerable change in the filament. This high 
temperature treatment of the base is, however, a beneficial 
step in the process here described. 


839 


840 HOWELL: NEW CARBON FILAMENT. [June 19 


Before describing the new process, it may be well to recall. 


the steps by which the standard filaments are made. A solu- 
tion of cellulose is squirted through a die into a liquid that 
hardens the cellulose. The resulting fibre is dried, then shaped 
into the desired form for the finished filament and heated in 
a muffle until carbonized. In this process the highest tem- 
perature of a gas-furnace is employed. The product at this 
point is called a “ base filament.’ The base filaments are 
usually separately heated by a current passed through them 
while they are surrounded by an atmosphere of hydrocarbon 
vapor, and in this way a coat or shell of graphite is deposited 
upon them. They are then said to be treated filaments. The 
best quality of standard carbon incandescent lamps of to-day 
owe their superiority to the use of treated filaments. 

In attempting to graphitize carbon filaments it was discov- 
ered that treated filaments undergo very remarkable changes 
when subjected to the highest possible temperature of an elec- 
tric resistance furnace. The furnace consisted of a carbon 
tube, held at the ends by large water-cooled copper clamps; 
the tube was imbedded in powdered carbon to prevent its com- 
bustion. The filaments were packed in small, cylindrical 
carbon boxes, which were fed into the heated tube. The tem- 
perature was usually between 3000 and 3700° cent. 

Under such firing the ordinary treated filament changes in 
appearance; its graphite coating looks as though it had been 
melted, and its specific resistance is greatly reduced. The 
resistance of one of these filaments, measured at ordinary 
temperature, may be reduced as much as 80% by the firing. 

The curves representing the resistance at different tempera- 
tures are also remarkable. Fig. 1 shows curves of resistance 
and temperature of a regular base filament, a base filament 
fired, a regular treated filament, a treated filament fired, a 
shell of regular treated filament, and a fired shell. 

The resistance in ohms is plotted against the temperature, 
as indicated by the percentage relation of the pressure on the 
filament to the normal pressure at which the filament has an 
efficiency of 3.1 watts per candle. 

The curves show a more rapid fall in resistance of the base 
filament after firing, but little change in the character of the 
curve. 

The change produced in the treated shell by firing is very 
great, the cold resistance being reduced from 1000 to 200 ohms, 


r 


1905.] HOWELL: NEW CARBON FILAMENT. 841 


.while the great change in the character of the curve of the fired 
shell brings the hot resistance of the two shells nearly together. 

The resistance curve of a fired treated filament depends 
upon the relative thicknesses of base and coating and upon the 
_ temperature of firing. Figs. 2 and 3 show curves of filaments 


~ 2100 


— FILAMENT 


FIRED BASE 


be 


ee 


500 —- 
SHELL OF| TREATED 
FILAMENT 
SHEUL OF TREATED) FIRED 


TREATED |FILAMENT 


TREATED AND|FIRED 


200 | : =F 


10 2 #2 40 50 60 0 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 


PER CENTS OF 3.1 WATTS PER CANDLE PRESSURE 


fired at five different temperatures and of a similar filament 
that has not been fired. In Fig. 3 the reistances are shown 
in percentages of the cold resistances, and in Fig. 2 the actual 
resistances are shown. 

These filaments were heated in the carbon-tube resistance 


842 HOWELL: NEW CARBON FILAMENT. [June 19 
closed in a cylindrical carbon box, placed 
left open for observation. 


btained by looking 


furnace. They were en 
inside the tube, one end of which was 
An indication of the temperature was © 


Fig.2. 
600 + | | | 


ol re EE 


Bais | | == 


} 


: 


eee 


30, 40 50-60 70-80 90 «100 
OF PRESSURE GIVING 3.1 WATTS PER CANDLE. 


6 = 
i Pie he 


0. 20 
PER CENTS 


directly into the open’ end of the tube at the box holding’ the 
filaments, and. holding in the line of vision the filament of an 
ordinary 50-volt lamp, the temperature of which was adjusted 


1905.] HOWELL: NEW CARBON FILAMENT. 843 


until the filament became invisible against the incandescent 
carbon box. ‘The pressure on the lamp was then observed and 
the box of filaments taken out. | 

Curve No. 1 is the resistance curve of a regular treated filament. 


i=} 

7 a Gl 6 Wea Pie 

> bon 
prs: { 
| | 


T 
140 


130 


a 
120 


110 


100 


90 


80: 


PER CENTS OF PRESSURE GIVING 3,1 WATTS PER CANDLE, 


70 


Up 
60 - 


50 


40 


8 
R 
tee, 3 

. 

> S S So So 

Be eR 2 Ragess es 


aan! 
"SONVLSISSY G100 4O SLN3O Yad 


Curve No. 2 is the curve of a similar filament heated in the 
tube to a temperature corresponding to the temperature of a 
carbon filament operating at 153% of its normal, pressure, or 
at 125 ‘candles for a normally 16- -candle-power lamp. 


— 


844 HOWELL: NEW CARBON FILAMENT. [June 19 


Curve No. 3 is the curve of a filament fired at a temperature 
corresponding to the temperature of a lamp at 161% of its nor- 
mal pressure, or at 163 candles. 

Curve No. 4, 183% of normal pressure, or at 230 candles. 

Curve No. 5, 200% of normal pressure, or at 280 candles, for 
a 16-candle-power lamp. 

Curve No. 6 is the curve of a filament heated hotter than 
No. 5. The temperature was not measured by this method 
for fear of breaking the comparison lamp. 

An attempt was made to measure the temperatures by 
means of an optical pyrometer (Wanner) which indicated tem- 
peratures up to 3700° cent. at the highest heats. 

Fig. 4 shows the resistance curve of a filament made from a 
thin base having quite a thick treatment; this shows a resistance 
increasing to 250 per cent. of its cold resistance. 

The change in the resistance curve of this coating from 
negative to positive seems to be due, in part at least, to the ac- 
tion upon the shell of some substance driven out of the base 
filament by the high temperature. This is indicated by the 
considerable change in the curve of a treated fired filament 
produced by heating the base filament to the same high tem- 
perature before it was treated and then reheated. 

Fig. 5 shows resistance curves of carbons fired at the same 
temperature after treating, but with the base fired at different 
temperatures before treating. The base filament in Curve A 
was unfired; in B, C. D, and E the base was fired at successively 
higher temperatures. 

It will be observed that the curves made from filaments, the 
bases of which have been heated to high temperatures before 
being treated, are much less positive than the others. The con- 
clusion that the effect is produced by material being driven 
out of the base seems to be borne out by the fact that during 
the preliminary heating of the base at high temperatures it loses 
practically all of its mineral ash constituents, and also by the 
fact that, if some of the elements that the base loses in its high 
heating be separaiely placed in the furnace with the treated 
filaments, effects are produced similar to those observed when 
the base has not been previously heated. ; 

The effect of some agency beside heat is also indicated by 
the fact that the lamp filament used in the temperature ob- 
servations, although maintained at the same temperature as 
the filaments in the furnace, and: for a sufficiently long time, 


1905.] HOWELL: NEW CARBON FILAMENT. 845 


showed no indications of such a change as was produced in the 
filaments in the furnace. 

The appearance of a filament fired both before and after 
treating is very different from that of one fired after treat- 


Z 


_ PER CENTS OF COLD RESISTANCE 
cs 
S 


0 1 2 #230 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 


PER CENTS OF PRESSURE GIVING 3.1 WATTS PER CANDLE 


ing only. The former has a slightly pebbled appearance, as 
seen through a microscope, and a rather dull-gray color. 

The single-fired treated filament is generally very much blis- 
tered, many blisters extending outward a distance greater than 
the diameter of the filament. These blisters indicate an out- 


846 HOWELL: NEW CARBON FILAMENT. [June 19 


flow of gas from the base when the shell was in ‘a soft condition. 
The surface of the filaments is highly lustrous. aie 

The specific-resistance of the highly heated coating (measured) 
has been found to be as low as 0.00005 ohms per cubic 
centimeter which is very much lower than the specific resist- 
ance of any other known form of carbon or graphite. 

Its specific gravity is also much higher than it was before 
heating. 

Its changed nature is also indicated by its toughness and 
flexibility. The coating of a double-fired filament may be 
pulled off in short tubular sections, which if pressed flat, will 


7, 
NI 


aE 
aN 
aN 
eae 
pas 
Be 
oe 
ae 
Ei 
aed 
aes 


He 
R 
1s) 


3 


40 60 80 oO 


PRESSURES IN PER CENTS OF PRESSURE GIVING 3.1 WATTS PER CANDLE 


Ee 
spring back to their original form when the pressure is removed. 
The same coating before being fired is comparatively brittle, 
and will break with very little pressure. On account of’ the 
positive resistance curve and physical characteristics of these 
filaments, they have been given the name “ metallized filaments.” 

The treated coating on filaments, even before firing, is graph- 
ite, as determined by the chemical test established by Berthe- 
lot—the production of graphitic acid (a yellow insoluble sub- 
stance) when treated with a mixture of anhydrous nitric acid 
and potassium chlorate. Ordinary carbon is dissolved by these 
reagents. The coating on the treated filament has also: the 
greasy feel of graphite, and gives the characteristic ‘mark: of 


“-graprite on white paper.“ ') mane a} EO cenyarerb: ong 


. 


_ 1905.) HOWELL: NEW CARBON FILAMENT. . 847 


After being heated to high temperatures in the electric re- 
sistance furnace these characteristics continue and the chemical 
action is much more marked. 

.Metallized filaments blacken the lamp-bulb very much less 
than ordinary filaments. This may be due.to the removal 
from the former of practically all the mineral. ash and other 
impurities,. or it may be due to the changed character a the 
carbon itself. "9 
Bamboo, coated by dipping in a solution of asphalt, is altered 
by firing, the coating changing to graphite and giving the char- 
acteristic positive curve. 

Silk dipped in a sugar solution also gives the same roan 

‘The base of a metallized filament, from which the treated 
coating has been removed, when mounted in a lamp has been 
_.found to give the resistance curve of a fired base:,. Pieces. of 
the coating, about 1.5-in. long, mounted in lamps, ‘have been 
found to give the strongly: positive. resistance curve .that’ is 
characteristic of the metallized filament. These observations 
show that the change is practically all in the treated coating 
and not in the base. wey an 

Metallized filaments, as. above described, are much more 
stable at high temperatures than ordinary carbon filaments. 

The most éffective carbon filament lamp now in general use 
operates at 3.1 watts per candle and under accurate test con- 
ditions gives a useful life (to 80%. of its initial candle-power) 

of about 500 hours. At the present time metallized filaments 
that give the same useful life at about 2.5 watts per candle 
are being produced with a fair degree of uniformity. N 


848 A NEW CARBON FILAMENT. [June 22 


Discussion on ‘‘ A NEw CARBON FILAMENT.” 


H. N. Porrer: The lamp here presented is the challenge 
of carbon to the many rivals that are clamoring for recog- 
nition. It is to be regretted that no curve is given showing 
the change of candle-power during the life of the lamp, as this 
is a most important characteristic and one wherein a difference 
from the ungraphitized filament might be expected. The 
curves given are not in such form as to show whether this graph- 
ite filament is longer than the filaments of lamps now in use or 
not. 

The chemistry here concerned does not seem to be novel. 
The changes occurring appear to be those characteristic of graph- 
itization. This much-studied molecular change depends on 
several factors; the physical structure of the carbon to be 
graphitized, the temperature reached, the duration of the high 
temperature, and the presence or absence of elements other 
than carbon. The presence of foreign elements promotes 
graphitization—a distinction recognized by Acheson as dis- 
tinguished from Moissan, and an explanation presumably of 
the observed difference in the behavior of the filament in the 
pyrometer lamp, and the similar filament in the electric furnace 
noted in the paper before us. 

The treatment carbon in a filament is different physically 
from the carbon of the core because it is not porous but con- 
tinuous. It is therefore in condition to be graphitized more 
quickly than the porous core. Graphitization is probably a 
rearrangement of the number of carbon atoms in the molecule, 
which rearrangement or polymerization can also be effected 
in the porous core carbon, though it requires a longer time 
than in the treatment carbon, which is devoid of pores. 

J. W. Howe: In answer to Mr. Potter's questions: the 
filaments will not, as he intimates, be longer than the present 
type of filament, on account of their lower specific resistance, 
because the resistance is lower only when cold. At working tem- 
perature the specific resistances of the 2 filaments are nearly 
the same. The new filaments, however, will be materially 
shorter because of their higher efficiency. The 16-c-p. filaments 
of the new type will be about the same length as a 10-c-p. 
filament of the old type. 

No chemical data are given in the paper because knowledge 
of the chemical reactions that takes place is quite incomplete 
at the present time. 

Regarding the graphitizing of the base by time, success in 
graphitizing the base has been only partly successful at the 
highest temperature that could be produced by the furnace, 
because its life at this temperature was too short. Probably 
with a differently constructed furnace a sufficiently high tem- 
perature may be maintained long enough to accomplish this 
result, The changes in the shell seem to be independent of 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 849 


time; a few minutes in a hot tube seem to be sufficient to accom- 
plish the result. 

Regarding the characteristics of the time and candle-power 
curve, they are only slightly different from those of an ordi- 
nary lamp, except’ that it takes about four times as long to pro- 
duce the same loss of candle-power. 

In answer to President Lieb’s question: little has been said 
in the paper about commercial prospects. I have made the 
statement that 2.5-watt lamps are being made at present. 

Referring to the observations of temperature given in the 
paper, it was a remarkable incident to see the filament of a 
lamp look black if interposed between the heated furnace 
and the eye, when the furnace was hotter than the filament, 
although the latter was burning under nearly double normal 
voltage. 

The process of matching the color of the filament with the 
color of the furnace is quite delicate. If the voltage on the 
filament is reduced only two or three volts below that at which 
the temperatures seem to be the same, the filament will look 
like a black line across an incandescent surface, whereas when 
the filament is raised a few volts above the voltage of matching 
it will look like a bright line across a less bright surface. 


-¥ 


r oes 
‘ aig 
A 
iad 
bk 
Pr) . 
tn ee 3 
hats pe aed 
= 


ee coe 


pit ap es 


a ete 


doe 


Lor ae 


‘A paper presented at the 22d Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. EH. 


ALTERNATE CURRENT MACHINERY—INDUCTION 
ALTERNATORS. 


BY WM. STANLEY ASSISTED BY G. FACCIOLI. 


In the following pages it is proposed to discuss some ofthe 
elementary phenomena found while studying the performance | 
of alternators»excited by alternating currents. In a second 
paper the writer intends to deal with the Bae applica- 
tion of the principles here described. 

It occurred to the writer a number of years ago. ed if the 
field of an alternator is made by alternating instead. of 
continuous currents, the variations of current in the armature, 
both in value and phase, due to changes of resistance. or. in- 
ductance in the work circuit of the machine, would produce 
corresponding changes in the value and phase of the field cur- 
‘rents, because the value of the field producing currents under 
these conditions is determined by the inductance of the field 
circuit, and this inductance is varied in value by armature 
reaction. And, because the writer long ago devised the 
following simple rule for predicting the flow of periodic currents 
- in circuits, where the phenomena of distribution were not: entirely 
clear at first sight; ‘namely, that periodic currents attempt to 
flow in a network of connected circuits, or in circuits possessing 
~ mutual induction, so as to produce the least possible magnetism, 
(flow at such time and value as to destroy each other’s fields). 

The alternators to be described have their rotors ‘and 
stators wound with distributed windings. The totor circuits 
are supplied with very low-frequency multiphase currents, 
as shown in Fig. 1. These currents produce a field, or fields, 
which move around the rotor at a speed proportional : to ‘the 
frequency of the magnetizing or exciting source. © aad 
851 


852 STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. [June 19 


If the connection of the multiphase exciter circuits is such as 
to produce a clockwise electromagnetic rotation of the field 
(rotor), the rotor structure of the alternator may then be 
mechanically revolved either in the same or in an opposite direc- 
tion. 

Let n be the frequency of the exciting circuit and 1, the fre- 
quency of mechanical rotation; then if the electromagnetic and 
mechanical rotations are in the same direction the speed of the 
flux will be proportional to n, +7; if they are in opposite direction 
to n,—m, and, as will be shown, these two relative arrangements 
produce very different phenomena. 

Call n,+n or n,—n = ny, = the frequency of the currents 
induced in the stator or armature conductors of the machine; 
evidently when » = »,, 2,—” = 0, and there is a stationary 
field in the space opposite to the stationary armature conduc- 
tors; consequently, no electromotive force is induced. 


INDUCTION 


ALTERNATOR 


ARMATURE 


Fiav tf: 


Suppose, however, that ” is small compared to n,; for example, 
let the exciting frequency » = 1 cycle, while the frequency 
of rotation n, = 61 cycles; then 

n,—n = 60 cycles, 
n,+n = 62 cycles. 

Consider the first case for a moment. Suppose the stator, 
or armature, of the alternator is supplying current to an ex- 
ternal circuit; then, if we have a clockwise rotation (revolutions 
per minute) of 61 cycles and a counter-clockwise electromag- 
netic rotation (exciting current) of 1 cycle, the effective field 


rotation is clockwise and 60 cycles; consequently, the armature. 


(stator) currents are also of 60 cycles frequency. But these 
stator currents produce a field in the air-gap of the machine 
and this field revolves synchronously with the rotor induction, 
but not synchronously with the rotor conductors, for they (the 
conductors) are going faster, viz., at the rate of 61 cycles. They 


1905.) ‘STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. 853" 


are therefore constantly overtaking the stator-produced field, 
and passing through it. That is to say, cutting it, and they 
therefore have electromotive force induced in them of a fre- 
quency = 61 — 60 cycles = 1, = n, the exciting frequency; the 
final result being that an electromotive force of the same fre- 
quency as that of the exciting current is produced in the rotor 
(field) conductors, by simply loading the alternator in the usual 
manner. ; 

This ‘‘ stator induced electromotive force’ in the rotor con- 
ductors (so we call it) is evidently proportional to, and in quad- 
rature with, the stator current. It is zero when the stator 
current is maximum; maximum when the stator current is 
zero, etc. It is of the utmost importance in the phenomena 
to be described, for if the rotor circuit be of low resistance 
(great time-constant) the ‘‘ stator induced electromotive force ”’ 
in the rotor will produce a current (called ‘‘ stator induced 
current ’’) approximately equal in value, nearly opposite in phase 
to the stator current and, consequently, competent to neutralize 
the magnetomotive force of the armature or stator circuit and 
to destroy almost completely the magnetization due to the 
stator winding. In such an alternator there should be, then, 
no armature reaction, no back magnetization, no distortion of 
the field of the machine. 

At first sight it would seem that these machines should give 
a constant electromotive force at all loads; when excited at 
constant potential they do not do this, but they give, when 
properly designed, a gradually rising potential at power-factor 
= 1 with a slight drop of potential for lower power-factors 
down to power-factor = 0. 

In Figs. 2 and 3, Mr. Faccioli has represented the phase rela- 
tions of the electromotive force, currents, etc., when (Fig. 2) the 
effective frequency of the alternator is equal to the difference 
between the rotational and magnetizing frequencies, and 
(Fig. 3), when it is equal to their sum. 

In the diagram here given the ratio of the rotor to the stator 
turns is assumed to be 1:1; the ohmic and inductive resistance 
of the exciter is zero, that is to say, the exciter is assumed to 
maintain a constant terminal potential. 

In the case of Fig. 2 (Vx = N,—WN) the flux of the alter- 
nator rotates in one direction regarding the rotor and in the 
opposite direction regarding the stator; therefore Diagram 2 
is supposed to rotate in the direction R regarding the rotor and 
in the direction S regarding the stator. 


’ 


854 STANLEY: INDUCTION A LTERNATORS. [June 19 


vis the leakage coefficient of the rotor; that is, the. ratio ~ 
between the flux produced by the rotor which enters the stator 
and the total flux set up by the rotor. The leakage coefficient 
of the stator is assumed to be equal to the leakage coefficient 
of the rotor. 


Fic. 2. 


E, represents the electromotive force of the exciter (low 
frequency) which is supplied to the terminals of the rotor and 
is assumed as constant for any load of the machine. 1%, is the 


Pre." 3. 


magnetizing current of the machine at no load and lags behind 
E, by, the angle ¢; # being a function of the resistance. of the | 
rotor and the frequency of excitation. =. Spree 

;At no-load the flux set up by 7, will induce an electromotive 


1905)". STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. - 355 


force ér ,at the terminals of ‘the rotor; a part of the same flux 
proportional to vi,, will induce an n electromotive force @s at. the 
terminals of the stator. 

Now consider the case in which the machine is loaded by” 
the current J, at power-factor 1. The current 7, of the stator 
(armature) induces at the terminals of the rotor (field) an 
electromotive force in the direction FE, proportional to the fre- 
quency of excitation of the machine. The electromotive force 
E produces in the rotor a current J, which lags behind E by 
the angle ¢. J, and vl, give a resultant j;, whosé’ magneto- 
motive force is superimposed on the original magnetomotive force 
Uto, Giving a resultant magnetomotive force 7,,, which is in quad- 
rature with J,. The electromotive force of the stator is E, in 
quadrature with 7, and therefore in phase with J,. 

In the case of Fig. 3 when (Vi, = N+N,), the diagram ro- 
tates in the same direction regarding the stator and the rotor. 
The same symbols represent the same quantities as in Fig. 2. 
In this case the electromotive force e, and e, have the same 
direction, and the resultant maghetomotive force j; has such 
direction as to decrease the original magnetization vz, of the 
machine; while in the case of Fig. 2, the magnetomotive force 
js, due to the load currents, has the effect of increasing the no- 
load magnetization of the machine. 

When, therefore, the generated frequency of the machine 
is equal to the difference: of the frequen¢y of rotation and the 
frequency of excitation the magnetization of the machine may be 
higher when loaded with non-inductive load than when running 
free; this result being principally due to the resistance of the 
rotor or field, which prevents the current J, from lagging exactly 
90° behind E and consequently neutralizing the magnetomotive 
force of I,. 

On the other hand, the resistance of the ‘rotor when the gen- 
erated. frequency is equal to the sum of the frequency of rota- . 
tion and the frequency of excitation, has the effect of decreas- 
ing the magnetization of the machine when loaded with non- 
inductive load. ; 

If the rotor = the machine iad zero resistance and perfect 
mutual induction, then the rotor current J, would lag exactly 
90° from its electromotive force in both Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, and 
would be exactly equal and opposite tothe stator current /;. 
There would be no resultant magnetomotive force due to’ the 
load and therefore j, would be equal'to zero and the machine 


856 STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. [June 19 


would have constant electromotive force at any load and at 
any power-factor. 

It then appears that if a machine of this type; that is, a 
machine with almost perfect mutual induction and very low 
resistance, could be built, there would be very little difference 
in its regulation when excited by forward and backward running 
fields. The principal difference would consist in the fact that 
with a forward running excitation the exciter would supply 
energy to the alternator in proportion to the ratio of the ex- 
citing to the generated frequency, while with the backward 
running excitation, the exciter delivers no energy to the alter- 
nator but receives energy from it. 


; 


Fic, 4. 


It is interesting to study the regulation of the system at 
power-factors less than unity and examine the effects of varia- 
tion of exciting frequency. This has been set forth by Mr. 
Faccioli in the following diagrams: ; 

First, take up the case of the backward rotation of the field. 
In Fig. 4, Zs is the load current of the machine. The electro- 
motive force E induced by v/, at the terminals of the rotor is 
proportional to the frequency of excitation 7. 

E=jwLvl, 
where w equals 2 2 f and wL is the inductive resistance of 
the rotor at the frequency f. 


1905.] STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. 857 


The superimposed load current in the rotor is: 
wre Eth 
VR? +w? L? 


R 


R being the ohmic resistance of the rotor. 


vl, wl 
VR+u? L? 


vl, = =v? I, sin.d 


¢ being the angle of lag of I, behind E. 

The locus of vl, is therefore a circle of diameter equal to 
v° I, as represented in Fig. 4. In Fig. 5 this circle is drawn 
directly upon J;,. 

If the constants of the rotor are known we have the angle ¢ 


AB=Js 
BC =, 
or - -- ; CA=imnm 
BD=VI, 


POWER FACTOR =0.86 _-[-~ 
- 


- 


Fie, 5, 


in function of the frequency of excitation. It is then possible 
to draw vl, and j;. We suppose E, andi, constant and neglect 
the ohmic drop of the stator winding. 

The resultant of 7, and vi, must be inclined on J; by 90° 
plus the angle of lag of the load current I, behind the terminal 
electromotive force FE, of the armature. If therefore, with 
centre on the terminal of vl, and radius = vi), we cut the 
power-factor lines (Fig. 5), we obtain the resultant magneto- 
motive force i,, effective at the stator terminals for a given 
ampere load of the machine at any power-factor and any fre- 
quency of excitation. 

The terminal electromotive force of the alternator will be 


858 STANLEY :.INDUCTION A LTERNATORS. [June 19 


proportional to” 1» if the saturation and ohmic drop of ‘the 
stator winding are neglected. 

Fig. 6 shows the regulation of the induction alternator at 
different frequencies of excitation. The curves belong to a 
100-kw., 8-pole, 60-cycle, 900. effective rev. per min. machine 
built by the Crocker-Wheeler Co. for experimental purposes ; 
Figs. 2, 3, 4, and 5 refer to the same machine. The curves of 
Fig. 6 are in perfect ‘accord with the actual tests made on the 
machine, the results of which are given later on. 

This Fig. shows that for each machine, that is, for each 
combination of resistance and leakage in any machine, there 
is a certain frequency of excitation below which trifling changes 


s 


& 35 . 
é = 
aes 60% 
P| uw 
5 z 
- 25 10 
=) 203 
E wi 20 = 
Gj ou 
© S45 Ss 
3 = 202 
ny POWER{FACTROR = 0. & 
ra MN) 403 
N ‘ACPOR = 0 | ra 
iF 60 = 
z S 
g m8 
= Co 
100 
0 1 2 3 4 5 § i 18, 10 
100 kw.—900 Effective rev. per min,—60 Cycles. 
Fic. 6. 


in the constants of the alternator produce great changes in its 
potential characteristics. For small high-frequency machines 
an exciting frequency of about five cycles may be required, 
while on large machines in which the resistance and leakage may 
be relatively lower, the exciting frequency may be as low as one 
cycle. 

In a similar way it is possible to study the influence of the 
variations in the exciting frequency in the case of the forward 
rotation of the field. The locus of v/, is in this case a circle, 
as shown in Fig. 7. Fig. 8 gives the regulation of the same 
100-kw. alternator at different power-factors for different fre- 
quencies of the field. 


qe etal hill. hla ano 
Nore.—Since this machine was designed experience has taught us to 
design with much less variation of potential for changes of ‘oad and 
power-factor. 


1905}. STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. 859 


The curves in Fig. 8 show that in the case of ‘forward rota- 
tion of the field the potential of the alternator will drop at any 
power-factor, due to the effect of the. resistance and leakage; 


Nyp=Nt+Ny 


F 


Fic. 


but the difference in regulation between power-factor unity and 
lower power-factors is very small in comparison, with the results 
obtainable with the alternators of standard type. (The Pe 


a 
ra le POWER FACTOR = 1 = = 
FF POWER FACTOR = 0. 86 = 
oa 15 no? 
=I iu e 
z GOMER ERT ORS POWER FACTOR = 0.50 wl 
Be 300. 
3) z 
<w z 
POWER FACTOR = 1 = al ’ 
& & if j= z £0 wy 
re $10 POWER FACTOR = 9. 86 oe 
as Ny =N + Ny oa 
re oc 
= 5 a 
POWER FACTOR . 
g | tea BS 
Bek 80% 
©) 
Gi + 3 
g » " 
4 
= FREQUENCY OF EXCITATION 100 
j 4 if 2 3 4 5 6 it 8 i) 10 
100 kw.—900 Effective rev. per min,—60 Cycles. 


Fic. 8. 


nomena in this machine are e magnified by the oe resistance of 


‘the rotor.) 
The variation of the air-gap in these’ machine has a oie kat 


860 STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. [June 19 
influence on their regulation. In Fig. 6 are shown the curves 
of a 100-kw., 8-pole, 60-cycle, 900 effective rev. per min. induc- 
tion alternator having an air-gap of 0.0625 in. (single). 

Curves of Fig. 9 give again the resultant magnetizing current 
effective at the terminals of the armature at constant ampere 
load (full load) and different load power-factors for the same 
machine with an air-gap of 0.125 in. 

Figs. 6 and 9 both refer to the case of a backward rotating 
field (n,—n). Doubling the air-gap of the same machine 
has affected very little its regulation at the frequency which is 
used for its excitation (about five cycles). This is due to the 
fact that any increase in the air-gap involves an increase in 


50 


POWER-FACTOR 
40 S 


=1 
SS 
LE 0.86 


——— 0 


8 


MAGNETIZING CURRENT AT FULL LOAD. 
AMPERES. 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
100 kw.—900 Effective rev. per min.—60 Cycles. —(Double Air-Gap.) 
Fic. 9. 


the no-load magnetizing current of the machine, and an increase 
of the leakage coefficient v, and these two phenomena have con- 
flicting influences on the regulation of the alternator. 

When, however, tle leakage of the machine is comparatively 
low, as in the case of high-speed alternators with a small 
number of poles, and the no-load magnetizing current is high 
(large air-gap) then something is gained in regulation by in- 
creasing the length of the air-gap. For instance, this is the 
case with turbine alternators where a large air-gap is required 
for mechanical reasons. 

Considering now the phenomena of the system, the following 
general conditions are found: the current in the exciting circuit 
is composed of two parts or components. First, that due to the 
exciter electromotive force, which is the no-load magnetizing 


1905.] STANLEY: INDUCTION. ALTERNATORS. 861 


current; secondly, the current due to the electromotive force 
generated in the field (rotor) eonductors by the stator load 
current. The first of these, the no-load magnetizing. current, 
(volt-amperes) is, for any given capacity of the alternator, 
inversely proportional to its speed; that is, is proportional to 
the number of poles of the alternator for any given generated 
frequency, or is proportional to the frequency of the alternator 
driven at constant speed. 

This magnetizing apparent energy is therefore small with 
high-speed machines of given frequency, and small with low- 
frequency machines of given speed; consequently, it is smallest 
in low-frequency turbine alternators and is larger in slow-speed 
direct-connected high-frequency machines. It is to be remem- 
bered, however, that the magnetizing current is only a fractional 
part of the full-load current in the exciting circuit, therefore 
it is not necessarily a limiting condition and does not determine 
the size of the exciter. 

The second component of the exciting current is the 
superimposed component, and is approximately equal in total 
amperes to the armature current of the alternator. tits 
electromotive force of the exciter is proportional to the 
electromotive force of the alternator multiplied by the ratio 
of the exciting to the generated frequency. The two com- 
ponents of the exciting current (the magnetizing and super- 
imposed) have the following phase relations. 

When the alternator is delivering current at power-factor 
unity, the magnetizing and superimposed components are nearly 
in quadrature; when the alternator delivers current at power- 
factor zero, the components are nearly in phase. 

If we. call M the no-load magnetizing volt-amperes of the 
exciter, N, the frequency of excitation, N,, the generated fre- 
quency of the alternator, w the capacity of the alternator in 
kilovolt-amperes, we have the size of the exciter approximately 
proportional to: 


N? iN ee 
M?+W? —+ + 2M W— sin 
\ IN? Nit : 


¢ being the maximum angle of lag of the current that the alter- 
nator is called upon to deliver. 


Norz.—The size of the exciter can be exactly calculated by taking 
from Fig. 5 the value of the total current of the exciter for any given 
load and power-factor (the right phase displacement between nc-load 
magnetizing current and load-superimposed exciter current being taken 
into consideration). 


862 STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. [June 19 


Thus, if the alternator is a 100-kw., 25-cycle machine excited 
at a frequency of 2.5 cycles, and the no-load magnetizing voit- 
amperes are five kilovolt-amperes, and if the alternator is called 
upon to deliver its full-load current at power-tactot 0.5, the 
gize of the exciter is: 


pn SS es e " 

Y 5 \2 2.5 Le 

n 52-4 (100 +?) L-?%5>x100 ail % 0.86 = 14.5 kilovolt-amperes 
o Rs, 


It will then be seen that 12° exciter is called upon to carry 
a current practically equal in total amperes to the load current 
of the alternator, the apparent energy of which is dependent 
on the frequency of excitation; consequently, the aim of the 


o 
— 


Pa 
Z 10 
w O30 
Ne /POWER FACTOR= 7 
wi 20 
a 
z10 
m 
510 
a2 
a4 
o&3 
uw 4 
fe) 
50 
60 
70 
80 
100 
0 0.25 0.50 0.75 FULL LOAD 1.25 
100 kw.—900 Effective rev. per min.—60 Cycles. 
Fic. 10. 


engineer is so to design his machines that they will require the 
minimum exciting frequency. 

The following examples give the regulation characteristics 
of alternators of different capacities and speed when excited 
by alternating currents and the relative size of their exciters. 

Fig. 10 shows the regulation curves of the 100-kw., 8-pole, 
60-cycles, 900 effective rev. per min. alternator above mentioned, 
in function of ampere load of the machine when its field is ex- 
cited by 5-cycle currents at constant potential (backward 
; rotating field). For full load of alternator at power-factor 0.8 
-the size of the exciter is 13 kilovolt-amperes, or 13% of the size 
of the alternator. ta data, OM 9 


Wel Aes £ 


—————— 


1905:]:. STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. 863 


Curves of Fig. 11 give the results of tests of this 100-kw. 
machine, results which agree very: closely with the calculated 
characteristics of the alternator as set forth in Fig. 10. 


~ 
—) 


--y 


POWER FACTOR = 1 


RISE 
So 


Z 


—) 


— 


POWER FACTOR = 0.80 


POWER! lencron = = 0.08 
is 


DROP 
OF PRESSURE IN PER CENT 


ss) 
i) 


100 
0.25 0.50 0.95 FULL 
100 kw.—900 Effective rev. per min.—60 Cycles.—(Tests.) 
ines lle 


Fig. 12 gives the regulation curves for a 500-kw., 100-effective 
rev. per min., 25-cycle alternator. (The ohmic drop of the 
stator is not considered.) 


10}- SSS SSS 


POWER-FACTOR —1 


: 


RISE 


S 


POWER-FACTOR = 0__ 


— 
(=) 


POWER-FACTOR 0.8 | POWER-FACTOR —0.5 


2 
o 


OF PRESSURE IN PER CENT 


A | 
co 
S 


DROP 


40 


0 0.25 0.50 i 0.75 ees 


500 kw.—100 Effective rev. per min.—25 Cycles. 
Fic. 12. 


i Hee case ‘the frequency of excitation. (backward rotating 
field) is as low.as 0.75 cycles. . At full load of the alternator at 
power-factor 0.8 the size of the exciter is 42 kilovolt-amperes 
Be or 8.5% of the:size of the alternator. 


864 STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. [Jure 19 


Fig. 13 gives the curves for a 500-kw., 60-cycle, 514 effective 
rev. per min. type alternator (backward rotating field. 
The frequency of excitation is two cycles, and the size of the 
exciter at full load of the alternator, power-factor 0.8, is 41 
kilovolt-amperes; that is, 8.2% of the size of the alterna- 
tor. 


5 20 R-FACTOR = 1 
ui a POWE! \ 
HO POWER-FACTOR|= 0. 8 
Xe = 
uw 
oO: POWER-FACTOR|==— .5= L 
Zz POWER-FACTOR = 0° 
w 
cc 
=) 
ao 
aw 
ou 
co 
on 
iL 
(e) 
1009 0.25 0.50 0.75 Hes) 
500 kw.—514 Effective rev. per min.—60 Cycles. 
Fie. 13. 
110 POWER FACTOR 0.8 0 
° — = ————— 
° 100 Z POWER me °o WK 
z 
mY ui 
al 200 
a i 
b 30a. 
< z 
}- 40 
& r 
a 50 
2h 3 
Ww 
3 0m 
oO a. 
z 70 uw 
N fe) 
= 
Ww 80 to} 
z « 
g 0 
= 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 "4 8 9 10 
500 kw.—b14 Effective rev. per min.—60 Cycles, 
Fic. 14, 


Fig. 14 gives the regulation curves of the same 500-kw., 
60-cycle, 514 effective rev. per min. machine in the case of the 
forward rotating field. Note the small difference of regulation 
curves for different power-factors. 


1905.] STANLEY. INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. 865 


Figs. 15 and 16 refer to a 1500-kw., 25-cycle, 1500 effective 
rev. per min. turbine alternator. The frequency of excitation 
is 0.75 cycles and the exciter at full load of the alternator, 


8 


RISE 


OF PRESSURE IN PER CENT 


o 
cS 


a 
J 


POWER FACTOR 1, POWER FACTOR 0.8\ 


co 


7 | == 


POWER FACTOR 0 POWER FACTOR 0, 5” 


DROP 


100 
0 0.25 0.50 0.75 LAG 
1500 kw.—1500 Effective rev. per min.—25 Cycles, 
Fie. 15. 


power-factor 0.8, has a capacity of 95 kilovolt-amperes ; that 
is, 6.5% of the size of the alternator. 
For all the above curves the abscissas represent either the 


250 
POWER-FACTOR =1 


POWER-FACTOR 0.8 
as eres 


ae a ed 
se 
SS ee ee TS 


POWER-FACTOR =|0 POWER-FACTOR = 0.5 


200 


1 
| 
& 
i] 


rn 
o 
So 


— 
Se 


AMPERES 


100 


| 
= 
avs 
DROP OF PRESSURE IN PER CENT 


MAGNETIZING CURRENT AT FULL LOAD 


FREQUENCY OF EXCITATION 
: 1 2 3 4 

1500 kw .—1500 Effective rev. per min .—25 Cycles. 
Fic. 16. 


aS 
Ss 


amperes of load or the frequency of excitation of the alternator, 
while the ordinates represent the resultant magnetizing current 


866 STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. [June 19 


If the saturation of the machine could be neglected this 
resultant magnetizing current would be directly proportional to 
the terminal voltage of the alternator. 

Fig. 17 gives the exciting watts for different loads of 
the 100-kw., 60-cycle, 8-pole, alternator (at unity and lower 
power-factors). As shown by these curves the energy deliv- 
ered to the alternator at no load is small and positive. As the 
alternator-load — increases, the current-in the—-rotor mag- 
netizing circuit increases, but the watts fall to zero and re- 
verse; that is, the current in the rotor-exciter circuit lags until 


+ 


FACTOR==0 


FACTOR 0.8 


+—__—— 


POWER FACTOR 


KILOWATTS 


Ercaelds 


it exceeds 90° behind the exciter electromotive force; it there- 
fore flows through the exciter against the exciter’s electro- 
motive force, just as a current delivered by a generator flows 
through a motor circuit against the counter electromotive force 
of the motor. 

The all important factor in the design of induction alter- 
nators is then the excitation. 

At first sight, the designing of an efficient and economical ex- 
citer to deliver multiphaseexciting currents of five cycles or lower 
frequency, would appear to be an almost hopeless undertaking ; 
for if an exciter of, say, 3-cycles frequency and 50 kilovolt-am- 
peres is necessary to furnish the field and controlling current 
fora, 500-kw...alternator, working on old lines, we shouid be 


tal 


1905.] STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. 867 


compelled to design a 2-pole machine of 180 rev. per min. to 
deliver 50 kilovolt-amperes at power-factor zero to power-fac- 
tor.I: 

The manufacture of such a machine would ruin any going 
concern. We are therefore compelled to: 1, find such a method 
of generating the exciting currents as will permit the use of 
normal speeds and consequent reduction of size of the exciter,; 
that is, the exciters must be designed to give low frequencies 
at high speed; 2, to produce the desired potentiai gradient on the 
alternator, we must so design the exciter that it will have a 
characteristic complementary to that of the natural charac- 
teristic of the alternator it excites. These are severe con- 
ditions to impose upon any machine, but they have been met 
in a novel manner in the machine about to be described. 

It is evident that if the field of an ordinary direct-current 
machine is slowly alternated, corresponding alternations in the 
electromotive force of the armature will occur. Such a machine 
could evidently be driven at any speed and would give alter- 
nating current through its commutator and brushes correspond- 
ing in frequency to the frequency of its field, but it could fur- 
nish single-phase currents only. 

It is evident also that two such machines could be coupled 
on the same shaft, each machine having its field excited by 
low-frequency and phase-differing currents; and such an arrange- 
ment would generate from the two armatures two phase-differ- 
ing currents, whose frequency is independent of the speed of ro- 
tation. 

If now these two fields are combined in one machine; that is, 
if the field is a Ferraris or rotating field, instead of a simple 
periodic field, it is evident that a single armature with a simple 
commutator and four brushes placed in quadrature around the’ 
commutator will deliver two sets of alternating currents, differ- 
ing in phase by the angle of the brush displacement, and at 
the same frequency as the rotating field, and that the figuring 
of the generated currents will be independent of the speed of 
rotation. . 

Such an arrangement is shown in Fig. 18, where the stator 
consists of a 4-pole structure having energizing coils diamet- 
rically located on opposite poles and connected to a two-phase 
source of excitation, while the armature and commutator de- 
liver two-phase currents to external circuits. But this 
arrangement presupposes and employs a third element to fur- 
nish the original exciting current of the exciter.' That device 


868 STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNA TORS. {June 19 


might be called a frequency setter. It tends, however, to 
complicate the system and add an unnecessary element. 

In order to make the exciter self exciting and self contained, 
and to reduce the apparatus to the simplest terms, the fol- 
lowing scheme for excitation has been devised, Fig. 19. First 
let us notice that the usual method of self exciting a machine 
of the continuous current type is to connect the armature 
terminals, that is, the brushes collecting currents from the 
armature, to a field coil so located with reference to these 
brushes that currents in the coil will increase the electromotive 
force and current the brushes deliver; thus a cumulative action 
between armature and field coils continues (in ordinary prac- 
tice) until limited by the saturation of the iron of the machine. 

In the machine here described, a pair of brushes correspond- 


Fic. 18, 


ing to those of an ordinary generator is connected to a field 
coil, so located with reference to these brushes that the flux 
it produces will be displaced by a predetermined angle, de- 
pendent upon the number of phases desired. Thus for a two- 
phase machine a pair of brushes is connected to a field coil so 
located as to produce a flux, by means of which and by rota- 
tion an electromotive force is generated upon the other pair 
of brushes, while the second pair of brushes is connected to a 
coil so located as to produce a flux that will generate an electro- 
motive force on the first pair of brushes. This is shown in Fig. 
19, which illustrates the connection and operation of self ex- 
citation by means of two- and three-phase currents. 

Let the residual magnetism of the machine be as shown in 


1905.] STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. 869 


the diagram. Then, on rotating the armature, an electromotive 
force will be developed on brushes 2-4. These brushes are 
connected to the field winding at x—x! instead of at y—y', asis 
usual in exciting continuous-current machines, consequently a 
current will flow, say from x through a-a to x’, producing a 
flux through the armature at 90° to the residual magnetism. 
A resultant field will therefore lie between the points y—x and 
y'-x!, but this field will generate an electromotive force on 
brushes 1-3 and these brushes will deliver a current through 
y-a-a-y, in such a direction as first to oppose the residual 
magnetism and afterward to reverse its direction. At the in- 
stant that the residual magnetism.is zero the only field operating 
in the machine is that due to the currents from the brushes 


TWO PHASE 
yi THREE PHASE 
| y-RESIDIAL MAGNETISM 


Fic. 19. 


2-4: subsequently this field combines with the vertical reversed 
field to brushes y-y,, producing a resultant with polar line 
between x-y!. These operations being cyclic, they recur at 
periodic intervals, and the phenomena become continuous. 

As the resistance of the energizing circuit a—a is low in com- 
parison with its inductance the currents delivered from each pair 
of brushes lag nearly 90° behind the electromotive forces, and 
therefore little energy is wasted in field excitation. This pro- 
cess of excitation presents many curious and interesting features. 
If, for example, one of the magnetizing circuits, such as x, be 
disconnected from the armature, the field immediately dies out, 
even if there is no current in circuit at the instant of the breaking. 

The approximate calculation of the frequency of self excita- 


870 STANLEY. INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. _ [June 19 


tion as given by Mr. Faccioli will be found by considering for 
a moment the physical phenomena that occur. 

Assume the speed of rotation of the armature to be 7,; let 
the machine be a single magnetic-circuit machine with x con- 
ductors in the armature, and y conductors on the stator. A 
qnoment’s consideration of the laws of induction will show that 
the direction of the currents delivered by the armature to the 
field must be such as to produce a field rotating in the same 
direction as the rotation of the armature. 

Let the frequency of this rotating field be N, then evidently 
the effective frequency of the armature conductors will be: 


Ni=N = NG 


We therefore have X armature conductors cut by the flux 
of the machine at frequency ,,, and Y conductors of the field 
cut by the same flux at frequency N, therefore there will be 
two electromotive forces; one on the rotor and one on the 
stator, for each magnetizing circuit; and as is evident the con- 
dition of equilibrium of current flow will be obtained when 
these two electromotive forces are equal and opposite to each 
other. 

This condition of equilibrium will always be fulfilled for a 
certain frequency of self excitation ;.such in fact as will make: 


XN = YN 

But Ni=N,—-N 

EY YN =X (N,-N) 
; o% 

and N = Nixay 


That is, the frequency of self excitation will be equal to the 
frequency of rotation times the turns on the rotor divided by 
the sum of the turns on the rotor and stator. — 

By this formula we can easily determine the winding of a 
machine for a given frequency of self excitation; for instance, 
in the case of a two-pole machine in which the speed of rotation 
is 900 rev. per min. (15 cycles) the number of armature con- 
ductors is 200 and the frequency of self excitation desired is 
three cycles, we find that the number of turns required on the 
stator is: 


* 200 (15 — 2 is 


3 = 800 


1905.] SLANER VE INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. 871 


Evidently these results are only strictly true when the re- 
sistance and leakage of the machine are zero, or not considered, 
as these quantities have a slightly modifying effect. 

When the windings are similarly disposed in rotor and stator, 
it is not necessary to take into consideration the winding dis- 
tribution coefficients, but the proper coefficients should be em- 
ployed when the statcr has salient poles. ; 

This type of machine satisfies, therefore, the first condition 
laid down as necessary for a commercial exciter; for it produces 
low-frequency multiphase currents at normal speeds. It also 
fulfils the second condition—that it should deliver zero and 
negative power-factor currents at constant or rising potential 


POWER-FACT! 
es 


= 
02 
on = 
iF cc 
2 WwW 
oO Q 
Zs z 
Zz z2 
sn Ww 
te s 
3 oD 
rp) : 
o uw 
us cc 
a. 

c 
< 50 - 
(e) 
wl 
es 
«x 


0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
AMPERES 


Fic. 20. 


with much greater exactness than the ordinary type of alter- 
nator; for the reason that the armature reaction of a machine 
of this type may be made practically zero, because the field 
of the machine progresses in the same direction as the rotation 
of the armature and consequently tends to maintain the electro- 
motive force at low power-factor loads, and because it may 
be compensated to give a positive, potential gradient. 

Fig. 20 gives the voltage characteristics of a 10 kilovolt- 
ampere exciter in function of the amperes of load for power- 
factor = 1, and power-factor = 0. The frequency of self-ex- 
citation of this machine, when run at 900 rev. per min., is five 
cycles. 


872 STANLEY: INDUCTION ALTERNATORS. [June 19 


An examination of the characteristic curves of the induction 
alternator (n,—1) type curve 10 shows that the potential 
gradient of these machines is positive for load currents of unity 
power-factor; zero for load currents of (about) power-factor 
= 0.8 and negative for currents of power-factor = 0. 

If, therefore, the exciter is given such a characteristic that the 
electromotive force of the exciter will be slightly lower when 
the alternator is full loaded with power-factor = 1 currents, 
and slightly higher when the alternator is delivering low power- 
factor currents, the potential of the alternator may be main- 
tained practically constant for any variation in load or power- 
factor. 

It is to be remembered that the exciter, when used with 
(n, —n type of alternator) is never called upon to furnish power- 
factor unity currents, but to receive them, and that the mag- 
netizing reaction of such currents upon the exciter field is ex- 
actly the reverse of that found when the power-factor unity cur- 
rents are delivered; therefore, the exciter should be so designed, 
when used with this machine, as to give an increase of potential 
when delivering power-factor unity currents (that it may 
have a negative potential gradient when receiving them), as well 
as a slight increase of potential when delivering power-factor 
zero currents. 

As stated in the first paragraph of this paper, the writer 
purposes to describe later the application of the phenomena 
here given to various new types of alternators. He hopes to 
be able to convince the members of the INsTiTuTE that machines 
excited by continuous currents cannot compete with those 
employing alternating-current excitation, as the latter possess 
distinct advantages in simplicity, performance, and cost. 


Nore.—The phenomena accompanying this type of machine are of 
great interest and will be offered to the InstiruTE in a subsequent 
paper. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 873 


Discussion on ‘t ALTERNATE-CURRENT MACHINERY—INDUCTION 
ALTERNATORS.” 


; Cuas. P. Steinmetz: The machine by Mr. Stanley is of great 
interest, and remarkable by reason of its reactions, which 
permit, without change of excitation, an automatic compound- 
ing or over-compounding; that is, a rise of voltage with in- 
crease of load. Perhaps the internal reaction of the machine 
and its mode of operation may be made a little clearer by looking 
at it from another point of view; namely, as a frequency-conver- 
ter. The machine is an induction machine containing primary 
windings connected with an impressed electromotive force, of 
low frequency in this instance, and secondary windings con- 
nected to an external circuit as load, and movable relatively to 
the primary windings. Now, in the simplest form this can be 
shown diagrammatically in Fig. 1. 


P is the low frequency primary winding of the induction 

machine, in inductive relation to the secondary winding S. 
The secondary winding S connects to the load L, while the 
primary winding connects to a source of constant impressed 
electromotive force, é, the terminal voltage of the synchronous 
or commutating machine E, or ‘“‘ the nominal induced electro- 
motive force,”’ as I called it, when operating the synchronous 
machine E at constant field excitation. 
It is seen then that the diagram is nothing but an ordinary 
transformer diagram, or rather, since primary P and secondary 
S are movable with regard to each other, the diagram of the 
general alternating current transformer, as described and dis- 
cussed by me in an INSTITUTE paper some years ago- In such 
an induction machine or frequency converter, not only voltages 
but also frequencies are transformed. 

In an induction machine, frequency converter, induction 
motor, etc., the frequency or slip equals the difference between 
the impressed frequency and the speed; that is, if N o= primary 
impressed frequency, that is frequency of E, Ny= secondary 
frequency or frequency supplied to the load L, and N = frequency 
of rotation, or speed, it is 

N,=N-N, 

And the primary electric power P,, the mechanical power 
P, and the secondary electrical power P, are proportional to 
the respective frequencies: 

-P:P,=Ny:N:N, 


0° 


874 A NEW INDUCTION GENERATOR. [June 22 


Applying these induction motor relations now to Mr. Stanley’s 
machine, the impressed frequency = 4, the secondary frequency: 
N, = 60. Two cases are possible: the primary impressed fre- 
quency may produce a revolving field in the same direction 
as the rotation: N, = +4, or it may produce a revolving field 
in the opposite direction: N, =—4. In the former case, the 
machine is driven in the direction of the rotating impressed 
field; that is, at over synchronous speed; in the latter case it 
is driven against the impressed rotating field or in backward 
rotation. In the former case, to get N, = 60, requires a speed 
N = 64, and in the latter case a speed N = 56. In the former 
case, at over synchronous rotation, P, and P, both are positive; 
that is, the machine produces electric power as generator in pri- 
mary and in secondary; that is, E is a motor receiving power 
from the induction machine, and the flow of the power is as 
shown by the arrows in Fig. 2, from the induction machine J 
outwards in both directions. This is the well known case of 
an induction machine driven above synchronism, when it be- 
comes a generator. 


Ro 


“In the second case: N, = — 4, P, is negative, 1.e., the primary 
P of the induction machine produces negative electric power; 
that is, receives power, and the exciter FE is a generator, the 
flow of power is from E to J to L. 

The strange compounding effects of such a frequency con- 
verter connected to a source of electromotive force e, are now 
quite obvious. Considering first the case of over synchronous 
rotation. In this case the primary and the secondary are both 
generating power, which flows outwards, the primary power 
into the motor exciter E, the secondary power in to the load 
L (Fig. 2), both powers being proportional to each other. In 
the primary exciter circuit, there is, however, an electromotive 
force ¢, which is constant (or varied in any desired manner, 
automatically or by hand). With increasing load L, that is, 
increasing secondary current in S, and therefore, increasing 
primary current in P, there is an increasing drop of voltage in 
the resistance RK, between the induced electromotive force e 
in the induction machine J and the electromotive force e, of the 
motor exciter, and since é, is constant, e rises with increasing 
load, since the induction machine has no definite voltage of its 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 875 


own, but excites itself to whatever voltage is required by the 
circuit conditions. The increase of the induced electromotive 
force e of the induction machine with the load, primary as well 
as secondary induced electromotive force, since both are pro- 
portional to each other, therefore is proportional to the load and 
the primary resistance R,; just as in any electric circuit, as a 
transmission line, the increase of generating voltage required 
to produce a constant voltage at the other end of the line 
must be proportional to the load and to the line resistance or 
rather impedance. 

Of the induced electromotive force e of the induction machine 
Ia part is consumed by the secondary resistance R,; the rest 
appears as terminal voltage ¢,. It is seen then that with in- 
creasing load, at constant exciter electromotive force ¢@, or 
constant excitation of the synchronous machine EF, the induced. 
electromotive force e of the induction machine J increases pro- 
portionally to the primary resistance Kg, and the secondary 
terminal voltage e,, or output voltage of the machine, falls 
below the induced electromotive force e proportional to the 
secondary resistance R,. 

If then the secondary resistance drop R, is greater than the 
primary resistance drop Ry, the ‘terminal electromotive force 
e, falls with the load; if the resistance drop R, is less than in 
R,, the voltage e, rises with the load; that is, the machine over 
compounds, and if the drop in R, and R, is equal, the voltage e, 
remains constant; that is, the machine compounds for constant 
voltage, and by varying or adjusting the resistance R, of the 
primary or exciter circuit, such a machine may be made to 
compound or over compound in any desired manner, within 
certain limits. An increase of the exciter resistance, there- 
fore, increases the secondary; that is, the output voltage. A 
serious difficulty, however, is met with when considering the 
effect of the reactance of the motor circuits, on’ wattless cur- 
rents of the load. Due to the over synchronous rotation, a 
lagging secondary produces a leading primary current. A lead- 
ing secondary current reaches its maximum later; that is, 
while the rotor has been driven further forward, therefore, pro- 
duces a primary current which reaches its maximum’ further 
forwards or earlier. In consequence thereof, with a leading 
secondary current; that is, an inductive load, the terminal 
voltage e, is less than the induced voltage e by the reactance 
drop of the secondary circuit. The corresponding primary cur- 
rent which flows into the exciter E is leading, hence the voltage 
rises in the direction of the flow of power, in the primary 
reactance, or ¢, the secondary electromotive force of the motor 
exciter, is higher, by the reactance’ voltage, than the impressed 
or induced electromotive force e, and with lagging current 
load, the voltage in the system drops from e, to e by the primary 
reactance voltage, from e to e, by the secondary reactance 
voltage; that is, the terminal voltagé‘e, falls off: with: increasing 


876 A NEW INDUCTION GENERATOR. [June 22 


load of lagging current. Inversely with increasing load of 
leading current, the terminal voltage e, rises, by the sum of 
the reactance voltages of primary and secondary circuits. It 
means, then, that the compounding is wrong with wattless 
currents, by the reactance drop of the system, and, assuming 
constant terminal voltage e, in the exciter circuit, the secondary 
terminal voltage e, at the load varies between 90° lag and 90° 
lead, by twice the sum of the reactance voltages of primary 
and secondary of the induction machine. 

Hence such a machine does not automatically compound 
for constant voltage at varying power-factor, but can be made 
to compound automatically only for a constant power-factor 
of the load (provided this power-factor is not too low) or the 
voltage e, of the exciter must be varied in correspondence 
with the power factor of the load. 

In the second case, or backward rotation, the exciter E is a 
generator, and with increasing load the voltage falls from 
the constant voltage e, to the induced voltage e, by the im- 
pedance drop of the primary circuit, and from the induced 
voltage ¢ to the secondary terminal voltage e, by the impedance 
drop of the secondary circuit; that is, the variation of voltage of 
the machine with the load correspondence to the impedance 
of the primary and secondary circuit; that is, the internal 
impedance of the induction machine, exactly in the same manner 
as in any transformer or similar apparatus. Hence no more 
automatic compounding, with constant excitation e , can take 
place. 

As you see all the phenomena of the machine become plain 
and intelligible by merely considering the direction of the flow 
of power, and taking in view that the voltage drops in the 
direction of the power flow, but is held constant in the primary 
circuit by the exciter é. 

Comrort A. ApaAms: I should like to ask Mr. Stanley if 
any tests have actually been made with this exciter, and if so, 
what the results of those tests were, as to the regulation of the 
alternator under loads of various power-factors. 

Morcan Brooks: I should like to know how the machine 
acts as a motor. I understand it is a generator as described. 
_W.E. GotpsBorouGH: Dr. Stanley has brought to our at- 
tention a piece of apparatus that gives constant potentials at 
practically all loads. 

I believe I once presented before the INsTiTuTE the results 
of an experimental demonstration in which the reactance of 
an armature tended to compound the machine instead of 
diminish the potential at the brushes, even though the machine 
was excited with a direct current. The question uppermost 
in my mind is, whether the machine described by Mr. Stanley 
is one that is going to be of practical utility at this stage of the 
art because of giving a constant potential. In the power de- 
velopments of to-day 5 000-kw. machines, and even 10 000-kw. 


— 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT ASHEVILLE. 877 


machines are common, and 20000-kw. machines promised. 
In the case of such large units is automatic regulation im- 
portant? Do not the load fluctuations fairly compensate one 
another in the case of these large units? In stations that 
include small units, and in isolated plants, automatic regulation 
may be important, but in stations equipped with only large 
units hand regulation will in general suffice. 


» ‘ 
waite 


_ 
Cs 
vere 


" 


A paper presented at the Rd Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A.1.E. E. 


NOTE ON A SIMPLE DEVICE FOR FINDING THE SLIP 
OF AN INDUCTION MOTOR. 


BY CHAS. A. PERKINS. 


There are a number of devices for finding the slip of an in- 
duction motor, but the following device, adopted more than a 
year ago in the laboratory of the University of Tennessee, is 
more simple and inexpensive than any other accurate device 
known to the writer. It does not even require the contact- 
maker and voltmeter described by B. F. Bailey in the Electrical 
World of April 22, 1905. 

The device consists of a strip of sheet-iron clamped at one 
end to an iron base, leaving the other end free to vibrate. An 
electromagnet is mounted on the same base with its pole near 
the free part of the strip. When an alternating current is 
passed through the electromagnet, in series with one or more 
lamps, the strip will be thrown into vibration, if it has about 
the same period of vibration as the driving current. The adjust- 
ment of the time of vibration of the strip is readily made by 
giving it such a length as shall cause it to vibrate a little too 
rapidly and then loading it by a small copper wire which may 
be slid along the strip until approximate synchronism is obtained. 

On the shaft of the motor is placed a cardboard disc, pierced 
by as many equally-spaced holes as there are north poles on 
the motor. The iron strip, with the electromagnet, is now 
placed in a good light and set into vibration by the supply cur- 
rent, and viewed through the holes in the rotating disc. If 
the hole comes at each revolution in front of the eye when the 
current is in a certain phase, the vibrating strip will also be in 
the same phase at each view, and will apparently be standing 
still. As the motor slips backward, the strip is seen at success- 

879 


880 PERKINS: SLIP-FINDING DEVICE. [June 22 
\ 


ively later phases of its vibration, and seems to be slowly vi- 
brating, making one complete vibration when the motor has 
lost one complete cycle. By this method the slip may be 
counted up to about 300 cycles per minute, serving for all cases 
excepting for small motors with heavy loads, or on high-frequency 
currents. 

The holes in the disc may be of generous size. In the disc 
that the writer is using they have a diameter equal to about 
one-eighth the circumference of the disc, without troublesome 
blurring; therefore it is easy to view the strip from a convenient 
distance, without stooping to the level of the disc. The fre- 
quency of the supply current may be taken from the speed 
of the motor, adding the correction for the slip; or if the iron 
strip is provided with a definite sliding weight whose position 
is calibrated for different periods of vibration, as described by 
Kinsley in the Physical Review for April, 1899, the frequency 
of the supply current is read off directly from the position of 
the slider, and the speed of the motor is then found from its 
slip. This requires a more careful adjustment of the slider and 
the use of a weaker current in the electromagnet, so as to avoid 
producing a forced vibration of the strip. 

It is possible that a strong current in the electromagnet may 
reverse the magnetism of the core, giving the strip a period of 
vibration double that of the current. If the ear cannot decide 
from the pitch, a disc having twice the number of holes may 
be placed on the motor-shaft. If the image of the strip is still 
clear, the vibration is double the frequency of the current. 

The rotating disc on the shaft of the induction motor is a 
convenient device for producing a number of stroboscopic 
effects. Thus, if an alternating arc is projected on a screen 
through the holes of the disc, the arc is observed to go through 
all its different phases. The brightening of the poles during 
the maximum and their cooling during the minimum are con- 
spicuous. A soft cored carbon has a bright point on the hard 
shell during the positive maximum, and a lighting up of the 
core at the negative maximum. The arc nearly or quite dies 
out in the case of a hard carbon, while with a low-tension flame 
carbon the arc simply changes a little in size. Of course these 
changes may be used for counting the slip of the motor, but 
the motion of the iron strip is usually more convenient. 


A paper presented at the 2d Winder Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Ashevillt, N. C., June 19-23, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


NOTES ON THE POWER-FACTOR OF THE ALTERNAT- 
ING-CURRENT ARC. 


BY GEO. D. SHEPARDSON. 


The alternating-current arc presents a wide field for research 
because of the many variable elements. During the last year 
the effect of the wave-form of electromotive force applied to 
the terminals of a standard enclosed arc-lamp, and the ele- 
ments affecting the power-factor, were studied in connection 
with the graduating thesis work of Messrs. L. S. Billau, C. B. 
Gibson, E. H. LeTourneau, and R. Morris at the University of 
Minnesota. Some of the results obtained seem of sufficient 
interest for presentation before the INSTITUTE. 

Electromotive forces having sine, flat-topped, and peaked 
wave-forms, Fig. 1, were obtained from a 7.5-kw., 60-cycle, 
General Electric double-current machine provided with three 
interchangeable sets of pole-pieces. Another wave-form, shown 
in the oscillographic curves in Figs. 5 to 8, was obtained from 
the circuit of the local lighting company. Current from these 
sources was sent through an enclosed constant-pressure lamp 
of standard manufacture, or through a hand-feed lamp having 
in series the reactance and feeding coils of the standard lamp. 
With the latter, all the conditions of a standard lamp are re- 
produced, except that the length of the arc is controllable. 

For part of the experiments, wave-forms were recorded by a 
modified Duddell oscillograph; unfortunately this broke several 
times during the progress of the work, and many of the tests 
had to be made without oscillographic records. 

Much difficulty was experienced from lack of uniformity in 
the carbons, although these came from a well-known maker of 
high-grade carbons and were supposed to be of the best quality. 


881 


882 SHEPARDSON: POWER-FACTOR. [June 22 


In fact, the irregularities in the carbons entirely masked some 
of the variables which were being studied, and led to results 
so erratic that only a small part of the investigation gave re- 
sults worthy of confidence. Variations in the performance of 
the carbons affected the candle-power of the light more than 
did changes in wave-form. 


ELECTROMOTIVE FORCE WAVE-FORMS 
Bical: 


Study of the power-factor of the arc under varying condi- 


tions shows that it is practically independent of the form of . 


the electromotive force applied to the lamp terminals. The 
power-factor of. the enclosed arc with soft cored carbons is 
found to be practically constant for current strengths between 
4.5 and 8.5 amperes with 7/16-in. carbons, varying between 
95 and 99 per cent. See Fig. 2, The power-factor of the 


1905.] . SHEPARDSON: POWER-FACTOR. 883 


whole lamp-circuit, including reactive coil and feeding coil, 

practically independent of the wave-form of impressed tine 
motive force, being higher for small currents and lower for 
large currents. The change in the power-factor of the lamp- 
circuit, from 76 to 43 per cent. in this case, is evidently due to 
the smaller resistance of the arc with larger current, the reactance 
of the circuit being sensibly constant within the range con- 
sidered. With the same grade of soft cored carbons and with 
open arc, the power-factor of the arc increases from 94 per cent. 
with 5.5 amperes to 99 per cent. with 8.5 amperes, Fig. 3, being 
independent of wave-form of impressed electromotive force, at 


5 6 be 8 AMPERES. 
1.00 [eee ae EAKED ieee “af as ELA 7 
SINE ARC 
-90 =e 
fr | riG.2 | 


POWER-FACTOR OF ENCLCSED ARC 
WITH CORED CARPON 


POWER-FACTOR 


least within the limits of accuracy available. With open arc 
and with copper-plated hard carbons, such as commonly used 
with open arcs, the power-factor of the arc varies from 80 to 
90 per cent. See Fig. 4. 

The power-factor of the arc is found to remain constant when 
the arc pressure is constant, whatever the range of current and 
whatever the wave-form of impressed electromotive force. 
Likewise when the length of the arc (measured by the image 
thrown by a lens) is maintained constant, the power-factor of 
the arc is independent of changes in current and in wave-form of 
electromotive force applied to the lamp terminals. The quality 
of the carbons and the exposure of the arc to the air affect the 


884 SHEPARDSON: POWER-FACTOR. [June 22 


AMPERES 


5 
1.00 


POWER-FACTOR 


AMPERES 


POWER-FACTOR OF OPEN 
WITH HARD CARBON 


1905.] SHEPARDSON: POWER-FACTOR. 855 


power-factor of the arc considerably. The distortion of the cur- 
rent wave-form doubtless affects the wave-form of electromotive 
force developed by the transformer or by a small generator. 


ENCLOSED ARC - 
CORED CARBONS, | 


Fie. 5. 


The effect of the lamp coils doubtless tends to make all impressed 
electromotive force waves alike when they reach the arc. Future 
investigations are expected to determine the wave-form of 


ENCLOSED ARG - CORED CARBONS 


LONG ARG 


Fic. 6. 


electromotive force actually applied to the arc under varying 
circumstances, the effect of changing it, and the reactions of 
the arc upon the source of electromotive force. 


886 SHEPARDSON: POWER-FACTOR. [June 22 


By means of a modification of the Duddell oscillograph, curves 
were obtained showing the variations in the instantaneous 
values of line pressure, arc pressurc, and current. The de- 


QPEN ARC - HARD CARBONS 


Fic. 7. 


parture of.the arc power-factor from unity is evidently due to 
distortion of the current and electromotive-force curves, there 
being little if any phase difference. In some of the records 


OPEN ARC =HARD CARBONS 


LONG ARC 


Fic. 8. 


there is a slight unsymmetrical displacement of zero values. 
Duddell and Marchant show similar displacement of zeros in 
their paper before the British Institution of Electrical Engineers’. 


‘'y, Jour. Inst, Elec, Eng., vol, 28, pp. 60 to 86, 1899. 


1905.] SHEPARDSON: POWER-FACTOR. 887 


This phenomenon seems not to have been explained satisfac- 
torily, and suggests a field for fruitful investigation. 

The hard carbons show a much more sudden rise in the differ- 
ence of potential around the arc than do the soft cored carbons 
or soft solid ones. Characteristic of the soft cored carbons is 
the secondary peak on the arc potential curve, occurring nearly 
simultaneously with the maximum current value and thereby 
raising the power-factor. Differences between the positive 
and negative loops are probably due to slight differences in 
the composition of the carbons. The more gradual growth 
of the current wave with the long arc will be noted, probably 
being due to the more rapid cooling of the arc gas during the 
extinction. With long arcs there is a tendency toward a 
double peak on the front of the potential wave. This portion 
of the wave changes greatly with the condition of burning 
and with irregularities in the carbons. With the short arc the 
potential wave rises to a marked peak at the rear. The current 
waves are concave to the axis when rising and convex when 
falling, due to the resistance being less in the hot vapor of the 
decreasing arc than in the cooler vapors of the increasing arc, 
The effect of the inductive action of the reactive coils is plainly 
seen in the lag of the current (marked ‘“‘I’’) and arc potential 
(marked “P, D. A.”) waves behind that of the impressed 
electromotive force (marked ‘“‘ P. D. L.’’) in Figs. 5 to 8. With 
the hard carbons and open arc, the arc potential waves vary 
considerably with the length; with short arc the potential rises 
almost vertically to a high peak, is nearly horizontal on top, 
and rises to a peak at the rear; with the long arc, the peaks are 
not so prominent and the potential wave does not rise so rapidly. 


A paper presented at the 22d Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Asheville, N. C., June 19-28, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A.I. E. E. 


THE PRESERVATION OF THE SOUTHERN APPALA- 
CHIAN STREAMS. A FOREST PROBLEM. 


BY CHARLES EDWARD WADDELL. 


To the south of the Shenandoah Valley in Virginia, and 
occupying portions of North Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia, 
lies the high plateau commonly known as the Southern Ap- 
palachians. This plateau attains its greatest width, a distance 
of some 70 miles, in North Carolina, and has an average elevation 
of about 3000 ft. It includes 275 peaks that exceed 5 000 ft. 
in height, and 36 summits of over 6000 ft., among them 
Mount Mitchell, which is the highest point east of the Rockies, 
and the oldest land on the continent. 

The eastern and western boundaries of the plateau are, 
respectively, the Blue Ridge and the Unakas. The slope 
of the Blue Ridge toward the Atlantic is gradual, and forms 
the rich agricultural Piedmont section. The Unakas, on the 
other hand, are higher and more rugged, and are cut into numer- 
ous deep gorges through which flows the rivers; it is a peculiar- 
ity of this region that all the streams, those flowing both east 
and west, take their rise on the slopes of the Blue Ridge. 

Lying between the Blue Ridge and the Unakas are numerous 
cross-ridges, the general direction of which is northwest, and 
which divide the plateau into a number of valleys, and direct 
the course of the rivers. 

This vast plateau constitutes the apex of the drainage area 
and serves as a source for magnificent rivers flowing to the 
four points of the compass. The largest and most important 
of these rivers are the New, which eventually becomes the Kan- 
awha, the Yadkin, Catawba, Saluda, Broad, Toxaway, Tallu- 
lah, Chattahoochee, Pigeon, Watauga, Hiwassee, Little Ten- 


889 


390 WADDELL: A FOREST PROBLEM. [June 23 


nessee, French Broad, Nolichucky, and Holston, having a 
combined drainage area of over 78000 square miles. The 
majority of these rivers flow through excellent agricultural 
lands and possess fine water-powers, in fact all large water- 
power developments in the South to-day are located on streams 
rising in the Appalachians. Therefore, any influence that 
affects these rivers is far-reaching in its consequences and is 
of vital importance. The value of a river as a water-power 
depends upon its. uniformity of flow rather than .upon its 
quantity; regularity of flow is influenced by erosion. of the hill- 
sides, and floods. 

The rainfall in western North Carolina is heavy, approxi- 
mating in some localities to 70 in. per annum. On steep 
slopes where the land has been cleared one violent precipita- 
tion could do more damage.than would be caused in years if 
the same land were covered with forests. _ | 

To illustrate the serious nature of erosion the following data 
were collected. Beaverdam Creek is a small tributary of the 
French Broad River, and previous to the impounding of water 
by the dam of the. Weaver Power Company it flowed into 
the French Broad through rocky banks a few hundred yards 
above the dam. The creek drains an area of some 14 sq. miles, 
all cleared land, and flows through gently undulating valleys. 
It is a representative but conservative type of mountain stream. 
The dam was completed just a year ago, and of course 
created a body of still water at the mouth of the creek. The 
run-off for the year, calculated from the recorded rainfall, and 
from averages of other measured streams, was 46 000 000 cu. ftia 
by actual measurement the amount of sediment deposited 
was 12000 cu..yd. It must be borne in mind that last year 
was exceptionally deficient in rainfall. In time of floods 
erosion is at its worst; then mountain torrents eat away their 
channels, and carrying down stones and other débris and de- 
positing them on some rich agricultural land or in the pond 
of some developed weter-power. Hence it is all important 
to prevent rather than to direct these floods. It is estimated 
that in 1901 the loss on the Catawba alone amounted to nearly 
$1500 000. Property 200 miles from the mountains was 
damaged. The total loss for the year on all streams exceeded 
$10 000 000. : ie 

The government gauging stations report an increasing irregu- 
‘aritv in the streams of the Southern Appalachians, and investi- 


1905.] WADDELL: A FOREST PROBLEM. * 901 


gation as to the cause leads to the conviction that it is on 
account of the removal of the forests. Originally these moun- 
tains were covered to their summits with forests, but in the 
last few decades the lumbermen have made ruthless inroads 
with deleterious consequences. It is especially noticeable 
that some of the smaller streams, whose headwaters have been 
denuded, at certain seasons dry up altogether. 

Experience in this locality together with that obtained 
elsewhere, notably the German and French Experiment Sta- 
tions, indicates that the forests exert a potent and direct in- 
fluence on stream flow; to form a clear conception of the 
nature of this influence it is necessary to consider the manner in 
which streams are formed and the methods by which they 
derive their supply. It must be noted that surface run-off is 
the cause of rapid fluctuations, while the perennial springs 
and underground drainage furnish the permanent supply; 
therefore, regularity of flow is secured if the run-off is diverted 
into storage. This is the part the forest performs. Its fac- 
tors of conservation are lower temperature, shade, capacity of 
the humus, and the retarding of evaporation by protection 
from strong air currents. Benefit is alsc derived from the 
mechanical action of the trees in breaking the fall of the rain 
drops, thereby protecting the soil, and to the obstruction 
offered by the roots to the rapid run-off of the precipitation. 

The roots further assist by increasing percolation through 
keeping the ground open and porous. The forest cover pro- 
tects snowfall from rapid melting, and the snow in turn pro- 
tects the earth from freezing, thereby keeping it open and 
susceptible to filtration when the snow does melt. Evapora- 
tion is much more rapid from bare tracts than from wooded 
areas; this is especially true of the mountains as the greater 
the altitude the greater the effect in preventing evaporation: 

The stream preservation of the Southern Appalachian de- 
pends solely on the forests; in this respect it differs from New 
England, where glacial deposits and the lakes cooperate 
with the streams. Unfortunately in the south both the deposits 
and the lakes are lacking. The expedient of planting grasses 
that have been found to flourish in New England, and to pro- 
tect the soil subsequent to the removal of forests, is not success- 
ful in the South, due doubtless to the greater heat and conse- 
quent parching effect. 

Consideration of the fonegoing beneficial action of the forests 


892 WADDELL: A FOREST PROBLEM. [June 23° 


convinces one that the woods at the headwaters of the streams 
should never be removed. Valleys alone are suited to agri- 
culture. Cleared mountain sides yield at most four or five 
crops, then the land becomes so impoverished that it is value- 
less. Nor should the lumber industries be permitted to destroy 
all standing timber. Protection of the forests does not imply 
that lumber is not to be cut; on the contrary it is beneficial to 
the forests to remove lumber, but it should be removed in an 
intelligent manner, in a way that will protect young trees. 
The present wholesale methods of removing forests should be 
stopped. 

Next to the lumbermen the greatest enemy of the forests 
is the fires. These are especially bad on the southern exposures, 
due to the greater dryness, and they work the dual harm of 
damaging the standing timber and killing the seedlings. 

In 1892 the first practical forestry in the United States 
was started on the Biltmore Estate. The methods in vogue 
consist of mapping the tracts of timbered lands, making accurate 
surveys of the extent and character of the forests, noting 
trees that have reached maturity, and reforesting bare tracts. 
Conservative methods of lumbering are pursued, the trees 
being so removed as not to destroy the younger growths, and 
plantings of seedlings taking the place of matured trees. 

On steep declivities where the forests have been previously 
removed, and where erosion has ensued, the hills are first staked 
in belts at regular intervals of some four feet, and artificial 
obstructions such as rhododendron and kalmia roots are intro- 
duced which result in the formation of new soil. After sufh- 
cient time has elapsed to insure permanency and desired rich- 
ness, the hillsides are planted with very small trees of a kind 
especially adapted to the locality. The results of these methods 
are to-day apparent in the condition of the brooks and streams. 
The deposit of sediment is materially less than on the streams 
not so protected, and the streams are not so turbid subsequent 
to heavy rains. 

The French Broad river with its tributaries above Ashe- 
ville drains the Biltmore Estate, and the fact that statistics 
show the French Broad to vary less than any other stream 
in the South Atlantic States may be attributed to the protection 
the river receives in the manner just outlined. 


——— 


A paper presented at the 99th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
New Vork, September 22d, 1905. 


Copyright, 1905, by A. I. E. E, 


STANDARDIZATION OF ENCLOSED FUSES. 


BY H. O. LACOUNT. 

The object of this paper is to describe: 1. The necessity of 
standardizing enclosed fuses. 2. The work of standardizing 
such fuses. 3. The result of this work, namely: the specifica- 
tions for the National Electric Code standard enclosed fuse. 
4, The tests of fuses designed to comply with the specifica- 
tions. 

Necessity of Standardization.—Prior to about 1896, the fuses 
in use in this country were largely of the so-called “link”’ 
type. These consisted of a strip or wire of fusible metal, such 
as lead-alloy, soldered to copper terminals, which were made 
to fit under binding-screws or nuts on the cut-out blocks. The 
aluminum fuses of different forms should also be included in 
this class. Cut-out terminals were in the early days mounted 
on wood; but later, slate and porcelain were used for this pur- 
pose. The link cut-outs were frequently mounted in the open, 
though as time went on the use of cut-out cabinets became 
more and more general, because it was found necessary to pre- 
vent the flash, and melted metal produced when the fuses were 
blown, from being thrown out and igniting nearby combusti- 
ble material. 

The open link fuse has always been objectionable, not only 
from the standpoint of fire hazard but also from that of 
danger to person. The latter objection has possibly been 
greatest in the case of switchboards thus equipped, espe- 
cially the larger boards where a considerable number of these 
fuses were used either on the front or back of the boards. 
With low-voltage boards repairs or changes are frequently made 
while the boards are in use. The wiremen are thus exposed 

893 


894 LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. (Sept. 22 


to a possible flash and shower of hot metal, which might be 
serious, if, for example, the metal were thrown in the face. 
When the fuses are on the front of the board with the switches, 
as is frequently the case, the attendant may be severely burned 
or even blinded by the blowing of fuses when the switches are 
closed, if there happens to be a short circuit on the line at 
the time. The menace increases, of course, as the capacity of 
the fuse and the voltage of the circuit are increased. 

While considering the early types of fuse, an exception to 
the link-fuse should be noted—the so-called Edison plug-fuse, 
which consisted of a fuse wire enclosed in a casing designed 
to screw into a receptacle in the cut-out base. This fuse was 
quite satisfactory in both the respects above noted; in fact, 
with some slight improvements it is still freely recommended 
for use, and has been adopted as a part of the standard fuse 
referred to later. 

Another feature of the link fuse has been a somewhat variable 
carrying capacity, depending upon the way it was installed 
and the treatment it received later. The specifications for link- 
fuses have required that they be “ stamped with about 80 per 
cent. of the maximum current that they can carry indefinitely ;” 
and inthe specifications the melting point of fuses up to, say, 
500-ampere rating has been estimated to ‘‘ be the minimum 
current which will melt them in about 5 minutes.” This is 
the time usually necessary for a practically maximum tem- 
perature to be attained under this condition. While the 
approved makes of link-fuses will meet the requirements just 
mentioned, if connected to terminals of the usual size and 
held free in the air at ordinary temperatures, their carrying 
capacity will be materially changed if they should happen to 
be connected with very large or very small terminals as is 
{frequently the case; or what is more important, if the fuse 
strip itself is in contact with surrounding objects, such, for 
example, as the porcelain part of the cut-out block. Many 
cases have been noted where the fuse, originally properly in- 
stalled, has become heated by an overload, and softened suffi- 
ciently to sag until it struck the cold cut-out base, was then 
immediately chilled, and its carrying capacity thereby greatly 
increased. 

In order to overcome the above-mentioned objections to the 
open-link fuse and obtain a fuse free from flash and the expul- 
sion of hot metal. and also to obtain a fuse that could be more 


1905.] LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. 895 


accurately rated and that was less affected by exterior con- 
ditions, the. enclosed fuse was developed. It consisted of a 
fusible strip, more or less tightly enclosed in a strong fibre 
tube, at the ends of which terminals were provided for con- 
necting the fuse with the cut-out blocks. The space between 
the fuse proper and the tube was filled with some non-com- 
bustible material, generally a powder, to break the arc formed 
when the fuse melted, and also to absorb or chill the gases and 
thereby prevent rupture of the tube. 

In 1896, before enclosed fuses were placed on sale in this 
country, at least in any considerable quantity, the writer wit- 
nessed a series of tests upon fuses of this character, which 
demonstrated their ability to open safely the circuit under 
short-circuit conditions. The early history of this work is very 
interesting and shows a large amount of patient and persistent 
effort by those who have manufactured satisfactory enclosed 
fuses. Soon after this type of fuse appeared on the 
market other concerns brought out more or less complete 
lines of enclosed fuses, and after a few years at least 5 com- 
panies were engaged in their manufacture. Each company, 
however, adopted dimensions of its own, and also various types 
of terminals, so that the fuses of one manufacturer would 
generally not fit blocks made by other concerns unless con- 
structed upon special order. There has always been some 
difference of opinion as to the exact reason for this action on 
the part of those companies that entered the field at a later 
date. Some persons contended that the motive was a selfish 
one, on the ground that these later companies anticipated that 
if the dimensions of their fuses were somewhat different from 
those of fuses then in use a definite market for their fuses would be 
created later to supply all cut-outs of their own make that might 
be installed. On the other hand, it has been claimed that the 
dimensions chosen were based entirely upon a consideration of 
successful operation, and that the difference in dimensions was 
accidental rather than premeditated. In any event, the result 
was a large number of types and sizes, few of which were inter- 
changeable; in consequence of which supply houses found it 
necessary to maintain a very large stock in order to have on 
hand even only a few fuses of each particular design and capacity. 

At the beginning of 1903, at least 5 manufacturers were doing 
considerable business in this line, and each averaged at least 
_ 4 different types of enclosed fuses. There were generally sev- 


896 LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. [Sept. 22 


eral classes in each type, So that the total number of fuses 
having either different dimensions or different styles of ter- 
minal, or both, was very large; for example, there were from 
20 to 25 different 10-ampere fuses for use on circuits up to 250 
volts, so that unless the customer knew exactly what make 
and type of fuse he required there were 20 chances to 1 that 
he would get the wrong fuse—a fuse, which he would later 
find out, would not fit the cut-out that he had installed. 

In practice this large number of non-interchangeable fuses be- 
came a real fire hazard, also a source of great inconvenience and 
annoyance to both customer and dealer, because of the difficulty 
found in procuring the right fuse for the cut-out that happened 
to be installed. The supply houses found it impracticable to keep 
a full line and frequently could not furnish the fuses desired, 
so that either the customer or supply house was obliged to send 
to the manufacturer for a supply of the particular fuses needed. 
In the meantime some dangerous substitute for the proper fuse 
was generally provided, in the form of copper wire, wire nails, 
fuse wire, etc., because it was out of the question to cut out 
circuits until such time as the desired fuses could be obtained. 
As it was considered permissible to use in most places the en- 
closed fuse without a cabinet, the hazard was at once ap- 
parent when any of the above substitutes were employed in 
place of the enclosed fuses, because the combustible surround- 
ings were at once directly exposed to the flash and melted 
metal produced when ‘such a substitute fuse melted. More- 
over, the use of such substitutes as have been mentioned was 
objectionable because of the liability to overfuse the circuits. 

The only solution of this difficulty seemed to be to secure 
a standardization of this class of fittings whereby fuses of the 
same capacity would be interchangeable with reference 
both to dimensions and style of terminal. The considerable 
hazard that had thus been brought about and its apparent 
remedy were recognized at the same time by different insurance 
and municipal interests, in fact, several of them wrote inde- 
pendently to the different manufacturers, calling attention to 
the condition of affairs, offering to assist in bringing about an 
interchangeable fuse. In some places conditions had become 
so serious that definite action against the further use of en- 
closed fuses was contemplated; had it not been for the pro- 
posal to standardize the fuse at that time, this action would 
certainly have been taken. The writer was one of those who 


1905.] LACOUNT; ENCLOSED FUSES. 897 


addressed the manufacturers, and it was soon discovered that 
others in different parts of the country were of the same mind. 
The Switch and Cut-out Committee of the Underwriters’ 
National Electric Association, of which the writer was chair- 
man, had already under consideration the question of the 
rating of enclosed fuses. It became evident at once that. the 
question of standardizing the fuses could be best taken up 
by the committee in connection with its other work on. the 
subject, especially as the results would undoubtedly -have a 
more universal acceptance, because the committee represented 
in its membership the insurance and municipal interests, as 
well as the principal testing bureaus of the underwriters. The 
membership of the committee consisted of James E. Cole, 
Chief Inspector, Wire Department, Boston; Wm. H. Merrill, 
Jr., Secretary, Underwriters’ Laboratories, Chicago; Ralph 
Sweetland, Inspector, New England Insurance Exchange, 
Boston, and E. V. French and the writer, of the Associated 
Factory Mutual Fire Insurance Companies, Boston. This plan 
was promptly outlined to several members of the Electrical 
Committee of the Underwriters’ National Electric Association, 
who thought favorably of it, and the sub-committee, therefore, 
at once made arrangements to undertake this work in addition 
to the other matters already in hand. This was in July, 1903, 
and the manufacturers were definitely asked to make sugges- 
tions regarding the proposed standardization. 

Work of Standardization: The problem was at first taken up 
with the manufacturers of approved enclosed fuses; but later 
suggestions from other parties were requested; in fact, the 
committee welcomed advice from anyone interested in the sub- 
ject. The work of tabulating in detail the several fuses then 
on the market with regard to the type and dimensions was 
promptly begun; and on September 17, 1903, after some pre- 
liminary correspondence on the general subject, the first con- 
ference with the manufacturers was held in Boston. The 
situation was carefully gone over, and the necessity for the 
proposed standardization was outlined. The difficulties in the 
way of accomplishing it were at once evident, as it would re- 
quire manufacturers to make a considerable change in stock, 
and in dies, and in shop methods to some extent, all of which 
would entail a large expense to each manufacturer. The ques- 
tion of bringing about a change in practice from the fuses in 
general use to others of a different design was also a prominent 


898 LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES: [Sept. 22° 


factor, as there were many thousands of enclosed fuses and 
corresponding cut-outs already in ‘service. In addition to these 
difficulties came the greater difficulties of determining just 
what style of terminal and what dimensions should be adopted 
for the standard. The manufacturers, however, were willing 
to give their aid in the matter and made definite recommenda- 
tions for the standard, all of which was of great assistance 
because their data, obtained from innumerable tests and close 
observation of the operation of the fuses in practice, were 
available. . 

As a result of the codperation of the Switch and Cut-out 
Committee and the manufacturers, the committee was able to 
report, in December, 1903, at the annual meeting of the Under- 
writers’ National Electric Association, an outline for the pro- 
posed standard enclosed fuse; the report was adopted and the 
committee was given authority to complete the details. 

Further conferences were held in June, 1904, several 
of the manufacturers submitted more or less complete lines 
of fuses made to conform to the proposed specifications for the 
standard enclosed fuse. About 300 of these fuses were tested 
in Boston with special reference to their operation under short- 
circuit conditions. The large currents necessary for the work 
were obtained at the stations of the Edison Electric Illuminating 
Company and the Boston Elevated Railway Company. The 
complete results of the tests were incorporated in a report, 
dated July 14, 1904. In general the tests were satisfactory, and 
showed conclusively that the proposed specifications for enclosed 
fuses were, as a whole, practicable. The specifications, as far 
as completed, were therefore printed and promulgated in a 
pamphlet dated July 1, 1904, entitled ‘‘ Enclosed Fuse Supple- 
ment to the 1903 edition of the National Electrical Code.” 

Since July, 1904, the work has been continued with the view 
of securing a list of manufacturers prepared to make the standard 
{use in a satisfactory manner, which has required a further 
series of tests on nearly 600 fuses. Part of the work has been 
done at the Underwriters’ Laboratories, Chicago; but the 
larger part has been carried on, in Boston, by the members 
of the committee residing there, who have not acted in this 
work, however, as the Switch and Cut-out Committee but as 
engineers. The work of the committee has technically been 
confined to the preparation of the specifications. The work, 
however, gave the committee additional data from which they 


1905.] LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. 899 


were able to complete and perfect the specifications given iri 
the July supplement. The last series of tests also required 
very large currents under conditions where short circuits could 
be made, and, like the earlier tests, were: conducted at the 
stations of the Edison Electric Hluminating Company of Boston 
and the Boston Elevated Railway Company. 

The later tests were reported in full to the respective manufac- 
turers, under date of November 30, 1904. The fuses gave better 
results in certain respects than at the June tests, and on the 
whole a considerable improvement was noted. A number of 
the makes were, therefore, approved and were included in a 
special edition (dated July, 1905) of the pamphlet ‘‘ Approved 
Electrical Fittings,” issued by the Inspection Department of 
the Associated Factory Mutual Fire Insurance Companies. The 
approval of these fuses was also bulletined by the Underwriters’ 

_ Laboratories to all subscribers. 


RESULT OF THE WORK OF STANDARDIZATION: 


THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE STANDARD ENCLOSED FUSE. 


The result of the work of standardizing and tests for ap- 
proval of the enclosed fuse, which has been in progress for 
- nearly 2 years, is given in the National Electrical Code of 1905, 
and in the List of Approved Fittings of April, 1905. The com- 
pleted specifications are appended to this paper. It may 
be of interest to note some of the main features of the stand- 
ard fuse. 

Terminals.—The form of terminal to adopt was one of the 
most difficult problems to solve. Every one of the several 
terminals in use had advantages and disadvantages, and in 
the conferences there were strong advocates for the adoption 
of each. The screw-and-washer type, though probably the 
simplest and possibly the best electrically, offered also a ready 
means for wrong re-fusing with wires: in fact, such use was of 
everyday occurrence. This form of terminzl had been used 
for fuse connections from the beginning of electrical installa- 
tions, and everybody was accustomed to clamp, the fuse wire 
under the screws, so that such a terminal would at once suggest 
this method of fusing, which would manifestly be improper 
where the cut-outs had been installed for the ,use of enclosed 
fuses. The merits of this type, ‘however, were, discussed at 


considerable length. 


900 LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. [Sept. 22 


Several suggestions were made for an entirely new terminal, 
and two or three models were constructed. Of course, none 
of them had had the test of practical use, and it was soon de- 
cided to recommend some one of the forms that had been found 
reasonably satisfactory in practice. 

The spring-clip and knife-blade terminals were finally chosen. 
Neither of these was especially new, as both had been in use 
for some time, particularly the spring-clip type These forms 
of terminals seemed to remove the temptation to wrong re- 
fusing as far as it was practicable to do so by mere form of 
contacts. Just how successful such terminals will be in this 
respect is yet to be determined as the standard fuses come more 
and more into general use. 

Probably no fuse better illustrates the points that it was 
desired to secure than the old Edison plug; nevertheless this 
plug can be sadly misused. Inspectors and others have un- 
doubtedly seen Edison plug cut-outs from which the plugs have 
been removed and pieces of fuse wire run over the top or along 
the sides of the cut-out and connected under the screws at the 
wire terminals. Sometimes the plugs have even been filled 
with type metal, and afterwards naturally ‘‘ gave no trouble 
from blowing out and interrupting the circuit.’”’ In other 
instances where the attendant was somewhat less ignorant 
or more interested in the safety of the equipment, ‘‘ blown ”’ 
plugs have been re-fused on the premises with much larger 
wire than the plug was designed for, “in order to prevent it 
blowing again.”’ It has also been found that bent hairpins, 
wads of tin-foil, etc., can be crowded into the Edison plug 
cut-out in place of the proper fuse plugs and carry the current 
all right. All such expedients are, of course, most dangerous. 

While the Edison plug has been subjected to all these abuses, 
the total number of such cases is believed to be insignificant 
compared with the millions of plugs that have been properly 
used. This, however, cannot be said of the screw-and-washer 
type of terminal. The right use of the plug is probably due 
to: (1) the rules of the underwriters and their inspection bureaus; 
(2) the readiness with which they can be secured in almost any 
location; (3) the reasonably low price at which the plugs can 
be bought; (4) the convenience in replacing them in the cut- 
outs and (5) the difficulty frequently found in re-fusing them. 
The wrong use of the screw-and-washer type of enclosed fuse 
cut-out can probably be charged to: (1) the cheapness of fuse 


1905.] LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. 901 


wire; (2) the adaptability of a single spool of wire to cut-outs 
of widely different capacities, and (3) the familiarity of wiremen 
with the use of link fuses and fuse wire in similar cut-out blocks. 

The spring-clip and knife-blade terminals were believed to 
have as many of the advantages of the Edison plug and as few 
of the disadvantages of the screw-and-washer terminals, with 
respect to wrong fusing, as could be obtained and still retain 
other desirable features. 

Another point in favor of the terminals that have been adopted 
is that the fuses may be inserted and removed without the aid 
of screw-drivers or wrenches, which many times have accidentally 
been the cause of serious short circuits when fuses were being 
replaced on live circuits. 

Dimensions.—The dimensions for the fuses finally chosen 
were not those of an entire line of any one of the several manu- 
facturers. In fact, many, if not most of them, were somewhat 
different from the dimensions of fuses then in use. At the 
start it was pointed out, on the one hand, that the dimensions 
must not be so small that the standard fuse would thereby be 
limited to a certain particular construction in order to success- 
fully meet the other requirements, such as test, rating, tem- 
perature rise, and thus become a serious handicap to other 
manufacturers, who might find it necessary or desirable to use 
some different form of construction; and, on the other hand, 
that the dimensions must not be so large as to make the fuses 
unnecessarily bulky, as this would 1equire, among other things, 
larger cut-outs, larger switch and panel boards, and more 
room in cabinets, all of which would tend to increased cost, 
not only in the installation of the devices but probably also 
in the manufacture and shipping of the fittings themselves. 
As it was considered that the manufacturers had to a great 
extent the data necessary to show the safe and reasonable limits 
for these dimensions, they were looked to for suggestions, 
with the caution that they keep in mind the points above men- 
tioned. 

After definite conclusions had been reached it was of con- 
siderable interest to compare the results of the several con- 
ferences, and the large amount of study that had been given 
the matter, with a table that had been prepared at the beginning 
and before any of the problems had received much attention. 
The table was based on the dimensions of the fuses then on the 
market, and gave for each classification what seemed to be aver- 


902 LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. [Sept. 22 


age dimensions without special reference to any type OF make. 
in many cases the average dimensions in the table were exactly 
the same as finally recommended for the standard fuses, and in 
practically all of the classes the differences were only small 
fractions of an inch. The average variation between this table 
and the table of dimensions finally adopted was only 12 per 
cent. The new dimensions are, therefore, not radically different 
from those of fuses that have been in use for several years. 

Rating.—As already pointed out, the previous specifications 
of the underwriters required that the fuses be marked with 80 
percent. of the maximum current they could carry indefinitely. 
This was an arbitrary rating, since theoretically the rating 
would be 100 per cent. or, in other words, the maximum current 
the fuse could carry indefinitely. The reason for the above 
rating was to take care of irregularities of manufacture, and 
especially to guard against blowing of fuses exactly propor- 
tioned to the existing load when, for example, the voltage 
happened to be slightly increased or another lamp added; in 
other words, the rating was intended to provide a reasonable 
margin for irregularities in manufacture and ordinary fluctua- 
tions in service conditions, including changes in temperature 
of the surrounding air. In many cases it is believed that this 
precaution prevents interruption of service caused by un- 
necessary blowing of fuses, and thus appreciably lessens the 
temptation to put in larger fuses, which many times would 
be much heavier than required. On the whole, therefore, better 
protection is secured by this rating. 

While this rule was retained for link fuses, it was slightly modi- 
fied in the specifications for the standard enclosed fuse, which as 
originally proposed required that the fuse must carry 10 per cent. 
more current than that for which it was rated, and must melt with 
15 per cent. current above its rating. The melting point of the 
fuse was, therefore, between 10 and 15 per cent. overload. The 
25 per cent. overload necessary to melt a link fuse was thus re- 
duced to from 10 to 15 per cent. for the standard enclosed fuse. 
This smaller margin between the rating and the maximum 
carrying capacity was considered sufficient, as it was claimed 
by manufacturers that the enclosed fuse could be rated more 
accurately than the link fuse, and possibly would be less affected 
by surroundings. The latter point, however, is perhaps open 
to some question. 

In order to be sure that: the fuses would melt in a reasonably 


1905.] LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. 903 


short time with an appreciably greater overload, a third re- 
quirement was made that with 50 per cent. overload the 
fuses must open the circuit within a specified time, ranging 
from 30 seconds for the 30-ampere class to 10 minutes for the 
600-ampere class, the test starting with the fuse cold, that is, 
75° fahr. 

The above figures were almost entirely a suggestion of the 
manufacturers, who were sure that they could meet such a 
specification for rating. In tests of a large number of fuses 
made later. it seemed to be evident that it was going to be 
difficult, if not impracticable, to manufacture commercially a 
fuse complying with the first two parts of the rule, and the 
15 per cent. limit was increased to 25 per cent., which is now 
required in the completed specifications. As the minimum 
melting point and the maximum carrying capacity are prac- 
tically the same thing, the ratings of link fuses and enclosed 
fuses may be nearly alike regarding their overload capacity. 
. The actual performance of the enclosed fuse is, however, more 
definitely defined. 

The rule for rating also has an especially important require- 
ment, viz., that with the 25 per cent. overload the temperature 
of the fuse must not be sufficient to injure the tube or the 
cut-out terminals. To keep the fuses reasonably cool is obvi- 
ously an important matter and, therefore, an additional re- 
quirement has been made regarding it. 

Temperature Rise -—Excessive overheating of the fuses may 
mean ignition of lint or other readily inflammable material on 
or near them and would be almost sure to char the fuse tube 
sufficiently to weaken it seriously, so that it might give way 
when the fuse is blown, especially if-on a bad short circuit or 
under other severe conditions. Although accurate tests have 
not yet been made regarding this point, it would seem from 
what has already been done that the present approved fuses 
will meet this requirement satisfactorily. 

Test.—Regarding the operation of the enclosed fuse, it is 
evident that it should successfully open the circuit according 
to the requirements for rating under the most severe con- 
ditions liable to be met in actual practice, and this should 
be done without liability of igniting nearby combustible 
material, since the fuses are intended for use outside of 
cabinets in almost any convenient place. The specifications, 
therefore, require satisfactory operation in both respects when 


904 LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. [Sept. 22 


one fuse is blown on a short circuit on a system of large gen- 
erating capacity. There may be a difference of opinion as to 
what this capacity should be, but in the specifications the 
minimum limit of 300 kw. was designated to guard against 
testing on a system of such small capacity that poor fuses 
could stand the test. 

The amount and kind of resistance in the testing circuit are 
undoubtedly of considerable importance in such tests, for it 
has been found by actual test that a fuse that will operate 
well on a circuit having what would ordinarily be considered 
a small resistance and connected to almost unlimited generating 
capacity, such as a large storage-battery, may be blown to 
pieces on a 300-kw. generator, if connected to the machine 
by only a few feet of wire of liberal conductivity. The ideal 
specifications, therefore, should probably also call for a definite 
resistance in the fuse circuit, but just what resistance should 
be used has not yet been fully determined. It is believed, 
however, that it should not be so small that fuses suitable for 
use practically everywhere, except in the stations themselves, 
will be condemned. 

If the fuses are made to withstand station conditions, the 
cost must necessarily be greater than if a less severe test were 
required, and this increased cost would fall on the general 
public, whose equipments, except in rare cases, do not require 
such heavily constructed fuses either for safety or for successful 
operation. Undoubtedly the present users of enclosed fuses 
will agree that they already cost enough, and any additional 
rule beyond the requirements of safety that would increase 
this cost would probably result in greatly reducing the number 
that otherwise would be in service. Therefore, in laying out 
the tests for fuses submitted for approval such conditions 
were chosen as seemed best to represent the severer conditions 
of the average equipment, without expecting that the fuses 
submitted would be satisfactory for station use. For such 
service stronger fuses would undoubtedly be required. 


Tests of ENcLosED Fus—Es MADE UNDER THE SPECIFICATIONS. 


In addition to the two series of tests already mentioned, 
in which 900 fuses were tested, 200 more tests were made, in 
February and April, 1905, on improved samples of those makes 
and sizes that had not operated satisfactorily in the previous 
tests. The testing facilities previously given by the Edison 


1905.] LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. 905 


Electric Illuminating Company of Boston were again available 
for the greater part of the third series of tests, although quite 
a number of the tests were made at other places where ap- 
proximately the same conditions could be obtained. 

In all the short-circuit tests the available generating capacity 
was much larger than 300 kw. mentioned in the specifications. 
While undoubtedly the 300 kw. would have been sufficient for 
the smaller fuses, it would not properly represent conditions 
under which the larger fuses are used in practice, and it is 
believed that this point should be kept in mind when con- 
sidering the present specifications for test. The minimum 
limit of 300 kw. was intended more for the smaller fuses, say 
60 or 100 amperes, depending somewhat on the voltage for 
which the fuses are designed. For the larger fuses, however, 
it is believed that greater capacity is necessary, if commercial 
conditions are to be represented, and for a general rule it is 
suggested that the available capacity back of the fuse under 
test be, say, 10 times that at which the fuse is rated. 

The 250-volt fuses, of 100 amperes and smaller current 
capacity, were tested on a regular commercial building service 
of the Edison Company, and the larger fuses were connected 
to a sub-switchboard fed through large cables from the main 
power-station about 4000 ft. distant. There was, therefore, 
no question but that the tests were made under actual service 
conditions. 

It was necessary to test the 600-volt fuses on a special testing 
circuit, so that the question of a proper resistance had to be 
considered. In most of the tests the total resistance of the 
circuit, with switches closed and the fuse in position, was about 
0.13 ohms, which represented a reasonably small per cent. loss 
for commercial circuits, especially for the smaller circuits, 
although possibly a little greater loss than is to be found in actual 
practice on the larger circuits. In some of the tests the resist- 
ance was 0.24 ohms, although no appreciable difference was 
noticed in the results, showing that within limits the resistance 
can probably be varied somewhat without seriously affecting 
the results. 

In some of the tests, however, it was noted that fuses that 
were reasonably satisfactory under severe short-circuit con- 
ditions were liable to fail if the current flow was limited by a 
resistance, even to a fairly large amount; for example, 1 500 
amperes when testing 100- and 200-ampere fuses, and vice 


906 LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. [Sept. 22 


versa; fuses that apparently were successful under the lim- 
ited load conditions would fail in the heavier short circuit tests. 
This result was evidently dependent upon the special interior 
construction of the several fuses used. While this point was 
interesting and suggestive, it was not investigated sufficiently 
by the committee having the tests in charge to warrant them 
in drawing any definite conclusions or recommending modifica- 
tions of the present requirements for tests. 

The failures noted during tests might be divided into two 
classes: first, failures in which the circuit was opened but 
the fuse tubes were burst or the end caps or ferrules blewn 
off; and secondly, failures in which the arc held either through or 
around the fuse. While both classes of failures were rated 
‘‘ poor,” the second class is, of course, by far the more dangerous. 
In one of the worst failures the arc held inside the tube until 
the emergency switch was opened; in the meantime flame 
and melted metal were thrown in a continual stream from 
both ends of the fuse a distance of, say, 20 ft. and a volume of 
flame and gas or smoke was discharged upward through the 
side of the tube at least 25 or 30 ft. Lest it might be thought 
that these failures were frequent, it should be stated that 
the reverse was true. Such failures clearly indicated defects, 
which in later tests of improved sa.nples under practically 
the same conditions were found to have been removed. 

In contrast with a comparatively few bad failures were a_ 
large number of successful tests of fuses of the different sizes 
and makes, which operated quietly and with but little or no 
flash outside the fuse tube. This was especially true of the 
last two series of tests. It is, therefore, believed that the 
enclosed fuses that have been approved and included in the 
List of Approved Electrical Fittings, published by the Na- 
tional Board of Fire Underwriters and the Associated Factory 
Mutual Fire Insurance Companies, are safe for general use. 
Accidents will occur; and so also will defective fuses be found 
now and then, but in view of the care being used by the manu- 
facturers in constructing them the danger from this cause 
should be small. 

It should be noted that with but few exceptions the fuses 
tested were provided with indicato-s, and while these are not 
required .by the specifications, it has been found necessary 
to furnish them in practice, due to the demands of the users. 
The indicator is, therefore, considered in the trade as an essen- 


1905.] LACOUNL -ENOLOSED FUSES. 907 


tial part of a commercially successful enclosed fuse. This 
question of indicator has been rather difficult to solve, not so 
much because they could not be made to work, but because 
they tended to interfere with the safe operation of the fuse. 
This feature has been found to be of such importance that 
in making the tests for approval it has been required that if 
an indicator was to be used in the commercial product, it also 
be provided on the fuse submitted for test. Although, as 
stated, the indicators are not mentioned in the specifications, 
a record of their performance was kept throughout the tests, 
and it may be of interest to know that while the majority 
operated as intended, they frequently failed to give the proper 
indication. 

A considerable number of fuses have also been tested for rating 
in line with the specifications. Some of these tests were made at 
the Underwriters’ Laboratories, Chicago. The other tests were 
carried on at the Mass. Institute of Technology. Inthe latter tests, 
to economize time and increase the accuracy of compariscn, :ev- 
eral fuses were connected in series (at times as many as 20) and the 
rated current was passed through them until the maximum tem- 
perature had been reached, as noted by frequent readings of ther- 
mometers placed on the fuse tubes, with small bits of cotton 
waste over the bulbs to shield them. The temperatures thus re- 
corded may not have properly indicated the actual tempera- 
ture of the fuse casing, although probably the results were 
not greatly in error. They did show, however, when the con- 
ditions were approximately constant, which was the information 
specially desired. The maximum temperature was reached in 
about four hours; the current was then raised to 10 per cent. 
overload, and thence by steps of about 2.5 to 5 per cent. over- 
load, until all of the fuses had melted. The current was held 
at each step until all the fuses had reached the maximum 
temperature or had melted, and the instant a fuse melted, 
which was indicated on the ammeter, a dummy fuse, provided 
for the purpose, was put in its place in order to interrupt the 
continuity of the test as little as possible. 

In the last series of tests a few 200-ampere fuses were tested, 
but otherwise the rating tests were limited to 30, 60 and 100 
amperes, due to the lack of time and proper facilities for con- 
tinuing the tests on the larger sizes. From 2 to 4 fuses 
of each size and make were tested, and in addition two of 
each were subjected to 50 per cent. overload, and the time 
required to melt them, starting cold, was noted. 


908 LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. [Sept. 22 


Direct current was used in most of the tests, although for 
some of them alternating current was more convenient and was, 
therefore, used. Regarding the use of alternating current for 
this work, the point has been raised that the temperature of 
the terminals is liable to be increased, due to the eddy currents 
set up in the caps, especially in those of the larger fuses. This 
matter has not been investigated, although it seems probable 


that any such action can have but little effect on the final 
results, Nevertheless, tests with alternating current would not 


be out of order, for enclosed fuses are frequently used on alter- 
nating current systems. 

As a rule, it has been found that if the fuses meet the spect- 
fications regarding the 10 per cent. and 25 per cent. overloads, 
they require a somewhat longer time to melt than given in the 
specifications. Manufacturers are still confident that the 
‘blowing ’’ time can be brought within the limits specified 
and are at work on this feature, which was not considered of 
sufficient importance, however, to prevent approval of the 
fuses at the present time. 


APPENDIX. 
SPECIFICATIONS FOR NATIONAL ELECTRICAL Cope STANDARD EN- 
CLOSED Fuses AND Cut-OUTs. 
Cut-Ovts. 


These requirements do not apply to rosettes, attachment plugs, car 
lighting, cut-outs and protective devices for signaling systems. 


GENERAL RULES. 


Must be supported on bases of non-combustible, non-absorptive 
insulating material. 

Cut-outs must be of plug or cartridge type, when not arranged in 
approved cabinets, so as to obviate any danger of the melted fuse metal 
coming in contact with any substance which might be ignited thereby. 

Cut-outs must operate successfully on short-circuits, under the most 
severe conditions with which they are liable to meet in practice, at 
twenty-five per cent. above their rated voltage, and with the largest 
fuses for which the cut-out is designed. 7 

The most severe service which can be required of a cut-out in prac- 
tice is to open a ‘ dead short-circuit ’’ with only one fuse blowing, and 
it is with these conditions that all tests should be made. 

Must be plainly marked where it will always be visible, with the 
name of the maker, and current and voltage for which the device is 
designed. 


———— 


1905.] LAGCOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. 909 


ENCLOSED-FusEe CutT-OuTs—PLUG AND CARTRIDGE TYPE. 


Base.—Must be made of non-combustible, non-absorptive insulating 
material. Blocks with an area of over twenty-five square inches must. 
have at least four supporting screws. Holes for supporting screws 
must be so located or countersunk that there will be at least one half 
of an inch space, measured over the surface, between the screw-head 
or washer and the nearest live metal part, and in all cases when be- 
tween parts of opposite polarity must be countersunk. 

Mounting.—-Nuts or screw-heads on the under side of the base must 
be countersunk at least one eighth of an inch and covered with a water- 
proof compound which will not melt below 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 

Terminals.—Terminals must be of either the Edison plug, spring 
clip, or knife blade type, of approved design, to take the corresponding 
standard enclosed fuses. They must be secured to the base by two 
screws or the equivalent, so as to prevent them from turning, and must 
be so made as to secure a thoroughly good contact with the fuse. End 


: Fie. 1. 

Showing maximum sizes in the several classifications of the National 
Electrical Code Standard Enclosed Fuses and Cut-outs. 

Notge.—The 30-ampere 250-volt plug cut-out is shown equipped with 
a plug casing for a Standard cartridge fuse and also an Edison plug fuse; 
the 60-ampere plug cut-out is equipped with a plug casing. 

Samples of all the approved makes of Standard Enclosed Fuses are 
shown in this Fig. generally inserted in cut-outs of a different make to 
illustrate the interchangeable feature. 


910 LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. [Sept. 22 


stops must be provided to insure the proper location of the cartridge 
fuse in the cut-out. 

Connections —Clamps for connecting wires to the terminals es be 
of a design which will ensure a thoroughly good connection, and must 
be sufficiently strong and heavy to w ithstand considerable hard usage. 
For fuses rated to carry over thirty amperes, lugs firmly screwed or 
bolted to the terminals and into which the connecting wires shall be 
soldered must be used. 

Classification. —Must be classified as regards both current and voltage 
as given in the following table, and must be so designed that the bases 
of one class cannot be used with fuses of another class rated for a higher 
current or voltage. 


0-250 VoLts. 251-600 VoLts. 
0-- 30 amperes. 0- 30 eh 
31- 60 31- 60 
61-100 * 61-100 Ly 
101-200 - 101-200 “ 
201-400 + 201-400 oe 
401-600 es 


Design.—Must be of such a design that it will not be easy to form 
accidental short-circuits across live metal parts of opposite polarity on 
the block or on the fuses in the block. 

Marking. —Must be marked, where it will be plainly visible when the 
block is installed, with the name of the maker and the voltage and 
range of current for which it is designed. 


EncLosED FusEs,—PLuG AND CARTRIDGE TYPE. 


These requirements do not apply to fuses for rosettes, attachment 
plugs, car lighting, cut-outs and protective devices for signaling systems. 

Construction.—The fuse plug or cartridge must be sufficiently dust- 
tight so that lint and dust cannot collect around the fusible wire and 
become ignited when the fuse is blown. 

The fusible wire must be attached to the plug or cartridge terminals 
in such a way as to secure a thoroughly good connection and to make 
it difficult for it to be replaced when melted. : 

Classification.—Must be classified to correspond with the different 
classes of cut-out blocks, and must be so designed that it will be im- 
possible to put any fuse of a given class into a cut-out block which is 
designed for a current or voltage lower:than that of the class to which 
the fuse belongs. 


Terminals.—The fuse ieehinals must be sufficiently heavy to ensure 


mechanical strength and rigidity. The styles of terminals must be as 
follows: ; 


0-250 Volts. 
a, spring clip 
A Cartridge fuse to } terminals. 
o- 30 “ (ferrule contact) fit | 6, Edison 
plug casings 
LB Approved plugs for Edison cut-outs. 


911 


EACOUNT : ENCLOSED FUSES 


1905.] 


OOF-L0Z é] ie iT v/T ET Ss OOF-LOG 
OOS-LOT all va el 9I/S tl L QOZ-TOL 
OOI-19 t 1] I 8/T i 9) OOT-1L9 
G ULLO oT G UlIO of 
09\-1¢ | , See Il ¢ ip eg Cots 
os -0 k ‘ 91/8 t P ¢ 0e =0 “OOY-1ES 
[ Wao [| ULIO ST SN 
009-LOF Sj iG TG ¥/1 46 9 201 O0O9-LOF 
O0F-1L0 é j a ¥/1 $1 Gg gS QOF-LOG 
00Z-TOT pal a 1 91/¢ tI if tL OOZ-LOL 
OOI-19 E I i 8/T - i ig OOT--19 
(aA ULIO | ee ULL 
09 -IS E i 91/8 : Hat ¢ 09 =I 
os —0 § § 91/6 i | Sj og —0 0SZ-0 
| ULIO oT [ ULL oJ 
“soyouy “Sououy “SOUouy “Ssoyouy *Sououy *soyouy “Ssoyouy 
“Oqny 
“SOpReld “Oqn L Jo aptsyno “Soprlgd 
‘soroduy yeululle jo sopelq yeurut [euluto jO ‘sd “sd “speurlute y ‘sorodury 
Jo “ULeICy =a0[, jo Io Sssouxory | qoe Uor)- yoe UO) ISAO ‘ 
*Aqrordes UIPIM so[Ni1o yy Jo IO so[NII9 YJ jo WadM4oq yysue’] “Aqroedey “aseqOoA 
peer yysue’y ULL JO Io}oUureiqd, UIPEM, JOUPISIC] peyer 
3) a a at 6) a Vv 


ce 


“ISQG GHUSOTONA ADGIULYVI CUVGNVLS UCOO TVIIALOETE TVNOILVN AHL dO S 


a 


NOISNANIG dO ATAVL, 


912 LACOUNT: ENCLOSED FUSES. [Sept. 22 


a, spring clip 
} Cartridge fuse to | terminals. 


31-60 “ (ferrule contact) fit | b, Edison plug 
casings. 

61-100 “ 
101-200 “ Cartridge fuse (knife blade contact). 
201-400 * 
401-600 * 
251-600 Volts. 

yar vee Cartridge fuse (ferrule contact). 

31- 60 

61-100 “ 

101-200 “ Cartridge fuse (knife blade contact). 
201-400 “ 


Dimensions.—Cartridge enclosed fuses and corresponding cut-out 
blocks must conform to the dimensions given in the table attached. 

Rating.—Fuses must be so constructed that with the surrounding 
atmosphere at a temperature of 75 degrees Fahrenheit they will carry 
indefinitely a current 10 per cent. greater than that at which they are 
rated, and at a current 25 per cent. greater than the rating, they will 
open the circuit without reaching a temperature which will injure the 
fuse tube or terminals of the fuse block. With a current 50 per cent. 
greater than the rating and at room temperature of 75 degrees Fahren- 
heit, the fuses, starting cold, must blow within the time specified. 


Q-— 30 amperes, 30 seconds. 
31- 60 ss 1 minute. 
61-100 Ny 2 minutes. 

101-200 ve 4 ;: 
201-400 . 8 shy 
401-600 - 10 by 


Marking.—-Must be marked, where it will be plainly visible, with the 
name or trade mark of the maker, the voltage and current for which the 
fuse is designed, and the words ‘‘ National Electrical Code Standard.” 
Each fuse must have a label, the color of which must be green for 250- 
volt fuses and red for 600-volt fuses. 

It will be satisfactory to abbreviate the above designation to “ N. E. 
Code St’d ’’ where space is necessarily limited. 

Temperature Rise-—The temperature of the exterior of the fuse en- 


closure must not rise more than 125 degrees Fahrenheit above that - 


of the surrounding air when the fuse is carrying the current for which 
it is rated. 

Test.—Must not hold an are or throw out melted metal or sufficient 
flame to ignite easily inflammable material on or near the cut-out, when 


only one fuse is blown at a time on a short-circuit, on a system having 


1905.] LACOUNT: ENCLOL£D FUSES. 913 


a capacity of 300 kw. or over, at the voltage for which the fuse is rated. 

The above requirement that the testing circuit must have a capacity 
of at least 300 kw. is to guard against making the test on a system of 
so small capacity that the conditions would be sufficiently favorable 
to allow reaily poor fuses to stand the test acceptably. On the other 
hand, it must be remembered that if the test is made on a system of 
very large capacity, and especially if there is but little resistance be-~ 
tween the generators and fuse, the conditions may be more severe than 
are liable to be met with in practice outside of the large power sta- 
tions, the result being that fuses entirely safe for general use may be re- 
jected if such test is insisted upon. A more definite rule regarding the 
conditions of this test is desirable, and the matter is under considera- 
tion. In any case the test should be arranged to best fepresent the 
severer conditions of actual practice, not, however, including central 
station equipments where specially designed and stronger fuses are un- 
doubtedly necessary. 


914 STANDARDIZATION OF ENCLOSED FUSES. [Sept. 22 


DiscussION ON ‘“‘ STANDARDIZATION OF ENCLOSED FusEs,” 
at New York, SEPtT., 22, 1905. 


H. O. Lacount: Here on the table is a complete line of the 
standard enclosed fuses adopted by the Underwriters National 
Electric Association. The collection shows clearly what has 
been accomplished in regard to interchangeable features. In- 
stead of this one table half covered with fuses, it would have 
required at least five such tables to hold all the enclosed fuses of 
these exact capacities which were in the market a year ago. 
Thus the number of fuses has been reduced about nine-tenths. 
To make all enclosed fuses of any given capacity interchangeable 
in the cut-outs, regardless of the make or date or place of 
purchase, was the object constantly in view, so that they 
might be as interchangeable, for example, as ordinary standard 
pipe-fittings. In order to make the cartridge type of enclosed 
fuse as interchangeable as possible in the Edison plug cut-out, 
which was adopted as part of the standard, fuse casings have 
been made which will receive the cartridge fuses, and can then 
be screwed into the plug cut-out. With these cut-outs thus 
equipped with casings, it is certain that the standard cartridge 
fuse, up to 60 amperes, at 250 volts, will go into either of the 
standard cut-out bases. 

President Wheeler: I might add to what Mr. Lacount 
has said about this cut-out, that Mr. E. H. Johnson and Mr. 
C. S. Bradley discovered about 23 years ago that it was neces- 
sary in practice to have a fuse on both sides of a circuit; 
otherwise one side being grounded in one place and the other 
side in another place, there might be established a circuit 
with no fuse in action at all. This array of samples reminds 
me vividly of the fact that at that time I was going over the 
ground described to-night—the standardization of fuses — 
though of course they were fuses of a type different from these. 
I am much interested in the paper, because of my interest in 
standardization and in the increase of interchangeability. I 
hope to see the Instirute do something further this year in 
the way of standardization. 

L. W. Downes: If I am not very much mistaken, the tests 
that Mr. Lacount refers to as having taken place in 1896, were 
conducted in the presence of Mr. Lacount, Professor Puffer, 
and Mr. E. V. French, in my laboratory at Providence. That 
was at the beginning of the enclosed fuse industry. 

Although quite a large number of the National Electrical 
Code fuses, made by the D. & W. Fuse Company, with which 
I am connected, have been used for several months, no com- 
plaints have been received. There are certain objections to 
the form of contact, but this holds true of any form of 
fuse that can be devised. I believe that the best results 
will be obtained by such a fuse as is represented in the type 
A, or screw-clamp contact, where the fuse terminals are firmly 
bolted to the cut-out. 


1905.] DISGUSSION AT NEW YORK. 915 


It is difficult to make fuses interchangeable according to the 
new National Code standard; and it has been found impossible 
to have the width of the blade always the same. A variation of 
two or three thousandths of an inch in thickness is practically 
unavoidable, and is sufficient to spread the jaws of the ter- 
_minals and thereby materially reduce the area of the contact. 
It is to be hoped, however, and I believe it to be a fact. that 
the area of the standard fuse terminals will be found amply large 
enough to allow for this necessary variation. 

In his paper Mr. Lacount refers to tests, and recommends 
that the available generator capacity back of the fuse be, 
say, 10 times that at which the fuse is rated. If kilowatt 
capacity is meant it seems low tome. Take, for example, a 600- 
ampere, 600-volt fuse; the required kilowatt capacity for testing 
this will be 3 600 kw. I believe that Mr. Lacount is too conserva- 
tive. I should say that as the ampere capacity of the fuse in- 
creases the relative generator capacity for testing it should be 
even greater than that given by him. A 600-ampere fuse that 
will operate perfectly when tested on a 1 000-kw. generator may 
go to pieces when tested on a 5 000-kw. circuit. 

H. O. Lacount: My recommendation was intended to em- 
phasize the point that the available capacity on the testing 
circuit should not be too small. For example, it would require 
that when testing a 600-ampere fuse of a given voltage, the 
source of current should be capable of delivering to the testing 
circuit 6 000 amperes at that voltage; with 100-ampere fuses, 
for example, 1 000 amperes should be available. 

L. W. Downes: You referred, then, to the ampere capacity, 
and not to the kilowatt capacity? 

H. O. Lacount: Yes. 

L. W. Downes: The D. & W. Fuse Company was given 
an unusual opportunity to investigate the effect of large gen- 
erator capacity back of the fuse by the Interborough Rapid 
Transit Company of New York. An exhaustive series of tests 
was conducted. A generator capacity of not less than 5 000 kw. 
was available, with a measured current on short-circuit as high 
as 18 000 amperes. The tests were conducted at several points 
on the line of the Manhattan Railway Division, the majority 
of them being made at the 99th Street station, where the po- 
tential drop between that point and the generating station 
was extremely small. There was practically no drop in leads 
connected with the fuses between the third-rail and the elevated 
iron structure, which acted as the ground or return circuit. 
In the earlier tests elaborate arrangements were perfected 
for measuring the current, and rise in potential, and for taking 
instantaneous photographs of the fuses at the instant of dis- 
ruption. It was found that.a very slight resistance in the 
circuit materially affected the operation of the fuse; therefore 
I think it desirable to test fuses with a much larger relative 
generator capacity than Mr. Lacount has suggested, as other- 


916 STANDARDIZATION OF ENCLOSED FUSES. |Sept. 22 


wise the conditions that accurately tell how the fuse is going 
to operate in service will not be obtained. I believe that for 
the security of the property a fuse should be tested under the 
severest conditions that it is likely to be called upon commercially 
to withstand. 

President Wheeler: When the fuse melts, what causes 
the potential to rise beyond the potential that the fuse is in- 
tended to stand? 

L. W. Downes: The potential rise, as measured on the Man- 
hattan Division when short circuiting these fuses, was approxi- 
mately 100%, the normal potential being 625 volts. The first 
evidence of the potential rise was in the flashing-over of the 
motors on passing trains. The test took place between 11 and 
1 o’clock at night when the load was light; several trains were 
stalled at different times by the flashing-over of the motors 
immediately after the fuses under test had been short circuited. 
This great rise in potential I attribute to the large mass of 
iron in the elevated structure becoming magnetically charged, 
so to speak, and thus raising the potential as in a transformer 
action. In a large number of tests conducted on other cir- 
cuits, where great masses of iron were not present, no such 
extraordinary rise in potential was noticed. 

President Wheeler: I am surprised that fuses are used for 
service of that kind. I did not suppose these conditions 
would arise in ordinary service. 

L. W. Downes: These fuses are placed on what is termed 
the ‘‘ shoe-beam,’’ to which the shoe is attached. 

President Wheeler: But is not that rather a special use, 
and does it not show that, for the majority of purposes, fuses 
do not need this extra large generator capacity in testing? 
It seems to me that nine-tenths of the fuses used are not for 
service where the potential will rise 100%. 

L. W. Downes: I do not think the potential rise affected 
in any way the operation of the fuse, as this rise occurred after 
the fuse had opened the circuit. 

President Wheeler: What is the necessity of having very 
large dynamo capacity when testing fuses, except to keep on 
supplying the current that will continue to flow when the fuse 
arcs under the higher potential? 

L. W. Downes: With limited dynamo capacity, the rush of 
current through the fuse on short circuit is materially cut down. 
The operation of the fuse, good or bad, is dependent entirely 
on the rapidity with which the metal of the fuse-link enclosed 
in the tube is converted into vapor, since this governs the 
resulting pressure developed within the fuse-casing. It is 
estimated that the instantaneous pressure developed within 
the casing of the 400-ampere fuse, such as is employed on the 
Manhattan Division of the Interborough Rapid Transit Com- 
pany, may rise as high as 900 to 1100 lb. per square inch. 
Now if the generator capacity is small the period occupied in 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. O17 


converting the fuse-metal into vapor is materially lengthened, 
and as this vapor escapes and condenses very rapidly the 
Pressure produced is consequently less, so that the fuse will 
operate satisfactorily, which it would not do if the period of 
operation were materially cut down. 

_ President Wheeler: I do not think this condition applies 
to ordinary fuses in ordinary service. 

L. W. Downes: I feel that it does, and for this reason: 
throughout the country the capacity of generators in central 
stations is constantly growing greater. Formerly it was held 
that a 300-kw. generator was a big machine; now there are 
1 000-, 1 500-, 2 000-, or 3 000-kw. generators in central sta- 
tions supplying light and power. It is on such circuits that 
fuses may be installed, some of them within the station or 
very close to it, and on lines with a very small drop. 

A. H. Pikler: In reviewing this paper I find no mention 
made of the material or substance used for enclosing the fuse. 
As this is quite important in view of the danger of fire, the 
maintaining of the arc, etc., it would be well to consider that 
point in future standardizing of enclosed fuses. 

W. L. Puffer: In regard to the rise of potential noted by 
Mr. Downes, if the generator is so large that the electromotive 
force remains at its primary value, the current obtained on 
short circuit follows the usual law. The flow of such an enor- 
mous current in any kind of circuit will give rise to a large 
magnetic field, which will produce the same results when the 
circuit opens as does a spark-coil in an automobile or in a gas- 
lighting system—there is a kick or discharge which makes a 
terrific spark through which the current keeps flowing. 

I have in mind some short-circuit tests of 50-ampere fuses dur- 
ing which the bus-bar voltage of a 480-kw. compound generator 
went down 75% at the time the switch closed, and when the 
fuse opened the circuit the bus-bar voltage went up 100 per 
cent. The current that went through that 50-ampere fuse 
was somewhere between 5 000 and 10 000 amperes; nevertheless 
the operation was over so quickly that had the lamps in this 
hall been on the circuit no flicker in the light would have been 
perceived. I think the enormous increase of voltage coming 
across that gap produced the effect which Mr. Downes spoke 
of as necessitating the use of a larger fuse in railroad work. 

As far as the amount of current to be used on testing a fuse is 
concerned, it seems to me that a fuse is put in as a pro- 
tection to a circuit delivering a certain amount of current. 
The circuit is designed for a certain per cent. of drop, and 
therefore the maximum possible current will be, roughly speak- 
ing, the increase obtained when the circuit is closed; in other 
words, if the average drop is 5% the current would increase 
about 20 times. This is in lire with what the last speaker 
said, and he is correct; but I think it hardly just to expect 
all small users to buy a fuse that is sufficiently good to be used 


918 STANDARDIZATION OF ENCLOSED FUSES. [Sept. 22 


on Interborough work, for example. I think that in such places 
they should have a specially made apparatus It does not 
seem to me that the insurance people and the engineering 
people are especially interested in that type of fuse for general 
distribution. 

As far as the heating of the knife-blade terminals is con- 
cerned, experiments that | have seen seem to suggest that 
the knife-blade itself is not a source of heat, but that the 
heat which appears there at times comes from another place. 
This has been suggested to me by the fact that when the fuse 
is removed and a dummy fuse put in its place there is no heat, 
which would seem to indicate that the blade had nothing to 
do with it. 

H. G. Stott: Perhaps I can throw a little light on the fuse 
tests on the Interborough lines. Mr. Downes has referred to 
the rise of potential when a fuse breaks. The reason for this 
rise of potential is, of course, very simple. There is a 100-lb. 
iron rail carrying between 20 000 and 30000 amperes at the 
moment of short circuit; when this current is suddenly inter- 
rupted the enormous magnetic flux surrounding the iron con- 
ductor induces counter electromotive force of self-induction in 
the rail causing, as has been stated, a rise of potential of about 
100 per cent. It is quite obvious also that the moment the 
short circuit takes place the same self-inductive electromotive 
force is generated, but in the opposite direction to that in which 
it is broken, so that it tends to reduce the potential on the 
circuit almost to zero. This, of course, is in accordance with 
Lenz’s law, that the electromotive force of self-induction is 
always opposed to the electromotive force giving rise to it. 

Experience shows that though a certain fuse might be per- 
fectly satisfactory on a given system, it might fail absolutely 
on another system with a greater kilowatt capacity. A note 
of warning should be attached to all standard specifications for 
fuses, calling the purchaser's attention to the well-known fact 
that fuses must be designed to meet the special conditions 
under which they are to work, and that because a fuse is labeled 
600 volts it does not follow that this fuse will safely open such 
a circuit. 

Reference has been made in the discussion to switchboard 
fuses on the supposition that they are in use in the Inter- 
borough system; I wish to say that that supposition is wrong, 
as nothing but circuit-breakers are used on any Interborough 
switchboard. 


A paper presented at the 199th Meeting of the Ameri- 
can Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
September 22, 195. 


Copyright 1905, By A. I. E. B. 


AIR-GAP FLUX IN INDUCTION MOTORS. 


BY A. S. LANGSDORF. 

In determining the variation of the value of the flux in 
polyphase induction motors, and its progression around the 
air-gap, it is customary to assume that the current in each 
phase follows a sine law. In this way it has been shown that 
the flux rotates synchronously around the air-gap and that its 
magnitude varies between a maximum and a minimum; but 
it does not appear that the law of this variation in magnitude 
has been investigated. It is common practice in determining 
its mean value to consider the flux a maximum (in the case 
of three-phase motors) when the three currents are, respec- 
tively, J, —41,—41, where I is the maximum current per 


be. /3 
phase; and a minimum when the currents are —- i, Dsand 


v3 


5 J; the mean of these two values being then considered as 


the average for the cycle.* This method is, of course, only 
approximate; but it will be shown in what follows that the 
actual average is not only greater than the value obtained as 
above, but it may even exceed the above assumed maximum. 

The object of this investigation was to study the effect 
upon the flux distribution of varying numbers of teeth in the 
stator. It was found that the law of this variation could be 
conveniently expressed in the form of relatively simple equa- 
tions, which are derived in the manner shown below. Four 


a ae a eee 
*The Induction Motor, De la Tour (Mailloux) pp. 5-8. 
919 


920 LANGSDORF: INDUCTION MOTORS. [Sept. 22 


distinct cases are considered: (1) Three-phase motors having 
an even number (t) of slots per pole per phase; (2) three-phase 
motors, t odd; (3) two-phase motors, t even; and (4) two-phase 
motors, t odd. In each case, for convenience, a unit length of 
core parallel to the shaft is assumed. 
Let ¢ = number of slots per pole per phase. 

a = pitch of slots. 

n = number of conductors per slot. 

d = radial length of air-gap. 

1 = developed length of pole-pitch. 

I = maximum current per phase. 


I. TuHrREeE-PHASE Motors, t EVEN. 


4, =TIsin@ = current in phase 1. 

i, = Isin (9—120) = current in phase 2. 

iz = Isin (0-240) = current in phase 3. 
l=d3at 


Let Fig. 1 represent the instantaneous distribution of magneto- 
motive forces for a general phase angle 0, the rectangles corre- 
sponding to any particular phase being drawn with slightly 
different ordinates for greater clearness. The ordinates have a 

4 : é 
length equal to <G ni, and it we assume that the reluctance of 
the teeth and core is negligible in comparison with that of the 
air-gap, the flux per unit area will be 7 a 


The flux included between the lines A B and CD; that is, 


.905.] LANGSDORF: INDUCTION MOTORS. 921 


included in a space equal to that of the pole-pitch, is the sum- 
mation of all the rectangular areas between these lines, pro- 
An nt 


vided the ordinates are read in terms of te i The flux is 


also equal to the area under a stepped “‘ curve ’’ (Fig. 2) whose 
ordinate at any point is the algebraic sum of those of the sev- 
eral rectangles at that point. This curve will, in general, 
consist of two parts; one above the horizontal axis, or positive; 
the other below the axis, or negative. The expression for 
the net area obtained by adding all the rectangular areas is, 
therefore, not the flux per pole; to obtain the latter there 


must be added to the net value an amount equal to twice the 
area of the negative loop of the stepped curve. 

The net value, ¢), may be found by considering each phase 
separately, thus: 


Phase 1. = 


us 


7 


b-i “Hal @r-a) ca {@i-1-att.... 


nm 1 @t—1)-2(5-1)1 


4 Wid O. 
= — Soe 


mt 
10 d 


922 LANGSDORF: INDUCTION MOTORS. [Sept. 22 


Phase 2. 
P2 = p2' +2" 


Phase 3. 
By analogy with phase 2, 
4n nat? 1 
Sy" 0 me ae 
An: "ait? brs 1 1 
oe rd Ee " siz) 


Tv 
® 
above is entirely positive between the limits A B and CD, 
but immediately thereafter a negative loop appears in the 
space sy (Fig. 1), due to the progression of the field. This 
loop has an area 


At the moment when 9 = —, the stepped curve referred to 


1905.] LANGSDORF; INDUCTION MOTORS. 923 


and it remains the only negative area until the ordinate in 


space s; becomes zero. If this ordinate is b,, we have 


: say NONE 
which vanishes when 0-= tan-! ls =). 


We have, therefore, that between 


and 


Proceeding in this manner from slot to slot, letting the or- 
dinates in spaces sy, S3, etc., successively vanish, the following 


expressions result: 


. 1 V3t 1 34 
From @ = tant (— > 5 ) to § = tan-' (ae 3°), 
+ t Anz na 
T-,na = : i,| 


924 LANGSDORF: INDUCTION MOTORS. [Sept. 22 


AT CI IORY NF id ie hioh 
= $+ 2/55 5 ids Some 355 4] 


In general, we have that between 


aS 
t +1) 4 : 
b= 9.4 2[4% Ort nA Gi POY FF Pal 


: : t 
where p is an integer that takes all values from zero to fe - 1) 


“a 


inclusive. When p has the latter value, the superior limit of 
6 becomes 120°; 7, then becomes zero, and thereafter the cycle 
of changes is repeated in inverse order. To obtain the average 
value of ¢ it will, therefore, be sufficient to integrate the func- 
tion between the limits @ = 90° and @ = 120°, dividing then 


ay 


The ¢ function being a discontinuous one, we have 


oe sznel [ {ae pty} sing 


~22 +13 751008 0| 


1905.] LANGSDORF; INDUCTION MOTORS. 925 


whence 


p==-1 

$ Ee GyraT Ss pP+4P—-4p(p + 1)’ 

seem Dh? ad : [ V4 (p4$1)’?4+3? 
Lc 


38f-peP+4pP(pt) 
V4p?> +3? 


II. THREE-PHASE Morors, ¢# Opp. 


Constructing the magnetomotive force rectangles (Fig. 3) and 


proceeding as in (1), we find that between 0 = = and @ = 


tan-! (— V3 2) 


Fig, 3 


In general, after 0 = tan-! (—»/37) and between 


31 J/31 
6 = tan-! (- wet) and @=tan-! (-s 545). 


926 LANGSDORF: INDUCTION MOTORS. [Sept. 22 


b= +248 py Gi) a 


where p takes all integral values from unity to (=) in-. 


clusive. This general value may be written 


Ate 2 
d= st en (eas r*) sin 90 —»/3 ptcos | 


To obtain the average value of the flux we have 


Patan t—a/3th, an cf) os Baton eas ) 
6 Tet 2 pti) 
Paver, = I go d 8 — a { eee 
a = ie 6=tan-1 (-¥2*) 
* 2p-1 


which reduces to 


jae 
6 Teer 1 | (7A +42p242 is 
na eal Sve = ct 2pi? + 2p +1-8p* 4p? 


Por = T9 d L/3Pr1 VOptl+3e 


TO y Sip 2p hos ae 
V(2p - 1)? +3? 


Ill. Two-pHase Motors, t EVEN. 


Using similar methods, and remembering that 
i, = J sin 8 
i, = I sin (@— 90) 
lL =2at 
we have that between 


f = tan-! (% i 5) and @ = tan-! (-sr+ +) 
er. p+i 2 


i 


bo 


1905.] LANGSDORF: INDUCTION .MOTORS. 927 
Ate yori Wy ere 2p+1 
p= Th aa 14 -p (pti) }sing-7241, cos 0 |, 
where p takes all integral values from zero to (= — 1), inclu- 


sive. The extreme limits of @ are, therefore, 90° and 135°; thus 


= a + -1 c. =i +) 
ca 5 ee pti 2 
Dover a a = if p dé 
coe tan-t(- a ‘) 
Pp 2 
x Reducing this expression, 
t 
dae 
Od SPE PP so (p41) 
Daner, = 4%) Pr = a 2 2 
10 Wp 1) PE i 


-pP+4p ott) 
Vip te 


oa 


IV. Two-pHaseE Motors, t Opp. 


Between 7 = = and @ = tan-* (—?) 


wie fot Tl \ 
d= b= > ( zn ) sin 0; 


after 0 = tan-! (— #), and between the limits 


928 LANGSDORF: INDUCTION MOTORS. [Sept. 22 


ee. 2 
¢ = <= Eee sin 0 — pt cos 6 |, 


: i=—1\ : 
where p takes all integral values from unity to ( 5) ), inclusive. 


4p’ 


VY2p+)?+? 


32 48p'4+1-2pP-4p'-22p 


V(2p-1? +? 


4 nal E= = feapr tier 


| 


The results of the above four sets of equations are represented 
graphically in Figs. 4 and 5. It is interesting to note the 
marked reduction of extremes of values in going from t = 2 to 
t= 3, and the comparatively small change produced by a 
further increase in the number of slots. These curves have 
been drawn by reducing all the equations to the basis of equal 
pole-pitch and equal number (N) of conductors per pole per 


phase. Thus, 
N 
n= — 
t 
l 
C= s5 for three-phase motors 
l 
a=>; for two-phase motors, 
whence 


a0 Gime for three-phase motors 


1905.] LANGSDORF: INDUCTION MOTORS. 


and 

4nxnal_ 4xnNII 1 f 

DMada eR Bee” two-phase motors. 
Therefore,. 


929 


for the corresponding cases. The ordinates. of the curves of 


Figs. 4 and 5 are, respectively, the expressions 


and 


930 LANGSDORF: INDUCTION MOTORS. (Sept. 22 


It would appea» from an examination of Figs. 4 and 5 that 
the actual flux is made up of two components; one, a flux of 
uniform value, ¢ aver., rotating synchronously; and the other, 
a flux consisting mainly of one of sextuple frequency in the 
case of three-phase motors, and of quadruple frequency in the 
case of two-phase motors. 

It was at first thought that this tendency to produce a 
superposed flux of higher frequency would account for the load 
losses of induction motors; but since the quantity J in the ex- 
pression for ¢is the maximum value of the nearly constant 
magnetizing current, the changes in the high-frequency flux 


EEE 
scab SeauEAE 


0.40 


SP Se 


90° 95° 100° 105” 110° 115° 120° 125° 130° 135? 
FIG. 


with increased load on the motor would be in the wrong di- 
rection to account for the increased losses. Moreover, these 
changes of flux do not really take place; with a sinusoidal im- 
pressed electromotive force, the flux will also be sinusoidal, and 
will be approximately constant if the electromotive force is 
constant. The object of this investigation, as stated in the 
introductory paragraphs, was to obtain expressions for the 


average flux per pole by a consideration of the changes that. 
would take place throughout a cycle were it not for the damp- 


ing action of the secondary current. This value, averaged for 
a cycle, is plainly more rational than one derived from one or 


ee 


1905.] LANGSDORF: INDUCTION MOTORS. 931 


two arbitrarily selected points in that cycle. It seems prob- 
able that the source of the load losses must be looked for in 
the vernier action of the teeth and slots of stator and rotor, 
which gives rise to periodic disturbances in the flux distribu- 
tion; these disturbances increasing with the slip, and hence 
with the load. 


932 AIR-GAP FLUX IN INDUCTION MOTORS. [Sept. 22 


Discussion oN “‘ Arr-GAP FLiux in INDUCTION Morors,’’'AT 
New York, SEPT. 22, 1905. 


B. A. Behrend: Mr. Langsdorf assumes, in Fig. 1, that 
the magnetic flux produced by one of the coils lodged in the 
slots can be represented by a straight line parallel with the 
abscissa. This assumption is erroneous and, therefore, viti- 
ates the conclusions that are drawn from his mathematical 
arguments. 

Now, as to the practical application of the author’s theory. 
To use his formula, would require, in my opinion, a great deal 
more time than is at the disposal of engineers, and the results 
of such calculations would be more than problematical on ac- 
count of the incorrect and incomplete premises. Designing 
engineers cannot afford to make use of complex mathematical 
argument about the accuracy of which there is a shadow of 
doubt when important work, involving the expenditure of much 
time and possibly hundreds of thousands of dollars, is at stake. 

Fitzhugh Townsend : This paper is of interest in that it 
ig an additional step in the theory of the induction motor. 
The assumption that the magnetomotive forces are sinu- 
soidal removes it, however, from the conditions of prac- 
tice. In the induction motor it is more correct to assume 
that the impressed electromotive force is a sine wave, and 
if the resistance reaction is small the curve of magnetic 
flux which cuts the primary turns will be the same in form 
as the electromotive-force wave. This refers to the curve of 
total magnetic flux enclosed by the coil, taking time as the 
abscissa. Of course if the curve of flux density is plotted 
with respect to distance around the circumference, it will not 
be asmooth curve, because of the concentration of the winding 
in slots. 

In the induction motor the magnetic reluctance varies just 
as it does in the static-transformer, owing to the change in 
permeability which accompanies the flux variation, and it 
also varies with the slip, on account of the venier action of 
the teeth. The magnetomotive-force curve, therefore, differs 
from the sine form by the amount necessary to maintain a 
sinusoidal magnetic flux, in spite of variations in magnetic 
reluctance. ; 

A. H. Pikler: The equations given in the paper are quite 
simple and permit of easy interpretation. They are based on 
the assumption of sinusoidal exciting current, while in reality 
the current is always distorted, on account of the cyclic change 
in permeability of the magnetic material. The practical ap- 
plication of the author's conclusions to machines in use would, 
therefore, not be attended with satisfactory results. 

A. S. Langsdorf (by letter) : In reply to the remarks of 
Mr. Behrend I would call attention to the following passage 
from his book on ‘‘ The Induction Motor (chap. II., p. 11), 
as follows: 


ee — 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 933 


“The magnetic field in a three-phase current motor is produced by 
three windings, I., Il., and III., Fig. 7. If the current in III. is a max- 
imum, and if the currents vary according to a simple sine curve, then the 
currents in I. and II. are each equal to half the current in III. The 
magnetomotive forces of each phase are represented by the ordinates of 
mthejcurves Lil, and Til., respectively. + * *2 


The curves referred to in the quotation are straight lines, 
and from these assumptions, which are identical with those 
adopted by the writer, Mr. Behrend obtained a value for the 
flux per pole. The difference between the two methods fol- 
lowed in arriving at a result is that Mr. Behrend determined 
only one point on the curve of flux variation, while I 
have obtained the average of all possible values. 

I do not attach much importance to the peculiar form of 
the curves deduced from his equations. The point that 
deserves emphasis is that it is possible to write an equation 
which gives an average value of the flux; from this average 
value the flux density, assuming a sinusoidal distribution, can 
be calculated; and from this the effective value of the equivalent 
sinusoidal magnetizing current can be found, 


ae 


A paper presented at the 200th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
New York, October 27, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A.1I.E. E. 


SOME EXPERIENCES WITH LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE 
APPARATUS. 


BY JULIAN C. SMITH. 


This paper will deal with some experiences with lightning 
protective apparatus which the operating department of the 
Shawinigan Water & Power Company has had during the years 
1903, 1904, and 1905. 

The generating station at Shawinigan Falls has three gen- 
erators each of 3 750-kw. capacity, 2 200-volt, 30-cycle, two- 
phase, and one generator of 6 600-kw. capacity, 2 200-volt, 
30-cycle, two-phase. Each of these generators is direct-con- 
nected to a water-wheel operating under a head of 130 ft. 

Referring now only to the long-distance lines, it is sufficient 
to note that the energy is delivered through a double set of 
bus-bars to the low-tension side of the step-up transformers. 
These transformers are T-connected for transforming from 
two-phase to three-phase. The ratio of voltage transformation 
is 2 200:50000. The neutral point of these transformer banks 
is grounded, giving about 29000 volts between each wire and 
earth. 

In 1903, only the No. 1 Montreal line was operating. This 
line connected the generating station at Shawinigan Falls, 
P. Q., with the Montreal terminal station, situated just outside 
the city of Montreal. The distance from the generating station 
to the terminal station is 85 miles. The transmission line 
consists of three 7-strand aluminum cables, each of 185 000 
cir. mils cross-sectional area, spaced 60 in. apart and arranged 
in the form of an equilateral triangle with the apex upward. 
These cables are supported on 35-ft. poles, with cross-arms 

935 


936 SMITH: LIGHIN!NG PROTECTION. [Oct. 27 


6 ft. long fastened with through bolts. The top of every pole 
is bored to receive a pin. All pins are 18 in. long, and were 
boiled in stearine. 

The voltage at Shawinigan is normally about 50 000; at the 
Montreal terminal station it is 44 000. 

In the spring of 1904, a sub-station was built in Joliette, 
distant about 45 miles from the generating station, and from 
this sub-station a branch line was built to the city of Sorel. 
This line is about 20 miles long and is operated at 12 500 volts. 
The only special point of interest is a submarine cable about 
5 000 ft. long by means of which the line crosses the St. Lawrence 
River. 

In the Montreal terminal station, the voltage is reduced to 
2400 and supplied to a set of 30-cycle bus-bars. From these 
bus-bars the frequency-changers are operated. Each frequency- 
changer consists of a 30-cycle synchronous motor connected to 
a 60-cycle generator. There are at present installed in this 
station five of these motor-generators each of 1 000-kw. capa- 
city and one of 5 000-kw. capacity. In addition to these ma- 
chines there are two synchronous converters, each of 1 000-kw. 
capacity, operating street railway circuits. It is interesting to 
note that the whole load of the long-distance line consists of 
synchronous apparatus, and that by properly regulating the 
fields of this apparatus the power-factor can be kept at unity. 

In the fall of 1904 the No. 2 Montreal line was completed. 
The No. 2 line is parallel to ~he No. 1 line for nearly the entire 
distance, and in most places is not more than 100 ft. distant. 
The second line is similar to the first except for the size of the 
conductor and for the fact that a ground-wire is strung along 
the line at the neutral point of the triangle. This ground-wire 
is connected to the earth at each pole by a wire running down 
the pole. 

When the No. 1 line was put into service the lightning ap- 
paratus installed was as follows: at each end of the line was a 
bank of Westinghouse lightning-arresters of the low-equivalent 
type and a bank of static-interrupters. The number of gaps in 
these arresters was decided upon only after a series of tests 
had been made to determine the lowest practicable break-down 
voltage. These arresters were set to discharge at about 65 000 
volts. In 1904, a bank of General Electric arresters was 
placed on the 50000-volt line in the Joliette sub-station. 
This bank was also adjusted to discharge at about 65 000 volts. 


1905.] SMITH: LIGHTNING PROTECTION. 937 


In 1904 three banks of horn-arresters were put on the No. 1 
Montreal line. These arresters consist of bent copper rods. 
The horns were spaced 6.25 in. apart at the gap, this distance 
corresponding to a break-down voltage of 90000. See Fig. 1. 
In 1905, when the No. 2 line was equipped with lightning- 
arresters, three banks of low-equivalent arresters were put in, 
one at each end and one at Joliette. In addition to these ar- 
resters three banks of the 1905 type of horn-arresters were put 
in. Some changes were made in the setting of these arresters 
as will be noted farther on. 


se or 


000 COPPER WIRE 


Horn Lightning-Arrester, Joliette. 


The Montreal lines run in a general northeasterly south- 
westerly direction, parallel to the St. Lawrence river and about 
20 miles distant from it. The elevation of the power-house is 
about 200 ft. above sea-level, that of the sub-station being 
nearly the same. Some 10 miles farther north and parallel 
to the transmission lines, the Laurentian mountains bound the 
north side of the St. Lawrence Valley. In general, the country 
over which the lines pass is a flat farmland, but near the power- 
station the country is very rough. 

The prevailing winds are westerly, and the general course 
of the electrical s‘orms is parallel to the lines. The storm 


938 SMITH: LIGHTNING PROTECTION. [Oct. 27 


period extends from March to October. Nearly all the storms 
occur during the latter part of June, and in July, August, and 
early in September. The storms are most severe during July 
and August. In the territory covered by the lines of the 
Shawinigan company there occurs during each year about 
fifteen thunder storms. As these storms move along in an east- 
erly direction and sometimes take days to cover the 100 miles, 
we have found that from June 25 to September 10, a storm 
is reported nearly every day from some part of the line. In 
general, however, there are not more than four or five severe 
storms during each year, and these storms are most severe in 
well-defined localities. The discussion of our experiences 
with lightning will be simplified if these experiences during 
1903, 1904, and 1905 are considered separately, year by year. 

As stated above, the only line in operation in 1903 was 
the No. 1 Montreal line. That line was protected by low- 
equivalent arresters at each end. During the summer of 
1903, several disturbances occurred which may be summarized 
as follows: 

1. Poles splintered by heavy discharges. 

2. Insulators broken, in a few instances. 

3. Flashes across the static-interrupter terminals. 

4. Arcs on the transformer terminals. 

5. Arcs inside the transformer cases at the top between ad- 
jacent leads. 

6. Damage to apparatus caused by 3, 4, and 5. 

7. Interruption to service, due usually to excessive voltage- 
drop, causing synchronous apparatus to fall out of step. 

1. On several occasions poles were splintered. In most cases 
two or three poles were torn to pieces; the adjacent poles on 
both sides were less damaged, the damage decreasing as the 
distance increased from the point of disturbance. One of the 
worst cases recorded by us shows that 5 poles were torn to 
pieces while 10 poles on each side were somewhat splintered. 
This disturbance extended over a distance represented by 25 
poles, or about 2500 feet. This case, however, is exceptional, 
usually not more than one pole is badly damaged, and a few 
of the nearby poles slightly splintered. 

2. In only one or two instances were insulators broken; in 
each instance it was the top insulator. In these cases the 
breakage seemed due to the flashing over and consequent 


heating, as the insulator was notin any case punctured. In no 


: 


939 


SMITH: LIGHTNING PROTECTION. 


1905.) 


‘edkT GO6L “S0UeISISOY PU JoysoIIY-suTUzYsr] WIOH 


IIe 


own 
O3QNVYLS 00 4 "10 4O USAVT , | HLIM H3A09 ONY 
3uIM GNNOKD ‘wa.vM OaTIILSIC 41VH 3NO 
QNV 3NIN39A19 41VH JNO asn M4 


3did 
NivuO 


Ww 
MY 
SS 


alvid YaddO9 $4g'SIVNIWNSL 


YIM BAddOO bay 


3SN4 BYSdWNV 0% 


BHIM H3ddOO 0007, 


9 


94C SMITH: LIGHTNING PROTECTION. [Oct. 27 


case was an insulator so badly damaged as to need immediate 
replacing. 

3. At the same time that the pole were splintered on the 
line there would be evidences of excessive potential in the 
stations. The most frequent occurrence was an arcing over 
on the terminals of the static-interrupters. In some cases 
this flash would reach across to an adjacent static-interrupter 


OIL CIRCUIT-BREAKER 


2200 VOLTS 


50000 VOLTS 
SERIES 
TRANSFORMER 


NEUTRAL GROUNDED 
Fig. 3 
Transformer Connections. 


Note: Neutral point grounded through a series transformer and 
relay Current in ground-wire trips oil circuit-breakers. 


SWITCH CONTROL WIRES 


and establish a short circuit between the lines. In most cases, 
however, it was simply a flashing from the ends of the ter- 
minal to the case, or hetween the incoming and outgoing wires 
ot a single static-interrupter, thereby short circuiting the 
reactance coil. 


4. The arcs on the transformer terminals were more rare, 


1905.] SMITH: LIGHTNING PROTECTION. 941 


only occurring when the static-interrupters were put out of 
service by the flashing over mentioned above. 

In view of the above disturbances and damage it was decided 
to put in a type of horn lightning-arrester affording a low 
resistance path to ground, to depend on a fuse for the inter- 
ruption of the short circuit which would occur if the horns 
did not break the arc, and to set these horns so that only the 
heavier discharges would break them down. The horns were 
consequently adjusted to discharge at about 90 000 volts. 

At the end of 1903, it was determined that the arresters 
installed were sufficient to meet the conditions caused by 
ordinary storms. They protected the line from abnormal 
rises of potential due to switching or short circuits; but in 
those cases when the lightning-stroke damaged poles on the 
line the rise of potential was so high and took place so rapidly 
that the arresters could not carry enough current to keep the 
potential of the line within safe limits. The horns installed 
were especially designed to meet only the conditions which 
were not met by the standard arresters. 

In 1904 there were more than the usual number of storms. 
On the following dates the horns discharged: 


Date. Shawinigan. Joliette. Montreal. 
[itl et lei 3 horns 1 horn None 

/ BO SN eee a Dea 3 horns ai 
Septa SU sel ya Pee 25 “ 


One or two storms did not cause any disturbance. 

The storm of July 11 was central near the power-station, 
and one pole about five miles distant was splintered. The 
Joliette horns discharged about an hour before the discharges 
took place at Shawinigan. 

On August 5, the storm was central at Joliette. Both the 
horn arresters and the standard arresters discharged violently. 
the horns at Shawinigan discharging at the same time. There 
was evidently a rise of potential in the Joliette station, as one 
of the glass windows through which the wire enters the building 
was cracked, due to the flashing over which must have occurred, 
At the same time that this disturbance occurred in the station, 
some 25 poles about five miles away were splintered, a few of 
them very badly. No disturbance other than the discharge 
of the arresters occurred in the other stations. The service 
was not interrupted, a rather severe blow being felt, lasting 


only about a second. 


SMITH: LIGHTNING PROTECTION. 


942 


“IWSYLNOW'S11V4 NVDINIMVHS 
‘INIT NOISSINSNVYL “dW 


M4 [e109 


1970d 7S AYD'T eo 


LB 


oaqan} OL _<— 


Seq uesturmeyg 


1905.) SMITH: LIGHTNING PROTECTION. 943 


On September 20, the storm was central about midway be- 
tween Shawinigan and Joliette. Fifteen poles were struck. 
No excessive potentials were noticed in the stations, nor wos 
the service interrupted. 

During 1905, the number of storms was less than usual, but 
there were two very violent storms, both near Shawinigan. 
Poles on the No. 1 line were damaged. At various times during 
the summer the horns of both lines discharged, but it is note- 
worthy that the horns of the two lines did not discharge at the 
same time; that is, the two lines only about 100 ft. apart would 
not be equally affected by lightning discharges. 

The horn arresters on the No. 2 line were designed to take 
less current than those on the No. 1, as a resistance consisting 
of a mixture of glycerine and water was put in the ground con- 
nection; in parallel with this resistance was a _horn-gap. 
During the first storms it was noticed that the resistance had 
“an equivalent spark-gap’”’ greater than the horn, although 
the resistance was about 10 000 ohms and the gap about three 
inches. The resistance was greatly decreased early in the 
summer by pushing the terminals closer together, and the 
gap was slightly increased. After this was done the lightning 
discharge went through the resistance. 

Another factor came into play in 1905. The two long- 
distance lines are operated in parallel on the low-tension sides 
at both ends. As stated previously the neutral point of the 
transformer banks is grounded at Shawinigan. A series 
transformer was placed in the ground-wire leading from each 
bank of transformers, and an overload relay connected to this 
series transformer so that if any considerable amount of current 
flowed into the neutral the relay would open. the low-tension 
side of all of the transformers connected to that line. The 
operators in the Montreal terminal station were depended upon 
to separate the two lines in cases of trouble. By this means 
a ground or heavy disturbance on one line would cut that line 
out of service. Our experience during the past year shows that 
this scheme works satisfactorily. To some extent, however, 
it masks the action of the lightning-arresters, as in case of 
heavy discharges over the horns the relay would cut off the line, 

Summing up our experience with reference to the horns, I 
would say that we consider them a valuable addition to the 
standard equipment. Since the installation of the horn ar- 
resters we have had no arcs in our station. No damage has 


944 SMITH: LIGHTNING PROTECTION. [Oct. 27 


been caused to our apparatus. No interruptions to the service 
have been caused directly by lightning. On the other hand, 
each time the horns discharged a more or less severe short 
circuit occurred, in no case, however, being severe enough to 
cause trouble or to cause our synchronous apparatus to fall 
out of step. 


A paper presented at the 200th Meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical E MglNeers, 
New Vork, October 27, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A.I E.F. 


NOTE ON LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS ON ITALIAN HIGH- 
TENSION TRANSMISSION LINES. 


BY PHILIP TORCHIO. 

During a recent trip abroad the writer inspected several 
high-tension transmission lines in Italy, and found that Amer- 
ican lightning-arresters with choke-coils are quite generally 
used at the ends of the lines. In addition, Siemens horn- 
arresters are sometimes installed at the ends of the line and 
at intervals on poles along the line. 

The protection furnished by these devices, however, is not 
considered sufficient, on account of their inability to protect 
the line and the machines under all conditions of lightning 
discharges and surges, or even static disturbances caused by 
load fluctuations in the ordinary operation of the system. 
Transmission engineers have found it necessary to supplement 
the ordinary lightning-arresters with some other protection, 
and to that end a variety of devices has been developed on 
different installations. Among these the so-called ‘‘ Series 
Lightning-Arrester’”’ of Gola, and the “ Water-Resistance 
Static-Discharger’’ call for special attention. The series light- 
ning-arrester has been described in the technical papers 
(see Transactions of the Associazione Elettrotecnica Italiana, 
January and February, 1905, in which are also cited earlier 
publications relating to this form of arrester). 

It is claimed by Gola that the shortcomings of the ordinary 
commercial lightning-arresters are due to some deficiency in 
the choke-coils employed and not to any deficiency in the 
lightning-arresters themselves, their function being only to 
discharge the line. To overcome the shortcomings of such 
choke-coils, Gola devised an apparatus in the shape of a 


945 


946 TORCHIO: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. (Oct. 27 


large shell, consisting of a choke-coil and a number of large 
cast-iron diaphragms and shells connected in series by means of 
small copper conductors, the whole being placed in series on 
the line to perform the functions of a choke-coil, and also to 
introduce an abrupt and great change in the section, material, 
and shape of the line conductors leading to the station ap- 
paratus. The device is illustrated in Fig. 1. In proximity 
to the sharp-edged ends of the shell are located corresponding 
air-gap, horn-shaped lightning-dischargers which are connected. 
through a resistance to ground, either directly here, or in series 
with ordinary lightning-arresters, according to the requirements 
demanded by the line voltage. The function of the supple- 
mentary lightning-arresiers is to assist the main air-gap in 


TO LINE 


GROUND 


Wo MACHINE 
To MACHING 


Pic. 1: 


rupturing the arc after the lightning discharge has taken place. 
It is claimed that while this device will allow the main line 
current to pass undisturbed, it will so obstruct the passage 
of lightning or static-discharge currents as to cause them to 
be reflected at this point and pass to ground via the dischargers 
above mentioned. This obstruction is claimed to be due to 
several effects of discontinuity of the circuit, in so far as the 
“homogeneous circuit of the lime conductors of approximately con- 
stant section and of the same material (generally copper), always ina 
diamagnetic medium (air or insulating material), is suddenly interrupted 
by the introduction of several lengths of conductors of magnetic material 
of section and surface enormously greater, joined one to another by 
lengths of copper conductors again of small section, but placed ina 


magnetic medium, the whole with sudden changes of direction and 
section.** 


1905.] TORCHIO:; LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 947 


Gola, in the publication above referred to, makes several 
interesting comparisons between hydraulic and electrical laws, 
and by analogy attempts to explain the operation of the series 
arrester. The device has been used in many places in Italy 
for the last two or three years. In many cases it has proved 
to be most effective, while in other cases the results have been 
indifferent. 

The ‘‘ Water-Resistance Static-Discharger”’ of Friese and 
others is connected at each end of the line, one discharger 
between each conductor and ground, thereby forming a per- 


RUBBER JOINTA, =. 


GROUNDED WATER PIPE 


Fic. 2.—Water-Resistance Static-Discharger. 


manent continuous path to ground for a small fraction of the 
main-line current. A general feeling prevails that this ground- 
ing will eliminate a great many troubles from lightning and 
surges on the line. Several ways of grounding the lire are in 
use in Italy, but the one at the Morbegno station of the Val- 
tellina three-phase railway may be considered as representative 
of the water-resistance type of grounding device. The device, 
which is shown in Fig. 2, is mounted on an iron frame outside 
the station. It consists of grounded feed and discharge water- 
pipes supplying the necessary water to three pairs of glass 
tubes, each pair being joined at the middle by a metallic union 


948 TORCHIO: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. [Oct. 27 


to which are brought the grounding connections from the line 
conductor; the grounding is made through the two water 
tubes in parallel. The current to ground in this system, op- 
erating at 20000 volts (11 000 volts to ground) is 0.2 ampere 
from each line wire to ground. The superintendent of the 
station was hopeful of the success of the device. 

At the Paderno station of the Milan Edison Company a 
different arrangement of water-resistance static-discharger was 
being installed at the time of the writer’s visit. It consisted of 


GROUNDED WATER RHEOSTAT 


SIEMENS HORNS 
WATER RESISTANCE 


WWE: =A MMMC™=Z@MAA£Xzaa LZ 


6 © © ase 
Ts ko 


BANK OF LIGHTNING ARRESTERS 
STATION 


Fic. 3.—Scheme of Station Protection. 


only three large glass water-tubes, but of greater diameter and 
length than those used in the Morbegno station. In this 
case it was also expected that the device would give satisfactory 
results. 

Summarizing the observations made by the writer, the best 
practice of to-day for the protection of Italian transmission 
lines indicates that the plan illustrated in Fig. 3 should be 
adopted. The plan shows that: 

1. The terminals of the transmission lines should be ex- 
tended in a direct line some distance away from their entrance 


1905.] TORCHIO: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 949 


into the station, and the ends should beequipped with Siemens’ 
horn-arresters grounded through water resistances. 

2. On the line side of the branch entering the station a water- 
resistance static-discharger should be installed. 

3. Choke-coils and ordinary lightning-arresters should be 
installed inside the station. Possibly, choke-coils of the series 
lightning-arrester type should also be added. 

4. Siemens horn-arresters should be used on the poles along 
the line only after careful study of the installation. Series 
lightning-arresters, with Siemens horn-arresters, or ordinary 
lightning-arresters may, however, be installed at particular 
points; as, for instance, where a line divides into branches, or 
at special points of a line installed in a mountainous country. 


4 paper presented at the 200th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, New 
York, October 27, 1905. 


Copyright, 1905. By A. I. E. E. 


PERFORMANCE OF LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS ON 
TRANSMISSION LINES. 


BY N. J. NEALL. 


This paper describes a method of obtaining, by means of 
test-papers, records of the operation of lightning-arresters in 
service; it gives some results obtained by the use of this method 
on several transmission lines. 

A method for registering eer operation should 
have the following characteristics: (1), it should be applicable 
to all types of arresters; (2), simple to install; (3), not interfere 
with the operation of the arresters; and (4), it should be positive 
in its information. 

These requirements were met in the test-papers' furnished by 
the Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company to a 
number of operating companies about one and one-half years 
ago, who agreed to investigate this matter under its auspices. 
Instructions were issued relatively to these tests, from which 
the following extracts are taken: 


‘“‘A method of keeping a record of the operation of lightning-arresters 
by inserting special papers between the gaps. These papers to be care- 
fully marked; to contain all necessary information as to events during 
their service in gaps; * * *. 

(1) Form of Record Papers. (See Fig. 1, sketches 1 to 3.) - Aside from the 
shape necessary to co npletely cover the gap, nothing special is required ex- 
cept that the paper be of unifor n texture in order that any punctures may 
be clearly marked. For this purpose a light bond paper has been found 
satisfactory. The peculiar shape of the papers for the low equivalent 
lightning arrester is due to the overhang of the porcelain support for 
the non-arcing metal cylinders used in this type. There is a simple 
arrangement for drawing th2 paper into plac by a sort of spring action 


ee SI ee ee ee ee ee 

1. Originals of these papers, as well as of Figs. 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 21, 
are on file with the Secretary of A.I.E.E. for reference and comparison. 
If requested, the writer will gladly lend any special papers for reference. 


951 


952 NEALL:; LIGHTNING-A RRESTERS. [Oct. 27 


due to the folding. No discharge must pass over the gaps without passing 
through the paper. For method of installation see Figs. 1, 2, 3. 

(2) Marking of Record Papers. In order to avoid confusion all light- 
ning arresters on the same phase or leg of the system should be given 
the same distinctive letter or identifying mark. By marking the record 
papers accordingly the relation of all parts of the system to be shown 
by the papers would be greatly simplified. 


SKETCH 1 


SKETCH 2 


USE PRONGS OF WELL ORIED ASH, TREATED, AND 
OF SUITABLE LENGTH TO ENABLE HANDLING OF 
PAPERS WITH SAFETY WHILE LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 
ARE CONNECTED TO LIVE LINE, 


SKETCH 3 
VETHOD OF PUTTING PAPERS IN PLACE. 
1. INSERT IN ARRESTER AS SHOWN IN SKETCH 1 
2. PULL GENTLY INTO PLACE BY GRASPING WITH PRONGS AS SHOWN IN SKETCH 2 
a. TO REMOVE PAPERS LIFT OUT AS SHOWN IN SKETCH 3 


SHUNT 


SHUNTED 
GAPS 


—_ 
TO SERIES RES. 


SKETCH 4+ 
Fic. 1. 
Shows form of test papers and method of placifg them in 
low-equivalent lightning-arresters (Westinghouse Electric 
& Manufacturing Company). 


(3) Handling of Record Papers. In order that a complete knowledge 
may be obtained as to the behavior of the system as a whole, it is neces- 
sary that these record papers be placed in all lightning arresters con- 
nected thereto. It therefore becomes necessary to watch all points 
with equal care in the matter of records, and this fact should be kept 


1905.] NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 953 


strongly in mind during the investigation. Be careful that the proper 
papers ase placed in the various gaps; that is, a low equivalent lightning 
arrester should have two kinds of papers—one color for series gaps and 
the other for shunted gaps; * * *. 

(4) Distribution of Record Papers. (See Figs. 1 and 4, sketch 4.) 
Low-Equiavulent Lightning-Arresters. One paper should be placed in 
the first and one in the last series gap units; one paper in the first and 
one in the last shunted gap units. 

A gap unit consists of seven non-arcing metal cylinders in porcelain 
holder (See Fig. 1.) A gar, however, is the air-space between two 
adjacent cylinders. 


Pree 2 


Test papers being inserted in a low-equivalent lightning- 
arrester. ; 


The same general recommendations given above apply to the inspec- 
tiori of olber types of lightning-artesters. 

‘“‘ Any special arresters on your system should be equality well studied, 
and submitting a sketch of connections, we shall be glad to suggest 
such an arrangement of papers as will give ful'est data of their operation. 

(5) Inspection. During fair weather or uneventful periods, inspect 
these papers once a week, replacing with fresh papers and completing 
to this effect the record papers thus removed. 


954 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. [Oct. 27 


After any disturbances, such as lightning storms or discharges due to 
switching, etc., remove the papers as soon as possible, replacing with 
fresh papers and note on the test papers for record the attending cir- 
cumstances. 


USE PRONGS OF WELL-DRIED ASH, TREATED, AND 
OF SUITABLE LENGTH TO ENABLE HANDLING OF 
PAPERS WITH SAFETY WHILE LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 
ARE CONNECTED TO LIVE LINE, 


SKETCH 1 
Fic. 3. 
Method of inserting test papers in simple multi gap type 
lightning-arrester with resistance pencils in series (General 
Electric Company). 


(6) Dates. Papers should be, above all else, carefully marked before 
insertion with dates and location data; and upon removing from gaps, 
necessary information should be immediately completed. 


LINE 


SERIES 
GAPS 


SHUNTED 
GAPS 


SHUNT 
RESISTANCE 


SERIES 
RESISTANCE 


Fic. 4. 


Arrangement of gaps and resistances in the low-equivalent 
lightning-arrester (Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing 
Company). a4 


(7) Returns. In filing papers do not use pins as they may cause 
confusion with static puncture holes. Incase a record paper is destroyed 
by a hold-over in the gaps, a statement should be enclosed fully de- 
scribing the circumstances. 


1905.]. NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 


ce} 
on 
nr 


(8) Precautions. Should the ground connections be impaired or the 
resistances become open-circuited, these records would have no value 
and might only be misleading. For this reason, not to speak of best 
service of the protective apparatus, resistances and-ground connections 
should be inspected from time to time for open circuit. This can be 
done by a magneto or by “ lighting out.” 

(9) Duplicate Records. If it is desired to keep a duplicate record, 
then in addition to the above instructions, please note, etc. * * *.” 

The general idea in the distribution of test-papers in accord 
with the foregoing instructions was so to cover the country 
that the same apparatus at different localities would come under 
comparison; there was no endeavor to make a thorofigh com- 
parison of all types of arresters used, chiefly because the selec- 
tion rested with plants in operation, and the main investigation 
was to be of the effectiveness of the arrangement of gaps and 
resistances in the low-equivalent lightning-arrester. Inci- 
dentally, however, some interesting results were obtained on 
other types at what happened to be comparable voltages of 
transmission, and they will be referred to in detail later. Incom- 
plete reports were obtained from other plants, with occasional 
records of special interest. 

The range in voltage of the high-tension plants under dis- 
cussion extends from 6600 to 55000, particular interest at- 
taching to returns at 25000 and 30000 volts. The tests 
covered territory extending from Maine to California, the fol- 
lowing companies taking active part in the investigation: 

Boise-Payette River Electric Power Co., Boise, Idaho; 

Cascade Water, Power & Light Co., Ltd., Nelson, British 
Columbia; 

‘Indiana Union Traction Co., Anderson, Ind.; 

Missouri River Power Co., Helena, Montana; 

New Richmond (Wis.) Roller Mills Co.; 

Northern California Power Co; ; 

Shawinigan Water & Power Co., Montreal, Canada. 

St. Paul Gas Light Co., St. Paul, Minn. ; 

Trade Dollar Consolidated Mining Co., Dewey, Idaho; 

Westbrook Electric Light and Power Co., Westbrook, Me. 
(through S. D. Warren & Co., Boston, Mass.) ; 

West Penn Railways Co., Connellsville, Pa.; 

The records from the following plants are particularly com- 
plete and will be taken up for special consideration: West Penn 
Railways Co.; St. Paul Gas Light Company; Indiana Union 


Traction Company 


956 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRES TERS. (Oct. 27 


WEST PENN RAILWAYS 


Greensburg es 


Switching 
Station Youngwood 
Postdean Laken SAS SEL eis 


: 


Dawson Vanderbilt _ 


Main Power 
House 


McCleliantown 


OT 


pay) Uniontown 


Leckrone 


Fairchance 


MILES FROM POWER HOUSE 
Connellsville 1.5  Youngwood 20 
Uniontown 12, Greensburg 25 
McClellantown 21, Manor 29 
Iron Bridge 10. Dawson 8 


Points from which records 
were received are designated 


thus: © 


Fie. 5. 


Map of lines of the West Penn Railways Company. This 
company operates a lighting and railway (synchronous 
converter) service transmitting from Connellsville—the 
power-house—at 22 000 volts, to the various sub-stations. 
The transformers for this purpose are protected throughout 
by low-equivalent lightning-ar esters and static-interrupters. 
There is no special line prctection. 


1905.] NEALL:; LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 957 


West Penn. Rwys. Co.1—This system is located in Western 
Pennsylvania in the foothills of the Allezhenies, along the 
head waters of the Monongahela, and is particularly subject to 
lightning disturbances. As will be seen from the map, the 


PrG..6. 


A group of low-equivalent lightning-arresters tested on 
the lines of the West Penn Railways Company, Manor sub- 
station. Test-papers can be seen in place. 


line is extensive, operating both a railway (synchronous con- 
verter) and lighting system, with a large number of sub- 
stations. The line is approximately 50 miles in length, and 
some 54 low-equivalent arresters were under test. Figs. 5 and 6. 


De eo Jae 
1. Street Railwav Remew. Avr. 15. 1905. 


958 NEALL: LIGHTNING-A RRESTERS. (Oct. 27 


St. Paul Gas Light Company.’--The chief interest of this 
plant lies in the use of the high-tension cable for conveying 
power at 25000 volts underground several miles from the 
city limits of St. Paul to a sub-station in the city. The over- 
head line is approximately 25 miles in length and runs through 
a part of the country (upper Mississippi valley) where lightning 
disturbances are known to be frequent and severe. This plant 


xs 
RESEVOIR_or 


ST. PAUL GAS LIGHT CO. ae 
25 000 VOLTS. APPLE RIVER 
FALLS 


FLUME 


LIGHTNING- 
ARRESTER 
HOUSE 


6UB-STATION, 
§T. PAUL- 


ATLANTIC ST., 
ST. PAUL. 
THREE PHASE 


SINGLE POLE CONSTRUCTION- 


THREE PHASE BARE COPPER. 


CABLE - 
RUBBER INSULATION~ LEAD SHEATHED 


\ 


IGI cs 


Map of lines of the St. Croix Power Company (St. Paul 
Gas Light Company). This company supplies power at 
high tension—25 000 volts—for the purpose of furnishing 
light to the city of St. Paul. Air-blast transformers are 
used at the power-house and oil transformers at sub-stations, 
and the standard protection of the General Electric Com- 
pany lightning-arresters and air-insulated choke-coils, as 
well as special arrangement of the same are used through- 
out. A copper overhead grounded wire runs from the 
power-house for 2 000 ft. 


s doubly interesting in the present instance because of the 
special arrangement of lightning-arresters of the multi-gap 
carbon-pencil type (G. E. Co.) under test. There were: a reg- 
ular G. E. arrester between line and ground, an arrangement 


of G. E. units onthe W. E. & M. Co. low-equivalent lightning-ar-- 
rester principle, see Figs. 7, 7a, 7b, 8, 9, the Pearson-Cutcheon ar- 


2. Transactions A. I. E. E., 1900, vol. 17, page 635. 


es 


1905.] NEALL; LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 953 


rangement® for protecting transformer windings at the power- 
house, and the St. Paul end is protected by G. E. units be- 
tween line and ground at the point of connection of the over- 
head lines to the underground and between legs at the sub- 
station end of cables. There were choke-coils and_ special 
multiplex connections (between phases) of arresters at both ends 
of the overhead lines. 


USE GREEN 
PAPERS 

G. E, CO. ALTERNATING- 

CURRENT LTG. ARRESTERS& 

SPECIAL MULTIPLE K- 

GAP ARRANGEMENT, 


SKETCH 2 


Fic. 7a. 
Method of connection suggested to St. Paul Gas Light Co. for 
a study of the effectiveness of the multiplex connection of light- 
ning-arresters. In Febuary, 1905, connections were changed to 
those shown in Fig. 7b. 


3. Transactions A. I. E. E., 1904, vol. 23, page 568. 


TRaNsFORMER : 


ca i 
; TAP, TAP 
le) 
RESISTANCE RESISTANCE RESISTANCE 
TO LINE 


TO LINE 
The Pearson-Cutcheon arrangement of gaps and resistances for the pro- 
tection of generating apparatus is shown diagrammatically by abovesketch, 


{[Oct. 27 


NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTF KS: 


960 


‘QL ‘OIY 


WD PIMad 1/007 LS ISTO wRmeS yy ‘ earn en 42295 OF 


ee ha PAT en 50-02 190:F1NG OL ININIONVESY OD LH9IT SVD vd 18-09 wIMOd OUD IS 
Sil Ydvddyy FAMLITUOEd 10 WV49Vid 


“ JSNOH #ILSIOAY ONINLHDIT Wid 15 


poinsss jus 2d0b 
| sou. Ped 4k 


j Sea ywo w 01396 


i 


bay yoo wi TOE 


sus £91 


~ punem ayers — 


110? OUP 


arrey 42mod “044 .000E 


a a a pe a a ee re J |. FOB 2 40 Sema] Ya ~F 28m ONES NLINION 4aQ~ 200 PIPUMCED Za ~ 


1905.] NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 961 


Indiana Union Traction Company.s—This is an extensive 
interurban line as will be seen by reference to map. There 
are some 24 equipments of protective apparatus at 30 000 
volts, and 36 at 15 000 volts—the original ot: Figs. 10; 
Tea. 


ISniey tee 


vee of ‘the lightning-arrester house of the St. Croix 
Power Company (St. Paul Gas Light Company) showing in 
the background the standard arresters of the General Elec- 
tric Company with a special multiplex arrangement (locally 
made); and in the foreground special arrangement of units 
on the same manner as for a low-equivalent lightning-ar- 
rester. (The arrangement of General. Electric arresters 
shown in background above was modified Feb. 12, 1905, 
(see Fig. 7b) the gaps to ground being reduced to 25, with 
11 resistance pencils; the multiplex arrangement being 
retained, with 48 gaps between line and line with 22 re- 
sistance pencils.) 


: fi ~~ 
Sc EN pt 


LBS. EAS 


“~"="~ Discussion oF Data. 
By referring to the file of records and the corresponding sum- 


maries note can be made of the following: 
All arresters operate more frequently than has been hither- 


to supposed to be the case. 


4. Street Railway Journal, Dec. 17, ‘04, p. 1064. 


NEALL: LIGHTNING-A RRESTERS {Oct. 


“o. 


~ 


iol Fire, z 3 ? ; 
2 ARR ag fey S : 
bese ReNenras 0899.5 
ep 
i Zak > 
, : pa Ai 


Fic. 9. 


View of the Pearson-Cutcheon arrangement of General Electric Com- 
pany arrester units applied to the transformers at power-house of the 
St. Croix Power Company (St. Paul Gas Light Company). 


1905.] NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 963 


wy 


val 
jegansport ane ! ~ ( . 
“2 ‘espe l wa ease i di YVatdcinGtTtoN 
H ! i} 2 ' 
| | i 
= p $s i Bunker HM I . 
* i M f M 1 T . . — ak rye ae a 0 GR + Go a 
fantam t i eo: 
o- . . w € et’ s 
ee Galveston Bennett's , bs 1 a 
~ Aes NS fae arte > NY Mari gp ae ES eo —- 
' Cassville a ene Le Cartage 
ce 8 | L j 
| , 
Sa G RA Net} 
S Bouesd § P) = 
° i 4 ) lonesboro) Gas City t'e Lat KGaRO. 
eT | Fairtiel ; 2 b 
Pace exe ae | @ {Fairmount { 
be cr Sharpsville ‘ set | 
r cool bef ee? << ies tes —, 
' i { 
: é Summitville 
Neraheas nto Gomes = \ 
‘ Ha *3 VRE oe 0% ] = i 
cuernvon { — a tw oeit niovanaria “ 
as XS ———— = 
! Elwooc:.. 3 LAwa@aRe H 
OS a, |e 3 #20 wet 
” Gud 
West aMuncle ; 
Daleville 


" 
/ 7 Noblesville ' ’ yr Power House 


————— 
{ file 
endleton i 
Gray 7 i] 
Ingalls i 


— ee 


VY Fonville 


Onklgndon aera fad 


3 
ee fn ¢ & MILES FROM, INDIANAPOLIS ) 
Nee Noblesville 23.6 
‘ Tipton . 
7 : 


Elwood 
Kokomg 


Peru 


Indianapo is' VA MAP OF Logansport 3 
y Union Het ; ; 
Fite INDIANAPOLIS NORTHERN TRACTION CO. 


te SHOWING CONNECTION WITH 
. % INDIANA UNION TRACTION CO, 


OTe3is I 


Bic. 10. 


Map of Lines of Indiana Union Traction Company. 
Points from which records were received. 


30 000-volt Lines 15 000-volt Lines. 
Power-House—Anderson—Power-House. 


Broad Ripple. Tipton. Lawrence. Daleville. | Elwood 
Peru. Noblesville. Fairmount. Ingalls. Muncie 
Kokomo. Logansport. Alexandria. Marion. 


964 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTE RS: [Oct. 27 


By comparing the holes made by the discharges through the 
older forms of arrester which have no series resistance, with 
those made by discharges through the low-equivalent -.crester 
for the same voltage (indiana Union ‘Traction Co., Fig. 14), 
it will be seen that no greater dithiculty in discharge is encoun- 
tered, as evidenced by the ragged edges or torn appearance 
of the holes in the low-equivalent arrester papers. These blis- 
ter-like holes seem characteristic of free severe static dis- 
charges. If a paper is placed in the path of discharge of a 
high-tension condenser used in the equivalent spark-gap method! 
a blistered hole aivariably results, see Fig. 16. If an element 
having a high static resistance? is inserted in the circuit, this 
hole is reduced to a fine one with smooth edges, see Fig. 17. 
If current continues to pass, the hole will be enlarged and 
badly smoked, but will still have smooth edges. By 
comparison it is found that the typical static discharge through 
4 carbon-pencil type of resistance is of this smooth-bore char- 
acter, while free gaps give the blister. 

A curious effect observed in the plain-gap papers shows 
that the original puncture may be very fine, and yet the current 
once having‘ held over will completely burn it away. On the 
>ther hand, the low-equivalent lightning-arrester gives evidence 
of a quicker suppression of the short-circuit arc after the 
discharge has passed. The action of the shunted gap is shown 
clearly and aids, by means of the summaries, in locating the 
center of disturbance. 

In the case of the Indiana Union Traction Company the 
summaries will show not only the point of original discharge 
but the reflection on the line due to these causes. It is possible 
that a few of the discharges over series gaps at distant points 
may be due to lightning, but I think it safer to consider them 
jue to reflection. Figs. 13 and 14, Tables 1 and 2. 

St. Paul Gas Light Company.—By comparing the West Penr 
Railways Co. records with the records from the St. Paul Gas 
Light Co. it will be found that the evidences of freer operatior. 
are most pronounced. Figs. 18 and 19, Tables 3, 4, 5. 


ee 


1. Electric Club Journal, April, 1905. 


2. By “high static resistance” is meant high resistance or ‘‘skin effect’ 
jue to very high frequency (by bridge or at commercial frequencies 
the ‘‘ohmic”’ resistance may be negligible). 


965 


1905.] NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRES1 ERS 


Dies HAL 


A group of low-equivalent lightning-arresters tested on the 30 000-volt 
lines, at power-house, Indiana Union Traction Co. Test papers can be 
seen in place. 


966 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARKRESTERS. {[Oct. 27 


There seems to be enough for two arrester groups to Care 
for in this plant, and nothing to show any superiority of the 
low-equivalent arrester arrangement of G. E. units in the 
present case. This can perhaps be explained by the fact that 
the resistances for this purpose were not properly proportioned, 
and that in general it was easier for the initial breakdown to 
happen elsewhere. 


Fie?) 72. 


A group of low-equivalent lightning-arresters tested on 
the 15 000-volt lines at power-house, Indiana Union Trac- 
tion Company. Test papers can be seen in place. 


The special multiplex arrangements have not had a satisfac- 
tory test, owing to the general arrangement of lightning- 
arresters. 

Test-Papers from Idle Lines.—In order that a fair basis of 
comparison may be obtained for the foregoing it is desirable 
to know how severe the induced disturbances on a line may be, 


1905.) NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 967 


"IPE 
CREEK * pew 
Date in -~— 7+ 
“ outYysry-0 4” 


‘Station 


Ge 


REMAAKS {30 over) 


Wihjala. 
heh in pH 


REMARKS (200 
‘ 


* were 7 
* eathafi 
Station Asn he Tre 
Bate inh=¥- 77 
” out A/~ 7 
REMARKS (a00 aver) 


Gite 


J 
G so 
ub 


e 
aS 
S 
2 

3 
2 
= 
3 


c 


BLESVILLE 


i 


Indiana Union Tract: 
| 3000080 Transmission 


Hiew 13: 


A page from the file of returns from the Indiana Union Traction Com- 
pany 30 000-volt lines showing the general arrangement adopted th rough- 
out this investigation. The test papers (in duplicate) are first carefully 
inspected for punctures and those selected for final mounting which are 
thought to be most typical. It will be seen that the papers, reading up 
and down, are arranged according to the phases, a,b,c, etc.; and from 
left to right show the relation of events to lightning-arresters on the same 
wire from power-house to sub-stations in a given order. In this ard in 
Figs. -14, 18, 19, papers are turned back to show typical dis: }arges. 
The papers differ in color—this scheme being used entirely to avoid con- 
fusion in testing where a large number of arresters of different kinds or 
special gaps in a given arrester are concerned. It often happens that 
owing to rises of voltage which affect only the gaps nearest line, test pa- 
pers in those gaps will show punctures when the remaining papers 
do not. Since no special note is made of papers placed near lines, 
it is necessary to examine all papers tocheck this. Again, the paper may 
imperfectly cover a gap, and were papers not in duplicate we should find 


{Oct. 27 


NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 


968 


> -eyavnge > 
— (tg m0 HO sa 7 En Laren: wT 
* 


ee 


& bey 


bs eikcase eee 


\ ee 
whe 


ua 
Tepe uw a P 
xe ¢ re TLL EL 


TITY, wong 
pr er 


se 

Le 62 ues 
OUTS © B0-arg aon? 
(sone 200) sx9YNae © 
a are © NolveWeounss 


\ Hpbi 


|Z f pr 4990 


Oo ber 
wa . 


f _ een 0 | ipfhattinn 4 


p L/w 0 


Go-I-Ayne 
GOnk pews pn 
(vero 008) SHNE MIE 


— Novy von e 
af 
wry +{ 
pA LPO 
ew teat 


cutee ks wovwsrumuet, 3/9 20087 


cern Moverpet 


14. 


Fixe; 


ee BOO © oe 
B @esee sees 
O° tn Owe Oe (eso 
Sf vai Nae A= 
woo ne VD 
& 2G ct 00) ton a a 
D5 iS 2 aks baie 
r te¥s) wn fe} 
< Co na 
& FERS doHS UY 
3) on 
- ge 88562 
& 5 "onto Soe 
© ORL 66.2 Pan 
Sat a pe i a 
_ =} pa 
oa ee 8 Baton 
a SATS Or OR 
r= | La! 2 eae 
ep ey ies ome ses se 
S$ BMS col bss 
IE th ete ae oe 
me ge ga Ore oO 
y BeOS MM g Be 
a 3S 
= wa QP ake gs 
a 6, 482°8 meen 
I) 22 Se eG ed 
= _= 
fo gst sO ge Sx 
n nak aoa? -° 
S OS ts te aos 
& OR EAD OT Ew 
cs) aw v2 <4 be oo 
4 e2AaVogkeaD 
v aos co .0 
=. ages nw oO 
b= sO O08 ks 
fe) ae sana 
-GHeronpy.8 Ob 
2omeS got Fe 
Bens eg ase WE 
os k -38oC 9's 
Sem oosr ak. 
PSG we OULD OEE 
BS aS Y2saqgo%RrM 
5 eel hey ee ceap = Be SSeO 
EAL -“SaAR Ses 
SO p-4 wton DHOE 
ee Oi | Logs 
bids 9g Big 85 OVS pm 
BuO ans e 
a, 272 .S mS n4seo 
POM OB y OG wy > 
< 22 oo FE Pe Wig 
Qa sara Sonid 


1905.] NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 969 


independently of the stored energy which endeavors to readjust 
itself at the time of a lightning-arrester action. 
For this purpose we may refer to two sets of papers, Figs. 20, 21. 


Fic. 15. 


View of files of returns from Indiana Union Traction Com- 
pany. Each page (1 1% in. by 8% in.—approximately letter 
size) contains a complete set of records for any given period. 
In this case two pages—one of 30 000 volts test-papers and 
one of 15 000 volts, respectively—complete the record. The 
summary sheets (see above) are then filled out, and the 
whole filed by the vertical system. 

Approximately 10 000 test papers (in duplicate) were re- 
ceived from this company, of which 5 000 were selected for 
filing. 

26 000 papers (approximately) have been received in all 
from the companies mentioned; of these approximately one- 
half were kept for record. This work has taken only a part 
of one man’s time. A complete set of returns from the 
above company, for example, could be assorted, inspected, 
mounted, and summarized in 2.5 hours. 


The one from a line in the Salt Lake Valley of the Utah Light 
& Railway Co. called the Sandy Creek line, taken by Mr. P. H 


970 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. {Oct. 27 


Thomas!, and the other from the Missouri River Power Co.’s 
lines, in Montana. The former coming from simple gaps, the 
latter from arresters of the G. E. type (with resistances short 
circuited). A curious indication of these discharges is the 


PiGy Osa: 

Test papers from the laboratory, showing typical punc- 
tures. 1. Free static discharges (note blistering) magnified 
two diameters. 

Values of test: Condenser (oil immersed) charged to 
29 000 volts, 0.10 microfarad approximately. The eftect 
of this discharge sould not be confused with ordinary stat-c 
machine sparks. The latter may look formidable, but will 
bend around rather than pass through paper. 


smooth-bore hole which does not at first seem to fit in with 
the facts of the blistering action reported for the free con- 
denser discharge. I think that the difference can be readily 
explained as follows: 


1. Electric Club Journal, March, 1905. 


1905.] NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 971 


The charge may be induced at a particular part of the line 
which is remote from the discharge path, The intervening 
impedance reduces the abruptness of the discharge at the ar- 


Bie. 47 


Test papers from the laboratory showing typical punc- 
tures, full size. 

2. Free static discharge and current. (Note burning.) 

3. Static discharge through a gap and high static (400 
ohms) resistance. (Note reduction in freedom of discharge.) 

4. Static discharge with current simultaneously impressed 
over a gap and high static resistance. (Note burning away of 
holes by current which has been also greatly redueed by high 
resistance.) 


rester. In practice this induced disturbance is the one that 
first breaks down the gaps between line and ground, and fol- 
lowing closely on this comes the stored capacity of the system 


{Oct. 27 


NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRES TERS. 


: = : > 


5 WONDER 


Ne 


sy Boy 
DLLy wT, 


pee 


TRE RRR 8 SPS PE Fi st 


aW'OR WON d TOO OF WHS By yoy yong 1M 8 WeM dé foo Mu De NOMA PITH Oe RAS 


Syne « 


ow 


opm 


1 


ae 


at 


fas 


’ 


ber 
om 
oa 


oe 4 


Bi 
9) cana 


peop 
Sf men 


yen he 


by) sxvazy 


af worms Vy 


£3 Bey PO 0" 4 
py ea }% 3 
< 
1S 
3 
7 


oe Mi? 


eS 


18. 


Fic. 


> 


he file of returns from the West Penn Railways Compan 


For comment 


+ 
v 


A page from 
2 000 volts. 


3. 


gol 


s on method of filing see Fi 


2 


LIGHT NING-ARRESTERS 


EALL 


i. 


19, 


Fic 


ight Company 


Paul Gas L 
(See Fig, 13 for comments 


ge from the file of returns from the St 


—St. Croix Power Company—25 000 volts. 


on method of filing.) 


A pa 


974 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS (Oct. 27 


trying to readjust itself to the new conditions. Lastly, but 
most serious of all, the generator current endeavors to establish 
a short circuit following the discharge. It is possible for only 
the first two ettects to occur, generally all three come into 
action. 

The most important information given by these papers is 
that the lightning disturbances on a line are not of the mag- 
nitude generally supposed. It is impressive that the small 


Magnified and photographed by Charles Edward Skinner. 
Fic. 20. 


Paper and its magnification showing a discharge over a 
gap of 1.63 in. on idle line. Magnified 19 times. 


(Courtesy of The Electric Journal.) 


Test-papers punctured by lightning disturbances on an 
jdle line in Utah. Taken by Mr. Percy H. Thomas in 1902 
from Sandy Line, Utah Light and Railway Company, Salt 
Lake City Valley. 


holes made in paper are substantially the same as those made 
in insulation, and yet these small holes pave the way for very 
serious breakdowns of apparatus, due to normal current fol- 
lowing. 

A comparison of lightning-arrester papers punctured in 
practice with the papers taken from the idle lines, leads to the 
belief that the low-equivalent arrester is discharging these 
disturbances almost as freely as if the resistances were or iitted. 


1905.] NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 975 


Fic. 21. 

Test-papers punctured by lightning disturbances on an idle line in 
Montana, slightly magnified. Line, 5 miles, 10 000 volts, idle. Ar- 
rester, 20 General Electric gaps, with resistances short circuited, in series 
to ground. Date in and out, one month, June-July 5, 1905. 


aA 


976 NEALL: LIGHTNING-A RRESTERS. (Oct. 27 


oe RESULTS OBTAINED. 

A comparison of results shows clearly that for freedom 
of discharge the arrestets which are built like the low equiv- 
alent with low resistance have freer discharge than the straight 
zaps and high resistance. 

The action takes place through the series gaps and both of 
the resistances, and nothing occurs in the shunted gaps unless 


FiGwge. 


“Tell-tale’”? gap for investigation of special protective 
apparatus. 


discharges are of high frequency and above a certain severity. 
When discharges are found in the shunted gaps the papers 
usually show a cl an puncture, indicating that the discharge 
is chiefly static. It seems that the time-element of the dis- 
turbances, together with th throttling action of the non-arcing 
metil multi-gaps, enables the static disturbance to pass before 
the line current can fellow. 


es 


1905.] NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 977 


Arresters with gaps and resistance capable of carrying 
considerable current for a short space of time act like high- 
potential regulators, relieving the line of surges promoted by 
many causes other than lightning. 

The papers show the ability of arresters to discharge auto- 
matically and repeatedly without attention. At 55000 volts 
the papers in hand show as free discharges as are obtained at 
lower voltages. 

Multi-gaps without Resistance.—The returns from the Indiana 
Union Traction Co. show that arresters of non-arcing metal 
multi-gaps without resistance, when used on plants having very 
large generating capacity, cannot be depended upon to operate 
successfully, but are liable to short circuit or burn; but this 
difficulty is obviated by the introduction of resistances on the 
low-equivalent arrester principle. In fact the large burned 
holes indicate that a large amount of current has followed the 
discharge, and I have been told that the circuit-breakers are 
thrown out nearly every time these arresters discharge, whereas 
the low-equivalent arrestors for the same voltage discharge 
freely without this breaker action. In other words, the old 
type of arrester under these conditions takes the discharge 
but fails to interrupt the short circuit which causes the breakers 
to open. In a synchronous converter system this involves the 
starting and synchronizing of apparatus. By avoiding any 
necessity for starting again, the newer type of arrester has 
greatly improved the normal operating conditions of the plant. 

Multi-gap Type with Resistance Pencils, G. E. Co.—The re- 
turns from St. Paul indicate that two groups of these arresters 
will share the discharge, although in this case they are not 
symmetrically arranged. This may arise from the inability of 
either arrester to discharge the line completely, because neither 
discharges freely, and seems to show that several arresters in 
multiple which are not free dischargers are bettcr than a single 
arrester. 

In a freely discharging arrester with disturbances of the 
order noted above, a good free discharger should take all the 
discharges; and of two arresters thus placed in multiple the 
one with the freer path to ground would carry off the disturb- 
ances. This is a point which can only be determined by a 
test of this kind and is yet to be proved conclusively. 

Judging by the character of the puncture the multi-gap 
arrester with carbon pencil appears not to discharge very freely. 


978 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. (Oct. 27 


The multiplex arrangement acts occasionally, but with the 
exception of the data given, Tables 4 and 5, on May 7—lay 
14, 1905, St.Paul Gas Light Co., no action of primary import- 
ance seems to have taken place. 

No information of any moment has been obtained as to the 
value of the apparatus for cable protection, as the performance 
in this regard has been practically uneventful. 

Pearson-Cutcheon Arrangement.—This method of protection 
has given evidence of its ability to carry off certain rises of 
potential at the terminals of transformer windings. It is curious 
to observe the erratic way in which this takes place, often 
skipping some coils and taking others. In many cases this 
action may be considered as representing the amount of the 
disturbances which ordinarily reaches apparatus protected by 
lightning-arresters and choke-coils; if the protective apparatus 
be properly proportioned, certainly nothing would be thought 
of the small amount of disturbances which the apparatus 
simultaneously shares. The ability of the device to operate 
satisfactorily seems to be established by these tests. Further _ 
tests, however, should be made with transformers in delta con- 
nection, and with generators. 


Points ON OPERATION OF TRANSMISSION LINES. 


Indiana Union Traction Company.—Reference to the returns for 
the winter months 1904-1905, Table 3, will show the disturbances 
raised on a line due to the action of grounding, etc., by reason 
of insulators breaking down. The fact that no shunted gaps 
operated throughout this period shows the whole trouble to 
have been one of potential disturbance within the system rather 
than from lightning. It is interesting to know that the opera- 
tion of this line has been uniformly successful from the stand- 
point of lightning or other static disturbances. 

St. Paul Gas Light Company.—The experience with cables on 
this plant seems to indicate that in general they are free from 
disturbances from lightning. 

As is indicated in the Remarks, Tables 4 and 5, it was found 
inadvisable to switch high-tension single-pole because of the 
disturbances thereby created. 

The absence of cable disturbances is particularly noticeable, 
although there is full evidence of high potential by reason of 
the “S,” seen frequently in the synopses, as well as the action 
of the Pearson-Cutcheon arrangement without any attendant 


1905.] NEALL; LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 979 


Of the other plants contributing to this record little of nov- 
elty can be said. Each in its way gives some information bear- 
ing on its local situation. For example, lightning in certain 
parts of British Columbia is very rare, and for more than a year 
_ several storms of this kind were reported, and, judged by their 
effect on the papers, they were of a relatively light nature. 


CoNncLusions CoNCERNING REcorRDs. 

Recotds to be effective should run along regularly in the 
Same way that any other part of the plant is metered. There 
is a natural variation from year to year in the severity of light- 
ning storms over any given locality. 

The fitst purpose of this test was to demonstrate its ap- 
plitability, which is now sufficiently indicated by the facts 
presented. It is reasonable to expect that the advance in 
the design and installation of apparatus from now on will in 
general be suchas to reduce to a minimum the inherent dis- 
turbances in a plant, limiting these to what might be called un- 
controlled forces, such as lightning, wind, etc., the effect of 
which, however, can be largely cared for by properly installed 
protective apparatus. 

In proposing this method for general investigation of all 
protective apparatus certain of its features are not lost sight 
of, these are: first, it requires frequent handling; secondly, 
the time-interval between the placing and removing of papers 
covers more than one discharge—refinement on this would 
call for complicated apparatus; thirdly, the method will not 
succeed unless pursued by constant determination to obtain 
results; fourthly, lines must be carefully marked and all inci- 
dents directly or indirectly related to the operation of ar- 
resters in any given case must be carefully traced out; fifthly, 
records require careful filing and summarizing. Fig. 15. 

The method is applicable, however, for all apparatus giving 
protection to a line by carrying disturbances from line to 
ground over an air-gap or its equivalent. Where there are a 
number of gaps in series, like the multi-gap arresters, the papers 
can easily be installed without impairing the action of the 
arresters. 

In special cases such as the investigation of an overhead 
grounded wire, horn lightning-arresters, etc., use can be made 
of a special tell-tale gap placed in the path to ground at some 
part of the device. This gap is shown in Fig. 22 and consists 


980 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. (Oct. 27 


of two non-arcing metal knurled cylinders between which a 
test paper can just be placed. By insulating the leads in such 
a way that any discharge passing to ground must go through 
this gap, a record can be obtained of the operation of the ap- 
paratus in question. Figs. 23, 24. An overhead grounded wire 
by reason of its great length and frequent grounding could 
have a special section cut out for investigation and pro- 
vided with gaps. The application to the horn lightning-arres- 
ter is obvious. 


RiGy 23% 


Detail of ‘‘ Tell-tale” gap for investigating the perform- 
ance of special protective devices. 


VALUE TO ENGINEERING. 


The novelty of this method of testing does not lie in the 
apparatus but rather in its present comprehensive application. 
It follows that by a concerted effort engineers have at their 
disposal a means of establishing beyond dispute within a com- 
paratively short time, say two years, the many questions of 
protection still under study. The problem naturally divides — 
itself into three classes: 

1. Observations on the occurrence and magnitude of light- 
ning discharges, 


1905 .] NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS. 981 


2. A determination of the value of standard protective ap- 
paratus at all voltages. 

3. A study of the value of protective apparatus located along 
a line. 


LIGHTNING 
ARRESTER 


GROUND LEAD 


\ TELL-TALE BOX, 


TO GROUND 


Fic. 24. 
Shows application of “ tell-tale” gap. 


No endeavor has been made to mention all the facts given 
by the reports shown by these records. It is hoped that what 
is given will be of sufficient importance to receive the atten- 
tion of those concerned in this cubject. 


982 LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE APPARATUS. [Oct. 27 


DiscussIoN ON LIGHTNING AND LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE 
APPARATUS. 


President Wheeler: The subject of lightning and lightning 
protective apparatus, though of extreme importance, has un- 
fortunately not received the attention it deserves. Most of us 
do not appreciate the amount of damage to property and the 
number of injuries and deaths caused by lightning discharges. 
We need more reliable information as to the nature of lightning 
and lightning discharges and the most effective method of pro- 
tecting apparatus from these discharges. I regret that none of 
the papers takes up the subject of lightning striking things 
that are not electrical, such as buildings. 1 mention this be- 
cause I think the public is usually misguided in the matter, 
many lightning rods that are worse than useless being sold to 
the credulous public. Engineers should at all times try to 
prevent the public from being imposed upon. 

P. H. Thomas: Progress is being made nowadays with 
lightning protective apparatus. I do not believe that the 
behavior of lightning arresters is going to be one of our great 
mysteries much longer. 

It is interesting to learn that European engineers are ad- 
vising the use of American lightning arresters, but it is also 
significant that they seem to find it wise to install. special ad- 
ditional lightning protective apparatus. This would indicate 
that European engineers have not full confidence in American 
apparatus. 

There are only one or two really fundamental features in a 
lightning arrester; an air-gap for discharging the static charge, 
and some means for interrupting the arc that may be estab- 
lished by the discharge. However ingenious the arrangement 
of any arrester, these are the basic features of all—except one 
special type of arrester not including a spark-gap, viz., a high 
resistance path between line and ground, which will undoubt- 
edly carry off slow accumulations of static charge; how serious 
this sort of accumulation is, I do not know, but I do not believe 
it very serious. It is hard to believe that a high resistance, 
like a water-resistance, will offer a different character of oppo- 
sition to the flow of current at the 100000 volts of a static 
discharge than it offers at the 50 000 volts of a step-up trans- 
former. For ordinary discharges then, it would seem that a 
high water-resistance really cannot give protection. 

‘As stated above, the basic features of all lightning arresters 
are air-gaps and arc-interrupting devices. The commonest 
form of gap is the multi-gap arrangement, which is to a great 
extent self-interrupting.*” Other interrupting devices are the 
extension of the arc, as in the horn arrester, by the heat gen- 
erated or by magnetic force; and the interruption of the circuit 
by fuses. The efficacy of most of these methods is usually 
and must in general be increased by the use of a certain amount 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 983 


of resistance in series with the arrester. These are the only 
devices that commercial designers have to work with at the 
present time. 

What needs to be known in regard to lightning arresters 
may be summarized as follows: ; 

First, are present series resistances too great for free dis- 
charge? 

Secondly, is it possible to use less resistance and still have 
non-arcing arresters? 

Thirdly, is it possible to use less series resistance in the 
horn type of arrester than in the multi-gap type? 

Fourthly, can any system be arranged by which it is feasible 
to protect lines by the use of fuses for interrupting the dis- 
charge, the difficulty being to protect the line after one dis- 
charge has occurred before replacing the fuse, and to prevent 
the dropping out of synchronous apparatus? 

These questions are of greatest importance in the protection 
of commercial installations. If all our attention is concen- 
trated upon these features, I believe the solution of this problem 
will be arrived at more quickly than by the effort to devise 
new combinations or forms of the old elements. 

Taken in connection with a great deal of corroborative 
evidence, Mr. Neall’s paper pretty nearly enables us to answer 
satisfactorily the first of the four questions asked above. Ina 
majority of cases, both of lightning and static discharge— 
practically in all cases of static discharge—as far as the speaker’s 
experience goes, the series resistance or the total resistance 
contained in the arrester, seems sufficiently small not to impede 
the discharge of actual accumulated electric charge without 
injury to the apparatus. On the other hand, there were a 
number of cases where Mr. Neall found discharges in the shunted 
gaps, showing that they perform a useful function; but as far 
as his evidence goes, there seems to be no reason to suppose 
that the series resistance in connection with the shunted gaps 
is not sufficient in practice in all cases where there is first-class 
insulation strength in the apparatus and wiring. Of course 
more evidence is always needed on this point. 

Mr. Neall’s paper does not throw much light on the second, 
third and fourth questions—is it possible to use less resistance? 
-does the horn type of arrester require less? and is it feasible 
to use a fuse arrester? 

To get the most satisfactory lightning protection, only the 
best types of insulated electric apparatus should be used, and 
the line insulation should be made as good as possible. That 
has not been the case until very recently. Not until recent 
times does the speaker believe, has the standard of insulation 
strength been brought sufficiently high for the best results. 
More attention to the insulation means, other things being 
equal, less trouble from lightning discharges. 

Mr. Neall’s efforts to obtain data from commercial operation 


984 LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE APPARATUS. [Oct. 27 


on this important branch of engineering work should be en- 
couraged by all operating engineers. In the first place, close 
attention to these details is in itself an education; it gives the 
operating engineers an opportunity to study the action of the 
protective apparatus and to judge whether it is sufficient or 
not. It determines, too, what are the sensitive parts of the 
system, where the worst discharges are to be expected, which 
knowledge should lead to the addition of protective apparatus; 
weak methods of insulation will be detected, etc. This informa- 
tion gathered from different parts of the country for a number 
of years will materially aid manufacturers in their efforts to 
perfect the lightning protective apparatus. A protective sys- 
tem like other systems should be to some extent an evolution. 

Mr. Smith’s paper is interesting and important, though it 
deals with a different kind of data. He confines his observa- 
tions to one plant, whilé Mr. Neall gives data from plants that 
are operating under many different conditions of voltages and 
locations. Mr. Smith says that since 1903, when he installed 
horn arresters, he has had no difficulty from lightning so far 
as interruptions of circuits or damage to apparatus is concerned. 
If I am not mistaken, there was at that time a substantial in- 
crease in the insulation strength in the wiring and apparatus 
of the plant he describes, which will undoubtedly do much to 
help eliminate trouble and leaves us rather uncertain as to 
whether the horn arrester or the increase in insulation was the 
essential protective feature; at any rate, with the increased 
insulation and the adopting of the horn arrester, he has secured 
substantially the protection. This is a most hopeful sign, as 
the very high voltage plants are the ones that are the most 
difficult to protect. There are of course many ways in which 
lightning can affect the line—electromagnetic induction, electro- 
static induction, the accumulation of a charge on the wire from 
a charged cloud, the gradual accumulation of charge from the 
atmosphere, and finally, the direct stroke on the line. How- 
ever, all things considered, it appears that the most dangerous 
kind of lightning is that in which a direct stroke (usually com- 
paratively small) actually reaches the line. In Mr. Smith’s 
plant in all cases in which the horn arrester has acted, some poles 
have been damaged; in one case, 15 poles were totally de- 
stroyed. This is very significant, and the conclusion is sug- 
gested — it is supported also by much evidence from 
different plants—that these severe strokes do not pass very far 
on the line, but that in the first few hundred feet their greatest 
severity is overcome by the discharges that pass down the 
pole. Of course a certain amount of the charge passes to the 
nearest station where it encounters the arresters which should 
be able to relieve the system, as the severity of the wave is 
limited to the insulation strength of the line. The obvious 
conclusion is that it will be very helpful in high-tension plants 
where the lines are very long if arresters can be placed one, 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 985 


two, or three miles from the station. At such places the ar- 
rester gets a chance at the static wave initiated by a direct 
stroke or otherwise before it reaches the apparatus. The draw- 
back to doing this sort of thing is the necessity of leaving the 
arrester unattended, and the likelihood that it will cause more 
trouble than it will prevent. 

The desirability of placing the arresters on the line near the 
stations brings forward a discussion on the fuse type, on 
account of the certainty of its freeing the line after a discharge. 
I believe that there is a great deal to be said in favor of using 
fuse arresters in plants like that of the Shawinigan Water 
and Power Company; but if the fuse type is to be used, 
there is perhaps no need of making a horn of it. It should 
be made as simple as possible—a plain gap, a fuse of non-cor- 
rodible wires of the smallest practicable diameter and highest 
resistance enclosed in a tube, which will open the circuit quickly. 
Unfortunately, when one fuse is blown the plant is unpro- 
tected until another fuse is put in; but it is only occasionally 
that one of these very severe discharges occurs. A direct 
stroke on the line is not likely to occur more than once in two 
or three days. Another method is to provide a number of 
fuses connected in parallel, in which case and if a separate 
series gap is provided for each fuse, the chances are that any 
lightning discharge will pick out one fuse and leave the others. 
If this sort of protection be used, there can be two or three 
discharges without replenishing the fuses. 

In the light of present experience the natural conclusion 
seems to be that the type of arresters found to give best service 
should be placed in all modern stations; if then there is any 
trouble in any particular locality, the arrester already in- 
stalled can often be supplemented by a fuse arrester or another 
arrester placed on the line some distance from the station. 
A trial of many variations of arrangement of protective 
apparatus will often determine an arrangement that will protect 
the whole line. There may be many plants in which the horn ar- 
rester, without series resistance and without fuses, may operate 
without throwing out synchronous apparatus or circuit breakers, 
but in most cases, I think this an unlikely condition, and further- 
more additions to the size of the plant may change such a 
condition. It will in general be necessary to have a series 
resistance in which case the multi-gap arrester may just as 
well be relied upon to protect the apparatus. 

Charles F. Scott: Many of the papers that are read and 
much of the discussion which takes place in regard to light- 
ning, particularly among practical station men, seem to treat 
lightning as if it were definite and uniform in its action. Per- 
haps +he most characteristic features of lightning are the varied 
conditions under which it occurs and the equally varied phe- 
nomena arising from it. The practical question is, what light- 
ning arrester will answer not only for a given specific condition, 


986 LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE APPARATUS. [Oct. 27 


or for all the conditions which may arise? Some of these 
varying conditions are: the character of the discharges, as pointed 
out by Mr Thomas; the difference in the tendency of an arc 
to follow a discharge, e.g., the dynamo current which may fol- 
low the discharge depends upon the voltage of the line and 
the kilowatt capacity of the station; the location of the ar- 
resters, whether at the power house or at a distant point on 
the line, as the line resistance between generator and arrester 
may be a considerable factor in determining the readiness 
with which the subsequent current may be extinguished. With 
a very high voltage the current which may follow a short cir- 
cuit is less in volume; consequently, it is less apt to burn the 
arrester, and is in someways, therefore, less liable to damage 
the spark-gaps than a current at a lower voltage. 

Mr. Neall’s paper is valuable in that it tends to bring to- 
gether many isolated cases of lightning discharges. The 
paper summarizes an experience of some years in the develop- 
ment of a system of records of lightning protective apparatus. 
I have visited some plants where tell-tale papers of the kind 
described by Mr. Neall have been in use, and found the opera- 
ting engineers interested in watching the effects of lightning 
discharges on the tell-tale papers. The papers were classified, 
and after a storm, they have shown the positions at which 
discharges have occurred In this way some idea is reached 
as to the effectiveness of the protective apparatus. 

No mention has been made this evening of the practice of 
grounding the neutral point of the system. As is well known, 
those who use a grounded neutral are usually of the opinion 
that it is the only safe way to operate a plant; on the other 
hand, there are others who regard the insulated system as the 
only safe way to operate. The practice of the Shawinigan Water 
and Power Company is, I believe, to ground the neutral; at the 
Missouri River Power Company plant the practice is to keep 
the system entirely insulated. The latter plant has run con- 
tinuously for service 24 hours a day and seven days a week, 
carrying a fairly uniform load all the time. As motors are used 
in connection with mining operations and smelters, the inter- 
ruption of the power would be a very serious matter. During the 
past year they have had only three or four disturbances on the 
high-tension system; one of these was in the station and was 
simply a discharge across a new terminal that had recently 
been put in and was not properly insulated. The arc following 
the discharge went out of its own accord without interrupting 
the circuit. Out on the line there had been several discharges 
resulting in short-circuits; these short-circuits were inter- 
rupted by opening the switches at the power station, and as these 
switches were closed immediately the only inconvenience was 
that of starting such motors as had stopped. I have been 
told that the Missouri River Power Company has had more 
interruption from lightning on 2000-volt distribution lines 


1905.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 987 


than on the 55 000-volt transmission line. The service of this 
line has been so satisfactory that an extension to the plant 
is being made, and the whole system will operate at 70 000 volts. 
This is higher, I believe, than is employed anywhere at present. 

The operating engineers at this plant say that by listening 
at the telephone, at times a slight crackling noise may be heard 
every little while, due probably to a discharge on the line. 
The phenomena of lightning on the line manifests itself in dif- 
ferent ways. When a storm—such as a winter wind storm 
with a light driving snow—first strikes the line, there is a slight 
clicking in the telephone; when the storm is leaving the line 
the telephone clicks in a different way. 

The matter of protecting the poles on the line seems to me 
to be one of the most serious questions in lightning protection. 
Mr. Smith reports that great disturbances occur on the line, 
such as the splintering of poles, with no concurrent disturb- 
ances to the generating and transforming apparatus within 
the station. I believe that no transformer in service has been 
damaged by lightning during the several years that his plant 
has been in operation. It is rather remarkable that in a coun- 
try where storms splinter so many poles, the apparatus in the 
station has been so well protected. 

W. S. Franklin: The problems that confront us at present 
in connection with lightning-arresters can, probably, be solved 
only by experiments on long-distance high-voltage transmission 
lines. It seems to me that the important thing to know about 
a lightning arrester is not that it operates successfully a great 
many times, but the number of times it fails to operate, the 
number of failures that result in damage to the apparatus in 
the station or to the pole lines. Mr. Neall’s paper, though 
interesting, seems to me to be faulty in this respect. 

The series lightning arrester described by Mr. Torchio—Gola’s 
series arrester—is, I think, a very fanciful arrangement. It is 
well known that iron is not magnetic at the excessively high 
frequencies which correspond to the frequency of lightning 
discharges; therefore, the iron diaphragm is no longer iron 
so far as the lightning discharge is concerned. The only 
thing that constitutes a sufficient change in the condition of 
the line effectually to reflect a pulse of discharge is change 
in capacity or in inductance, Changes in resistance are ex- 
tremely ineffective in producing reflection unless the resistance 
is suddenly made very large indeed over a considerable length 
ot jine. 

The kind of resistance that is needed not only for line dis- 
charges but also for use in series with a spark-gap, is that 
which offers a comparatively low resistance to quick dis- 
charges and a comparatively high resistance to slow discharges— 
in short, a skin resistance. The use of resistances 1n series 
with spark-gaps has been by no means pushed to the extent 
it should be in the development of lightning arresters, My 


988 LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE APPA RATUS. [Oct. 27 


idea is to use a series of three-foot terra-cotta pipes painted 
before the final firing with about two cents’ worth of platinum 
chlorid spread out on a surface about six feet broad. This 
arrangement presents an enormously high resistance to a slow 
discharge, corresponding to low frequency machines, and at 
the same time a resistance nearly as low as a solid conductor 
to the extremely rapid discharge induced by lightning. In 
the protection of pole lines something similar should be done 
to prevent a flow of current down a pole when the pole acts as 
a lightning arrester; that is, to prevent it from flowing through 
the fairly high resistance material of the wood, for a high 
resistance substance conducts not only on the surface but through 
the material. If the pole were made of copper, it would con- 
duct only on the surface; being of wood, even the extremely 
quick pulses of current which constitute lightning discharges 
are able to penetrate into the very heart of the pole. Perhaps 
the problem could be solved by applying to the pole some 
kind of conducting paint offering a comparatively high resist- 
ance, but not so high resistance as that of the pole itself. 

In regard to the freedom of spark discharge, as affected by 
resistance in series with gaps, I think the question of the in- 
fluence of a series resistance cannot be answered by the char- 
acter of the spark in the gap. An ordinary thread two or three 
feet long connected in series with a Leyden jar will discharge 
across the spark-gap, and instead of giving a large brilliant 
spark will give the weakest kind of a pale-violet spark. In 
this case the noise produced by the spark is a snap, as clearly 
defined as the snap of the brilliant spark produced when there 
is no resistance in series. The sharpness of this snap is the 
real indication of freedom of discharge, and to judge of the 
freedom of discharge by the brilliancy. of the spark or by the 
amount of the visible puncture produced in the bit of paper 
placed in the spark-gap, would be misleading. I think that the 
retardation of discharge by series resistance, provided that 
the resistance is of the right kind, has been greatly overesti- 
mated. 

The practical way to judge of the influence of series resist- 
ance upon the freedom of the discharge is, it seems to me, to 
have an auxiliary spark-gap in parallel with the lightning- 
arrester, and then to have that auxiliary spark-gap protected 
by a small amount of inductance and then to see, when the 
rush of current comes in over the line whether the time that 
elapses during the building up of sufficient voltage to break 
through the lightning-arrester is enough to allow the current 
to force its way through the choke-coil and to jump across the 
auxiliary gap. In judging of the freedom of discharge in the 
lightning-arrester, this time element is very important. 

The enumeration of the important features of lightning pro- 
tective apparatus by Mr. Thomas is very interesting. I think 
that a vitally important feature is the provision for the dissi- 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 989 


pation of the energy of the discharge (e.g., in a series resist- 
ance) so as to prevent oscillation and thus greatly lessen the 
time during which the spark-gap remains a fairly good con- 
ductor and thereby reduce to a minimum the likelihood of 
the formation of an arc 

Mr. Scott expresses the opinion that the most important prob- 
lem facing us at the present time in the matter of lightning 
protection, is to protect against these extremely violent light- 
ning discharges. It is precisely in these cases where it is neces- 
sary to provide for the dissipation of the energy. Ordinary 
“static discharges ” so called, represent but little energy, and 
special means for dissipating this energy is unnecessary. 

J. H. Hallberg: I wish to relate an experience with a 
modern well-known lightning arrester. It was installed on a 


4—-— fhkaseWwetre < frase Wire 


Grounded Neutraly brounded Wealials 


<fhase Wire 


Zwoggpunt One gap ume 


One Gap ane 


hace gap serie 


Grounded weutratly “crounded Meutral 


fig 3. fig 4 


three-phase four-wire 4 000-volt system, with a grounded neut- 
ral. There were about 2400 volts between the neutral and 
each phase-wire, and about 4 000 volts between the phase-wires. 

Fig. 1 shows a standard 2 400-volt lightning arrester which 
would be entirely destroyed during a lightning discharge, due 
to the main current following the discharge. Fig. 2 shows a 
3 600-volt arrester, which in several cases permitted the light- 
ning discharge to jump and the current to follow from A to B. 
instead of over the air-gaps as it normally should. Fig. 3 
shows the same type of lightning arrester differently assembled ; 
this was installed later on and successfully overcame all 
troubles under the most severe conditions. Fig. 4 shows the 


990 LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE APPARATUS. (Oct. 27 


lightning arrester equipment which was finally adopted as a 
standard for the system referred to. 

I have experimented considerably with several arresters, 
and find that, in the form of arrester here referred to, if the 
resistance is maintained it produces a straight path, and effectu- 
ally prevents the main current from following the lightning 
discharge. 

It would be interesting to know if the graphite resist- 
ance used in the General Electric lightning arrester dete- 
riorates to any appreciable extent with repeated discharges. 

H. C. Wirt: I believe there will be no appreciable increase 
of resistance in any of the General Electric arresters made 
within the last three years where the resistance amounts to 
450 ohms with a six-inch stick. That resistance is now made 
almost wholly of carborundum, whereas in the first form of 
arresters graphite resistances were used. The carborundum is 
much more satisfactory than the graphite. 

My experience is that all types of lightning arresters give 
more or less trouble.’ There is real need for reliable data on 
the operation of lightning protective apparatus, and I think 
it unwise to attempt to draw conclusions from investigations 
extending over a short period of time. Though the puncturing 
of paper may occur frequently, still it may not be a true repre- 
sentation of the operation of the arrester. Before any reason- 
able conclusion can be drawn from them, these punctures 
should be carefully examined by one who has had considerable 
experience with lightning protective apparatus. An experience 
of this kind is remarkably uncommon. 

What is wanted is improvement in all makes of lightning 
arresters. I have reports on all makes of arresters in operation 
except some of recent construction, and experience prompts 
me to say that these arresters, too, will give more or less trouble. 
For the last year and a half, I have been observing carefully 
the operation of lightning arresters in a modern power house; 
up to two months ago, I felt safe in predicting the successful 
operation of a particular form of arrester; now I am tempted 
to qualify such predictions because within the last month 
three transformers have burned out during storms. 

Personal observation leads me to believe that more can be 
learned from high-tension than from low-tension plants. There 
are disturbances going on in such systems which are not shown 
on any instruments now in use. I think we should not be 
hasty in forming an opinion regarding the possibilities of an 
arrester without any resistance. Very little has been written 
regarding the form, size, and number of gaps, size of cylinders, 
static capacity of these cylinders, though all these things have 
been under investigation. There is also considerable difference 
in respect to non-arcing metals. I think it is possible to reduce 
the number of gaps by using better non-arcing metals. 

The lightning arrester on the line may not be under observa-. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 991 


tion at the critical moment, and an entire season might pass 
without a discharge that would cause an injury to the appar- 
atus. I think it may be possible—it seems so from recent 
tests—to get a condition at the factory that approximates 
the conditions on the outside. The article by Dr. Steinmetz 
on the Manhattan trouble is worth careful study. I think it is 
possible for arresters to take care of many of the conditions 
that cause surging. 

H. A. Pikler: It seems to me that in most of the cases where 
the rising potential is due, not to the direct effect of the stroke 
of lightning, but to magnetic or staticinduction, surges, and short- 
circuit, that the protective apparatus does protect the line. 
In cases where the lightning strikes the line directly, the insu- 
lators are broken down and the poles damaged. I believe that 
in cases like this, the resulting damage is due to the enormous 
skin effect on the line. Short portions of line offer so good a 
resistance tc the very high oscillatory discharge of the lightning 
that it naturally seeks a path of lower resistance; this breaks 
down the insulation and goes to ground through the pole. 
A remedy for this would be to install lightning-arresters at 
such distances and on-such portions of the line that the re- 
sistance from the arrester to the ground is lower than that of . 
the insulator. If this were done perhaps the discharges would 
go along the lightning-arrester and not through the insulator 
to the pole. 

H. G. Stott: Lightning phenomena may be divided into 
two classes; the first corresponding in degree to the surges 
which are the result of switching in and switching out cables, 
short-circuits on the lines, mistakes in synchronizing, etc., 
which may amount to a net rise of three or four hundred per 
cent. This class of phenomena can undoubtedly be taken care 
of in several ways with the apparatus at present in use. The 
second class, however, corresponds to the effect produced by 
the explosion of a ton of dynamite, and at present there is ap- 
parently absolutely no way of safeguarding apparatus from a 
direct lightning stroke of this kind. In the case of the first 
class the present type of lightning arrester is probably an 
element of safety to the insulation of the entire system and 
will safeguard against any ordinary surge, or induced lightning 
discharge. When purchasing apparatus, a small additional 
investment will frequently be sufficient to give an insurance of 
safety to the insulation of four or five times the working voltage, 
and would seem to be the best kind of an investment in light- 
ning protection. In the second class of lightning discharge we are 
brought face to face with two absolutely contradictory condi- 
tions: the first condition is that in order to take care of the 
lightning discharge the best possible path to earth must be 
provided; the second condition is that the worst possible 
path to earth ought to be provided in order to prevent the line 
current from following the discharge to earth. These two 


992 LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE APPARATUS. [Oct. 27 


conditions it seems practically impossible to harmonize; for 
whatever is done to improve the one must at the same time 
work against the other, so that any apparatus designed to 
meet both requirements must necessarily be a compromise and, 
therefore, inefficient under both extreme conditions. 

A plan I should like to see tried would be to put in a single 
air-gap in series with an oil-switch in the connection to the 
ground. A current transformer would operate the oil-switch 
through a relay, in case of a severe discharge to ground followed 
by the line current, after a predetermined interval. This oil- 
switch after tripping out would then automatically close itself 
again after an interval of, let us say, three or four seconds, and 
so be ready for the next discharge. The generator relay being 
set, of course, for a longer time than the time-interval, would 
not operate. 

Philip Torchio: A word further in regard to the protective 
devices I have seen in Italy. The opinion abroad is that the 
present lightning arresters safeguard the ordinary operation of 
a station; for even if a generator is struck by lightning it would 
be disconnected from the bus-bars before causing a shutdown. 
But the real troubles are short-circuits along the line caused 
by a flashing between the wires; these short-circuits cannot be 
stopped without opening the line, resulting, of course, in an 
interruption to the service. 

The Milan Edison Company has put in double insulators of 
the type described by Mr. Semenza in a paper presented before 
the INSTITUTE a short time ago.* Since then—it was three 
years ago—no trouble has been caused by the breaking down 
of insulators, though there have been a great many storms. 

It seems to me that at present the question of lightning 
protection of the station apparatus is not so important as the 
protection of the line itself. What really needs to be known is 
how to protect the whole line, say, at 20 miles from the station, 
as well as just outside the station. 

The water-resistance dischargers used abroad are in a way 
similar to the arresters mentioned by Professor Franklin. 
They expose large surfaces to lightning discharges. Mr. 
Thomas -has said that these discharges—on account of their 
high resistance—would not act to discharge the line poten- 
tial more than any other type of resistance under ordinary 
operating conditions. But will not these oscillatory discharges, 
involving a relatively small amount of energy, be made harmless 
in a short time by even a high resistance discharger acting as a 
safety valve? 

N. J. Neall: I think, considering all the difficulties in getting 
the performance of lightning-arresters during storms, that the 
method described in the paper is the most effective yet pro- 
posed for getting the needed information from operating en- 


*Transactions, A. I. E. E., 1904, Vol. 23, p. 147. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 993 


gineers. I should be very glad to hear of any other method 
that can be used to get the same information. One year of 
trial is certainly not sufficient to establish a case; three or five 
years would be better, because that is the only way in which 
to get a record of all the storms which might affect a given line. 

As far as the bad performance of arresters is concerned, the 
tests now placed before you are complete; had there been any 
bad performances they should have been included in this record. 
As a matter of fact I do not know of any cases of serious failure 
of the low-equivalent arrester in and of itself. In some instances 
extraordinary conditions affected the operation of the ar- 
resters, and for this reason I have not endeavored to give the 
impression that the arresters are capable of taking care of very 
high discharges. 

The value of the standard protective apparatus as manufac- 
tured to-day is not for extraordinary disturbances but for every- 
day conditions. A few years ago nothing was heard about 
line protection; but now that lines are operated from 60 to 
200 miles in length the protection of the line itself has become 
an important matter. 

The remaining point is, that the papers placed in the dis- 
charge-path of the condenser were in the path of a 30 000-volt 
condenser. The character of that discharge is different from 
the discharges obtained by Mr. Wurts from a static machine 
and Leyden jars. The energy of the discharge is different. 
There is no novelty as far as the skin effect is concerned, in the 
tests made by us; we have however gone a little further and 
used larger quantities than have been previously employed. 

Charles P. Steinmetz: The successful operation of long dis- 
tance transmission systems depends to a large extent upon. 
their protection from lightning. Unfortunately, the same ab- 
solute confidence can not yet be placed upon the proper per- 
formance of that part of the electric circuit constituting the 
lightning protective apparatus that is had in respect to almost 
every other part of the system, notwithstanding all that enthu- 
siastic engineers and designers of lightning arresters may 
assert. The reason is obvious: Under the term “ lightning ”’ 
are included a large number of phenomena, not all of which 
are fully understood or have been investigated. 

In its broad definition, ‘‘ lightning ’’ in electric circuits com- 
prises all the effects of voltages different from and usually 
higher than the normal operating voltage of a system. Such 
abnormal voltages may enter a system from the outside, as in 
overhead lines, or originate in a system. Hence the terms 
“external” and ‘‘internal’”’ lightning may be used. The na- 
ture of both types of disturbance is the same, but they fre- 
quently differ quantitively, as in frequency, amplitude and 
duration. 


994 LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE APPARATUS. [Oct. 27 


Common causes of internal disturbances are: spark discharges 
over faults in the insulation, sudden changes of circuit condi- 
tions, etc. Some of these disturbances have already been 
discussed before the InstiruTE. Other disturbances such as 
high-frequency oscillation resulting from a ground on a high- 
voltage three-phase system; the interesting effects observed at 
the junction of overhead lines with underground cables; and 
the complex set of phenomena resulting in a three-phase system 
from the coincidence of the 3d, 9th, 15th, etc., harmonic, may 
well form the subject of a paper. As is well known, the 3d, 
9th and 15th harmonics in a three-phase system are in phase, 
and therefore rise and fall simultaneously; which may result in 
cross-currents flowing between the different parts of the system 
through the ground, and occasionally high-frequency oscilla- 
tions or low-frequency high-power surges of the whole system 
against ground—in the latter case, mainly of triple frequency. 

The discussion on the paper deals only with those high-voltage 
disturbances that enter the system from the outside, that is, 
from the atmosphere. The designing of lightning protective 
apparatus is seriously limited by the fact that such apparatus 
must not only promptly and effectually discharge atmospheric 
disturbances entering the line, but must do so without producing 
internal surges. The charge and discharge of electric trans- 
mission systems by atmospheric disturbances is sudden and 
liable to be oscillatory. It is, therefore, a sudden change of 
ci cuit conditions; and it is changes of this character that pro- 
duce internal surges. If lightning were a very high-frequency 
oscillation, like the discharge from a Leyden jar, the system 
could be protected by interposing reactive coils between the 
station and line, and shunting the discharge through multiple 
spark-gaps to ground; if it were a steady gradual charge of 
the line, it could be discharged to ground by a high-resistance 
shunt, with or without a spark-gap; again, if it were a low- 
frequency high-power surge, an effort could be made to take 
care of it. 

But lightning is not limited to any one of these phenomena; 
it may include two or all of them at the same time, as for in- 
stance, a gradual static charge of the line, followed, as soon as 
the voltage has risen sufficiently high, by a discharge in the 
form of a high-frequency oscillation, which in short-circuiting 
the line, gives rise to a low-frequency high-power surge. And 
even still other, and practically unknown forms of lightning 
may exist; for instance, globular hghtning has occasionally 
been observed, so that no question can be raised regarding 
the fact of its existence; practically nothing is known about it 
however, excepting that it is extremely destructive; it seems to 
be rather a discharge centre than a simple discharge. Obvi- 
ously, then, since our knowledge of lightning is incomplete, 
the results of efforts to construct lightning protective apparatus 
cannot yet be perfect. 


~1905.] DISCUSSION AF NEW YORK. 995 


In the interior of a body of perfect conductivity, no electrical 
-disturbances can be produced by external causes. Hence if 
a, transmission system is enclosed by a grounded conducting 
shell—put underground—atmospheric disturbances cannot enter 
it. Since a transmission line cannot be put underground, the 
best available protection is to put the ground above the trans- 
mission line. That is, a grounded system of wires above the 
transmission line is the most perfect protection from lightning, 
and the more perfect the nearer it approaches the character 
of a grounded enclosing shell of perfect conductivity. A 
single grounded wire over the transmission line offers consider- 
able protection from atmospheric disturbances; but two such 
wires are better than one; and, naturally, the greater the num- 
ber of wires the more perfect is the protection afforded. 

To protect a transmission line by overhead ground wires, 
however, it is essential that the line be within the protective 
zone of the wires, that is, within the space enclosed by an angle 
of 45 degrees, or preferably 60 degrees from the ground wires 
downward. 

Barbed wire, by reason of its more rapid action, is more 
effective than ordinary wire against some kinds of atmospheric 
disturbances; for example, electrostatic charges picked up 
from drifting rain or fog; while with other disturbances it 
offers no superiority over plain wire. 

The conductivity of the ground wire is of considerable im- 
portance. For the purpose of bringing ground, or zero, po- 
tential up to a point above the transmission line, and thereby 
lowering the electrostatic potential of the space in which the 
_transmission line is located, the size of the ground wire obviously 
is immaterial; but high conductivity of the ground wire is 
of importance in protecting the transmission line from 
the. inductive effects (electromagnetic or electrostatic) of 
oscillating, or sudden, atmospheric discharges, such as light- 
ning flashes; and also in protecting the stations in case a direct 
stroke of lightning reaches the line, by its damping effect as a 
grounded secondary conductor. ; 

Inasmuch, however, as a system of overhead ground wires 
cannot be a complete enclosing shell of perfect conductivity, 
its protective effect, however great, cannot be quite complete; 
therefore protective devices have to be installed at the sta- 
tions as safeguards against the entrance of lightning from the 
line. ¢ 

The elements available for the construction of station pro- 
‘tective apparatus are mainly spark-gaps, resistances, and 
reactive-coils. The purpose of the spark-gap 1s to isolate the 
line from the ground when normal voltage prevails, and to 
connect it to ground in case of abnormal voltages, but to con- 
nect it in such a manner that the connection 1s disrupted again 
when the voltage returns to normal; that is, the gap must 
. let a spark pass at abnormal voltage, but must not hold an arc 


996 LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE APPARATUS. (Oct. 27 


at normal voltage. sparks in series require about the same 
voltage as (in some cases very much less voltage than) one 
spark n times the length; ™ arcs in series, however, require 
nearly n times the voltage of a single arc of m times the length. 
Hence the greater the number of the spark-gaps, and the 
shorter, therefore, their length, the more favorable is the rela- 
tion of arc voltage to spark voltage. This relation of spark 
to arc has led to the almost universal introduction of the multi- 
ple-gap arrester. 

In addition to spark-gaps, arc-interrupting devices, as for 
instance shunted resistances, are used; which, due to the par- 
ticular character of the arc, are caused, by the increase of arc 
voltage with decrease of current, to make the arc unstable and 
so extinguish it. 

The purpose of the series resistance is to make the discharge 
non-oscillatory. A discharge from line to ground or from line 
to line will be oscillatory if no series resistance or other oscilla- 
tion-preventing device is in circuit, and may cause a low-fre- 
quency surge in the system, which may be more destructive 
than the lightning itself. 

In its effect upon the discharging capacity of the arrester, 
the series resistance is unqualifiedly bad; the greater the series 
resistance interposed, the less discharge ability the arrester has. 
Considered solely from the standpoint of the discharge of light- 
ning, the best lightning-arrester is therefore the one that has 
no series resistance. If an arrester could be made without 
series resistance and depended upon to discharge non-oscillatory 
it would be the preferable type. 

The reactive-coil protects the station against a high-fre- 
quency oscillation, but offers no. protection whatsoever against 
static charges of low-frequency surges, because the amount of 
reactance which can be introduced is limited: The reactance 
employed must be less than would be appreciable at the normal 
frequency of the system; and therefore less than would exert 
an appreciable effect on low-frequency surges. Its purpose is 
to obstruct a high-frequency oscillation, like that of a Leyden 
jar discharge, but it is not a general protective device any 
more than is the series resistance. 

The important feature of very high-power discharges is 
their extreme suddenness, which causes destruction at the point 
of entrance, usually in the middle of the transmission line, 
without transmitting sufficient energy to the terminal stations 
to be very serious at those points. Very high-power dis- 
charges destroy transmission-line poles, but do not menace 
a station unless the discharge occurs very close to the station. 

J. B. Taylor (by letter): Professor Franklin referred to the 
stiddenness and sharpness of the sounds caused by atmospheric 
disturbances on telephone lines indicating rapidity with which 
charges may collect on a conductor under different atmospheric 
conditions. Tests on telephone lines have led me to the con- 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 997 


clusion that these sharp crackling sounds are due to the sudden 
discharge of a line to ground, on account of its potential having 
gradually increased to a breaking-down point. On several 
occasions I have observed discharges of this nature in the middle 
of winter during snow storms. A line approximately 40 miles 
‘long would charge and discharge with such rapidity that the 
disturbance in the telephone line was, on several occasions, 
mistaken for a cross with a telegraph line. 

The action in this case was apparently as follows: each 
flake of snow carries a charge, and sufficient of these strike the 
wires to charge the whole line. On account of the protectors 
used—carbon blocks separated by thin sheets of mica—as soon 
as the line reached a potential of about 400 or 500 volts one of 
the discharge gaps would be bridged, and the line discharged 
with the accompanying sharp click, these discharges occurring 
so rapidly that the result was the same as though the line 
had become crossed with a telegraph circuit. A Weston volt- 
meter connected between telephone line and ground would 
give a steady deflection, in one case the deflection corresponding 
to a current of, roughly, 3to 4 milliamperes. These disturbances 
would sometimes continue without interruption for several 
hours, and the service was seriously interfered with. The 
obvious remedy was to ground the neutral, thus causing the 
charge to be dissipated as fast as it accumulated. This neutral 
point was readily obtained from a tap taken from the middle 
point of an impedance coil bridged across the line. The line 
to which I have referred was at Burlington, Vermont, and the 
observations made some years ago, when I had no facilities for 
getting more complete data as to the polarity and potential 
of the snow-flakes. Snow-storms causing this trouble would 
occur perhaps on an average of three or four times in a year. 

After devising the grounded neutral for removing the trouble, 
I learned that in Montreal this same charging of lines during 
snow-storms was of more frequent occurrence, and the same 
remedy—the grounded neutral—used to remove such disturb- 
ances. 

W. S. Franklin (by letter): The practically important thing 
nowadays in making up one’s mind what to try in the way of 
improved lightning protection is elimination. Let us not enter- 
tain the distracting idea that everything ever imagined is to 
be considered in this important practical problem; in fact I 
think that many aspects of the lightning discharge may be 
legitimately and definitely set aside. 

First as to globular lightning. There is no doubt in my 
mind that this is a wholly subjective phenomenon. A fixed 
impression on the retina of a particularly vivid end-on lightning 
flash follows the eye when, at the crash of thunder, the at- 
tention of the observer is upset and at the same time the eyes 
jump and the slowly-moving globe of fire seems to have vanished 
in a crash of simultaneous thunder. 


998 LIGHTNING PROTECTIVE APPARATUS. [Oct. 27 


Secondly, as to sudden versus sluggish lightning discharges. 
I believe that the sudden variety is the only variety that need 
be considered. Even the slow accumulation of charge on a 
line which engineers call the “ static charge’ is a series of 
spits, if one can trust the evidence of the telephone. A very 
sluggish lightning discharge of moderate intensity can be taken 
care of by the grounding of a point in the system; for example, 
the neutral point in a three-phase system, and a very sluggish 
discharge of high intensity would on the other hand represent 


an immense amount of energy and it would have to be taken | 


care of by the same means that are used to guard against short- 
circuits in the system; that is, by fuses and circuit breakers. 

Thirdly, as to the use of a guard wire. A complete metal 
shell would be absolutely effective as a screen for purely static 
effects, and at the time of discharge a complete metal shell 
would allow a disturbance to pass through it too small to be 
of any consequence. The incomplete metal shell, the guard 
wire, approximates in its degree of shielding to a complete 
metal shell. For purely static and very sluggish dynamic 
effects this degree of approximation is fairly great. For ex- 
tremely abrupt dynamic effects, however, the guard wire be- 
comes more and more nearly ineffective. Sunlight, for ex- 
ample, is an extremely abrupt type of electrodynamic disturb- 
ance, and of course in this case the guard wire screens only its 
shadow. 

I am inclined to think that the value of the guard wire lies 
mostly in its affording what one might call a spark-guard to 
prevent a spark from above from actually reaching the trans- 
mission wires. Of course when analyzed this spark-guard 
effect partakes in part of the nature of the ideal screening 
effect of which Dr. Steinmetz speaks, but it is by no means 
simply that. The behavior of a system at the instant of a 
breakdown cannot be described in terms which apply toe the 
system in a quiescent or steadily varying state; the ideas of 
static screening and of the reflection of an orderly electro- 
magnetic wave by the guard wire cannot be applied to what 
takes place at the instant of a terrific collapse or breakdown 
of the dielectric (the air) near the line. 

Fourthly, it may be of importance so to design a transmission 
line as to realize the condition of the “ distortionless ” circuit; 
for example, by providing high-resistance leakage paths, to 


earth from the line, so that any wave starting out from the. 


place of a lightning discharge would retain its abruptness un- 
impaired, and thus be of a character to be arrested by a choke- 
coil and deflected to earth through a spark-gap. 


A paper presented at the 2orst Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, Nov. 24, 1905. 


Copyright 1905, By A. I.E. E, 


THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 


BY S. W. STRATTON AND E: B. ROSA. 


Early in the history of our Government an office of weights 
and measures was established in connection with the Coast & 
Geodetic Survey for the purpose of providing suitable standards 
of length in connection with its work. At about the same time 
. it became necessary for the Secretary of the Treasury to adopt 
standards of mass and capacity, and to provide copies of the 
same for use at the various custom-houses, thus increasing its 
functions to include mass and capacity. Later he was directed 
by the Congress to provide copies of these standards of length, 
mass, and capacity to the various states. This work was 
necessarily delegated to the office of weights and measures. 
Precision measurements of length necessitated the adoption 
and comparison of thermometic standards through the ordi- 
nary range of temperature. During the last years of the office 
of weights and measures it had begun in a very small way the 
testing of standards of electrical resistance and_ electro- 
motive force, but owing to the limited facilities of the office 
its work was practically confined to the bare necessities arising 
in connection with the work of the Treasury Department. 
In urgent and important cases comparisons were made for other 
departments of the Government and for the public, although 
no provision was made directly for that purpose. In the 
meantime the scientific, manufacturing, and commercial in- 
terests of the country had assumed gigantic proportions. Accu- 
rate measurements were employed where before guesswork 


999 


1000 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


and rules of thumb were considered quite sufficient. Scientific 
work, and the introduction of scientific methods of manu- 
facturing necessitated accurate methods of measurement. The 
dissemination of scientific knowledge and the adoption of the 
interchangeable method in manufacturing made the use of 
uniform working standards imperative, a result to be obtained 
only through primary standards of the highest type, and a 
central institution provided with the facilities for their com- 
parison with secondary or working standards. 

It was not until 1901 that our Government provided suit- 
able standardizing facilities, although the necessity for such 
work had been recognized for many years previously. In 
fact the demand for it had become so great that for some time 
previous to the establishment of the National Bureau of Stand- 
ards we were compelled to avail ourselves of the facilities of 
foreign governments, principally those of the Physikalisch- 
Technische Reichsanstalt of Germany, an institution to which 
too much credit cannot be given for having demonstrated the 
value of such institutions founded on broad scientific prin- 
ciples, and independent of commercial considerations. The 
work of that institution is too well known for further com- 
ment, but it may be safely stated: that were it not for its mag- 
nificent example the Bureau of Standards would probably not 
be in existence to-day. At that time the United States held 
a creditable position in physical science and had some of the 
best laboratories in the world; it was leading in the manu- 
facture of electrical and other machinery, and in some kinds 
of scientific instruments. To be compelled to ask foreign 
laboratories for standards and standardizing facilities was 
clearly a situation that ought to be corrected. The Congress 
acted promptly when the matter was brought to its attention. 

Funds were appropriated for the construction and equipment 
of laboratories and for a small scientific force, with a view to 
increasing the latter as soon as the laboratories were com- 
pleted. Since it would require at least two to three years for 
the planning and building of the laboratories, temporary 
quarters were at once secured in connection with the quarters 
formerly occupied by the office of weights and measures. 

Immediately after the passage of the Act establishing the 
Bureau of Standards, March 3, 1901, the planning of the labora- 
tories was begun, as well as the selection of the scientific staff, 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1001 


and the development of some of the more important methods 
of testing. The first and one of the most important problems 
which presented itself was the selection of a site. After a 
careful examination of all the sites available in that section 
of the city of Washington, in which it was desired to locate the 
bureau, one was found which was sufficiently near the city 
and lines of transportation to be reasonably easy of access, 
and which possessed the desired physieal qualifications. The 
site secured is about 7.5 acres in extent and is situated in the 
northwest section of the District of Columbia, about 3.5 miles 
from the White House on Connecticut Avenue extended. The 
location has proved by experience to be a most excellent one, 
and while it is sufficiently large for immediate purposes, steps 
have been taken towards securing sufficient adjacent property 
to protect the bureau from mechanical and electrical disturb- 
ances that may arise with the future development of the city. 
The selection of the site was naturally followed by the de- 
signing and constructing of the buildings. It was decided to 
erect two buildings, one of which should contain the mechanical 
plant, instrument shop, and other work requiring heavy appar- 
atus; the other, a physical laboratory, situated at some dis- 
tance from the first, and as far as possible free from machinery 
or mechanical disturbances. The amount appropriated for the 
buildings, exclusive of the equipment, $325 000, would not 
permit of ornamental or expensive construction; nevertheless 
it was sufficient to erect two strong, substanticl, fireproof 
buildings, of dark-red brick, trimmed with buff Bedford lime- 
stone; and of a style well suited for laboratories. They were 
designed by the Supervising Architect of the Treasury De- 
partment according to general specifications drawn up by the 
experts of the bureau. At all times these experts exercised 
- direct supervision as to both design and construction. Both 
buildings were planned with reference to future extensions on 
the cast and west. A third building to accommodate machinery 
for the liquidification of gases is nearly completed; it is prac- 
tically an extension of the mechanical laboratory to the west. 
It is proposed to erect a similar but larger building at the 
east of the mechanical laboratory for the testing of engineering 
instruments, the strength and other properties of materials. 
At the east and west ends of the physical laboratory it is pro- 
posed to erect in the future two buildings, each about the 
size of the present physical laboratory, one to be devoted to 


1002 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


electrical work, the other as a chemical and metallurgical 
laboratory. The entire group of buildings will be connected 
by tunnels through which heat, power, light, and other facilities 
will be distributed from the mechanical laboratory. In de- 
signing the buildings and their equipment special attention 
has been paid to the production and distribution of general 
laboratory facilities, the details of which will be described 
later. The work of many physical laboratories is seriously 
handicapped by the lack of these facilities, such as a sufficient 
range of temperature, pressure, and electrical current. Often 
the provision of some special facility necessitates a greater 
expenditure of labor and time than the solution of the problem 
in hand. The testing work of the bureau also requires a com- 
plete variety and range of these facilities. 

One of the first principles laid down in the general specifica- 
tions of the laboratory was that it should be possible to install 
at any time pipes or wires leading from the mechanical plant 
to the various laboratory rooms, or from one room to another. 
This principle has been rigorously carried out and will be ad- 
hered to in all future buildings. Another feature incorporated 
as far as possible is that all laboratory rooms shall be general 
in character, that is to say, all are provided with the same 
facilities, temperature regulation, and conveniences, varying 
only in the special equipment installed, so that any room in 
the physical laboratory would serve almost equally well for 
investigations or testing in optics, electricity, heat, or for 
precision measurements of length, mass, and capacity. The 
space beneath the first floor of the physical laboratory is un- 
excavated, thus obviating all fixed piers of masonry, but which 
may be installed when and where necessary or removed in 
case they are not needed. The heavy wall brackets are at- 
tached ‘to the wall in such a manner that they may, also, be 
removed in case the wall space is required for other purposes. 
The physical building has now been occupied for about a year 
and has been found to be exceedingly well adapted to the 
purpose for which it was designed. 

The entire personnel of the bureau, numbering 14 the first 
year, was increased to 24 the second year, 58 the third year, 
71 the fourth year, and 87 for the present fiscal year beginning 
July 1, 1905, the fifth year in the history of the bureau. Over 
75% of the personnel consists of scientific and technical men, 
the selection of which presented a difficult problem owing to 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1008 


the high standard that must be maintained by the bureau, and 
the great demand for the same classes of men by educational 
institutions and the engineering professions. Nevertheless, the 
bureau from the beginning has insisted on filling its positions 
with none but the best material, often allowing them to remain 
vacant rather than appoint undesirable or even fairly good 
men. The selections have always been made by competitive 
civil service examinations; this is not always the quickest or 
most advantageous way of selecting professional men, espe- 
cially when the demand is greater than the supply, but it 
guards successfully against political influence or favoritism. 
The Civil Service Commission has codperated with the bureau 
in maintaining a high standard in the scientific qualifications 
of its personnel. With the exceptions of the leaders in the 
principal lines of the bureau’s work, the policy has been to 
appoint graduates of first-class scientific or technical colleges 
to the lower grades of assistantships, advancing them to the 
higher grades as they become proficient and vacancies occur. 
At entrance they are allowed to select the line of work in which 
‘they desire to specialize, and every opportunity is given them 
for development. The leaders of several important sections 
of the bureau are men who entered it as minor assistants, but 
who were equipped with a thorough scientific training which 
enabled them to take advantage of the splendid opportunities 
the bureau offers in certain fields of scientific research. 

The grades, or ranks, in the scientific corps are: laboratory 
assistant, assistant physicist or chemist, associate physicist or 
chemist, and physicist or chemist, with two or three different 
salaries in each grade. With a few of the higher positions 
yet to be provided, they constitute a series of positions with 
a uniform gradient of salaries from the lowest to the highest. 
Whenever possible vacancies or new positions are filled by 
promotion, new men being appointed to the lower places, but 
always selected with the educational qualifications that will 
permit of the advancement of meritorious men through all 
of the grades above. Promotion in all cases depends upon the 
success with which the work of the previous grade has been 
performed. This principal is not only adhered to in the scien- 
tific corps, but in the clerical and engineering positions of the 
bureau. 

To provide the minor assistants in the routine testing and 
experimental work, a system of apprentices and aids has been 


1004 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


established. Graduates of first-class manual training and 
technical high schools are appointed to the position of ap- 
prentice and advanced to the position of aid at end of two years, 
or as soon thereafter as a vacancy may occur. All aids are 
eligible for promotion to the lowest grade of laboratory as- 
sistant, if during the period of minor service they have ac- 
quired the requisite mathematics and theoretical scientific 
training, provision for which is made in the evening classes 
of the George Washington University of Washington. While 
the work of the younger members of the bureau’s staff is care- 
fully supervised by its experts, independent thought and 
originality are encouraged, due credit being given them in the 
publications of the bureau, when merited. 

Manufacturing concerns and engineers solve great problems 
by the association of experts. In like manner the different 
sections of the bureau codperate and assist one another in their 
work. For example, the specialist engaged in the development 
of the fundamental electrical standards has at his hands the 
best facilities for the measurement of length, mass, time, and 
temperature, and can readily consult with the corresponding 
experts, as well as with the chemist. The advantages to be 
gained by this association of specialists can only be appreciated 
by those who have wasted valuable time calibrating or testing 
instruments which were only incidental to the problem in hand. 

The entire scientific staff of the bureau meets once a week 
in a room set aside for this purpose. This room is equipped 
with all the facilities of a first-class physical lecture room 
where papers intended for publication are presented and dis- 
cussed. Current literature pertaining to the work of the 
bureau is reviewed, and reports made as to work contemplated 
or in progress. 

The leaders of the various sections of the bureau’s work 
constitute a Council which meets from time to time with the 
Director for the discussion of matters pertaining to the policy, 
or administration, of the bureau. The results of all scientific 
work intended for publication are submitted to the Council 
for approval. The Council has been of great assistance in the 
administration of the affairs of the bureau; great credit is due 
its members, and especially the editorial committee, for the 
care and supervision they have exercised as to the bureau’s 
publications. 

The working unit of the bureau’s force is the section based 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1005 


upon a definite class of work and headed by an expert. For 
purposes of administration, these sections are grouped into 
three divisions; the first under the immediate charge of the Di- 
rector comprises six sections, as follows: 
Weights and Measures. 
. Heat and Thermometry. 
. Light and Optical Instruments. 
Engineering Instruments. 
The Office. 
The Instrument Shop. 
The second division, in charge of the physicist, also com- 
prises six sections, as follows: 
1. Resistance and Electromotive Force. 
2. Inductance and Capacity and Absolute Measurements. 
3. Electrical Measuring Instruments. 
4. Magnetism. 
5 
6. 


SoC ie GR bo 


. Photometry. 
The Engineering Plants. 

The third division comprises the chemical work of the bureau 
and is in charge of the chemist, but has not as yet been sub- 
divided into sections. As the work and personnel of the bureau 
grows, the more important sections will become divisions. 

The scientific staff for the present year consists of 1 physicist, 
1 chemist, 4 associate physicists, 1 associate chemist, 9 assistant 
physicists, 2 assistant chemists, 17 laboratory assistants, 4 aids, 
4 laboratory apprentices; total 43. 

The office and clerical force consists of 1 secretary, 1 librarian, 
6 clerks, 1 storekeeper, 1 draftsman, 6 messengers; total 16. 

The engineering and mechanical personnel for the present 
year consists of 1 engineer, 3 assistant engineers, | electrician, 
6 mechanicians, 2 woodworkers, 2 shop apprentices, 3 firemen, 
6 laborers, 2 watchmen, 1 janitor; total 27. 

The Act establishing the Bureau of Standards provides for 
a Board of Visitors, to be composed of scientific or technical 
men who shall visit the bureau at least once a year and report 
on the work of the bureau, its equipment, and personnel. It 
was thought by those interested in the establishment of the 
bureau that a board of this kind would serve to guard the 
character of its work, and advise as to the policy of the insti- 
tution, especially as to its relations to the public. The Board 
of Visitors consists of five members, each appointed for a period 
of five years; the original appointments being made for one, 


1006 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


two, three, four, and five years respectively. Thus far the 
members appointed originally for a period of less than 5 years 
have been reappointed. At present the members are: President 
Ira Remsen of Johns Hopkins University, representing the 
chemical interests of the country; President Henry S. Pritchett, 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, representing 
technical educational institutions; Professor Elihu Thomson, 
representing the électrical interests of the country, and whose 
selection was made at the suggestion of the members of the 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL EncINEERS; Professor 
Edward L. Nichols, representing physical interests; and Mr. 
Albert Ladd Colby, Secretary of the American Association of 
Steel Manufacturers and representing a wide range of manu- 
facturing to which the bureau's work is also very closely re- 
lated. These gentlemen have all been connected with the 
bureau from the beginning and have been of great assistance 
in its development. : ; 

The Director of the bureau renders an annual report to the 
Secretary of Commerce and Labor, covering a financial statement 
and the principal needs of the bureau in the exercise of its 
functions. An estimate of the expenses for the next fiscal 
year is also submitted, which is transmitted to the Congress 
as a basis for making appropriations. For the present year 
the appropriations were as follows: 


Calarienr ee! Pia ee ih see wee eee ees $99 660 00 

Apparatus and Equipment......-++++++++ 40 000 00 

x Fuel and Miscellaneous Expenses........-- 12 500 00 
Improvement and Care of Grounds and 

Bildings! EL e See ees ees ee a 2 500 00 


The functions of the bureau as defined by law include the 
custody and construction of primary standards, the construc- 
tion of secondary standards, their multiples and subdivisions, 
and the comparison of these standards with the secondary or 
working standards used by the public. The bureau is also 
authorized to determine physical constants and the prop- 
erties of materials. The importance of such problems is too 
well recognized for comment, but the character of the work 
involved and the apparatus employed can hardly be appreciated 
by those who have not been brought in touch with it. Consider, 
for example, the construction of a copy of the standard metre 
and the work involved in subdividing it to the ultimate teiooe 
of a micrometer, or the construction of its multiples as used 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1007 


in base measuring apparatus, steel tapes, and other engineering 
standards, also the testing of the various instruments for 
measuring temperatures from that of solid hydrogen to the 
highest temperatures that it is possible to produce. And yet, 

' these are but examples that have their counterpart in every 
section of the bureau’s work. 

The relation of the bureau’s work to the manufacture of scien- 
tific instruments and apparatus is very close and important. 
The bureau is codperating with the makers of such apparatus 
in every way possible; they visit the bureau from time to time 
for suggestions and advic<, and are regularly submitting ap- 
paratus to the bureau for testing and investigation. The 
time is not far distant when our makers of scientific apparatus 
will be supplying not only the home demand but also the 
foreign markets. The benefit to be derived from the bureau 
to this industry would alone justify its maintenance. 

The laboratories of the bureau are always open to manu- 
facturers, scientists, and others who desire information or in- 
struction as to methods of measurements, physical constants, 
or the properties of materials. The bureau receives daily many 
requests for information of this character, and it is rapidly 
becoming one of the most important parts of the bureau’s 
work. 

Tue MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT. 


The mechanical building contains the mechanical and elec- 
trical plant,.the instrument shop, about one-half of the elec- 
trical work, photometry, and engineering testing. It stands on 
ground sloping towards the north so that the north part of the 
basement story is wholly above ground, but projects only a 
few feet. above it on the south. The accompanying views of 
the building were taken before the grading of the grounds 
was completed. The building is 135 ft. long east and west, 
4g ft. wide at the ends and 58 ft. wide in the center. An ex- 
tension of the basement wholly below the ground level on the 
south is 20 ft. wide and projects 25 ft. east and west beyond 
the main portion of the building, Figs. 1&2. This increases the 
floor area of the basement by 50 per cent., affording ample 
accommodation for the mechanical and electrical plant on this 
floor. . 

The boiler room is 42 ft. square and 19 ft. high, the floor 
being 5 ft. below the engine room floor, and like the engine and 
dynamo room it is lined with white-enameled brick. Two 


a 
4 


1008 STRATTON AND ROSA 5 [Nov. 24 


water-tube boilers of 125 h.p. each have been installed to- 
gether with an economizer and forced draft. Space is reserved 
for additional boilers, with a final capacity of 500 h.p. The 
platform along the north side of the boiler room accommodates 
the filters, electric and steam high-pressure water-pumps, 
boiler-feed pumps, feed-water heater, and other auxiliary 
machines. Under the platform are located the heater for the 
hot-water service, pressure tanks for the cold water service, 
storage-tank, etc. 

The engine and dynamo room is 87 ft. long and has an average 
width of 24 ft. The larger of the two engines is a tandem 


Fic. 1—Mechanical Building (from the South). 


compound of 120 h.p., driving two direct-current 37.5 kw. 
generators, each giving 300 amperes at 120 volts connected 
in a three-wire system. The smaller engine, shown at the right 
in Fig. 3, has a capacity of 40 h.p. and, like the larger engine 
drives two direct-current generators. Beyond the engines there 
are the following machines some of which have been installed 
since the accompanying picture was taken. 

1. A double motor-driven booster for charging storage-cells, 
having a capacity on each side of 200 amperes at 30 volts 


Si ita NOI 


‘NVId YOO1Td LNAWYSVE—AUOLVUOEVT IVOINVHOUN 


Basa Pa 
O#8 


DvePOla TT 
1 ob 


aloof’: 
es iy 


gE 
mn 


oa|a 


ao? 
Wwoow 
SI1dOWO.LAW 


1010 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


and which is also used alone to charge storage batteries of 
relatively low voltage and large current capacity. 

2. A pair of two-phase alternators, surface wound, and giving 
an electromotive force of nearly sine wave form, direct con- 
nected to a driving motor. One machine gives 60 cycles and 
the other 180; the two may be placed in series and the wave 
form varied through wide limits by varying the relative ampli- 
tudes and phases of the two waves. By using them separately 
and varying the speed, considerable ranges in frequency may be 
obtained. 


Fic. 2—Mechanical Building (from the North). 


3. Another three-machine set contains two 60-cycle, three- 
phase alternators, the relative phases of which may be varied 
by shifting the field of one of them. Thus, connecting one to 
the current coil and the other to the voltage coil of any instru- 
ment, any required power-factor may be obtained. 

4. A second smaller set of a similar kind gives two 60-cycle 
currents of adjustable phase relation. This is useful in cali- 
brating phase indicators as well as testing power measuring 
instruments. 


5. A three-phase 120-cycle alternator, driven by an inverted 


‘NVId YOOTH LSULI-AUOLVAOUVI TVOINVHOUN 


ONILS3L LNAWNALSNI 
LNaYaAND ONILYNASLIV 


1012 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


synchronous converter used as a motor, the latter also giving 
alternating current at 60 cycles. 

6. A ten-machine set has been built and is soon to be installed. 
This set contains eight alternators and two driving motors 
all direct connected, but capable of Leing uncoupled in the 
middle and operated as two independent sets. One set has, 
besides the driving motor, three alternators of 6, 18, and 30 
poles respectively, giving 60, 180, and 300 cycles, sine-wave 
form, and capable of being joined in series, so varying the wave 
form. The second set has a driving motor and five alternators 


Fic. 3—Engine Room. 


giving 420, 540, 660, 780, and 900 cycles respectively. All the 
machines may be joined in series, as they have the same current 
capacity, namely, 20 amperes. The voltages, however, decrease 
gradually from 250 for the largest to 10 for the smallest. When 
joined in series all the odd harmonics to the 15th will be present 
in the electromotive force, or any may be quickly cut out. 
The wave form can be varied indefinitely by varying the number 
of harmonics employed and their relative intensities and phases. 
This machine will be very useful in testing and research, not 
only for varying wave form, but for obtaining a great variety 


‘NVId UOOTA GNOOUS~AYOLVAOEVI TVOINVHOAN 


v oe 
dOHS doom 


AVILNZLOd HOLH 
DNUWNYSLIY 


AULINOLOHd & 


1014 STRATTON AND ROSA: | [Nov. 24 


of frequencies. The switchboard, which is now building, will 
be equipped with hot-wire instruments arranged to show what 
components enter into the resultant electromotive force. The 
operating switches give quick and complete control over the 
various possible combinations. 

The switchboard shown in Fig. 3 not only controls the various 
direct- and alternating-current generators, but also six storage- 
batteries arranged in groups of two on the three-wire system, 
for use in operating the motors when great steadiness of speed 
is desired, for lighting and power when the engines are not 
running, and for experimental purposes. There are also sev- 
eral plug-panels which enable the current from any generator 
or battery to be sent to any laboratory room in either building. 

In the foreground at the left is shown part of a motor-driven 
exhaust-fan for withdrawing fumes from the battery rooms and 
other rooms of both buildings. 

In the sub-basement under the engine-room floor are located 
the high-pressure steam-mains, exhaust-steam pipes, air-ducts, 
water, gas, and other piping, and the wiring. This gives an 
engine room practically free from piping, affording free travel 
for the crane and giving a very pleasing appearance. 

The refrigeration room is 41 by 18 ft. and contains a 30-ton 
ammonia refrigerating machine of the absorption type. Its ca- 
pacity is equivalent to the melting of 10 tons of ice in 8 
hours. This is used io furnish low temperatures in small rooms 
for experimental purposes, to remove moisture from the air 
of laboratory rooms in order to obtain a dry atmosphere in 
hot or wet weather, and for making ice. The machine is in- 
dispensable, and greatly increases the efficiency of the labor- 
atory work, more especially of course in the summer; but it is 
found necessary to use it for some kinds of work part of the 
time during at least 9 months of the year. The cold brine is 
pumped from the machine through a system of piping around 
both buildings, so that it may be used in almost any of the labor- 
atory rooms. Flowing through a coil of pipe in any room, it 
condenses moisture out of the atmosphere and reduces the 
humidity from 100 or 90 or 80 per cent. to perhaps 70 or 60 or 50 
per cent. according to the surface exposed. Thus electrical 
surface leakage may be so far reduced that precision measure- 
ments may be made in the hottest and dampest summer weather. 
Moreover, the temperature of the laboratory may be controlled 


‘NVId WOOTH DILLV—AUYOLVAOAVI TVOINVHOUN 


IP 
aADVUOLS 


5b coll pw 


1016 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


at the same time, the gradual rise of temperature during the 
day being prevented. The rate of absorption of heat may be 
regulated by varying the speed of the fan which blows air 
against this cold brine coil. 

A large tank of calcium chloride brine in the sub-basement 
under the refrigerating room gives a considerable storage ca- 
pacity for “cold,” and avoids the necessity of running the 
machine every day except in summer. 

The storage-battery room is 61 ft. long and contains the 
following chloride cells: 

4 batteries of 66 cells each, 200 ampere-hour capacity. 

2 “ SOOT - BS SOOO i oo He 

Two additional batteries of the 400-ampere size will probably 
be installed next year. 

The heating and ventilating plant is located near the engine 
room, as shown in the basement floor plan. 

The forced draft, double-duct system is used, with thermo- 
static dampers to control the proportion of hot and tempered 
air in each room so as to secure constant temperature. This 
is effective in cool weather; in hot weather the temperature 
of the laboratory rooms may be controlled by means of the 
brine coils. Two large motor-driven blowers stand in the 
basement hall, at the entrance to the tunnel, one handling the 
hot air and the other the tempered air. The second may re- 
ceive cooled air (in hot weather) from the cooling chamber, 
which contains a large number of brine coils. The hot and 
tempered air for the physical building passes through ducts 
in the upper part of the tunnel to the basement of the physical 
building, and is there distributed through the flues shown in 
the floor plans to the various rooms. The airis heated by passing 
through stacks of steam-coils, the steam being for the most part 
the exhaust from the engines. 


Tue Low-TEMPERATURE BUILDING. 


The low-temperature building is being erected to accommo- 
date the machinery and apparatus necessary for the liquefac- . 
tion of air, hydrogen, and other gases, and to provide space 
and facilities for low-temperature experiments. The building 
is about 28 by 58 ft. and two stories high, being built of dark 
red brick, trimmed with limestone to correspond with the 
main buildings. It is connected with the sub-basement of 
the mechanical laboratory by means of a tunnel, through 


‘NWId WOOTA LSUII—-AUOLVUOAVI AYALVAAI NGL MOT 


We ae ee bn ae be ee ee ee eS ee ee ee ee ST eee 


1018 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


which water, gas, steam, and waste pipes and wires are carried. 
The bureau purchased from the British government a complete 
plant for the liquefaction of air and hydrogen; this was built 
in London and exhibited last year at the St. Louis exposition. 
The apparatus consists of a hydrogen generator and gasometer 
for storing the gas; power pumps for compressing air and 
hydrogen to 3 000 pounds per square inch, and heavy cylinders 
for storing hydrogen at this pressure, a combined air and 
hydrogen liquefier; and a machine for liquifying carbon dioxice 


(Fic. 4.—Low-Temperature Building (under construction). 


which is used as an auxiliary refrigerant in the process of liqui- 
fying air. In liquifying hydrogen, both liquid CO, and -liquid 
air are employed as auxiliary refrigerants, the compressed 
hydrogen being thus cooled to the temperature of liquid air 
and then suddenly expanded, thereby suffering a reduction 
of temperature sufficient to liquify a portion of the gas. The 
liquified hydrogen may be frozen in a separate apparatus, its 
temperature being reduced to about 16° absolute. 

This is the only apparatus in America for liquifying hydro- 
gen, and we believe the only one outside the Royal Institution 


NVId UOOTA GNOOAS—-AUOLVAOIVI AANALVAAdNAL MOT 


Da hae SO et wt 


AGO LVvVeCoew dt 


— i a Ye ep — at — Bh ~ a — Ff — 


1020 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


of Great Britain for producing liquid hydrogen in considerable 
quantities; that is, by the liter. It will be of great service 
to the bureau in research work and also in the testing of low- 
temperature thermometers. In the near future a second air 
compressor of larger capacity will be installed and a second 
liquefier for air will be added. 

Piping and Wiring of the Physical Building. The physical 
building is 172 ft. long, 55 ft. wide, and four stories high, besides 
a spacious attic. It faces the south overlooking the city of 
Washington. 


= a 
Lh 


et 
Smesa ve 


Fic. 5—Physical Building (from the North). 


The corridor extends the entire length of the first floor. 
The exterior of the building is so designed that the two ad- 
ditional buildings which may in the future be placed one on 
the east and the other on the west of this building may be 
connected with it by means of an arcade opening into the 
corridor of the first floor. A basement is excavated only 
under the central portion of the building and under the cor- 
ridor; the four rooms at either end of the ground floor have 
concrete floors resting on the ground, covered by a substantial 


‘NVId WOOT LSYII—AUOLVAOUVI TVOISAHd 


cil 


| 
} 
ve 
| | AvoLbyoghT, THdILd0 


c 


LTNGA = 


» " > 5 ‘>. “ ~ « ‘ » 7 - ’ 
a _—, ee a a a ee ee a es eee ae ee ae a ae ee Sn ae ee ee ler 


1022 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


flooring of oak blocks. This gives a firm support for tables, 
apparatus or even temporary piers if necessary. 

Instead of building up permanent piers through the floor 
as is often done, the entire building is so substantial and free 
from vibration that the most delicate apparatus can be mounted 
on brackets or shelves attached to the walls of the building. 

In one of the basement rooms a subdivided storage-battery 
has been installed for use in this building. Six other rooms 
of the basement will be used as constant temperature rooms 
as they may be needed. 


Fic. 6—Physical Building (from the Northeast). 


The entire first and second floors are given up to laboratory 
work. And in order that the changes in temperature may be 
4 minimum double windows have been provided, and automatic - 
temperature control secured by means of thermostatic dampers, 
controlling the supply of hot and tempered air. This of course 
regulates the temperature only in winter, or in cool weather; 
in summer the temperature is controlled in some rooms when 
necessary by means of brine coils as explained above. 

Between rooms 101 and 102, next to the outer wall, is a 
vertical shaft three feet square, extending from the basement — 


PEEFs 


‘NVId WOOTA GNOOUS—AYOLVAORVT TVOISAHd 


os 


oz iz a | aed 
F410 . | 
io 2% ae 
| = 
es -- Z 
jaa 
602 ‘ae Bel 902 
— 
SININWFTYNSHIM TWIIYLIITI | 74N 10894 
co ae 
aa 


'. 


” wiz iy tod | 


ONY = SLHOITM 


Sea ee ee ee ee eee eee; 


1024 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


to the attic, and in corresponding positions there are three 
similar shafts in the other three quarters of the building. All 
the pipes for distributing hot and cold water, ice water, cold 
brine, gas, compressed air, vacuum, and all electric wiring 
for lighting and experimental purposes are carried up through 
these shafts. A door opens into each shaft on each floor, 
making all main pipes and wires accessible without having 
them exposed in the Jaboratories. On each floor branches 
are brought out from the water and waste pipes to the sinks, 
from the air and gas pipes to the work tables, from the brine 
pipes to any cold boxes or other apparatus requiring it and 
from the distributing wires in the shafts, to the small local 
switchboards, of-which there is one for each suite of laboratory 
rooms in the building. The wires connected to these small 
switchboards run to a main switchboard near the north door 
of the first floor, and thence trunk lines run through the tunnel 
connecting the two buildings to the main distributing switch- 
board of the dynamo room. Thus through these two main 
switchboards and a local laboratory board any circuit in any 
laboratory room may be joined to any circuit of any other 
laboratory room or to any battery or generator in the mech- 
anical building. By means of a subdivided battery wired to 
the switchboard and an auto-transformer at the switchboard 
any direct or alternating voltage less than the regular line 
voltages (120 and 240) can at any time be obtained. 

Great pains have been taken to equip every laboratory with 
the conveniences necessary for the most efficient work. 


THE GENERAL DIVISION. 


Section 1. Weights and Measures. The duties of the section 
of weights and measures include the comparison of standards 
of length, mass, and volume with the official standards of the 
United States, all of which are in the custody of the bureau. 
_ These measures are submitted by the government departments, 
by state and city inspectors of weights and measures, by manu- 
facturers, and by scientific and technical institutions, and in- 
dividuals. In cases where there are no local inspectors the 
bureau tests and seals commercial weights and measures, pro- 
vided they conform with certain essential requirements as to 
construction. This section also gathers information as to the 
laws and usage of local and foreign weights and. measures, 
and when such information is sufficiently important it is pub- 


“NVWId a 


ole 


woow oNiobly 
ony 


Aguygil 


OOTd GUIHI—AUYOLVUAOAVI TVOISAHd 


oor 
Woow 
JUNLIFII 


1026 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


lished by the bureau. In addition to the verification of weights 
and measures this section tests hydrometers and aneroid baro- 
meters, and it is preparing to take up the testing of watches 
and other time-measuring apparatus. To illustrate more 
fully the nature of the work of this section, it might be well 
to mention a few examples, and also to describe briefly the 
more important equipment. 

The construction in the shops of the bureau of a special 
comparator for directly comparing end standards and gauges 
with a line standard has just been completed. There is no 
problem in the field of precise measurements more difficult 
than to: determine the absolute value of an end standard in 
terms of a line standard. It is comparatively easy to compare 
two end standards or gauges with one another to the one hun- 
dred theusandth part of an inch, but to determine their abso- 
lute values is an entirely different thing. Thus far all meas- 
urements made with this comparator have been made with 
contact pieces, between which the end standard or gauge is 
placed, and the contact pieces have been pressed together 
with a constant known pressure. This corresponds with the 
use of such gauges in practice, but on account of the possi- 
bility of wear on the gauges it is proposed to provide means 
for making the contacts by both optical and electrical means. 

The bureau is well equipped to test-bars of one meter or less, 
and is rapidly completing a 50 meter comparator for testing 
tapes and geodetic base apparatus. When these comparators 
are finished it will be possible to measure 50 metres or yards 
with a probable error not exceeding the one five millionth part 
of the total length. 

The bureau possesses two platinum-iridium copies of the 
international metre to which all length measurements, both 
customary and metric, are reduced. 

For the comparison of masses, the bureau possesses a com- 
plete series of the very best balances, duplicates of which will 
only be found in the standardizing laboratories of a few of 
the first-class countries. All mass comparisons are referred 
to the international kilogram, two copies of which are in the 
possession of the bureau. Like the metres, they are made of 
platinum-iridium. ; 

Last January a meeting of the state sealers of weights and 
measures was held at the bureau for the purpose of discussing 
the means for securing uniform laws and inspection of com- 


ola 
NIHILIN 


‘NVId WOOT HLANAOA—AUOLVAOUVI TVOISAHd 


AvoLbwogh7 


TWHIIWIHI 


I/b 


AvOLYYORH? 
DILATOWLIITI ~*-- 


FI/II0 


b/t 


Avosbyoeh7 


| 


I) 


WIIWIHI ~~ 


Avolhuogh7 


THIIWIHD 


AbLIWOWWIHL 


sshienaualy 
AubuaiT ond 


hoow zonhibe 


1028 STRATTON AND ROSA: _  [Nov. 24 


mercial weights and measures throughout the United States. 
A compilation of the various state laws on the subject showed _ 
the greatest diversity. The efforts of the bureau will be toward® 
uniform laws and practices in matters pertaining to weights 
and measures. 

Section 2. Thermometry, Pyrometry, and Heat Measurements. 
The work carried on by this section includes the testing of 
thermometers of all kinds and of the various forms of pyro- 
meters for the measurement of high temperatures, the deter- 
mination of calorific values of fuels, and investigations bearing 
on the establishment and control of the temperature standards 
cof the bureau. Information is furnished, upon request, to 
departments of the government, and to cities, manufacturing 
interests, technical schools, and individuals, as to methods of 
measurement, thermal constants, specifications for thermo- 
meters, etc. 

The intercomparison of the primary standard mercurial 
thermometers of the bureau in the interval 0°-100° cent., in a 
specially designed comparator is now nearing completion. A 
number of platinum resistance thermometers, together with 
the necessary apparatus for their use, have been designed and 
constructed, to be used in connection with the establishment 
of the standard scale of temperature. 

An investigation of the methods of measurement of high 
temperatures by means of the light and heat emitted by in- 
candescent bodies, with a view to their application in the 
laboratory and in the industries, has been completed. 

The demands of electrochemical processes make it necessary 
to control and measure temperatures far beyond the range 
of any pyrometer requiring contact with the heated substance. 
With the establishment of a satisfactory scale of extreme 
temperatures in view, an investigation has been carried on in 
which the several methods of estimating such temperatures . 
by optical and radiation pyrometers were compared at the ex- 
treme temperature of the electric arc. The results of this. 
investigation showed the several methods to be in satisfactory 
agreement. 

The construction and study of a standard gas thermometer, 
which is the ultimate standard in all thermometric work, is 
of fundamental importance in its bearing on the standards of 
the bureau. Progress has been made in assembling the ap- 
paratus necessary for this investigation. 


ij". <7 a". oY fe Yr 


—_ a 


Ya.” . 


~~ s T2 ee r 


a" fee eS ee ee 


1905 ] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1029 


~ The low-temperature liquid air and hydrogen plant recently 
acquired by the bureau makes available the equipment neces- 
sary for the extension of the temperature scale and the study ot 
the standards at the lowest attainable temperatures. 

The great importance in many industrial processes of an 
accurate knowledge and control of the temperatures at which 
the operations are carried out is just beginning to be realized 
in this country. The representatives of many manufacturing 
plants have visited the bureau during the year, with a view to 
Studying the pyrometers in use in its laboratories, and con- 
sulting its experts concerning the methods of temperature 
measurement. No inconsiderable part of the work of this 
section has been the furnishing of information of this kigd-to 
the public. Se 

Section 3. Optics. While the work of this section is chiefly 
related to the determination of physical laws and constants, 
considerable testing has been done, especially in connection 
with polariscopic apparatus and standards. The spectroscopic 
work has been confined to the determination of the laws and 
conditions governing the production of pure spectra, with a 
view to their application in spectroscopic methods, the deter- 
mination of standard wave lengths, and their use in optical 
methods of measurement. It has involved investigations in 
connection with the spectra of mixed gases and multiple spectra, 
and the spark and arc spectra of alloys. It is proposed further 
to examine the individual lines by means of the echelon spectro- 
scope. For this purpose a 30-step echelon grating has been 
purchased and a special mounting constructed. 

The work of polarimetry includes the examination of methods 
and apparatus used in polariscope analysis of sugar. Polarizing 
apparatus for especially accurate measurements and a thermo- 
stat for use in connection with this apparatus have been designed 
and built in the bureau shops. An accurate quartz com- 
pensation polariscope has been assembled, and a number of 
quartz control plates to be used as primary standards have 
been obtained. One of the greatest obstacles to accurate 
polariscopic measurements is the lack of sources of mono- 
chlomatic right of sufficient intensity. Sodium light, the ac- 
cepted standard, is far from monochromatic. One of the 
spectral lines emitted by a quartz mercury lamp has been 
found to answer every requirement. Accordingly a determina- 
tion of the rotation of quartz for light of this particular wave 


1030 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


length has been undertaken. The measurement of the abso- 
lute rotation of quartz control plates for primary standards 
is.well under way. 

Section 4. Engineering Instruments and Materials. It has 
been impossible to assign to this section laboratory space and 
assistance commensurate with the importance of the work 
and the demand for testing. The bureau is in a position to 
study and test water meters not larger than 2 inches, gas meters, 
speed indicators, and pressure gauges. Designs have been 
completed for an anemometer testing machine, which is now 
in process of construction. 

An investigation in connection with fire-hose couplings has 
been taken up with a view to the selection of a national standard 
in this direction. The more important tests of materials in- 
clude the test of the tensile strength of the new cable for the 
elevator in the Washington Monument, the cement used in 
the construction of the new office building for the House of 
Representatives, and the adhesive power of a large number 
of mucilages, with a view to determining the proper specifica- 
tion to be used in government purchases of this article. 

It is planned to increase the facilities for this work in the 
near future, to include the testing of engineering and building 
materials, not the mere physical tests of individual specimens 
which is now well done by private testing laboratories but 
their behavior under varying conditions. 

Section 5. The Office. The clerical assistants of the bureau 
are organized as the office in charge of editorial work, the files, 
records, and accounts, the purchase and disbursement of sup- 
plies, printing, and the library. The office also furnishes the 
stenographic assistance to the various sections, attends to the 
mailing of publications, and other clerical work. 

Section 6. Instrument Shop. An instrument shop equipped 
with suitable machinery and provided with expert mechanicians 
is an essential feature of any laboratory; this is especially 
true in institutions where precise measurements and original — 
investigation constitute the greater part of the work. The 
shop of the bureau is equipped with modern machinery, each 
machine separately driven by an electric motor. It is both 
an instrument shop and a machine shop, capable of hand- 
ling a wide range of work. A supply of metal sheet, rod, 
tube, and wires, as well as a great variety of other materials 
used in the construction of apparatus, is kept in stock. The 


seit ew Rt A ll tl i ll a 


ANY 


“vu TAS Se 


ae 


aA Tee Teeny ee 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1031 


mechanicians have been carefully selected, both as to personal 
and technical qualifications; they have been trained in the best 
American and foreign instrument shops. 

A system of apprenticeship has been established. The 
apprentices are graduates of manual training and technical high 


schools, thus assuring the fundamental education necessary 


in this class of assistants, and so often lacking in men who 
have been trained in commercial shops. 


Fic, 7—Instrument Shop. 


Tue ELECTRICAL DIVISION. 


Section 1. Resistance and Electromotive Force. The work of 
this section consists in the construction and verification of 
resistance standards and standards of electromotive force, 
the calibration. of precision rheostats, Wheatstone bridges, 
potentiometers, and other resistance apparatus, the verification 
of resistance standards: for current measurement, and the 
determination of the electrical properties of materials. 

The permanent equipment for this work, the installation of 


1032 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 
which has recently been practically completed, has been planned 
with the view of facilitating the routine testing work by the 
application wherever possible of direct reading methods and 
the use of specially designed apparatus, so that several funda- 
mental investigations relating to the mercurial resistance 
standard and the standard cell can now be seriously taken up. 

One of the rooms has been fitted up for the verification of . 
resistance standards of precision, the results of which are, at 
present, based on the mean value of a number of coils as deter- 
mined through one-ohm standards re-verified from time to 
time at the Reichsanstalt. The results are thus based upon 
the primary mercurial standards of that institution pending 
the construction of similar standards by the bureau, which 
work is now under way. A considerable number of standards, 
including the master standards of the leading American manu- 
facturers of electrical apparatus have already been verified. 

By the aid of the new Weston high sensibility D’Arsonval 
galvanometers, resistance standards as low as 0.0001 ohm are 
readily compared, by the Kelvin Double Bridge method, to one 
part in a million. 

The comparison of coils without potential terminals is greatly 
facilitated by the aid of a direct-reading substitution method 
involving the use of a shunt compensation ratio set, one arm of 
which consists of four sections having a total resistance of one 
ohm, and provided with a separate ten-step shunt dial. The 
resistances are so proportioned that the dials correspond to 
0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001, and 0.000001 ohm per step. Suitable 
comparing stands have been designed to adapt the method to 
the comparison of precision standards with potential terminals. 

Special importance has been attached to the accurate estab- 
lishment of the ratios 1:10, 1:100, etc., upon which the mul- 
tiples and submultiples of the unit depend. Such measure- 
ments are quickly made to an accuracy of one part in a million 
by the aid of a mercury contact rheostat of the Anthony pattern 
by means of which one arm of a bridge may be altered in the ~ 
ratio of 1:10:100 by parallel, series-parallel, and series combina- 
tions of ten approximately equal coils. 

The equipment includes also a Carey-Foster Bridge built 
by the Weston Electrical Instrument Co., on plans elaborated 
from a bureau design. 

For the calibration of resistance boxes, bridges, potentio- 
meters, etc., a direct-reading apparatus has been designed 
based on the proportionality of the resistances included between 


——— see +. 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS 1033 


two points in a circuit and two points having the same potential 
in a parallel circuit. By this method all errors due to plug- 
contact resistances are obviated and much time is saved. A 
direct-reading substitution method has also been employed 
with entire satisfaction. 

In the calibration of resistance standards for current meas- 
urement the Kelvin double-bridge method is employed. Re- 
cently measurements were made to determine the change of 
resistance due to the Joule and Peltier effects, as the load 
and rate of stirring are varied. 

Investigations pertaining to the standard cell, interrupted 
by the work incident to the equipment of the new laboratories; 
have been resumed in codperation with the chemical division. 
An electrolytic method of preparing mercurous sulphate has 
been devised and efforts are now being made to obtain large 
and perfect crystals of that material by another method, on 
account of the alleged influence of the size of grain. The 
methods of preparation and purification of the remaining con- 
stituents and the influence of impurities are also under investi- 
gation. 

Section 2. Inductance and Capacity and Absolute Measure- 
ments. This work includes the investigation of methods of 
measurement of inductance and capacity, the construction 
and testing of the bureau’s standards of inductance and capacity, 
the testing of capacities and inductances for the public and the 
measurement of the inductances and capacities of instruments. 
The bureau possesses a series of standards of inductance and 
capacity, the values of which have been fixed with high pre- 
cision using several different methods of measurement. 

The testing of condensers includes: (1), the measurement 
of the capacity of the condenser; (2), the variations of this ca- 
pacity with the frequency of charge or the duration of the 
charge; (3), the temperature coefficient; (4), the insulation or 
leakage resistance; (5), the phase angle of the charging current; 
that is, the power-factor of the current, which is very small 
in a good condenser. There are considerable differences even 
among good mica condensers, and very great differences when 
good and poor condensers are compared. The bureau possesses 
a series of mica condensers which represent the best makers 
of Germany, England, France and America. After testing a 
considerable number of condensers the performance of a good 
one has been determined. A good condenser after it has been 


1034 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


investigated and its constants ascertained is a very valuable 
piece of laboratory apparatus, and is an instrument of pre- 
cision. Without such investigation it is an unknown quantity. 
Every well equipped laboratory ought to have at least one such 
condenser, and it ought to be retested occasionally to guard 
against change. 

Very few standard condensers are provided with thermometer 
holes, the idea being that the temperature coefficient is too 
small to be taken into account. This is a serious error. Pro- 
vision should be made for inserting the bulb of the thermometer, 
not simply into the box containing the condenser, but into the 
mass of paraffine in which the condenser is imbedded, or at 
least in contact with the condenser. The temperature lag: is 
considerable, but a thermometer used in this manner gives 
the mean temperature of the condenser very nearly and if 
the capacity is known at different temperatures it is not neces- 
sary to bring the condenser to a particular temperature. 

Inductance standards are susceptible of very exact measure- 
ment, and if properly made are very permanent. Many of the 
methods of measuring inductances require the use of a standard, 
and some of these methods are convenient and very sensitive. 
If accurate standards are employed the measurement of in- 
ductance becomes a matter of precision. Very few laboratories 
possess such accurately calibrated inductance standards, and 
few people seem to realize that inductance measurements can 
be made with accuracy, or that there is any need of attempting 
to make them accurate. The bureau certifies well made 
standards of inductance (of suitable value) to 1/50 of one per 
cent. They are subject to much smaller changes arising from 
changes of temperature or of frequency of the test current 
than standard condensers, and are destined to play a much more 
important part in electrical measurements in the near future 
than in the past.. The bureau will be glad to furnish information 
to anyone interested regarding the subject of standards of 
inductance or of capacity. . 

A standard of mutual inductance is very useful in calibrating 
ballistic galvanometers, and by having more than one value 
it may be applied to galvanometers of quite different sensi- 
bilities. . Inductance standards (either variable or of fixed 
values) may be so arranged as to be used either as mutual 
or self inductances. 

The equipment of the bureau for measurements of inductance 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1035 


and capacities is very complete. Much use is made of tuned 
galvanometers, which are very sensitive and which do not 
respond to the harmonics contained in the test current. This 
gives results free from error due to such harmonics, which error 
is present in some of the best known methods and is often 
serious. A very thorough study has been made of the sources 
of error in inductance measurements, particularly the errors 
due to residual inductances and capacities of the wire resistances 
employed, and methods have been developed for eliminating 
these errors. The bureau is prepared to measure these residual 


Fic. 8.—Laboratory for Irtuctance and Capacity Measurements, 


inductances and capacities in the “ non-inductive’”’ coils of 
resistance boxes or resistance standards, so as to permit their 
use with alternating currents in inductance measurements. 
This important source of error has been too generally ignored. 

In this section extended investigations are being carried out 
in absolute measurements of the fundamental electrical units, 
namely, the ohm, the volt, and the ampere. The equipment 
of the bureau for this work is very complete. 

The following are some of the more important researches 
completed or in progress in the line of absolute measurement: 


1036 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


1. An extended research on the ratio of the electromagnetic 
and electrostatic units, employing three different types of 
standard condensers; namely, spherical, cylindrical, and parallel 
planes. This has involved the design and construction of an 
absolute cylindrical condenser and an absolute plane con- 
denser. Each of the three types of condensers has more than 
one value and each is being measured by two different methods, 
at different frequencies and under many different conditions. 
The results so far are very gratifying. 

2. Development of plans for an absolute electrometer, for 
the purpose of determining the absolute value of the standard 
cell, by measuring a high voltage by the electrometer and 
multiplying the result by v, the ratio of the units. The parallel 
plate condenser is so constructed as to be made into an absolute 
electrometer, when the work on the determination of y is ended. 

3. The bureau has a carefully constructed absolute standard of 
inductance the value of which is accurately known by calcula- 
tion. We shall measure its value very accurately (1) by our 
improved methods using alternating current and (2) by means 
of a ballistic galvanometer. This will give two new deter- 
minations of the ohm in absolute measure, the first by a method 
never before used and the second by Kirchhoft’s method. We 
have also made a careful study of the various methods of de- 
termining resistance in absolute measure, and are designing 
apparatus to be used in that connection. " 

4. One of the instruments recently designed and constructed 
is a new type of chronograph, which gives the speed of the 
driving motor or frequency of current employed with great 
accuracy and very quickly. “One can see by mere inspection 
a change of speed as small as one part in 5 000, and for a run 
of a few minutes the mean speed (when the speed is steady) 
can be quickly determined to within one part in 100 000. Sev- 
eral other new instruments have been devised. 

5. Study of the silver coulometer (voltameter) and com- 
parison of different forms of the coulometer to determine the 
uniformity of results obtained with each different type and 
the differences among the several types. (Results published 
in Bulletin.) 

6. The absolute measurement of current by means of an 
electrodynamometer, involving a careful study of various 
types of suspension. (Results soon to be published.) 

The last two investigations have been made in connection 
with the magnetic work. 


a. «tea 


-_T- - 
. 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1037 


Section 3. Electrical Measuring Instruments. The work of 
this section includes the investigation and testing of instru- 
ments of precision for measuring electric current, voltage, 
and power (both direct and alternating) and the testing of 
laboratory and commercial instruments designed for such 
measurements, such as ammeters, voltmeters, wattmeters and 
watt-hour meters for direct and alternating currents, and 
special alternating-current instruments such as frequency 
meters, phase meters, curve tracers, etc. A considerable 
amount of work ot investigation of instruments and methods 
of measurement has been done as well as some testing of instru- 
ments. The facilities required for handling and measuring 
alternating currents up to 1000 amperes and direct currents 
of several thousand amperes are of course much more difficult to 
provide than those required for smaller currents. A battery 
of four large storage cells has been installed and so connected 
that by means of switches the cells may be used in series or 
in parallel, furnishing current up to 10 000 amperes at 2 volts, 
5000 amperes at 4 volts, or 2500 amperes at 8 volts. At 
present we are testing current shunts up to 5000 amperes 
capacity; but a new controlling rheostat and current standard 
have recently been designed and when completed will increase 
the capacity to 10000 amperes, the resistances of the con- 
ductors, switches, rheostat, and standards being low enough 
to give a current of 10 000 amperes with an electromotive force 
of 2 volts. 

Ammeters and current shunts for ail ranges are tested for 
error of reading on short load or continuous load as desired, 
and errors due to temperature coefficients and to thermoelectric 
effects are investigated. 

Alternating-current ammeters and current transformers are 
tested up to 1000 amperes capacity, and effects of change of 
load, of frequency, and of wave form ascertained. 

Direct-current voltmeters and millivoltmeters and portable 
galvanometers are tested, and errors due to orientation, load, 
temperature, etc., ascertained. 

Alternating-current voltmeters are tested, their inductances 


"measured, and the errors due to change of frequency or of 


temperature ascertained. 

Potential transformers are accurately calibrated, showing 
their ratio of transformation with different loads on the sec- 
ondary, so that they may be depended upon as closely as the 
voltmeters employed in connection with them. 


1038 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


Phase meters and frequency indicators can also be accurately 
calibrated, using sine wave form or distorted waves. 

The special alternating-current generators, mentioned in 
connection with the engine room, and a number of storage- 
batteries of different capacities furnish the necessary testing 
currents, and permit the best conditions for a test to be secured. 

A considerable number of instruments have been designed 
and built in the instrument shop of the bureau for use in this 
work. 

Section 4. Magnetism. The work in magnetism has not been 
developed so far as the work of the other electrical sections. 
A considerable number of instruments for testing the per- 
meability and hysteresis of specimens of iron have been secured 
and comparisons made by testing the same sample with different 
apparatus. Koepsel’s apparatus, the Picou permeameter, the 
Ewing apparatus, and apparatus built in the instrument shop 
of the bureau have been used, and plans are under way for an 
equipment for magnetic testing by means of alternating current. 
It is expected that this work will be largely developed during 
the coming year. 

Section 5. Photometry. The photometric work of the bureau 
comprises the testing of incandescent lamp standards for 
candle-power and distribution of light, the commercial testing 
of lamps as to life, candle-power, and efficiency for various de- 
partments of the government, and the study of special problems 
in photometry. 

The equipment includes a precision photometer with a 
Lummer-Brodhum contrast screen, a horizontal rotator with 
four mercury cups giving separate potential leads to the lamp, 
and a potentiometer, standard cells, current standards, etc., 
for the accurate measurement of current and electromotive 
force. An extended research on the use of a rotating sectored 
disc for reducing the intensity of light from a source has been 
made on this photometer and will shortly be published. 

An integrating photometer (modified Matthews form) has 
been designed and built for measuring mean spherical and 
mean hemispherical candle-powers. It is larger than the 
Matthews instrument, has 20 pairs of mirrors and their posi- 
tions have been calculated so as to give the greatest possible 
accuracy of both mean spherical and mean hemispherical 
candle-power. ». This instrument will shortly be applied to study 


the effect of the frosting of lamps on the mean candle panay 
and on the distribution of the light. 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1039 


A commercial photometer has been designed and constructed, 
for the rapid testing of incandescent lamps. This includes a 
horizontal and an end-on rotator, Bunsen screen with Leeson 
disc, variable sectored disc by the use of which lamps ranging 
from 4 to 100 candle-power can be read without readjustment 
of the comparison lamp. An efficiency meter, by means of 
which efficiencies or watts per candle can be read directly, 
has recently been designed and built and added to this photo- 
- meter. 

An equipment for life tests is being installed, for use in the 
testing of lamps for the departments of the government and for 
seasoning standards. 

The equipment of the laboratory also includes a Brace spectro- 
photometer, a flicker photometer, standard Hefner lamps, etc. 

Section 6. The Engineering Force. The engineers, firemen, 
electricians, janitors, and laborers are organized into a section 
under the charge of the chief engineer, who acts also in the ca- 
pacity of superintendent of grounds and buildings. The entire 
mechanical and electrical equipment constitutes a somewhat 
complicated system, and it requires a considerable force to 
operate and care for it. 


Tue CHEMICAL DIVISION. 


The chemical laboratory is located on the fourth floor of 
the physical building, occupying nine rooms and possessing 
an excellent equipment. The working staff consists of a 
chemist, an associate chemist, and three assistant chemists. 
This work was not begun as early as the work in the 
other divisions for lack of suitable quarters, but was taken 
up shortly before the physical building was completed. 

In addition to the planning and installing of the permanent 
equipment and apparatus of the chemical laboratories, a num- 
ber of investigations have been undertaken which were consid- 
ered important from a commercial or scientific standpoint, or 
have been necessary in connection with the work of this and 
other government bureaus. : 

The bureau has undertaken to standardize some of the 
more important chemical reagents, and considerable work has 
been done in this direction. Samples of a few important 


materials, including limestone and steel, have’ been carefully 


) 


1040 STRATTON ANB ROSA: [Nov. 24 
' 


analyzed with a view to their distribution when necessary for 
the purpose of checking the accuracy of methods of analysis 
used in scientific work and the industries. Questions relating 
to the purity of reagents and analytical methods are of the 
greatest importance to scientific and commercial interests. It 
is hoped that the bureau may considerably extend this work 
during the coming year. A number of substances have been 
examined physically and chemically for the Department of 
Commerce and Labor and other departments of the government 


Fic. 9.—High-Temperature Laboratory. 


with a view to determining standards and standard specifica- 
tions to be employed in the purchase of government supplies. 
The relation of the chemical work to that of other sections of 
the bureau is exceedingly important. Scarcely a problem can 
be taken up concerning the construction of standards, or prop- 
erties of materials, that does not involve chemical prepara- 
tions, chemical analysis, or the codperation and advice of expert 
chemists. The entire work of the bureau has been greatly 
strengthened and its efficiency increased by the organization 
of the work in chemistry. 


ei 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 


Tests MapDE From Juty 1, 1904, To Jury 1, 1905. 


Standards of Length, and Length Measuring Instruments: 


Engineers’ and surveyors’ steel tapes...............05 163 
Standardeieulesueteaie see ees fees era ite es nek il 
Geodetictlevelirodstramtrrrn esos enn ts are ee 30 
POlATISCOpe RLU DeSier rent auttes tLe nies sees ates meiner ete 40 
Standards of Mass: 
Standards of mass from 0.1-mg. to 10 kg............. 571 
Balances everett eae. ey on cites hese cients 10 
Standards of volume and measuring apparatus 
PIC ULES tne Nerasae at co chavers eet «. diarardlise dite aeemavaty te Oa celavs 181 
JEN EACTRG... 3 ceca BAe ORG ONCE Cl OND EISEN CRORE Cae eaC eR Ce cca ee 559 
SOE ULESMCUC S Aeyninieve ina SINISICre oe Dieta TUE AGE renee oS es 15 
Meer al AOS presen Muar gcy secu AN a) Sha anti S1ays oo) Bs ay’ sitolee Win wile e's 43 
MA rela OINEU CHS iape me siaee Sey ele oy Sus IANS (ech ce i/oUsy sua, 4 wifalleranenera ahs Se evate 25 
Barometers: 
PATIOE OIG e DAT ORE TCLS crane oh shia aisila) sic e's! eis, © itelta¥0 lo) o's. ove wie volte te 9) 
Stan ARG MDALOMICLELS ea wists oso wh.ct ot s/aicietie! 3 iellatorsie @ siebelousnane 2 
Heat and Temperature Measuring Instruments: 
Standard thermometers. .o..50 ccc ee ve vesces cee wes 333 
Glinicalet netmOmeterse gta ceo eee sso tlc ecie sete es 12340 
AMET OCO TM DICS acre stetisiels <4 <leieis,clel+ sfeleis «viele se sfei sitio ele.e 2 
(Callortien eerie oh a too metroid eeiO I as Onesie ciceraree ennai 6 
Poy E OM CUCES tame ein Wate teeietetereret+|s 9) ele els siele ounce sivas os 6 
See at CO SMM tet ate lere oilers olen riretnchopov ats Tonsley si citr sya geqelie #6 4 
Optical: 
PolariscOpe.......- es ces eee e cece cece teeters eeaes 1 
Quartz plates... .. ccc wesc ce cen eee n eee e entree eemes Hal 
Samples of sugar. .......-.seeeee eee e eens teeeees 527 
Engineering: 
Woatereimetense aevaceniee lait ileitela ie slo 21sts, «Xe! #0 epeasretersisy sire 4 
Tensile strength tests. .......... se eee sense ere eccees 13 
Samples of cement......---..sceeeceee reese ees eeeees 37 
Pressure Gauges... . ses ene e teense esc ee eee enet ee ees 1 
PEPE? Leste t cs omce cy acs mre ent Re 2 Anse ati et ord 1 


Bvcrieyy Al epsetesee tae oh ane eee cee eco foo Spee rece oF eo ene ene 6 


1041 


581 


823 


101 


12 691 


539 


1042 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


Brought forward.......eeeeeeerenseerceersenes 15 035 


Electrical Standards and Measuring Instruments: 


Resistance standards, precision.....-.+++++seerrerreee 34 
< es for current measurement 1000 
amperes and less......---++++seerrectrerst ins 19 
Ganie for-5 000 amperes... -.5-..- 555-289 71s te meee i 
Wheatstone bridges... 60-0208 eres ee eee cine suas ses 5 
Potentiometers: js cso «aes «ease = = eae se 5 
Samples of wire for conductivity testes sementene sane Hi 
+ Sron_rail and Welddsyie aca - 12ers ee 1 
Direct-current voltmeters......-.2--eeeeseeeersertees 40 
Alternating-current voltmeters... ...--+-+s++seeercre 17 
Direct-current ammeters.....-.--- sees errs st ettt 27 
Alternating-current ammeters....- aa Stam ie eens eGo etek 21 
Indicating wattmeters......---.--+-seer seer est etree 20 
Curve-drawing wattmeters.......---++-0+s see reresetes 2 
Wattchour meterssc stra ace sei ey neat elnino oc) nee 48 
Current transformers........--++sssseteee sects etree 4 
Potential transformerS........---- +2: estes e sete te 3 
Portable galvanometers......--- ++ +seeeeeeeresssstses 14 
Standard cells (Weston)....--.-+ sees e reer rteeertces 10 
sid UCtAICeSs orate owe eel ai che cusitelm sks honedsnanalsl mereoanads 8 
YY condensers, Mica......-. eee ee eee eee 8 
[es condensers, adjustable.........-. eee e esse eeeees 1 
Inspection of measuring apparatus. .....++-++ssese ses 1 
Blectric mOtorSsstaes foe eke «gs urs Snes, rear reaa 5 
Samples of alloy for special test.......-++++e+ssereees 6 
Electromagnet....<. sees been oe eo oe ne cee pe ae pies 1 
Arc lamps, current test......5+ +. seers reese ee eres 212 520 
Photometry: 
Incandescent lamps, c.p. of standards.............+05- 38 
7 Coe COTATTEL GION g steis uals mieneteraene ta LPO Le 
oS a ‘Site MP ae eae ae ie eee 
Oil test. <c3 cous va oS so won es 50S Crm eer gee 4 1087 
Chemical’ tests: soiccce cviae oo ce sa cet e's oa) sere enero teria 38 38 
Total ccvcrate ie tate detelt nbdtel etalon son, celal eran 16 680 


PUBLICATIONS OF THE BUREAU. 


1. The Bulletin contains the more important investigations 
carried out in the various sections of the bureau. Three num- 
bers of the Bulletin, so far, have been published, together con- 
stituting Volume I. The following is a list of the papers con- 
tained in this volume, 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 


ran 


on ON 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 
I. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21 


22. 


No. 1. 
[Issued November 1, 1904] 


. Recomparison of the United States Prototype Meter, by L. A. 


ICM Ie MS. ae ee Pe ee ee 


. A Study of the Silver Voltameter, by K. E. Guthe........... 
. The So-called International Electrical Units, by Frank A. Wolff 


The Spectra of Mixed Gases, by P. G. Nutting............... 


- On Secondary Spectra and the Conditions under which They 


May be. Produced, by: P.-G. Nattine Was ale eto 


- Some New Rectifying Effects in Conducting Gases, by P. G. 


TSIEN Pet 5 ey pe eS oe ee 


ledt S, NE SSG Van yout ety aan Tht a arcana lat a er ia 


- On the Temperature of the Arc, by C. W. Waidner and G. K. 


BS Me eas ee LE IT Ma Oe Se eet i ann 


No. 2 
[Issued February 1, 1905.] 


. The Absolute Measurement of Inductance, by E. B. Rosa and 


dB NN GAB RMON Keteons areca TOT ERE ee eee ee oe 


. The Absolute Measurement of Capacity, by E. B. Rosa and 


TURE OVCL A Sane ep Sate cents ERECT, Ser rate 


. Optical Pyrometry, by C. W. Waidner and G. K. Burgess..... 
. On the Theory of the Matthews and the Russell-Léonard Photo- 


meters for the Measurement of Mean Spherical and Mean Hem- 
spherical Matensibies), bys bic) Py EL ydeipecsmi.c oa sities ti sme 
The Testing of Clinical Thermometers, by C. W. Waidner and 
Moye dBlis DENISGING SR oe B Bas CaCGRO NEE EN ORSON RRC SC Rei 


No. 3. 
[Issued November 1, 1905.] 


Measurement of Inductance by Anderson’s Method, Using Alter- 
nating Currents and a Vibration Ga: vanometer, by E. B. Rosa 
relsaye A Wie LE ORON KERR e Cero, cit HTS CRC O theca oe cee CRS CP 

Use of Serpentine in Standards of Inductance, by E. B. Rosa 
LINC sem Vge LO NEN seams eect fepouise cy mache wes oh hcee. sn! sin Gyagonomeneuaitege a 

ihe ssilversCoulometer, by dO.slb4 Guthe.s. si ««ervencise.e eeu 

History of Standard Weights and Measures of United States, ie 
CAPM EMSC lS iereane co aeths ontltehcls (ARLE heleiarots bee e stale eee chaser wiagen= 6 

Wattmeter Methods of Measuring Power Expended upon Con- 
densers and Circuits of Low Power-Factor, by E. B. Rosa... 

The Relative Intensities of Metal and Gas Spectra from Elec- 
trically Conducting Gases, by P. G. Nutting............... 

The Use of White Walls in a Photometric Laboratory, by E. P. 
(EN Sy Be cl pas Ton ae ee en ee ieee ee es ec, 

Influence of Wave Form on the Rate of Integrating Induction 
Wattmeters, by E. B. Rosa, M. G. Lloyd, and C. E. Reid.. 

Detector for Small es Currents and Electrical aes. 


lesy 1s ANice MECH Gaiac areca peo FPO ORDCL DIO E amr 


1043 


101 


109 


125 


153 


189 


255 


275 


291 


337 


. 849 


365 


383 


399 


417 


. 421 


1044 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 


23. The Positive Charges Carried by the Canal Rays, by L. W. Austin 439 

24. Radiation from Platinum at High Temperatures, by Gate 
Burgess s. «sew s0 ti e.csiin mussels sleimraiom)> miele its -etei Sessa 443 

25. A Five-Thousand Volt Generator Set, by P. G. Nutting war 449 


Each of the above articles is reprinted as a separate paper 
bearing the number given above. 

2. Circulars which give information regarding the testing of 
apparatus, fees, etc. The following circulars have been issued: 


Before July 1, 1903. (Treasury Department.) 
. Announcement of Organization. 
. The Verification of Tapes. 
. The Verification of Standards and Standard Measuring Instruments. 
. Table of Equivalents of Customary and Metric Weights and Measures. 
After July 1, 1903. (Commerce and Labor.) 
. Verification of Standards and Measuring Instruments. 
. Verification of Metal Tapes. 
. Verification of Standards of Mass. 
. Verification of Standards of Capacity. 
~ Testing of Clinical Thermometers. 
Verification of Electrical Standards and Measuring Instruments. 
. Pyrometer Testing and Heat Measurements. 
. Testing of Thermometers. 
. Testing of Glass Volumetric Apparatus. 
. Legal Weights (in pounds) per bushel of various commodities. 


wOnr PON 


rs 


3. Annual report of the Director, which is addressed to the 
Secretary of Commerce and Labor and by him transmitted to 
the Congress and distributed with the other department reports. 

4. Special publications, of which the following have been 
issued: 

1. Laws Concerning the Weights and Measures of the United States. 

2. Table of Equivalents of the Customary and Metric Weights and 
Measures. 

3. Conference on the Weights and Measures of the (Ula tS 


4. The International Metric System. (A chart intended especially for 
schools.) 


Any of the above publications will be sent free upon request 
to any person interested in the subject treated. 


Tur ExPposITION LABORATORY. 


In addition to the exhibit which the National Bureau of 
Standards made in the government building at the Louisiana 
Purchase Exposition, it undertook, at the request of the 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1045 


authorities of the exposition, the installation and operation 
of an electrical testing laboratory in the Palace of Electricity. 
The work which was undertaken in this laboratory was as fol- 
lows: 

1, The exhibition in actual operation of a complete collection 
of instruments and apparatus for electrical measurements of 
the highest precision. 

2. The verification of electrical measuring instruments for 
the Jury of Awards, The Electrical Railway Test Commission, 
exhibitors and others, and the investigation to some extent 
of instruments and standards. 

The laboratory was located on the east side of the Elec- 
tricity Building, in Space 29, being about 175 feet in length 
and occupying a floor space of about 4000 square feet. The 
building was divided into six rooms, all of which, except the 
office, were used for the apparatus and equipment of the labor- 
atory. 

The laboratory building was erected by the bureau at an 
expense to the government of about $4 000.00. The exposition 
furnished water, gas, and electricity free of charge, and made 
an appropriation of $1 000.00 to pay for extra assistants during 
the period of installation and during the session of the electrical 
jury. 

The laboratory building was a substantial frame structure, 
erected on the floor of the Electricity Building, and against, 
but not supported by, its east wall. Within it was lathed and 
plastered, with a pine wainscot finished in the natural wood, 
and a hard pine floor laid upon the floor of the niain building. 
The east wall was substantial and steady enough to support 
galvanometers and other wall instruments, while some of the 
most delicate apparatus was mounted on massive concrete 
piers which extended {hrough the floors from the solid ground. 
Substantial benches and tables were erected, and the labor- 
atory possessed mary of the appointments of a permanent 
installation. It was on the opposite side of the Electricity 
Building from the heavier machinery, and the only machine 
which caused appreciable vibration was in an adjacent ex- 
hibit, the manager of which kindly shut down the machine at 
certain times when the vibration caused serious disturbances 
to the more delicate galvanometers. The latter were all of 
the moving-coil type, and hence not easily disturbed magnet- 


ically. 


1046 STRATTON AND ROSA: . [Nov. 24 


The most serious difficulty in carrying on precision electrical 
measurements under such circumstances is due, not to the 
magnetic disturbances or mechanical vibrations, but to the 


humidity of the atmosphere in midsummer. The bureau could - 


not have undertaken to install precision apparatus or to make 
exact measurements, had it not been possible to cool and dry 
the atmosphere of the laboratory artificially. Fortunately a 
10-ton refrigerating machine was installed in a space immediately 
adjacent to the laboratory of the bureau; the owners operating it 
as an exhibit and furnishing refrigeration to the bureau without 
charge, in consideration of which the exposition furnished 
the gas used by the refrigerating machine free of charge to the 
exhibitors. This machine was of the absorption type, not 
requiring a mechanical compressor, and hence operating very 
quietly and not disturbing the work carried on in the adjacent 
laboratory. 

The several rooms of the laboratory were ventilated by 
means of a large blower, driven by an electric motor, which 
forced air into the rooms through a system of ducts. Between 
the blower and the main duct was a chamber containing iron 
pipe through which cold brine was pumped from the refrigera- 
tion machine. The air passing through this chamber was 
cooled and its surplus moisture was condensed, so that as it 
entered the laboratory rooms it was cool and dry, ready to 
absorb moisture due to respiration and evaporation without 
becoming saturated. Thus the atmosphere was kept dry enough 
to maintain good insulation in wiring and instruments, and 
make it possible to conduct electrical measurements with no 
errors due to surface leakage. That would have been im- 
possible under the normal conditions in midsummer. 

By means of a system of automatic temperature control, 
installed as an exhibit, the temperature of the laboratory was 
maintained quite steady. This cool-and relatively dry atmo- 
sphere made the laboratory a very comfortable place in which 
to work, and the cool office of the bureau was a fa\ orite retreat 
for the electrical jury in some of the hottest days of the jury 
period. 

The amount of money available for the installation of the 
laboratory was limited, and owing to the unusually high cost 
of labor and materials, the building absorbed the greater portion 
of the fund. For this reason the work of installation could 
not be pushed as rapidly as was desired and the equipment 
was not entirely completed until midsummer. It was, how- 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1047 


ever, in full working order during the time of the congresses 
and the jury period, and until the end of the exposition, although 
the laboratory force, amounting to about 20 in September, 
was gradually reduced in October and November. The labor- 
atory was heated only by gas stoves, so that late in the season 
it became uncomfortably cool. 

Although the laboratory was designed primarily as an ex- 
hibit, and the continuity of the work was considerably inter- 
rupted by visitors, still considerable testing was done, and not 
a little research. ; 

The work of the !aboratory was separated into two principal 
divisions, The first was for the testing of standards of re- 
sistance, standard cells, resistance boxes, potentiometers, 
Wheatstone bridges and other resistance apparatus, and the 
determination of specific resistances, temperature coefficients, 
Suez 

The second division of the work was the testing of elec- 
trical measuring instruments, including direct- and alternating- 
current ammeters, voltmeters, wattmeters, watt-hour meters, 
frequency and phase meters, indugtances, capacities, etc. 
The dynamo room contained direct- and alternating-current 
generators for producing current for experimental purposes, 
and the battery room contained several storage-batteries kindly 
loaned by an exhibitor. 

Laboratory for Resistance and Electromotive Force Measure- 
ment. The north room 'of the laboratory building, about 22 
by 30 ft. in size, was fully equipped with apparatus for the 
first division of the work the most of which was brought from 
Washington. This work can be conveniently specified under 
four separate heads as follows: . 

1. The comparison of resistance standards with one another 
and the verification of precision resistance boxes, potentio- 
meters, and other apparatus requiring .the accurate measure- 
ment of resistance. The apparatus included sensitive galvano- 
meters, Kelvin and Carey-Foster bridges, ratio coils, a large 
number of manganin wire standards and other apparatus re- 
quired in this kind of testing. 

2. The verification of low resistances for use in measuring 
current, especially accurately adjusted manganin resistances of 
0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, and 0.00001 ohm intended to be used as 
standards in the calibration of current measuring instruments. 
This equipment included a storage-battery for giving relatively 
large currents, with heavy bus-bars and reversing switches for 


1048 STRATTON AND ROSA‘ [Nov. 24 


conducting the current to the Kelvin bridge used in measuring 
resistances, and other apparatus incident to the measurements. 

3 The measurement of the electromotive force of standard cells 
by comparison with the standards of the bureau. This equip- 
ment included a potentiometer, with its galvanometer and 
auxiliary apparatus and suitable baths for containing the stan- 
dard cells and the cells to be tested. 

4. Miscellaneous tests, such as electrical conductivity, thermo- 
electromotive forces, temperature coefficients, etc. ; 

Laboratory for the Testing of Electrical Measuring Instruments. 
The large middle room of the laboratory, about 22 by 65 ft., 
was fully equipped with apparatus, most of which was brought 
from Washington, although a considerable number of pieces 
were loaned by the makers. The testing done in this division 
of the work may be conveniently specified as follows: 

1. Inductance and capacity. This work included the verifica- 
tion of standards of inductance (both fixed and variable) the 
determination of the inductance of measuring instruments, 
particularly of alternating-current instruments and of high 
resistances intended for use in alternating current circuits; 
the measurement of the capacity of condensers and the testing 
of the quality of condensers. 

The equipment included a full collection of standards of in- 
ductance and capacity, resistances, direct-and alternating- 
current galvanometers, rotating commutators, alternating- 
current generators and other apparatus required for absolute 
and relative measurements. 

2. Direct- and alternating-current voltmeters. The equipment 
for this work included potentiometers, standard cells, rheostats, 
multipliers, and batteries of small storage cells for use in cali- 
brating direct-current voltmeters and such alternating-current 
voltmeters as could be calibrated by a potentiometer and 
direct current; the latter were employed to test other alter- 
nating current voltmeters. 

A special Weston testing set was also used. This consisted 
of a combination of a potentiometer and a laboratory standard 
voltmeter, with accurate resistance coils and switches, so that 
a voltmeter could be quickly and accurately tested for any 
multiple of 5 volts up to 550. 

- 3 Direct- and alternating-current ammeters, wattmeters and 
watt-hour meters. The equipment for this work included a 
very complete collection of measuring instruments, such as 


1905] BUREAU OF STANDARDS. 1049 


potentiometers and standard cells, accurate resistances, standard 
alternating current ammeters and wattmeters that could be 
calibrated by direct current, and then used to measure alter- 
nating current and power, electrical generators and a variety 
of auxiliary apparatus needed to provide the necessary range 
of current and voltage, frequency and wave form. 

Instruments were tested, not only for accuracy under normal 
conditions, but also with varying loads, frequency, power-factor, 
wave form and temperature. 

To control the frequency the alternating-current generators 
which furnished the testing current were driven by motors 
which received their current from storage-batteries installed 
in one of the rooms of the laboratory adjacent to the dynamo 
room. Thus the speed of the motor was not subject to varia- 
tions due to fluctuations of voltage on the supply lines of the 
Electricity building, and the speed and hence the frequency of 
the current could be maintained accurately constant for any 
period desired. By changing the voltage or introducing re- 
sistance any desired variation of frequency could be secured. 

To vary the wave form two alternating-current generators 
were direct connected to a single driving motor, one generator 
giving an electromotive force at 60 cycles and the other an 
electromotive force at 180 cycles. Either of these could be 
used alone or both in series. In the latter case the 60-cycle 
electromotive force was the fundamental and the 180 cycle 
was the harmonic; the latter could be increased or decreased 
in amplitude by varying the exciting current of the generator 
and thus the resultant wave form could be varied throughout 
a wide range. 

Variations in the temperature of instruments under test 
were made by placing them in a specially constructed testing 
room which was cooled by means of cold brine circulated 
through coils of pipe, or heated by means of electric current. 
Thus any temperature between 0° cent. and 40° cent. (32° fahr. 
and 104° fahr.) could be maintained and the variation in the 
readings of instruments ascertained; that is, their temperature 
coefficients determined. 

4. Miscellaneous tests. These include tests of frequency 
meters, phase indicators, wave form apparatus, primary and 
secondary batteries and other direct and alternating current 
instruments and machines. 

A small instrument shop was equipped in one of the rooms, 


1050 STRATTON AND ROSA: [Nov. 24 | 


and one of the machinists of the bureau was in attendance 
during a part of the season. 

The laboratory was conducted by ten of the members of the 
electrical division of the Bureau of Standards, assisted by a 
number of scientific assistants temporarily employed. 


A paper presented at the 201st Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, Nov 24, 1905. 


Copyright 1905, By A. I. E. E. 


A TESTING LABORATORY IN PRACTICAL OPERATION. 


BY CLAYTON H. SHARP. 


The writer has been asked by the InsTITUTE to prepare a 
paper describing the results attained in the establishment and 
maintenance of a laboratory for commercial electrical testing. 

The importance of laboratory work to the progress of elec- 
trical engineering does not need to be emphasized. Electrical 
engineers fully realize that their science originated in the 
laboratory, and that improvement and progress result very 
largely from laboratory researches and tests. The laboratory 
is the basis for all work of exact measurement, without which 
scientific engineering disappears and rule of thumb methods 
become the fundament of practice. 

The laboratories with which the electrical engineer concerns 
himself can be divided into three classes: first, those having 
to do with the conservation of units and primary standards, 
and with the certification to the accuracy of secondary stand- 
ards which are to be used in general practice; secondly, those 
engaged in making experiments, researches, and tests having 
an immediate commercial end in view; thirdly, those used 
primarily for purposes of instruction. 

Under the first class come the great national laboratories. 
One of the best of this class we are now so fortunate as to 
have in our own country, in the laboratory of the National 

Bureau of Standards. Laboratories of this character are in- 
valuable, not only to electrical engineering but to other con- 
structive arts and sciences. Apart from their primary usefulness 
in connection with the fundamental standards of measurement, 
laboratories of this class are enabled, through their unique 
1051 


1052 CLAYTON H. SHARP: [Nov. 24. 


position in enjoying governmental support, to enter into ex- 
perimental investigations of questions too extensive, too ab- 
struse, or too expensive to be undertaken by an individual 
or by an industrial corporation, but which, at the same time, 
are of such great practical importance that the use of public 
funds in prosecuting them is justifiable, even though there 
may be no prospect of immediate commercial returns. 

Of laboratories of the second class many are in existence. 
The large and progressive manufacturing and operating com- 
panies maintain well-equipped laboratories for the research 
and testing work so vital to them. 

We realize, however, that in spite of the existence of these 
laboratories, many electrical workers are practically without 
laboratory resources. The cost of proper laboratory equipment 
is by no means small, and the salaries of laboratory experts 
is of considerable moment if the product submitted to test is of 
only moderate value. Consequently, manufacturers of smaller 
output, purchasers of electrical supplies in moderate quan- 
tities, inventors, ‘users of electrical instruments, and many 
consulting engineers have found it impracticable to provide 
themselves with laboratory facilities. To such parties a de- 
sideratum would be the establishment of a completely equipped 
electrical laboratory, as a quasi-public institution, where all 
desired tests and experiments would be made at a reasonable 
expense, exactly as they would be made in a private labor- 
atory, and, if desired, under conditions insuring privacy. 

Recognizing this fact, the Electrical Testing Laboratories. 
has been formed as a business enterprise. This organization 
has equipped and put into operation an extensive plant 
for testing purposes. The writer recognizes the very 
proper custom not to exploit any business enterprise at a 
meeting of this INstiruTsE, and to eliminate commercialism as 
far as possible from the papers here presented. It has been his 
object to follow this tradition as far as practicable, but it is 
manifestly impossible to eliminate some general reference to the 
business of the laboratories, for it isin this very feature that 
the interest of this paper to the members largely consists; and 
without this it would be a mere description of the routine of 
laboratory work. 

He believes, moreover, that, organized as the laboratory is 
for public service of a nature in which the INsTITUTE is par- 
ticularly interested, no further apology is needed for presenting 
certain facts as to the nature and scope of the work done by 


1905] A TESTING LABORATORY. 1053 


a laboratory of this character. It may be mentioned in this 
connection that the Société Internationale des Electriciens in 
its corporate capacity stands sponsor for a similar laboratory 
in Paris, the Laboratoire Centrale d’Electricité. This laboratory 
while receiving a subvention from the City of Paris, and from 
the French Government, by which it is recognized as a public 
utility, is chiefly supported and directed by the Société Inter- 
nationale des Electriciens. The Electrical Testing Laboratories 
in this city has a plant which is by no means inferior to that 
‘of the Laboratoire Centrale, and is, it is believed, in position 
to render services to the electrical profession and industry 
similar to those which the Paris laboratory has rendered to 
its supporters. It cannot be out of place, therefore, to make 
a brief report of its activities to the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 

The Electrical Testing Laboratories has now been permanently 
established and in practical operation for nearly two years in 
a large and substantial building in East Eightieth Street, New 
York City. The building and equipment have been described 
at length,’ it is, therefore, unnecessary at this time to discuss 
these details. It is sufficient to say that the building is of 
adequate size, unusually substantial, and well adapted to labor- 
atory purposes, while the equipment of apparatus is most gen- 
erous as to quantity, quality, and range. The arrangements 
for obtaining large quantities of electrical power are also ex- 
cellent. In other words, an earnest effort has been made to 
obtain as perfect an electrical laboratory equipment as is prac- 
ticable. 

As has been indicated in the foregoing, the purpose of these 
laboratories is to fill a hitherto existing lack in the electrical 
field. The Electrical Testing Laboratories is not engaged in 
producing any manufactured product. It does not attempt or 
expect to supplant the testing laboratories organized by oper- 
ating and manufacturing companies, but rather to supplement 
them. By abstaining from giving advice or rendering opinions 
it does not encroach upon the particular province of the con- 
sulting engineer, while it places at his disposal facilities for ob- 
taining such experimental data as he may need in his practice. 
It will thus be seen that the purposes of this enterprise are 
not in the least antagonistic to any other industry or established 
interests, but the establishment is in a position to be of im- 


1. Electrical World and Engineer for January, 7, 14, and 21, 1905. 


1054 CLAYTON H. SHARP: [Nov. 24 


partial service’ to all. The National Bureau of Standards 
maintains the primary standards; the Electrical Testing Labor- 
atories devotes itself to commercial electrical measurements 
for the promotion of electrical industries: thus these two labor- 
atories are mutually supplementary, the one undertaking a 
work which is essentially a function of government, and the 
other applying the results of such work to productive industries. 

It is pertinent to inquire to what extent, by whom, and for 
what purposes, the testing facilities thus offered have been 
made use of in commercial undertakings. As an answer to’ 
this question tabulations have been prepared classifying the 
tests which the Electrical Testing Laboratories has been called 
upon to make in two ways, namely, with respect to the kind 
of tests requested and with respect to the parties ordering the 
tests. In this classification each order is considered as a unit, 
no account being taken of the number of articles to be tested 
under it. Thus an order for a check of a voltmeter counts 
the same as one for the complete study of a set of integrating 
watt-hour meters or for the determination of the conductivity, 
insulation resistance, capacity, and dielectric strength of 
several lengths of wire or cable. A partial examination of the 
records shows, for instance, that 310 orders covered a total 
of 581 individual instruments; 148 orders a total of 484 reflectors. 

In these classifications certain large tests performed under 
general contracts are not included. These contracts cover 
tests of incandescent lamps bought in large quantities. The 
tests are made to determine the acceptability of the lamps 
under the specifications which are agreed to by the manufacturer 
and the purchaser, or to fix the value of the lamps, the labor- 
atories in this case acting as the intermediary between the 
producer and the consumer. 

The Electrical Testing Laboratories was engaged in this class 
of work previously to entering into the field of general testing. 
The volume of lamp testing is very large, the total number of 
lamps submitted for inspection and test during the year ending 
April 30, 1905, was 13 000 000. The existence of this well-estab- 
lished line of testing has made it financially possible for the labor- 
atories to engage in the larger work upon which it had entered, 
and still constitutes the real backbone and substantial income 
of the business, without which the maintenance of the general 
laboratories would be impracticable. The results achieved 
through this systematic testing of incandescent lamps have 


1905] 


been of very 


The initiative 


A TESTING LABORATORY. 1055 


great significance to electrical science and in- 
dustry. Under this stimulus, the quality of the lamps manu- 
factured in this country has steadily risen, and the practice 
of electric lighting has reached a high degree of excellence. 
in this practice of lamp testing came from large 


lighting companies, and large purchasers of lamps. 


Instruments. Number of Orders. 
Hiadicarc imo weeehe neice Menem essa Seo. see) ners. o ero. Save OCOD OLE 219 
SE PMIMeMt abratiSlOraensetamis s +.<leceiue oi eaieie;+ © es/s Slore sie «.sisie-s « 9 
NL Corse aC ef CCOLGINS trates aieiretters wie elect eres cists e eloreree6 93 
PLE CISIOTUITISY LUMMLEMUS setecatcyereityense aie e sicie es eusvelee tee ee seine es <6 20 
WE Oar Serremee tris steph aan ee wire ete savas oocooS at Somopene, Whe 

ML Oteil re Rapes oP tars tacts aferar's she miateiavs Sa foie ale) easaKe sale aies em OOO 

Materials, Supplies, and Machines. 

Wonductivioverae ns was. aihea es ot 6 ccs condos domo sobotec 34 
Insulating materials and insulators............ Re oi Siere sieve. exe 70 
WERE SMe CimaineSimrtgrtewts caiitte wiiclnielele@ etheietee «Ose tt 510s « 30 
Dias at ObOUS we Anca LLETICS: nitrclaatstels i) elolels siete ecleie-c.tes 11 
Fuses, circuit-breakers, and mechanical joints..... ehafe catia seve 29 
Magnetic properties of iron and steel............. joctegoon a 
VMASCellAMCOUS velaettntarterckeke 6 oialn eiicilorenevoie. averensi i eters) 6 870 e a @ euerire 2 

pRotalicerprecaietsta a sialcletsnettce ss ae eters cote eres araret eats erence LOS 

Photometry. ; 

AMRo TANTS: oho dion 60 Ge DOO O00 OdInG0 0 Od COU CO MOUNU DOO OOO eae 20 
(Cem leks, su 513 ole poe oan Bos COC an ob Da ORO One oo G ant 10 
Incandescent lamps, inspection and candle-power........... 140 

*s SMELLS srotevene ste Orsi MastoreMercheton eh e)'s1 a's voce a" sioveys fore ss 51 
Meridian, Nernst, osmium, and tantalum.......... Siemens 22 
LVEMEC LOLS TAM tutes ioe oceremo Monit pace arate e Wl rede 04.0% Spach Wea 
Standards of light (including standard lamp sales)...... seer lod 
itsellAatteO tl Sevetettretelerenovsiersiehetosey sisiejeleieys.evov0G/ eas; viceJe's'e Meister stsase LO 

POs IR cloaca slevistene eo cols saves se esses ecevee OOO 

Miscellaneous. 

Greneralé cia srecsilene.oo1s Ryeneyei suecevpuer es 50-600 SADIE RO CCC IOI ON wears: 
Priv ApetIaDOLALOPICS reecicisss.csissicessscoscgeressestensee - oO 
PD Ghalbretsteleleleystorstoie sie clete/ere's cre) esse s1e.'e) 8:6 Rreeceae or staterel sie 56 
Grands totaleeusiesr ot 0 sie CE COOLIO eee care : 1 136 


An examination of the above table shows that the aggregate 
number of tests which have been carried out is by no means 
inconsiderable. The number of photometrical tests of all 


TABLE I. 


ANALYSIS OF ORDERS. 


1056 CLAYTON H. SHARP: [Nov. 24 


sorts is substantially equal to the number of instrument tests 
and materials tests combined. While this indicates that there 
is an extensive field for photometrical testing, it is not a good 
indication that this field of testing is as large as that of all 
other electrical tests. At the beginning of the period covered 
by Table I. the laboratories had already an established repu- 
tation for photometrical tests and in consequence there was a 
large preponderance of such orders. This preponderance has 
been steadily diminishing with the increase of business in the 
more general line of electrical testing. 

Similarly, the number of instrument tests is twice as large 
as the number of materials tests. This may be interpreted 
as indicating that the importance of accuracy in electrical meas- 
urements and metering is more definitely appreciated than the 
importance of testing materials and machines. Informing such 
a conclusion, however, it should not be lost sight of that many 
tests of instruments have been made for parties intending to 
conduct their own tests of materials or machines. For ex- 
ample, the instruments and instrumental transformers which 
have been used as sub-standards in efficiency tests of some of 
the largest generators ever constructed have been checked by 
the Laboratories. 

The following table classifies the orders received with respect 
to the occupation or position of the clients from whom such 
orders have come. This classification is approximate only, 
since, for instance, it frequently happens that a manufacturer 
requires a test of materials which he is purchasing, and hence 
for purposes of classification would properly be placed under 
the head of consumer. These cases cannot be distinguished 
from those in which the manufacturer has a test made of his 
own product. ; 

TABLE II. 


ns 


Colleges 
Dealers | and other 
Laboratories 


Electrical 
Engineers 


Manufacturers | Consumers 


a | | EE | | 


56% 29% 8% 4% 2% 1% 
ee ee nn EEE 


It is seen that more than one half of all orders came from 
manufacturers, and that consumers’ orders number only about 
one half of the manufacturers’ orders. There is, however, a 
well marked tendency for the relative number of orders from 
consumers, electrical engineers, and dealers, to increase more 


1905] A TESTING LABORATORY. 1057 


rapidly than orders from manufacturers. Consumers and 
dealers will undoubtedly realize more and more with increasing 
competition and increasing demands upon them, the importance 
of testing materials and supplies. 

As indicating the increasing use made of the facilities thus 
provided, and illustrating the fact that the laboratory is in 
practical operation, a diagram is given showing the number 
of orders received every month. A moderately steady increase 
can be seen, and a considerable volume of work. Each summer 
the volume decreases considerably, but increases rapidly during 
the fall when the vacation season is past. 

Certain further approximate analyses of the work done by 
the laboratories can be made which indicate some of its fields 
of usefulness. For example, a large number of orders from 
manufacturers have covered tests and experiments required in 
developing new or improved products and in getting exact data 
on their existing product. Some manufacturers submit sam- 
ples of their output systematically and periodically to the Elec- 
trical Testing Laboratories for test, and use the data thus ob- 
tained for their own information. This is sometimes done when 
the manufacturer is supplied with his own testing department, 
and it serves as a check on his own results. Sometimes the 
results are used for advertising purposes. A catalogue of a 
certain line of appliances of interest to the illumination engineer 
has recently been issued in which the characteristics of: each 
article are shown by curves obtained by the laboratories. 
Manufacturers, consumers, and others frequently submit sam- 
ples of different makes of an article for competitive tests. 
These are all subjected to similar tests and a separate report 
is written covering the behavior of each. A comparison of 
such’ reports is sufficient to give a clear idea of the relative 
merits of the articles tested. It will be noticed that the method 
of returning separate and independent reports on competitive 
articles precludes the possibility of the laboratories making any 
direct comparison between them or drawing conclusions as to 
their relative merits. This is in accord with the fixed policy 
of the laboratories. An exception is made in case samples 
are designated in such a way as not to reveal their true identity. 
Thus a comparative report will be returned on samples of 
cable marked A, B, and C, but separate and independent 
reports if they are designated as Smith’s make, Jones’s make, 
and Brown’s make. In no case is an opinion rendered as to 


1058 CLAYTON H. SHARP: [Nov. 24 


the relative merits of articles as disclosed by the data obtained. 

A number of tests have been made which are noteworthy 
either for their unusual nature or for their magnitude and 
comprehensiveness. Among these may be mentioned a study 
of the teat-dissipating qualities of various insulating varnishes; 
an efficiency test by electrical means of a variable-speed gearing; 
a study of the relation between voltage and sparking distance 
in air on the high-tension transformer set installed in the labor- 
atory; complete studies of nearly every kind of integrating 
watt-hour meter which is, or might be, a commercial possibility 
in this country; spectro-photometric tests of most of the usual 
light sources; stroboscopic tests to determine the amount of 
variation of the light from incandescent lamps during each 
half cycle of alternating currents of various frequencies; com- 
plete tests of Nernst, osmium, tantalum, and flaming-arc lamps; 
comparative life-tests of incandescent lamps on direct-current 
and alternating-current circuits; determination of the influ- 
ence of frosting the bulb of incandescent lamps, or enclosing them 
in globes, on their life and efficiency ; international comparison 
of standards of light by the exchange of standard lamps with 
the principal European laboratories. 

Thus it will be seen that while the laboratory equipment is 
intended primarily for routine testing of the every-day useful 
sort, it has been made use of for tests which are out of the 
ordinary and which would usually be carried on in a physical 
laboratory. i ; 

To sum up, it may be noted that systematic and constant 
testing and experimenting are of the greatest importance in 
promoting electrical s¢ience and industry. By. testing, the 
manufacturer is able to determine the quality and properties 
of the raw material entering into his product; and he is able 
to detect faults, to make improvements, and to blaze a trail 
into unexplored fields. By testing, the purchaser may assure 
himself that he is getting the quality that he has specified, 
and can protect himself against carelessness and fraud. By 
testing, the electrical engineer is enabled to collect the data 
needed for his plans and recommendations. The attainment 
of accuracy in practical electrical measurements is also of great 
importance and can be obtained only by reference to accurate 
laboratory standards. 

It is, therefore, a matter of congratulation that the electrical 
industry. has attained to the stage in its development where it 


Ov 
O 
a. 


Seo 
Number _of Orders 


VAAN 


oer MAM: Ji, A. 8.0.,H. Dy dM, RM MNS fo ayaa Fe Ms AOMoe eee 
Hdd, ANS. 0. NOL i MAM: do) ALS, © NS DIE Rape 
1902 | 1903 | 1904 | . abe ees 


1060 CLAYTON H. SHARP: [Nov. 24 


feels the need of such facilities as are afforded by the laboratory 
of the National Bureau of Standards and of the Electrical 
Testing Laboratories, and that it is showing its appreciation 
of the availability of such facilities by making practical use of 


’ them in the conduct of commercial operations. 


—————— 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 1062 


Discussion ON “ THE NaTIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS,” AND 
A TEsTING LABORATORY IN PRACTICAL OPERATION,” AT 
New York, NoveMBER 24, 1905. 


_F. B. Crocker: The Instirute has done much commendable 
work in encouraging standardization, but it has remained for 
the Government to do something even more important by giving 
to the public the standards of weights and measures needed 
in the industries. 

The matter of international standardization is very important. 
As a profession, I think we have reason for congratulating 
ourselves that it is much more advanced in the electrical in- 
dustries than in other engineering industries, or, for that matter, 
in any other branch of human interest. This is so because 
the electrical units are international, and have been so since 
the Chicago Congress of 1893. 

The matter of standardizing electrical machinery, while 
fairly well established in this country, is in some respects un- 
settled even here. There is very little international stand- 
ardization of electrical machinery, but I think the time has 
come when even that will be attempted. At St. Louis the 
International Electrical Congress passed resolutions favorable 
to international standardization of electrical apparatus. 

I think that uniform practice is an excellent phrase by which 
to designate all of the efforts to bring about uniformity in all 
branches of applied science. The mechanical engineers, for 
example, are responsible for uniformity in steam-engine prac- 
tice; electrical engineers for electrical-generator practice; and 
in the matter of direct-connected units the responsibilities for 
standardizing are shared alike by both professions. Such 
standardization is actually accepted to-day, and I think that 
it will reach even further. 

As a representative of the Committee on Standardization of 
the Institute, I heartily endorse the work that has been de- 
scribed here to-night; work by the government, powerful in 
its influence, which can accomplish a great deal; and work by 
the various standardization interests—all of which are pro- 
ducing such excellent results. 

W. E. Goldsborough: Several years ago, when the matter 
of the formation of a National Bureau of Standards was being 
agitated, I felt that laboratories throughout the country, and 
also manufacturing plants, were in great need of a proper 
standardizing bureau to which to refer instruments needing 
adjustment and accurate calibration, and to which could also 
be referred matters in doubt relating to important scientific 
or engineering constants and other data. Since the appropria- 
tions for establishing the Bureau of Standards were passed by 
Congress a great deal of work has been done to meet all of the 
demands I have enumerated, and many more. 

I visited the site of the new laboratories of the National 


1062 NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS. {June 22 


Bureau about a year and a half ago; and was much impressed 
with its possibilities as a permanent home for an institution of 
this character. 

To my mind it is essential that there should be in the United 
States a court of last resort to determine and regulate units 
and standards of measurement. Heretofore such work has been 
restricted to a few educational, or commercial, laboratories, 
which have, to a large extent, been obliged to develop their 
own methods and make their own standards; and none of them 
possessing a corps of men devoting their time exclusively to 
refined work of the character now carried on by the Bureau 
of Standards. 

Undoubtedly, with the aid given to electrical engineers by 
the bureau, much more rapid progress can be made in all 
branches of commercial electrical development than has hith- 
erto been possible. 

I have been in many finely equipped laboratories, and have 
seen many enthusiastic men working with refined instruments, 
but I do not know of any place in which will be found more 
jdeal conditions for scientific work or a more enthusiastic 
body of men at work than in the National Bureau of Standards. 

C. O. Mailloux: I visited, last year, the laboratories of the 
Reichsanstalt, at Charlottenburg, and also, very soon after, 
those of the National Bureau of Standards, at Washington. 
The laboratories at Washington were far from being in completed 
form; but I felt, even then, that the Bureau of Standards was 
already ahead of the best establishments of the same character 
in Germany or elsewhere. 


. George F. Sever: Some years ago Professor Crocker read a 


paper before the Harvard Engineering Society, on the accuracy 
of electrical engineering. In that paper was embodied prac- 
tically all the ideas that the National Bureau of Standards 
and the Electrical Testing Laboratories have evolved; that is 
to say, the electrical engineering profession is so exact in every 
detail that it can, by means of these standardization laboratories, 
obtain results that are practically a dead hift with other pro- 
fessions. 

The Electrical Testing Laboratories are extremely beneficial to 
the electrical testing laboratories of the universities. In the 
old days the electrical and physical laboratories of the various 
universities did the work that is now done by the two in- 
stitutions represented here to-night, much less satisfactorily 
than they conduct it. In those days one university had a 


certain set of standards; other universities had, in turn, other > 


sets of standards. There was no means whatsoever of stand- 
ardizing the standards; for the professors of electrical engineer- 
‘ing and the professors of physics in the various universities 
were unable to codperate at that time. 

University teachers most heartily welcome the establishment 
of the Bureau af Standards and the Electrical Testing Labo- 


~ 


1905 } DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 1063 


Tatories. The latter have relieved Columbia University of a 
lot of commercial work that often completely disorganized 
and impaired the success of teaching, by taking time and 
equipment and interfering with the training of students under 
a purely academic standard. In university electrical labo- 
ratories, apparatus must be adapted for many different kinds of 
tests; it cannot be maintained for some one particular line of 
work, requiring the same process over and over again, as the 
financial facilities and the personnel are limited as compared 
with the conditions in a commercial testing company. The 
charges for similar work are usually larger than those made 
by a commercial laboratory. 

All things considered, then, the establishment of the Elec- 
trical Testing Laboratories in this city is of great advantage 
not , to the universities, but to the engineering profession 
as well. 

C. A. Doremus: To the chemist, the knowledge that his 
volumetric apparatus is of standard type is of the greatest 
importance. Accurate measures are needed as much as accu- 
rate weights. If I am correctly informed, the Act which 
legalized the U. S. gallon does not mention the temperature 
at which the volume of water shall be measured, This spells 
confusion. 

Heretofore we have had to depend on the German government 
for our standard volumetric apparatus. We now may go 
directly to the Bureau of Standards. 

Dr. Stratton confirms the importance of this bureau to the 
chemist when he says: ‘‘Scarcely a problem can be taken 
up concerning the construction of standards, or properties of 
materials, that does not involve chemical preparations, chem- 
ical analysis, or the coéperation and advice of expert chemists.’’ 
This statement, together with the fact that one of the heads of 
department is a chemist, shows how intimate a relation exists 
between the bureau and chemistry. 

One of the most important functions of the bureau is the 
standardization of polariscopic apparatus. This apparatus is 
used in assessing the duty on sugar, one of the chief sources 
of revenue of the government. The government must know 
that the polariscopes at New York, Boston, and New Orleans, 
all indicate the same percentage of sugar in the same sample. 

Pure chemicals are essential in the testing of materials such 
as steel, copper, etc. The chemical manufacturer is beginning 
to recognize the value of producing chemicals of standard qual- 
ity. They need not always be absolutely pure. Indeed, im- 
purity may be acquired from a container; but it is necessary 
for the chemist to know whether a particular chemical is con- 
taminated, and to what extent. It is this ideal condition 
which the chemical manufacturer is trying to bring about, 
and the bureau will greatly facilitate his efforts. _ 

The electrochemist will also look to the bureau for important 


1064 NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDA RDS. [Nov. 24 


information. If it has been found available to enter the field 
of research of low temperatures, it will not be long before 
experimental work at high temperatures will become a matter 
of routine in the bureau. 

William McClellan: A comparison of old foreign catalogues 
of instruments with catalogues of American instruments shows 
a great difference in the kinds of instruments listed. The makers 
across the water, even now, are producing instruments which 
enable the physicist to start his most advanced work at first 
principles. The American maker has ceased to do this, or rather 
never began making this sort of instrument, but is willing to 
leave standardizing to the proper bureau. Measuring-instru- 
ments of all kinds can now be standardized at Washington, 
and with more despatch and accuracy than in an ordinary 
laboratory, and much of the drudgery and inaccuracy of former 
methods of .experimental work avoided. One recalls the 
difficulties Professor Rowland had with his preliminary work 
in connection with the mechanical equivalent of heat, in order 
to be sure of his thermometers. Most of us would now avoid 
such troubles by applying to the Bureau of Standards. Few 
physicists have the time or the ability to make their own ohms 
and volts, and would rather leave it to the bureau. 

The standardization of machinery referred to by Professor 
Crocker, should enlist the interest of every engineer. But to 
insist too much on this would stifle proper experimenting and 
improvement. The exploiting of apparatus modified for com- 
mercial reasons is responsible for much of the variety existing, 
but this has not prevented the manufacturers from standardiz- 
ing in some particulars. A more common cause of trouble is 
the whim of an engineer which introduces a slight change with 
little or no compensating advantage. This can only be pre- 
vented by rational conservatism. 

These two papers suggest the question as to where the activi- 
ties of the two organizations should be divided. At this point 
it would be interesting to hear from the Director of the Na- 
tional Bureau as to just how far the bureau can go in the matter 
of making commercial tests—where the government does or 
would prevent anything further in this line. It would be 
interesting, too, to know what classes of people have patronized 
the bureau at Washington. 

S. W. Stratton: This question arises in connection with 
nearly every phase of work done by the bureau. For ex- 
ample, in the matter of weights and measures the line drawn 
between fundamental standards and local standards is sharp; 
however, we hope to bring about relations between the state 
and city sealers of weights and measures which will give the 
bureau control of their working standards. By associating 
ourselves with the sealers they will be instructed in the va- 
rious methods, without interfering with the routine testing of 
commercial weights and measures. There is hardly a section 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 1065 


of the bureau’s activities which can be separated from routine 
testing. 

In photometry the policy of the bureau has been to do com- 
mercial testing for the departments of the government, and for 
the public in cases where an authoritative test is required. 

It is absolutely necessary for those who are solving problems 
in connection with photometric standards to keep in touch 
with commercial testing. In fact, the bureau is frequently 
called upon to instruct individuals and officials in the methods 
of such testing, just as it offers to city officials and others 
‘every opportunity for instruction in matters pertaining to the 
testing of commercial weights and measures. Here again, in 
order that the experts of the bureau may be thoroughly familiar 
with the practical side of the problem, a certain amount of this 
commercial testing is done for the departments of the govern- 
ment, and for the public when no local facilities are provided. 
Work was done by the bureau last year for many educational 
institutions of importance, for instrument makers, and many 
commercial firms. 

John W. Lieb, Jr.: We Americans are apt to be taken to 
task for our utilitarian spirit, but this institution affords good 
evidence that the nation has arrived at a point where it appre- 
ciates the importance of experimental research, scientific in- 
vestigation, and correct standards of weights and measures. 
I believe that the National Bureau of Standards at Washington 
is likely to play a very important part in enlisting the sympathy 
and coéperation of the manufacturing industries in this country 
toward bringing about that great desideratum, the universal 
adoption of the metric system. 

E. B. Rosa: The National Bureau of Standards is nct com- 
pletely developed, not by a good deal, but it is well started. 
Recalling that the Reichanstalt has cost more than $1 000 000 
for the grounds, building, and equipment, and that there 
is an institution for the testing of weights and measures quite 
distinct from the Reichanstalt, called the Normal Aichungs 
Kommission, and that there is still another institution for the 
testing of engineering instruments and materials, it will be 
appreciated that the government has not made such a very 
bad beginning. The three German institutions represent an 
equipment cost of $1 500 000; taking into account the greater 
cost of labor and material in this country, the plants could not 
be duplicated here for less than $2000000. The total cost 
of the equipment of the National Bureau of Standards is, to 
date, not more than $600000. This expenditure represents 
about one-third of the amount expended by the Germans for 
this kind of work, and therefore allowance should be made if 
in the matter of equipment the National Bureau of Standards 
does not contain all that is found in the German institutions. 


A paper presented at a Meeting of the Chicago 
Branch of the American Institute of Electri- 
cal Engineers, Chicago, May 2°, 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A. I.E. E. 


LIGHT ELECTRIC RAILWAYS. 


BY JAMES R. CRAVATH. 


Although the building of interurban electric railways has 
been carried on very actively in the Central States during the 
last six years, a general survey of the situation shows that the 
territory served by such roads is rather limited, especially in 
states west of Indiana. The typical interurban electric railway 
of the Central States costs from $20 000 to $25 000 per mile 
of single track. The building of such roads has therefore been 
generally confined to such places as in the opinion of the build- 
ers have sufficient population and resources to yield an annual 
gross revenue which will leave from $1 200 to $1 500 per track 
mile to pay interest on the investment after paying operating 
expenses, maintenance, and depreciation. Without going into 
details, it can be said in a general way that a gross revenue of 
$3 000 to $4 000 per track mile per year must be earned at the 
start on a most economically constructed interurban road of 
the ordinary type, if it is to be a financial success. 

It has for some time been apparent to engineers that have 
had to advise regarding numerous proposed interurban electric 
roads in certain~states (of which Illinois and Iowa are the 
most notable examples) that there is need for a class of elec- 
tric railway that does not require the heavy investment needed 
to build the typical interurban road of to-day. In other words, 
there are scores of places that would not yield an interurban 
road a gross revenue of $3 000 per track mile per year, and 
there is little prospect that they ever will; yet half or two- 
thirds that income would be certain and continuous, On ac- 
count of the numerous opportunities for roads of a cheaper 
class in our rich agricultural states, which have comparatively 

1067 


1068 CRAVATH: LIGHT ELECTRIC RAILWAYS. [May 23 


few large manufacturing towns, many engineers have looked 
forward with much hope to the single-phase alternating-current 
railway motor as making possible a considerable saving in the 
cost of construction and operation of these roads. A careful 
review of recent estimates on cost of construction made by vari- 
ous engineers does not reveal any great possible reduction in 
first cost by the use of the single-phase electric motor as long 
as present standards of heavy track construction, heavy rolling 
stock, and high speeds are adhered to. 

It is the purpose of this paper to consider whether it is not 
feasible to work out a new type of light electric railway construc- 
tion which will involve only about one-third the cost of the 
typical high-speed interurban road with which we are familiar, 
which can prosper on a much smaller revenue, and yet fulfil 
all the transportation requirements of many rural communities. 
The advent of the single-phase railway motor at least makes 
such an undertaking appear more promising of success now than 
in the past. ; 

The first thing to be done in planning such a road is to dis- 
miss the idea of using cars of the weight. and operated at the 
speed required in interurban service, for it would be useless 
to figure on any material cheapening of the cost of construc- 
tion, as compared with that of interurban roads, if cars weigh- 
ing 25 to 30 tons are to be run at speeds of 40 to 50 miles per 
hour. Of course, first-class, substantial, heavy construction 
is absolutely essential for interurban service where such con- 
struction is to be the basis for operation of cars of the weight 
and at speeds just mentioned, But the question naturally 
arises: is it necessary to adhere, to such high standards _ of 
service and construction for serving all kinds of communities? 
Why should hamlets and. farming townships in Illinois and 
Iowa, with populations of 100 to 1 000, be entirely denied elec- 
tric railway transportation facilities because they cannot sup- 
port first-class, high-speed, electric railway service, such as 
now, connect the closely situated manufacturing towns of In- 
diana and Ohio? In other words, is there any reason for estab- 
lishing a, kind of engineering dead-line, and saying no electric 
railway outside the cities is worth considering unless it is up 
to the present interurban standards? sat 

As the character of a road should depend entirely on the 
character of its rolling stock, consideration will be first given 
to that feature. It is suggested that on a light electric rural 


1905.] CRAVATH: LIGHT ELECTRIC RAILWAYS. 1069 


and interurban railway, small double-truck cars for a track of 
about 28-inch gauge might be adopted. Narrow-gauge rail- 
ways have fallen into disrepute among railway engineers, and 
with good reason, because the ordinary narrow-gauge road 
does not differ sufficiently in cost from a standard-gauge road 
to make the saving worth while in most cases, and also because 
of the inability to take standard-gauge cars from connecting 
roads. If we go into the narrow-gauge business we must go 
far enough to gain some substantial advantage. It is there- 
fore suggested that a road of about 28-inch gauge, although 
at a disadvantage in not being able to take standard steam- 
road cars, nevertheless has the decided advantage of a greatly 
reduced cost of construction. 


OUTLINE OF CAR SUGGESTED FOR LIGHT RURAL ELECTRIC RAILWAY, 
28’ GAGE. 


On a road of the character proposed, maximum speeds of 
15 to 20 miles per hour will answer all practical requirements. 
This speed should be feasible on a roadway of 28-inch gauge, 
with light double-truck cars of 8- to 10-tons’ weight. A sug- 
gestion as to a suitable form of car construction for such a road, 
with dimensions, is presented in the accompanying outline draw- 
ing, Fig. 1. As 28 inches is about one-half standard gauge, no 
doubt cars of one-half the width of standard-gauge cars could be 
used with safety. This would permit a passenger car of 5-ft. 
width. Such a car, if equipped with cross-seats, would be of suffi- 
cient width for a single seat of 16- to 18-in. width on each side of 


1070 CRAVATH: LIGHT ELECTRIC RAILWAYS. [May 23 


an aisle 24 to 28 inches wide. Longitudinal seats could be used 
if preferred. It would not be possible to use the regular plan 
of placing motor-trucks under the car, because, in order to 
keep the center of gravity of the car low enough for safety on 
the narrow gauge, wheels of 16- to 18-inch diameter would have 
to be used, and it would be impossible to place motors of suffi- 
cient capacity on trucks equipped with such wheels. The motor- 
trucks in this case should therefore be equipped with 30- to 33- 
in. wheels, which would give abundant room for motors of 
sufficient capacity to propel the light cars proposed. The car 
floor is made higher at the ends over the motor-trucks than 
under the balance of the car. If a motor-truck were placed 
only under one end of the car the trail-truck could have small 
wheels and be arranged in the common manner. By the ar- 
rangement shown the center of gravity will be low, and it 
leaves a compartment at one or both ends of the car above the 
motor-trucks, in which can be installed the various electrical 
appliances that are usually under the car but which cannot 
be so placed when the car-body is hung as low as it is in this 
case. These compartments can also be occupied by the motor- 
man and used for baggage. The car body can be supported 
by I-beams or channels in the sides of the car just below the 
windows, and these beams can also support the side-sills of 
the passenger compartment by means of tie-rods and struts. 
The length of the car may vary considerably, but for very light 
traffic a car 18 feet long is suggested. This will seat comfort- 
ably 12 passengers. Equipped with a motor-truck at one end 
only, it will probably weigh not more than 10 tons, and with a 
motor truck on both ends, 12 tons. 

It is assumed that single-phase motors are to be used, which 
would cause the electrical equipment to weigh more than a 
direct-current equipment. No such narrow-gauge, single-phase 
motors have been produced yet, as far as the writer knows, 
but undoubtedly could be produced were there need for them. 
Motor-cars, such as suggested, could haul one or two light 
freight-cars on roads without heavy grades. For a road of 
this kind trailers would probably best serve to carry freight; 
and they should be designed so as to allow the freight to be 
readily transferred to grain elevators or steam-road freight cars. 

With double-truck motor-cars of the type suggested, a 
maximum speed of 15 or 20 miles per hour should be safely 
possible on a 28-in. gauge track with standard T-rails of about 


eee st CU 


1905.) GRAVAREEA IGE PEBCTRIG RAILWAY'S. 1071 


30 pounds per yard. It costs much less to build a 28-in. gauge 
road laid with 30-lb. rails than a road of standard gauge. The 
tonnage of steel required is half that of a road equipped with 
60-lb. rails, these being the lightest that it is now considered 
good practice to use in interurban electric railway work. The 
cost per ton of light rails is also about 25% less than that of 
rails weighing more than 40 lb. The ties used can be half the 
standard 8-ft. length and less than the usual 6-in. by 8-in. 
cross-section. 

The cost of grading would be reduced from standard-gauge 
construction for the two following reasons: first, the reduction 
of the cross-section of cuts and fills by the narrowing of the em- 
bankment; secondly, with a road of this kind operating at slow 
speeds on a narrow gauge it would be good engineering to 
avoid many of the cuts and fills that would be necessary on a 
high-speed road, and to pick a location which goes round hills 
rather than through them. The rolling prairie country of the 
Central States would almost invariably permit the: location of 
the route of such a light railway so as to be almost free from 
all heavy grading work. What would be considered a very 
crooked route for a standard-gauge steam-road would be un- 
objectionable on a light railway of this kind.~ By laying out 
the road so as to avoid heavy grading work, the expense of 
bridges and trestles would also be reduced to a minimum. 
In crossing large streams of course approaches and _ bridges 
must be built which are out of the way of floods, but large streams 
are the exception and probably the-majority of light railways 
of this class would not cross any large streams unless on a 
highway. 

The next question is that of ballast. Since many branch 
steam lines and some interurban electric lines are still operating 
without ballast it would hardly seem wise to invest much money 
in ballast for a light railway of this kind. Ballast is desirable, 
- to be sure, but in this case the expense would hardly be justified. 

The overhead trolley construction should be simple in char- 
acter, since it will have but light traffic passing under i By 
using single-phase, alternating-current motors with a trolley 
pressure of 3000 to 4000 volts, feeders will not be needed to 
supplement the trolley on a rural road 20 miles long with power 
supply from one end. The trolley-wire itself can be No. 0 wire. 
_ The poles will therefore need to be heavy enough to support 
the trolley-wire bracket only. It is assumed that the catenary 


a 


© 


1072 CRAVATH: LIGHT ELECTRIC RAILWAYS.  |May 23 


construction would be used with the trolley-wire, supported at 
frequent intervals by a steel catenary, the catenary resting in 
turn upon center-bearing, high-pressure insulators. Instead of 
a costly iron bracket for supporting the trolley, a bracket con- 
sisting of a 5-ft. wooden cross-arm, supported from above by 
a tie-rod and bolted to the pole at one end, would answer the 
purpose. 

In most cases power could be purchased from a light and 
power company at the principal terminus of a line, thus keeping 
the cost of power within reasonable limits, as the amount of 
power required would not justify a separate power-house. It 
is assumed that the railway company would furnish a generator, | 
this generator to be placed in the lighting company’s station. 
The balance of the power investment to be made by the lighting 
company. 

The following estimates are on the cost per mile of a railway 
built according to the foregoing ideas; these estimates are of 
course conjectural, as no such road has ever been built. The 
figures are based on cost of present railway construction, assum- 
ing all the supplies and rolling stock to be standard. 


COST OF ROAD AND EQUIPMENT PER MILE. 
TRACK AND GRADING. 


Right of way donated. 
Grading averaging 7000 cubic yards per mile at 18 cents per cubic 


Spe ae Ee OS NE SR SR ie Sd een re ee $1 260 
30-lb. T-rail at $33 per ton, 52.8 tons, 30-ft. lengths.........-.. 1 742 
352 rail-joints at 75 cents each.......eeeereeerre seer re ceeress 264 
2 640 ties, 4 in. by 6 in. by 4 ft., at 20 cents €achs ..cqchaustesneaeers 528 
30 kegs spikes at $3. ..5...00 62 css e ober since cts gens eco cnisnee 90 
360 bonds at 30 cents each, in place..........+ sees eee etree 108 
Labor; laying track Unk (ob. is Sah Tha hs RR aes 300 
Highway ‘crossings: ¢ 4/404 0's © Saree sie sha leer eye Ss tien ah 25 
Fencing (20 miles).......:+.ce sree seer eben ence teeter nner ses 150 


Tracle TOCAL feta on e ciae tee seni is ieee Cee) eiihels ca nsalanes rotenone $4 467 


GENERAL ROADWAY ITEMS FOR 15-MILE ROAD. 


Culverts, Cte... cece cece cree een ere neee erase er eeeeensceenes $1 500 
Bridges. ja nce slawioe yg xaiaopme hei disee ee gee an ia aca Sa pc 1 000 
Special OLE. See UR salen: sities cies forte eke sligcarohereis ystevele ole tets areelelr next renene 2 000 

$4 500 


Fe] 
1905.] CRAVATH: LIGHT ELECTRIC RAILWAYS. 1073 


OVERHEAD LINE PER MILE. 
4S poles (25-ft:) at $400.8 . sce oe te a ee ee oe oie es ewig tt $192 


Wood brackets (cross-arm size) 3.5 in. by 4.5 in. by 60 in., at 50 cts. 24 
48 high-pressure insulators at 15 cents.....-..+---++++eeeere es 8 
5 280 feet No. 0 trolley wire at 15 cents per Ib.......---+--+:- 253 
5 280 feet 0.25-in. steel stranded catenary at 65 cents per foot... 34 
528 clips and catenary attachments at 20 cents.....-..-+++-++: 106 
Miscellaneous overhead supplies. ........6.--- seers tees eee 50 
Labor on trolley. and catemiaryi.... vs one hee er tee et 150 
48 cross-arm tie-supports at 15 cents.......--- +--+ sees etree 7 
Telephone wire, 2 miles, No. 8.2.0.2... +++ seers eerste tes 30 
Telephone insulators and brackets.......-.----++++srsreerree 10 
Tisborroa telephone Ene. i.e... 2s see be hes peste eae st 25 

$889 


ROLLING STOCK, BUILDINGS, ETC., FOR 15-MILE LINE. 


3 passenger motor-cars at $2 500.........-22---2 2s steers $7 500 
2 passenger trailers at WRG ac oo an odo ew onenide Seon Sande do acc 1 500 
Meteora AMOUUE Cats cec sad rye ne hotter eet eee 2 200 
15°miscellaneous freight cars at BY) se cieh Stacto Chu Orbea Gwe eas io Ore 4 500 
Garchouse and repair-shop..... 220. bene esate ee et ei ste 2 000 
100-kw. generator capacity in lighting station.........-+++++++: 2 000 
Miscellaneous engineering and superintendence........--++++++> 15 000 

Mot al fox 1) itless a cs ins a5 2 to tiny oe ce $34 700 

Deeiir dele aaile eae ere e ee cae = ee pees re een a $ 2 313 


RECAPITULATION COST PER TRACK MILE. 


etd Oat bed Pa ctiws nie iin «oi 2 2 8 oes Mes FR Ae ee $4 467 
Preealercatlvea yy iteMso Vilas wale tine veils eee net ee nett 300 
Bie ee ori yates haves er ton et 889 
Rolling stock, buildings, and miscellaneous.......---++e++eeces 2 313 

Total per mile of track.......©--+-- eee sess senses $7 969 


The estimates are believed to be fairly liberal for the class 
of construction proposed. The total amounts to about $7 900 
per mile of track, or a little over one-third of the cost of a 


standard-gauge high-speed road. 

The next question to determine is whether a road of this kind 
is capable of earning enough to pay interest on the invest- 
ment. Assume the road to be 15 miles long. A good passenger 
and freight service for a rural community could be given by a 
daily schedule calling for the equivalent of 15 round-trips of 
trains consisting of motor-cars, hauling freight cars whenever 


necessary. On a 15-mile road this would mean 450 train-miles 


1074 CRAVATH: LIGHT ELECTRIC RAILWAYS. [May 23 


per day, or say 135 000 train-miles per year, allowing for some 
reduction from foregoing schedule during the winter. 

The following is believed to be a fair estimate of the ordinary 
operating expenses per train-mile of such a road: 


Power per train mile, one kw-hr. at 3 cents (purchased).........$0.03 
Motormen’s Wages. ... 0.250 deed tec eleiclee tant eietinle datas Miele 0.025 
Repairs and maintenance on rolling stock /i))2)-e eee etree 0.005 
Repairs and maintenance on track and overhead line....5. =. -3: 0.01 
General expenses..... 00.2 ee reese eset rene cece aede sta wee cans 0.015 

$0 .085 
135 000 train miles per year at $0.085.....-..--- +--+ sees eeees $11 475 
Cost of operation per track mile ($11 475 +15 estes) lee tay a oi 765 
Interest at 6 per cent. on $7 900 per mile cost construction.... 474 
Interest and operating expenses per track WML]. . aphcto ayeeh ene $1 239 


Obviously, there are plenty of locations where a road could 
easily earn this, and in addition enough to cover depreciation. 
In these locations standard-gauge, high-speed roads would be 
prohibited by financial considerations. 

Without doubt difficulties stand in the way of the construc- 
tion of the first roads of this class that may be built. One of 
the most serious obstacles is that no cars, motors, trucks, or 
overhead work suitable for such a road are now being manu- 
factured; and before such roads can be built these must be de- 
veloped, either by the manufacturers or by the prospective user. 
It is not to be expected that the manufacture of light electric 
railway apparatus will be attempted until there is a wide enough 
interest in and demand for railways of this kind to induce 
manufacturing companies to develop and market suitable 
equipments. 


RURAL PASSENGER AND FREIGHT TRAFFIC. 


Supplementary to the engineering and construction matters 
considered in the foregoing part of this paper, tentative estimates 
have been compiled by the author on the traffic possibilities 
of a strictly rural territory. Light railways of this class need 
not necessarily be confined to strictly rural business, as doubt- 
less most of them would serve small towns as well as the inter- 
vening country. However, in a rich agricultural state where 
the chief industry is farming the revenue from the farmers is’ 
the first thing to be considered. 

In the United States census of 1900 the annual value of farm 


1905.] CRAVATH: LIGHT ELECTRIC RAILWAYS. 10745 


products in three of our richest agricultural states is given as 
follows: 


lic waterrseieeete csaiese Serene < Cysja ates $6 600 per square mile 
IMLS) Sienna ac cee et 6 180 per square mile 
Indiana........+.++eeeee sees 5 700 per square mile 


-In Iowa 40 bushels per acre is considered the average corn 
crop. If this brought 35 cents per bushel, the yield per square 
mile would have a value of $8 960, but of course this amount 
would not be shipped. If $7 000 worth were shipped, it is fair 
to assume that the local rural railway would be able to get a 
price equal to one per cent. of the value of the shipment, or $70 
per square mile. _ 

Rough estimates obtained from the owners of six ordinary 
farms located in central Iowa result in the following average 
estimates of the amount of farm products shipped. The total 
area of these farms was 1 513 acres and the amount of live- 
stock shipped 470 000 Ib. or 295 Ib. per acre. The grain hauled 
to town from these farms amounted to only 7 095 bushels, or 4.7 
bushels per acre, as that part of the country has practically 
abandoned grain shipment and gone into the stock-raising 
business. The tonnage of coal hauled from town to these 
farms averaged 8.1 tons per square mile. 

Take as a basis the figures from the six farms before men- 
tioned, and suppose that the live-stock is worth four cents 
per lb. With 295 lb. per acre the value of live stock would be 
$11.80 per acre. Assuming the 4.7 bushels of grain per acre to 
be oats (as most of it was) at 25 cents per bushel, the value 
would be $1.17 per acre, which added to the live-stock makes a 
total of $12.96 per acre or $8 300 per square mile for the value 
of products shipped. If one per cent. of this could be obtained 
for the local freight rate, it would give the road a revenue of $83 
per square mile of tributary territory. Estimating on a tonnage 
basis, the revenue from hauling the same products would be as 
follows: 


94 tons live stock at 50 cents per ton......---+sereeeeerereerees $47 
84 tons coal at 50 cents per tom: .. 2... eee ee en entre were reese 4 
3 000 bushels of grain at 1 cent per jot eto e Bow ome + Cio cio C 30 

Total freight revenue per square INA Cie gare pe Ae ck eeaasaaee sw 308 $81 


It will be seen that all these estimates correspond in ultimate 
results: this leads one to believe that they are not unreasonable. 


1076° CRAVATH: LIGHT ELECTRIC RAILWAYS. [May 23 


Now consider these estimates in the light of the probable earn- 
ings of a strictly rural electric railway. 

For this purpose assume that a road is to extend from a 
good-sized county seat 15 miles into a country which has no 
railroad stations nearer than said county seat. The tributary 
territory to such a road may be estimated to be 106 square 
miles by the following process of reasoning: for the first three 
miles out of the terminal no tributary territory is considered, 
although of course there should be considerable passenger and 
light freight. business from this portion of the road. For 
the remaining 12 miles of the road the tributary territory is 
estimated as follows: 


4th mile of track, 1 mile on each side...............-.. 2 square miles 
5th mile of track, 3 miles on each side............--..-- 6 square miles 
6th mile of track, 4 miles on each side.................. 8 square miles 
7th to 15th miles inclusive, 5 miles on each side........90 square miles 
Total tributary CemitOry se os cen e age vicina ers 106 square miles 


While a territory extending five miles each side of the track 
may not seem a conservative estimate at first, it must 
be remembered that traffic will naturally seek the nearest rail- 
road; and in this case it is assumed that there are no other 
railroad stations as near to the territory served. 

The possible gross revenue from freight has already been esti- 
mated to be between $70 and $83 per square mile. Taking the 
lowest figure, $70, the revenue from 106 square miles would be 
$7 420 or $494 per track mile. 

Assume that a prosperous rural community yields $10 per 
year per capita in passenger revenue—not an unreasonable 
assumption when one considers that the estimated earnings of 
interurban lines between large towns include a large population 
which does not ride and is not dependent on the interurban 
road. Assume a rural population of 10 per square mile. A 
territory of 106 square miles, with 10 persons per square mile, 
makes a total of 1 060 population and $10 per capita per year 
for this population is $10 600, or $706 per mile of track for 
the rural population. 

Suppose that the road has at about 10 miles from its terminus 
a town of 1 000 inhabitants. These should yield a revenue of 
$5 per capita per annum or a total of $5000. This is equivalent 
to $333 per mile of track. . 


1905.] CRAVA TH. LIGHT ELBECTRIG RAILWAYS. 1077 


EARNINGS AND OPERATING EXPENSES PER TRACK MILE: SUMMARIZED. 


PAGSCIVe GLMCA LIMOS att Gal) east Metts «coe ene! vcore oie 4, ce Wlieees oh les $706 
Wellarempaccen Setscacuinosn amici mets eae ciacisits siete ed i erieinye wlece sll 333 
Meio Momeni OS WIOWeSty CSULUA LC usleye ae o-- eierelee sisi sis + cities as) selene sa, ® 494 
Mianl@anclalighibre xpress) arcmin cteeake 6,5 sis) <ieleis ssc dis eighe ais avn cerns @ wavs 100 
FEO CAM eTOSS ae ALI SS terror oretaicictieis, crslase ave ns sehersicl vel crs leselanw afs ioe $1 633 
(COSTANEUNE EGOS Ne a on Go cio GIG CLIO CO CIS Geran eC aCe 765 
INCU SVaeR MES IR cWet os Calica ie a fecretonde ntttot ois fatehantt Santora re 8h sus $868 
|KaRESS GLY SHES GENES Sas oF a ode y Ob a Oe Goer bine Ds 7 OO DI oIG 474 
Spo tis Mp eem Nem rare es MAREN eR Sines bie Grate ie Genel ate ate oon vee ere $394 


Considering better railway transportation as one solution of 
the good-roads problem in the middle West, and the number of 
places demanding light electric railways, it is important that the 
attention of the public, of electric railway engineers, and of 
the manufacturers of electric railway apparatus, be centered 
on the light electric railway problem. From the manufacturing 
standpoint it opens an immense field for this kind of railway 
equipment, while from the farmer’s standpoint the increase in 
the value of farms served by such a road would ultimately 
pay for its construction. 

It is with the object of creating interest in the subject of light 
electric railways that this paper has been written; the details 
attending the building of such railways may properly be taken 
up later. If the suggestions offered in this paper result in the 
establishment of the light electric railway as a recognized and 
important part of the transportation industry in this country, 
the author’s object will have been accomplished. 


~ 


Lc” nt ghee sale 
‘pe a ei 
Aaa 2 7 THe » 


A paper presented at the 22d Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, December 15, 1905. 


Copyright 19(5. By A. I.E. E. 


THE RELATION OF RAILWAY SUB-STATION DESIGN 
TO ITS OPERATION. 


BY SYDNEY W. ASHE. 


This paper is limited to a consideration of sub-stations in 
which high-tension alternating current is received and con- 
verted into low-tension direct current. In the operation of a 
modern railway converter sub-station, reliability of service is 
of paramount importance, being more important than con- 
siderations of first cost, of depreciation, and of maintenance; 
and in turn the reliability of service is affected to a marked 
degree by the length of time required to manipulate the vari- 
ous combinations of sub-station apparatus. The following 
factors will be noticed in this connection: 

1. The best method of starting converters. 

. The protection of converters, 

The use of oil-switches when synchronizing; 

. The regulation of load; 

The best arrangement of switch-gear; 

The operation of reverse-current relays; 

: The adjustiient of load between the sub-stations which 
feed the same -circuit; 

8. The noiseless operation of synchronous converters. 

1. The best method of starting converters. In considering the 
various methods for starting converters, it should be noted 
that the prime requisite of every method is ability to start 
and synchronize a converter in the shortest time without 
affecting the system generally. The first rule that a sub- 
station operator must learn is to be ready at all times to carry 
upon the converters whatever load may come upon the sub- 
station, this load being limited only by the maximum carrying 

1079 


NEO Crib ww 


1080 ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. - [Dee. 15 


capacity of the feeder oil-switches. -Occasionally, as “a result 
of congestion of traffic, excessive overloads come upon a sta- 
tion. In this case another converter must be started immediately, 
synchronized, and placed on the bus-bar. This calls for a 
convenient arrangement of switch-gear, a rapid, reliable method 
for starting and synchronizing converters, and a quick and 
steady operator. 

Three methods are usually employed for starting converters; 
namely, 

A. From the direct-current side. 

B. By means of'a small ‘direct-connected induction. motor. 

C. From the alternating-current side.. 

Method A. The converter is started as an ordinary shunt 
motor, receiving its current either from a shunt-wound gen- 
erator or from the direct-current bus-bar. A double-throw 
switch is usually provided so that the converter may receive 
current from either source. » Ordinarily, when started by cur- 
rent from a shunt-wound generator about two minutes are re- 
quired to start, synchronize, and connect a 1 500-kw: converter 
to the:bus-bar. .In emergency cases the machine is ‘started 
by..current from the direct-current bus-bar, and only a minute 
and a half are required to place it in service. The advantages 
of method ‘A’ are the smallness of first cost,-and ‘the rapidity 
of starting, since it requires but one starting set for all the con- 
verters, and the expense of maintenance is slight. “ 

The disadvantages of the method consist in a small. factor 
of reliability, and the possibility:of a heavy surging of current 
during the process. of synchronizing. | The latter disadvantage 
may, however, be obviated by the use of a simple modification 
of the switch-gear, devised by Mr. H. G,~Stott. This device 
ss now used in connection with the Interborough Rapid Transit 
Company’s equipments. It consists in closing a’ local storage- 
battery through tripping coil of the circuit-breaker ofthe starting 
bus-bar a fraction of a’ second before the converter oil-switch 
closes. -The converter then runs practically free*from the direct- - 
current side, and self-excited at the instant the oil-switch closes. 
he oil-switch motor and the tripping-coil of the circuit-breaker 
are in multiple with the battery when the control-switch :on 
the bench-board has been.closed. The oil-switch requires only 
0.4 of a second for complete connection, whereas the circuit- 
breaker operates almost instantly. ea rd 5 vee 

When the converter is rotating slightly under or above.its 


lee 
Sis 


mm nairare (— 


de Excise 
pee se OK Chic 
@yiiey4é & 


bow 


OOLCOMCG BCPLATAE LERPDEVS 


CHM oh MEKL 
Toure a ob 


_ 8a aoAnanaeia 


or im 


“COQUA dS KP WEr 


3a} 
Dust 
SBAAS” AATAAV NGI II 
BRAVVOD HRB DIGN ORS 


erat ant 


un> mer - Crepe Ta 
porrann aur eet 


Drvraaref = - " JAVA AATRAavved avatesA 3d 
wove 


to 
c 
a 
|< 
ie) 
| > 
i 
| > 
€ 
} 


© 
c 
a 
Qo 
3 
4 
5 
4 
) 


PRN TAS IAAYS MS S96 35257 
naar Aen - nani 


i 2A saa, 
7 rei ne 


Jana 34 a2 animRare 


Rarannaé 


RaTaN Tor 


= Se === 
AATAN TAY. ant é. Ss. REE 


opty Van aTe] 


aia 
é'xinoauornral_ 
any Vane 
GAs a 
vA ape 


‘comfepuecy 


WASLYNFFEMLS BHOAIDED tow iEwoe 
vic CoMvArbace peuer 


a 


Rionve eo “ehe 


raat" 


‘ joe 
Vv ( 


~ 
SIVA YRATTAS Ie 
KY 


2S PNSSES 


Ise Ae 


a 
> 
la 
L 
’ 
x/ 
u 
a/ 
s 
4 


a2.) 


a Brae 


CoebMe] Fuse - ese po 


1905.] ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. 1081 


synchronous speed, and the pointer of the synchronism indicator 
is moving slowly round the dial, if the local storage-battery 
switch be closed just as the pointer is approaching zero it is 
possible to connect the converter through the transformer to 
the alternating-current bus-bar without the operator being 
conscious of the fact except from the noise made when the 
oil-switch closes. A complete wiring diagram of a sub-station 
in which this method of starting converters is employed is 
shown in Fig. 1. 


Eres. 


Method B. With this method, by means of a small induct’on 
motor mounted upon the main shaft of the converter, the 
converter is brought up to synchronous speed (Fig. 2). The 
starting motor has fewer poles than the converter and there- 
fore a higher normal speed. A variation in speed may be ob- 
tained by placing a slight load upon the converter through the 
medium of a resistance shunted across the brushes, the con- 
verter being self-excited. Varying the resistance in series with 
the converter field-coils will also. cause a slight variation of 
load upon the induction motor. This is the means usually 


1082 ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. {[Dec. 15 


employed, the electrical connections for which are shown in 
Fig. 3. 

The main advantage of this method is the increased factor 
of reliability, since each converter has its individual starting 
motor. For mechanically starting the converter armature it 
is common practice to install a motor somewhat smaller than 


High-Tension Alternating-Current 


Step-down Transformers 


Shunt Transformer , 
bass J 
O O © O O O 
Three-Pole.Single-Throw 
Synchroscope io d 4 d Switches. 
wena 
Synchroscope Plug Receptacle 
Shunt Field S 
= Synchronous 
= Converter Starting Motor 
02000 Series Field 


Rheostat Bi 


Circuit Breaker Jl 


Single -Pole.Single Throw. 
Switches 


<= Direct Current Bus-bars 


Fic, 3: 


the motor used for driving the exciter generator in method 
“A.” As a result, a converter does not accelerate so quickly 
with this method as when started from the direct-current bus- 
bar. One of the disadvantages of this method is the fact 
that owing to the torque of the induction motor varying with 
the square of the impressed voltage, a very small drop of 
voltage will keep the motor from starting at all. For instance, 


1905.] ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. 1083 


if only 80 per cent. voltage were received, as is sometimes 
the case after a bad shutdown at the power house, or on the 
system, due to a variety of causes, it is highly improbable that 
the converter will start. Another bad feature is, in case of a 
burn-out on a starting motor the converter is crippled. Other 
disadvantages are the greater first cost and increased cost of 
maintenance. 

Method C. In this method, the ordinary connections for 
which are shown in Fig. 4, two sets of taps on the low-tension 
side of the step-down transformers are commonly used. These 
taps are connected to a two-way switch, the middle terminals 
of which are connected to the converter slip-rings. To prevent 
an excessive starting current, reactance is inserted between 
the converter slip-rings and the low-tension windings of the 
transformer. 

The converter is started as an induction motor by throwing 
the two-way switch so that the low-potential taps are con- 
nected. When the current has fallen sufficiently low—the con- 
verter speed increas:ing—the two-way switch is thrown in the 
opposite direction, connecting the converter directly to the 
normal-voltage taps. 

It is usual with this method to start converters of 300 kw. 
or less, from starting taps giving one-half normal voltage. 
Converters varying from 300 kw. to 1500 kw. are started by 
voltages of one-third and two-thirds the normal voltage. On 
the one-third voltage taps, with 25-cycle converters, the current 
at starting is generally a little less than that at full load. 

Owing to the large ratio of the field-turns to those of the 
armature, high electromotive forces are liable to be induced 
in the field windings when making use of this method of starting. 
It is common practice to provide a field-switch which dis- 
connects the windings at several points, as represented by 
Fig. 5. 

With this method no time is lost in adjusting the speed as 
the converter builds up into synchronism, but an objection to 
this method is the large current drawn at starting. This, 
however, is generally at a power-factor that yields a corre- 
spondingly inereased starting torque, and brings the converter 
up to synchronous speed in a shorter space of time. Another 
important advantage is the large factor of safety due to the 
entire absence of starting sets and starting motors. The ad- 
ditional field-switches consume, however, additional time for 


their manipulation. 


Cuse A ATR Panel for A AConnected. Transformer 
With Type F Form K Switch 


Ohms 


Main Bus-bare 


yf _ Potential 


We" Transformer 


[pees | 
ee | 
<= | 
Zak 
! 
! 
| 
| 
f Potential 
i] Transformer Bus-bar 
—9---———+ —-¢+ -H++-- --- 


Trip Coil 


Voltmeter_ Ammeter 
7% by. 
‘ ? 1 
‘4 
‘Ko 


iS 


= Resistance 


Current Transformer 


Synchronizing Bus-bare 


Receptacle at RY Synchronizing Plug 


jas To Next Transformae 


Fuses 


Reactive -Couils 


To Blower-Motor 
Synchronizing Connections( Shown Dotted) for Synchronous 
Converters,Started from Direct Current End, or by Induction Motor. 


Synchronous Converter 


Fic. 4. 


1905.] ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. {085 


The time ordinarily required to put converters in service 
when using this method is approximately as follows: 


SYOM Maite fas is nia crkoa otome Pein 45 seconds; 
MR OOOM wate waiter th kosie So icucterst ates 75 seconds; 
it SOO) Va. 5 Rees SO oo oes Oe Ome 120 seconds; 


It is possible to start these converters more quickly. The 
following times have been recorded, though they do not repre- 
sent the minimum: 


FINO Ley am o Bibra OsnO Oloien er urcwO Ro Iee ycecwas 16 seconds; 
LROOOT WE eke ee ome ge a Nee wah 40 seconds; 
He SOOM weer ede ee oes le eteas oes 65 seconds; 


This includes the time necessary to close the high-tension 
alternating-current switch of the converter transformer, the 
time of starting by means of air-brake lever-switches, and 
the time included in closing the field-switches, the direct- 
current circuit-breakers, and the line-switch. 

Considering the best starting conditions, the chief disadvan- 
tages of this method are the high potential generated in the field 
windings, the large starting current which may affect the regula- 
tion of the system, and the necessity fora changein design. The 
two former disadvantages are minimized by the arrangements 
previously mentioned. The latter disadvantage, however, necessi- 
tates the elimination of the circular dampers embracing the entire 
pole-piece. A converter constructed in this manner is liable to 
“hunt” on the slightest provocation, and ultimately trip 
itself out of the circuit. For instance, a short-circuit on some 
other part of the system, throwing a lagging current on the 
line, or some slight trouble in the governor of one of the 
engines supplying it, or anything which may happen to vary 
the angular velocity of the prime mover, is sufficient to start 
hunting in a synchronous converter. It may be noted, how- 
ever, that to the writer’s knowledge, converters of large capacity 
have been started from the alternating-current side, even when 
protected by the most efficient form of pole-dampers, but as the 
self-induction of the converter armature were small in these 
cases, the starting current was excessive. The -pole-dampers 
act as the closed secondary of a transformer, tending to neutralize 
the self-induction of the armature. When starting without 
pole-dampers, the starting current is approximately four 
times that used with methods “A” or “B” for the same 
capacity machine. 

It should be noted when cons. tering the time necessary to 


1086 ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. [Dec. 15 


start converters, that this time depends to a great extent upon 
the personal peculiarities of the operator. Moreover, the 
interval of starting for all methods has been so far reduced 
as to be adequate to the demands of railway operation. When 
an excessively steady overload comes upon a station, the operator 


Outside 11 1 


Fic. 5. 


” 


! Indicates Inside End of coil 


0 


Commutator End. 
pirection ° Rotatio, 


qozsoayy Of 


Four Pole Double Ti:raw Field 
I Reversing and Break up Switch 


qh { 
i aed 
; v 

19 


, 


! Be 


may easily trip a few of the section-breakers, while an ad- 
ditional machine is accelerating. The cars on the rail-sections 
fed by this sub-station will receive slight power from adjoining 
rail-sections as the 7 R drop will be excessive. The cars will 


Back Connections of 
Switch 


1905.] ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. 1087 


consequently slow down. When the power has been off the 
circuit for about 20 seconds and the speed of the converter is 
approaching synchronism, the circuit-breakers formerly opened 
may be closed, and the other section-breakers and switches 
opened. In this way trains may be kept moving during the 
time required to start, synchronize, and place on the bus-bars 
this additional machine. Passengers in the cars will hardly be 
conscious of what has occurred. 

The Protection of Converters. In the design and installation 
of circuit-breakers, the inductance of the system is usually 
relied on to prevent an excessive rise of current during the 
interval of time elapsing between a short-circuit and the open- 
ing of the circuit-breaker. This, however, is not sufficient 
protection; for an excessive short-circuit in the system, say 
during light load when only one machine is operating, will 
often cause a flash, accompanied by a shrill sound, around 
the commutator of the converter. At first one might think 
that a reactance-coil of low ohmic resistance could be placed 
in series with the breaker to minimize this effect; but a coil 
of constant reactance, resistance, or self-inductance, could not 
entirely meet the conditions, owing to the variability of the 
time-constant of the circuit. For instance, the self-inductance 
and resistance would vary with the distance from the sub- 
station in which the short-circuit occurred. Proper conditions, 
however, might be approximated and a coil designed which 
would partly protect the converter. 

Where sub-stations are equipped with storage-batteries 
which float on the system, there is a tendency for the storage- 
batteries to bear the brunt of the load, in case of short-circuit, 
permitting the converter circuit-breaker to open, followed 
shortly by the opening of the battery circuit-breaker. This, 
however, does not always prevent the converter from flashing 
over, owing to the fact that the velocity of chemical action 
at the electrodes of the battery, and the limitations of the 
velocity of migration of the ions of the electrolyte are insuffi- 
cient to prevent this action. Theoretically, the converter 
bus-bar voltage would drop, the battery carrying the peak 
of the load. As a matter of fact, the battery does not always 
perform this function. 

The Use of Oil-Switches when Synchronizing. Much has been 
written of the superiority of oil-switches over air-switches for 
opening and closing alternating-current circuits. This su- 


1088 ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. [Dec. 15 


periority is due to several causes; namely, the smothering action 
upon the arc by the oil, the rupturing of the circuit at the zero 
point of the current wave, the absence of leakage between 
contact points, and the small dimensions of the switch. Elec- 
trically operated oil-switches, however, have a few disadvantages 
which, while not vital, are worth mentioning. It is not the 
intention of the writer in mentioning these disadvantages to 
criticise the use of oil-switches over air-switches, as the former 
are far superior to the latter for heavy traction work. 

With an oil-switch, the time required to close the circuit 
varies with the voltage of the local storage-batteries. When 
this voltage falls below a certain point, the switch fails to 
operate. Such switches are guaranteed to operate over a con- 
siderable range of voltage, something like 125 volts to 70 volts, 
but several instances have been brought to the attention of 
the writer in which switches have not operated when the voltage 
has fallen below 95 volts. This characteristic is extremely 
objectionable; for it obliges the operator to re-synchronize, 
inasmuch as the general sub-station rule requires the starting 
over again of all auxiliary apparatus when an oil-switch fails 
to operate. Another objectionable feature is that sometimes 
oil-switches fail to lock when closed by the switch-motor, 
opening again and closing subsequently when the converter 
is perhaps as much as 60° out of synchronism. This perform- 
ance is characterized by operators as “‘ looping the loop.” 
One can readily imagine what happens when a converter that 
is considerably out of synchronism is closed upon the circuit, 
making what is termed ‘a bad shot.’’ This may do consid- 
erable damage. These troubles, however, are not of frequent 
occurrence and an operator who is familiar with the “‘ individu- 
ality ’’ of each switch soon learns to test it frequently, as well 
as to keep his storage-batteries well charged, and thus to 
minimize these disagreeable characteristics. 

The Regulation of Load. Railway operation does not call 
for as close a voltage regulation as is requisite for electric light- 
ing circuits. Economic operation, however, demands that con- 
verters be run on as constant a load as possible. The general 
use of storage-batteries for load-regulating in railway work 
seems to have been retarded owing to their objectionable 
features; for instance, their acid fumes, the necessity for 
special wiring, and their heavy depreciation. In addition 
their enormous first cost has placed them actually out of com- 


1905.] ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. 1089 


petition with synchronous converters and generating ap- 
paratus. The usefulness of storage-batteries in railway work 
is being more and more appreciated, as evidenced by their 
recent applications. An interesting development in connection 
with storage-batteries is a carbon regulator put to use during 
the last year. It consists of a variable carbon resistance 
which is used in connection with pilot-cells and an exciter, to 
vary the excitation of the field-coils of a booster. 

Referring to Fig. 6, H is a solenoid carrying the total gen- 
erator load, which acts on a soft-iron plunger suspended from 
the lever A-B of the carbon regulator. At the other end of 
the lever is a spring S, whose tension is adjustable. K and L 
are piles of carbon discs on the opposite sides of the fulcrum, 
CG, of the lever. The resistance of these piles is altered by slight 


Fetes) 


Fic. 6. 


variation in mechanical pressure, produced by slight fluctua- 
tions of current in the coil H.- The details of the electrical 
connections are self-explanatory. The battery booster is rep- 
resented by D; F being its field-coils. E is a small exciter, 
whose field-coils, M, are connected to the carbon regulator as 
shown. ' 

Consider the operation of this regulator, a perspective view 
of which is shown in Fig. 7. As the lever-arm is raised or 
lowered, the resistance increases in one arm and decreases in 
the other, causing wide variations in voltage across the exciter 
field-coils, the direction and intensity of the current in the 
coils varying accordingly. The action is somewhat analogous 
to that of Wheatstone’s bridge. 


1090 ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. [Dec. 15 


With the polarity of the booster changing and its field ex- 
citation varying in intensity, it is possible automatically to 
charge the main battery or to raise the battery voltage so as 
to carry part of the load of the bus-bar. By limiting the 
motion of the lever-arm it is possible to limit the load which 
the battery will carry under extreme conditions. With this 
system, close regulation of the load on the converter is obtained, 
as evidenced by the load-diagram, Fig. 8. This diagram was 


RIG es 


taken in the sub-station of the Lewiston & Auburn Electric 
Railway on October 7, 1905. 

The Best Arrangement of Switch-Gear. The most suitable 
arrangement of switch-gear is obviously that which best facili- 
tates the manipulation of sub-station apparatus with a minimum 
outlay. . 

There are two distinct arrangements of switch-gear, their 
adoption depending upon the capacity of the sub-station. 
With one arrangement, which is especially applicable to small 


TIME IN MINUTES 


100- 


a St Lone ea ee a 


Fre. 8. 


900 


sausdwv &$ 
= 


rie ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. (Dec. 15 


sub-stations, all of the switch-gear is located upon the main floor 
with the converters and with the transformers. The. other 
method, which is usually employed in stations of large capacity, 
consists in locating all the manually operated switches, except 
the negative switches, in a switchboard gallery. 

It is worth noting that in the first case, where all the switch- 
ing apparatus is located on the same floor with the trans- 
forming apparatus, as in Fig. 9, the station attendance is mini- 
mized; for the operator may also perform part of the duties of 
station foreman, and the converter tender may also perform 
the duties of janitor, thus dispensing with two men. But this 
system is not wholly advantageous. In the first place, it is 


Fic. 9 


difficult to keep the switch-gear clean; and in case of trouble 
the operator is too near the converters to act with unconcern. 
On the other hand, this system reduces the expense of wiring 
to a minimum, allows excellent ventilation, and results rea CY 
very compact station. 

Where a switchboard gallery is employed, as in Fig. 10, the 


operator is able at a glance to scan the whole station, a great 
advantage in case of trouble. He is relieved of the fear of 
personal injury; he is less hampered, and more comfortable, 
and can better perform his duties. But the expense of wiring 
is greater and the ventilation inferior. 


i905.] ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. 1093 


. It is becoming the standard practice to construct the switch- 
board in three distinct sections; namely, a controller-board 
from which the oil-switches are operated, as in Fig. 11; a.set 
of machine-panels; and a set of distributing-panels. The 
positive direct-current bus-bar forms a connecting link between 
the machine-panels and the distributing-panels. This system 
is sometimes modified in small stations. 

Various arrangements of circuit-breakers are employed; in. 
some cases they are mounted directly upon the switchboard- 
panels; in others distinct and separate compartments are used. 


pes 
E¥4 
a 
_ 
= 
— 
¥ 

i 24 
— 
Pd 
a 
a 
~ 
4 


Rie. 10 


The latter is preferable if the expense be justified; for it dis- 
concerts an operator to see the flash of an opening circuit- 
breaker. 

It has become quite common to separate the negative switches 
from the positive switches, the reasons for which are obvious. 

A feature worth mentioning is the arrangement of a circuit 
of lamps on the switchboard, and their feeding from the local 
battery circuit, so that in cases of failure of power at the power 
house ‘there may be sufficient illumination in the evenings for 


1094 ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. [Dec. 15 


the operator to manipulate the board. Upon the same circuit 
a complete set of signal-lamps should be installed to indicate 
whether switches and circuit-breakers are open or closed. 

The Operation of Continuous Reverse-Current Relays. Much 
criticism has been directed against continuous reverse-current 
relays, owing to their sensitiveness, the amount of adjustment 
they require, and their inability to perform their service at 
all times. While these criticisms are partly warranted, the 
fact remains that such relays are better than no protection 
at all. 


Fie. 11, 


An operator is supposed to try the relay controlling the 
machine circuit-breaker each time a converter is Cisconnected 
from the bus-bar. The field rheostat of the converter is cut 
in entirely, the converter dropping its load. The positive bus- 
bar voltage being slightly higher than the machine voltage, 
the reverse-current relay is energized, closing the local-battery 
circuit through the tripping-coil of the circuit-breaker, which 
should open instantly. 

Sometimes when .a converter is being placed on the bus-bar 
its voltage is slightly lower than that of the bus-bar and con- 


1905.] ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. 1095 


sequently it “backs out,’”’ the circuit-breaker being tripped 
by the action of the reverse-current relay. This feature is 
disagreeable but it tends to make the operator more careful. 

If reverse-current relays were not sensitive they would be 
practically worthless. Hence the features which appear to 
make the instrument objectionable are necessary elements of 
its successful application. 

The Adjustment of Load between Sub-stations that Feed the 
Same Circuit. Where all sub-stations are equipped with con- 
verters of the same capacity, it is desirable to have a definite 
tule governing the adjustment of power-factor of converters, 
in order that the rail load may automatically distribute itself 
to the proper sub-stations. Such a rule requires the adjustment 
of the power-factor of all converters so as to be unity at full 
load; but it fails where applied broadly, owing to the prac- 
tical impossibility of finding any two converters of the same 
capacity—although manufactured by the same company—with 
identical characteristics, and equal brush contact resistances. 
This rule is, however, usually observed with discretion by sub- 
station operators, and its observance yields good results. But 
if the rule be adhered to rigidly, the results are not altogether 
satisfactory. . 

For instance, assume two converters operating in multiple 
between a common alternating-current bus-bar and a common 
direct-current bus-bar. Assume also that the field resistances 
of the converters are adjusted for unity power-factor at full 
load. When the load upon both machines is greater than the 
combined full load capacity of each machine, one converter 
may draw more than half the load. Also when the total load 
is less than the combined normal load of both machines, the 
other converter may absorb the greater proportion of the 
load. This condition is aggravated by the resistance of the 
converter field-coils changing with the temperature, and also by 
the maintenance of the converter direct-current brushes. 

When an individual converter in a sub-station is disconnected 
from the direct-current bus-bar, it does not follow that the 
original station load will distribute itself over the remaining 
converters operating in multiple. Moreover, when an additional 
machine is connected to the circuit, the sub-station will draw 
more of the load from the adjoining sub-stations. The energy 
in this way surges back and forth with each operation. It is 
obvious, therefore, that it is practically impossible to frame 


1096 ASHE: SUB-STATION DESIGN. [Dec. 15 


a rule of this character which may be adhered to rigidly. If 
storage-batteries are employed as a method of regulation, 
keeping the individual load upon the converters practically 
constant, this rule would apply more generally; but where the 
energy fluctuation upon the converters varies from quarter 
load to 50 per cent. overload and sometimes 100 per cent. 
overload, it is obvious that the previous rule will not apply. 
The same reasoning holds good in the case of a sub-station. 
equipped with machines of different capacities. z 

Noiseless Operation of Converters. The operation of con- 
verters is usually accompanied by a shrill and disagreeable 
sound. It is not caused by the commutator, by the slip-rings, 
or by air passing through the crevices of the armature as is 
usually supposed, but is purely an electromagnetic phenomenon. 
It is probably the result of vibrations set up in the armature- 
core teeth by the varying electromagnetic conditions of the 
circuit. 

That this tone is caused by magnetic action may be illus- 
trated by the following simple experiment performed by the 
writer. A converter was driven by a separate belt-connected 
_shunt motor, and the speed was adjusted to 1 800 revolutions 
per minute. The converter was a four-pole machine, so that 
this corresponded to a frequency of 60 cycles. The converter 
field-coils were unexcited and the machine operated practically 
without noise. Upon exciting the field-coils, this shrill tone 
became audible, and then increased in intensity until upon 
over-excitation it became very loud. This would seem to 
indicate that the phenomenon is purely magnetic, and that it 
might be obviated or at least modified by proper design. The 
desirability of such modification must be evident in the case 
of sub-stations located in residential sections. 


A paper presented at the 202d Meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
necrs, New York, December 15. 1905. 


Copyright 1905. By A.I. E. E. 


SOME CONSIDERATIONS DETERMINING THE LOCA- 
TION OF ELECTRIC RAILWAY SUB-STATIONS. 


BY C. W. RICKER. 


No attempt will be made in this paper to define the con- 
ditions under which indirect distribution, through the medium 
of transformer sub-stations, is more economical than direct 
distribution from one or more generating stations containing 
prime movers. It is assumed that because of the size of the 
railways to be considered, and the local conditions determining 
the cost of generating power, the indirect method of distribu- 
tion has been selected as offering ‘the best economy in com- 
mercial operation; and an attempt will be made-‘to outline a 
general method for determining the number and location of 
sub-stations. po 

In many cases, perhaps the majority of cases, a general 
solution of this problem is quite impossible. Most of the large 
electric railway systems now in existence are the result of de- 
velopment not foreseen by their projectors; and there is little 

reason to believe that future systems will be very widely 
different in this respect, but probably they will continue to 
grow by extensions and consolidations depending upon the dis- 
tribution and development of local centres of industry and 
population. | 

For convenience of discussion, electric railways large enough 
to require indirect distribution may be classified as follows: 

1, Large simple networks, serving a single community. 

2. Long single lines or groups of such lines, connecting sep- 


arate communities or different parts of one very large community. 


1097 


1098 RICKER: LOCATION OF SUB-STATIONS. [Dec. 1& 


3. Complex networks, with connecting lines, serving a large 
city and its suburbs. 

4, Several networks with long connecting lines, serving 
separated communities. 

Railways of the last named class are usually consolidations 
of the local systems of neighboring cities or towns, and inter- 
urban lines, which frequently furnish power for lighting and 
general uses in the towns served. There are usually well-marked 
centres of load which, together with local business conditions, 
determine the position and equipment of sub-stations. 

Railways of class 3, those serving a large city and its suburbs, 
are also most often the result of the consolidation of separate 
lines and networks. While the large central network belongs 
in class 1, the outlying districts present a difficult problem to 
the engineer, for he must anticipate the direction, character, 
and sequence of growth so as to provide for them. This re- 
quires an intimate knowledge of local conditions, both indus- 
trial and social, and, in addition, he has need to be something 
of a prophet to foresee the changes which the building of new 
lines and the starting up of new works may produce. The 
problem is a local and particular one, and must depend mainly 
upon individual judgment for its solution. 

Classes 1 and 2 can be treated more generally. Take first 
the case in which a large network, or long line or group of lines, 
is contained wholly within a large city, so that a fairly uniform 
sehedule can be operated over the whole system, and the mean load 
upon each mile of road is approximately uniform throughout 
the system, at any given time. 

It is required to acjust the cost of losses in the primary 
distribution, the secondary distribution including the track, 
and in the sub-stations, the fixed charges upon each of these 
three divisions and the cost of sub-station attendance, so that 
their sum shall be a minimum, with due regard to the condi- 
tions of regulation and continuity of service. 

As the density of the load in such a system is very great, 
the unit of sub-station equipment may be made large enough, 
so that at the time of least load one unit per sub-station can 
be operated at or near its best efficiency. Hence the sub-sta- 
tion losses per kilowatt-hour may be considered constant. 

The aggregate capacity of the sub-stations will equal the 
capacity of the generating station plus the sub-station reserve 
capacity, if any is necessary, which will not exceed one unit per 


1905 ] RICKER: LOCATION OF SUB-STATIONS. 1099 


sub-station. The greater the distance between sub-stations, 
the larger the sub-station unit will be; hence the cost of sub- 
station apparatus will decrease as the number of sub-stations 
decreases, until the largest practicable unit is reached. The 
same is true of sub-station land and buildings. 

The cost of sub-station attendance will depend only upon 
the number of sub-stations, as the same number of attendants 
is required in a small as in a large sub-station, unless the cost 
of land makes it necessary to double-deck the sub-stations, 
which will cause a sharp rise in the cost of attendance when the 
number of units becomes greater than can be placed on one floor. 

Assuming that direct-current motors are to be used, the 
voltage of the secondary conductors will be determined by the 
conditions of standard practice; and the weight of the secondary 
conductors may be determined by Kelvin’s law, subject to the 
limiting condition that the maximum drop shall not be so great 
as to prevent the required acceleration of train units. With 
a fixed secondary voltage, the cost of the secondary conductors 
decreases rapidly as the number of sub-stations increases, 
much more rapidly than the distances between sub-stations 
while the energy losses in the secondary conductors decrease 
if the conductors are proportioned by Kelvin’s law, and remain 
constant at the limiting conditions of fixed maximum drop. 

In this case the primary distribution would be underground, 
and the primary voltage would be determined by the relative 
cost of copper and insulation, and should be as high as is con- 
sistent with safety; hence the losses in the primary conductors 
may be considered constant, and the total cost of the primary 
conductors will be independent of the number of sub-stations, 
but will depend upon the mean distance and the total energy 
to be transmitted, end may be determined by Kelvin’s law. 

To obtain the greatest reliability of service, each sub-station 
should be fed directly from the generating station by at least 
three cables. In the case of a great difference in the number 
of sub-stations considered, the total cost of cables and conduits 
would be somewhat greater with the larger number of sub- 
stations as more and smaller cables would be required. Other- 
wise the cost of the high-tension distribution, and the losses 
in it, may be considered constant. 

Neglecting those quantities that are constant, the fixed 
charges on sub-station land, buildings, and apparatus, and the 
cost of sub-station attendance increase as the number of sub- 


1100 RICKER: LOCATION OF SUB-STATIONS. [Dec. 15 


stations increases; the fixed charges on the secondary dis- 
tributions decrease and the losses in the secondary distribution 
decrease or remain constant. 

The various losses and charges upon which the solution of 
the problem depends may then be considered as constants or 
variables dependent directly upon the number of sub-stations 
and inversely upon the distance between sub-stations. These 
quantities may be reduced to a common base of annual kilowatt- 
hours; curves representing them may be drawn with respect 
+o the number of sub-stations as one coordinate, and a sum- 
mational curve may be drawn which, if the premises are rightly 
chosen, will indicate the number of sub-stations at which the 
sum. of the various charges is a minimum. 

In a far greater number of railways the load is not uniform 
throughout the system. This is true especially of the long 
interurban railways using a comparatively small number of 
heavy train units. The load at any given time is concentrated 
upon parts of the system, or travels from end to end of the long 
lines. In sucha system, the aggregate capacity of the sub-station 
apparatus in operation at any given time, is greater than that 
of the generators; hence the load-factor of the sub-stations is 
unfavorable, and in most cases the power-factor of the system 
is low. 

In a solution by the method outlined in this paper, several 
curves must be drawn in addition to those named: One 
showing the all-day losses in the sub-station apparatus, 
which will increase with the number of sub-stations; a sec- 
ond showing the losses in the primary transmission lines, which 
will also increase with the number of sub-stations, due to the 
greater length of lines and to the lower power-factor; and a 
third showing the fixed charges on the primary transmission 
lines. 

The last two curves are relatively much less important than 
the first. It is possible by compounding or automatic adjust- 
ment of fields, to keep the power-factor of the synchronous con- 
verters very near unity, making the transmission losses more nearly 
constant, and independent of the number of sub-stations. Insuch 
systems it is not usual, and seldom practicable, to use separate 
feeders from the generating station to each sub-station; and 
the primary distribution is usually by overhead lines, generally 
supported on poles which are used for other conductors as well. 
But with all the sub-stations along a single line of railway, ora 


1905.] RICKER: LOCATION OF SUB-STATIONS. 1101 


group of such lines connected to one transmission line, the ad- 
ditional cost of extending the same for a greater number. of 
sub-stations will usually be but a small part of the whole ex- 
pense. So, for at least a preliminary consideration of the 
problem, the last two curves may be omitted and the same 
quantities used that are considered in the solution for a road 
having a uniform distribution of load, with the addition of one 
containing the all-day losses of the sub-station apparatus. — 

In systems consisting of long lines with infrequent train 
service, the cost of attendance and all-day losses in converter 
sub-stations often become so great that the regulation in sec- 
ondary conductors economically proportioned for standard 
direct-current voltage will not permit the operation of the 
required schedule. The usual remedy is to set the sub-stations 
nearer together, though at the cost of operating economy. 

If other conditions still make the use of standard direct- 
current equipment desirable, it would seem that better economy 
could be obtained by lengthening the sub-station sections and 
using boosters, a plan that has been found profitable in the supply 
of such lines of less length from direct-current generating sta- 
tions. The fixed charges on, and losses in the boosters should 
then be included in the curves of sub-station apparatus. 

In the discussion of the method of treating the problem of 
sub-station location herein suggested, the usual type of converter 
sub-station, with direct current, secondary distribution has 
been kept in mind; but the method is no less applicable toa 
complete alternating-current system with static sub-stations, 
in which case the curves of sub-station losses, attendance, and 
fixed charges, all become flatter, while the higher trolley voltage 
“available permits a wider spacing of sub-stations without ex- 
ceeding the limiting conditions of regulation—all of which indi- 
‘cate a better efficiency of sub-station apparatus and secondary 
‘distribution, in roads of low and non-uniform load density. 

“To show this method of treatment more clearly, a simple 
problem will be discussed by means of it. A typical interurban 
railway consisting of one long line has been selected, because 
it suffices to exhibit the method without an excessive amount 
of labor. No attempt has been made to determine exactly the 
quantities used, but only to make them consistent, as in any 
problem they must be determined for the particular conditions 
encountered.” * 97+ =: af ot 
Assuming the following data, there is required the number 
of sub-stations to obtain the best operating economy. 


1102 RICKER: LOCATION OF SUB-STATIONS. [Dec. 15 


Distribution.........-. Alternating-current—direct-current. 
Length of line........ 60 miles. 
SErviCe: sai ae ne cade Hourly in both directions, 20 hours per day. 
Schedule speed....... 30 miles per hr. 
Stops per single trip..... 10 
Cars on the line...... 4 for 18 hours, 2 for 2 hours. 
Car-hours perday......-- 76 
Weight per car (approximate)..... 30 tons. 
Mean amperes per Car..... 135, 
Mean square amperes per Car,....-- 35 000 
Running current, multiple, per car. . . .200 amperes _ 
Starting current, multiple, percar....- 400 amperes. 
Tracks) uiwagia: cee oeeee single, SO rails. 
Track resistance per mile.....-.+++-- 0.0313 ohm. 
‘Sub-station power-factor......-+++++:> i, 
Resistance of copper per mil-mile..... 54.750 ohms. 
Weight of copper per mil-mile...-... 0.016 Ib. 
Price of copper perlb.....----+ +255 ee te 
Rate of interstices: intact eee “oan 
Annual fixed charges on sub-station | 
buildings and land........---:.:5: Bris 
Annual fixed charges on sub-station uf ea 
equipment .....--- 6 setts be: Sali is 15%. 
Cost of energy at sub-station alternating-current. 
bis=baneee Ce ee ee Te ee ROE 


The secondary copper is assumed continuous and of uniform 
section from end to end of the line. | 
The sub-stations are arranged so that the drop in the, sec- 
ondary copper and track is the same at points midway between 
sub-stations and at the ends of the line, the end-sections being 
three-fourths the length of the intermediate sections. 
Assuming this line fed through different numbers of sub- 
stations, it is desired to draw the following curves, with the 
number of sub-stations as abcissas and the total annual cost in 
dollars as ordinates. 
Annual charges on sub-station buildings and land 
Annual charges on sub-station equipments 
Annual charges on secondary conductors 
Annual cost of sub-station attendance 
Annual cost of sub-station losses 
Annual cost of losses in secondary conductors and track. 
The cost of and loss in the primary distribution are assumed 


1905.] RICKER: LOCATION OF SUB-STATIONS. 1103 


to be nearly enough constant, so that they may be neglected 
in a preliminary discussion; but if desired, curves representing 
them may be added to those enumerated. These quantities 
have been computed, and the curves drawn, for the number 
and arrangement of sub-stations shown in the following table. 

Sub-station Capacity——With the service outlined, the max- 
imum load of any sub-station will be that due to the starting 
of two cars at once, 800 amperes, lasting for a few seconds. 


40000 
Secondary | Copper by 


Kelvin’s Law 


“35000 | _ —t 
aes 
| 


5 Total 
ease 


30000 


fal 


| 
4 | 
an ia 


3 
a 


& 
—J 
é 


Annual Cost und Charges in Dollars 


| Sec.Copper Loss 


Sec.Copper 
| Annual Cost 


| 


: 


Sub-station 
Losses 

5000 ; Sub-station 
Equipment 

Sub-station 
Attendance 

Sub-station 

g Land and Buildings 


5 4 
Number of Sub-stations 


BIG 


With the largest number of sub-stations, the capacity of each 
has been made equal to one half of this, allowing a momentary » 
overload of 100% in case the whole load falls upon one sub- 
station. With the smallest number of sub-stations, the capacity 
of each has been made equal to the maximum load. In the 
intermediate arrangements, the capacity of each sub-station 
is graded between these limits in the proportion of the com- 
bined line and track resistance between adjacent sub-stations; 
this is very nearly proportional to the distance between the 


sub-stations. 


: 


RICKER: LOCATION OF SUB-STATIONS. [Dec. 15 


1104 


ee er 


OOF 92 
OZT ST 
08 8 
ogs ¢ 
O9F F 


ont OO N 


OLL £6 09S F 
OF0 9E 09¢ F 
GOP GE 09S F 
090 FE 09S F 
082 SE 09g ¥ 
*S[EJOL ‘ssor] taddog Arepuos0g 


jo 4ys09g yenuuy 


‘dOUd ONILINIT Ad AAddOO AUVGNOOAS— Il ATAVL 


‘yaddog A1epuosag 
sosivyg [enuuy 


“Uorye3g-Gng 


30 ON 


026 TE cr OL og. ¢ O88 & 069 8 006 & O83 SFT £8 926 L 0F0 T 00g 0¢¢ ‘OF G 
SEP O& coo 2 OOF 9 OZE F os? 9 026 ¢ OGF fe) L°G8 040 8 Tet T OOF LLE “FS € 
goo Ie OIr 9 0z6 9 0924 ¢ O8P ¢ 6% 9 09¢ eo't L118 cst 8 096 T 00€ Ste T'2T iy 
OF9 €& ocr ¢ 096 2 00c 2 oss ¥ 08d 2 002 sot £62 Oly 8 OOF I 00€ 186 €°sT ¢ 
OLL SE oes F 0&2 8 OF9 8 O8F ¥ ose 8 OF8 19°F 9° LL 00g 8 o9s Tt 0&6 096 6°OL 9 

“sso’T *sasso’] -pusiyy aoddog | s},dmbqy ayeysyq | seq-sng “} ‘deg “deg 

saddoy | *eig-qng | “eIGg-qng | 4,puccag | “FIS-quS Teed quero ‘ya ‘Iu-My | [2IOL “ul0g ‘deg “4sIq "ON 
*‘sTRIOL A puos2sg -palqd eq ynduy 

“Ty-MT Tv TROL ; 
yo ysog [enuuy uo sasieyg [enuuy 4so9 Apreq *SuUOT}EIG-qug 


ee ee ee SO 


‘MV S.NIATAM AD UAddOD AUVAGNOOAS I aTaVL 


1¢05.] RICKER: LOCATION OF SUB-STATIONS. 1105 

Sub-station Losses and Secondary Copp2r.—The mean all-day 
efficiency of the sub-stations of each arrangement was obtained 
by dividing the total output of the sub-stations by the total 
input. The total output was assumed constant at 6 669 kw-hr. 
The efficiency of each sub-station at the mean load of one car 
and at the mean load of two cars was computed from typical 


= plas dv 


Secondary| Copper by 
Limiting Drop Iz 
a 


Oy ar 


oe iE 


Wee re I 
—— 
oe 
=. joy ae ae Sub. 
station Loss 
Sa ese Sub-station . 
Copper Loss 


— = 
Py ewe sittin 
ani ee 
aie sa | Sub.station 
a a ee =< Attendance 


Annual Cost and Changes in Dollars 


PEELE 
| 
a 


0 are es ese = 
6 6 3 2 ‘Sub.station 
Numer of Sub-stations Land and Buildings 
Fie. 2 


efficiency curves of synchronou 


allowing 6% for losses when running idle. 
rates of input and the total input were computed. From the 
the cost of energy at the direct-current bus- 
ondary 


all-day efficiency the 
bar was computed, for use in proportioning the sec 


conductors by Kelvin’s law. 
The exact computation of the losses in the secondary con 


s converters and transformers, 
From these the mean 


1106 RICKER: LOCATION OF SUB-STATIONS. [Dec. 15 
ductors is very laborious; to approximate these losses the 
load was assumed to be fixed at its mean distance from the 
sub-station, one-quarter section, and the resistance of the sec- 
ondary copper multiplied by the car-hours per section,. and 
the mean square current per Car. The annual cost of the 
secondary copper was taken at 6% to cover interest and cost 
of reclaiming. The secondary copper was proportioned by 
Kelvin’s law, for each arrangement of sub-stations as follows: 
35000 Xcar-hr.per year Xres. per mile copper X length section X cost kw-hr. 


4 000 


wet. mil-mile X res. mil-mile X length section X15 x 6 
Res. per mile copper X 10 000 


0.95 
Res. per mile copper ee ee 
\/car-hr. per year X cost kw-hr. 


The. annual loss in the secondary conductors and tracks was 
computed in the same way. The annual loss in the sub-station 
apparatus is the difference between the total input and out- 
put. In computing the cost of these losses the cost of 
power at the sub-station alternating-current bus-bar should be 
used. 

Cost of Sub-stations—The cost of sub-station buildings and 
land was taken at $2000 each. Switchboards and wiring 
were estimated at $2500 per sub-station The nearest com- 
mercial sizes of synchronous converters and transformers were 
used in estimating the cost of sub-station equipments, at 
prices varying from $21 per kw. for 500 kw. to $38 per kw. 
for 250 kw. 

Table I. and Fig. I. show the results of this computation, 
with a minimum operating expense at three sub-stations, 
spaced 24 miles apart and secondary copper, 746 000 cir. mils., 
which is evidently impossible to operate without the use of 
boosters in the sub-stations. 

Table II. and Fig. II. show the results of recomputing the 
same problem with the secondary copper proportioned to per- 
mit a maximum drop of 300 volts in line and track, about the 
worst condition in which operation is practicable. 

It is apparent, then, that economy of operation is usually 
sacrificed to regulation. 


= 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 1107 


Discussion oN ‘‘ THE RELATION OF RAILWAY SUB-STATION 
DESIGN TO ITS OPERATION,’ AND ‘ SOME CONSIDERATIONS 
DETERMINING THE .LOCATION OF ELECTRIC RAILWAY SUB- 
Stations,” AT NEw Yorxk, DECEMBER 15, 1905. 


H. A. Lardner: Among the disadvantages of the method 
of starting synchronous converters from the direct-current 
side not noted by Mr. Ashe may be included the fact that direct 
current is not always available. For instance, the conyerter 
sub-stations of the majority of interurban railways are shut 
down at night; and unless storage-batteries. are included in 
their equipment direct current is not ayailable for starting 
the converters in the morning. Therefore, it becomes neces- 
sary to include another method of starting them. 

The author suggests that one disadvantage of the method of 
starting from the direct-current side is the small factor of 
reliability; but I. think this difficulty can practically, be ob- 
viated by the installation of two resistance boxes so connected 
that either one may be utilized. They would be in circuit 
such a short time that they could be comparatively small and 
inexpensive, and would constitute about the only special ap- 
paratus necessary for utilizing this method. 

The starting of converters on the direct-current side strongly 
appeals to me because of its certainty of action; and with the 
addition of Mr. Stott’s method of synchronizing referred to, it 
is applicable in a great many cases, I personally know of 
many installations among the smaller sub-stations where satis- 
factory results are obtained from direct-current starting, even 
without the modification of the switch-gear referred to. 

I should like to know why the direct current for operating 
the circuit-breaker in Mr. Stott’s device can not be taken from 
the bus-bars, or from the direct-current side of other operating 
converters, as well as from a storage-battery. Ttugseenisea 
unique and a useful method; and that it would be applicable 
to even the smallest stations if it does not require the intro- 
duction of an auxiliary storage-battery. It must be remem- 
bered that the small sub-stations of the majority of inter- 
urban railroads do not contain such desirable, but rather 
expensive, pieces of apparatus as motor-operated oil-switches 
and other devices requiring an auxiliary storage-battery. 

In the discussion which the author gives of the method of 
starting converters by means of a small induction motor mounted 
upon the converter shaft, he does not call attention to the 
fact that many converters, at least of the smaller sizes, do not 
include such convenient methods of assisting the synchronizing 
of the machines as a resistance across the brushes or in series 
with the field coils. 

A more common method of synchronizing by means of the 
small induction motor is to allow it to run the converter above 
synchronous speed, and then open the motor switch and catch 


1108 RAILWAY SUB-STATIONS. [Dec. 15 


the converter as the speed falls past the point of synchronism. 
I am not prepared to say that the refinement of a resistance 
in connection with this method is an expense that is prohib- 
itive; but it is not usuaily found in stations with converters 
of under 500 kw. I should like to ask whether the author 
has made any tests showing the time required to start con- 
verters by this method? 

While breakdowns of the starting motors have undoubtedly 
been rare, it seems a rather bad feature of this system that 
trouble with the starting motor, or with any of its switches 
and connections, is sufficient to cripple the converter itself 
until these are corrected. The speaker feels, therefore, that at 
least one other method should be provided if the method of 
starting by a motor is used. 

The method of starting converters from the alternating- 
current side, as described by method C, has, in the speaker's 
opinion, many advantages; among them are great simplicity 
and the omission of special apparatus. The introduction of 
taps running from the middle points of the transformers is 
a slight modification, and the double-throw switch required 
is also. Furthermore the division of the fields is not seriously 
objectionable. : 

The author presents, as the chief disadvantage to this method, 
the necessity of eliminating dampers and other devices, intro- 
duced for the correction of hunting. It would be interesting 
to hear from designers of this class of apparatus on this sub- 
ject. Personally I have observed many installations in which 
the converters were of 500 kw. and under, operating at 25 
cycles, where this method of starting was satisfactorily used, 
and where hunting practically did not occur. For many 
cases, especially where the size of the converter is 500 kw. 
and under, I am rather in favor of the use of method A and 
method C—method C to be used principally for starting the sub- 
station apparatus in the morning when direct current is not 
available; and method A for the addition of other units at any 
time during the period of operation. 

The disadvantage of method C, in that it draws a large 
starting current from the line is not serious under the above 
conditions; and even though it becomes necessary to employ 
this method in an emergency when many cars are depending 
on the sub-station, it is always possible to trip feeder circuits 
and otherwise lighten the load on the sub-station until the 
converter can be started. As shown by the author, the time 
required under this method is very short, especially with the 
smaller sizes of machines. 

Referring to the paper by Mr. C. W. Ricker, I note his sug- 
gestion that in the case of interurban railway sub-stations 
he believes it possible to secure better economy by lengthening 
the sub-station sections and using boosters. I question whether 
this method will be practicable in many cases. The entire 


1905.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 1109 


capacity of a sub-station may momentarily be required for 
starting cars at the extreme ends of the section fed thereby; 
and schecules frequently work out in exactly this way. If it 
were attcmpted to install boosters to handle the loads at the 
extreme ends of the section they would have to be of con- 
siderable size, especially as to commutator capacity even 
though under severe load for only short periods. I think that 
after taking into consideration the added cost of these machines, 
and of their switching apparatus, their maintenance, and the 
space required, their use would not be considered desirable, 
nor justified by other savings made in first cost and in opera- 
tion. 

Referring again to the last paragraph of Mr. Ricker’s paper, 
in which he says that in alternating-current systems with 
static sub-stations, the trolley voltage available permits a 
wider spacing of sub-stations, I would call attention to the fact 
that while this is undoubtedly true, it must be remembered 
that owing to the characteristics of the alternating current, the 
usual saving by increase of pressure cannot be applied, owing 
to the fact that the drop in both rail and overhead conductor 
due to the alternating current is, per ampere, considerably in 
excess of the drop for direct current. 

_W./I. Slichter: In connection with that part of Mr. Ashe’s 
paper describing a method of starting synchronous converters 
by means of an auxiliary induction motor and devices for 
regulating its speed, it is interesting to note that there is another 
method of indirect starting by the use of the single-phase 
commutator motor. The alternating electromotive force of a 
converter is approximately the voltage that is suitable for 
the single-phase commutator motor, and by putting a reactance 
in series with such a-motor an easy means can be obtained 
for regulating the voltage and the speed. By this method it 
would be easy to secure the proper speed for throwing the 
converter into synchronism. ‘ : 

" John B. Taylor: .I was somewhat misled by the title of Mr. 
Ashe’s paper, which I think should be “ The Relation of Con- 
verter Sub-station Equipment to its Operation.”’ Since the 
matter of alternating-current starting of converters has been 
brought into such prominence, regret that I did not bring to 
the meeting some oscillograph records, showing the induced 
voltage in the field, the manner in which the current falls 
with increasing speed, and various other factors involved ih 
starting synchronous converters from the alternating-current 
end. , 

Under method C, Mr. Ashe states, ‘‘ To prevent an excessive 
starting current, reactance is inserted between the converter 
slip rings and the low-tension windings of transformer.’’ There 
seems to be a general impression that the purpose of the re- 
active coil is to permit starting from the alternating-current 
side. How this impression came about I do not know, but 


1110 RAILWAY SUB-STATIONS. (Dec. 15 


as a matter of fact the reactive coil is used for several reasons: 
to permit automatic compounding, to compensate partly or 
wholly for drop in the transmission line, transformer, and in 
the converter itself; it also allows the converter to run under 
variable load with comparatively slight changes in power- 
factor, and makes it almost unnecessary for a station attendant 
to change the adjustment of field rheostat; it likewise readily 
permits the desired division of load between converters. 

All such factors as brush resistance and field’ resistance 
become of small importance when reactive coils are used, as 
there is no more difficulty in securing adjustment of load be- 
tween converters than with any class of direct-current ma- 
chinery. 

Reactive coils permit the running in parallel of machines of 
different manufacture, or of different rating of the same manu- 
facture. For example, I call to mind a case where the secondary 
voltage on one bank of transformers in a sub-station is 370 
volts, and on another bank in the same sub-station the pressure 
is 380 volts, and there is no difficulty in dividing the load 
between two converters connected respectively to each of the 
two banks of transformers. 

Evidently a mistake has been made in copying the diagram 
of connections which Mr. Ashe has shown on the blackboard. 
This diagram is evidently intended to show the diametrical 
connection of a six-phase converter with transformer taps 
and switches arranged to start the machine from the alter- 
nating-current end, the mistake in connections being such as 
to apply the full secondary voltage of the transformer to ad- 
jacent collector rings instead of to collector rings which connect 
to points on the armature windings diametrically opposed to 
each other. Consideration of a vector diagram will make 
it evident that if connected in this manner the converter will 
run at double voltage. 

Mr. Ashe states that the current required for starting a 
25-cycle converter is a little less than current at full load. 
For the converters which are started from. taps giving’ one- 
third of the full secondary voltage, possibly two-thirds or three- 
fourths of full-load current would be a fairer value. The 
standard practice, -when “starting converters from the alter- 
nating-current side is, for the larger machines, to apply to the 
collector rings, first, one-third of the secondary voltage, and, 
after the machine has reached synchronous speed and the field 
excited, to transfer to taps giving two thirds of full secondary 
voltage, and finally transfer again to the main leads of the 
secondary winding of transformer. The tap giving one third 
of full voltage is used in all cases, so as to make the practice 
uniform and ensure the starting of the converter under all 
conditions. This starting should not fail in case the alter- 
nating current for any reason drops to 80 or 90% of the normal 
value. Asa matter of fact, most of the General Electric Com- 


1905.) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 1414 


pany’s converters will start at one-fourth voltage, and some 
of them, if the armature happens to stand in a favorable posi- 
tion, will start at as low as 17 or 18% of full voltage. 

When converters are started from transformer taps the 
effect of the compensator action should be noted. The cur- 
rent in the high-tension line falls very rapidly as we reduce the 
voltage applied to the converter collector rings; that is, the 
current in the high-tension line when starting a converter 
from one-fourth voltage taps compared with the current in 
the line when starting from one-third voltage taps would be 
in the ratio of 9 to 16, or but little more than one-half as much 
on the one-fourth voltage tap as on the one-third voltage tap. 

I might mention one test I have in mind, made with a 1 000-kw. 
converter at Buffalo, which was supplied with power from 
Niagara Falls. Starting this machine at one-third voltage 
disturbed the high-tension voltage of the system at the sub- 
station less than two per cent. 

The matter of disturbance in voltage, due to starting con- 
verters from the alternating-current side may, I think, be 
summed up as follows: in a railway system the greatest dis- 
turbance that can occur will not be sufficient to cause trouble; 
in a lighting system, in which synchronous converters are also 
used for feeding the lighting circuits, the disturbance in voltage 
becomes an important factor. There are comparatively few 
such systems in this country, and as a rule, they are so large 
and have so many converters in service that the tendency 
to disturb the voltage is thereby reduced to a minimum. On 
systems of this character I doubt if it would be a serious matter 
to start the converters from the alternating-current side. 
As stated above, where it is desired to reduce the starting 
current to the lowest possible value, a tap giving less than 
one-third voltage might be employed. | 

The breakdown of field winding of converters is a matter 
that has been given more prominence by Mr. Ashe than it 
deserves. While it is true that some fields have broken down, 
due to the induced voltage when starting from the alternating- 
current end, in most of these cases the field wiring was not 
in accordance with present practice. In some cases a two- 
pole field breakup switch was installed, and the -wiring ar- 
ranged so that one terminal of the ficld winding was permanently 
connected to ground, which arrangement caused. an increase 
in potential strain at the other end of this section of the winding. 
The present arrangement of wiring breaks up the field winding 
into three sections, and both terminals of each section are 
isolated when the field breakup switch is opened. The in- 
duced voltage in the field winding is not over 2000 volts to 
each group, and there is no more reason why this winding 
should break down on a synchronous converter than on an 
engine-driven railway generator, which must have its field 
constructed to withstand the heavy “ kicks” due to opening 


the field circuit. 


7 


1112 - RAILWAY SUB-STATIONS. [Decs1559 


The times required for putting converters in service, as 
given by Mr. Ashe, are quite fair for the alternating-current 
method of starting. The time, 16 seconds for a 300-kw. ma- 
chine, however, I should say is rather small. It is possible 
to make this record with a machine of this size if started from 
half-voltage taps with no reactive coil in circuit, in which 
case it would take about 8 seconds for the machine to reach 
full speed; but it is my impression that the 300-kw. machine 
started at half voltage with a reactive coil in circuit—the 
standard connection for 25-cycle converter of this capacity 


would take more than 16 seconds to attain full speed, and a. 


few seconds more will be required for the manipulation of 
switches to make the transfer to full voltage. 

As far as the use of bridges on the pole pieces is concerned, 
there are a number of synchronous converters in service having 
bridges, or damping coils, which start satisfactorily from the 
alternating-current end, and there is no practical reason for 
leaving off these bridges to accommodate this method of start- 
ing. There are also in use numerous converters without these 
bridges, and Mr. Ashe’s statement that such machines are liable 
to hunt is not borne out in practice. The previous speaker, 
Mr. Lardner, I believe corroborates my statement in this 
respect. 

The drawing of a dividing line between machines which 
should start at one-half voltage and those which should start 
at one-third voltage is more or less arbitrary. As a matter of 
fact, the General Electric Company have a definite dividing 
line, not exactly that indicated by Mr. Ashe, which is drawn, 
however, more for the sake of uniformity in practice than for 
any other reason. ; 

H. G. Stott: One important point to which no reference has 
been made in either paper presented to-night, is that in oper- 
ating synchronous converters we are limited to a maximum 
drop of 12% between the power house and the converter. If 
we assume that the line is fairly well loaded, giving a maximum 
drop under normal conditions of 8 to 10%, then a sudden 
additional drop of, say, 5%, due to a momentary overload or 
short circuit, will cause the converter to flash over. This, then, 
becomes one of the limiting conditions in the location of sub- 
stations. 

E. M. Hewlett: Mr. Ashe refers to the possibility of the motor- 
operated switch operating accidentally; also of the care that 
attendants give to the switch. I think that if the necessity 
of taking care of switches was appreciated more by operating 
men, occasion for complaint would be eliminated. It is my 
experience that as operators become familiar with these switches, 
complaint ceases. 

In order, however, fully to provide against accident, switches 
are now constructed with a positive stop, and a trip-coil which 
automatically moves the stop out of the way when it is desired 
to operate the switch. 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. TAL3 


D. B. Rushmore: The form of damping device mentioned in 
the paper by Mr. Ashe is used because of its efficient operation 
and not because this form is necessary; a converter starts as 
well with damping devices as without them. The use of such 
devices may, however, slightly change the power-factor at 
starting. : 

Reactive coils may be adjusted for an even division of load 
at any one output, and unequal division of load should be smiall 
at other outputs. 

It is understood that most of the large converters in New 
York City are operating with the series coils cut out. In small 
-sub-stations where much drop in the line exists, compound coils 
are universally used. 

The advisability of installing power-factor indicators in small 
stations is open to question; experience having shown that 
use is seldom made of them. 

At present one seldom hears of trouble from the heating 
of converters; and with the use of steam turbines instead of 
reciprocating engines this evil should entirely disappear. It is 
now well understood that while variation in angular velocity 
may enter as a disturbing factor. it has but little effect upon 
the parallel operation of alternators. 

Mr. Ricker’s paper illustrates the fact that regulation is 
more important than other commercial consideration in de- 
termining the allowable voltage drop in power transmissions. 

R. B. Owens: The main consideration in connection with 
the location of electric railway sub-stations, namely, voltage, 
seems to me to have been omitted from Mr. Ricker’s paper. 

We have to-day two distinctly different systems of operating 
railways for heavy traffic; the alternating-current system, and 
the direct-current system with sub-stations, the latter system 
using alternating-current generators and synchronous con- 
verters operating at, say, 650 volts. 

Without going into the question as to whether direct-current 
generators of large size can be successfully designed for a pres- 
sure of 1000 to 2 000 volts, I believe it is true that makers are 
prepared to furnish converters of 1000 volts, and perhaps 
more, and also motors, at least of the bi-polar type, that will 
operate successfully at such voltages. If this is true, it mate- 
rially affects the whole question of sub-station location, and 
also materially narrows the field which some have supposed 
belonged to the alternating current. 

The relative merits of high-voltage converters and high-volt- 
age motors as compared with single-phase-current systems for 
heavy traction will bear discussion. The question seems to 
be: how far can the direct-current voltage be carried; can 
converters be made that will operate successfully at 1 000 to 
2000 volts; can motors be made that will operate at such 
voltages? The whole nature of the problem is changed; instead 
of sub-stations with a load-factor of a few per cent. it may be 


1114 RAILWAY SUB-STATIONS. [Dec. 15 


possible to get load-factors of a decert percentage. It is of 
great interest to hear from some of the designers as to whether 
such apparatus can be afforded. I think it is a question of 
voltage. The question lies in the design of direct current 
machinery, in large units, to operate successfully under con- 
ditions met in traction work at high voltages. 

William McClellan: It is a question if this method offers 
much help in connection with most of the cases of sub-station 
location, It has always seemed necessary to divide a line 
into load sections rather than distance sections, and conse- 
quently it is difficult to arrange any general method of solution. 
As a rule, sub-stations on any one system are alike only in 
general arrangement, but differ in size of apparatus and cost 
of construction, which still further operates to prevent the 
use of a general rule. 

A factor which is sometimes neglected in considering the 
location of sub-stations, is the possibility of congestion at cer- 
tain points. The problem is rendered all the more difficult 
when these are ordinarily points of light load. This con- 
dition is of frequent occurrence in steam railroad work, 
but is easily overcome by concentrating locomotives at the 
point for the time being, and thus relieving the congestion. 
In heavy electric railroading this finally becomes a question 
of feeders, for the portable sub-station may be used in the 
same way as the extra locomotives, if the high-tension feeders 
are sufficient to transmit the power. It is obvious that no 
general method can cover this point, which is of increasing 
importance in heavier railroading. 

C. P. Steinmetz: The papers presented deal fully with one 
phase of the complicated problem of electric railroading. They 
deal with the electric railway sub-station, so far as it is a con- 
verter sub-station, and converter sub-stations seem destined to 
remain for a long time to come. It is proper, therefore, that 
a large part of the paper should be devoted to the synchron- 
ous converter. 

Railway converter sub-stations can be divided into two 
typical classes: first, the sub-stations in a large, high-power 
distribution system, as in those of the Manhattan, the Inter- 
borough, and the New York City Railway systems, all in New 
York City; and secondly, the sub-stations of systems of com- 
paratively low power and extended distribution, as in inter- 
urban systems. 

In systems of the first class the loss of voltage between gen- 
erating station and sub-station, and between sub-stations, is 
very small. The sub-stations contain at all times a large 
number of high-power units in operation, which run practically 
at steady full load; so that individual momentary variations 
of load are not perceptible in the sub-station to any great 
extent; the daily changes of load are taken care of by varying 
the number of converters in use. In sub-stations of this class 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 1115 


the possible variation of voltage due to line drop is insignificant; 
therefore automatic control of voltage for variations of load on 
the converters is not necessary, and means for controlling the 
voltage, such:as series fields on the converters for compounding, 
and reactive coils are not only not needed, but also areundesirable, 
because, if present, they are a source of possible danger of racing 
in case the direct-current system feeds back into the sub- 
station; this danger, due to the small resistance between sub- 
stations, is greater than it is in the case of sub-stations of the 
second class, that is, sub-stations of interurban systems. : 

In interurban systems, sub-stations of moderate power, 
with two or three converter units of, say, 500-kw. or less, are 
fed from long-distance high-potential transmission lines, with 
considerable drop of voltage in the transmission lines and 
comparatively high resistance between the sub-stations. In 
these systems the variation of load would be so large as to 
make it impracticable to use for any ordinary methods of 
voltage control; therefore the so-called methods of phase-con- 
trol, by means of powerful series fields and reactive coils, be- 
comes necessary. 

In the operation of a converter sub-station, the most im- 
portant factor is starting the converters. In early days, con- 
verters were started from the alternating-current side by 
throwing full voltage on a machine and letting it run up to syn- 
chronism as a synchronous motor. To-day a different method 
is employed. Starting from the alternating-current side 
causes the severest disturbance in the system, especially when . 
starting under full load. 

At present, converters are started either by means of a start- 
ing induction motor, or from the direct-current side or syn- 
chronism. 

The method of starting may be subdivided, then, into two 
general methods: those that require synchronism, and those 
that do not require synchronism. There may be some differ- 
ence in the two methods as to the time required to start; the 
second method may take a little longer time, to synchronize 
but in.either case the maximum time is sufficiently short for 
all practical purposes. - | 

The method of starting or synchronism when started from 
the direct-current side, is the least ‘severe on the system. , By 
this method, moreover,.a converter can be put into the system 
without any trace of disturbance. The method was introduced 
to a large extent to avoid shock on the system, but recently 
the tendency has been strongly away from that; and at least 
in interurban. systems it may almost be said that the method 
of starting by synchronism has failed. It has failed because \ 
employed under just those conditions where the utmost rapidity 
of starting is essential. If there is trouble in the system, such 
as heavy overloads, or if the direct-current voltage cannot be 
held up and begins to disappears altogether, and the voltage on 


1116 RAILWAY SUB-STATIONS. [Dec. 15 


the alternating-current side of the system fluctuates up and 
down, synchronizing cannot be undertaken with safety, be- 
cause even after the converter is started, its speed, as obtained 
from the starting motor, rapidly changes up and down, and 
may cause the alternating frequency to vary, the station at- 
tendant watching the phase-lamp, sees it flicker rapidly, then 
slowly, and then rapidly again, without ever becoming steady, 
however, and finally throws the switch; and all this occuts 1n 
those cases where the greatest rapidity of starting is essential. 

Some cisastrous experiences in this direction were had on the 
suburban line running from Schenectady to Albany, which 
made it necessary to abandon direct-current starting and adopt 
alternating-current starting. The converter sub-station was 
in use, but due to the rapid growth of local traffic, the load 
was heavier than had been expected, and the voltage control 
on the alternating supply system was possibly not so good as 
had been anticipated; consequently when the attempt was 
made to synchronize converters, it was almost impossible, 
with average, or even more than average, skill, to get them in 
step without throwing them in when out of phase with different 
speeds and disabling the whole sub-station. These are the 
main reasons for returning to the alternating-current starting. 

It is true that a specially skilled operator might be able to 
get the converter in circuit in this manner without throwing 
the whole sub-station out of service by throwing the switch, 
not at equality of frequency, but when the two frequencies 
are approaching each other. It is practically impossible to 
succeed by attempting to close the switch while the frequencies 
are together, because they cross each other so rapidly that 
there is danger of so doing just after the frequencies coincide 
and while they are again going apart. And that is the most 
dangerous point at which to connect the converter in circuit; 
it fails to catch short-circuits and throws the other converters 
on the system out of service when they are most needed. 

In general, the proper moment of synchronism is not when 
the machines are in step and in synchronism, but just a moment 
before they are in synchronism. For that reason direct-current 
starting is of exceptionable usefulness in interurban systems. 

In large metropolitan sub-stations the difficulty is largely 
reduced, because the voltage has steadied on the alternating- - 
current side as well as on the direct-current side, and synchron- 
ism can be effected. Nevertheless, if the switch 1s thrown 
when the converter is out of synchronism the result is much 
more disastrous, because there is almost no resistance between 
the generating station and the sub-station, or between sub- 
stations; and the electromagnetic momentum of the whole 
system feeds back into the converter, thus reversing the con- 
verter at full velocity. This result may occasionally happen even 
when the machine is manipulated by the most skilful operator. 
Assuming the efficiency of the operator as very high, that his 


1905.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. iLike 


liability to error is only one-tenth of one per cent. and that 
he makes a mistake only once in 10 000 times, then in a city 
like New York, where more than 100 converters of 1 000 kw. 
or more have to be thrown into the system daily, three times 
a year he would throw some big converter in wrong, out of 
step, and tear down the station, with the usual disastrous 
results. On this showing it is preferable to start from the 
alternating side by means of low voltage. 

At least two compromise arrangements, methods of so con- 
necting a converter in circuit as to reduce the disturbance on 
the system, have been developed. In one method the converter 
is started from the direct-current side and brought up approx- 
imately to synchronous speed, possibly a little above synchron- 
ism; it is then disconnected absolutely, from the direct-current 
side and the alternating-current switch immediately closed. 
The converter drops in step almost instantly, with hardly an 
appreciable disturbance on the system. This method is not 
quite so simple as starting from the alternating-current side 
from rest; but it is sufficiently simple for a large system, where 
the risk is considerable. 

Referring to the employment of anti-hunting devices with 
alternating-current starting: one of the most effective devices 
of this character is a squirrel-cage induction-motor winding. 
which is extensively used in synchronous motors intended for 
very severe conditions, such as operating heavy fluctuating 
loads at the end of a long transmission line in which there are 
resistance losses. It is obvious that a squirrel-cage winding 
is of great advantage in starting converters. 

Two other anti-hunting devices are short circuits consisting 
of heavy closed copper bands around the field poles, or between 
‘them, both of which devices operate on the reduction of the 
magnetic flux; when hunting, the magnetic flux shoots across 
the field pole, and cuts through the copper bands in which a 
heavy short-circuit current is set up by the electromotive force 
produced thereby. 

The short circuit between the field poles obviously cannot 
interfere with starting, but are motors and start up giving a 
quarter phase winding to the normal pole and gives effect to 
the quarter-phase motors secondary as a field. 

The other arrangement of short-circuiting around the field 
poles is used to a considerable extent in synchronous motors; 
and I know it gives no trouble. I have not used it in connection 
with converters, but see no reason why it would not prove 
satisfactory in that connection. 

In regard to the noise made by converters, I have always 
observed that comparatively they are as noiseless as any other 
machines. In engines and other apparatus some part will 
always be noisy; and no satisfactory explanation — of the 
cause can be given. All theories in this direction, 
when compared with experience, have fallen down. So far, 


1118 RAILWAY SUB-STATIONS [Dec. 15 


the prevention of noise in machinery has been a case of elimina- 
tion rather than of cure. 

Lastly, in regard to the use of the storage-battery in electric 
railway systems, it is a very useful and desirable element. 
The only and main objection to a storage-battery which has pre- 
vented its introduction in most railway systems, especially 
in interurban systems, is its cost, which, as a rule, is prohibitive. 


1120 REPORT OF THE [May 16 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


ANNUAL REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR THE 
FISCAL YEAR ENDING APRIL 30, 1905. 


The Board of Directors presents herewith for the information of the 
Institute a report of its work during the past year, also of the financial 
standing of the organization. 

The Annual Convention was held at St. Louis, September 14, 1904, 
occupying but one day, and taking the form of a joint meeting with the 
Institution of Electrical Engineers, according to the program outlined 
in the Annual Report one year ago. This Convention was fixed during 
the holding of the International Electrical Congress. At this Conven- 
tion President Arnold delivered his annual address, and the joint dis- 
cussion was upon the topic ‘‘ Different Methods and Systems of Using 
Alternating Current in Electric Railway Motors.” 

The growth in membership during the year has not equalled that of 
either of the previous two years, which could hardly be expected to be 
maintained, The total membership is now 3460. There are also 617 
students enrolled. Among the four national engineering societies the 
Institute now stands second in numerical strength, being exceeded 
only by the American Institute of Mining Engineers with a membership 
of 3680 on December 31, 1904. 

The Board of Directors has held during the year twelve regular and 
three special meetings. At these meetings the various standing and 
special committees have reported, and brief abstracts of their reports 
for the year are included herewith. 

Through the courtesy of the Association of Edison Illuminating Com- 
panies, the Institute was provided with a spacious booth suitably fur- 
nished at the St. Louis Exposition, with an attendant in charge, for 
the accommodation of visitors. This arrangement proved entirely 
satisfactory and was maintained through the entire period of the Ex- 
position without expense to the Institute. 

Among the Italian exhibits at the Exposition was a bronze bust of 
the late Professor Galileo Ferraris, also a reproduction of his historical 
apparatus. At the close of the Exposition this exhibit was presented 
to the Institute by the Board of Directors of the Royal Italian Industrial 
Museum. 

On September 17, 1904, at the New York State Building, Universal 


1905.] BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 1121 


Exposition, St. Louis, President Robert Kaye Gray, in behalf of the 
Institution of Electrical Engineers, presented to the American Institute 
of Electrical Engineers, a magnificent painting representing Dr. William 
Gilbert of Colchester before Queen Elizabeth. 

Through the courtesy of the Engineers’ Club these gifts have been 
placed in the clubhouse, 374 Fifth Avenue, New York, pending the 
erection of the Union Engineering Building, where ample space will be 
available for historical, technical and decorative exhibits. 

Committee on Papers—Eight monthly meetings have been arranged 
for upon the following subjects: Transmission of Intelligence, Heavy 
Electric Traction, High Tension Electric Railways, Instruments and 
Measurements, Safety Devices. For these meetings 16 papers have 
been prepared. Of these but two were volunteered, 14 being written 
at the request of the Committee, the authors and titles being suggested 
by specialists. Arrangements have been also made for the presentation 
of 20 papers at the Annual Convention, June 19-23. The manuscripts 
of seven of these are already on hand. 

The Editing Committee —The experience of the present Editing Com- 
mittee has covered but one month of the past year, but it realizes the 
increase in the number of original papers presented at branch meet- 
ings, and the volume of the reported discussions. Of this mass of 
material, provision is made in the By-Laws for the printing of such 
matters as may be of permanent value. It has in view the suggestion 
of a plan by which the local Executive Committees may be authorized 
to select for publication either in the Transactions or the technical 
press such portions of this material as they deem worthy of bringing to 
the attention of the Editing Committee for approval. 

Board of Examiners—During the year, ten regular and four special 
or adjourned meetings have been held. At these meetings 527 appli- 
cants were recommended for election to the grade of Associate. The 
applications of 332 persons for enrolment as students were considered, 
and of these 331 were recommended for enrolment. Fifty-four applica- 
tions for transfer to full membership were acted upon. Of these 28 
were recommended and 26 not recommended for transfer. 

Committee on Increase of M embership.—During the past year 595 Asso- 
ciates were elected, a decrease of 203 from the previous year. The 
total membership at the close of each fiscal year since 1899 is given in 
the following table: 


ee 
| | 


Honorary 


Year. Members. Members. Associates. Total. Increase. 
|———_—_————_ a 
1900 2 374 807 1183 50 
1901 2 387 871 1260 77 
1902 2 405 1142 1549 289 
1903 2 417 1810 2229 680 
1904 2 459 2566 3027 798 
1905 2 482 2976 3460 | 433 


1122 REPORT OF THE [May 16 


Committee on Finance.—The plan outlinei a year ago by which certain 
funds were established for specified purposes has been continued, all of 
which including the daily balances are drawing interest. No change 
has been made in the items of $8000 in U. S. bonds, and the Mailloux 
Fund of $1000 in a certificate of deposit; the income of the latter being 
devoted to continuing the files of certain periodicals in the library con- 
tributed by the founder of the fund. 

The ordinary receipts during the fiscal year ending April 30, 1905, 
were $43 130.95. This amount was made up of $33 822.19 from mem- 
bers, including entrance fees from Associates and transfer fees from Mem- 
bers: $1660 in students’ dues, $5765.40 from advertising sales and sub- 
scriptions, $743.89 interest and exchange, $977.75 badges, and $161.72 
miscellaneous. The ordinary operating expenses of the Institute were 
$37 529.25, leaving a balance of ordinary receipts over expenses of 
$5601.70: 

The bank balance available for current expenditures on April 30, 
1905, was $11 054.31. Adding this sum to $8875.63, the market value 
of the United States bonds owned by the Institute makes a total of 
$19 929.94 in cash or its equivalent. Subtracting from this amount 
$4400, as due to the Life Membership Fund, gives a net balance of 
$15°529.94 in cash or its equivalent immediately available for any or- 
dinary or extraordinary expenditure of the Institute. : 

The total amount of bills payable by the Institute, April 30, 1905, 
was $368.82. During the year the property of the Institute was increased 
by purchase of furniture, etc., to the amount of $667.40, and the stock 
of Transactions to the value of $3413.00, all of which was paid from cur- 
rent revenue. t 

Local Organization Committee —During the year additional Branch 
organizations have been authorized by the Board of Directors as 
follows: Baltimore Branch, December 16, 1904; San Francisco Branch, 
December 23, 1904; Syracuse University Branch, February 24, 1905; 
University of Colorado, Student meetings, December 16, 1904. 185 
Branch meetings have been held during the year (Sept. 1 to May 1 
—others will be held before the summer) at which 156 original papers 
were presented. The average attendance at these meetings was 1097, 
a slight falling off from last year. This was due no doubt to the fact 
that there was an abnormal attendance at the initial meetings of the 
Branches, most of which were organized in 1902-3. The increase. of 
membership in the immediate vicinity of Branches has been 193. No 
meetings have been reported at Cincinnati and Denver. A special 
committee has been appointed to recommend a plan for the selection 
for publication of original papers. presented at the Branches, ; 

Union Engineering Butlding—Plans and specifications for the Union 
Engineering Building to be erected under the gift of Mr. Andrew Carnegie 
have been approved by the Joint Committee, and bids invited. The 
United Engineering Society has been incorporated and an agreement 
entéred into between it and the Founder Societies, the American Insti- 
tute ef Electrical_Engineers. American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
andthe American.Institute of Mining Engineers. The nine trustees cf 
the United Engineering Society are appointed by the Founder Societies. 


tiers & 


1905] BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 1123 


The United Engineering Society wi:l own and its trustees will admin- 
ister the Engineering Building and the Founder Societies will pay to 
the United Engineering Society funds for the purchase of the land and 
will receive Treasurer’s receipts therefor. The United Engineering So- 
ciety now holds title to the land purchased for the Institute two years 
ago by Mr. Carnegie, on the north side of 39th Street, half way between 
5th and 6th Avenues. 

Building Fund Committee —This committee sent to the membership 
early in May, 1904, its fourth announcement embodying a full statement 
of the progress of the work at that time, and the amounts subscribed 
to March 31, 1904. An appeal was made to the members for subscrip- 
tions, and their valuable personal aid in obtaining subscriptions. On 
May 26, 1904, the committee reported subscriptions to the amount of 
$60 000. The committee then canvassed the Local Branches and was 
assured by their officets of their hearty desire to coéperate. In July, 
1904, the committee published its fifth announcement, containing a 
list of subscriptions amounting to $62 752 from over 500 members. 
This has since been increased to $66 534.50, of which $19 301.25 has been 
deposited to the credit of the Land, Building and Endowment Fund. 
The committee contemplates a vigorous prosecution of its work as soon 
as the plans of the Union Engineering Building are issued. 

Standardization Committee —The existing committee having been ap- 
pointed in March, 1905, has not been able to do more than outline its 
proposed work. It contemplates reviewing the last report of the com- 
mittee, adopted June 20, 1902, making such modifications as seem desir- 
able, and also completing the work of the committee during the past two 
years under the chairmanship of Professor Ryan, which has not been 
finally formulated. The committee proposes to coéperate with foreign 
societies, notably the Institution of Electrical Engineers and the British 
Standards Committee. It will be glad to receive general or specific sug= 
gestions from the membership which may be addressed to the Secretary. 

National. Electric Code.—This committee met, December 6, 1904, in 
conference with code committees of the National Electric Light Association 
and the Association of Edison Illuminating Companies, followed by 
attendance, December 7, 1904, at the New York meeting of the Under- 
writers’ Electrical Association. In April, 1905, at the instance of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, a meeting of the National 
Conference was called by its secretary, at Boston, April 21, 1905. In 
advance of this meeting a circular was issued by our committee inviti-g 
criticisms, from the membership, of the existing code. Fifteen replies 
were received, but it was decided by the committee, in conference with 
the other code committees, to defer action upon them to a more favor- 
able opportunity. At the meeting of the National Conference, April 21, 
the chairman of this committee was present as an official delegate. The 
existing situation is about as follows: 

1. The relations of the Institute, and other bodies in the Con- 
ference, to the code, as appearing on the fly-leaf of the same, have, it 1s 
believed, been materially improved and corrected by the amended 
phraseology to appear on the fly-leaf of the forthcomin g edition of 1905. 

2. With the exception of a few details submitted in the replies men- 


1124 REPORT OF THE [May 16 


tioned, the Institute membership appears to be generally satisfied with the 
coder, 

3. Measures have been secured for entertaining appeals to the Board 
of Insurance Underwriters from the rulings of individual insurance in- 
spectors alleged to have misapplied the code. 

John Fritz M edal.—The first award of the John Fritz medal has been 
made to Lord Kelvin for Cable Telegraphy and other General Scientific 
Achievements. This medal was established by the professional asso- 
ciates and friends of Mr. John Fritz of Bethlehem, Pa., on his 80th birth- 
day, August 21, 1902. The board of award is composed of 16 repre- 
sentatives of national engineering societies, four being past-presidents 
of the Institute, viz. Carl Hering, Charles P. Steinmetz, Charles F. 
Scott, and Bion J. Arnold. The medal is of gold, its intrinsic value 
being about $100, and is accompanied by a certificate. 

Edison Medal Committee—This committee organized May 20, 1904, 
under the Deed of Gift, and resolutions of the Board of Directors adopted 
April 22, 1904. The by-laws prepared for the government of this com- 
mittee were submitted to the Board of Directors and approved December 
23, 1904. It was found impracticable to award the medal for the year 
1904. A letter accompanied with a copy of the by-laws was sent by the 
committee to each of 86 institutes of learning in the United States con- 
sidered eligible. Replies have been received from only five of these in- 
stitutions. 

Committee on By-Laws. —During the year this committee has con- 
sidered certain by-laws referred to it by the Board of Directors, also 
several amendments deemed necessary in the administration of Institute 
affairs. Such of these as were acceptable to the Board were adopted 
February 24 and March 24 and were printed in the April, 1905, issue of 
the PRocEEDINGS. Complete copies of the Constitution and amended 
by-laws will be furnished upon application to the secretary. 

Membership.—The total membership at the close of last year’s report 
was 3027, classified as follows: 


Honorary Members...00..serpseescs tiers etter se 2 
Members. ataicheipus yelmer atin * ene FOR ene a 459 
ASesObiahes va. cidw neers mare Cet Sees Eee eee 2566 
Total: May, 1906s = v«ag: sal op vail gee he cit oer 3027 
Elected prior to May 1, 1904, and since qualified. .....-. 65 
Elected May 1, 1904, to April 30, 1905, and qualified.... 450 
Restored to Membership... ..++--s-sstecrtspst setts: 1 
3543 
Deduct— 

Total Deaths nics] cota k< «quieren > Seip one ae Li 

Total, Resignationsss s\n salen’ onctied 2 att = See eG 23 

Dropped as delinquents. ..../--.-+ssssrrrttrnete ts 43 
83 


Total membership, April 30, VOO Ss carter se cocoon 3460 


1905.] BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 1125 


The membership April 30, 1905, is classified as follows: 


OHOLAG ya VICHUDCLS ety acs 21m 8 cyagntasione sss ivatis nee Seite ne eh ees 2 
LET ELS MRM Tose ec casita Ps ete ete ar sepayotee aeons ws? 482. 
ENSSOCIAE CC NaN ete hota ya fs IPAS ele 5 Suny oni Sep ohQd Gurtens 2976 

ANOS Bare ohn ec ee eee OA i.c5 Peete WIN ct 3460 


The net gain in membership during the year was 433, an increase ot 
14 per cent. As there are now applications pending and associates 
elected, but not yet qualified, to the number of 267, there is an immediate 
prospective total of about 3700 members. 

Associates Elected —The Associates elected during the year, May 1, 
1604, to April 30,-1905, and their present status is as follows: 


"Qualified and now Associates..... 2... 20... eee e eee ees 450 
Desens Gnavaaltdlen? aegis ea Se eons Biptom ao Sire oom oe 3 
Not qualified*on' April 30... 2... 622+. cer ee ee eee nent 142 

Telia QSUNGINGS = Giles erg tacks Gad octane Oe aio ace 595 


Resignations —The following Members and Associates have resigned 
in good standing during the year: 

Members.—G. W. Blodgett. 

Associates. —G. L. Bayley, Chas. Brandeis, R. G. Brown, Mario 
Capucio, O. T. Crosby, A. G. Compton, F. N. Drane, Keith Donaldson 
Cc. B. Graves, P. F. Gaehr, DeForest Hicks, C. He Hurd, David 
Halstead, H. F. Hitner, Wm. Hallock, R. A. Joslyn,'C. G..Y. King, G. 
L. Knight, C. W. Naylor, C. T. Penton, S. C. Shaffner, E. E. Flitchner. 
Total, 23. 

Deaths.—There have been during the year the following deaths: 

Members.—Max Osterberg. 

Associates.—Adolpho Aschoff, E. K. Adams, B. B. Abry, H. C. Brown, 
Geo. A. Cooke, Geo. W. Frank, M. R. Gutieriez, B. S. Lanphear, E. H. 
Mullin, A. Meuschel, E. F. Phillips, C. E. Stephens, R. B. Strong, A. W. 
Underwood, C. E. Webber, C. W. Wilkes. Total, 17. 


FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR APRIL 30, 1905. 
GENERAL BALANCE SHEET. 


ASSETS. LIABILITIES. 
ne 1 lib fund $339.11 General library fund $339.11 
e ibrary fun : y, funds... eee. 2 
Gate fain (li- Carnegie fund (library)........ 4,084.17 
[READ MEA Soe’ 4,160.19 Land, Building and Endowment 

- Land Buliding and fund. ..--.- eee ee eect eee 22.747 .54 

Endowment fund. 22,747.54 Mailloux PMG. capstone + viaisio a 1,008 . 20 

Mailloux fund...... 1,000.00 Life Membership fund......... 4,400.00 

Mercantile Trust Co. Surplus (cash and bonds).....- 15,597.76 

(on deposit)..... '. 11,054.31 Surplus (property)...++++-++++ 44,220.11 
——— $39,301.15 
U. S. bonds market value...... 8,875.63 
Secretary's petty cash......--- 500.00 
Library volumes and fixtures... 22,705.04 
TransactionS.....----+s+e2e+* 7,622.50 
Office Furniture and fittings.... 799.45 
Badses. oak awe cree tee 103.00 
Congress books.....----+++++: 201.00 
Accounts receivable... ...--++- 10,514.12 
Suspense account. ....--.-++++ 1,775.00 


$92,396.89 | $92,396.89 


1126 


REPORT OF THE 


[May 16 


RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS. 


ORDINARY RECEIPTS. 


Entrance Fees....-. $2,657 .00 
Current Dues....-+- 29'256.90 
Past Dues....--+-- . 1,318.34 
Students’ Dues....- 1,660.00 
Advance Dues....-+ 319.95 
Transactions Sales. . 1,038 .36 
Transactions Subs. 787 .52 
Binding....+-+++++> 158.72 
Advertising.....--- 3,939.52 
Electros and Cuts.. 3.00 
Badges.....---+++5 977.75 
Pranater Fees... 52.0 270.00 

Interest on ank 
Balances....--.--- 480.59 

Income from Invest- 
MENS ere shew ona ake 240.00 
Exchange....------ 23.30 
$43,130.95 


ORDINARY DISBURSEMENTS. 


Stenography & Type- - 

writing. . 403 .52 
Stationery & “Print- 

ING ss ccc.cleeouaye 2,476.03 
Postage » 2,327 .66 
EXpress....--+s+0-+ 829.14 
Badges. . 893 .88 
General Expenses. - 1,648.49 
Certificates....-.--- 41-25 
Office Fittings.....- 266.25 
Salaries excepting 

librarian).......- 6,214.36 
Cuts and Electros.. 1,739.92 
Publishing Transac- 

tIONE. Vics recites 10,104.71 
Rent.. 2,642 .54 
Advertising ‘Com's’ns 543.14 
Binding Volumes. . 2,032.82 
Binding Pamphlets. 115.26 
Meeting pa ae 380.39 
Branch Meetings. . 1,057.77 

Library Rent..... 1,475.04 

Library Salaries. 834.00 

Library Insurance 106.35 

Library Miscel. . 460.81 
Students Expenses. 3.75 
Congress Reception. 781.76 
St. Louis Expenses. . 105.35 
Reception.......... 75.06 

alance....-<%. 5,601.70 
$43,130.95 - 


SPECIAL RECEIPTS AND DONATIONS AND SPECIAL EXPENDITURES 


SpecrAL RECEIPTS AND DONATIONS. 


Land, Building and Endowment 
Fund, Donations and Interest $18, 150.20 


General Library Fund, cya yt 10.28 
Mailloux Fund, Interest. d 30.00 

Carnegie Fund (Library), Ine 
terest. : 123.76 
Carnegie Fund, ‘Cash ‘Return. 6.75 
$18,320.99 


~ SpectaL EXPENDITURES. 


Land, Building and Endowment 
Fund, paid United Engi- 


The total receipts for 1905, exclusive of donations, were in 


excess of 1 


The total Disbursements for 1905. were in “excess ‘of 1904... 
Due from Members account of entrance fees and , 


Due on miscellaneous accounts. 
Unpaid bills, May 1, 1905, amount to. 


Total Cash Receipts from ordinary sources. 
Total Cash Disbursements, account ordinary ‘expenses. - 


Proper, on hand according to oie ee qi tea 


ffice Furniture and ni 
Badges. . 5 i 
Transactions. . 

Congress Books. . 

Library Volumes and Fuxtures. . 


neering Society .... $1,000.00 
Land, Building za Endowment 
Fund, Collection aanenses 2,012.59 
General Library Furd.. 40.84 
Mailloux Fund. 22.10 
Carnegie Fund (Libra Ps ene 478.72 
Balance to Esai ° ——— 

Funds.. wents _ 14,766.74 
$18,320.99 

$2,144.13, 

1,135.05 

9,230.00 

1,284.12 

"368.82 

.. 43,130.95 

37,529.25 

$5,601.70 

$799.45 

103.00 

7,622.50 

201.00 

22,705.04 


31,430.99 


1905.] BOARD OF DIRECTORS. ala 
TOTAL NET ASSETS. 
— 5 
ercantile Trust Co., deposit..........2.eeeeeeee+s $11,054. 
Farmers Loan & Trust Co., Library Fund.......... : Sore 
Farmers Loan & Trust Co., Building Fund.......... 22,747 .54 
Farmers Loan & Trust Co., Carnegie Fund.......... 4,160.19 
Certificate of Deposit, Mailloux Fund..............- 1,000.00 
39,301.1 
Secretary's Petty Cash...-.....-- +s cece cece ee er eeeees a pooi00 
U.S. Bonds, market valu€....... 0.0. cece cece cece sens 8,875.63 
Inventory aS ADOVE. .. 1... cece ee ee ee ee ee te teers 31,430.99 
————._ 80,107. 
Total Net Assets last year... .-..-cccve ce ence creer ce nseress ease 86 
WaxCrease cect cere syle overs ares sisi 'ea8 oyatvanie> oy Sy sretsvseioele eels Boas cOe AL 
PROPERTY ACQUIRED DURING THE YEAR. 
(Reported as directed by the Constitution.) 
Office Furniture and Fixtures.........-0+ esse seer seer creer reese $256.50 
Transactions. ....... 002 ee ee eter ee ete oe 3,413.00 
Library Books and Binding...........-.--- 405 .96 
MibraryaDatoleeccdeists ele elec ste cients 5.00 
$4,080. 46 
Respectfully submitted for the Board of Directors, 
RALPH W. POPE, 
Secretary. 


TREASURER'S REPORT. 
For THE YEAR May 1, 1904, To AND IncLup1nG APRIL 30, 1905. 


GerorceE A. HamILton, Treasurer, in account with the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL 


ENGINEERS. 
On account of General Fund iDy Ces 
Balance from April 30, 1904.......-+-+--se reer oer ee $7,861.44 
Received from Secretary during year...-..++++-+++++00> 45,180.29 
Payments on Warrants: 7 
No. 2144 to No. 2513 inclusive... ....---+++eseeer este $41,987 .42 
Balance to new account, May 1, SOS aeirs < earteroicrats > "='9 + 11,054.31 


$53,041.73 $53,041.73 


GENERAL LIBRARY FUND. 


Balance from April 30, 1904.....--.-- ++ +--+ eee eres $369 .67 

Received from the Secretary.......--+-++eser errr tte 10.28 
Payments on Secretary's warrants. ...-.---+-s++500> $40.84 
Balance to new account, May 1, 1905..........+.++-- 339.11 


$379.95 $379.95 


CaRNEGIE FunD (LIBRARY). 


Balance from April 30, 1904....2.---.-- 22 sserre ttt $4,303.43 

Received from the Secretary during the year....------- 259.46 
Payments on Secretary S warrants....+++++e0s ++ on $402.70 
Balance to new account, May Di OOS nse. is sere 2 apaystte 4,160.19 


——— 


$4,562.89 $4,562.89 


Lanp, BUILDING AND ENDOWMENT FUND. 


Balance from April 30,1904. .... insets ot is $7,609.93 
Received from the Secretary during the year......--+-. 18,150.20 
Payments on warrants by special authorization of 
Board of Directors... 5 a $3,012.59 


—— 


Balance to new account, May ‘1,1905. 2 RAY opie 22,747.54 


$25,760.13 $25,760.13 


MaiILLoux FunND. 


Balance from previous year.....--+++ssesrctrr reeset $1,000 .00 


Balancertol new ACCOUNb: 0. 2 ewan ss ne eiiroe: 1,000.00 


$1,000.00 $1,000.00 


Respectfully submitted, 


Gro. A. HAMILTON, 


Treasurer. 


1128 COMMITTEE ON FINANCE. (May 16 


May 11, 1905. 


Mr. Joun W. Lies, JR., PRESIDENT AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL 
ENGINEERS, New York Ciry. 


Sir: Pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution, the Committee 
on Finance has during the year exercised supervision over the finan- 
cial affairs of the Institute. It has considered all bills and approved 
for payment such as constituted a proper charge against the Institute. 

It has considered and reported upon specific appropriations, and has 
made special reports upon various matters referred to it by the Board 
of Directors. 

As provided by the Constitution, it has employed an expert accountant 
to audit the accounts of the Institute; and this report, made by Mr. 
William H. Macnabb, has. been approved by the Finance Committee, 
and is transmitted herewith. 


Very truly yours, 


}..J. CARTY, Chairman Committee on Finance. 


May 11, 1905. 


Mr. J. J. Carty, CHAIRMAN FINANCE CoMMITTEE, AMERICAN INSTITUTE 
oF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, New YorkK Ciry. 


Dear Sir: In accordance with your instructions I have carefully ex- 
amined all the books of account, records, bills rendered and bill-book 
entries, cash receipts and cash-book entries, ledger entries from all 
sources, and ledger balances, cash payments, checks, check stubs, and 
cancelled checks, warrants, vouchers, and receipts of the American Insti- 
tute of Electrical Engineers, for the year ending April 30, 1905. 

I have verified all additions, and compared receipts of cash by the 
Secretary, with the amounts turned over by him to the Treasurer, and 
find same correct. 

The amounts of cash on hand, May 1, 1905, as shown by the balances 
in the books of account, have been verified by me, and I have personally 
inspected the United States Bonds on hand, as well as a Certificate of 
Deposit for $1,000. 

The books and accounts are correct; all special funds are in correct 
form, and all trust funds intact. 

The statement of assets and liabilities, receipts, and disbursements, 
etc., as submitted by the Secretary, and the report of the Treasurer, 
have been verified by me, and are correct, and in accordance with the 
books and records of the Institute; and the assets as shown are held in 
fact in the manner and condition as shown on the said books and state- 
ments. 

Yours respectfully, 


Wma. H. Macnass, 


Accountant 


1905.] GENERAL RECEPTION COMMITTEE. 1129 


REPORT OF GENERAL RECEPTION COMMITTEE OF 
THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGI- 
NEERS IN CONNECTION WITH THE INTERNATIONAL 
ELECTRICAL CONGRESS AND CIRCULAR TOUR. 


To THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS: 


One of the important events of the fiscal year just closing 
was the International Electrical Congress held at St. Louis, 
September 12-17, 1904. At the last International Congress 
held in Paris in 1900, the INSTITUTE was represented by official 
delegates and visiting members, and they were splendidly 
entertained in London en route to Paris by the Institution of 
Electrical Engineers. The AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL 
EncInEERS had been desirous of reciprocating the courtesies 
received at the hands of the sister society, and the International 
Electrical Congress at the St. Louis Exposition afforded a wel- 
come opportunity to again extend a cordial invitation to the 
Institution to visit America. The invitation was accepted and 
it was arranged to hold a joint meeting in St. Louis during the 
sessions of the Congréss. 

In order to facilitate the visits of our guests to some of the 
principal cities and important centers of electrical industry, a 
circular tour was organized under the auspices of the INnsTI- 
TuTE, embracing visits to Boston, New York, Schenectady, 
Montreal, Niagara Falls, Chicago, St. Louis, Pittsburg, Wash- 
ington and Philadelphia. A general invitation was also ex- 
tended to visiting members from European Electrical Engineer- 
ing Societies, and in addition to our official guests the Institu- 
tion of Electrical Engineers, a large delegation from the Asso- 
ciazione Elettrotecnica Italiana joined in the tour, together with 
a number of official delegates to the Congress, and Electrical 
engineers from many European countries. President Arnold 
placed the arrangements for the reception and entertainment 
of our guests in the hands of a General Reception Committee, 


1130 GENERAL RECEPTION COMMITTEE. [May 16 


with Mr. J. W. Lieb, Jr., as Chairman, with the codperation of 
a Committee on Transportation and Arrangements, of which 
the late Mr. E. H. Mullin was Chairman. In the several cities 
visited, prominent members of the InstiTuTE assumed the 
chairmanship of the Local Committees and with the codperation 
of efficient Local Committees they provided splendid programmes 
of entertainment, and assured everywhere a cordial welcome 
to the visitors. When it is considered that this lavish enter- 
tainment was provided through the Local Committees without 
expense to the membership at large of the INSTITUTE, a deep 
debt of gratitude is due the Chairmen of the Local Committees, 
through whose efforts the INsTITUTE was able to accord a digni- 
fied and worthy reception to its visitors and guests from abroad. 
About 150 joined in the circular tour, of whom 74 were repre- 
sentatives from the Institution, 42 of the Associazione Elettro- 
tecnica Italiana, 16 visiting electrical engineers from other 
foreign countries, and 18 members of the InsTITUTE, who acted 
as hosts and guides to the visitors; in all 16 ladies accompanied 
the party and contributed notably to the gayety and enjoyment 
of the trip. 

The representatives of the Associazione Elettrotecnica Italiana 
arrived in New York August 24-25, and spent the interval until 
September 2 visiting New York and vicinity under the guidance 
of a committee of American members. 

The representatives of the Institution, our official guests, 
arrived in Boston September 2, where they were joined by the 
A. E. 1. and other visitors, and here began the official round of 
entertainments and visits. The official welcome of our INSTI- 
ruTE to the Institution and all foreign visitors and guests took 
place Monday, September 5, at the Waldorf-Astoria, with ad- 
dresses by President B. J. Arnold; President Robert Kaye Gray 
of the Institution; President Moisé Ascoli of the A. E. 1.; Dr. 
Wilhelm von Siemens; Professor Elihu Thomson ; Professor John 
Perry, F. R. S.; Charles A. Coffin, Esq., President of the Gen- 
eral Electric Company, and President-elect J. Ws Liebrelr: 

The week spent in St. Louis was marked by notable recep- 
tions and banquets, culminating September 17 in a luncheon 
tendered by the Institution to the InsTITUTE in the New York 
State Building, at the conclusion of which President Gray of 
the Institution presented to us a magnificent oil painting rep- 
resenting Dr. William Gilbert of Colchester before Queen Eliza- 
beth, as a mark of appreciation from the Institution to its 
sister society. 


1905.] GENERAL RECEPTION COMMITTEE. 1131 


Through the courtesy of the Engineers’ Club of New York 
City, this gift temporarily adorns one of its walls, pending the 
construction of the United Engineering Building, in which it 
will find a permanent home in the headquarters of the INsTITUTE. 
A committee of three, consisting of Messrs. Arnold, Rice, and 
Weaver, was appointed by the Council to prepare a resolution 
of thanks, of which the following is a copy: 


To tHe INSTITUTION OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS OF GREAT BRITAIN. 
GREETING: 

“Having in mind the many evidences of friendship and good will 
from the officers and members of your body during their recent visit, 
as our official guests, to the International Electrical Congress of St. 
Louis, 1904, and which culminated in the presentation through your 
distinguished President, Robert Kaye Gray, on September 17, 1904, of 
the magnificent painting representing Dr. William Gilbert of Colchester 
before Queen Elizabeth: 

““The President, Board of Directors and Members of the AMERICAN 
InsTITUTE oF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS desire to express formally by 
these presents, their grateful appreciation for the generous and thought- 
ful gift, and their recognition of the kindly spirit which prompted it. 

“This masterly representation of a historic scene will always be cher- 
ished by us as a testimonial of the warm friendship which, no less than 
professional ties, binds our InsTITUTE with the elder Institution of the 
mother country. The painting will be displayed in a prominent position 
jn our new headquarters in the United Engineering Building, in honor 
of the esteemed donor and of its great subject, your illustrious country- 
man, who gave the world not only the first clear conception of the prin- 
ciples of the magnet, but also the first treatise in which, according to the 
light of to-day, true scientific method was employed. 

“We beg of you to accept this official expression of our appreciation 
of your generosity as a slight token of the high esteem in which your 
society is held by our InstTITUTE.” 

Attest: Signed: 

Ratpu W. Pore, Secretary. J, We Line, JR., President. 


These resolutions were formally presented by Mre-PeeO; 
Martin at a meeting of the Council of the Institution, and a 
copy -was also presented to President Gray, its esteemed Past- 
President, who was at the head of the delegation visiting America. 

In each of the important cities visited on the tour the Local 
Committee published an Electrical Handbook containing a de- 
scription of the important electrical industries and constituting 
a valuable library of ten volumes, or 11, including a volume 
of ‘“Edisonia’’ contributed by the Association of Edison 
Illuminating Companies. 

The Committee of Organization of the International Elec- 
trical Congress, the Advisory Committee, and the Chairmen and 


1132 GENERAL RECEPTION COMMI DPTLEE. [May 16 


Secretaries of the eight sections were almost without exception 
members of the InstiTuTE. An extensive programme of papers 
and discussions, many by foreign electrical engineers, was 
presented at the Congress, covering the whole range of 
electrical science and its practical applications. 

Through the courtesy of the Association of Edison Iluminat- 
ing Companies, a handsomely furnished booth was placed at 
the disposal of the INSTITUTE for use as head-quarters in the 
Electricity Building at the St. Louis Exposition, and many 
members availed themselves of its facilities. 

Attached to this report and filed with it in the archives of 
the InstiruTE, are copies of the circular letter issued by the 
InsTITUTE giving the general arrangements for the reception of 
visiting electrical engineers, and inviting participation in the 
circular tour; a list of the Local Chairmen and Local Committees; 
a list of the visiting members of the Institution of Electrical 
Engineers and of the A. E. I.; the names of those who took part 
in the circular tour; the programme of the trip prepared by the 
Institution and the programme for the entertainment in New 
York of the A. E. I. in advance of the beginning of the circular 
tour; and a copy of the Souvenir Number of the Electrical Maga- 
zine, containing an account of the trip from the visitors’ point 
of view. 

Respectfully submitted, 
Cavin W. RICE, J. W. Lies, Jr., 
Vice-chairman. Chairman. 


— 


1905.] LIBRARY REPORT. 1133 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


ANNUAL REPORT OF LIBRARY COMMITTEE. 


We beg to submit herewith a report of the present state of 
the Library of the InstiruTE, and the state of the several 
funds under the cognizance of this Committee. 

Progress in upbuilding the Library has been halted during 
the past as during the preceding year, owing to the undesir- 
ability of pressing upon the membership the claims of the Library 
to their support, in view of the large sum of money the INsTI- 
TUTE is endeavoring to obtain by donation in order to meet the 
obligations assumed in connection with the United Engineer- 
ing Building. 

The compilation of the Wheeler Bibliography is now com- 
plete and the manuscript will soon be placed in the hands of 
the printer. The volume should be printed and be in the 
hands of members during the present year. 

Through the kindness of Mr. W. J. Johnston, the Library 
has come into possession of a complete set of the Operator, 
1874-1883. This is undoubtedly the only complete set of this 
pioneer periodical in existence. Mr. Edward D. Adams has 
very kindly entered a subscription for the Library covering a 
period of five years, for the ‘International Catalogue of Scien- 
tific Literature.” This catalogue is a continuation of the 
“Catalogue of Scientific Papers ”? formerly issued by the Royal 
Society of London, a complete set of which was presented to 
the Library by Mr. Adams. Mr. Adams has also brought up 
to date, by the purchase of recently issued volumes, the com- 
plete sets of the Transactions and of the Proceedings of the 
Royal Society, which he presented to the Library. From the 
New York Public Library, through the kindness of Dr. John S. 
Billings, the Library has received many copies of periodicals, 
Transactions, etc., which were lacking from our sets. The 


Smithsonian Institution has presented to the Library a com- 
plete set of its miscellaneous publications on subjects relating 
to electricity and physics. 

During the year a catalogue of the periodical publications 
in the Library was printed, the entries including the Transac- 
tions of professional and scientific bodies. A copy of this will 
soon be sent to each member of the InstTiTUTE, together with a 
circular asking their aid in filling out certain departments in 


the Library. 


During the year gifts of books and pamphlets were received 


from the following: 


ADAMS, EDWARD D. 
AHEARN, T. 


ARMY WAR COLLEGE. 


AMERICAN PHYSICAL SOCIETY 


BEHREND, B. A. 
BREWER, A. R. 


BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY. 


BRADLEY, C. S. 

BRITISH PATENT OFFICE. 
BRIDGE, J. H. 

CROCKER, F. B. 
CARNEGIE LIBRARY. 
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY. 
DUNLAP, J. R. 

DOHERTY, H. L. 
ECLAIRAGE ELECTRIQUE. 
GAUTHIER-VILLARS., 
GODDARD, C. M. 

HERING, CARL. 

HOBART, H. M. 
HAMILTON, G. A. 

JOHN CRERAR LIBRARY. 
JOHNSTON, W. J. 


LAIRD & LEE. 

LAMB, F. J. 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS. 

LOW, G. P. 

MAVER, W. 

MASSACHUSETTS BOARD OF GAS 
& ELECTRIC LIGHT COMMIS- 
SIONERS. 

MCGRAW PUBLISHING COMPANY. 

NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY. 

NEW YORK STATE LIBRARY. 

NEW YORK ELECTRICAL SOCIETY. 

PETTY, W. M. 

PLAINFIELD PUBLIC LIBRARY. 

SPANG, H. W. 

SAGE. T.tce 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION. 

U. S. NAVAL BUREAU OF EQUIP- 
MENT. 

VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY, D. 

WARDLAW, G. A. 


1905.j LIBRARY REPORT. 1135 


Following are the statistics of the Library, brought up to 
May 1, 1905: 


STATISTICS OF LIBRARY. 


———— 


Vol- | Pam- 
Titles. | umes. |phlets | Valuation. 


Source. 


Report of May 1, 1904........------ 6924 | 9420 114 | $20,136.68 


PURCHASES: 
Carnegie Fund.........-.-++-++> 8 214 2 263 .30 
Monation Pund.s...-.er oe me + 2 20 38 7 64.64 
IM Exblkayepe sahusatclong Saab aoa hore 3 10 2210 
Institute Appropriation........--- 1 1 .90 
Periodical Volumes........--.-+-+ 64 116 232 :00 

GIFTS: 

Edward D. Adams.......--.---- 3 24 187.34 
De IN BYES, Soe cdc a cee Oe 36 4] 24 58 .00 
C2S. Bradley. . ; Be 1 118 120.00 
McGraw Publishing Coe TH 106 TNS 42 .£0 
Miscellaneous Gifts (35 eke 82 116 88 116.85 
Total, May 1, 1905.......-.-- 7219 |10204 392 | $21,244.31 
Duplicates. ....-.+-++--- Pal || S83 144.72 


7002 | 9611 | 392 21,099.59 
Duplicate Periodical Titles 


6880 | 9611 392 | $21,099.59 


— 


Following is the total valuation of the Library, May 1, 1905, 
including permanent Library fixtures: 


ToTAL VALUATION. 
Sane 


Books..... Par oar ue a< dole ish SN: en et, ,.821,099...59 
Book Stacks OT SEE Res Rs ORI CR ove ba 1 470.25 
Furniture, Catalogue Cases, etC...-+++serrerrrrre’ 135.20 


$22,705.04 


1136 LIBRARY REPORT. 


[May 16 


Following are tabulations giving the present state of the 
several funds of which the Library Committee has cognizance: 


Donations (GENERAL LIBRARY FUND). 
Pr OE a ee ee eee 


Dr. Cr: 
Balance May 1, 1904.... . $369.67 Purchase of books..... 
Interest to May 1, 1905..... 10.28 Unexpended.......... 
$379.95 


1Oke Gr 


Balance May 1, 1904... .$4,432.38 Books .c:.caseeeene ee 
Interest to May 1,1905.. 123.76 Wheeler Bibliography... . 
Unexpended.. 2: .5.2.. 


$4,556.14 


Marttoux ENDOWMENT Funp. ($1,000.) 


Drs Cr, 
Balance May 1, 1904...... $.30 Books 22ec i aads cee er 
Interest Accrued.......... 30.00 Subscriptions ne.es aes 
Unexpended....:...... 
$30 .30 


.-- $64.64 
_o @olSsod 


$379 .95 


The table below gives an account of funds appropriated by 
the Institute for library purposes during the past year: 


INSTITUTE APPROPRIATIONS. 
NT 


Appropriation for Main- Renta aren: ste sageeeke ie 
TENANCE? ore cv stele nl a $3,000 .00 Insurancé.«<o. ts... oes 
Special Appropriation Salary, Librarian....... 
for Periodical Catalogue... 250.00 Extra Assistance. . 
Bindin gy ote te saree 


Library supplies. acs 


Subscriptions 


Miscellaneous 
Unexpended = inrac- 


$3,250.00 


Express and Postage... 
Catalogue of periodicals. 


106.35 


14.60 
101.28 


1905.] LIBRARY REPORT. 1137 


Following is a comparative statement of disbursements from 
the annual appropriations of the past two years: 
1903-1904 1904-1905 


LESS PB wal-s 305 aya ee $1,505.04 $1,475.04 
UES VEIN Soa eee 54.77 106.35 
abr Sia NOAA rok ater tse) Bona cio es: “Vega /A 4 780.33 780.00 
Piste ae Seis Panes oe ey aslo ee Sek hs 50.00 54.00 
Binding, Periodicals and Books......... 254.20 277.75 
Dt Ary CUP pies eis ae eae aes a tie 2 e's os 65.36 16.51 
SMUSCMDLIONG Rk 11. atlas 625 2.5 ae 20.00 32.00 
Fe<press and Postage... 52. ssw 11.35 14.60 
SEE LIAR COUS oes nc dv ares eaciete «aK oy sayhitels 8s 7.70 *109.35 
Mane RCC spb). le Gu orig, ere ees ees 8 = 251.25 334.40 
PDPTOpria tion)... aed os pee ee oleae es 3,000 00 3,250.00 


*Including $101.25 for printing Catalogue of Periodicals, for which an 
extra appropriation of $250.00 was made. 


ANNUAL APPROPRIATION, 1905-1906. 


The annual appropriation asked of the INsTITUTE for Library 
purposes is limited to the sum required for routine expenses, 
and it includes no provision for the purchase of books or Library 
fixtures. The estimated requirements for the fiscal year May 
1, 1905, to May 1, 1906, are as follows: 


Repent Mee nd Nik’ Wind rd es one suet $1,475.04 
AetSranCet. 6s ci e rear ane ee 2 eisiels See 115.00 
alate LAD EATIAN cj oer cts cys she hist * 780.00 
Extra Assistance.....- sere eee eee 50.00 
ie yLive fe ke As Rn ee ne ee 300.00 
Pinar OUD plies. es - tae i ier ee oS 75.00 
SMSC tITIONG) 3, aoe ge opie ims et 40.00 
Express and Postage.......-----+-+s0+000' 25.00 
MiiacellanCOUs caclo win ate e ie Sees oe es 139.96 
$3,000.00 
Gano S. DuNN 
W. J. JENKS. 
F. A. PATTISON. 


A 
F. W. ROLLER. 
W. D. Weaver, Chairman. 


1138 BOARD OF EXAMINERS. [May 16 


ANNUAL REPORT OF BOARD OF EXAMINERS. 


To THE Boarp oF DirEcTORS, AMERICAN INSTITUTE ELECTRICAL ENGI- 
NEERS: 

Dear Sirs: In compliance with your request, the following report is 
submitted of the work of the Board of Examiners for the fiscal year 
ending April 30, 1905. 

During the year, ten regular meetings were held; also four special 
or adjourned meetings. At these meetings, 527 applications for Assoicate 
membership were recommended for election to that grade. The appli- 
cations of 332 persons for enrollment as Students of the INSTITUTE were 
considered, and of these, 331 were recommended for enrollment. The 
Board of Examiners acted upon 54 applications for transfer to the grade 
of Full Membership; and of these 28 were recommended for transfer, 
and 26 were not recommended for transfer. 

The following remarks are suggested by matters that at times engage 
the attention of the Board of Examiners: 

It is to be assumed that any Board, having charge of work similar 
to that with which the Board of Examiners has to do, would naturally 
strive to follow carefully the rules laid down for its guidance. But 
apart from this, the By-Laws of the InsTITUTE, Section 40, specifically 
requires the Board of Examiners to do so, in the following language: 

“It shall be the duty of the Board of Examiners to carry out 
strictly the provisions of the Constitution respecting the elec- 
tion of Associates, and the transfer of Associates to full mem- 
bership.” 

It has been observed that many full members of the INsTITUTE appear 
not to make themselves conversant with the qualifications required by 
the Constitution for transfer to full membership, prior to endorsing the 
applications of their friends and acquaintances for transfer. It appears 
also, not to be fully recognized by some members that the Constitution 
lays down hard and fast rules as to the professional qualifications which 
Members must possess, and as to the time during which applicants shall 
have beeri in the active practice of the profession of electrical engineer- 
ing, during a certain portion of which time they shall have been in respon- 
sible charge of work. 

An important point that seems to be frequently lost sight of, both by 
endorsers and by applicants for transfer) is that membership in the 
InstituTE should signify that the Member by his work in some branch 
or another of the electrical engineering profession, has attained a nromi- 
nent position in the profession. It may be assumed that it is “not a 
function per se of the INsTITUTE to give an Associate a reputation. 


1905.] BOARD OF EXAMINERS. 1139 


There should be, it would seem, a differentiation between that class 
of men who by their ability and energy have attained to prominence 
in the electrical engineering profession, and another class who, for ore 
reason or another, make no mark in the profession. (Consider that 
both classes have been regularly. graduated electrical engineers.) Yet 
there appear to be members of the InstiruTEe who fail to appreciate 
this distinction. It is obviously no fault of the InstiTuTE if a man 
after graduation as an E. E. eects to become, for example, an author, 
or to adopt any other occupation where in the nature of things he 
cannot practise electrical engineering. 

Another matter that occasionally arises for consideration is as to 
what time after graduation a young man may be said to have become 
fitted to practice electrical engineering as a profession. On this point, 
Mr. H. W. Buck, in an article on ‘‘ Electrical Engineering,” Encyclo- 
pedia Americana, aptly says: 

‘A man makes a mistake to consider himself a qualified elec- 
trical engineer after he has been graduated by a college, for he 
is not one—his mind has been trained into a condition where he 
can readily absorb the principles of the electrical profession, but 
that is all; and the subsequent apprentice training is as impor- 
tant as the college course in order to acquire a broad view point 
from which to make a correct start in the direction for which 
the man is best fitted.”’ 

This time will doubtless vary in nearly every instance; and perhaps 
the decision in such case or cases, must be, as heretofore, left to the judg- 
ment of the Board of Examiners, or Board of Directors, as the case may be. 

There seems to be some difference of opinion as to the merits or general 
fitaess of the existing constitutional qualifications for transfer. Some 
associates and members appear to consider them too rigid. Others 
intimate that judging by alleged, but not specified, poor examples of 
members already transferred, the standard is too low. 

It is the opinion of the Chairman that the present standard of quali- 
fications for transfer to membership is not too high. If any change 
should be contemplated in this direction, it would, he thinks, perhaps 
be advisable to increase the time of actual practice of the profession 
of electrical engineer, and the time of actual charge of work. This 
change might temporarily conduce to limiting the full membership list, 
owing to the great number of young men who have entered the electrical 
engineering profession within the past few years, but every passing year 
would add large numbers to the eligible list for transfer, so far as the 
time limit of practice is concerned. 

While holding the views just expressed as to the maintenance of the 
present standard of qualifications for transfer to full membership it 
should be added that in common with his colleagues on the Board of 
Examiners, the Chairman has long felt that there might with advantage 
be made a distinction between members in the Associate class who are 
in line for transfer to full membership, and those who are simply asso- 
ciated with the electrical profession for commercial reasons. It would 
seem, also, that a satisfactory method might be adopted by which men 
of prominence in other engineering professions, or who are prominent 


1140 . COMMITTEE ON PAPERS. [May 16 


in the electrical engineering profession in a semi-technical way, might 
be admitted to some grade of membership in the INsTITUTE above that 
of Associate. 

The Board of Examiners has had this last mentioned matter under 
informal consideration in the past, and in fact had prepared a set of 
suggested amendments to the Constitution to cover the points noted; 
but jt was understood when these proposed amendments were submitted 
to the Board of Directors for its consideration, that the time was not then 
thought to be opportune. The Chairman would respectfully suggest 
that perhaps the t:me is now ripe for some action on this question. 

Very truly yours, ‘ 
(Signed) Wma. Maver, JR., 
Chairman Board of Examiners. 


REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PAPERS. 


To THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELEC- 
TRICAL ENGINEERS, New York City: 


Dear Sirs: Your Committee on Papers begs leave to submit the fol- 
lowing report of its work dwing the past year. 

Arrangements have been made for eight regular monthly meetings on 
the following subjects: Transmission of Intelligence, Heavy Electric 
Traction, High Tension Transmission, Central Station Practice, Light 
Electric Traction, High Tension Electric Railways, Instruments and 
Measurements, and Safety Devices. For these meetings 16 papers have 
been prepared. Of these but two were volunteered, the remaining 14 
being written at the solicitation of the Committee. The names of the 
writers and their subjects were suggested to the Committee by 
specialists. 

The work of the Committee has been again somewhat hampered by 
the non-delivery of promised papers. In connection with the preparation 
for five different meetings, eminent engineers have given notice to the 
Committee, within only a few days of the time when their manuscript 
should have been in the hands of the printer, that it would be impossible 
for them to prepare these manuscripts. 

Arrangements have been also made for the presentation of 20 papers 
at the Annual Convention. The manuscripts of seven of these are 
already on hand. 

Very respectfully submitted, 
Committee on Papers by 
SAMUEL SHELDON, 
Chairman. 


1905.] EDISON MEDAL COMMITTEE. 1141 


ANNUAL REPORT OF THE EDISON MEDAL COMMITTEE. 


To THE Boarp oF Directors, AMERICAN INSTITUTE ELECTRICAL EN- 
GINEERS: 


Dear Sirs: The Edison Medal Committee met on the 20th of May, 1904, 
and organized under deed of gift and under the resolutions passed by 
the Directors of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINERES, 
April 22, 1904. At this meeting Mr. Gherardi was elected to act as Secre- 
tary of the Committee: In accordance with the resolution of the Directors 
the members of the Committee were, at this meeting, divided by lot 
into groups as follows: 

To serve 1 year: Messrs. Clarke, Martin, and Browne. 


ee eo years:: ‘* ‘Howell, Scott, and Reber. 

s a ae ‘Bradley, Kelly, and Wolcott. 
Cae, eee ‘« Edgar, Sprague, and Gherardi. 
iS ee es “Doherty, Stott, and Hamilton. 


At this meeting a sub-committee was appointed by the Chairman to 
prepare By-Laws to govern the work of the Committee. This Committee 
was composed of Messrs. Clarke, Hamilton, and Gherardi. 

Since that time the Sub-Committee on By-Laws has drawn up a set 
of By-Laws in accordance with deed of gift, and after various meetings 
of the Committee, these By-Laws were finally accepted by the Board of 
Directors on the 23d of December, 1904. 

The first question of importance which called for consideratian was 
the award of the medal for the year 1904. At the many discussions of 
this subject it was decided, in view of the very great difficulty involved, 
due to the lateness of time at which the Committee was organized and 
the By-Laws accepted, that it was impracticable to award the medal for 
the year of 1904. 

The matter was finally referred to the Board of Directors of the In- 
STITUTE and our recommendation to them that the medal be not awarded 
for 1904, was adopted and approved by them. 

A Committee on Institutions of Learning composed of Messrs. Browne, 
Wolcott, and Stott was appointed to carry on such correspondence with 
the various institutions of learning as was necessary, and to pass upon 
the eligibility of all such institutions of learning as wished to compete 
for the medal. 

The Committee sent a letter and copy of the By-Laws to each inst itu- 
tion of learning in the United States and Canada which they considered 
eligible, to the number of 137. 

From these we have received reply of only five institutions, which are 
as follows: 

University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Ark. 

Thos. S. Clarkson Memorial School of Technology, Potsdam, N. Y. 

University of Missouri, Columbia, Mo. 

New York University, New York City. 

School of Mining, Kingston, Ont. 

I am very sorry indeed that so few of the institutions have responded 
and am at a loss to understand why so many of them have apparently 
taken no notice of our letter, unless it be that they considered it un- 


1142 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE. [May 16 


necessary to make reply until such time as they may have a student 


whom they wish to enter for competition. 

I certainly hope that as the end of the college year draws near we 
may have a good many theses presented to us for the competition this 
year. 

Yours very truly, 
Joun W. Howe Lt, 
Chairman, Edison Medal Committee. 
May 9, 1905. 


ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL © 
ELECTRICAL CODE. 


To tue Boarp oF Directors, AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL 
ENGINEERS: 

GENTLEMEN: I beg to submit the following report on behalf of the 
Committee on National Electrical Code. 

The Committee met in New York on December 6, 1904, and also met 
at that time in conference with code committees of the N. E. L. A., and 
the Assn. Ed. Illg. Cos. The committee also attended the annual 
New York meeting, on December 7, of the Underwriters’ Electrical 
Association. A report was submitted to the President and Board of 
Directors on December 20 upon the actions at those meetings. 

At the instance of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, 
through its Secretary, a meeting of the National Conference was re- 
quested. In order to ascertain the views of the membership of the 
InsTITUTE as to the rules in the National Electrical Code, the Board of 
Directors directed the Secretary of the INsTITUTE to issue early in April, 
1905, a circular letter of enquiry to the membership. A copy of this 
circular is appended herewith. Fifteen replies to this circular were 
received by the Committee. The corporations whose officers’ replies 
are included in this list are the Bishop Gutta-Percha Co., the Crocker- 
Wheeler Co., the Pennsylvania R.R. Co., and the United Gas Improve- 
ment Co. The remaining replies were from individuals not representing 
corporations. The rules of the 1903 code specifically criticised in the 
replies were 20 in number, Viz., 1¢, ‘1d; "S8a, 12a" 12m; 12n, 3a," 21d. 
22c, 24a, 33e, 34a, 36c, 41d, 4le, 41f, 47, 51, 54b, 81. Of these, three rules 
were criticised by two persons, viz., lc, 21d, and 36c. No rule was 
criticised by more than two persons. It is considered that most of 
the criticisms are good, and should receive careful attention in detail; 
but that none of them are of sweeping importance. 

The committee met in New York on the 20th of April last to con- 
sider these criticisms, and also to confer with the code committees of 
the National Electric Light Association and of the Assn. of Ed. Illg. Co. 
In view of the greater importance of the matters coming before the con- 
ference, it was voted to defer action upon the criticisms until a more 
favorable opportunity. 

The Conference met in Boston on the 21st of April, 1905. An official 
report will no doubt be’ forwarded to the INsTITUTE, and to all the other 
conferring bodies, by the Conference Secretary. As the delegate of the 


aT 


1905.] NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE. 1143 


InsTITUTE to the conference, I submitted an interim report to the Presi- 
dent of the InstiTuTE on April 24 last. 

Summing up the situation, 

(1) The relations of the Institute, and other bodies in the 
conference, to the Code, as appearing on the flyleaf of the same, have, 
we believe, been materially improved and corrected by the amended 
phraseology due to appear on the flyleaf of the forthcoming edition of 
the Code (1905). 

(2) With the exception of a few details, mentioned above, the mem- 
bership of the InstiITUTE appears to be generally satisfied with the 
rules in the Code. 

(3) Measures have been secured for obtaining appeals to the Board 
of Insurance Underwriters from the rulings of individual insurance 
inspectors alleged to misapply the Code. 

Respectfully submitted, 
: A, E. KENNELLY, 
Chairman, 


May 5, 1905. 


(Copy of circular referred to in above report 2) 
New Yorks, April 3, 1905. 
To THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL EN- 
GINEERS: 

A meeting of the National Conference on Standard Electrical Rules 
will be held at 10 o'clock a.m., Friday, April 21, 1905, at No. 55 Kilby 
Street, Boston, Mass. 

The INSTITUTE will send an official delegate, to be appointed by the 
President, and will also be represented at the sessions of the Conference 
by its Committee on National Electrical Code. 

The Code Committee will be glad to receive suggestions which any 
member or associate member may desire to offer recommending any 
important substantial change in the National Code, such as modifica- 
tion, addition to, or elimination of, any rule or requirement which may 
be shown to be necessary as a result of experience in the practical opera- 
tion of the Code or owing to the progress in the state of the art. 

If no criticisms are received by the Chairman of the Code Committee 
prior to April 14, it will be assumed that no special action amending the 
Code is called for by the membership. 

Communications, preferably typewritten, should be sent to the 
Chairman of the Code Committee not later than April 14, 1905, so that 
they may be considered by the Committee in advance of the meeting 
cf the National Conference. 

Yours very truly, 


A. E. KENNELLY, Chairman. 
Address all communications to L. A, FERGUSON, 
A. E. KENNELLY, P. G. GossLER, 
Chairman A. I. E. E. Code Committee, F. A. C. PERRINE, 
Pierce Hall, Harvard University, H. A. SINCLAIR, 
ARTHUR WILLIAMS, 
G3 


Cambridge, Mass. 
J. H. Woorsury. 


1144 UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. [May 16 


ANNUAL REPORT OF REPRESENTATIVES ON JOINT COM- 
MITTEE ENGINEERING BUILDING. 


To tHE BoarD oF DrrecToRS, AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL 
ENGINEERS: 

Plans and specifications for the Engineering Building to be erected 
under the gift of Mr. Andrew Carnegie have been approved by the Com- 
mittee and bids have been called for. 

The United Engineering Society has been incorporated and an agree- 
ment entered into between it and the “ Founder Societies ’’ the AMERI- 
CAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL EncINEERS, American Society of Mechan- 
ical Engineers, and the American Institute of Mining Engineers. The 
nine trustees of United Engineering Society are appointed by the Founder 
Societies. The United Engineering Society will own and its Trustees 
will administer the Engineering Building and the Founder Societies 
will pay to the United Engineering Society funds for the purchase of 
the land and will receive Treasurer’s receipts therefor. The United 
Engineering Society now holds title to the land purchased for us two 
years ago by Mr. Carnegie on the north side of 39th Street half way 
between 5th and 6th Avenues. 

Such in brief are the results of the work of the past year. 

The architectural competition referred to in the report to the Board 
of Directors in 1904 resulted in 26 sets of plans. After careful examina- 
tion by the Committee plans were selected and were found to be 
those submitted by Herbert D. Hale, Architect, and Henry G. Morse, 
Associate. These plans were elaborated by the architect and were care- 
fully studied by the Committee. They were submitted to the governing 
boards of the three Societies for suggestion and approval. 

In order that proper provision might be made for a great engineering 
library the Committee suggested to the governing boards of the Founder 
Societies that a conference committee on library be appointed. Such 
a committee was appointed, there being three members from each of 
the three Societies. A comprehensive scheme for bringing together 
the libraries of the Societies and making them the nucleus of a great 
engineering library was recommended to the governing boards of the 
Societies and accepted by them, The Conference Committee on Library 
has made a study of the plans and recommended the arrangement of 
the library and stack room floor of the Building. 

The Building will provide a reception room on the first floor, a mezza- 
nine coat room, and a large auditorium on the second floor. Over this 
will be assembly and small lecture rooms. Above the meeting rooms 
will be office floors for the three Founder Societies and other engineering 
and scientific bodies, termed Associate Societies. The library will 
occupy the upper floor. 

The Committee has had a double problem: first, to determine the 
probable future needs of the growing Engineering Societies and second, 
to design the Building so as to accommodate these needs. 

The details of the plans are not given in this report as it would be 
anticipating a report which the Committee has in preparation for dis- 


1905.] UNITED ENGINEERING SOCIETY. 1145 


tribution through the Secretaries of the several Societies, which will 
contain the plans with descriptive matter. 

The Joint Committee is constituted as follows: AMERICAN INsTI- 
TUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, Charles F. Scott, Bion J. Arnold, 
Schuyler Skaats Wheeler; American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 

Charles Wallace Hunt, James M. Dodge, Frederick R. Hutton; American 
Institute of Mining Engineers, Albert R. Ledoux, Theodore Dwight, 
Charles Kirchhoff; The Engineers’ Club, John C. Kafer, William ial 
Fletcher, Thomas C. Martin. Ofthis Committee Mr. Scott is chairman, 
and Professor Hutton is secretary. 

This Joint Committee represents the four organizations named in the 
letter of Mr. Carnegie, in which he devoted one and one-half milion 
dollars ‘‘ for the erection of a suitable home for you all.” 

Soon after its organization two sub-committees were appointed on 
behalf of the Engineering Societies, one on organization consisting of 
Messrs. Wheeler, Ledoux, and Hunt; and one on building plans consist- 
ing of Messrs. Scott, Hutton, and Kirchhoff (the latter has been suc- 
ceeded by Mr. Dwight). 

A statement regarding the plan of permanent organization by Dr. 
Wheeler, who has been instrumental jn its evolution and who is treasurer 
of United Engineering Society, is appended to this report. 

The Engineering Building faces on 39th Street and the Club building 
faces on 40th Street abut in the rear and there will be convenient means 
of access between the buildings. The titles. to the two properties and 
the administration of the buildings will be independent, being vested 
jn the United Engineering Society on the one hand and The Engineers’ 
Club on the other. 

The contract for the Engineers’ Club, Whitfield & King, Architects, 
has been let and work is just beginning. The buildings which formerly 
occupied the five lots which will be occuiped by the Engineering Building 
have been removed and all is in readiness to proceed when the contracts _ 
are let. 

Respectfully submitted, 
Cuas. F. Scort, 
Bron J. ARNOLD, 
ScHUYLER SKAATS WHEELER. 


STATEMENT REGARDING UnitEpD ENGINEERING SOCIETY. 


On behalf of the representatives of the InsTITUTE on the Joint Com-~- 
mittee for erecting the building for the United Engineering Society, and 
particularly with reference to the sub-committee on organization of 
which I was lately made chairman, I report as follows: 

The original Joint Committee consisted of fifteen members, three each 
from five bodies, but the Civil Engineers withdrew and the Committee 
thereupon became one of twelve members. 

The original Sub-Committee on Organization, Dr. Ledoux Chairman, 
quickly decided that the fund should be handled as two funds, one 
belonging to the Club and the other to the Engineering Societies, and 
that tenancy in common and other arrangements being undesirable for 
the sister engineering societies, a separate corporation should be organ- 


1146 UNITED ENGINEERING SOCIETY. [May 15 


ized for holding their property, authorized if possible by a special Act of 
the Legislature. 

Such an Act was obtained, but through error it provided that the 
Society’s property should be exempt from taxation, in violation of a 
very recent amendment of the State Constitution. This, however, did 
not nullify the Act in general and the Act is useful in providing simple 
and satisfactory machinery for the administration of the affairs of the 
Society for the three beneficiaries in such a way that its property shall be 
exempt from taxation. The property of a membership corporation may 
be kept exempt from taxation if it is used exclusively for library, 
educational, and similar purposes, and no profit is made out of it. 
United Engineering Society had to be a “ holding’’ corporation for 
membership corporations, a legal relation without precedent, and the 
special charter obtained as above, being Chapter 703 of the Laws of the 
State of New York signed May 11, 1904, gives authorization for this 
arrangement. 

The settlement of the question of the division of the fund of $1 500 000 
was long delayed, but was finally made $1 050 000 for the engineering 
societies and $450 000 for the Club. 

The question of placing a bond between the properties of the Club 
and the United Society so that neither could be alienated from the other, 
was taken up, but was not carried out further than by the Club’s placing 
upon its minute book a declaration of intention to stay with the societies. 

It had been understood the donor of the fund was to purchase the 
four-story 25-ft. residence to the east of the Engineering Society site in 
39th Street, and was to resell it in the market after restricting it to its 
present height for the benefit of the United Engineering building. 

A misunderstanding in regard to the above proposition developed 
and the arrangement was not made. The Club purchased the property, 
after obtainimg-Mr. Carnegie’s offer to carry the mortgage for them for 
twenty years at four per cent., and the Club placed the restriction on it 
as to its height in favor of the United Society. The ultimate object of 
the Club is to hold the property available for an addition. For the 
present it has been leased by them for ten years. 


ORGANIZATION. 


The special charter granted to United Engineering Society by the State 
of New York, confers upon certain individuals (being the individuals 
appeinted by the several societies to represent them in the United So- 
ciety) the right to organize as a corporation and leaves the character 
of that corporation to be determined almost exclusively by such by-laws 
as the men above referred to may adopt. In consequence great atten- 
tion was given to the preparation of these by-laws, since upon them de- 
pends the whole complexion of the holding company. After much 
discussion and seven revisions in print, a set of by-laws was approved 
by each of the founder societies and adopted by the United Society. 
The organization so formed provides a corporation to be managed 
absolutely by nine men, and these men are to be appointed, removed, 
etc., absolutely by the Founder Societies, three men each. These 
trustees are to allot space in the building to the various societies, both 


1905.] LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS. 1147 


founder and associates, and each is to pay a share of the total cost of 
maintaining the property proportionate to the space each occupies. 
Carried on in this way the property is not taxable. 
For further detail of the organization see the printed by-laws of 
United Engineering Society adopted December 16, 1904. 


EXPENSES. 


All of the expenses of the Joint Committee so far that are not directly 
chargeable respectively to each of the two interests, are divided between 
them in the same ratio as the original fund. 

Plans and specifications for the complete building of the United En- 
gineering Society are about ready to be issued for bidding, the contract 
for the erection of the Club having been let some weeks ago. 

ScHUYLER SKAATS WHEELER. 
Treasurer United Engineering Soctety. 


ANNUAL REPORT OF LOCAL ORGANIZATION COMMITTEE. 


To tHE Boarp oF Drrecrors, AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL 
ENGINEERS: 

The local work of the InstiruTE has shown a healthy development 
during the past year. Four additions have been made to the list as 
follows: 

Baltimore Branch, December 16, 1904, J. B. Whitehead, Chairman; 
C. G. Edwards, Secretary. 

: San, Francisco Branch, December 23, 1904, G. O. Squier, Chairman; 

A. H. Babcock, ‘Secretary. 

Syracuse University Branch, February 24, 1905, W. P. Graham, Chair- 
man and Secretary. 

University of Colorado, Student Meetings, December 16, 1904, H. B. 
Dates, Chairman; A. J. Forbess, Secretary. 

The original object of the local organization work was three-fold. 
First, to afford the means by which members geographically scattered 
might participate in the work of the InstiTuTE by contributing to the 
discussion of papers read at the general meetings and in contributing 
new material; secondly, to awaken local interest and activity among elec- 
trical men, not only among those belonging to the InstTiTUTE but out- 
siders as well; thirdly, to bring the up-to-date engineering papers before 
the students in technical schools and universities in order to bring them 
into sympathetic relations with the InstITUTE and its work. 

The formation of over 30 centers of local INSTITUTE activity in two 
years and a half, followed in nearly all cases by sustained interest and 
in many cases by the presentation of original papers, indicates the com- 
prehensive activity of the electrical men of our country; it, moreover, 
indicates the response given by our membership at large to the oppor- 
tunities afforded through the action of the Board of Directors. 

Latitude has been given in the method of organization and conduct- 
ing of branches in order to enable each to meet in the best snanner the 
local conditions by which it is surrounded. The results which are being 
secured are due in a large measure to the intelligent direction of the 


1148 LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS. [May16 


STATISTICS OF BRANCHES, MAY, 1905. 


ee een ee eS Se eee 


Membership 


No. of Original 
Meetings |Average | Papers 


Branch In- |A.1.E.E.| Since | Attend-]| Since 
Apr. 20 | May 1 crease |Students| Sept. 1 ance. Sept. 1 
1904 1905 1904 1904 

CHICAGO .6. oo sci or sies 152 176 24 6 80 6 
Minnesota.........-.- 12 15 3 9 22 2 
Pittsburg.........--- 128 157 29 60 5 
Denver..........---- 32 32 0 
Cincinnati.........-- 47 56 9 1 60 
St. Louis..........-- 60 65 5 4 20 1 
Schenectady........- 113 121 8 7 90 2 
Philadelphia......... 92 114 22 6 45 4 
Bostomsias oat scifi 195 187 a= 6 85 5 
Washington, D., C.... 44 51 7 6 40 16 
Toronto. :..<...-+5+- 24 26 2 11 19 6 
Columbus.........-- 33 42 9 10 16 6 
Seattle.......5..+.-. 17 24 7 1 12 2 
Atlanta). ...;. 0055-0 as: 19 37 18 5 12 5 
Pittsfield..........-- 27 31 4 14 35 22 
Baltimore.........-- 21 34 13 4 23 
San Francisco.......- 36 57 21 5 42 
Cornell University ... 14 13 —1 102 5 75 
Lehigh University... . 4 5 1 0 7 40 20. 
Univ. of Wisconsin... 19 19 0 8 16 18 17 
Univ. of Illinois..... . 5 4 —i1 15 22 
Purdue University... 5 7 2 46 5 26 
lowa State College.... 5 10 5 34 8 32 11 
Worcester Polytechnic 

Institute........... 10 14 4 13 8 45 5 
Syracuse University. . 8 12 4 Ki} T 16 2 
Onio State Univ...... 3 2 9 10 30 2 
Penn. State College .. 1 2 ul 12 40 8 
Univ. of Missouri... .. 1 2 1 15 7 15 
Armour Institute..... 1 3 2 46 5 32 3 
Washington Univ... . 1 1 0 19 3 Wey 1 
Univ, of Michigan... . 3 3 1 15 10 25 jf 
Univ, of Arkansas.... 2 0 11 9 12 1 
Univ. of Colorado... . 2 0 15 9 20 7 


1905.] STANDARDIZATION COMMITTEE. 1149 


officers in charge. ‘The secret of success lies largely in the management 
of the Branch, as the selection of topics and the conduct of meetings in 
such a way as to present live and important subjects in an interesting 
and profitable manner is sure to meet with the codperation of the mem- 
bers and to attract others. In some Branches the arrangements for 
- each meeting are assigned to one of the members of the executive com- 
mittee; each member then has a definite thing to do and he takes an 
interest in doing it successfully. 

One of the elements in Branch meetings is the benefit resulting from 
bringing together electrical men from the various interests in which 
they are engaged for social acquaintance as well as technical discussion. 
In several cases the members are invited to dine together at a restauran’ 
on the evening of the meeting. This is an especially pleasant oppcr- 
tunity for out-of-town members who may chance to be in the city, as 
the chairman has found from his own experience. 

The InsTITUTE has at present 617 Students. These young men rep- 
sent over 50 institutions. They pay a nominal fee, which is approxi- 
mately equal to the cost of the ProcEEpINGs which they receive. The 
INSTITUTE may congratulate itself in gaining a substantial hold upon 
these young men and in contributing a substantial influence toward 
rendering them acceptable members at a later time. The institutions 
from which the larger enrollment comes are Cornell University, Purdue 
University, Armour Institute, Iowa State College, Washington Univer- 
sity (St. Louis), University of Colorado, University of Missouri, Syracuse 
University, University of Michigan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 
Pennsylvania State College, University of Arkansas, McGill University, 
each of which numbers from 102 to 10 students. Schenectady and Pitts- 
burg, the seats of large manufacturing companies, enroll about 30 each, 

The appended statistics show the work of the year. The increase 
in membership is about 18%. The number of meetings does not repre- 
sent a full year, as some meetings will be held after this report is closed. 
With few exceptions there have been monthly meetings and in some 
places meetings are more frequent. The aggregate attendance averages 
between 1100 and 1200. There is considerable activity in the prepara- 


i new papers. 
Ta nie CHAS. F. SCOTT. 


Chairman Local Organization Commuttee. 


eS 


ANNUAL REPORT OF STANDARDIZATION COMMITTEE. 


To THE BOARD OF Directors, AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL 


ENGINEERS: . 
GentLeMEN: As this Committee was not appointed until the March 
meeting of the Board of Directors, it is not in a position to make 
on work done. 

E i teeenised by the Committee that the previous reports have been 
very useful and important in crystallizing and standardizing electrical 
practice. And as electrical progress is not fixed and completed, nether 
is the possibility for useful work through the Standardization Committee 


of the INSTITUTE, terminated. 


1150 LAND AND BUILDING FUND. [May 16 


It is the purpose of the present Committee to review the last Report 
of the Committee, adopted by the INsTITUTE June 20, 1902, making 
such modifications as may be found desirable; also to complete the 
work of the Committee during the past two years under the Chairman- 
ship of Professor Ryan, which has not been finally formulated and 
adopted. It is the purpose, also, to coéperate with the work of similar 
societies in other countries, notably the Institution of Electrical Engi- 
neers and the British Standards Committee. The move toward inter- 
national standardization received a decided impetus at the International 
Electrical Congress held in St. Louis in September last; both through 
the paper of Col. Crompton, reporting the work of the British Standards 
Committee, and also the action of the Board of Delegates, recommending 
international codperation. 

The Committee will be glad to receive suggestions either general or 
specific from the members of the InstITUTE, which may be addressed to 
the Secretary. 

Cuas. F. Scort, 
Chairman 


ANNUAL REPORT OF THE LAND AND BUILDING FUND 
COMMITTEE. 


To: tHE Boarp oF Directors, AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL 
ENGINEERS: 

Dear Sirs: I have the honor tosubmit the Annual Report of the A.I.E.E. 
Land and Building Fund Committee. 

In the report of the Committee to President B. J. Arnold, dated May 
5, 1904, it was shown that the contributions to the Fund to that date 
were $45 000. 

Early in May the Committee seat out its Fourth Announcement, 
embodying the report of Mr. Chas. F. Scott, Chairman of the Joint 
Committee of the Union Engineering Building, to the Board of Directors 
of the InstiTuTE, a full statemeat of the progress of the work, the char- 
acter and plans of the Engineering Building, a full list of subscribers, 
and the amounts subscribed to March 31, 1904. At the same time, an 
appeal was made by circular to INsTITUTE members asking not only for 
subscriptions, but also for the valuable aid of their personal offices in 
securing subscribers. ar 

On May 26, the Committee reported contributions to the amount of 
$60 000, among the recent subscriptions being $5000 from Thos. aXe 
Edison, and $5000 from Dr. M. I. Pupin, the latter being promised on 
condition that nine other contributions of like amount were to be made 
to the Fund. 

The Committee then took in hand the careful canvass of the Local 
Branches of the InstiTuTE with regard to the possibility of arousing 
local interest in, and securing subscriptions for, the Fund. The officers 
of the Branches responded enthusiastically, expressing their desire to 
coéperate actively with the plans of the Committee; and a large number 
of subscriptions were due to their efforts. In the month of December 
a regular list of the members of the Local Branches was prepared, and 


1905.] LAND AND BUILDING FUND. 1151 


r9) 


. much care was expended on the making of this list. During this month, 
the Committee wrote special letters to such members of the various 
Branches as seemed likely to be contributors. 

In July, the Committee published its. Fifth Announcement, giving 
the text of the Act for Incorporating the United Engineering Society, 
the report of the Library of the Union Engineering Building, a statement 
of the work of the Joint Committee, and a list of subscriptions to June 
30, 1904, amounting to $62 752, showing that over 500 members had 
subscribed, and urging still wider and more effective support. 

In July and August, the Committee wrote to every subscriber from 
whom an instalment was due, and in December similar applications 
were made, other letters being addressed in the meantime as the re- 
spective promises of subscriptions matured. The Committee has also 
prepared a special list covering over 15000 of the leading firms and 
organizations in the electrical field. 

The subscription list has now reached $66 534.50, of which $19 301.25 
has been placed in the treasury of the INsTITUTE. 

The Committee is now looking forward to a vigorous prosecution of 
its work as soon as the plans of the United Engineering Building are 
issued and it has reason for the belief that much of the careful labor 
which has been expended in preparation for a wider range of activity, 
and in the enthusing of those whose eventual support is hoped for, is 
now about to bear abundant fruit. 

Very truly yours, 
CaLvIN W. RICE, 
Chairman, 


INDEX. 
BUSINESS OF THE INSTITUTE. 


Address, President John W. Lieb, Jr., at Asheville, N. C., June 19, 


NO I er eR tates gay SURES c) casteoya lol ois ua) Webbe CRG Ra GATS Terke wel gw Bangs us 283 
Annual Convention, Asheville,-N. C., June 19-23, 1905........... 283 
ea COMO EC hee SE CTE UATAN Gir cieicdet cledegiol oto) 4 6) + oho shred n nu cole “endyey ot sa ol 1125 
SoaEcmOLeDirecbOrs, INeCPOLL Olt. eects ie eee eo ee 1120 
Boston vMcetino Mepritariol, WOOD. csi 2. Olemriets eee «cre eel ene 24 
Chicago Meeting, February 28, 1905..............-.--.e eee e eee 55 
Maceo Mecting- May 23, 19052. ..5 28s ee cok oe ee 1067 
Circular Tour, 1904, Report of General Reception Committee..... 1129 
Convention, Annual, Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905.......... 283 
Tisai IDibonates env 0 hens Rae oer ec es een ol > Gi teow ui ba oie 1125 
Wirectors, Reporuen woard! Of... 2... 22 =. ewe ee enone 1120 
Disiuirsements and. Receipts arent cial Mics la ele ied og ele bee sae 1126° 
Edison Medal Committee, Annual Report of............-....54. 1141 
Engineering Building, Report of Representatives on Joint Com-: peal 

Eat STS pop rants Sle ca RCo Ca ETL aC hen oo oe RO a a 1144 
Examiners, Annual Report of Board of.............--....+..... 1188 
Finance, Annual Report of Committee on........---...+-+.e05 1128 


General Meeting, Twenty-second, Asheville, N. C., June 19-28, 1905 288 
InsTITUTE Receipts and Disbursements..............---2200++0: 1126 
International Electrical Congress, St. Louis, 1904, Report of General 


Peception Committee of... 00.0. 6. F808. tye ee 1129 
Land and Building Fund Committee, Annual Report of.......... 1150 
Library Committee, Annual Report of...............2.-++.+00) 1133 
Lieb, John W., Jr., President of the InstTiTuTE 1904—5, Portrait of. 

Frontispiece 
Local Organizations, Annual Report of Committee on.........--. 1147 
Meeting, Boston, February 1, 1905..........--.... 00s see eee 24 
Meeting, Chicago, February 28, 1905.....--. 2... +... seer eee ees 55 
Meeting, Chicago, May 23, 1905.........---- sees eee eens 1067 
Meeting, New York, January 27, 1905.......-....-.+- ++ ss serene 1 
Meeting, New York, February OY SRS Olan oer tis erence ene 65 
Meeting, New York, March 24, 1905......06..- essere eerste 97 
Meeting, New York, April 28, 1905......-....-+- +e sess eer rreee 165 
Meeting, New York, May 16, 1905.........-.-- +20. sees e reese QA7 
Meeting, New York, September-22, 1905.........-.-0-++esesees 893 
Meeting, New York, October 27, TOYO NER Cache A f fee uch nee REMC Ea 935 
Meeting, New York, November Dee wade 5 coco! cro Tory GIR Ceaea 999 
Meeting, New York, December 5, OOo n mclos hott 6 ce eens 1079 
Meeting, Philadelphia, May 8, 1905...-....-++-+-seseeererccees 231 
Meeting, Pittsburg, May 8. 1905.......---.-----ee seer eee t reese 237 
Meeting, Pittsburg, June 5, 1905:.....----- seer rere tees 281 
Meeting, San Francisco, May 9, 1905....----+---+ssserere sere 240 
Membership, Resume Of... 2.62... 200 veneer rc etin ese ".. 1124 
National Electrical Code, Annual Report of Committee on.......- 1142 
National Engineering Societies, Organization and Administration 

OMe oma We Lieb, ere). i ee aren ae es 283 
New York Meeting, January 27, 1905....-...--+---sseee reece 1 
New York Meeting, February 24, 1905.....----+++25se sree eee ree 
New York Meeting, March 24, 1905........-+ 2220225525 e erences 97 
New York Meeting, April 28, 1905......- 6. -+-+sseeeee eee errr 165 


1153 


1154 INDEX. 


New York Meeting, May 16, 1905......----++see eee ree rete 247 
New York Meeting, September 22, 16°, 1 en ee ane Sr rete fu 850 © 893 
New York Meeting, October 27, 1905......-.+-+--+++eeerrrrces 935 
New York Meeting, November 24, 1905.......-.--+++++sees+-5 999 
New York Meeting, December 5, 1905......-.-+ +--+ + seperate: 1079 
Organization and Administration of National Engineering Soci- 
eties—By John W. Lieb, Jr... 6.2 eee ce ee settee eee eees 283 
Papers, Annual Report of Committee on......--++-++e+sssesrere 1140 
Philadelphia Meeting, May 8, 1905. .....2. 21022 epee nese es Zan 
Pittsburg Meeting, May 8, 1905........-- +--+ ee ester rere recess 237 
Pittsburg Meeting, June 5, 1905........ 5+ ++. +e ee eee eet tte ee 281 
Portrait of John W. Lieb, Jr., President of the InstITUTE 1904-5, 
Frontispiece 
President John W. Lieb, Jr’s., Address at Asheville, N. C., June 19, 
ik! | 0) ERE RRM ASA Ors An a ou tig 2S 2. 283 
Receipts and Disbursements........- +. -+secs seer reer eerste: 1126 
Report, Annual, of the Committee on Finance............+-+-+: 1128 
Report, Annual, of the Committee on National Electrical Code.... 1142 
Report, Annual, of the Committee on Papers.......-.--+-+-++++ 1140 
Report, Annual, of the Board of Directors........--++-++++++++: 1120 
Report, Annual, of the Board of Examiners.......-++--+++-+++5 1138 
Report, Annual, of the Edison Medal Committee............-.-- 1141 
Report, Annual, of the Land and Building Fund Committee...... 1150 
Report, Annual, of the Library Committee. .......+.++++++++5+> 1133 
Report, Annual, of the Local Organization Committee. ....-...-. 1147 
Report of Representatives on Joint Committee, Engineering 
Build ../ 0. oss 5 2s eaen oe RW he Speen erie 1144 
Report, Annual, of the Standardization Committee....-......-.. 1149 
Report of General Reception Committee, in connection with Inter- 
national Electrical Congress, and Circular Tour, 1904........ 1129 
San Francisco Meeting, May 9, 1905...........00.- sees eee eeees 240 
Secretary’s Balance Sheet.......-.. sees ee seer eee e ee sree eee 1125 
Twenty-second General Meeting at Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 
tes Sen ot ar Srey tc ck Sat 283 
Tréasuret’s Reports «oo 0065 «a0 sale st ey hid aM okie aac 1127 


United Engineering Society, Statement Regarding...........-.-. 1145 


PAPENS AND DISCUSSIONS. 


Acyclic (Homopolar) Dynamos. (Illustrated. (J. E. Noeggerath.). 
Air Gap Flux in Induction Motors. Panett oe Si ao) 
Alternate Current Machinery—lInduction Alternators. (Ilustrated.) 

(William Stanley, assisted by G. F EGHOLYS) MRT ee es Ohne 
Appalachian Region, Water Powers of the Southeastern......-+... 
Appalachian Streams, the Preservation Of. ..-5.2..:.. Atk ea 
Are, Alternating-Current; Notes on the Power-Factor of. (Ilus- 

Pee er rarer ans ity es ata shies aieathielgtias AME FS 
Block Signaling, Electrical Features of. (ilustrated.)).% .2: ss 
Cement in Central Station Design. (Eugene B. (GHORIE. Ps chad= Desrake 
(SenuralsStation Design ase: osccitet. ots + feb co ude etn eras see 
Gentral Station. Desien,. Cement ims 2. eae ote i 
Choice of Motors in Steam and Electric Practice. (Ilustrated.) 


trated. (John W. Howell.)..0.0- 00. + per ire teen eens teens 
Commutation, Limits of Injurious Sparking in Direct Current. 
Wilt etstecOd. as A par evpunawth niereast arate te SEEN 6 > eS ae 
Conductors and Cables, Electric, Data Relating to. (llustrated.). 
Constant Current Mercury Arc Rectifier. (Illustrated.) (Charles 
ee ICU CS Et IHECES Yum onda secs 8 APA CoS RAS! Cone Soo TE OT 
Converters, Synchronous, and Motor Generators. (Illustrated.)... 
Crompton, Col. R. E. B., Comments on Remarks Made by, before 
the International Electrical Congress, St. Louis, 1904. (Illus- 
‘ced WN) eet © he Teacher m8 o MS Cet pce tk Be Gee OS GR 
Data Relating to Electric Conductors and Cables. (Illustrated.) 
Cas Fi sTeT push Seen aster eer t8 + 2 hal ah Es | Sa: 
Design, Limitations of Direct Current Machine. (Illustrated.).... 
Design of Induction Motors, with Special Reference to Magnetic 
Leakage. (Illustrated.) (Comfort A. Adams.).....+---++++: 
Development of the Ontario Power Co. (Illustrated.) (P.N.N uUnn.) 
Discussion on ‘‘A New Carbon Filament,” at Asheville, No Cr June 


nating Currents,” at Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905....-.-- 
Discussion on ‘“‘ Acyclic (Homopolar) Dynamos,” at Boston, Febru- 
Bi cr ere aes Et 
Discussion on ‘‘ Acyclic (Homopolar) Dynamos,” at New York, Jan- 
uary 27, 1905. ..2-- +22 es sou it Ua ih AIR To oe Dee SOR Toa: Oe 
Discussion on ‘‘ Air Gap Flux in Induction Motors,”’ at New York, 
September 22, 1905.....--+--s-rcer er tay ree cton aoe 
Discussion on ‘‘ Alternate Current Machinery—Induction Alterna- 
tors,’ at Asheville, N. C.,,June 19-23, 1905....- +--+ +++ 2 
Discussion on Central Station Design, at New York, January 27, 
pi SE eS Re ear a a aa a OE 
Discussion on ‘‘ Choice of Motors in Steam and Electric Practice,”’ 
at Asheville, N. C., June Pa wl OO Bigtihe we gar aa tte 3 pee 8 
Discussion on ‘‘Comments on Remarks Made by Col. RE: .B: 
Crompton before the International Electrical Congress, ats 
Louis, 1904,” at Asheville, N. C., June 102935 JOU Sirk. . ots wats 
Discussion on ‘Constant Current Mercury Arc Rectifier,” at Asheville, 
Raia ge 9-23, 00S eame nats orient ee tt eee 


1155 


1156 INDEX. 


Discussion on Electric Conductors and Cables, at Asheville, N.C., 
Jiine: 19=23;. 19052 s-ies; heat eerie tke eee we 
Discussion on ‘‘ Electrical Features of Block Signaling,” at Asheville, 
Nui: June sl9=23; 190 Sas eee eee ee eee Soles oY athe 
Discussion on ‘‘ Heavy Traction Problems in Electrical Engineer- 
ing,’’ at Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905..........--- ore 
Discussion on High Pressure Line Construction, at New York, 
March, 2457 1905255 ew rect toe ons = air ie tae ene We ees 
Discussion on Lightning, and Lightning Protective Apparatus, ta 
New Yorks October 27, 1905. 32 se25 ton dee Paes ae via aeidie 
Discussion on ‘“‘ Limitations of Direct Current Machine Design,” at 
Asheville N. C., June 19-23, 1905..............- ees 
Discussion on ‘Limits of Injurious Sparking in Direct Current 
Commutation,’”’ at Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905........ 
Discussion on Measuring Instruments, at NewYork, April 28, 1905.. 
Discussion on Measuring Instruments, at Philadelphia, May 8, 1905 
Discussion on Measuring Instruments, at Pittsburg, May 8, 1905.. 
Discussion on Measuring Instruments, at San Francisco, May 9, 1905 
Discussion on ‘‘ Methods of Measurement of High Electrical Pres- 
sures,’’ at Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905..........--.--- 
Discussion on ‘‘ Standardization of Enclosed Fuses,”’ at New York, 
September::22, 1905295... ene eee seek eet vs sel eens 
Discussion on Static Disturbances in Distribution Systems and 
Commercial Transmission Lines, at Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 
LOO 3 5 See Beds OS ei ee 
Discussion on ‘‘ Synchronous Converters and Motor Generators,” at 
Asheville, N. C., June 19-23, 1905........... aie 5 FOS 
Discussion on ‘‘ The Design of Induction Motors with Special Refer- 
ence to Magnetic Leakage,’’ at Asheville, N.C., June 19-23, 1905 
Discussion on ‘‘ The Development of the Ontario Power Co.,” at 
Asheville; N= C:,.June: 19-23, 1905.2). ...24 t0). See ee es 
Discussion on ‘‘ The National Bureau of Standards’’, and ‘‘ A Test- 
ing Laboratory in Practical Operation,’’ at New York, Novem- 

ber DA, VOOR L. 6.5 deo 8 Se ROCA ok A Ae PD CR eee Pe ae 
Discussion on ‘The Relation of Railway Sub-station Design to its 
Operation,’’ and ‘‘ Some Considerations Determining the Loca- 
tee of Electric Railway Sub-stations,’’ at New York, December 

> LOOT ats Fo ehile acre ha Gel ote actly & chalene ta eneevnLatets sina a aerate 
Discussion on ‘‘Three-Phase Traction,” at Asheville, N.C., June 
19-23; LODS scr. 2 TEAM dine heen be eral del die as.4 aeolian Aer enone 
Discussion on ‘‘ Time Limit Relays,’’ and ‘‘ Duplication of Electri- 
cal Apparatus,” at’ New York, May 16; L005.0"..0. ) deems 
Discussion on ‘‘ Time Limit Relays,’’ and ‘‘ Duplication of Electri- 
cal Apparatus,” at’ Pittsburg? June’5,71905, 9.20 is. aoe 
Discussion on Track Bonding, at New York, February 24, 1905.... 
Discussion on ‘‘ Two-Motor versus Four-Motor Equipments,’’ at New 
Yorks. February 24-1908. ats idcns sero ce eeeeeiele 
Discussion on ‘‘ Water Powers of the Southeastern Appalachian 
Region,’’ at Asheville, N. C., June 19-28, 1905.............. 
Discussion on “‘ Weight Distribution of Electric Locomotives as Af- 
fected by Motor Suspension and Draw-Bar Pull,’’ at Asheville, 

N.. ©. June: 19-23) 1905 ek soe, AS baler or ee 
Duplication of Electrical Apparatus to Secure Reliability of Service. 
(EE. Wie Buck.) ic ig le A 5 Raye te 
Eddy Currents in Large Slot-wound Conductors. (Illustrated.) 
(AvBy Bteld.). soc 5. eg Stale ee RAO ice. eon Ae ee 
Edison. Electric Illumination Co., of Boston.:......6..2...2.... 
Electrical Features of Block Signaling. (lIllustrated.) (L. H. 
Fallen Yrs oo ag Oe he SER tt Ge ae nT ect e 
Equipments, Two-Motor versus Four-Motor. (Illustrated.)....... 
Experimental Studv of the Rise of Potential on Commercial Trans- 
mission Lines, Due to Static Disturbances Caused by Switch- 
ing, Grounding, etc. (Illustrated.) (Percy H. Thomas.)..... 


Bye 


” nsec ll 


INDEX. 


Milament a0 New Carbon. — (Illustrated’) i. i se. eka ee eee oa 
Fuses, Enclosed, Standardization of. (Jllustrated.).............. 
Heavy Traction Problems in Electrical Engineering. (Carl L. de 
IOUS) os cc nce SE BDO 0 ECD en I ee 
High Power Surges in Electrical Distribution Systems of Great 
Magnitude. (Illustrated.) (Charles Proteus Sternmetz.)...... 
‘High Pressure Electric Railroads, Line Construction tor.  (Illus- 
RWS!) ae it oo a8 lo eee OE 0 tee eRe A 
High Pressure Line Construction for Alternating-Current Railways. 
Gilustratedkims (lcodorenY arnege eis tec nusice oe cite ities 
Homopolan) ynamosan (Mmstrateda) ei. cs. ce ceninne acts cre Ste ty ao ee 
Instruments on Switchboards, Notes on the Use of.............. 
Laboratory, Testing, in Practical Operation. (lllustrated.)....... 
Light Electric Railways. (Illustrated.) (James R. Cravath.).... 
Lightning Arresters on Italian. High-lVension Transmission Lines, 
INGtesmom-me (Lbustrateds) aterm ine) tele e e ee  e ecies wees 
ee eee vt resters on Transmission Lines, Performance of. (Illus- 
eeu CCM Meme esvarere nt sche cite oe Ma RT RMS A auchre a Rim val preiaarenns als 
Lager oo Apparatus, Some Experiences with. (Illus- 
TEEDUGGL Ns 815 6'6 O83 ee Aea EEE: BR ia, Bld Re opal eee cticiate OL On Roe ne cece 
Limitations of Direct Current Machine Design.  (Illustrated.) 
GS USACE MS CHISLIGES.) day cians aie Saket ale he aw Mion tes Atha el sie 
Limits of Injurious Sparking in Direct Current Commutation. 
gliliorert epee) an COLO UT IRCLG lero out cE Nee alee «aks ct Aleusee 9) «chi he 
Line Construction for High Pressure Electric Railroads. (Illustrated) 
MOR CEM DI OTNON Wore ne) s ans vias zone samea ee acl e ey 5 Bt teta Ss 
Line Construction, High Pressure, for Alternating-Current Rail- 
ves: (CMU Stine fer) ean cen levees checidic ilo oleictoro. oie icra Riec Iya 
Locomotives, Electric, Weight Distribution of, as Affected by 
Motor Suspension and Draw-Bar Pull. (Illustrated.)........ 
Magnetic Leakage, The Design of Induction Motors with Special 
lererencento mm elitnistrated.))s-tact eo aia ister os Geis psy yee 
Maintenance of Meters. (W. J. Mowbray.)..........0.++.eeeee- 
Measurement of Alternating Currents, A New Instrument for. 
Giletettt tea eee crew oes cn gene eo ole = wouttlnle dine 9» Whe 
Measurement of High Electrical Pressures, Methods of. (Illus- 
“EREUHOG!) ccna 0.9 Ou 6 188, Ol Osa 61S EOI ENROL) 0 OIC cicero aa 
Mercury Arc Rectifier, Constant Current. (IIlustrated.)......... 
Metering, Polyphase, Some Notes on.. (liitiictraueds) rec amierertstaletra 
Meters, Maintenance of.......... 20-2 eee cette ete eee 
Methods of Measurement of High Electrical Pressures.  (Illus- 
trated.) (S. M. Kintner.).......05 +02 cee e eee e ree eet 
Modern Central Station Design as Exemplified by the New Turbo- 
Generator Station of the Edison Electric Mluminating Com- 
pany of Boston. (. 1D. NCO b) Gocncee ott HocRm ance sor 
Motor Generators and Synchronous Converters. — (Illustrated.). Megs 
Motor, Induction, Note on a Simple Device for Finding the Slip of. 
Motors, Choice of, in Steam and Electric Practice. (Illustrated.).. 
Motors, Induction, Air Gap Flux in. (iilustrateda) tegen. eee. ce) 
National Bureau of Standards. (Ilustrated.) (S. W. Stratton 
Nandi Ba IROSG.)aasc0 ee. 2 cece te es tip Ne eC. Deaths 
National Engineering Societies, The Organization and Administra- 
tion of. (President's Address.).....-..++++- 10ers: Goes 

- New Carbon Filament. (Illustrated.) (John W. H owell.) . ee ae 
New Instrument for the Measurement of Alternating Currents. 
(Illustrated.)  (E. Ley Northrup.) . oe: BOR ee Aan ae 
Note on a Simple Device for Finding the Slip of an Induction Motor. 
(Charles A. Perkins.).....+..+. pie: Oe ayes inate 
Notes on Lightning Arresters on Italian High Tension Transmission 
Lines. (Illustrated.) (Philip Toreht0.)......+.+-000-- we ae 
Notes on the Power Factor of the Alternating Current Arc. (Lllus- 


1157 


839 
893 


591 


649 
215 


1158 INDEX. 


Notes on the Use of Instruments on Switchboards. (FPPt Goren 
On Track Bonding. (C. W. Ricker.)....--+++eeeeevereecereees 
Ontario Power Co., The Development of the. (Illustrated.)...... 
Organization and Administration of National Engineering Societies. 

(President's Address.) (John W. LAeby af?) ik ete ere ee 
Oscillograph and its Uses. ( Illustrated.) (Lewis T. Robinson.)... 
Performance of Lightning Arresters on Transmission Lines. (Illus- 

trated.)-  (N. fe Nell )ice oo new cone = coinisini nctaie el a oi ire 


Polyphase Metering, Some Notes on. (Illustrated.)). 2+. 3. wes 


Power-Factor of the Alternating Current Arc, Notes on the. (Illus- 


trated.).. dans cdae’s . daca eh wll Ad als LEA eee ee 
Railways, High Pressure Line Construction for Alternating-Current. 
(Illustrated) o0 cats Seok ws eR Oe 6 cia A aa 
Railways, Light Electric. (Illustrated.).........-. 2. hehe ee 
Relation of Railway Sub-station Design to its Operation. (Illus- 


; 1-317 trated.) (Sydney W. Ashe.)....... cece r ener etree eceres 


Relays, Time Limit. (Illustrated.)....... eed. SHAS de ete 

Slip of an Induction Motor, Note on a Simple Device for Finding. . 

Some Considerations Determining the Location of Electric Railway 
Sub-stations. (Illustrated.) (C. W. Ricker.).... 


Some Experiences with Lightning Protective Apparatus. ‘(Ilus- : 


trated. (Julian C. Smith.). 0.0... cece cnet renee eee ees ; 
Some Notes on Polyphase Metering. (Illustrated.) (J. D. Nies.). 
Sparking in Direct Current Commutation, Limits of Injurious. 
(Illustrated). ca.) 2) 2a aah. Seer * os aie PASS Peers 
Standardization of Enclosed Fuses. (Illustrated.) (H. O. Lacount) 
Standards, The National Bureau of. (TiHtustrated:)i: : aia. leaeece ne 
Static Disturbances, Caused by Switching, Grounding, ete. (Illus- 
oe trated.) ec ile cle cece ora esobe  fellebe sealwiat's beeen si etd Slanen tye Seats ere 
Sub-station Design, Railway Relation of, to its Operation. (Illus- 
ELAtE.) «ccc tin pcb bik ese menbeat uals sore coustfee/s js kills eseetasns nse Berst eet ea 
Sub-stations, Electric Railway, Some Considerations Determining 
the. Location’ Of.i 0S. acme Ge» Se eale eal nyt enons 
Surges, High Power, in Electrical Distribution Systems of Great 
Magnitude. (Illustrated.)....... 6-6. s eet e eee eee rece es 
Switchboards, Notes on the Use of Instruments on............-. 
Synchronous Converters and Motor Generators. (Illustrated.) 
(WL. Waters.) sca ss cass soa ta cha Neen aes nih se keene 
Testing Laboratory in Practical Operation. (Illustrated.) (Clayton 
He Sharp )iacin ste. QR D, wea d MCE ay SES Bere eee 
Three-Phase Traction. (Illustrated.) (F. N. Waterman.)........ 
Time Limit Relays. (Illustrated.) (George F. Chetlis))..2. ade 
rack Bondirtess wee tikh do al lo Se 8 Rie Sie s Ge AOE. heh ete em 
Traction Problems in Electrical Engineering........---+-+++++++ 
Traction, Three-Phase. (Illustrated.)........--.. 00+ e sree eeeee 
Two-Motor versus Four-Motor Equipments. (Illustrated.) (N. McD. 
Crawford. Yoru ais cag deyals Uae ed pale Gels oh pa cattle ee neces 
Water Powers of the Southeastern Appalachian Region. (Frederic 
Al C. Perrine) cc Baa aks <n ley Ae eRe) Sea aot tal oh oy oe 
Weight Distribution of Electric Locomotives, as Affected by Motor 
Suspension and Draw-Bar Pull. (Ilustrated.) (S. T. Dodd.) 


ee eo 


INDEX OF AUTHORS. 


Mekerimanil~ A.eb., DSCUSSION: cite ec see 2 

Adams, Comfort A., Paper 649; Discussion. ALE ee 686, a76 
Mrmstrong. A. H, Discussion. ......... scan cecsscspea conven ae 
pe acy We Pa bemiher 8 rcp ce ane) Sosgdes esses Om hee 
Fe oe A  DccusSlowt os eo 0 eo hea seks Sone cie ewes ee 
Bilin P Dischssign fen csw fi ets njorioreonce sh venus cu se 
rT oe esi te 9. St a cis eek Sk oe 
Bee he Discussion 60... ols een se eles ee eke oo 
Bradshaw, Wm., Discussion.......2...... Falk, ie debe em cia ae ae 
Boke Moreart< Discussion... c.04s.00. s+) see inessrwehetcee’ 737, oe 
fe HW. Paper 261; Discussion..ii.,.¢s+--- 5-0. east She 280 
@ariwieotin C2 sDiSCUSSION = s).\- ner «eles OTT ig the. “91 
aos Geo. FF. Paper 247; Discussion... 0... e+ 0s voce eS ecae 280 
Clark, Bugene B., Paper... ....-. GET Le OER tS 6 EN am 55 
COMIN CelssiOG, FON. foo ok bet ented awrsee eon tte 244 
sox Es P., Dae ON OR roo ge ee eae abe 181 
Cravath, James R., Ey cen er een FM te aan 1067 
Crawford, N. McD., Paper 65; Discussion........ PROUD Ss heen ee 76 
ee Miscussion. “0-3. eadaets HOS de aconde es ok 19, 1061 
ee Pp... es Sevens tortion ve edoaet x 97 
Wodd;.5. 1, Paper 591; Discussion. ark ee PFS rte eo iy: 77, BBA. 608 
Dunn, Gano S., Discussion....... .643, 646, 713, 733, 738, 740, 806, 834 
ipodd, Jo N., Discusgion= «20.05 Sees ces cape ees ee 646 
Beet 1 W.. Discussion. ... <2! 64 pests anny 914, 915, 916, 917 
Doremus, C. A.,. Discussion. ...-.-- 2... eee cece eee eee " "1063 
Everest, A. R., ee ae eee eee ae ad on 226 
Faccioli, G., Mie ecercs a Was cation ae Rance 851 
Field, A. B., Ae So Se Ce ee ree Mi Boge aco 
Fisher, H. W., Paper 397; Discussion.......... 360, 418, 419, 449, 759 
Franklin, W. S., Discussion..........6-0 00 cette eee es "987, 997 
fe deporoubh, We B., Discussion..<...........---. 573, 834, 876, 1061 
Green, C. M., Te Ro Eo a oct utes 26 
Grreomidee CoA, Disclissiom. 2-65.60 eee cutee nities pein ete 835 
Piaiiberg, J. H. Discussion... 0: 00.5. s eee eee ee ee 48, 989 
Hasking, Caryl D., Discussion........... +... eee ere eters ener eee 221 
Hayes, Stephen Q., Discussion.......---+-+-+0ssrer ttre gaye 238 
Heath, H..B., Discussion. 0.5.60... sre he ee DAD. es 20 
Rieschaw) DonV., DISCUSSION. .0) + 2-02 gees tees eee ee eee en Aik 
iarins, Cafl, Discussion. 042-26. eke he tee ediciones ne 804, 806 
Piewitt, Chas.) Discussion. ..- = - 5.5 ss oie: et eee ee ee 236 
Beets Discassionien.. yo. aks eee ee ieee 1L12 
Howell, John W., Papers 453, BBO DISCUSSION: « caees 3 = 394, 463, 848 
fiacton C. We. Disctission. 7... + 2210-2 > ses gametes i ete 240 
Junkersfeld, Pisce USGlOM ee. ee ers ee oo ey eiegammine nee sores 2h: 2, 
Kennelly, A. E., DHSGUSSI OM ee cacao cies seat) noteneys er ce 20,.... 24 
Kintner, S. M., Paper 421; IDVeabRiGnis lot Seouieme - 358, 450, 451, 519 
eee Discussion sk ie ele vee oe ties See Moe 94 
Zacount, H. O., Paper 893; Discussion.....-.---:++sse8sss+: 914, 915 
Langsdorf, A. S., Paper 919; TISCUSSLOTIs «sare castal wcoseenels io omer baofons ios 932 
Gardner, WH. A., Discussion. ....-. «2-2. 2e enter ... 598, 96, 1107 


Lieb, John W., Jr., President’s Address 283; Discussion, 44, 148, 

150, 163, 219, 231, 935, 236, 361, 394, 463, 737, 738, 805, 1065 
feacole Paul Mo, Discussion: 6.2.00 venti sae es ap ea et 
McClellan, Wm., Paper 561; THSOUSSION. .cnwp 6 62% pfuiet sooty LOCA, LINE 
Mailloux, C. O., Discussion, 48, 150, 274, 416, 447, 450, 517, 553, 


: 555, 573, 570, €08, 1062 
Marburg, L. C., TOTCCUSS TOT autleret cleat © aim ae Sao ~ileuvingt nen 735, 738, .%39 
Mershon, Ralph D., TYSCUSSIOT oh Paar iaie gape 8 oe Mo Vt $5 
Monges, R. F., TSS TONED Cte oe enti nies naw aalcetale RIE ES 8 es 


Moultrop, I. E., Paper’ 29; Discussion... ..-5+ 5... eirstae pect Sen 5 
1159 


a 
‘ 
4 

rd 


1160 INDEX. - 


Mowbray, W. J., Papers. cs. scien on ~emeenen Fine tere 
de Muralt, C. L., Paper 525; Discussion... es piles otter 520,7 
Neall, N. J., Paper 951; Discussion....----+-++++++++-> Beer ~ 
Nies, J. D., Paper... .- #2 vss mes 2 iho os eek perc ne oe eeee 
Noeggerath, J. E., Paper 1; Discussionivwes —ne.-2 5 ae 29, 24; Zoe 
Northrup, E. F., Paper 741; DiScuSSiOfs..-regie eae oe 395, 450, 758, 
Nunn, P. N., Paper 807; Discussion.....-.--+-++++++++++++> 357 
Owens; R. B., Discussion. 0. «+... 2. 6+ + eee a os 8 Siem 
Perkins, Chas. A., Paper 879; Discussion: «2. 2c + wate =o seule eee 
Perrine, F. A. C., Paper 789; Discussion, 359, 395, 803, 804, 805, 
Pestell, Wm., Discussion, ...05. 5. csc od ode 22> 2 wees ae +s amt ae 
Pike, C: W., Discussion. ...4..0/02+5-. (t> <8> Soses cine eee 
Pikler, A. H., Discussion. ......- 0. --0+++++-5+ 2055222" 917, 932, 
Pope, Ralph W.., DISCUSSION os oon o Seg ee ao ses shen. oye i ee PH 
Potter; H: N., Discussion. ...0. 5.0. ss snes ee se a 
Pratt, W. H., Discussion.....200 +. + <5 <0 2ee 4 \on nein ei 24, 
Proutt, F. G., Discussion... .)0 5.5. fos a oe aie Sars ie ee tie ee 
Puffer; W. L., ‘Discussion /.0275 yoo... fee 3 fair Gs ea 
Randolph, L. S., Diseussiom osisd cow ere, ie proses 1 Sima phe eke ot lence selene 
Reid, Thorburn, ‘Papers... 6-2 ese epee” ei eee 
Rice, C. W.,: Discussion. 2.0... 02202. ones he Deut ay oe reais 
Ricker, C. W., Papers 81; 1097, Discussion.) 4-2 5. Sans + eee 93, 
Robinson, Lewis ‘I’., Paper. 2. oo. ser sees e+ + ws See ce sh ee zs 
Rosa, Edward B., Paper 999; Discussion......-----++++++++- 222% 
Rushmore, D. B., Discussion..........-- sees seer ect ess enees 
Schoen, A. M., Discussion: ........-. 20sec eens t eee n ces onan 
Scott, Chas. F., Discussion. ......... +0525 2+++ssssemets rete 282, 
Senstius, Sebastiaan, Paper 689; BiscuSSiOn. soos 2.4. oe oe eed Wiles 
Sever, Geo. F., Discussion. .:.:. 2.2. .+ 02.2 sec eee eee renee 163, 
Sharp, Clayton H., Paper 1051; Discussion.....--. PEPE Mor tas « 
Sheldon, Samuel, Discussion... .:.-. +++. -+++eeee ees teee eee 361, 
Shepardson, Geo. DD. Papetsrc oe oars ap oe ee ele oe aoe ie 
Slichter, W. I., Discussion..........-- Fhe Cre oo oes Re Rees =e 
Smith, F. E., Discussion.:......... 266s ¢e eee teen e cette ners sens 
Smith, Julian C., Paper........ osc .a ses ees tee a net nee fens tae 
Smith, W. N., Discussion... ... 66. 6.65.02 e eee ns te te nae 
Sprong, S. Di, Discussion. .....54.+ 000341 snes eons ere as emia 
Stanley, Wm., Paper... .. 262.00 eee se sees ent tees noes a 
Steinmetz, Chas. P., Papers, 297, 371; Discussion, 362, 365, 396, 417, 
- 445, 449, 450, 451, 463, 515, 519, 556, 574, 644, 646, 685, 714, 
734, 739, 873, 993, 
Stevens, J. F., Discussion.......... 00.0 e reece teeter eee eens 
Stickney, G. H., Discussion. .... 0... +0 ee eee cee ee ee 
Stott, H. G., Discussion, 45, 50, 269, 355, 415, 419, 448, 519, 575, 
590, 737, 758, 834, 918, 991, 
Stratton, S. W., Paper 999; Discussion. .........-.++-+++++ee eee 
Stuart, H. R., Discussion. ... 1... 0.0.2 fete ee eee eee eens 
Swaren, J. W., Discussion.......... 00sec cee etree e eee eee eee 
Taylor, J. B., Discussion...... 0-0... sees eee eee eee 996, - 
Thomas, Percy H., Paper 317; Discussion...... 362, 369, 394, 835, -— 
Thillen, i. Hs, (Papers: cc. os acs enees cere clase oa Rake eee Hite 
Torchio, Philip, Paper 945; Discussion............++++-+; 46, 270, 
Townley, Calvert, Discussion............00 sees eee ee sree 79, 96-0 
Townsend, Fitzhugh, Discussion .022 5: ase vee fe nk einai lea a 
Van Buren, GrC.; Discussion... Vee eo eis os aetna ies eee t 
Varney, Theodore, Paper 123; Discussion.......-....-+.-+...+.9. 
Waddell, Charles Edward, Paper 889; Discussion.......... Bebe AS... : 
tae a Ae be ah Discussion, 143, 510, 521, 555, 608, 
aters, W. L., Paper 717; Discussion.......... 644, 685, es 
Wells, W. F., Discaasion oie Pe Pals igs ase a ae eee bi a 
Wheeler, Schuyler Skaats, Discussion...........--- 914, 916, 917 
White; W: B., Discussions. <i a.sjescsncne ot oe yatet eet een eaee : + ical 
Wirt, H.-C:,-Discussion... -. +2225 08 bee 


? 


DATE DUE 


PRINTED IN U.S.A 


GAYLORD 


ephemera NEN SR Atel Cat A: EE OC EE 
ae hee Se ene. pete: : ‘ 


NY 
~ 


“ 


S 


