SSG Ss 
SS = 


S 
SSX 


SsS::SSSS& SSSssS 


SSSS 
SS 


SSSSSSSSSSV7g» 
SSSSs 


SSSssssss < 


SSS: - S Ss > : SSS 
SSSS SS: SS 
SSS 


LE ted hath AAC ee oad CELTS 


VRS SANS 


= * - oie Ke ARSON 
4 PSE CCR EEE SECC SERS 

x — SS5SS SSSR CARESS ; 

SSSR SSS SSS 


tere Re ee, 


TRANSACTIONS 


OF THE 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE 


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


JUNE 25 TO DECEMBER 33, 1912 


VOL. XXXII, PART IL 


PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
33 WEST THIRTY-NINTH STREET 
NEW YORK, N. Y., U.S. A. 
1912 


beeen op 


Sai ay ED tll 


ae. Se 
> 
- 


Y Copyright, 1912 
by, the 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


¥ st ae 


_ . 
“ye 
: 
A 
- 
, é 
< ‘ 
A 
ioyse 
. 
. 
r ep 
. er 
3 * 
~< : 
= ¥ 
H 
+ 
> 


Press of Mcllroy & Emmet, 22 Thames 


CONTENTS. 


MEETING AT BOSTON, (Continued,) JUNE 24-28, 1912. 


Industrial Illumination and the Average Performance of Lighting 
Systems—By C. E. Clewell (lilustrated)................. 
The Problems of Interior Illumination—By Bassett Jones, Jr. 
CRU STCELC OU) MOM AMON NPE are cin se ote aT totie Tate eee Daa 
Discussion by D. McFarlan Moore, Preston S. Miller, 
Charles F. Scott, A. E. Kennelly, E. B. Rowe, Clayton H. 
Sharp, F. C. Caldwell, G. H. Stickney, William J. Hammer, 

E. A. Champlin, C. E. Clewell, M. Luckiesh, Roscoe Scott, 
SUCMSASSSLERPONES, e]iehe mata cles te StAttd techtle Rionincs Ze ete satsat 
Industrial Education.—Preliminary Report by the Educational 
KE OUIMEIEELCOR REAM ay ADs cb cero eI TDR ote eR ol patel ay, EA ANG 
Discussion by Henry G. Stott, A. L. Williston, Albert L. 
Rohrer, W. S. Franklin, Henry H. Norris, J. W. L. Hale, W. I 
Slichter, William McClellan, Professor Diemer, Comfort A 
Adams, F. C.Caldwell, M. J. McGowan, Jr., W. G. Raymond, 
Nee aeksonpandertarry Barkers iw. spade ay. nike team Sele iie « 
The Wiring of Large Buildings for Telephone Service.—By Fred- 


EriCkalon RO Gesy. MCLULStr ated) eee ke) A 2 BE . 


Discussion by Edwin M. Surprise, George K. Manson, and 
Hrederick#lienOues.akiste eis » sale Meera urine A alneeere Pee Sade le ale ee 

The Vibrations of Telephone Diaphragms.—By Charles F. Meyer 
Ai ejenbee Winttehead. ss (lilustrated) asso... 5 Aten Sees os 
Discussion by George D. Shepardson, George W. Pierce, 

Alan E. Flowers, A. E. Kennelly, John B. Taylor, Frank Wen- 
ner, John B. Whitehead, and Charles F. Meyer............. 
Military Telegraph Lines Using the Polarized Sounder as Receiv- 
ing Instrument.—By George R. Guild. (ilustrated)........ 
Measuring Stray Currents in Underground Pipes.—By Carl Her- 
AT MRMOLULIES EACLE CU RMR) We cue > SR tenet tO Ne os eet. are deers ee bis 
Discussion by Albert F. Ganz, Edwin F. Northrup, George 

F. Sever, Edward B. Rosa, Alexander Maxwell, Frank Wen- 
nerclaytoneHsoharp, and Carl Hering t. 2. ati... 

A Tubular Electrodynamometer for Heavy Currents.—By P.G. 
pA cores wer We CLI SE VEC) Since Stren coe ev to oath eel cevovovene stabalie es be 
Measurement of Alternating Current of Low Value.—By M. G. 
(Newmar CEILESIF ALEC itere Groce ra Tense ete whales «. Sa aeReN Mens. 0: Vielen 

To Measure an Alternating-Current Resistance and Compare It 
with the Direct Current Resistance-Electrodynamometer 
Method.—By Edwin F. Northup. (Jllustrated)............ 


ing.—By Evan J. Edwards. (Illustrated)................-. 


Incandescent Lamps as Resistances.—By T. H. Amrine. (J/lus- 


BRITO). 2, See $00 oligo DOM POE OND TOTO oe MONET case ne 
Discussion by Clayton H. Sharp, A. E. Kennelly, M. G. 
Lloyd, Paul MacGahan, T. H. Amrine, Evan J. Edwards..... 


Electrical Transmission of Electrical Measurements.—By O. J. 


Bliss, ASUUSU OIC). oe. owas hoe cos wen Se hee ee ee 
Metering Large Direct-Current Installations.—By F. V. Magal- 


1257 
1273 


1293 
1309 


iv 


Measurement of Energy with Instrument Transformers.—By 
Alexander Maxwell.” (Ulustrated)... sic 4-s eee 1545 

Wheatstone Bridge-Rotaging Standard Method of Testing Large 
Capacity Watt-Hour Meters.—By C. H. Ingalls and J. W. 
Cowles. (lustrated) .....5 se setae ee eee » 1551 

Discussion by William J. Mowbray, F. P. Cox, J. R. Craig- 

head, F. V. Magalhaes, W. H. Pratt, L. T. Robinson, T. W. 
Varley, C. H. Ingalls, Albert F. Ganz, Alexander Maxwell, 


Paul MacGahan, Elmer L. Kyle, and John Gilmartin........ 1558 
Induction Type Indicating Instruments.—By Paul MacGahan. 

(TH strated ys com etek Oe eo ee ere ea 1565 
Compensating Wattmeters.—By A. L. Ellis. (Jllustrated)........ 1579 
Hot Wire Instruments.—By A. W. Pierce and M. E. Tressler. 

(THaustvated):.3 = chain nd cA, eee Dehn oe ee eee 1591 
Resonant Circuit Frequency Indicator.—By W. H. Pratt and D. R. 

Price.’ (Illustrated) aie: 2308 ce. Seok done ne ee eens 1595 


Discussion by F. P. Cox, W. H. Pratt, Albert F. Ganz, A. W. 
Pierce, F. V. Mahalhaes, William J. Mowbray, A. L. Ellis, 
Paul M. Lincoln, F. H- Bowman, N. Monroe Hopkins, Paul 


MacGahan, W. H. Pratt, and John Gilmartin............ Hs al o99 
Permeability Measurements with Alternating Current.—By L. T. 
Robinsonvand J.D; Balle itaustrated)— i. ts ee Bae LOUS 
- Measurements of Maximum Values in High-Voltage Testing.— 
By C. H. Sharp and F. M. Farmer. (Jilustrated)........... 1617 
Discussion by E. D. Doyle, M. G. Lloyd, Clayton H. Sharp, 
T. W. Varley, L. T. Robinson, and Elihu Thomson.......... 1623 
Potential Transformer Testing —By J. R. Craighead. (J/lus- 
trated) 25. cS vert Sombre: 208 SS nes Bt tee 1627 
The Testing of Instrument Transformers.—By P. G. Agnew and 
F. Bs Silsbee: (iustvated ih eas ales Bee oe een eee 1635 


Discussion by Clayton H. Sharp, James R. Craighead, Ed- 
ward B. Rosa, L. T. Robinson, Frederick Bedell, W. W. Craw- 


ford, Frank Wenner, P. G. Agnew and F. B. Silsbee......... 1639 
Operating Characteristics of Large Turbo-Generators.—By A. B. 

Fieldve}Ullasivdted) iva Gite ete eaves aes, he ane Seed 1645 
The Transient Reactions of Alternators.—By William A. Durgin 

and -Relit Whitehead” (iesiteted):+. cco? send te Gonv eee 1657 


Discussion by H. M. Hobart, B. G. Lamme, P. M. Lincoln, 
Henry G. Reist, B. G. Lamme, Comfort A. Adams, A. B. Field, 
Sanford A. Moss, H. R. Woodrow, W. L. Waters, and William 


A. Dingist?. cigses. de cach. a8 ating lt «ictal eee 1681 
Determination of Power Efficiency of Rotating Electric Machines. 
By EB. M. Olin. . Uustrated) it. fac cet ee 1695 


Discussion by C. M. Green, B. G. Lamme, and E. M. Olin 1719 
The Squirrel-Cage Induction Generator.—By H. M. Hobart and 


BE. Knowltone - (ildstrated)v. te ttiaen). aattacoeoths tacteass 1721 
Single-Phase Induction Motors.—By W. J. Branson. (Jllus- 

trated) wiarcankh hod wae Renee A. Deewe dd peiineeeet a. cee ae 1749 
Motor Starting Currents as Affecting Large Transmission Sys- 

tems.—By P. M..Lincoln: | (Illustrated). .... one. . ete den 1789 


Discussion by Lee Hagood, E. F. W. Alexanderson, Lester 
McKenney, H. M. Hobart, E. Knowlton, and W. L. Waters.. 1801- 


Development of a Successful Direct-Current 2000-kw. Unipolar 


Generator.—By B.G. Lamme. (Illustrated)............... 1811 
Discussion by J. E. Noeggerath, Elihu Thomson, and W. 

Tis Warten. ce ths acre 2 ihe te «ca Leek. LIER . 1836 
Excitation of Alternating-Current Generators.—By D. B. Rush- 

more. (Illustrated) iuor; ns tate clei ee ee 1841 
Discussion by B. G. Lamme, H. M. Hobart, J. Lester Wood- 

bridge, E. A. Lof, and Lester McKenney................... 1877 


Localizers, Suppressors, and Experiments.—By E. E. F. Creighton 
and J. T. Whittlesey. (J/lustrated) 


Vv 


Relay Protective Systems.—By L. L. Elden. (Jilustrated)...... 
Discussion by D. W. Roper, Harold Osborn, L. C. Nichol- 

son, E. E. F. Creighton, L. L. Elden, and L. N. Crichton..... 
The Runaway Speed of Waterwheels and Its Effect on Connected 
Rotary Machinery.—By Daniel W. Mead. (Jllustrated)..... 
Application of Electric Drive to Paper Calenders.—By E. C. Morse. 
(CURIS SEED 55 coy Se Seo PEO OL oe ee re 
Electricity on the Farm.—By Putnam A. Bates. (Jllustrated).... 
Discussion by J. D. Merrifield, L. L. Elden, Putnam A. 

Bates, J. A. Moyer, Mr. Sanford, and Adolph Shane........ 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, OCTOBER 11, 1912. 


The Use of Reactance in Transformers——By W. S. Moody. 
(SERED ox tn ene BE AO eA De ta ee 
The Effect of Temperature Upon the Hysteresis Loss in Sheet 
Steel.— By Malcolm MacLaren. (Illustrated).............. 
Discussion by Philip Torchio, L. W. Chubb, C. A. Adams, 
David B. Rushmore, W. M. McConahey, Charles F. Scott, 

H. M. Hobart, M. V. Ayres, W. S. Moody, Ralph D. Mershon, 
Malcolm MacLaren, W. L. Waters, and M. G. Lloyd........ 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, NOVEMBER 8, 1912. 


Power perpen of Rolling Mills —By Wilfred Sykes. (1llus- 
SAAT sd coe ld Oe eae GROSS OO Ont Re te eR nC eS 
The Economical Speed Control of Alternating-Current Motors 
Driving Rolling Mills —By F. W. Meyer and Wilfred Sykes. 
(COCOA esi 0.8 cos Go OPEN COS COE OO ROT CLE 
Diseussion by John M. Hipple, J. H. Wilson, Selby Haar, 
Edward J. Cheney, Bayse N. Westcott, David M. Petty, Fred 
Bickford Crosby, L. T. Robinson, H. L. Barnholdt, G. E. 
Stoltz, Wilfred Sykes, A. Dyckerhoff, and Ford W. Harris... 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, DECEMBER 13, 1912. 


High-Frequency Tests of Line Insulators.—By L. E. Imlay and 
Rercyariqmbonidsume (LULUSTVOLCO ore se cece voces «els 
Comparative Tests on High-Tension Suspension Insulators.—By 
PIMA ERS O Chitinatiremn( LELUSTLALEO) tetiebeya «lsc o)sletane cuckarohsuoie venom otto 
Discussion by Ralph D. Mershon, Paul M. Lincoln, F. W 

Peek, Jr., J. A. Sandford, Jr., A. O. Austin, F. M. Farmer, 
Ralph W. Pope, E. E. F. Creighton, H. Winfield Secor, E. S. 
Lincoln, Ford W. Harris, Charles Rufus Harte, Edward Ben- 
nett, F. F. Brand, Max H. Collbohm, P. W. Sothman, L. E. 
Imlay, Percy H. Thomas, and R. F. Hayward.............. 


APPENDIX. 


Code of Principles of Professional Conduct.................. 
~ Report of Board of Directors for the Fiscal Year Ending April 30, 
1912 


Sata aeMsiiee sis de isiaiceiter (es) by e usige co) 6. Wie a! es "e: 1, 0 0.ce. iw 19 80 8) (8) Bele © (6 (6 4) 8 65 v8 


Index of Papers and Discussions.............-.+.+- eee eeeenes 
TTC EXARO CEA ELLLOLS aie Me pee neds Steet stele ur ous, cid) = cin wari Gace 0 9Gc8 a vise0s 


2096 


2121 
2143 


vii 


ix 
Synoptical and Topical Index...................5.455 End of Part II. 


A paper presented al the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 26, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION AND THE AVERAGE 
PERFORMANCE OF LIGHTING SYSTEMS 


BY C. E. CLEWELL 


Illumination in the past has been looked upon largely as an 
accessory. Modern illuminating engineering, however, is con- 
cerned with the adaptation of the available types of lamps to 
certain supply circuits, to various classes of service, and to given 
conditions of building construction. 

A few years ago the older type of arc lamp and the carbon 
filament lamp, typifying a large and a small unit, covered the 
range of types of lamps available for illumination work in the 
industries. This limitation in candle power has gone through 
an evolution by the introduction in more recent years of the 
enclosed arc, the open flame-carbon arc, the metallic flame arc 
and the long burning flame carbon arc lamp, as improvements 
on the original arc lamp; and the metallized filament, the tan- 
talum and the tungsten lamp, as improvements on the original 
filament lamp. The Moore tube, the Nernst and the mercury 
vapor lamps are also available as new types. 

The candle-power values of these various lamps are shown in 
Fig. 1 where, in an approximate manner, the average mean spher- 
ical candle-power values of all types, both old and new, are in- 
dicated. Fig. 2 shows the over-all dimensions of the various 
lamps, from which it is apparent that the dimensions for given 
candle-power values have been modified by changes in design. 

Re-directing the light where most useful, should be included in 
development of high-efficiency lamps as additional to the matter 
of total light flux per watt. The growing tendency to rate 
electric lamps according to the effective illumination produced on 
the work, rather than in terms of the watts per mean spherical 

1257 


1258 CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION [June 26 


candle power, is evidence that this item will probably be included 
in the considerations of lamp efficiency more in the future than 
it has been in the past. 

Quantity of light is no longer the sole criterion of excellence, 
but its uniformity over the work, diffusion, adequate intensities 
on the sides of the work, absence of glare, color values and similar 
items are now given an importance almost if not quite equal to 
mere satisfaction in the matter of vertically downward intensities. 

Factory work, generally speaking, may be grouped into work 
on a horizontal plane, as bench work of some kinds, which, in 


OLD TYPES - 


CARBON FILAMENT |f4 


ENCLOSED CARBON 
ARC 


OPEN CARBON ARC | 


NEW TYPES 


TUNGSTEN 


evn | 


NERNST 


MERCURY VAPOR 


QUARTZ 
MERCURY VAPOR 


METALLIC FLAME 
ARC 


FLAME CARBON Se Te eee 
ARC iS ES 


200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 
MEAN SPHERICAL CANDLE-POWER 
RANGES 


Fic. 1—AvrRAGE CANDLE POWER RANGES OF OLD AND NEW LAMPs. 


the main, requires only downward illumination; and other work, 
such as that included under machine tool operations, foundry 
moulds, rolling mills, assembly, and the like, where, in addition 
to vertically downward light, side components effective on 
vertical planes, as well as shadow elimination, play an important 
part in the excellence of results. 

The height of ceiling, roof or trusses limits in a very large measure 
the size and type of lamp to be employed. Experiment and 
usage demonstrate the disadvantage of using very large lamps 
for low ceilings, while lack of economy prohibits the use of small 
lamps for high areas. In former years arc lamps were used for 


1912] CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION 1259 


low factory bays, while in some extremes no appreciable general 
illumination was possible due to the absence of sufficient clear- 
ance between cranes and ceiling for an arclamp. In like manner 
very high bays have been inadequately lighted due to the lack 
of lamps possessing sufficient candle power and suitable distribu- 
tion characteristics. To-day, however, lamps of enormously 
greater candle power and more suitable distribution are available 
for the higher areas, while lamps with corresponding advantages 
are available for low areas. 

Open spaces simplify the problem by permitting the use of 
lamps spaced comparatively far apart, while the interference 
of belting calls for a type and arrangement of lamps which will 
provide diffusion, so as to reduce the shadows ordinarily pro- 


CARBON FILAMENT 
TUNGSTEN 
NERNST 
MERCURY VAPOR 
QUARTZ 
MERCURY VAPOR 
5) FLAME CARBON ARG 
LONG BURNING 


Ke OPEN CARBON ARC 
NDS 
s- ENCLOSED CARBON 
ARC 


os 


Fic. 2—CuHArRT SHOWING RELATIVE AVERAGE OVER-ALL DIMENSIONS 
oF VARIOUS LAMPS. 


duced by belts. In an atmosphere filled with dust and dirt a 
penetrating light should be employed, and in spaces of the latter 
class the maintenance is apt to be greatly increased with the 
rapid accumulation of dirt on the lamps and reflectors. These 
items will be clearer by a reference to Figs. 3 and 4, which compare 
free space with one filled with belting. 

Typical ceiling constructions as found in average shops are 
shown in Figs. 5,6,7,and 8. The arrangement of lamps should 
not be influenced primarily by the ceiling construction. Plans 
made up without regard to the ease of installation may sometimes 
be modified so as to yield equally satisfactory results, however, 
with a considerable reduction in first cost for installing, by taking 
into account certain features of the beams or girders. 


1260 CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION [June 26 


ILLUMINATION FACTORS 

The spacing distance of lamps is a first consideration. Ex- 
periments have shown, for example, that in certain office lo- 
cations with moderate ceiling heights, a spacing distance not 
exceeding 7 ft. 6 in. is most advantageous. This results in a 
uniform illumination on the desks if the proper reflectors are 
used, and the light from a sufficient number of sources thus 
secured insures a diffusion of the resulting illumination. The 
directional features of the light are furthermore far superior 
to those cases where larger spacing distances are employed. 

The spacing also governs the size of lamp to be used. As 


CEILING HEIGHTS. 


SPACING DISTANCES OF LAMPS. 


“SHADOW 
OBSTRUCTION ON BENCH 


C = CEILING LINE 


_— FLOOR LINE 


Fic. 9—CHART SHOWING RELATION OF SHADOWS TO MOUNTING HEIGHT 
AND SPACING. 


an illustration, whether one 250-watt or four 60-watt tungsten 
lamps are to be installed for a given area will be determined largely 
by the desired directional features of the light. 

The mounting height should be determined on a basis of the 
avoidance of glare and of the ease in getting at the lamps for 
maintenance. The lamps should be mounted high enough to be 
out of the line of vision, and where the ceilings are too low 
to admit this, lamps of small size should be selected to reduce 
the quantity of light flux which enters the eye or is effective 
thereon when looking into any lamp. Fig. 9 shows the effect 
of height on the directional qualities of the resulting illumination 


PLATE LXVI 
SEES 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[CLEWELL] 
Fic. 3—Factory SPACE FREE FROM OBSTRUCTIONS. 


[CLEWELL] 


Fic. 4—- Factory SPACE WHERE MucH BELTING Is USED. 


PLATE LXVII 
A. 1. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[CLEWELL] 
Fic. 5—Woop: CEILING FLUSH WITH UNDER SIDE OF GIRDERS. 


[(CLEWELL] 
Fic. 6—Woop CEILING DIvIDED By DEEP IRON GIRDERS. 


FLATE LXVIII 
A. 1 E.€. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[CLEWELL] 
Fic. 7—Woop CEILING DivIDED BY CEMENT-COVERED GIRDERS. 


[CLEWELL] 


No CEILING. 


Fic. 8 OPEN GIRDER CONSTRUCTION 


liga aka! 
ess cots eee 
a” rhngiy of (ey: 
“Apaeetpeaaig 


: Cts aie 
. fh nit, 
=e, 


Sell 


1912] CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION 1261 


on the working surface. This illustration shows graphically 
the need of closer spacing to maintain a given minimum shadow 
effect for low ceilings. 

Typical installations with accompanying data are indicated 
in Table I. Such a table of actual cases may serve as a guide 
to others with similar problems to solve, and also gives an idea 
of the varying requirements of different classes of industrial 
work from the fact that the installations here recorded have been 
the object of careful study fora number of years and furthermore 
are the results of carefully prepared plans. Obviously, these 
results are not intended to be used as rules for general lighting 
work, but the experiences recorded for these representative lo- 
cations will show clearly how they have been solved and what 
constants apply in each of the several cases. 


EFFICIENCY OF UTILIZATION 


The term efficiency is here used to express the relation between 
total light flux furnished by the lamps to the work, on the one 
hand, and the total flux emanating from the lamps of the system 
in all directions, whether useful or otherwise, on the other hand. 

Such a use of the term refers of course to the efficiency of 
the lamps themselves coupled with surroundings and reflectors 
in the matter of the useful illumination they furnish to the work. 
The numerical values expressing this efficiency will thus be less 
than unity and expressed in per cent of the ideal condition if 
the total light flux available were wholly useful on the work. 

Heretofore the measure of illumination efficiency, if it may 
be so called, has been changed in turn from watts per square 
foot required to furnish presumably satisfactory light, to lumens 
per watt (or foot-candles per watt per square foot), and finally 
to efficiency or the utilization of the total light flux of the lamps. 
The latter is a measure of the total losses from all causes, such 
as absorption by globes or reflectors, by dark ceilings and walls, 
as well as by dust, dirt, belting, or other obstructions, and there- 
fore adapts itself in an excellent manner to practical usage. 
One other feature should be noted in connection with the effi- 
ciency, namely, the importance of considering average perform- 
ance, in distinction from results obtained when lamps and re- 
flecting devices are new and clean. 

The need for data on the average performance of illumination 
systems has been felt for some time. With the view of meeting 


. this need, and also for the purpose of establishing some certainty 


A ee ” patos zz | 261 | 2:2 (SEO 33ST Aq UE 0°93 ST] PSHOY teMod » » al » 08] Bt este | Ct Ce 
ie eee) - 6z | ors | 8's |'tt0 8 Aq UE 0998 a ey onewsud 1ea[ 1 | » OOT| “UE O9FeT | UE GIF EL 
at ere » » 6z | oz | 8'€ [tO 338 49°‘UE O8 ” edo I] » OOT| “UE O93 ET | UF GIF ET 
» 33y— » 38IT » ere | co's | Ze |'UtO “438 AQ “Ut 0998 Aropr » a eT lew OL.) ST OmmeDR ee, Gas Sk 
» Aep— » » » e'cse | 86's | 9°9 |tI9 338 Aq‘Ut O9F8 | » » » Sh Wee OFT | AF S09 ee ese 
» ot 5 » » 9°62 | 9F'% | T'S [UO “3F0T AQ “UE O78 | » » ” 5 Sy e) BOOK (eS! OSE CIE ais GE 
ses y1ep—  , APC ” ee | p22 | eh Ure 3S Aq “Ur 0938 | dous eurHORN onewusyd 1291 IT) » OOT| “St OWI | UF CITT 
s[jear Ou—BuyT199 4YyBTT ued Lt | ere | 3'e |to 338 AqUt 078 Aloyoer sd edQ 1 | eM-09 | “UL OL | ME TS 
aoeds A1opey a 
” » ” » » Lg*| 20°¢ | 9° |'Bb.9 93 2-49 “Br OTL » ” » oto, OF L2FR-0° OL) Se Ga? CE 
suolyiyied ssejs ly » » L'9¢ | co'2 | 3'h |H0 936 AQUr sys ” ” . og {te OST [SEECO UTE Be Ons OE 
syjem ys y » » Z| 92't | 9°8 |UEL 33g Aqvur yaye » ” , oa [oot 08 | “UR63F Sta) BE Gar eh 
suolpped sse[s-Buryreo yYysrT uve ay | abe | pg fUrt aL Aqcur L44¢ » » Srl» GO fate OL EE os Er 
» 4rep sJoyyer o. no} Tee Apreg ee | o2'% | 6% [U6 339 Aqvur LS » | onewusyd rea tT! » 09 | “Ut 9978 | “UE 0996 
ST]eM 7B Ajsyej—sur[199 ON he) e'se | 2I'S | S2°F |SEO “332 Aq “Ut 0449 20H jedg [| 334-09 | “Ur O78 | UE 6358 
ssoyjo A10198 J (¥) 
Buyioo puv sea yep soyyeyY |Pertos ABS) 7g | FES | GL | VINE Aq‘ur ¢'y8 Buneiq | quassaqzzdg [| » 09 | “UOT3¥ST | UE OST 
Burieo pue sijem red ueatD zge | zt's | Sh |UEOT3¥9 Aqcur 9°39 » » 2 o Bat [ere 09 OP Oy Pi et Obs St 
” » ” »  {pattos Ay3qs| g'Fs | 90's | 2° |UE G39 AqcUreT ass » ” ” Thine 09 [CBr cas 0Ly BOTs OL 
” ” » » » gue | pte | Sh \ut e332 Aq ur 6359 » | onemsud ysiuy-unes IT) » 09 ‘ar S33 OT | “Ut O1'3 OF 
» » ” ” » g'9g.| 61'S | 3:8 | UEP IL Aqvat LFS » oneuistid sea a | » «©09:«*«| “UE O'9F OT | “UE 8°95 OF 
” » » » » g'ce | 80'S | FF |UIOT3F9 Aq‘Ur e939 » ” » OT hh fan 08° [tee 3s OLn| UE SOF OF 
» ” » » » ze | be] 98 | Urea, Aquat OFZ ” * F e LA. wee OD. Ut 0°93. ORE! PE sas OF 
» » y ” ued ere | G8'c | 6° | ‘UrEasL Aq ‘ur 8°49 200 oneusud ystuy-ureg J | 33eM-09 | “Ur es336 | “UE ET33 OT 
s]jea pue Sure yy] saougo [elauex) 
3.85 
2) Bo 5 s 5 
3 aa 2. d + iS) ts) 
o fo} io (= 
S oos s 3 z 5 St 
= “Fo 3 ae Q 2 =. ° 
8 sa ® 3 ® =. 5 = 
i] 294 B eas a & mR Eg 
*sBuUIpUNOIINs jo IoyoRIeYyD oem ray 3 aourysip Zurseds ° Ioysayas JO ajAIG ° pice @ &, 
° a0) @ oy = ¥ oe i= 
mud © 9q ‘“< 4 fo) 2 — a) e 
4 Bi caliies ‘ih 3 5 at 5 
& Sen Se We F 5 :. a 
oO en: ct 3 5 3 
g go : = 8 4 
5 @ oC a 3 ee 
a Blah : s 


ALSAS ONILHOIT IVIMLSNGNI NALSONOAL NO VLVG “I ATaVL 


n 
= 


1912] CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION 1263 


regarding the various factors involved, extensive tests have been 
conducted during the past year, and the results of the same are 
now herewith presented for the first time, in the hope that they 
may furnish useful information on this important phase of illumi- 
nation systems, and also serve to further additional work, thus 
begun in this particular direction. 

Practical Results under Working Conditions. At the outset 
a study was made of the items involved in the determination of 
the average performance, that is, the variation in the illumination 
intensities furnished by the lamps day in and day out, and a 
number of typical locations representative of average industrial 
conditions were selected for the test. These tests were made on 
the vertically downward (or so-called horizontal) intensities of 
the illumination produced by a fairly large number of lamps in 
each location, thus securing a more general idea of the changing 
conditions than would likely result from individual tests on single 
lamps or reflectors. By these tests it has been sought to establish 
the actual efficiency of the various illumination systems con- 
sidered, as compared to the theoretical efficiency which might be 
supposed to exist from calculation based on candle-power distri- 
bution curves. Four conditions were chosen, as follows: (1) 
new lamps and reflectors; (2) clean lamps which have been 
in service for several months, and clean reflectors; (3) clean 
lamps several months old and soiled reflectors, ready to be washed 
in the routine of the plant; and (4) soiled lamps and soiled 
reflectors ready to be cleaned. This series of conditions repre- 
sents lowering steps in the efficiency of the system, and the 
results show by how much each of these factors may reduce the 
total efficiency. It will be apparent that the reduction in effi- 
ciency by these three items refers to losses in the system itself. 
These losses further obviously determine the inherent perform- 
ance of the system, and great care was required in making these 
tests to maintain conditions unchanged throughout the tests, 
that is, under shop conditions, to be sure that the dust and dirt 
on reflectors was left undisturbed. 

Five typical factory locations were selected for this test, which 
covered seventeen weeks in itself, but which represents a con- 
siderably longer period of time in preliminary tests made through- 
out the past few years leading to the determination of ultimate 
reductions of light due to dust and dirt. These five locations 
were equipped with tungsten lamps and glass reflectors. The 
locations included a regular office in an office building; a long 


1264 CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION [June 26 


narrow factory office ; a low factory space with no walls and very 
dark ceiling; amedium high factory space with light walls and 
light ceilings; and a moderately high factory space with dark 
walls and no ceiling, the lamps being mounted on stringer boards 
‘attached to the girders. Observations of voltage were taken and 
all intensities corrected for the normal lamp voltage. Table II 
shows the results of these tests and the attending surrounding 
circumstances, while Table III shows the averages of the results. 
The value of these constants can hardly be overestimated when 


TABLE II 
TEST RESULTS ON TUNGSTEN SYSTEMS WITH GLASS REFLECTORS 
Efficiency values* Fairly Medium Fairly 
high Low high high 
Conditions of test Low factory factory factory factory 
office office space space space 
Ceiling aigna sting Hoan Light Light Dark Light None 
Well fare ay teva: cine Hiemia.aTeakasere i Light Light None Light Dark 
LLIN OSM ete sierereivereihane Mess. 60-W Cl. | 60-W. Cl. | 100-W. Cl | 100-W. Cl | 100-W. Cl 
Meflectoraninestisesiadebines I-60 SF. | I-60 Cl. I-100 Cl. | I-100 Cl. | F-100 Cl. 
Clase:Of Worle: cites s:cics.< 1a. Desk Desk Machines | Bench Bench 
Time between washings....| 14 weeks | 17 weeks | 9 weeks 11 weeks | 13 weeks 
Results Efficiency jin per cent 
Soiled lamps 19.7 24.2 22.4 25 20.1 
Soiled reflectors 
Cieac temps 20.7 24.9 22.5 27 23.6 
Soiled reflectors 
‘| ican lemme 34.1 29.3 31.2 35.3 33.6 
Clean reflectors 
New. Jampa 34.1 31.2 31.9 36.1 39.1 


Clean reflectors 


*All efficiency values corrected for normal lamp voltage. 


considered in the light of their usefulness in the calculation 
of factory lighting systems, which can thus be based on absolute 
experience. The foregoing notes apply to the performance of a 
system as installed and in regular service. 

Depreciation Items. In the calculation of illumination sys- 
tems additional factors must be taken into account, namely, (1) 
the effect due to the operation of the lamps at avoltage other 
than their rating, frequently the case in tungsten systems; (2) the 
depreciation of candle power due to the aging of thelamps; (3) 


1912] CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION 1265 


the depreciation due to surroundings which are liable to become 
dark; and (4) the effect of dust and dirt accumulations. 

The losses due to voltage conditions can readily be calculated 
from the curves showing the variation of candle power with 
voltage; the effect of age of the lamps, although somewhat more 
uncertain, can be determined with a fair degree of accuracy from 
the life curves of the lamps as made by the lamp manufacturing 
companies; tests have been conducted, as previously referred to, 
in the determination of the effect of surroundings on the illumina- 
tion results. The following material has resulted from extended 
tests ona variety of lighting systems to determine the dust and 
dirt characteristic depreciation curves with elapsed time of 
service. While the tests just described for the determination of 
practical efficiencies at the beginning and at the end of a cleaning 


TABLE III 
AVERAGE TEST RESULTS ON TUNGSTEN SYSTEMS WITH GLASS 
REFLECTORS* 

Average 

efficiency 

of system 
NSO OREC ET ee ter eN aT oie ie it cd Pech ct oltalouadaiierc (alee) 9 fal sueyags 10 le'lGhe! Suerte 27.1 per cen 
Reirly High factory OLACe. ei. c vialciso pie sie aclee Oe ae 45-06 Ht one A OC Se & 
TO WaEACLOT aS PACE citer veya ayo ctabeiarsveusnsperenateloya (oleieis layer sys iaiets.#) oie 27 i ‘ 
Medium high factory Space. ......c22s0500+ cote csccercens be L0) Ae fe el 
Bainly High fACtOry, SPACE. css. cle ccie css s ring tes ole aes ules 2931-5 “ 


*All efficiency values corrected for normal lamp voltage. 


period were difficult in the matter of maintaining conditions 
unchanged, these same difficulties encountered in this particular 
test were considerably greater. To insure value, it was deemed 
essential to perform the tests in factory spaces where the regular 
manufacturing operations were in progress from day to day. 
This necessitated constant watchfulness to make sure that the 
systems were undisturbed in the matter of the dust and dirt 
accumulations. 

At the outset the results anticipated rather seemed to promise 
indefinite results. Figs. 10, 11, 12, 18 and 14 indicate the 
characteristic curves of illumination intensities over a number of 
weeks as the result of the tests, and from these curves the very 
interesting and instructive conclusions may be roughly drawn, 
that under average factory conditions the deterioration of glass 
reflectors due to dust and dirt follows a fairly definite rate of 


1266 CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILL UMINATION [June 26 


candle power reduction, in so far as conclusions can be deduced 
from the number of cases on which these tests were conducted. 
This reduction as shown in the curves is due alone to dirt accu- 
mulations on the reflectors, since the new lamps were inserted 
before each test and all observations were corrected to correspond 
to normal lamp voltage. 

The curve sheet shown in Fig. 15 has been derived from the 
deterioration curves. This curve sheet shows, for example, that 
based on the average cleaning cost of three cents per reflector, 
with energy at two cents per kilowatt-hour, the integrated cost 
of light lost at the end of sixteen days in one of the cases, is equal 


> 


N 


INTENSITY IN FOOT-CANDLES 


0 6 12 18 24 30 36 


2 42 48 34 
ELAPSED TIME IN DAYS 


Fic. 10—DETERIORATION FROM DiRT ACCUMULATIONS. 


to the cost of cleaning. This point (namely sixteen days) would 
then naturally determine the economical interval for cleaning 
reflectors in this particular location, provided always that the 
reduction in intensity at the end of this interval is not below that 
which is necessary for satisfactory vision. It is of interest to 
note that apparently the effect of dust and dirt takes place far 
mote rapidly in the first week or ten days than during the suc- 
ceeding weeks. 

Other useful information may be deduced from these curves as 
follows; if, for example, the loss of light at the end of sixteen 
days equals 25 per cent, which means, for an initial intensity of 
four foot-candles, that there remain, at the end of sixteen days, 


1912] CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION 


5.6 


4.8 


o 4.0 
Ww 
=| 
a 
= 
—e 
@ 3.2 
(e) 
Oo 
mw 
= 24 _ FAIRLY HiGH | _ 
es _ | FACTORY OFFICE LOCATION 
g CLASS REFLECTORS 
iH 
z 1.6 


0,8) 


0 6 12 18 (2% 30 36 42 48 54 


ELAPSED TIME IN DAYS 


Fic. 11—DETERIORATION FROM DiRT ACCUMULATIONS. 


er 
a 


Sa 
20 


T eal 
FACTORY SPACE 
Se eae on ic 

4.0 + SOLID CEILING 


1 L 1 
GLASS REFLECTORS 
a oe 


Sans 


INTENSITY IN FOOT-CANDLES. . 


ELAPSED TIME IN DAYS 
Fic, 12—-DETERIORATION FROM Dirt ACCUMULATIONS, 


1267 


1268 


CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION [June 26 


1 


in 


— 


aM o Sail’ 
MEDIUM HIGH FACTORY 
SOLID CEILING 
Bes! : 
GLASS REFLECTOR! 


INTENSITY IN FOOT-CANDLES 
t 


4 3 6 
ELAPSED TIME IN DAYS 


Fic. 18—-DETERIORATION FROM Dirt ACCUMULATIONS. 


“2 


oA 


INTENSITY IN FOOT-CANOLES 


_ 


6 
‘ELAPSED TIME IN DAYS 


Fic. 14—DETERIORATION FROM Dirt ACCUMULATIONS, 


Vs 


1912] CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION 1269 


only three foot-candles, the average intensity throughout the 
sixteen-day interval may be approximated at three and one- 
half foot-candles, provided the reflectors are cleaned once every 
sixteen days. 

If an additional sixteen days without cleaning means a still 
further reduction from three to two foot-candles, the average 
intensity of the illumination throughout the thirty-two days 
interval may be approximated at three-foot candles. Hence the 
cleaning of the reflectors at intervals of sixteen instead of thirty- 
two days should insure an average intensity of say three and one- 
half instead of three foot-candles, or in other words to main- 


5.6 


LOSSES DUE TO DIRT IN CENTS FOR 
EACH 100-WATT TUNGSTEN LAMP: 


ELAPSED TIME IN DAYS 


Fic. 15—SuMMARY OF CURVES OF DETERIORATION Costs FROM 
Fics. 10, 11, 12, 13°and 14. 


tain an average intensity of three and one-half foot-candles 
would require approximately twenty per cent more lamps in the 
installation for a thirty-two days than for a sixteen days cleaning 
interval. 

This would mean in an installation of say 1200 tungsten 
lamps, a saving of 200 lamps in the original installation, or 
roughly, $1,000 in a total of $6,000, tie first cost, hy. the 
adoption of a sixteen days instead of a thirty-two days cleaning 
interval. To clean 1200 reflectors every thirty-two days in- 
volves in practise an expenditure of approximately $432 per 
annum, while to clean the smaller number of 1000 reflectors once 
per sixteen days involves approximately $720 per annum, or an 


1270 CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION [June 26 
increase of say $288 per annum. The increased cost of cleaning, 
with shorter cleaning intervals, is, therefore, small in comparison 
to the reduced first cost, to the lower energy consumption with a 
smaller number of lamps, and to the improved average service. 

The foregoing hypothetical instance can be worked out with 
accuracy for any of the locations found in the deterioration 
curve sheets, by the substitution of actual for the assumed 
values, and when applied to practical illumination design will 
be found to affect the results in a significant manner. 


MAINTENANCE 


Necessity for Systematic Maintenance. From the foregoing 
statements the necessity for careful and systematic main- 
tenance will at once be apparent. In one large system of 10,000 
tungsten lamps, the losses of light per day due to dust and 
dirt interpreted into money values, that is to say, evaluating 
the energy in watts represented by light wasted through absorp- 
tion by the dirt, to its kilowatt-hour cost, amounts approximately 
to $20 per day, or $7,500 per annum. If the systems are allowed 
to go uncleaned beyond the economical point, these losses 
become aggravated. The expenditure of an amount like the 
foregoing, for energy which represents no return, serves to in- 
dicate in a startling manner the significance of adequate main- 
tenance. 

This illustration and the ones previously mentioned in con- 
nection with deterioration have been based on tungsten systems, 
but the results will show what may be expected in lighting sys- 
tems of other types of lamps from the accumulation of dust and 
dirt, and it is hoped that these tests and statements will be 
but forerunners of additional data along these and similar lines 
in the near future. 

General Methods. The limitations of this paper prevent 
more than a passing reference to the details of maintenance 
work. It will suffice to say that systematic methods are now 
being worked out and are in operation for handling this feature 
of lighting system operation. It is the desire that data like 
the foregoing will be a stimulus to further and more liberal 
attention in the matter of such work, and that they will promote 
more system in short cleaning intervals and other similar work. 


Economic RELATIONS 


Relation of Wages to Illumination. The chart shown in Fig. 16 
has been prepared to give an idea of the relation of average wage 


1912] CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION 1271 


ENERGY AT 1 CENT 


' 1 


PER KILOWATT-HO 


10 MEN 


1000 SQUARE FT. 
TUNGSTEN LIGHTING 


WATTS PER SQ. FT. ASSUMED 


(Bite 


ae Me Ae 
Ve ae | 


ALL LAMPS. BURNING 6 HOURS PER DAY., eed 


ALL LAMPS BURNING 5 HOURS PER DAY | | 


TOTAL WAGES FOR WORKING PERIOD 
TOTAL LIGHTING COSTS PER DAY 


el eer 1 ooh, | 
mw Zz 


2 SS A | | 
aaaew er. 5 apis Naas aa 
WIA J = = = ALL LAMPS BURNING 3 HOURS PER DAY 
ALL LAMPS BURNING 2 HOURS PER DAY. |_| 
FF us Lawes BuaNING | HOUR PER DAY! — 
ALL. LAMPS BURNING 1 HOUR PER DAY 


8 


ALL LAMPS BURNING 4 HOURS PER DAY. 


Paint 
9 


0 1 2 3 a 5 6 7 
WORKING PERIODS IN MINUTES 
io) rs ay 2 

ee ee S oo” i's Ss 
Q_ Gi ENERGY AT2 CENTS eT Ae é 
i 2 CO} PER KILOWATT-HOUR 5 os a a 
wc: RAS «Y, oe 
a 44 | ak = 
oc aS & & \> ! 
Su ALL LAMPS, BUANING 6 HOURS PER DAY. 
Rais P< 
cn y YY Y 
e b 18 VASA. ‘ALL LAMPS BURNING 5 HOURS PER DAY. 

(e) 

oO 

a ae ALL LAMPS BURNING 4 HOURS PER DAY. 
uz 
2 Ee 12 ALL LAMPS BURNING 3 HOURS PER DAY] 
og 
ata ional eile oak 
ee, ALL LAMPS BURNING 2 HOURS PER DAY.! 
Zz ie 6 t “ 
5 2) ALL LAMPS BURNING 1 HOUR PER DAY. 
= 

0 iy z 7 8 9 


8) “i 5 6 
WORKING PERIODS IN MINUTES 


CENTS. 


oan 


ENERGY.AT 3 CENTS 
PER KILOWATT-HOUR 


rh 
as 


iN 


TOTAL LIGHTING COSTS PER. DAY 


Ss 
MPS BURNI 


TOTAL WAGES FOR WORKING PERIOD 


3 A SS 6 
WORKING PERIODS IN MINUTES. 


Fic. 16—CurVES SHOWING RELATION OF AVERAGE WAGES TO LIGHT 


Costs. 


ING 


1272 CLEWELL: INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION [June 26 


conditions and lighting costs. The values are taken from actual 
average cases and show in a graphical manner the small percent- 
ages of the total wages represented by the average lighting costs. 
When one pauses to consider the fact that the wages for six 
minutes per day in average shops, pays not only for meagre, 
but also for entirely adequate illumination, and when one further 
considers that nearly all shops have some lighting facilities, poor 
as they may be, the difference between poor and excellent light- 
ing in its relations to improved surroundings and better workman- 
ship is apparent. 


PRESENT ACTIVITY IN INDUSTRIAL LIGHTING 


In one large shop where extensive installations of high effi- 
ciency lamps have been under way for nearly three years, a sum- 
mary shows an increase of nearly 30 per cent in actual candle 
power for a 5 per cent increase in total operating and mainte- 
nance costs. This increase of 30 per cent in candle power in no 
way, however, indicates the enormous improvements in the 
matter of excellence in distribution and refinement of results; 
it merely shows what great advances have been made in the pos- 
sibilities of industrial illumination by the newer types of lamps. 
Added to this candle power increase there are, of course, many 
advantages which have been brought about by the careful and 
scientific adaptation of the lamps best suited to each condition. 

It will be impracticable to indicate in a definite manner the 
extent of present activity in terms of exact installations, but it 
is of both interest and significance to note the progress which is 
being made in the growing intelligence among factory owners 
regarding the proper illumination for their plants. The work 
of the past few years along this line, if taken as an indication of 
what may be expected, promises great advances in the immediate 
future. 


a, —_—- Fs,” * 


A paper presénted at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 26, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


THE PROBLEMS OF INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 


BY BASSETT JONES, JR. 

The practise of illuminating engineering as a separate profes- 
sion is a recent development of applied science. So short a 
time ago as 15 years there was little if any room or need for such 
work, and the ‘art of illumination ” was largely a matter of 
guess-work, precedent, and simple attempts to produce artificial 
light, with little attention given to its distribution from the 
standpoint of economy as that word is understood today. 

Within the last decade we have seen remarkable strides in the 
development of illuminants to meet the enormous demand for 
means of efficiently producing brilliant illumination. This de- 
mand is largely due to the commercial pressure of the times which 
requires that we shall do a large part of our work and take 
practically all of our pleasures after dark. 

It has been found that the character of illumination has a 
direct influence on the efficiency of work, and efficiency, in the 
broad sense, being the password of the period, it naturally fol- 
lows that any profession, the practise of which can do much to 
improve economical conditions, will find a large demand for its 
product. 

The economical production of artificial light, depending, as 
at present, generally upon the raising of solids or gases to exceed- 
ingly high temperatures has required a parallel development 
of auxiliary devices to protect the eye from injury. 

The design of illuminants, generally following upon the results 
of laboratory experiments and research, has produced devices, 
the sole object of which is, as a rule, the economical production 
of light. Until very recently the difficulties encountered in the 
commercial manufacture of illuminants has precluded any defi- 

1273 


1274 JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION [June 26 


nite attempts at design for given distribution of light flux, and 
this has opened a wide field for the manufacture of reflectors 
to redistribute the flux properly for the varied sorts of work to be 
done by its aid. 

The work of the illuminating engineer is, then, the design of 
such arrangements of illuminants as will most economically 
meet the demand for properly distributed light. In attacking 
any specific problem he must consider, first, the kind of work to 
be done by artificial light, second, the distribution of light flux 
that will make it possible to do that particular work best under 
such abnormal conditions as the limitations of his resources 
impose, and third, the character and arrangement of illuminants 
that will most economically produce the light required. 

So much for the general aspect of our subject. Specifically 
I propose to devote the remainder of this paper to the considera- 
tion of certain phases of the problem of interior illumination, 
where the interior is of such architectural character as to demand 
in the design of its lighting equipment more than mere engineer-— 
ing considerations, and for the reason that an enormous field for. 
this kind of work is rapidly developing itself. The problems 
that arise during the design of such illuminating schemes are 
varied and interesting, and their solution often taxes to the utter- 
most the knowledge, imagination and ingenuity of the engineer. 

Those who are in touch with the philosophy of our time know 
that the word “‘ efficiency ’’ has acquired a very great importance 
in fields of activity into which energy, as we understand the 
word, does not enter. ‘‘ Human efficiency,’ ‘‘ social efficiency,” 
etc., are expressions the use of which is increasing, and this broad- 
ening of the concept has had a retroative effect on the engineering 
profession until today, we frequently hear the engineer talked of 
as a social servant. His work is efficient when it redounds to 
the benefit of society and this, whether or not his designs are 
worked out with regard to maximum energy efficiency. As a 
matter of fact one’s work is efficient when, with a minimum of 
means, one succeeds in accomplishing what one sets out todo. But 
the accent is always on the success. 

It does not matter whether what is accomplished is the gener- 
ation of 50,000 kilowatts at Squeedunk Falls and its transmission 
to Bisonville, the construction of a hundred story building, the 
ornamentation of a wall, the carving of a marble Venus, or the 
salvation of lost souls, the same rule applies, and, by the same 
token, it is, within reason, the result rather than the means by 


1912] JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 1275 


which the world will gage such work. You, as engineers, may 
sit in judgment upon the fractional percentage avoidable loss in 
the Squeedunk-Bisonville line, but the citizen of Bisonville 
judges only by the constancy and general satisfaction of the 
service. 

So, in the artificial illumination of interiors such as we shall 
study, the gage of efficiency can only be applied when we appre- 
ciate and understand the results accomplished, whether these 
results be the proper illumination of the working areas or attain- 
ment of proper shadows and color values in the architectural 
design, or both. Usually both results must be obtained. Hence 
this complexity of the problem. 

It has generally been the custom to rate the efficiency of a light- 
ing equipment by the ratio of light flux received on a plane de- 
termined at so many inches above the floor to the light flux 
generated. The arbitrary and unnatural results obtained are 
best criticised by the following considerations. 

Such a method of determining efficiency counts as a loss all of 
the light employed in producing beautiful effects in fixtures and 
lost by absorption in the pigments used in decorating the walls 
and ceiling. The light so employed in properly obtaining effects 
is useful in the sense that it does-what is required of it. It does 
not follow because the light used in setting forth the design of a 
library is not directly concerned with the actual business of the 
room, that the lighting equipment is inefficient. In fact only a 
small portion of the generated flux need be used for reading and 
still the system be highly efficient, since it makes the room ef- 
fective and pleasant to see and to be in, whether one reads or 
not. 

So too, in an ornate banking room only a very small propor- 
tion of the generated flux may be employed in illuminating 
desks or other places where the work of the bank is done pro- 
vided such places are in themselves properly lighted, and still 
the illuminating efficiency be very high when properly rated. 

It is quite useless to have beautiful things unless one can see 
them, and that illumination which properly sets them off in true 
value as to perspective, shadow, and color is correctly designed 
no matter how much energy is necessarily and purposefully 
used in obtaining the correct results. 

In fact, the work to be done by any such lighting arrangement 
is not only to enable us to see to do our work with ease and 
comfort, but also to make the interior pleasant to the senses 


1276 - JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION [June 26 


and to make its beauty visible. The frescoes of St. Peter’s are 
wasted unless they can be seen and for this purpose the ‘‘ work- 
ing plane ” is on the ceiling and not near the floor. 

These remarks recall to the writer a review of some of his 
work in which the curious statement was made that “ the effi- 
ciency was remarkably high (about 25 per cent) when one con- 
siders the decorative character of the illumination.” 

I presume the reviewer considered that since the interior was 
an auditorium the working plane was somehow at the level of 
the programs. Apart from the question as to the existence of 
programs, is it not obviously ridiculous to ignore the light flux 
used to set off the ceiling, which happened to be the most import- 
ant architectural feature of the room, and the elaborate and 
interesting color scheme of which the light sources themselves, 
their color and their intensity, formed a part? 

As a matter of fact can such an illuminating system be rated 
at all in terms of energy efficiency? Obviously, it cannot be so 
rated, and the term has no meaning when applied. The difficulty 
is to distinguish between energy efficiency properly speaking 
and general efficiency which refers to the relation of end to 
means. Perhaps it would be better to rate such illumination in 
terms of effectiveness for, of course, we are dealing with a sub- 
ject that bids fair to become a fine art. But in so doing we are 
introducing that indeterminate factor, personal taste. 

Evidently one must come to judge such work free from the 
prejudices borne of narrow technical training. Appreciation of 
the beautiful must be our starting point. 

But it is necessary for the engineer engaged in the design of 
lighting equipments of this character to have some basis of com- 
parison. And for this purpose the arbitrary rating in terms of 
flux received on a certain plane may serve well enough. This 
will, at least, isolate that part of the illumination concerned with 
utilitarian ends. 

The problems of interior illumination are now evident. The 
engineer must be able to grasp and appreciate the effect desired, 
and to so devise the equipment that this result will be accom- 
plished with as little outlay and running cost as possible. He must 
understand the relation of shadow and color to design so that 
the lighting arrangements will not warp or destroy the value of 
the architectural treatment and ornament. For, as I shall later 
show, the importance of shadow and color is primary. 

The engineer must know sufficient about color, as such, ana 


1912] JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 1277 


about pigments, to discern beforehand just what effect any par- 
ticular tone or intensity in the light will have in altering the 
color scheme, for both color and intensity in light have marked 
effects on colored pigments, and these effects vary with the char- 
acter and saturation of the pigments. Thus the color of satu- 
rated pigments or pigments pure in color, remains true in tone 
under variation of color in the illumination, varying only in 
luminosity, while, under similar conditions, unsaturated pig- 
ments, or pigments mixed with white, vary widely in color. 

Under low intensity of illumination the cold colors, blue- 
green, blue and violet, are more luminous than the warm colors, 
red, orange and yellow, while under high intensity of illumina- 
tion the results are reversed. 

The relative importance of the colors in the ornamental treat- 
ment may then be variously altered by the character of the illu- 
mination. Since it is rarely possible to determine the color 
scheme only for artificial light, it must be subject to such alter- 
ations of greater or less extent and the engineer must so select 
and arrange his illuminants that the change will not be injurious 
or productive of as little injury as possible. 

The possibility of interestingly modifying the character of 
the color ornamentation by modifications in the color of the 
illumination opens up a remarkable field for the display of 
ingenuity and good taste. This phase of the subject is almost 
an art in itself. 

Again, shadows constitute an important means of setting off 
relief design. Such designs are, in fact, little more than arrange- 
ments in light and shade, so that any extensive alteration of the 
shadows in direction, extent, or luminosity, will usually consti- 
tute a corresponding alteration in the effect of the design. The 
engineer must therefore see to it that the shadows, usually 
essentially altered by artificial light, are changed in such a fashion 
as to produce an interesting effect. Reversal of shadows may 
reverse the apparent projections in the relief. 

It is obvious, then, that where the architectural effects are 
produced by relief ornament, the apparent flattening of such 
ornament by excessive diffusion of light may have a very harmful 
effect. This is particularly true of Gothic design in which the 
characteristic is emphasized by deep reveals and returns pro- 
ducing deep and often black shadows with correspondingly 
accented high lights. 

Of course, where loss of shadow is unavoidable, the design may 


1278 JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION [June 26 


be picked out in carefully selected unsaturated tints. During 
the day these tints, if carefully chosen, will be inconspicuous 
giving full play to shadow effects, while during the evening they 
may be accented by proper color or colors in the illumination. 

Another consideration that in these days of unlimited indirect 
illumination requires careful attention is the balance of the de- 
sign. For artistic effect, where should the emphatic illumination 
be thrown? The answer to this question lies entirely in a keen 
sense for proportion. Generally speaking, interiors are lighted 
by daylight streaming through windows from the sky above the 
horizon, and the natural result is that almost all well conceived 
interiors are designed to present the best effect when the brilliant 
illumination is on or near the floor; the ceiling and upper parts of 
the room, lighted largely by reflected light, being subjected to 
relatively low intensity of illumination. 

This result is natural, as we require to see well in that por- 
tion of the room we occupy and the sense of definiteness due to 
the bright illuminations in the lower planes gives a feeling of 
“bottom ” to the area so lighted. The reversal of the effect, 
particularly when there is great contrast between the now 
brightly lighted ceiling and the floor, produces a decided feeling 
of unbalance and lack of firmness. The ceiling acquires a prom- 
inence not warranted by its purpose. However, as we shall 
later point out, occasions may arise when the architectural de- 
sign is such that the light may and should properly be thrown 
first upon the ceiling and then redistributed. But in all such 
cases great care must be taken to balance the effect by correct 
design of the equipment, and in nearly all such installations 
the intensities of illumination must be so low that the contrast 
effect is inconspicuous. 

In the consideration of indirect illumination the question of 
the excessive loss through re-reflection from painted surfaces is 
frequently brought up. But such losses are commonly less than 
would ordinarily be expected, due to the fact that the coefficient 
of reflection of diffuse reflecting surfaces is higher the more dif- 
fuse the impinging light. 

Lastly, we have the question of lighting fixtures, to consider, 
for these must, as a rule, form a part of the room furnishing, be 
things of beauty both by day and by night, and being a part of 
the design, they must partake of the character of the design 
both in proportion and decoration and still execute the duty 
demanded of them. 


1912] JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 1279 


So much for one aspect of our problem, although the discussion 
might be developed at great length. What has been said may 
serve to indicate how far-reaching and broad the subject is. 

We now have an equally important series of problems to con- 
sider in the design of that part of the illumination concerned 
with the utilitarian purpose to which the interior is put. It is 
unfortunate that the limitations of architecture, and perhaps 
also the limited ability of architects, coincident with the limited 
ability of engineers, makes it impossible for the design of inte- 
riors, practically as well as theoretically, always to be suited pre- 
cisely to their purpose as human conveniences. If we have the 
money to spend we are prone to demand that our houses as well 
as our working places be merely beautiful in themselves, and, as 
an example, we find ourselves frequently called upon to cope 
with a problem in illumination where the light that will serve to 
set off the beauties of the design is totally inadequate as a means 
of enabling us to use the structure properly. 

Rarely, and generally by accident, the two requirements may 
be made to coincide. Sometimes the illumination designed for 
one purpose may be used to reinforce or be superimposed upon 
the other. Frequently the two must receive independent treat- 
ment and the result be so arranged as not to be unpleasant. 

The safest method of attack is to solve each problem separately 
and then cast around for some means of bringing them together. 

From the utilitarian standpoint we have first to consider the 
eye. Arrangements which produce strain, fatigue, and other 
injuries must be avoided. Low intrinsic brilliancy of exposed 
light sources and shading of sources possessing high intrinsic 
brilliancy are imperative. The equipment must be so designed 
that images of the otherwise well-shielded light source may not 
be reflected to the eye from surrounding surfaces of objects. The 
portions of the mechanism for vision—the iris, the eye-brow— 
must be able to perform their functions normally. The maxt- 
mum intensity of light must be concentrated upon the work and 
by variations in intensity between the light on work and on sur- 
rounding objects the muscles of adjustment must be given oppor- 
tunity for exercise. Nothing in lighting can be more unfortu- 
nate than an equal distribution of intensity throughout, as then 
the muscles that adjust the iris are kept in a fixed position and we 
should find ourselves much in the same condition of fatigue as 
though we were compelled to hold one arm out straight for a con- 
siderable period of time, 


1280 JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION [June 26 


It is better that the change in intensity from the work to 
surrounding objects be downward rather than upward as under 
such conditions the eye is given frequent rests. In libraries and 
reading rooms it is well if this change be relatively great, but not 
so great that the iris, once having opened wide, is not given a 
chance to readjust itself within reasonable limits when the eye 
is once more turned toward brightly lighted areas. In general, 
variations in intensity throughout an interior automatically 
produce normal exercises of the optic muscles. Further, the 
reflecting devices used to concentrate illumination upon the 
work must be so disposed and designed that light rays directly 
reflected from the work will not strike the eye. 

The color of the light may have a very marked effect upon the 
ease and comfort with which work can be done. The value of 
the intensity certainly does have such an effect and must be 
carefully determined in each case by experiment and test. 

These and numerous other similar problems must be studied 
and solved before we are even prepared to calculate the total 
quantity of light flux required and so determine the amount and 
distribution of energy to be used. 

It can readily be seen that in many cases of interior illumina- 
tion the sum total effect of the variables which have to be inde- 
pendently determined for each instance, usually by trial, may 
greatly exceed in amount the sum total effect of the constants 
that, with reasonable accuracy, can be predetermined. In this 
lies the principal difficulty in the way of the development of the 
art along any exact lines. Another difficulty is the lack of defi- 
nite information so generally evident in the early stages of all 
progress. 

Complete and useful values of reflection and diffusion coeffi- 
cient from various surfaces variously colored, and subjected to 
various arrangements and color of light; data as to the spectral 
composition of the light from standard illuminants; sensitiveness 
curves for color in the light of illuminants; exact data on color 
changes and contrast effects; studies of pigments; spectral com- 
position. and measurements of the light obtained from various 
illuminants transmitted through color screens; all of these and 
many more lines of inquiry must be followed out before any 
great exactness can be introduced into the solution of such 
lighting problems as we are considering. 

There are needed also-the results of careful and authoritative 
research into the subject of what has been called ‘‘ visual acuity ;”’ 
that is, the effect of various light arrangements upon the ability 


ac 


1912] JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 1281 


to discern various kinds of objects with distinctness; this among 
other problems in physiological optics where many needed data 
are lacking. 

The principal difficulty encountered in the attempt to give 
any fixed form to such data, is that the subjective elements, 
whose total effect is termed ‘the personal equation,’ are 
prominent factors in all judgments having to do with the 
measurement of the sensations of color and light. Such ex- 
periments are in reality attempts to measure and compare 
subjective activities themselves and thus, since the work ap- 
proaches closely to the business of psychology, the method of 
inquiry must be largely the method of psychology. 

Assuming now, that in any particular case, the engineer has 
attacked and solved the preliminary problems above briefly 
outlined. He is then in a position to determine with a greater 
or less degree of accuracy the total light flux required. It may be 
taken for granted that he has carefully studied the use to which 
the interior is to be put, has mapped out the working areas and 
has determined the average intensity and direction of flux over 
these areas. He has, we shall presume, obtained from the archi- 
tect information as to the general design, its character, detail, 
and color. He has probably prepared several schemes of illum- 
ination, the accomplishing of which has seemed practical, and 
these he has discussed with the architect until he has, at least, 
grasped the ideal embodied in the design. His imagination has - 
enabled him to see the interior as the architect has seen it in his 
mind’s eye,and so it must appear to the beholder when com- 
pleted. The engineer is now in a fair way to achieve some 
measure of success. 

The architect’s details and, if possible, plaster models, having 
been studied by the engineer for shadow, the general direction 
of the light at various points required to lend visibility to the 
design may be determined. 

The relative value of directed and diffuse light can be settled 
by noting the style of design, the relation of coarse to the fine 
relief, and the character of the detail within the shadows. The 


color of the light will be decided by a study of the color scheme 


the architect will employ. 

Thus having established the intensity and direction of the 
light at various points, or over the various areas, of the design, 
the location of the light sources, primary or secondary, can be de- 
termined. Of course, in nearly every case, only an approximate 
realization of such ideal conditions can be achieved. 


1282 JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION [June 26 


The location of the light sources thus having been fixed, the 
amount of flux to be generated, allowing for the character of 
the equipment imposed by the design, can be calculated with 
reasonable exactness. 

For this part of the work three general methods are available, 
all of which are useful. These are, in order of development, 

1. Point-by-point method. 

2. Flux method. 

3. Absorption method. 

We shall devote a few words to each of them. 

The point-by-point method employs the ideas of intensity and 
its direction. It attacks the problem in precisely the same way 
that is employed in calculations for intensity or potential gra- 
dient in the electric or magnetic field. The formulas employed 
in the two problems are, in general, identical in form. 

Given a light source having a certain radial distribution of 
intensity, it is generally possible to calculate the intensity in any 
direction at any point in the light field. The method is often 
tedious but, particularly where shadows or glare by reflection is 
concerned, serves as an excellent check on the two remaining 
methods. Geometrical or graphical solutions as substitutes for 
analytical solutions are frequently simpler and equally useful. 

Where surface sources such as skylights of considerable area, 
or wall surfaces considered as secondary sources are concerned, 
the point by point method is generally useful in spite of compli- 
cations. 

The point-by-point method bears much the same relation to 
the flux method that calculations for intensity bear to calcula- 
tions for flux density in the magnetic field. 

In the flux method we either assume an average flux density 
over a given area to be lighted or find the average of the intensities 
at a number of points on the area, the intensity at any point being 
determined by the conditions of the problem or, with a given 
illuminant, calculated by the point-by-point method. The sum 
of the flux values calculated in this way over all the enclosing 
illuminated surfaces, allowing for absorption, etc., is the received 
flux. A certain part of it may be set aside as ‘“‘ useful flux ”’ if 
desired. Generally it is all useful. 

The received flux is also the generated flux when we add enough 
to allow for loss by reflectors, glassware, shades, etc. If we 
divide the generated flux by the flux generated per lamp in the 
type and size of lamp we desire to employ, we obtain directly 
the number of lamps required. 


PLATE LXIX 


VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[SHNof] 


“SOTJISUO}UL JO [eSI9AVI SMOYS “P2eAOUTEI sUdaIOS 1O]OD 
‘LHOIT ‘IVIOIWILAY AM AOIAALINI—€ ‘Oly 


LHDITAV(] AM AOIUBLNI—] “OIG 


| 
| 
4 


1912] _ JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 1283 


On the other hand, in using the absorption method, we go upon 
the more logical and exact idea that the flux generated need only 
be that lost by absorption over the various enclosing surfaces 
lighted. Thus if we desire to light a surface to a given average 
flux density, we can apply to this average flux density the ab- 
sorption coefficient for the surface, and count the result as the 
flux which must be generated in order to light properly the area 
in question. The results obtained by both “ flux method eral 


VAVAVAVAVS LIPASE 


oo 


PUBLIC SPACE 


i 


T= INVERTED REFLECTOR —>! 


_— LINE OF 
MEZZANINE 


i<—INVERTED REFLECTOR 


a 


ie) 


i 
4 


©) 


SEMI INDIRECT 
opr a FIXTURES —., ° 


Fic. 2—OuTLINE PLAN OF BANKING ROOM. 


‘‘ absorption method ” are of necessity identical when properly 
applied. 

In order now, to give a concrete illustration of the applica- 
tion of these principles and methods I shall ask you to review 
briefly the studies and calculations carried out in the design of 
the lighting equipment of a banking room in New York. 

A general view of the room is shown in Fig. 1. Its plan is 
shown in Fig. 2. A view of the room taken at night by its own 
artificial illumination is shown in Fig. 3. 


1284 JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION [June 26 


The room has an open central space and smaller bays on the 
four sides. A mezzanine is run along the north and west sides. 
The main ceiling height from the main floor level is 30 ft. The 
ceiling height below the mezzanine is 17 ft.,and above, 11 ft. 
The floor area is variously divided into cages, conference 
rooms and offices, by wire mesh screens, marble partitions and 
wood and glass partitions 7 ft. 6 in. high. The main banking 
screen setting off the public space is of solid marble to the 
counter, and glass with marble columns and cornice above. 

The walls, columns and column caps of the main room are of 
marble. This marble has a light reddish buff color—highly 
polished Pavanella clair marble. The ceilings are of plaster. 
The ceiling of the central space is nearly flat with low relief 
ornament. The ceiling of each outer bay is divided by beams 
and soffits into four coffers in each of which is a plaster rosette. 
The ceilings under the mezzanines are flat. The color of the 
ceilings is generally a light reddish gray buff, the ornament 
and mouldings being picked out in unsaturated tints of red, blue 
and yellow. 

The general character of the architectural treatment is a 
refined classic based on the Ionic order. Delicate and beautiful 
mouldings and leaf ornament are used to set off the structural 
lines and proportions. A refined simplicity is the keynote of 
the design. 

It will at once be seen from the illustrations that the large 
open central space gives the room, otherwise relatively restricted 
in area, an appearance of spaciousness. Therefore, it would 
not be proper to introduce hanging fixtures in this space. In- 
deed even if such fixtures might be used, the design of this part 
of the ceiling could not be made suitable to receive them with- 
out distinctly marring the effect On the other hand the outer 
bays seem to require some such furnishing if only to carry the 
line of the facia of the mezzanine floor. The crossing beams in 
the bay ceilings furnished a sufficient apparent structural support. 

It so happened that the main banking screen was admirably 
suited in its position to receive such lighting devices as were 
required to light the central space, but since any effect of rows 
of illuminants would have been objectionable as lending too 
great a prominence to this feature of the design it was decided 
to employ indirect illumination, concealing trough reflectors 
in the cornice and leaving it to the fixtures in the outer bays to 
form the ostensible sources of light. For the lack of any such 


1912] JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 1285 


visible source is generally puzzling and productive of unfortunate 
psychological effects. 

The location of the light sources so determined made it theo- 
retically possible to produce good shadow effects. By proper 
handling of the side bay fixtures the deep ceiling coffers could be 
thrown into comparative shade and the ornament accented by 
so coloring the light thrown to the ceiling that the tinting in the 
coffer bottoms would be deepened, leaving the rosette, soffits and 
colored mouldings in high light. 

By confining the light thrown upward from the reflector in 
the top of the banking screen within the square defined by the 
beams framing the open central ceiling space, as shown in Fig. 4, 
and by proper adjustment of the light near the sides of this space 
after the reflectors were installed, it would seem possible to pre- 
vent any reversal of shadow on the column caps and architrave 
mouldings. The colors of the ceilings could be interestingly 
accented by the use of color screens in these reflectors. 

So much for the upper planes of the room. But the bottom 
of a room is the floor, and the final adjustments must be such 
that the principal variation in intensity is inverse with regard 
to the height—not directly so, but in some multiple thereof 
that will produce the most suitable gradation. Thus, if 77 be the 
intensity near the floor and h the height, we may express this 
effect by writing 

: aj 

4=k 1 
where i is the intensity or flux density of illumination at the dis- 
tance kh above the floor. The value of k is always such that 2 
diminishes as h increases. In the room in question k should have 
a value of approximately 2, for, by experiment, this gradation 
seemed to produce the most satisfactory results. 

We have a difficulty here, for, having selected an indirect 
system in general, our gradation is reversed. We can somewhat 
overcome this by so arranging our side bay fixtures that they 
will throw a large volume of light downward in a broad distri- 
bution. As we have said before they must also throw light 
upward. But now we meet two requirements that are dominant. 
First, the fixtures must be of the style and proportion suited to 
their location. Second, their intrinsic brilliancy must be low. 
The first requirement determines their size, the second require- 
ment taken in conjunction with the first determines the total 
light flux these fixtures can properly produce. 


[June 26 


INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 


. 
. 


JONES 


1286 


‘MOOY ONINNVG HONOUHL NOILOAS HLNOS GNV HLYON—F “DIY 


MO *, 
Je z a 
/ | \ i2 
Za “\ L 
¢ H *3°0 es 
AS | bon 40 €z° ———e- taee 
Tr Ia \ Bee 2 3-——F i 
. = fa | — Ses SS 7  — S3ILISN3.LNI FWNHON 
Cf 
\ “i G3LvINOIVO 40 3AuNO 
\ IH doen 7, ~ xt ll e 
40 LW 7 oO iwi / 
\ ae ae / 
\ 7 \ I 
\ Z XN / 
‘ 7 “ i 
RP =i= Ze 
ip ZL 
N33Y0S YO100 AAG 
Pe _ AL Naa408 HOT0O 
/ ~S _- \ 
e =. Be 2% 
yi ata 7 4 
, - 
4 =, bs - 
XM 40 SLINIT oll oe Leo xm 20 san mit 2 
/ i Be rae Na 
/ oar \ 
/ Wes ae i 
v4 ae ss \ 
- ~ 
/ - 7 \ 
a eas \ 
3-= <a Xe 
ea a. a" 
eae ee a 
B56 ee \ 
oer = \ 
pci Tes 4 
i Ses a 
a x 
Se \ 
~ ay," 
~» 


1912] JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 1287 


The design—a semi-indirect type with interior mirror reflectors 
and top of clear amber diffusing glass—is shown in Fig. 4. Each 
of the large fixtures contains a single 250-watt clear bulb tungsten 
lamp. The smaller fixtures of the same design on the mezzanine 
contain a 150-watt lamp. The energy of efficiency of these 
fixtures as light generators 1s comparatively low on account 
of the necessary equipment for color and diffusion. Their ‘‘ effec- 
tiveness” is, we believe, one hundred per cent. 

The net result of the use of these fixtures is perfect so far as 
the outer bays are concerned, but our gradation in the central 
space is still reversed. This we correct as follows: First by a 
gradation in color as we go up—from a whitish yellow through 
yellow to a warm orange like the light from a wood fire of glowing 
coals; second by low general intensities, and, third, by establish- 
ing a graded belt of more brilliant illumination in the public 
space. This last we can, fortunately accomplish by means of 
a trough reflector set in the bottom of the screen cornice as 
shown in Fig. 4. This device serves two purposes. First, to 
throw light through the screen into the public space, and second, 
to furnish proper illumination on the screen counters as well as 
to light up the faces of the people outside the wickets. In addi- 
tion to the light from this source there will also be some increase 
in the illumination of the lower planes in the room by light re- 
flected from the working areas. 

These, in brief, are the principal factors that determine the 
character of the equipment for general illumination so far as 
the design of the room is concerned. We now have to take up 
the illumination of the working areas themselves. 

Our first consideration is that the scheme for general illumina- 
tion can not be made adequate for working purposes. If the 
flux density were merely increased retaining its distribution 
not only would the architectural effect be weakened but the 
room would be uncomfortably brilliant. Besides a large 
amount of energy would be wasted. 

The working areas constitute the surfaces of the various 
tables, desks and counters, and it is here and here only that any 
great flux density is needed. The total working area on the 
main floor is about 950 sq. ft. The total main floor area being 
approximately 7650 sq. ft., it at once appears how wasteful it 
would be to light this entire area to a high intensity in order to 
produce the same intensity over one-eighth of te 

Let us assume that four foot-candles are required on the work- 


1288 JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION [June 26 


ing area. Then 4 X 950 = 3800 lumens is the working flux 
required. On the other hand, 4 X 7650 = 30,600 lumens is 
the flux required when the working illumination is obtained from 
the general room illumination. We shall therefore go on the 
basis that each desk shall be provided with its own lighting de- 
vices. 

Apart from the screen counters, the lighting of which has been 
described above, there are six types of desks and tables requiring 
in all five types of fixtures. These fixtures can be so designed 
that an even normal flux density of four foot-candles will be dis- 
tributed over the working area and so directed that, with the 
eye in the normal position, there can be no direct reflection from 
papers on the desk. There is no essential difficulty in obtaining 
this result by the use of sectional mirror reflectors. 


TAXIS OF 


FIXTURE 


\Yy 


e) 


REFLECTOR CASTING BELOW THIS LINE. 
Non eee ee ee ee ee DEVE. 
\ a 


\ ae 
N WORKING ANGLE. ~ 
Sis DIRECT REFLECTION 
ABOVE THIS FOINT. 
“. 


E 


~ 
, 
is 


ON << 


aa 7 


| 
| 
| 
' 
1 
' 
1 
| 
| 
' 
| 
' 
1 
' 
' 


DESK SURFACE, 


Fic. 5 


The casings of these reflectors are of drawn bronze given a 
sand blasted oxidized finish to prevent the appearance of images 
by reflection. They also cut off all direct light from the eye. 

The contour of the reflectors is designed geometrically for 
each type by working back from the illumination desired on the 
desk surface. The principle of the method may be expressed 
analytically as follows: 

Divide the surface to be lighted, Fig. 5, into strips parallel with 
the light source. Let the width of each strip be such that the 
incident flux per unit length of each strip is the same. Let the 
width of one of these strips be A C. From a point E, safely 
below the normal eye position, draw lines such as E B from E to 
the center of each strip. These are the limiting lines of direct 
reflection from the desk surface. Draw BQ so that a = of 


PLATE LXX 


Aol. iE. iE. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


“AMON LXI A 


[saNof] 


LOFAIGN]-INAS—G “OI 


[Sanof] 


‘ONILHOIT ASAQ—9J “OIA 


x fi ves Wy ¢ ibe, - 
an = . , :.? “ = ‘ 
’ ou s > # 6 4M > + ‘ 
5 ea a ee en ee ts nis ey . ae —- Ss 
. - ~- 4 | ie i. 


i a il iE 


1912] JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 1289 


These lines, B Q, are the limiting ‘‘ flux lines ”’ from the illumin- 
ant. Let any one of these lines intersect one strip P R of the 
reflector at 0. Draw A P and C R, and P O and R O so that 
the -angles of incidents are equal to the angles of reflection. 
These lines meet at P, the center of the source assumed to be a 
luminous line, perpendicular to the plane of the paper. Let the 
angle POR=06. The angle between A P and C R is also equal 
to?. LetQOO=7,Q0B =d,andletr+d=s. 

If z is the intensity at B along d then the flux per unit length 
of source, and a strip, A C, enclosed within the angle Ais 

B=0s4 

Now if J be the source intensity in c.p. then 
is 


4=— C, 
5 


where C, is the coefficient of 
reflection of the mirror. Then 


B=0s-~O, = 81a, 


and 


9 B 


dec phe 


Pie 7, 


from which, and the structural conditions the reflector contour 
may be plotted. 

A view of one desk lighted is shown in Fig. 6. 

The calculations for the semi-indirect units and the indirect 
reflectors are based upon the same reasoning. It is important, 
however, to determine the angle at which the reflector in the 
semi-indirect unit be set. 

In Fig. 7, let A B be the lamp filament. Let P R be a section 
of the reflector. Let b be the distance along the ceiling from 
the axis of the fixture to the point B at which it is desired to 
reinforce the flux density. It is required to finda, h being 
given. 

Then 


elas (ota ) ] 
C= 515 tan ( i, FW 
depending upon whether the center of the filament is above or 
below hk. With a given of course h can be found. 

Now let it be assumed, that on the central ceiling space of the 
room fabove discussed, we require an average apparent normal 


1290 JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION [June 26 


intensity of reflected light of one candle. The surface being a 
reasonably good diffuser, the reflected flux per square foot is ap- 
proximately 1.07 = 4.7 lumens. 

The ceiling area being 1976 sq. ft., the total reflected flux is 
1976 X 3.1 = 6125 lumens. Let us take 0.45 as the average 
absorption coefficient. The total flux absorbed is then 11136 
— 6125 = 5011 lumens. Assuming 380 per cent average ab- 
sorption in our color screens (seen in Fig. 1) and loss in reflector 
we have as our net generated flux 8350 lumens. This can be 
generated by 44 25-watt lamps. Actually, and after trial, 36 
were used. 

The reflectors, however, were made considerably longer than 
the calculations indicated so that the necessary adjustment for 
shadows and color could be made. Finally about half ruby and 
half light amber screens were used, the ruby being central. 
It is perhaps, needless to say that the reflectors were so designed 
as to prevent any appearance of glare or sight of the lamps from 
the mezzanine floor. 

A curve of normal intensities due to the illumination on the 
ceiling on a plane 30 in. above the floor is shown in Fig.4. These 
intensities are calculated by the point by point method, using a 
formula given by the writer in a paper ‘‘ On Finite Line and Sur- 
face Light Sources.’’* 

Let us now consider for a moment the method of obtaining the 
total generated flux required. This can be simply shown by 
the following table. 


| 
Surface Area Average incident Absorption Diffusion Required flux 
sq. ft. flux density coefficient coefficient lumens 
Central 
ceiling 1976 3.0 0.45 1.00 5011 
Side bay 
ceilings 2900 2,0 0.40 1.25 2320 
Soffits 184 2.0 0.40 1.25 147 
Mez. ceiling} 1875 2.0 0.50 1.00 1875 
Upper half 
walls 5368 | y Er / 0.30 1.45 2689 
Lower half . | 
walls 5368 IT 2 0.30 1.45 2679 
Upper half | | 
columns 1055 | 2.5 0.30 1.45 738 
Lower half 
columns 1055 2.0 0.30 1.45 633 
Floors 8333 2.0 0.75 1.25 2083 
Totalireduived Hix i liisre <loierdis: a vie wie ota Cayetels sikelele hale BAR tne wnt Reais ie 18,175 


*Transactions I. E.S., Vol. V, p. 298. 


1912] JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 1291 


The calculations for the above are as follows. Let i be the 
required apparent normal intensity of reflected light per square 
foot of surface. If the surface shows perfect reflection as 
from a mirror then the intensity of the reflected beam in 
the direction of the angle of reflection equals the intensity 
of the incident beam in the direction of the angle of incidence. 
The received and reflected flux will, of course, be the same. 
So, if 2, is the intensity of the reflected beam, and 7; is the inten- 
sity of the incident beam, 7%, = 7;. The normal intensity in this 
case is 1, cos 8 where @ is the angle between the normal and the 
direction of 77. On the other hand, when the surface shows per- 
fect diffusion, the maximum intensity of reflected light is along 
the normal. In any other direction it is 7 cos 0, where 7 is the 
normal intensity and @ the angle between the normal and the 
direction in which the intensity is measured. The polar or 


7 OE Cee ee 
POLAR CURVE 

F< FCR DIFFUSE 

INCIDENT LIGHT 


---> ao nie 


Fic. 8 


intensity curve of such a surface bounded by a circle is itself a 
circle whose diameter is the normal intensity and which is tangent 
to the surface at its center. The polar surface is therefore a 
sphere, and the reflected flux through a hemisphere bounded by 
the surface is m7 lumens. 

We may have every variety of diffusion between these two 
extremes. 

If then, as in Fig. 8, where O A B is the polar curve of reflected 
intensities, we measure the normal intensity as 7, zz will not give 
us the actual reflected flux, due to the high component of direct 
reflection. To obtain it we must multiply m7 by some con- 
stant which we shall call the diffusion coefficient. For the 
same surface, this coefficient will be different for different 
arrangements of incident light. Fora surface carefully painted 
with a non-lead priming body and a non-lead finish finely stippled 


1292 JONES: INTERIOR ILLUMINATION [June 26 


we may take the diffusion coefficient to be 1.00 and practically 
independent of the arrangement of incident light. 

Now let Cy be this coefficient. We may then write for Br, 
the reflected flux 


p= wt Ca 


If C, be the absorption coefficient, that is, the fraction of the 
incident flux absorbed by the surface, then the incident flux 
must be given by 


(1 — Ca) Bi = wi Ca 


In the case of any closed surface receiving a flux of energy 
from sources within the surface the only loss of energy is 
that absorbed by or transmitted through the surface. Hence 
to maintain a given quantity of energy within the surface the 
enclosed sources must constantly supply the losses. 

We may then write for the total flux to be generated by the 
light sources in any given enclosure 


B= > Bice 


The total required flux given in the above table must be further 
increased by the losses in the fixtures and equipment to find 
the total flux generated at the lamps. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1293 


Discussion ON “ INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION AND THE AVERAGE 
PERFORMANCE OF LIGHTING SySTEMS”’ (CLEWELL), AND 
‘‘Tur PROBLEMS OF INTERIOR ILLUMINATION ”’ (JONES), 
Boston, Mass., JUNE 26, 1912. 


D. McFarlan Moore: Mr. Jones has given us a demonstration 
which proves the fallacy of attempting to illuminate any interior 
without giving very careful attention to the matter of shadows. 
The problems of interior illumination are generally duplex, that 
is, attention must be given to daytime illumination and night 
time illumination. There are some instances, however, when 
it is not desired to produce at night time the same effect as in 
daytime. 

However, our object, generally, is to attain the ideal, and the 
more diffused the light, the more nearly will it approach day- 
light conditions. In most apartments it is impossible to arrange 
for the entrance of daylight from above, and we are compelled, 
perforce, to use windows, and therefore shadows naturally 
result. We have just had a demonstration that proves that 
shadows have their uses and if they are eliminated entirely, the 
result is not usually desirable to the architect. But the 
happy mean is right as regards shadows, as well as everything 
else in this world. 

Mr. Jones has also put us all through some rapid-fire visual 
gymnastics with color. Our final commercial object should be 
to devise the apparatus of our artificial lighting sources so that 
these valuable color effects can be produced with the greatest 
ease. 

The ideal method is not by means of colored glasses. A more 
scientific procedure is to vary, directly, the color of the light 
source, which can best be accomplished by substituting, for our 
heated solid conductors, various colored gaseous conductors. 

Preston S. Millar: It is very difficult to discuss a demon- 
stration, particularly when it is a good one. One can do little 
more than compliment the demonstrator and hope that some 
time he may have an opportunity to see it again. 

It seems to me that Mr. Jones’s paper sets before this joint 
meeting of electrical and illuminating engineers the field of 
illuminating engineering in an excellent manner. It discusses the 
principles of illuminating engineering and then illustrates their 
application in a notable installation. 

Prominent in that discussion is the comment upon the question 
of efficacy of lighting, the achievement of certain desirable 
lighting effects, and efficiency; and Mr. Jones points out that 
the proper lighting effects must be secured efficiently, if possible, 
but must be secured inefficiently if necessary. This indicates 
the importance of the scientific study of these problems and the 
importance of securing the effects efficiently. ; 

It has been demonstrated that if an illumination installation 
provides lighting which is at once properly diffused, properly 


1294 ILLUMINATION [June 26 


directed, and of a proper color value or intensity, that lighting 
system becomes expensive, perhaps two or three times more 
expensive, in both equipment and operation, than it would be 
if it merely lighted the place, but not properly, from these 
various standpoints. The question of efficiency, therefore, is 
of even greater importance when lighting is undertaken in this 
highly desirable manner. But it is so easy to lose a very large 
percentage of possible obtainable efficiency by ignoring the 
optical laws or selection of the proper illuminant, etc., and I 
have had an instance only recently brought to my attention in 
which the proper lighting effect was obtained, but most ineffi- 
ciently, because the optical laws involved and the characteristics 
of the illuminant were ignored. 

I know that Mr. Jones has made a considerable study of these 
matters, and it seems to me if he had laid a little more stress 
upon the cost of the experimentation which he has gone through 
in order to secure the effect he has obtained he would have 
placed the general illumination problem before us a little more 
broadly. 

Charles F. Scott: With reference to Mr. Clewell’s paper, I 
happened to be associated with Mr. Clewell in the general work 
on which this paper is based. It was in connection with the 
lighting of a large factory. Some improvements were to be made. 
Although a number of us who constituted the lighting committee 
were reputed to know something about the subject, electrically, 
and from the standpoint of illumination, we immediately called 
for experts associated with different companies in the illumina- 
ting business, to come and tell us what we ought todo. One 
of the surprises which came to us in connection with this call 
for expert opinion was when we found that these engineers 
could not look at a room and tell us, ‘‘ You want to put in so 
many lamps of such a size, and such a kind of reflector—that is 
the thing to do.” The rooms were simple, and of the same size 
as other rooms which had been lighted, the space to be lighted 
was no more than is met with in any average case, but no, they 
wanted to study the conditions, and see what was to be done, and 
get exact measurements of the room, etc., and go home and 
study over the proposition for several days before they would 
give an opinion as to what was the best thing to be done. 

A few months later, in lighting one of the offices in this same ~ 
factory, an office some 20 ft. (6.1 m.) square, we had first 
the single light in the center of the room, and then a number of 
individual lights over the desks, but we took out the single light 
in the center and put in a cluster of four lights, and that made a 
vast improvement over the illumination given by the single light. 
We thought that did not go far enough, and put up some smaller 
lamps, three rows of three lights each, all the lamps to be lighted 
at once, and had them burning several days, and tried to see 
which light was best, so that we could get along without the 
individual carbon lamps, etc. The assistant to the president 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1295 


-came round one day and. said, ‘‘We want to get this place 
lighted, and if your committee will stop this foolish experiment- 
ing you may accomplish something. You look as if you did not 
know what to do. Ask the people who are using the lights what 
to do, and then go away and leave it, and we can go ahead and 
light this factory.” 

That illustrates the type of man who is frequently met in the 
work of installing lighting systems. People do not understand 
these things, and the kind of analysis which Mr. Clewell has 
given shows in a simple way how the putting up of ordinary 
lights, with bell-shaped reflectors over them, is not a thing to 
be done in the abstract, but in the concrete. It is a place where 
theory and practise do combine, and where different kinds of 
practise may be combined with theory. 

From the demonstration we have seen, we all know it is most 
obvious, when it is pointed out, that the shadow effect and color 
effect depend on the direction of light, intensity of light, the 
color of light, etc. It took a quarter of a century for the electric 
lamp to realize that it was not to replace the gas jet, but the 
electric lamp did overcome the use of the chandelier. We have 
got rid of the chandelier, but still we try to imitate the candles 
which are a thousand years old; we cannot seem to get away 
from the old things. We must learn to be illuminating engineer- 
ing decorators. 

In reference to Mr. Clewell’s interesting diagram showing the 
spacing of the lamps and the direction of the light, a rough 
approximation to what he has there is to divide the space above 
the plane of the table into cubes and put a lamp at the center 
of each cube. The height of the ceiling from the floor ig 12 ft. 
(3.6 m.), and if the table is 4 ft. (1.2 m.) high, then the ceiling 
is 8 ft. (2.4 m.), above the plane of the table, and therefore 
the lamps should be 8 ft. (2.4 m.) apart, and that is what he 
has. This rule does not carry out fully, but is a close approxi- 
mation to what Mr. Clewell’s diagram shows. 

Not long ago I visited the office of one of the largest lighting 
companies in this country. The engineer showed me about, 
and incidentally showed me the lighting in some of the offices. 
There were two drafting offices. One had indirect lighting and 
the other was lighted by a wretched type of illumination, the bare 
tungsten lamps hanging over each desk, about 18 in. (46 cm.) 
above the desk. It was a remarkable illustration of faulty and 
criminal illumination, which it is our purpose to do away with, 
and to educate the people to a knowledge of its shortcomings. 
I said to the chief draftsman who had charge of both rooms: 
“T see you have both kinds of lighting here—the indirect 
lighting and the bare tungsten lamp. Suppose you had to use 
one room altogether, for the sake of getting work out for the 
company, if it took eight hours to do a certain piece of work in 
this poorly lighted room, in how many hours would you expect to 
do the work in the other room?” He replied, “ Tt would probably 


1296 ILLUMINATION [June 26 


take from an half hour to three-quarters of an hour less to do 
the work in the other room.’’ In other words, there was a gain 
of from one-half to three-quarters of an hour by having good light. 
I then asked him the cost of the draftsmen and the cost of the 
lighting to compare one with the other, and he said that the differ- 
ence in the cost of the lighting was equivalent to the cost of the 
draftsmen’s services for a period of five minutes in each day, so 
that if the lighting had been as good in one room as in the other, 
there would have been a saving of from one-half to three 
quarters of an hour each day. We ought to realize, therefore, 
what a great economy there is in efficient lighting. 

A. E. Kennelly: In pursuance of the idea which Professor 
Scott has given, I would like to draw attention to one detail of 
Mr. Clewell’s paper, which is, by the way, a plea for the duster, 
and shows us that, in illuminating engineering, cleanliness is 
next to luminescence. The constants are worked out very clearly 
as to the money value of cleanliness and, of course, they are 
convincing as a matter of simple arithmetic, from the standpoint 
of producer and consumer combined. Say it costs one dollar 
an hour to light a certain hall, if-all the light is cut off by dirt, 
all that dollar is wasted, and if half the light is cut off fifty cents 
an hour is wasted. An important point was touched upon by 
Mr. Scott—the value to the consumer alone, as distinguished 
from the combination of producer and consumer. Suppose the 
lighting in a work room, as compared with the original illumina- 
tion when the installation was first made, is cut down by dirt 
to the extent of 10 per cent, without making any noticeable 
difference in the amount or quality of work done in that room, 
the question arises whether the cost to the consumer of clean- 
liness is anything like the proportional value of the lost light, as 
long as the depreciation in the illumination value of the lamps 
does not interfere with the work. The moment dirt begins to 
interfere with the work, and cuts down the volume of the work, 
so that the consumer cannot earn as much as he did before, his 
production is less in volume, and there is manifestly a rapid 
rise in the cost of the dirt from his standpoint. _ 

E. B. Rowe: I do not know that I can answer specifically 
the question raised by Dr. Kennelly, but there is one point which 
might be brought up in connection with Mr. Clewell’s paper, 
which he omitted, perhaps intentionally, and which I might 
point out in connection with the poor conditions under which 
the tests were made. These tests did not include any considera- 
tion of the effect of depreciation of the walls and ceilings, which 
are important factors in many cases. For example, in certain 
industrial installations, in light manufacturing spaces, it is 
customary to have light walls and ceilings which, by means of 
their diffused reflection, increase materially the total efficiency 
of the installation. The effect of dirt and dust depreciation of 
walls and ceilings may therefore be considerable. In one series 
of tests which were made under average city conditions this 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1297 


loss by decrease in reflection from ceiling and walls, which were 
originally white, amounted in the course of three months to 
from 10 to 14 per cent. These figures, of course, are only approxi- 
mate and hold true only for the conditions under which the tests 
were made. 
C. E. Clewell: In connection with Mr. Rowe’s suggestion, I 
may say that practically all the installations tested were sur- 
rounded with very dark walls and the tests on the installation at 
the end of the run showed the illumination to be practically the 
same as at the start, so far as the surroundings are concerned. 
It would be very effective in the case of surroundings of light color. 
Charles F. Scott: Referring to Dr. Kennelly’s remarks, in 
illumination we have to do some things that are big steps. It 
becomes a concrete rather than an abstract theoretical science. 
To illustrate what I mean, I will refer to the computations which 
you make on long-distance transmission lines. You figure out the 
resistances to three or four distant places, and the efficiencies to 
several points, and then you take the nearest size of wire, which 
may take a 25 per cent jump. So in illumination, in considering 
a certain room we may say, if we can get along with 10 per cent 
less light, what is the need of cleaning lamps? Or, we might have 
put on, in the beginning, 10 per cent less of lamps, and got our 
necessary illumination, that is, might have secured a given 
amount of light from a few clean lamps, instead of from a greater 
number of dirty lamps. In a large hall where the lamps are 
inaccessible, it may be cheaper to let the lamps run somewhat 
dim and have more of them, than to have a man climb up to the 
ceiling every week or two and dust them off. The particular 
cost of the cleaning in the particular place, as well as the cost of 
power and the number of hours burning per day, are all factors, 
but to get a given amount of light, we can in many cases put in 
fewer lamps to begin with, and by keeping them clean can secure 
the maximum amount of illumination from those lamps. 
Clayton H. Sharp: Referring to Mr. Clewell’s paper, I 
think it contains a good deal of matter of value, and a consider- 
able amount which is not entirely new. The efficiency values 
which he gives, the ratio of the lumens generated by the illumi- 
nant to the illumination effective upon a certain plane, have been 
worked out for a good many classes of installations before, but 
it is useful to have the additional data on this question which 
Mr. Clewell gives us in his paper, particularly since they refer to 
shop lighting. The deterioration values for the plant as a whole 
have also considerable novelty and a great deal of value. I 
think, however, we should very clearly bear in migd that the 
illumination of a shop is not a question of simply so and so many 
foot-candles upon a certain uniform plane, but that the illumina- 
tion required is dependent to a very large degree upon the 
character of the work to be done, and particularly upon the 
reflecting power of the surface upon which the operator is work- 
ing. The direction from which the major part of the rays of 


1298 ILLUMINATION [June 26 


light comes, the diffusion of the light, the proper ratio of direct 
to general illumination, the protection of the eyes of the operators 
are also of very great importance in machine shop illumination. 
It follows that the problems involved in shop lighting can be 
solved only by a careful study of individual cases and of individ- 
ual machines. No wholesale method, no general solution, such 
as producing three foot-candles of illumination on a plane 30 in. 
(76 cm.) from the floor, suffices at all as an answer to the 
questions involved in the proper illumination to enable operators 
to see and carry out their work as rapidly and conveniently, 
and with as little fatigue, as possible. From this point of view, 
the data which Mr. Clewell gives in showing the wages value 
of the lighting of the shop, the cost of lighting interpreted in 
wages value, are extremely interesting. They show how insig- 
nificant a factor the cost of the lighting really is, and how uneco- 
nomical it is to use anything less than the most full and most 
effective illumination. To curtail the amount of light used by 
operators is the worst possible kind of economy. At the same 
time it must be remembered that the word of the operative as 
to the amount of light he needs cannot be taken at its full face 
value. The amount of light which is really required is something 
which itself requires experimental study and careful measure- 
ment. The elimination of disturbing factors, such as glare and 
specular reflections, has a very strong influence on this, so that 
the judgment of the operative on the question needs to be sup- 
plemented by that of some one of more experience, the judgment 
of an illuminating engineer, who can determine these things 
with more certainty. It is clear, therefore, that the purely 
utilitarian illumination of a workshop is not a simple matter but 
a complex one, requiring the exercising of the best talents of the 
illuminating engineer. 

Mr. Jones has shown us how carefully the decorative effects 
demanded in an entirely different class of illumination require to 
be studied, how the shadows and shades and the colors of the 
light have to be very carefully worked out, and that is very 
complex and requires experimental study. 

It used_to be said that illuminating engineering consisted in 
using tungsten lamps and holophane glassware. I think that 
what we have learned from these papers and demonstrations 
shows that there is a good deal more than that in the science and 
art of illuminating engineering. 

F. C. Caldwell: There are two points that may be deduced 
from these two papers. The deterioration in the light due to the 
aging of the lamps, and especially to the lack of cleanliness, 
ought to be taken into account in the original design of the illum- 
ination. In many cases this is overlooked, and the illumination 
is designed on the basis of what the lights will give in their origi- 
nal condition. 

Another point, which is very important in some cases, is the 
difference between illumination for use during the evening and 


—«°  - wt 


1912; DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1299 


for use during even a short period following daylight. It 
appears that in many cases a higher degree of illumination is 
really needed for a short period following daylight than for the 
whole evening, because the user of the illumination compares it 
with the daylight that he has been working with. The effect of 
the strain, on the eyes of a person who uses the artificial illum- 
ination for only a short time after daylight, may be quite severe, 
owing to the great change from the use of daylight to the use of 
artificial light. 

G.H. Stickney: It is interesting to note that these two papers 
illustrate the scope of illuminating engineering problems, as 
well as different typical methods of solution. Mr. Jones has 
treated problems of the class in which the dominating considera- 
tion is artistic effect, while Mr. Clewell has selected installations 
where utility and cost are the prevailing factors. In the first 
case cost is a secondary consideration, while in the latter the 
esthetic appearance is of minor importance. 

Again, in treating the problems, Mr. Jones has followed the 
laboratory method, while Mr. Clewell has adopted the practical 
installation method, or, as a lawyer would say, the “ case 
system.” Each has its advantages and limitations and is at its 
best when supplemented by the other. 

The question of depreciation was mentioned by Dr. Kennelly. 
Depreciation is sometimes divided into two components, which 
have been designated as “‘ inherent depreciation ” and “ acquired 
depreciation.” ‘‘ Inherent depreciation ” is that due to the peculi- 
arities of the lamp independent of its environment. It includes the 
internal coating of globes, decreased activity of illuminating ma- 
terials,etc. All types of lamps are subject toinherent depreciation, 


‘but some types are more affected than others. “ Acquired depre- 


ciation” is that due to the external conditions under which the 
lamp isoperated. For example, the accumulation of dust and the 
darkening of ceilings and walls. ‘‘ Acquired depreciation ”’ is 
independent of the type of lamp, though it may be largely 
dependent on the character of the maintenance. Proper cleaning 
will keep it at a minimum. 

This question of cleaning has been often discussed, but in 
spite of this it has not received the practical attention which it 
deserves. The illumination from an ordinary installation is 
either much poorer than it ought to be, or more expensive, 
due to lack of proper cleaning. Mr. Clewell shows how profitable 
cleaning is. Experience indicates that, in a large establishment, 
proper cleanliness can only be secured by organized cleaning at 
regular intervals. 

Other points which have been brought out and which deserve 
particular emphasis are the low cost of operating a good lighting 
installation in proportion to the value of the illumination. 

It is hard to understand why some plants still cling to an 
obsolete lighting equipment, when a modern installation requires 
but a small investment, as compared to the cost of a year’s 


1300 ILLUMINATION {June 26 


operation. Initiative in this direction is amply rewarded in 
improved illumination and often even a reduced annual cost of 
operation. 

William J. Hammer: I wish to express my appreciation of 
the practical value of these two papers. One point I 
wish to bring up, which Mr. Scott has already referred to. It 
is a thing in regard to which every electrical engineer should 
take a firm stand—that is, the criminality of placing brilliant 
and bare incandescent lamps in positions where the eyes of 
operators and workers will be injured. I will cite one instance 
which recently came under my personal observation. I recently 
went into the offices of one of the leading scientific and engineering 
organizations in this country and noticed the stenographer 
writing at her typewriting machine with a powerful tungsten 
lamp throwing light directly into her eyes, and the light reflected 
from the white paper she was writing upon. I said, “ Don’t 
you feel a good deal of eye strain?” She said, “ Yes, the writing 
gets so blurred at times that I cannot read it.” I said, ‘“ You 
have a good deal of headache?” She answered, “I have head- 
ache all the time.” I then remarked, “‘ You have a good deal of 
dandruff?” She said, ‘‘ Yes, it bothers me a great deal.” I 
said, ‘If that light is not changed you will lose your hair as 
well as your eyesight.” I took a string and tied the lamp back so 
that the light came over her shoulder and was kept away from 
her face, and I think it is still hanging in the position in which I 
tied it, at least it was when I went in there the last time. A 
good many people who knew about the bad effects of such an 
exposure of the eyes to a strong light went into that office and 
saw that lamp hanging there before I did. Many of us now walk 
along the street and see powerful tungsten and other lights 
blinding the people passing the store windows and in the homes, 
offices and shops the people are not only destroying their sight 
but their hair. We should take that matter up and use our 
influence in having that corrected by the proper placing of 
the lamps, and the use of proper shades and diffusers. 

One other thing occurred to me during the discussion, the 
importance of taking care of the deposits on the reflecting sur- 
faces, besides the surfaces of the mere shade itself. A prominent 
efficiency engineer told me that he had succeeded in getting the 
cleaning of windows in a factory down to four motions, and hoped 
to get it down to three motions. We all realize, though we do 
not bother our heads much about it, the need of keeping windows 
clean so as to let in the daylight. If we are efficient engineers in 
regard to illuminating problems, let us take care of that factor 
also, and see that all reflecting surfaces are kept clean and in the 
best possible condition. I asked the same efficiency expert if 
it was not better at times to replace the glass windows instead of 
attempting to clean them. He replied that this was frequently 
the case. 

E. A. Champlin: Reference has been made to lighting draft- 
ing rooms and also the manner of interior lighting through 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1301 


windows in the daytime, and I would like to ask if any particular 
effort is made to use the same direction of illumination with 
artificial illumination as you get through the window? In the 
drafting room the tables will always be so arranged that the 
lighting is most effective and in the proper direction for the use 
of a draftsman during the daytime. The window lighting will 
give him light so directed that the shadows will not interfere 
with his work, but I have noticed in most drafcing rooms that 
the artificial lighting is not so placed, but is often placed so 
that it directly reverses that condition, so that the draftsman 
has to work on the other side of his triangle, and perhaps even 
of his T square. I wonder whether there is any effective means 
of duplicating the direction of lighting from the windows when 
artificial lighting has to be resorted to. Of course, if we do 
not get the direction right the draftsman will ‘“‘ plug in ”’ some- 
where and use a portable light, much to the detriment of his 
eyes, as has been pointed out by Mr. Hammer in the case of 
the stenographer. 

C. E. Clewell: Answering the question of Mr. Champlin, 
I may say that very often the artificial light can be made to 
exceed in its advantages the direction of daylight; that is 
mainly brought about by the use of so-called semi-indirect 
lighting, which has been used in a great many cases under my 
own observation, and produces results which really exceed 
the advantages of daylight. The directional features in the semi- 
indirect lighting are such that the shadows are not reversed from 
what they are in the daylight. 

Dr. Sharp called my attention to the possibility that my paper 
may have given the idea that the refinements or problems of 
industrial lighting were very simple compared to the decorative 
features which had to be considered in such problems as have 
been described by Mr. Jones. I did not wish to give the impres- 
sion, by the various items which are set forth in my paper, 
that the problems in industrial work are not complex. For 
example, in one large installation it was found necessary to make 
a study extending over several months, in order to get the direc- 
tional features of the light properly proportioned and placed 
with respect to the individual class of work. It was found, for 
example, after making a study of the needs of the installation, 
that merely distributing the light uniformly over the work, with 
a uniform capacity of the light, to a certain point on the average, 
would not at all solve the problem in this case, and it was neces- 
sary to raise and lower the lamps, and try different classes of 
fixtures so as to increase the light on a vise, for example, and for 
different classes of very fine work. 

Another interesting problem has been the feeling on the part 
of workmen that individual lamps must be used in connection 
with some classes of work. In one installation, where three 
100-watt tungsten lamps were installed on the eighth floor, 
and in which, prior to the installation of the new system, a 


1302 ILLUMINATION [June 26 


good many hundreds of incandescent lamps were used, the 
superintendent, foremen and workmen themselves said that 
the individual lamp could not be dispensed with. We requested 
the foremen of the various floors to permit us to remove the 
individual lamps for a period of one month, during which time 
the workmen should try to perform their duties by the use of 
the overhead light, with the understanding’ that if it was not 
satisfactory we would put back all the individual lamps called 
for. We removed something like 1200 individual lamps, and 
after the month was over we were called on to put back merely 
two or three dozen on a floor space of 250,000 sq. ft. (23,225 
sq. m.). This shows that the notions of the workmen, or even 
the superintendents themselves, cannot always be relied on in 
the matter of the light that is required. 

The idea that I wish to emphasize in closing is that the prob- 
lems are exceedingly complicated, even in those cases which seem 
most simple, for example, in industrial work, where the matters 
of reducing shadow effects and producing certain color effects 
are most important, in interior work, and you will therefore see 
that there are many difficult and important problems in con- 
nection with the proper lighting of industrial plants. 

Charles F. Scott: A man in the mechanical engineering pro- 
fession, Mr. Hunt, said to me something I want to say to the 
illuminating engineers particularly. He had a dratting room and 
a factory, and had tried different kinds of light. He said, ‘“‘ The 
great thing now is that we can lay out our factory and drafting 
room without reference to windows, considering only the effi- 
ciency of the machines and the progress of the work, and we can 
get our light from artificial illumination, which is better than 
daylight.” 

M. Luckiesh (communicated after adjournment): In reply 
to Mr. Champlin’s question I would like to present my experience 
in attempting to imitate daylight distribution in an interior by 
the use of artificial light. A room with three windows—two on 
one side and one on the other—was fitted with removable dummy 
windows made of white diffusing cardboard. These dummy 
windows were placed in the window openings and illuminated by 
means of a special reflector hung on a bracket about 2 ft. (61 cm.) 
from the wall and near the top of the window. These reflectors 
were so adjusted that about the same relative distribution of 
brightness on the windows was obtained by artificial light as that 
presented to the view under daylight conditions. The distribu- 
tion of light in the room was quite like that prevailing under 
the natural lighting conditions. The effect was pleasing. No 
measurements of the percentage of total lumens effective on a 
horizontal plane were made, but an idea of the possible “ effi- 
ciency ”’ of the installation is gained from such measurements on 
daylight in the same room. It was found that 33 per cent of 
the total lumens of natural light which entered the room was 
incident on a horizontal plane 36 in. (91 cm.) from the floor. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1303 


This shows that the “ efficiency ’’ in a room with light walls and 
ceiling need not be prohibitively low with this kind of an installa- 
tion. I believe, however, that in many cases artificial lighting 
can be made far superior to natural lighting. Certainly special 
cases will arise where such a scheme will be useful. 

Some experience with this trial installation gives some infor- 
mation relating to the point which Mr. Caldwell brought forth, 
namely, that more artificial light is needed just as daylight fails 
than later in the evening. This of course depends entirely on 
conditions. If daylight fails gradually and the lights are switched 
on at the proper time the eye will have become adapted to its 
new condition and no change will be noted. From a practical 
standpoint the eye becomes adapted to a change in illuminatior 
in a very short time. The installation just described permitted 
the closing of the dummy windows in a few seconds, thus chang- 
ing from natural lighting of about 50 foot-candles on the test 
plane to artificial lighting of about 2 foot-candles. No more than 
a minute or two was required to become quite adapted to this 
abrupt change. 

Roscoe Scott (communicated after adjournment): After 
reading Mr. Clewell’s instructive paper, I am convinced that 
the test data he gives should be a valuable addition to the note- 
book of any illuminating engineer, especially of those who have 
to deal with the lighting problems of shops and mills, including 
the maintenance of lighting equipment. I wish to confine my 
discussion, however, to that section of the paper, near its close, 
entitled ‘‘ Economic Relations.”’ 

The three charts comprising Fig. 16 bring out in a very forceful 
manner the pettiness of the illumination cost as compared with 
the cost for labor in the average industrial plant. One conclusion 
must certainly be drawn from these charts, namely, that a very 
considerable percentage increase in lighting expense may be 
justified if it will produce an increase—even a small increase— 
in the efficiency of labor. Some time ago I worked out sets of 
curves intended to show graphically the general relations between 
the several variables which must be considered in estimating 
that increase in lighting expense which will result in the maximum 
net saving for an industrial concern.* One of these charts may 
be worth reproducing in this connection. On it the net saving is 
plotted (see figure) as ordinates against increase in lighting 
expense as abscissas. As this is intended to be a general graphical 
solution of the problem, the variables are necessarily expressed 
as percentages rather than in absolute measure. 

The increase in labor efficiency (a on the chart) should be 
understood as being measured by the resulting decrease in cost 
or the profitable improvement in quality of the manufactured 
product; it may or may not be directly measurable in. terms 
of the increase in individual production. 

Pepumipee soi Ow eg 

*See Electrical World, Feb. 10, 1912, pp. 317-319. 


1304 ILLUMINATION [June 26 


The chart really consists of several distinct sets of curves, one 
set for each value of a (the expected per cent increase in labor 
efficiency). In using the chart one picks out the particular 
bundle of curves labelled to correspond with the assumed value 
of a and then follows up the line corresponding to the given 
value of x (for definition of this symbol see chart), on which line 
the saving corresponding to the assumed increase or decrease 
in lighting expense may be found as an ordinate. As a numerical 
example: 


— 
o 


oO 


i 
| 
H/ 
a=/|8% 
_ 


NET SAVING, AS A%OF PRESENT LABOR EXPENSE—> 


Sa 


Te a a PY Na Pee ree Oe oe 


~— DECREASE, b=% INCREASE IN LIGHTING EXPENSE—> 


<—LOSS 
co 


t 
-_ 


Definitions: «x =Ratio of lighting to labor expense (percentage) 
a =Increase expected in labor efficiency (percentage) 


bx 
S=a-—— 
100 


Ten compositors employed on a night shift in a large print 
shop receive an average wage of $25 a week. The present 
lighting system costs $1.75 per week. 


Then x= ae = 0.7 per cent. 


The manager estimates that the improvements in the illumina- 
tion system necessary to produce a 1 per cent increase in efficiency 
of the men will increase his operating expenses for lighting by, 
say, 15 per cent. Referring on the chart to the bundle of lines 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1305 


marked ‘‘a = 1” we find by interpolation the point where 
a line corresponding to x = 0.7 would cross coordinate 6 = 15. 
This point is seen to correspond with a value of S, the saving, of 
0.9 per cent. That is, the net weekly saving expected is 0.9 
per cent of $250 = $2.25. By trying different values for b, 
with the corresponding estimated values for.a, a condition which 
will give the maximum net saving (‘‘ on paper ’’) may be found. 

Of course, the value of a—by far the most important factor 
in the calculations—must be estimated from the proposed changes 
in the illumination, rather than directly from the increase or 
decrease in operating cost consequent upon such changes. The 
difficulty of estimating it is enhanced because so many factors, 
such as diffusion, direction and color, as well as intensity of 
light, must be taken into account in deciding the comparative 
value of two or more industrial lighting installations from the 
labor-efficiency standpoint. 

We must rather ruefully admit that the illuminating engineer 
who has amassed any considerable amount of data of value to a 
practical man in determining a for his particular case, be it the 
lighting of a silk mill, a clerical office or what not, is the excep- 
tion rather than the rule. Such data—into which the human 
element enters so largely—must invariably be based on exper- 
ience or special test, and are particularly hard to obtain. If 
those who have reliable figures would place them—in addition to 
the purely physical data that Mr. Clewell has presented—before 
the members of the national technical societies they would be 
of untold benefit in the future application of industrial lighting 
economics. 

Bassett Jones, Jr.: Mr. Moore brought up the question of 
the diffusion of daylight. We have heard a great deal in the last 
few years of the necessity of copying daylight in interior illumina- 
tion, both as to color and diffusion. My own personal opinion 
is that rarely can the problems of interior illumination be solved 
by any attempts to copy daylight. The differences between all 
sources of artificial light and the sources of daylight are to great 
to permit any true similarity in their effects. Having read 
Mr. Luckiesh’s communicated discussion I should like to add 
that I entirely agree with his statement that daylight can even 
be improved upon by artificial means. I tried to draw at- 
tention to the fallacy of the superiority of daylight some time 
ago in a discussion of a paper by Prof. Nichols presented 
before the Illuminating Engineering Society, but at that time 
daylight and efficiency were the passwords of the art, and 
my attempt was quite bare of results. As far as the diffu- 
sion of daylight is concerned, the relation of directed day- 
light to diffused daylight can be very readily discovered by so 
holding a piece of white cardboard that one side is exposed to 
direct rays from the sun and looking at the other side. The 
difference in intensity between the two sides of that sheet of 
paper will be enormous. In other words, a large proportion of 


1306 ILLUMINATION [June 26 


daylight is directed light. The moment we have an overcast 
sky, so that the light is thoroughly diffused, we have trouble 
in seeing, and particularly if the sky is not very dense. There 
is under such conditions a decided tendency to shade one’s 
eyes. Perfect diffusion is not good for the eye, because the 
eye is not given a chance to perform its proper function. 

Of course, in interiors it would be ridiculous to attempt to 
reproduce the intensity of daylight. In the first place, if we are 
going to do work in the open daylight, work which requires close 
application of the eyesight, we want to be shaded from the day- 
light. If you are reading a book in the daylight, you usually 
seek a shaded place in which to read, or if there is no shaded 
place you will open your umbrella and read the book under the 
umbrella. Consequently, for artificial interior illumination, 
the solution of the problem cannot be determined wholly from 
the conditions of daylight illumination. 

Mr. Moore asked whether the effects obtained in my de- 
monstration were secured by the use of colored screens. They 
were. He also suggested the use of the different artificial il- 
luminants, each for its own color value. This has been done 
in the case of the Soldiers’ Memorial in Pittsburgh, where 
incandescent lamps were used for their color value, the Moore 
tube for its color value, and the mercury-vapor lamp for its color 
value, and the color values of the different illuminants play a 
very large part in the general color scheme of the design. 
The green light from the mercury-vapor lamp, slightly modified 
by a particular form of opal glass, produces a moonlight effect, 
which has become a part of the color scheme in the ceiling. 
So with the light from the Moore tubes. The flame arcs serve 
to produce sparkling centers of an orange hue. The efficiency, 
of course, is low, because the lamps are not used to give light 
on the floor, but simply to give an effect of a jewel-studded 
ceiling. 

In regard to the color of daylight, I performed some simple 
experiments a short time ago tor the benefit of an architect, with 
reference to the problem of the color in which rooms should be 
painted. The average architect, like the average decorator, 
still believes that red, yellow and blue are the primary colors, 
and also that a north room should be painted yellow and a 
south room should be painted blue. 

The experiments were carried on in a building in which there 
is a long corridor, on the south side of which is a series of offices 
with windows opening to the south. On the north side of the 
corridor is a series of offices with windows opening to the north. 
That light from the north sky is decidedly blue, and the light 
from the south sky decidedly yellow, was shown by giving the 
architect a little piece of cardboard, which he held before his 
eyes, so as to cover the window. The moment he covered the 
window with the piece of cardboard, that is the moment he 
covered his eye with the cardboard so that he could not see the 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1307 


window, he was asked to state the color of the unpainted plaster 
walls. In the north room he said blue. In the south room 
he said they were light buff. Therefore, the proposition was 
put to him that the north room should be painted blue, in order 
that the blue light should be reflected from a blue surface. If 
it was painted buff, it would absorb and_ not reflect blue 
light. The south room should be painted buff, because the buff 
walls would reflect the yellow light better than if the walls 
were painted blue, which would absorb the yellow light. 

The result of this and other experiments was that the north 
rooms were painted a light blue and the south rooms were 
painted a light buff, and then came the question of artificial 
light. We were going to use tungsten lamps with reflectors, but 
we did not want to make the north rooms blue at night, and we 
had to mix with the blue a little green which would respond 
to the tungsten light at night. The yellow walls in the south 
rooms did respond to the artificial light without any modifica- 
tion. 

These experiments give a practical example of how far the 
question of illuminating engineering can be carried. In fact, by 
such methods the best balance of color values for wall decora- 
tions can be determined in many interiors with, a resulting 
heightening of the effects. Thus it is possible to determine for 
a given southern interior that the general color tone should be, 
say a buff corresponding nearly to number « in any given scale 
of pigment hues, and that on top of that color another color 
must be applied, say about 50 per cent of the wall area, must 
be painted quite red laid on in any design the architect may 
desire. A room painted that way, with consideration of the 
daylight sources, will give a very much more heightened effect 
and will incidentally prove more efficient from the standpoint 
of illumination than if a decorator painted it as he saw fit. 
Now, while this is true, tell it to almost any architect and see 
what he will say. 

Mr. Millar said he thought it would have been interesting 
if the numerical results of the experiments had been given. The 
trouble with these experiments is that they have to be taken 
with a very large grain of salt; that is, it is impossible to 
conduct such a study, and apply the results promiscuously. 


iy or a alas i bw 
~~ aid és 


A report presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 27, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 


PRELIMINARY REPORT BY THE EDUCATIONAL COMMITTEE 


I. INTRODUCTION 


The Institute Committee on Education was reorganized last 
November as it was impossible for the original chairman to 
serve. At the meeting held at that time, it was decided to 
study the status of vocational education, that subject being at 
the present moment of paramount interest to the industrial 
interests of the country. The time available has been so short 
that it is impossible to present more than a preliminary report 
of progress, but this may possibly be of sufficient interest 
and value to warrant future committees of the Institute in con- 
tinuing the work. 

In laying out the plan of procedure of the Committee, no 
specific effort was made strictly to confine the study to educa- 
tional conditions as applied to the electrical industries. This 
attitude was taken because it was believed that the proper 
establishment of vocational education for all children who cannot 
advance beyond the rank of hand workers is essential to the 
highest success of the country as a whole in its industrial and 
commercial functions, and, as a result, to the success of the elec- 
trical, or any other particular branch of the industries. 

It is believed by the committee, since the Institute contains 
a large and intelligent membership widely distributed over the 
entire United States, that much good may be accomplished by 
gathering data together in the Transactions for ready refer- 
ence which will aid the individual members to effectively influ- 
ence the development of this most valuable kind of education 
in their respective commonwealths and communities. 

Probably there is no more important problem to be solved by 

1309 


1310 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


the industrial communities of this country today than the proper 
preparation of the new generation for efficient, skilful, intelli- 
gent, and loyal labor. It is now quite generally known that we 
have fallen behind Germany, Austria, France, and some other 
European nations in this regard. To a certain extent, this is 
indicated by the fact that many of our exports carry from 
three to fifteen per cent of labor cost, while a large part of the 
exports of the countries named carry from forty to eighty per 
cent of such cost. Indeed, we have occasionally exported 
large quantities of comparatively crude and unmanufactured 
products to Europe to have them improved and refined to many 
times their original export value and then have brought them 
back to this country for our consumption. These conditions 
must exist to some extent always, but the balance against us 
is so excessive that it behooves us to take it into consideration. 

In regard to the effect of applied education, Mr. H. E. Miles, 
chairman of the National Manufacturers Association’s Edu- 
cational Committee, makes this statement in a recent report: 
‘ By industrial education it now devolves upon us in very im- 
portant respects to shape the lives of the children of today and 
thereby to make the men and women of tomorrow. Each year 
2,500,000 children graduate from or leave our elementary schools 
proud and confident in having accomplished the first great task 
of their lives in successfully finishing the eight years’ course 
with credit. But this same vast army of 2,500,000 little ones, 
most of them only 14 years of age, leave the schools soon to be 
discouraged, to prove unsuccessful, aimless; most of them have 
gotten no further than the sixth grade, having learned little 
else than the three R’s, not educated in any sense, but only 
possessed of the rudiments whereby real education may be 
acquired. They then, in a way, learn in school only how to 
fail. These are the children who come into the industries, and 
deserve or require industrial or trade education.”’ 

This injurious condition, as set forth by Mr. Miles, is to be 
found to a more or less serious extent in almost every manufac- 
turing community in the United States and also to some de- 


gree in the rural communities. The difficulty has been largely _ | 


relieved in Germany by the development of her magnificent 
system of trade and “ continuation schools.” In this system, 
after a boy has reached the age of fourteen, he has the oppor- 


tunity to continue in schools which are particularly adapted by 


the character of their teaching and organization to aid him in 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION. 1311 


making himself a skilful and intelligent workman. <A compul- 
sory attendance law makes it necessary for most of the boys, 
whether working or otherwise, to attend these continuation 
schools at least one-half a day each week until sixteen years of age. 
The expense of the schools is little greater. than that required 
for maintaining the ordinary types of public school curricula 
with which we are familiar in this country. Though trades are 
taught—as many as two score in one of the cities of Germany— 
the cost of equipments required is comparatively small; only 
sufficient apparatus is used to teach the fundamental movements 
of the processes called for by a particular trade. Because of the 
large number of pupils who are employed in labor and attend for 
part time only, these foreign schools cost per pupil, per year, a 
small fraction of the amount expended per pupil in our best full 
time trade and industrial schools. 

It is considered by well qualified industrialists who have - 
studied the question, that many classes of workmen of con- 
tinental Europe are more skilful and accurate than similar 
classes of American workmen, even after due allowance is made 
for the American’s native resourcefulness, energy, and ability. 
Therefore, if the truth of this statement is conceded, active 
means should evidently be adopted for the development of ed- 
ucational methods which will cause our manual workers of the fu- 
ture to reach a higher stage of efficiency. This is particularly 
so since our country must, perforce—as its population grows 
and natural resources relatively decrease—in order to maintain 
its prosperity, wealth, and the happiness of its people, put forth 
increasingly greater efforts to maintain its share of the world’s 
trade. 

With theexception of a comparatively few successful experi- 
ments with continuation and free vocational schools such as are to 
be seen here and there scattered over the country, as yet compara- 
- tively little has been either attempted or accomplished in the 
United States in the form of publicly supported training of the 
character demanded; anda beginning only has been made in the 
establishment of industrial schools supported by private benevo- 
lence,or by industrial corporations for preparing workers for the 
ranks of their own employees. T he number of pupils enrolled in 
such schools, the number of teachers employed, and the buildings 
and equipments in use are small compared with those in some 
of the European nations. Statisticians estimate that only from 
ten to twenty per cent of the children of this country of the age 


1312 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


of sixteen, whom necessity drives from school to work, are so 
situated that they can learn a trade. The remainder work at 
casual employment or in such places as fail to develop their full 
usefulness to their communities. This condition of inefficiency 
is apt to remain with them throughout life to their detriment, 
and to a considerable degree the character of our export trade 
undoubtedly is influenced thereby. 

It seems probable that this country could, without heavy 
burden beyond that incurred in maintaining the present more 
or less inflexible public school system, so modify the pedagogical 
methods in use as to make it possible for the great majority of 
sound children to take positions in the world of labor where they 
could be classed as skilled. Such training of the mass of the 
people should lead to increased sense of responsibility, good 
spirit, orderliness, and efficiency and should go far toward re- 
moving much of the unrest and dissatisfaction rapidly becoming 
prevalent. 

On account of the limited time at the committee’s disposal, 

it was decided to study certain schools in the New England and 
Middle States—the thought being that if the work is continued 
by future committees, a further study can be made of the con- 
ditions in other parts of the country. Even in the districts 
chosen it was found wise to confine attention to but a few of the 
most typical schools and to neglect many institutions of great 
merit. The work of gathering data was divided among the mem- 
bership of the committee somewhat as follows: Professor H. H. 
Norris of Cornell University undertook the burden of reporting 
upon certain schools to be found in New England and New York; 
adding thereto, with some assistance from the Chairman, des- 
criptions of various schools maintained by the railroad systems 
of the country. Professor Samuel Sheldon of the Brooklyn Poly- 
technic Institute was assigned certain typical schools in New 
York City. 
* Insomuch as vocational education, to serve the entire pop- 
ulation of the country, eventually must be supported largely 
from the public purse, and insomuch as many of the common- 
wealths of the Union are now endeavoring to inaugurate such 
work by the enactment of special legislation relating to the subject, 
a special section of the committee’s report is devoted to a study 
of the laws already in existence. Dr. W. I. Slichter of Columbia 
University was assigned the duty of making an investigation of 
this subject and preparing a brief report thereupon. 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1313 


It is hoped that the short descriptions of the few schools that 
are named hereafter and, also, the brief discussion of laws which 
seem to be suitable for the establishment of effective vocational 
educational systems may be of service to members of the Insti- 
tute, who have not already given the subject special study, in aid- 
ing them to direct the development of this important phase of 
education in their own commonwealths. The committee, of 
course, does not pretend that its findings are complete, but the 
data given may prove useful by indicating the direction in 
which the development is tending. 

Before proceeding with the more detailed discussion, it seems 
well to point out here certain salient classifications and facts 
concerning industrial schools. They may be divided properly 
into three general classes, namely: 

1. Those maintained at public expense and open to all children 
of their respective districts. 

2. Those maintained through private benevolences and also 
open largely to children of their districts. 

8. Those maintained by corporations for preparing skilled 
employees for their own purposes. 

These schools, without including those that are giving instruc- 
tion in drawing, manual arts, etc., for purposes of general 
training rather than for direct vocational preparation, are fre- 
quently divided into two types, namely: 

a. Full time schools. 

b. Continuation schools. 

In the former, the youth attends the school continuously until 
he has been prepared so far as possible, both mentally and manu- 
ally, for the particular trade or vocation which he proposes to 
enter. The continuation schools are those to which pupils, 
already at work, give only part time—such as evenings, or a 
day or part of a day each week. The third general division 
named above consists of continuation schools, while the first 
and second divisions include both types, or a combination of the 
two. : 

It may be safely stated that the continuation school in 
which the pupil, already regularly employed, gives a part 
of the working hours each week to school work, shows dis- 
tinct and positive signs of being best suited to the conditions 
facing the great majority of young men. 

These schools, whether maintained at public expense or by 
industrial corporations, should aim to develop the mental judg- 


1314 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION {June 27 


ment and physical skill required for promoting the industries 
in the localities in which they are situated. This means very 
close correlation between the school work and the shop work in 
which the youth is engaged, and as a result demands efficient co- 
operation between the school and shop staffs. 

Continuation schools need not be materially more expensive 
than the common schools, as the practical applied part of the 
training can be obtained to a large extent during the portion 
of the time the pupils are at work. 

Experience with laws relating to the organization of industrial 
schools (continuation and full time), carried on at public expense, 
seems to indicate that certain more or less well defined conditions 
of organization are desirable. Some of these, which appear to 
be of especial importance, are presented below for consideration: 


1. Young men who leave the common schools at fourteen years 
of age should be required ordinarily to spend at least two years 
thereafter in either a continuation or full time vocational school. 
Those leaving at fifteen should give at least one year to work 
of the same kind. 


2. Opportunity should be given all residents of the community 
over sixteen years of age to enroll in the continuation school 
upon the payment of a small tuition fee, especially those persons 
between the ages of sixteen and twenty-five. 

3. Each commonwealth should have a commission composed 
of representatives of the industries, with power to direct its 
industrial school work, under the condition that its actions are 
subject to the approval of the regular state board of education. 


4. Local communities should have commissions selected from 
the personnel of the local industries, with power to direct the work 
of the local industrial schools, but subject in their actions to the 
approval of the local school boards. 


5. The commissions named above need not interfere with the 
regular public school organization of the state, but should be 
correlated therewith. - 


6. In order to encourage the establishment of vocational 
schools, and to give a proper central authority over the school 
officials of local communities, the state should give material finan- 
cial aid to those institutions which comply with its regulations 
and are approved by its commission on industrial education. 

Lack of state and local boards, whose membership is selected 
from the officials and ranks of the industries, having sufficient 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1315 


power to enforce the adoption of their methods, must result, asa 
rule, in industrial schools failing to give the full possible measure of 
usefulness. The modern school teacher usually knows his par- 
ticular business; but this does not include, in general, the direct 
preparation of his pupils for industrial pursuits, nor can he have 
the opportunity to learn the requirements essential to giving 
such preparation except through close contact with, and the 
active cooperation of, the industrialists who are to absorb his 
pupils into their ranks of labor. 

The term vocational education is used in this report to cover 
any kind of education that leads to a vocation; industrial ed- 
ucation is included in this and refers to the bulk of the manual 
vocations other than agriculture and the domestic arts (see 
hereafter). 


II. PROVISION BY LAW FOR VOCATIONAL TRAINING 
IN THE UNITED STATES 

A survey of the educational enactments of the various states 
shows that 24 states have active provisions for vocational training, 
six have permissive provisions and fifteen have no provision at 
all. In twenty of the states vocational schools are in practical 
operation. 

Massachusetts, Wisconsin, New York and Maine seem to have 
given the subject the most careful consideration and special 
commissions to study the subject have rendered elaborate reports 
on the subject. The State of Massachusetts seems to be not 
only the pioneer but the leader in this branch of education and 
while other states may have studied the subject and made pro- 
visions for the training yet Massachusetts is the only state in 
which elaborate provisions are in extensive operation. Astheterm 
vocational training is used in a very broad sense and includes 
any training intended to prepare the scholar to become economic- 
ally productive, it is desirable to distinguish between the various 
forms of training to be discussed. ‘The amended acts of the 
State of Massachusetts carefully define the various forms of 
education as follows: 

1. “Vocational education” shall mean any education the 
controlling purpose of which is to fit for profitable employment. 

2. “ Industrial education ”’ shall mean that form of vocational 
education which fits for the trades, crafts, and manufacturing 


1316 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION June 27 


pursuits, including the occupations of girls and women carried 
on in workshops. 

3. ‘“ Agricultural education ’’ shall mean that form of voca- 
tional education which fits for the occupations connected with 
the tillage of the soil, the care of domestic animals, forestry and 
other wage-earning or productive work on the farm. 

4. “‘ Household arts education ’’ shall mean that form of 
vocational education which fits for occupations connected with 
the household. 


5. “Independent industrial, agricultural, or household arts 
school’’ shall mean an organization of courses, pupils and 
teachers, under a distinctive management, approved by the board 
of education, designed to give either industrial, agricultural or 
household arts education as herein defined. 

6. ‘ Evening class” in an industrial, agricultural, or house- 
hold arts school shall mean a class giving such training as can be 
taken by persons employed during the working day, and which, 
in order to be called vocational, must in its instruction deal 
with the subject-matter of the day employment, and be so carried 
on as to relate to the day employment. 


’ 


7. ‘‘ Part-time, or continuation, class ’’ in an industrial, ag- 
ricultural, or household arts school shall mean a vocational class 
for persons giving a part of their working time to profitable 
employment, and receiving in the part-time school, instruction 
complementary to the practical work carried on in such employ- 
ment. To give ‘a part of their working time ’’ such persons 
must give a part of each day, week, or longer period to such part- 
time class during the period in which it is in session. 


8. ‘‘ Independent agricultural school ’’ shall mean either an 
organization of courses, pupils and teachers, under a distinctive 
management, designed to give agricultural education, as here- 
inafter provided for, or a separate agricultural department, 
offering in a high school, as elective work, training in the 
principles and practise of agriculture to an extent and of a 
character approved by the board of education as vocational. 

9. “‘ Independent household arts school ’’ shall mean a voca- 
tional school designed to develop on a vocational basis the capac- 
ity for household work such as cooking, household service, and 
other occupations in the household. 

Practically all states offer vocational education in the state 
normal and training schools for teachers, and work of a collegiate 


14 dah in) Mee 


“ve Ce 


4 
‘ 
: 
i: 
3 
a 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1317 


grade in the state land grant colleges established under the 
Morrill act. In a majority of the states there is permissive 
legislation relative to the introduction of manual training, in- 
cluding drawing, in the elementary schools. In many states 
instruction in these branches is required in all towns having above 
a certain specified population. In twenty-four states legal 
provision has already been made for the encouragement or 
support of industrial education beyond the general provision 
for the manual training in elementary schools. The following 
gives an outline, according to such information as was obtain- 
able, of the provisions in those states having such provisions: 


Alabama—Provides for the establishment and maintenance of a 
branch agricultural experiment station in each congressional district. 
The annual appropriation for each school is $4500. 

Arkansas—Has four state public schools of agriculture, appropria- 
ting annually $160,000 for their support. 

California—Permits but does not provide for. 

Connecticut—Aids in the support of two schools giving instruction 
in the principles and practise of trades. Total amount is $50,000 
for both schools. 

Georgia—Aids district agricultural high schools to the limit each 
of $2000. 

Illinois—No special provision, local option. 

Indiana—Authorizes industrial and manual training in cities of 
more than 100,000 and confers power to raise money by taxes. 

Iowa—Has no law but aid is given for manual training. 

Kansas—Authorizes local boards to levy tax of one half mill for 
the equipment of industrial training schools or departments. State 
aids such schools to the limit of $250 annually. 

Kentucky—Does not provide but the cities do. 

Maine—Provides for and aids to the extent of two-thirds the sal- 
aries of the instructors, subject to the approval of state superinten- 
dent. Has a commission which has made valuable recommendations, 

Maryland—Gives state aid to county manual training schools or 
departments, limit $1500 each. Also aids high schools having com- 
mercial courses. 

Massachusetts—Has a deputy commissioner of education whose 
duty it is to encourage and supervise forms of vocational education 
supported by the state. Grants permission to towns and cities to 
provide independent vocational schools and to provide evening and 
part time courses for persons already employed. Permits two or 
more cities to join for the purpose of maintaining vocational courses 
or schools; aids to the extent of one-half the net expense of such 
schools, provided the school has been approved by the state author- 


ities. 


1318 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION {June 27 


Michigan—Authorizes and aids county schools of agriculture and 
domestic economy to the extent of 2 of the cost if approved by state 
authorities. 

Minnesota—Gives state aid to departments of agriculture, manual 
training, and domestic science in state high, graded, and consolidated 
schools if approved by state board. Maximum limit of $2500 to 
any school. 

Nebraska—Does not provide but the cities do. 

New Jersey—Contributes half the cost of maintainance and author- 
izes the locality to levy a tax for the remainder; maximum limit 
of aid is $10,000. 

New York—Authorizes local board to establish such schools and 
gives aid to the extent of $500. Has a state director of trade schools. 


North Dakota—Authorizes and aids such schools. 
Ohio—Provides for manual training but the cities do most. 


Oregon—Provides for courses in any high school under supervision 
of state board. 

Pennsvlvania—Requires that manual training courses shall be 
provided and aids, by direct appropriation, established vocational 
schools. Has three deputy state superintendents of education in 
charge of work. 


Texas—Gives aid to the extent of half the cost of maintaining 
courses in agriculture, domestic economy, and manual training sub- 
ject to the approval of state board. Maximum limit $500. Aid 
is not permanent. 


Utah—Permits vocational courses to be prescribed in existing 
schools. 


Vermont—Aids schools with approved manual training courses 
to the extent of $250 per year. 


Virginia—Provides by law and has ten schools in operation. 


Wisconsin—Has a State Board of Industrial Education and a 
Commission to encourage Industrial Education; aids county schools 
having industrial courses which are approved by state. 


Thus in the majority of cases, heretofore, the vocational train- 
ing has been almost altogether in the form of agriculture or 
home-making and with manual training as an addition or inci- 
dental to existing courses in high and secondary schools. The 
problem, therefore, of true industrial education is comparatively 
new and has been met in only a few states such as Massachusetts, 
Pennsylvania, Maine, New York, Indiana, and Wisconsin. In 
order to study the subject and learn the best methods of ac- 
complishing the desired object we need therefore only consult 
the records of the results in these States. 

An especially appointed commission in Maine has made a 
very careful study of the subject and placed the results of its 


a 
c, 
7 
= 
3 

a 

“4 

4 

- 

s 

: 

5 


1912] FNDUSTRIAL EDUCATION ~ = deiks 


conclusions in a valuable report. This report is dated 1910. 
The records do not show that the conclusions of this commission 
have been carried out to the extent of perfecting an operating 
system. 

While there are a great many institutions of vocational training 
in New York State they appear to be not as fully correlated as 
those in Massachusetts and Wisconsin and the initiative ap- 
pears to be in the cities and localities themselves. The state 
board is ready and prepared to give advice but does not have 
the control that is provided for in Massachusetts and Wiscon- 
sin. 

In the opinion of this committee the feature of the Massa- 
chusetts and Wisconsin laws which causes them to excel is 
the provision that a vocational school, to receive state aid, 
must receive the state’s approval of many of its important 
features, such as courses, teachers, buildings, methods, time, 
and accounts. This clause is used as an inducement to en- 
courage the local boards to consult with the proper rep- 
resentative of the state board from the beginning of the 
organization of the school, rather than to await the exact 
period when money is requested of the state. The state board 
includes an assistant superintendent who has made a special 
study of the subject of vocational training, and, members of 
the board, private citizens representing the points of view of 
employers and employees. The new Pennsylvania laws bearing 
upon this subject are also much similar in effect. 

To crystallize and collect the best ideas on the subject of 
legislation and provisions for vocational training it is deemed 
sufficient to pick out the best points of the methods of Massa- 
chusetts and Wisconsin as representative of good practise. 


OUTLINE OF A SCHEME FOR INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION BASED 
LARGELY ON THE Laws OF MASSACHUSETTS AND WISCONSIN 


Either a state board of industrial education containing rep- 


‘resentatives of both employers and employees and independent 


of the usual state board should be appointed, or an advisory 
board of similar character should work with the regular board 
of education. 

The state superintendent of education or, in case the duties are 
sufficient to warrant the appointment, an assistant for industria! 
education should be authorized to approve, with the board, 
the courses of study and to certify that the work of the various 


1320 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


schools is satisfactory. The industrial assistant should be au- 
thorized to attend industrial conventions and make investigations 
outside the state as well as within. 

The board of education should have control over all state 
aid given, and aid should only be extended to those schools 
that have received the approval of the board and superin- 
tendent or assistant. The industrial board of education 
should be authorized to investigate and aid in the introduc- 
tion of vocational education and to initiate and superintend 
the establishment and maintenance of the schools. Three 
classes of independent schools should be recognized, such 
as industrial, agricultural, and household arts, and each 
of these schools should have day instruction, part-time, and 
evening classes. Attendance upon such day or part-time clas- 
ses should be restricted to those between fourteen and twenty- 
five years of age and should be compulsory for those between 
fourteen and sixteen. Attendance at evening classes should be 
restricted to those over seventeen. The local board of education 
should be authorized to establish and maintain independent 
vocational schools; and in the establishment of such schools 
should call in the advice of the state superintendent and after 
adopting a plan of organization and administration submit this 
plan for approval to the state board. It is desirable that local 
and district boards of trustees appoint an advisory committee 
composed of members representing local trades, industries, and 
occupations. The state should reimburse the local district to 
the extent of one-half the net expenses of the school, provided 
the form of organization, control, location, equipment, courses 
of study, qualification of teachers, methods of instruction, con- 
ditions of admission, employment of pupils, and expenditures of 
money are in accordance with the approved methods of the 
state board. 

The community should provide the buildings and equipment 
and sufficient money for the operation of the schools and after 
a year’s operation the state should reimburse the community 
the amount stipulated. In order that this amount may be 
easily determined uniform methods of accounting in the schools 
should be required. 

Each locality should endeavor to make its courses meet its 
local needs and, if possible, should endeavor to secure coopera- 
tion between the schools and the local industries so that the 
school shall prepare the students to be successful in those in- 


Pe 7 eT eee ME Se ee 


1 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1321 


dustries, and, if possible, so that the local industries shall supply 
the opportunity for practical work. To this end it is desirable 
that, either on the local board or the local advisory board, 
persons interested in the local industries be represented. 

It is desirable that a reasonable tuition fee be charged in order 
to discourage from attending those persons who have no serious 
purpose. 

It is desirable that all children from fourteen to sixteen years 
of age be compelled to attend these classes at least one day per 
week or the equivalent thereof and that their working hours, if 
employed, should be such that this attendance would not be 
an unreasonable burden. 

Provision should be made that illiterate minors over seventeen 
years of age should be required to attend the evening schools. 

The training given should be designed to encourage the child- 
ren of the locality to enter the local industries and to fit them to 
become expert workmen in those industries; thus the children 
would be kept at home, would be assured useful and successful 
careers and the local industries would be kept in the hands of 
natives of the community. 


Laws or MASSACHUSETTS ON STATE-AIDED VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS 
STATE ADMINISTRATION AND SUPERVISION 

Section 2. The board of education is hereby authorized and 
directed to investigate and to aid in the introduction of industrial, 
agricultural, and household arts education; to initiate and super- 
intend the establishment and maintenance of schools for the 
aforesaid forms of education; and to supervise and approve such 
schools, as hereinafter provided. The board of education shall 
make a report annually to the general court, describing the con- 
dition and progress of industrial, agricultural, and household 
arts education during the year, and making such recommenda- 
tions as the board may deem advisable. 


TYPES OF SCHOOLS 
Section 3. In order that instruction in the principles and the 
practise of the arts may go on together, independent industrial, 
agricultural and household arts schools may offer instruction in 
day, part-time, and evening classes. Attendance upon such day 
or part-time classes shall be restricted to those over fourteen 
and under twenty-five years of age; and upon such evening classes ° 


~to those over seventeen years of age. 


1322 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


LOCAL ADMINISTRATION AND CONTROL 


Section 4. Any city or town may, through its school com- 
mittee or through a board of trustees elected by the city or 
town to serve for a period of not more than five years and to be 
known as the local board of trustees for vocational education, 
establish and maintain independent industrial, agricultural, and 
household arts schools. 

Section 5. 1. Districts composed of cities or towns, or of cities 
and towns, may, through a board of trustees to be known as 
the district board of trustees for vocational education, establish 
and maintain independent industrial, agricultural, or household 
arts schools. Such district board of trustees may consist of the 
chairman and two other members of the school committee of 
each of such cities and towns, to be appointed for the purpose 
by each of the respective school committees thereof; or any such 
city or town may elect three residents thereof to serve as its 
representatives on such district board of trustees. 

2. Such a district board of trustees for vocational education 
may adopt for a period of one year or more a plan of organization, 
administration and support for the said schools, and the plan, if 
approved by the board of education, shall constitute a binding 
contract between the cities or towns which are, through the action 
of their respective representatives on the district board of 
trustees, made parties thereto, and shall not be altered or an- 
nulled except by vote of two thirds of the board, and the con- 
sent of the state board of education to such alteration or an- 
nulment. 

Section 6. Local and district boards of trustees for vocational 
education, administering approved industrial, agricultural, or 
household arts schools, shall, under a scheme to be approved by 
the board of education, appoint an advisory committee composed 
of members representing local trades, industries, and occupations. 
It shall be the duty of the advisory committee to counsel with 
and advise the local or district board of trustees and other 
school officials having the management and supervision of such 
schools. 

REIMBURSEMENT 

Section 8. Independent industrial, agricultural, and house- 
hold arts schools shall, so long as they are approved by the board 
of education as to organization, control, location, equipment, 
courses of study, qualifications of teachers, methods of instruction, 
conditions of admission, employment of pupils, and expenditures 


i Bt hie aL | 


+a 


Wah ey 


Po Pre MERAY 


; 
4 
; 
_ 
, 
; 
4 
: 
e 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1323 


of money, constitute approved local or district independent 
vocational schools. Cities and towns maintaining such approved 
local or district independent vocational schools shall receive 
reimbursement as provided in sections nine and ten of this 
act. 

Section 9. 1. The commonwealth, in order to aid in the main- 
tenance of approved local or district independent industrial and 
household arts schools, and of independent agricultural schools 
consisting of other than agricultural departments in high schools, 
shall, as provided in this act, pay annually from the treasury 
to cities and towns maintaining such schools an amount equal 
to one half the sum to be known as the net maintenance sum. 
Such net maintenance sum shall consist of the total sum raised by 
local taxation and expended for the maintenance of such a school, 
less the amount, for the same period, of tuition claims, paid or 
unpaid, and receipts from the work of pupils or the sale of pro- 
ducts. 

2. Cities and towns maintaining approved local or district 
independent agricultural schools consisting only of agricultural 
departments in high schools shall be reimbursed by the common- 
wealth, as provided in this act, only to the extent of two thirds 
of the salary paid to the instructors in such agricultural depart- 
ments: provided, that the total amount of money expended by 
the commonwealth in the reimbursement of such cities and towns 
for the salaries of such instructors for any given year shall not 
exceed ten thousand dollars. 

3. Cities and towns that have paid claims for tuition in ap- 
proved local or district independent vocational schools shall be 
reimbursed by the commonwealth, as provided in this act, to the 
extent of one half the sums expended by such cities and towns 
in payment of such claims. 

Section 10. On or before the first Wednesday of January of 
each year the board of education shall present to the general 
court a statement of the amount expended previous to the pre- 
ceding first day of December by cities and towns in the main- 
tenance of approved local or district independent vocational 
schools, or in payment of claims for tuition in such schools, for 
which such cities and towns should receive reimbursement, as 
provided in this act. On the basis of such a statement the 
general court may make an appropriation for the reimbursement 
of such cities and towns up to such first day of December. 


1324 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


Ill. DESCRIPTION OF A FEW TYPICAL VOCATIONAL 
AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS 


The few schools hereafter described were selected for the dual 
reason that they illustrate types and because information con- 
cerning them was readily available to the committee. There 
are numbers of other schools which would have served the pur- 
pose equally well and which are fully as efficient. 


A. CERTAIN SCHOOLS IN NEW YORK CITY 


Pratt Institute. This Brooklyn private school, founded by 
Charles M. Pratt in 1887 and now under the control of his six 
sons, is adequately endowed and gives day and evening instruc- 
tion to over four thousand students. There are at present five 
divisions ofinstruction. Among these is the ‘School of Science and 
Technology’ which offers thorough practical courses planned 
to meet the needs of four different classes of students: 

“Birst. Day Industrial Courses in Mechanics, Electricity, 
and Chemistry, for young men who cannot afford the time and 
expense required for four-year college or engineering courses, 
but who are nevertheless ambitious to fill positions above the 
grade of skilled mechanics in. manufacturing and industrial 
plants. 

“Second. Day Trade Courses in Machine Work, Carpentry 
and Building, and Tanning, for those who wish practical and 
theoretical instruction in these trades. 

“Third. Evening Technical Courses for those employed 
during the day in mechanical, electrical, and chemical industries 
and related occupations. 

““Bourth. Evening Trade Courses for apprentices and 
journeymen. 

“The courses offered are as follows: 


Day Industrial Courses 

Steam and Machine Design <A two-year course 
Applied Electricity A two-year course 
Applied Chemistry A two-year course 
Applied Leather Chemistry A one-year course 

Day Trade Courses 
Machine Construction A one-year course 
Carpentry and Building A one-year course 
Tanning A one-year course 


PAP EE SNe L Ve ASS 
vee r+ | 


FREON Te NY NED NY eT RAN 


1912} INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1325 


Evening Technical Courses 


Technical Chemistry Industrial Electricity 
General Chemistry Electricity and Mechanics 
Qualitative Analysis Electrical Machinery 
Quantitative Analysis Electrical Design 


Organic Chemistry 
Mechanical Drawing and __— Practical Electricity 


Machine Design Practical Mathematics 
Mechanical Drawing Steam and the Steam Engine 
Machine Design _ Strength of Materials 
Mechanism 

Evening Trade Classes 
Machine-Work Sheet-Metal Work 
Tool-Making Plumbing 
Carpentry and Building Advanced Wood-Working for 
Pattern-Making Teachers ”’ 


Requirements for admission to these courses are based largely 
upon the personality of the applicant rather than upon his prior 
scholastic achievements. A moderate honorarium is charged 
for each course. 

The purpose of the school is to reach and help all classes of 
practical workers, both artists and artisans, and to give every 
student practical skill along some line of work. Asa rule the in- 
struction is intended to be more theoretical and less practical 
than that usually given in trade schools, whereas it is more 
practical and less theoretical than that usually given in engi- 
neering schools and colleges. This type of instruction is a 
unique feature of the Institute’s work and its conception was 
inspired by the personal experiences of its founder, who was a 
self-made man of unusual breadth and power, and who started 
life asa machinist. In this connection there appear the following 
statements in a report by Samuel S. Edmands from the Depart- 
ment of Science and Technology: 

“The trained workers in the electrical and mechanical fields 
are, in a general way, divided into three different classes, the 
first and highest comprising the comparatively few men of 
superior ability and attainments who originate and direct opera- 
tions requiring the services of many. In this class we find the 
engineering experts, designing and consulting engineers, and 
many others who bear the prime responsibility for the successful 
operation of industrial and engineering enterprises. The third 


‘astjoeid pue Aloayy Ut peyyeueq Ayyeoi3 useq aavy Aayy aie[oap sjuapnys quasaid jo [[y “suotun Aq Ayjedround peusreao3 Sl SsaZeM Jo osvelOUT 


a 9eT 1G ¥ as 9 IZ 9 a 0 a Lae «GE z L ¥ “sazem Jo uortsod uy yuet 
© | -soueape Aq UMOYsSse PYouaq 
3 | \jeysnpur Aue peureyqo 
ea | sary oy sfidnd jo 1equinN 
| | | | | 
| | | | 
o¢ zs Tg OF 09 $9 TL Lag St TZ FE ey | 98 oF (6 So o>, aie sr ttsBor Jaqye Sse[o 
| | | | \yova ul Burureures syuepnys 
. qysiu Jo Jaquinu sseIOAYy 
| | | 
LOL est Let 96 L8 cL 9F 6FT zo || Pe + lee OS. a Rae 69 132 LS Ree ae een ie is SORE EES 
= ) apes} yuereyip 07 peqtat 
£ | | |-pe syuepnys jo JoquUInN 
& ) ) . 
Ps FIZ £ | 0 or 91 g € 16 Ore saat | LP 9 £ OS “ln 8 woreurioyut [eraues ures OL, 
3 | | i | 
2 ; 
Q LOF SL ) 48 cg Tg Of cI LY 1S | eBe 8 ¢ o¢ 86 | 6 Fain: opener Spears uay Oy 
ica} | 
9P zo | «(Og Té OF OF 8G It 1% Té I Y 56 6 ¥I Fie NIE a Sa fa Ree EN. 
= | ; jo oZpeymoux eAoidult OL 
s . 
=~ | 
fe | asinod apes} ZUTAR} UT Wy 
= eor G 0 9 or Vv 6 £ ¥ ) 9T 0 cy 0 eat ie ee +++ sssreak aatq} J9AQ 
S | | 
= 26 TRB “Vee KG g €1 9 rat I 9 1 =6 “eitme | Cm rc tet ly Sip pee See sivaA 9014} 0} OM], 
=~ | . 
ozt 4 9 ral a FI OL I 9 € z Be Ss) 2 |g [rrrrt ttt ssread oma 09 209 
; | 
601 LI ra 91 9 cI 9 0 eT... | ae ee 1Q 9 f=e9 hg loc Zeal eree oo ieak auo UeYy SSe’T 
€89 1s LIT Lg eF 9€ 6 FFL 12 ane &$¢ Il Soe tae 2a CT al: Ee ae Seas auoN 
suimeip Suimeip| Aijst | Wore] |Zutiasu | BUL99u astqoeid } 
re [eo L [ein |Burmerp| puey |-weyd |-[e3sUt -13u9 -13u9 Surs90u)| doys | 3ut Bur | Azautol |Supyeut {Bune | 
ay -y001 | ‘Yoo | -90t4 pue tel) ) “qoaya | -1Bus | euryo | -4yUIs |-quinid | pue | ulog | you | qyysney 
= ory + Suutm | psouea| pue | weag | -e | PI syed | -yeq | -19%9 apes} ut souetiedxg 
‘arg | -py |sotsAud | “18D | 
| 1 


SAS | VA ee A, YN CEN 


Le AA ee se aed 


q 
3 
=) 
: 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1327 


and last class is composed of the skilled laborers and trained 
mechanics. Between the highest and lowest class there is a 
constantly widening field, the workers in which constitute the 
second class and occupy positions secondary and subordinate 
to the members of the first class, but nevertheless of great im- 
portance. They are the assistants to the engineers, the super- 
visors of skilled labor, or the specialists performing operations 
requiring a degree of knowledge and training in excess of that 
possessed by those in the third class. The commercial demand 
for technically trained workers of this second or intermediate 
grade is keen, and it is to afford a means for them to obtain the 
training that they need that the two-year technical courses in 
the Institute are primarily intended.”’ 

During 1910 the National Association of Tanners, desiring 
to affiliate with some educational institution in the formation 
of a tanning school, found that the Pratt Institute was pre- 
pared to train young men for its employ in the manner desired. 

The formal report of the Tanning School Committee of this 
association contains an outline of the equipment and courses of 
instruction proposed by Pratt Institute. Its study is recom- 
mended to those interested in the formation of effective indus- 
trial curricula. : 

Public Schools. There are three public high schools in New 
York City which offer opportunities for instruction in vocational 
subjects, Stuyvesant, at 245 E. 15th St., Manhattan, for boys and 
men, Manual Training, on 7th Ave., Brooklyn, for boys and girls, 
and Bryant, on Wilbur Ave., Long Island City, for boys and girls. 
The courses of study, which are directed towards the technical 
industries, are similar to the ordinary high school courses, ex- 
cept that biology and history are omitted and manual training 
is given throughout four years. 

Applied Mechanics, Steam, and Electricity forms a special 
course at Stuyvesant which is given to fourth-year students and is 
open only to students of exceptional ability. It is designed to pre- 
pare its graduates for giving efficient service immediately after 
leaving the school. The physical equipment of all these schools is 
adequate for the purpose and the laboratories are better equipped 
with apparatus than many engineering colleges, as will be evi- 
dent after an inspection of the accompanying illustrations of the 
engine room at Stuyvesant. Though such extensive facilities 
as shown in the illustration are desirable it should be distinctly 
understood that much excellent and practical industrial instruc- 


1328 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


tion can be given with simple and quite inexpensive equipments. 
No community, therefore, need be deterred from entering upon 
this kind of educational work because of the burden of the pri- 
mary plant cost. 

The day instruction at this school is duplicated in the evening 
with some modifications, attending students being of the same 
general class as the day students but being commonly from 8 to 10 
yearsolder. The evening instruction has for its motive increased 
earning capacity of the student. Besides preparing some even- 
ing students for entrance to college, others are fitted for positions 
in the trades. The effectiveness and characteristics of this work 
may be judged from the data contained in the foregoing table, 
which is based upon information supplied by the students and 
which refers to the academic year 1910--11. 


B. A Few Scuoots SITUATED IN THE MIDDLE AND NEW 
ENGLAND STATES. 


The Privately Endowed Industrial School. As an example 
of the recent development in privately endowed trade schools, 
Wentworth Institute, of Boston, Mass., may be considered as 
representative of modern ideas. The. Institute is designed to 
be a high-grade trade school, that is, one which places a ra- 
tional scientific foundation under the direct preparation for 
mechanical trades and industry. The Director states that the 
aim is to develop artisans and skilled mechanics, and also to 
train men who wish to become inspectors, shop foremen, master 
mechanics, and superintendents in industry. 

As a school of this kind attracts young men of all kinds of 
preparation, the courses have to be adapted to various needs. 
There are, therefore, short one-year day courses for beginners and 
others with little practical experience, two-year day courses 
for those with some experience who wish to train themselves for 
positions of foremanship grade, and also evening courses where 
men employed in mechanical occupations during the day may 
either increase their skill and practical knowledge of their trade 
or study such supplementary subjects as will help them to ad- 
vance to more responsible positions. While the school has been in 
operation but a few months, those in charge of it have had long 
experience in somewhat similar schools, so that the plans and 
methods of instruction may be considered in no way experi- 
mental. The following faets dealing with the organization of the 
school and the results thus far accomplished will, therefore, be 
of interest. 


To PU, eee ee ee a ee et Nee ee eye 
oy oe x 1 


ed Wee oh ile 


;: 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1329 


Trades Taught. After a study of the probable demand for 
instruction the faculty of the Institute selected the following 
trades for the day courses. In the building trades—carpentry, 
plumbing, and electric wiring; in the manufacturing trades— 
machine work, foundry practise, and pattern-making; also, 
electrical construction for those who wish to become foremen in 
electrical industries, and machine construction for those who 
wish to become foremen in mechanical industries. While in the 
case of foundry practise, especially, great doubt was felt as 
to whether American boys could be made to see its scope, 
the possibilities of future development in the industry made 
this trade of importance. The class in foundry practise has 
proved one of the most successful of the day courses. 

‘For boys employed during the day, evening classes are pro- 
vided. For those who wish to perfect themselves in mechan- 
ical skill and practical knowledge of their trade, courses are 
offered in carpentry, pattern-making, machine work, tool-mak- 
ing, foundry practise, electric wiring, and plumbing; and for 
those who wish to supplement their knowledge and prepare them- 
selves for more responsible positions, there are courses in practical 
mathematics, mechanical drawing, machine design, practical 
mechanics, strength and properties of materials, the steam engine 
and the operation of power plants, applied electricity, and elec- 
trica! machinery. 

Selection of Students. Although the buildings and equipment 
of the Institute were hardly completed in September, 1911, more 
than three times as many applicants as could be accommodated 
appeared. In selecting from this large number, personal inter- 


-view and oral questioning were the only practicable means. All 


academic standpoints of scholarship and skilled attainments 
were discarded and the attempt was made to measure the appli- 
cant’s forcefulness, seriousness of purpose, and adaptability to 
the trade selected. In this way an earnest body of students 
was picked out. 

Selection of Teachers. Of the 18 men who constitute the 
day school faculty, eight have charge of shop instruction, 
Six of the eight have special qualifications for this work, having 
occupied responsible industrial positions. The other teachers 
are school and college trained and they have had wide experi- 
ence in industrial work. As the success of an institution like 
this depends largely on the teachers every effort has been made 
to get those properly equipped for this work. 


1330 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


Typical Curriculum. Following is a typical curriculum which 
shows clearly the scope of the work of this institution: 


A typical curriculum for a one-year course is as follows: 


Hours per week 


Fall Winter Spring 
term term term 
Shop practise in machine-tool work, 
machine construction, bench work and 
tool-making, principles and practise of 
forging, tempering steel, foundry practise 
and pattern-making........---++-+++++- 20 20 20 
Mechanical drafting and blue print 
VEAAN OS oe vise pathgpeeroinlaioly =7sic,euetoyaibyele gai 6 6 6 
Practical mechanics, materials of con- 
struction, and power transmission, etc., 
(recitations and laboratory practise)...... 9 9 9 
Practical mathematics, machine shop 
computationS........ eee eee eens seen ress 5 5 5 


A typical curriculum for two-year courses is as follows: 


FIRST YEAR 


Hours per week 


Fall Winter Spring 
term term term 
Practical Mechanics: 
Recitation. cde te thee tee ere sisi verte 5 5 5 
Laboratory practise. ..)4... 66s ee eee ees 8 8 
Electrical Motors and Appliances: 
Principles of construction and operation, 
REGHER TIONS. WGA ieee eT N en, cree. Mes 5 
iBeAefeyy lo! iy See See notes Sey hs Chee WEE oe 8 
Mechanical Drafting: 
Shop drawing and machine details...... 8 8 8 
Practical Mathematics: 
Shop computations and use of formulas. 5 5 5 
Shop Practise: 
Moulding and foundry work.,......... 8 4 
Patternimaking: %i.5.nt apn eth lew omer 4 8 
Forging’ and tenipering.. 0.0... = ne 6 


Machine tool work 


er ae oe 
1° 


ah oh 


q 
; 
3 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1331 


SECOND YEAR 


Hours per week 


Fall Winter Spring 
term term term 
Applied Mechanics: 
Mechanism of machinery, materials of 
construction, transmission of power, 
plant care and operation, etc. 
lcciba toms. pnsteters raved ne wks svsytys, weeks pohars 5 5 5 
Web Orator vane qicitae areas cious a-agiele Seeiebe ee 8 8 8 
Machine Sketching: 
Moolland figadesieniy «kde oe ves ems 0 6 6 6 
Advanced Practical Mathematics, includ- 
ing useful applications of algebra, 
geometry, and trigonometry......... 5 5 5 
Advanced Shop Practise: 
Machine Ccomstructione.....-2-oncr0--- 10 4 4 
MON sirla KT cteveterteheteveivsetrty le spits bbe 0 6 6 
Optional 
Advanced jig and tool making........... 6 6 6 
or 
Advanced machine construction.......... 6 6 6 


Note: In the two-year courses a considerable portion of the 
laboratory work is actual construction and for that reason the 
time spent in shop practise is somewhat reduced. 


Vocational Instruction under the Direction of the New York 
State Department of Education. In 1908 a law was passed 
by the legislature of New York State (already referred to in 
Section II) providing for vocational and trade instruction 
in public schools. To put this law into effect the New 
York State Education Department organized a separate 
division of trade schools under the supervision of a chief. 
This division endeavors to keep.in touch with the various labor 
organizations and with the manufacturers with a view to the 
promotion of education of such a nature that the young people 
of the state will be fitted to take up employment in the industries 
with the greatest possible efficiency. 

The Department of Education recognizes two divisions of this 
field: (1) There are young people from 12 to 16 who need indus- 
trial education of a preliminary character. At this age young 
people are of little value in the industries, but they are of an age 
suitable for the acquirement of the fundamental principles of 
industry. Assuming that the ordinary school subjects of read- 
ing, spelling, writing, arithmetic, etc., have been fairly well 
mastered, the applications of these fundamental studies to 


1332 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


shop work, shop accounts, business subjects, etc., may be 
profitably emphasized. It is not the aim in this part of the 
work to teach trades, but by means of manual training, drawing 
and other practical studies, the elements of all trades are taught. 

Under the law of 1908 a number of vocational high schools 
have been organized, including a school at Albany near the head- 
quarters of the State Department of Education. The Albany 
school is considered typical, and will be treated in more detail 
later. 

(2) The second division of industrial training recognized by 
the Board of Education is instruction in the trades. New York 
State contains a large number of groups of industrial workers 
engaged in printing, textile industries, shoe manufacture, ready- 
made clothing manufacture, manufacture of electrical apparatus, 
iron working, paper manufacture, etc. These groups need re- 
cruits especially prepared for their specialties. In addition 
to the general preparation given by the vocational high school, 
which is supposed to prepare the way for all trades and business 
activities, there are many special subjects which should be 
studied in order to make intelligent workers in, say, the print- 
ing business, shoe manufacture, or electrical machinery manu- 
facture. 

The State Department of Education has made a real beginning 
in the first division of its field mentioned above. State aid 
is given to schools which qualify under the law. In the 8th 
annual report of the Department, Mr. A. D. Dean, Chief of the 
Division of Vocational Schools, states as follows: 

““ The Intermediate Industrial School. The plan as now oper- 
ating provides that five-twelfths of the school program shall be 
given over to the shop, laboratory and drawing instruction and 
that the remaining seven-twelfths be devoted to “ book studies,” 
which practically amounts to saying that the pupils shall for the 
remainder of the time take the regular elementary school studies 
corresponding to the seventh and eighth grades. These studies 
are related to the industrial studies as far as is possible. Both 
boys and girls have similar work in English and history. The 
arithmetic course for boys differs from that for girls. The 
geography is viewed as an outgrowth of the life-long problem of 
providing food, clothing, and shelter. The physiology is studied 
from the view-point of hygiene and sanitation rather than the 
structural only. The shop, laboratory, and drawing work differs 
with the sex considered, 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1333 


Vocational Courses in the High School. The Education Depart- 
ment proposes a plan by which an average high school now teach- 
ing college preparatory, commercial, industrial, and home-making 
subjects can economically and effectively develop courses of in- 
struction which shall have a well-blended liberal and vocational 
training. Instead of these schools offering commercial, indus- 
trial, and home-making subjects it is arranged so that they offer 
well-defined courses for pupils who seek different destinations. 
A certain amount of the work is common to all these courses and 
consists of the prescribed studies which are deemed essential to a 
sound and symmetrical education and which, under normal con- 
ditions, should be prescribed for all pupils in a secondary school. 
These prescribed studies are English for four years, English 
history with civics, algebra, plane geometry, biology, and physics. 
Another division consists of such elective subjects as may be 
necessary for pupils seeking different destinations. 

The “ industrial and agricultural purpose ”’ courses have inten- 
sive courses in the agricultural and manual arts and drawing. 
The ‘‘home-making purpose ’”’ course is rounded out with strong 
courses in domestic science and art, household decoration, sanita- 
tion, and personal hygiene. It cannot be emphasized too often 
that a vocational course does not consist merely of vocational 
subjects thrown at random into a high school system. The voca- 
tional purpose must be satisfied by a definite course. 

The law states clearly certain conditions which a vocational 
school must meet in order to be considered as entitled to special 
State aid. (1) It must be independently organized— not neces- 
sarily a separate building but most assuredly established with a 
distinct vocational purpose in mind; (2) it must have an enrol- 
ment of at least 25; (3) it must employ the full time of a teacher 
and (4) it must have a course of study meeting the approval of 
the Commissioner of Education. The first three conditions 
admit of no changes and are to be enforced in all places without 
variation from the word of the law. ‘The fourth condition allows 
for considerable latitude and discretion. The course of study 
is not defined by the law; it may vary in different localities and 
connect with the different local industries, which vary in different 
parts of a great State. The course of study in agriculture and 
related subjects may emphasize dairying in St. Lawrence county, 
and fruit growing in Ontario county. An industrial course 


“may concern itself with the shoe industry of Rochester or the 


knitting mills of Utica; it may omit mechanical drawing in 


1334 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


Gloversville and emphasize it in Schenectady. The vocational 
training may be of rather the general industrial nature in Albany 
or have its specific trade aspects in Lackawanna. The only points 
that need to be considered in the establishment of such a school 
course in a high school system are: (1) Is it established to meet 
the vocational purposes in education? (2) Does it meet the re- 
quirements of the law? ; 

The New York Department has ruled that five-twelfths of the 
weekly program of a vocational school department must be given 
over to the vocational studies chosen for the elective group. 
This particular ratio was settled upon after considering two 
propositions: (1) The present requirements for an academic 
diploma call for 41 counts in certain studies, primarily liberal. 
These counts closely approximate seven-twelfths of the total 
number, 72, required for a diploma. (2) Vocational training of 
high-school grade demands a certain amount of liberal training. 
Preparation for a vocation should have academic recognition 
through a diploma if the work is of high school grade. The plac- 
ing of the ratio five-twelfths vocational to seven-twelfths liberal 
will satisfy the time elements of both divisions of the course of 
study. Consequently the pupils in the vocational school course 
have the same liberalizing studies, or their equivalent, as do 
pupils in other courses. They take the same department 
examinations in English, history, algebra, geometry, and biology 
when they follow the same syllabus as other pupils. When the 
school offers, as it should, special and practical courses in mathe- 
matics and science beyond, or in place of, those just mentioned, 
the work is inspected and if the definite outlines submitted to 
the Department are satisfactory, if the teacher is trained for his 
work, and if it is seen that he can make direct and useful applica- 
tions of the abstract to the concrete shop, laboratory, or field 
work of the home and the school, then the Department grants 
credits without examination. No examinations are given in the 
vocational subjects proper. 

There are now 35 industrial and trade schools, employing 145 
teachers. These schools have a day enrolment of 3370 pupils and 
an evening enrolment of 2933 pupils, or a total enrolment of 6303 
pupils. There are 527 other pupils using the equipment, but 
not enrolled in these schools. 

The Albany Vocational School is one of the most advanced 
of these institutions. It was organized soon after the law 
of 1908 went into effect. It started with one hundred pupils 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1335 


selected from a large number of applicants prepared in the lower 
schools. The equipment of the school does not differ materially 
from that of manual training high schools, but very much greater 
prominence is given to the manual part of the course. This 
equipment comprises a wood shop with the necessary benches, 
bench tools, saw bench, band saw, speed lathes, and accessories, 
all electrically driven. A home-making department uses cook- 
ing tables, gas stoves, and other necessities of the home, for in- 
struction in domestic arts. 

Book-work is not neglected, but it has a practical aspect. 
For example, in the study of algebra the formulas are stated in 
terms of the workshop and complicated equations are solved 
graphically. The formulas studied deal with such applications 
as electricity, mechanics, and engine practise. In mensuration, 
areas are studied by reducing plane figures to equivalent triangles, 
by counting squares when figures are drawn on squared paper, by 
weighing similarly shaped areas cut from cardboard, sheet lead, 
or iron. In scientific subjects like physics everyday applica- 
tions are studied. Among these may be mentioned the radia- 
tion from water supply pipes, practical use of exhaust steam, 
steam boilers, and heating and ventilating. 

Industrial work in this school is not confined to boys, but the 
needs of girls are carefully considered. The work for girls com- 
prises housekeeping, sewing and design. The fundamental 
scientific principles underlying the household arts are taken up. 
Girls are taught to use their hands as well as their heads. 

While the Albany school has been in operation but a short 
time, it has apparently demonstrated the soundness of the prin- 
ciples upon which it is founded. 


C. TypicaL ELECTRICAL OPERATING CORPORATION SCHOOLS 


New York Telephone Company. This company gives five 
courses of instruction to its employees, maintaining continuously 
(1) aschool for operators, and (2) a school for instrument inspec- 
tors and installers; and offering periodically, as occasion may 
demand, (3) a course for cable splicers and wiremen, (4) a 
course for salesmen and employees of the Commercial Depart- 
ment, and (5) a course for college men employed in various 
capacities in the Plant, Traffic, and Engineering Departments. 

The first three courses are directed towards the instruction of 
the employees in the performance of the specific duties for which 
they are employed. The other courses are directed toward 


1336 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


extending the information of the employees so as to give them a 
perspective view of the policies and many correlated activities 
of the company. 

The instruction in the operators’ school consists of a series 
of lectures, each followed by practise at a special school switch- 
board of standard construction. The course lasts for four weeks; 
the first week is devoted to simple calls from one direct line 
to another; the second is devoted to more complicated calls, such 
as emergency, party line, official, and telegram calls, and those 
involving an understanding of the meanings of switchboard 
markings; the third is devoted to calls from automatic pay 
stations, to busy or unanswered calls and to trouble reports; 
and the fourth week is devoted to a review. 

The instruction in the school for inspectors and installers 
comprises lectures, work with standard apparatus that has been 
specially modified for the introduction of troubles, and work as 
helpers in the field. There are six grades of instruction differen- 
tiated from each other by the greater or less complexity of the 
involved apparatus or circuits. Not all of the employees in this 
line are required to take all grades. 

The course for salesmen and employees of the Commercial 
Department consists of lectures and observations. It is directed 
so as to give information concerning the organization of the 
company, its territory, the correlation of its departments, central 
office operation and traffic troubles, accounting, ledger routine, 
adjustments, advertising, rates, contracts, renewals, office 
practise, orders, collections, canvassing, and salesmanship. 

College men are usually employed for engineering positions, 
for construction work, or as central office managers. Instruction 
is given to them through informal talks and through observation. 
They are required to make written reports upon their observa- 
tions. They are also questioned so as to determine their under- 
standing concerning the work. The following schedule, indicat- 
ing the nature of the course which is taken by those who enter 
the Engineering Department, has been obtained through the 
courtesy of Mr. H. C. Carpenter: 


New York TELEPHONE COMPANY 


INSTRUCTION COURSE é 
Operating— ' 3 weeks 
a. Course in the Operators’ School, 2 weeks; the afternoon 


being spent in listening in for about 1 week at the “A” board 
and for 1 week at the “‘B ”’ board at the Spring office. 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1337 


b. Listening in at various toll board positions, information 
desks, and ‘‘ A’ and ‘‘ B ” boards at other offices, 1 week. 


Maintenance of Common Battery Central Offices— 2 weeks 


To gain a general knowledge of the wire chief’s work and of 
the functions of the various pieces of apparatus. 


Instrument Installation and Inspection— 2 weeks 

To include a special course for one week in the Instrument 
Installer’s School in New York and a week on installation and 
inspection work, including private branch exchange installations. 


Pole Line Construction— 3 weeks 

Placing new and replacing existing poles, crossarms and other 
fixtures, highway and interior block. 

Making transpositions, including phantom circuit transposi- 
tions. 

Stringing wire and removing dead wire. 

Placing and splicing aerial cables and terminals. 

Joint construction with electric light and power lines. 

Protection against high-tension lines. 


Loop Construction— 4 week 

Special attention is given to the methods of distributing 
from crossarms, iron brackets, and from joint lines with an 
electric light company; distribution through trees. 


Subway and Subsidiary Work— 1 week 
To include, if possible, both light and heavy subway construc- 
tion in city and country, special attention being given to the 
arrangement of manholes, duct formation, and the kinds of 
material used. (If no heavy subway construction in congested 
streets ig under way while the student is taking the course, a 
day or two of this time may be spent with the Empire City 
Subway Company.) 
Placing and Splicing Cable— 3 weeks 
- Placing cables in subways and subsidiaries. 

Removing cables from subways. 

Placing interior block cables. 

Placing house cables. 

Placing submarine cables. 

Straight splicing. : 

Potheads of both okonite and switchboard cable (when made 
on the job). 

Test of splicing, including throw and tap work, special atten- 
tion being given to the methods of testing working and dead 
cables. 

- Block splicing. 


Wiring Work— 1 week 


Half tap. ; 
Block rewiring and reconcentration. ( io) 
Cutting in potheads in central offices and in buildings. 


1338 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


Galvanometer Work— + week 


To gain a general knowledge of the tests made, and also the 
method of locating faults. 


Outside Trouble Hunting— 4 week 


To gain a general knowledge of the kind of troubles met with, 
and the methods of locating and clearing them. 

Plant Engineering and General Office Work— 5 weeks 

This is to gain a general knowledge of the work of the plant 
engineer, of the methods of accounting, and of the organization 
of the Plant and other departments. It is suggested that these 
five weeks be spent about as follows: 

1 week in learning the nature of the plant engineer’s work, 
the preparation of spider maps, character maps, and getting 
familiar with joint use agreements and division instructions. 

13 weeks working with an assistant to one of the district 
engineers on such jobs as may be under consideration, if possible 
letting the student do some small job himself so that he may 
become familiar with the methods of planning relief and reaching 
new territory. 

1 week on block work—spending about a third of the time 
in inspecting block work, which should include both short pole 
line construction and fence runs so as to become familiar with 
the general layout of interior block cable. The remainder of the 
time may be spent with the block engineer in making new 
blocks and relief of existing blocks, in estimating the cost of the 
work, and finally in the making out the necessary permits for 
the Wayleaves Department. 

3 week in learning how to overcome inductive disturbances on 
telephone lines, in studying exposures and methods of cutting 
in transpositions on ordinary circuits and for phantoms. 

1 week with the Accounting Department—learning how the 
material is ordered from the storerooms and from the manu- 
facturing company, and the accounting of the material and 
labor under estimates; also learning how records of the Plant 
Department are kept, such as attachments to foreign poles, 
card records, statistics, and records of trunks. 


Traffic Department— 23 weeks 
Work of the traffic engineer. 
Rainy Weather. 


During rainy weather, the student goes to one or more repair 
shops to become familiar with the work done in them and to see the 
making up of cable forms, cable head boxes, repairing apparatus; 
also to gain a knowledge of the stock rooms and the methods of 
issuing and crediting material recovered. 


New York Edison Company. Under the auspices of the Asso- 


ciation of Employees of the New York Edison Company, there is 
offered free to any employee of the company a theoretical and 


4 
d 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1339 


practical course in electricity extending over three years and 
including fifteen two-hour weekly exercises each year. The 
upper portion of one of the company’s substation buildings 
contains a fine auditorium, a well equipped laboratory, and a 
carefully selected and growing reference library. Members of 
the test department give instruction during every evening and 
on one afternoon during fifteen weeks of the year, commencing 
about the middle of November. There has been prepared a 
separate printed and illus trated instruction sheet for each exercise, 
the nature of which can be inferred from the titles given in the 
following table furnished by Mr. H. G. Stott. 


Course l 


Uses and Properties of Electric Currents. 
Measuring and Controlling Electric Currents. 
Connections and Types of Circuits. 
Magnetic Fields and Magnets. 

Conductors and Resistors. 

Voltmeter Adjustments and Calibration. 
Ammeters and Shunts. 

Measurements of Power and Electric Energy. 
Magnetic Properties of Iron. 

10. Generators. 

11. «Motors. 

12. Storage Batteries. 

13. Characteristics and Testing of Insulation. 

14. Lamps and Photometry. 

15. Alternating Currents. 


OONAOTPWNE 


CouRSsE 2 


The Magnetic Circuit. 
Direct-Current Armatures. 
Separately Excited Generators. 
Shunt Generators. 

Shunt Generators (concluded). 
Compound Generators. 

Shunt Motors. 

Shunt Motors (concluded). 

Prony Brake Tests on Shunt Motors. 
10. Prony Brake Tests on Series Motors. 
11. Motor-Generator Heating Test. 

12. Armature Reactions. 


wonre 


COM OU 


ie) 


1340 INDUSTRIAL EDUCA TION [June 27 


13. Shop Tests on Motors. 

14. Boosters. 

15. Balances. 

CouRSE 3 
1. Alternators. 
2. Characteristics of Alternating-Current Circuits. 
3. Phase Measurements and Vector Diagrams. 
4. Principles of the Transformer. 
5. Constant Potential Transformers. 
6. Instrument Transformers. 
7. Polyphase Circuits. 
8. Induction Motor Principles. 
9. Induction Motor Operating Characteristics. 

10. Induction Regulators. 

11. Polyphase Transformations. 

12. Alternators in Parallel. 

13. Synchronous Motors. 

14. Converters. 

15. Wave Forms. 

Of some 4500 employees, the initial enrolments for 1910-1911 
in these three courses were respectively 60, 180, and 60. Of 
those there were respectively 5, 9, and 5 who attended every 
exercise and prepared the corresponding reports. The average 
weekly attendance was initially 100 and dropped to 70 at the 
conclusion of the season. Decrease in attendance after the 
novelty had worn off also characterized a course of free lectures 
by electrical specialists, given previously in connection with the 
educational work of this company. To prevent falling off in 
attendance, one department of this company is at present com- 
pelling attendance on the time of the company. 


D. Dara CONCERNING RAILROAD CORPORATION SCHOOLS. 

New York Central Lines Apprentice School System. As 
the New York Central plan has been worked out in great detail 
and as it comprises most of the features found satisfactory in 
other systems it may be considered as typical of the best practise 
in its line. Six years ago the New York Central lines put into 
operation at the larger shops a school system for the benefit of 
shop apprentices, in various trades. The purposes of these schools 
are: 

1. To improve the quality of mechanical skill available in shop 
work. 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1341 


2. To make apprenticeship attractive to intelligent boys. 

3. To make it possible for the right kind of boys to rise from the 
ranks to positions as foremen and master mechanics. 

School work is done in regular shop time under pay, and in the 
‘morning when the boys are at their best. The work is done 
under drawing and shop instructors appointed from the local 
shops, these instructors being under the direction of the officers of 
the company in charge of the local shop operations. The whole 
work is under the supervision of a superintendent of apprentices 
who in turn reports directly to the general superintendent of 
motive power. 

The boys who apply for apprenticeships in the shops of the 
company are of various grades of education, some having prac- 
tically no schooling, while others are high school graduates. The 
instruction is therefore somewhat varied in character, but is 
mainly of two general types: drawing and numerical calculations, 
and shop work. The drawing instruction is given in the rooms or 
small buildings especially devoted to this work. These rooms 
are fitted up in a simple style with drafting tables, blackboards, 
cabinets for storing boards and supplies, models, etc. The 
courses, which are laid out for all shops by the superintendent 
of apprentices, are of a nature to appeal to apprentice boys. 

The objects which he is expected to draw are the familiar things 
with which he worksin the shops. Small locomotive parts, parts 
of shop tools, wrenches, nuts, etc., form the drawing exercises. 
Very simple subjects are assigned at the start, leading up to 
rather complicated ones toward the close of the four-year course. 
The work includes tracing so that the student finally leaves 
his work as if for use in actual construction. In many cases the 
apprentices actually prepare drawings for foremen, supplementing 
-the work of the regular draftsmen. 

The drafting room periods afford an opportunity also for 
testing the ability of the students to think for themselves. 
A large number of problems are assigned for home work, these 
problems being all of a simple and practical character. Solu- 
tions to the problems are handed in from time to time, and by 
means of blackboard exercises the real ability of the pupils in 
solving problems is tested. 

Most of the time of the apprentices is put in at actual shop 
work under the direction of the shop instructor. This instructor 
is a practical mechanic who is familiar with all branches of shop 
work. His duty is to see that the pupil is taught thoroughly 


1342 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


all branches of the selected trade. The instructor shifts the pupil 
from one line of work to another, giving him sufficient time to 
obtain a thorough mastery of each part. For example, if a boy 
elects to learn the trade of machinist, which requires four years, 
his time will be divided up roughly as follows: helping in shop, 
0-3 months; bench work, 6-12 months; light tool work, 3-6 
months; heavy tool work, 3-12 months; in air brake department, 
tool room or brass tool, 3-6 months; in erecting shop, 16-24 
months. The instructor shows the apprentice how to perform 
each operation assigned to him and sees that the work is done 
thoroughly. He thus relieves the foreman of the necessity of 
instructing apprentices, and as he is a specialist in this line, the 
work is much better done than formerly. It is understood that 
while the shop course is going on the apprentice is also working 
in the drafting room, as explained earlier. 

The instruction of apprentices is very similar to the best type 
of school work of any kind, as will be evident from the descrip- 
tion given. The primary function of the course, as should be 
that of the courses of all schools, is to teach the apprentice to 
apply skill and knowledge efficiently in his vocation. Mental 
development is, of course a vital necessity; but this mental 
development comes as a result of the continual exercise of the 
constructive and reasoning faculties. Practically no text-books 
are used in the course. Lectures, examinations, and recitations, 
as used in school, have little place. 

The results of the system have been highly gratifying to 
the company, and although the experiment has been in operation 
but a few years, the benefits have been evident in an increase in 
shop output, a reduction in the amount of spoiled work, and 
increased desire on the part of the boys togprepare themselves 
for trades (including even some trades which a few years ago did 
not attract boys at all) and a general improvement of the spirit 
in the shops. The shop instructors meet from time to time to 
discuss their problems, and as they work through a central organ- 
ization, their efforts are marked by unity of plan and purpose. 

The Pennsylvania Railroad Apprentice School. An instance 
of a continuation school, doing a large amount of good in its 
community, is the one maintained by the Pennsylvania Railroad 
Company in Altoona, Pa., which was inaugurated under the 
direction of General Superintendent George W. Creighton and 
his staff, of the company, and the Chairman of the Committee 
making this report, representing The Pennsylvania State Col- 


1912] INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1343 


lege. (The latter institution holds an advisory position in the 
organization of the school and receives full weekly reports from 
the head instructor.) In this school something over 250 appren- 
tices spend one-half a day a week in a specially prepared build- 
ing, which, with its equipments, was comparatively inexpensive. 
Three instructors are required. The curriculum consists largely 
of practical drawing, English, natural science, and mathematics. 
The weekly time spent by each apprentice in the school is di- 
vided into two periods scheduled for different days. 

The English is taught in a manner best adapted, in the opinion 
of the instructors, to improve the pupils’ ability readily to un- 
derstand shop or similar orders and to make verbal or written 
reports in clear language. The natural science studies take up 
elementary functions having to do with features of combus- 
tion in the firing of boilers, the simple principles underlying 
machine mechanisms, the qualities and characteristics of mate- 
rials used in machine construction, and similar practical infor- 
mation which should add to the intelligent performance of the 
workman’s duties. The mathematics taught is a study of the 
fundamental principles of arithmetic, algebra, geometry, etc., as 
they apply to the ordinary simple mental or written computa- 
tions which are demanded of the skilled mechanic in the course 
of his labor. The drawing is of a practical sort, such as to give 
the mechanic keener appreciation of working drawings required 
in construction, and to enable the management to select men of 
suitable caliber for their drafting rooms as needed. The 
instruction in English and natural science, of the nature indi- 
cated, seemed at the outset of the work to be desirable; and the 
experience thus far obtained indicates its material value in 
improving the quickness and intelligence of the young men 
pursuing the work. 

While in the shops the apprentices are under the supervision of 
the foremen, who in turn are in close touch with the school instruc- 
tors. The use of the foremen, instead of the special shop instruc- 
tors employed in some other corporation schools, has much to 
commend it. The foreman of sufficient intelligence to carry on the 
industrial operations of his department should have ability, if he 
is the proper man for his place, to direct the apprentices to proper 
advantage. Further, adding this special supervision and in- 
structional function to the responsibilities of the foreman 
seems rather to add to his effectiveness and interest in his work 
than otherwise. And still further, by using the foreman the 


1344 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


schools are tied up more closely and correlated to better ad- 
vantage with the industrial organization as a whole than is other- 
wise possible. The apprentice courses are four years in length. 
During this time the young men are given a well rounded and 
broad shop training. They attend the school classes regularly 
during the first three years. 

The school instructors and foremen are required to submit 
exhaustive weekly, monthly, semi-annual, and annual reports to 
the organization management. These reports have apparently 
proved of value in enabling the management to weed out appren- 
tices who are unworthy and to place into line of promotion 
young men who are of noteworthy merit. This latter function is 
in itself of sufficient worth to warrant the expense of the school. 

The success of the school, though in operation but slightly 
over two years, has been marked; and the pupils themselves 
have been enthusiastic over this work. Those completing the 
course have, in many cases, petitioned to be allowed to continue 
further. That the management believes the expense of the 
school to be warranted by the results, is indicated by the fact 
that it has recently extended the system to other divisions of 
the railroad. 

Tabulation of Data Concerning Instruction by Certain Steam 
Railroads. A number of important railroads have well-or- 
ganized systems of instruction of apprentices. Mr. J. W. L. 
Hale, Head Instructor in the Pennsylvania Railroad Appren- 
tice School, just referred to, recently made a careful study of 
the instructional work of a number of systems. His findings are 
summarized in the following tables: 


1345 


INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 


‘eyseiqaN ‘eyewg 


“AUD ALOR 
MON ‘[eUIUtIey [eIjueQ puri 


‘saqongd ‘jeerzuOyy 


‘uuad ‘a[[lApeoyy 


‘CA ‘N ‘Aueqry) pues] vserg 


‘gulurel, soljueidde spiese1 se 
Ajjuepuedeput pezesedo doys yorgq 
‘moyshs 94} JO YIOM osotjueidde 
ay) IOj UoTVezIUesIO [eIZUI0 ON 


‘sesuey ‘exodoy 


*uoTjONIYSUT 
toy Ajdde Ajiequnjoa oymM 
ssesojdura [je seyorey 


ai 


(TI-1&-@) 
6z 


quowuyiedaq jeuoljeonpy 
oq} Ioj sloyienbpeoy 


peptaoid st uoTzoONI4sUt 
aloyM szurod jo ‘ON 


RNAs ohn he a 


“eYeUIO 7B [OOYOS BUIUAAD 30T} 
-usiddy ‘uolzyeullojuy jo neoing 
jeuoyjzonpy ue Aq peyonpuos 
sesinoo sduapuodselioo ysnoIy 


*worjONIysut [OOYOS pue 
doys yj}oq SurprAoid uteysAs 901} 
-usidde paziuesio ue Yysnoiyy 


*sdoys 94} Ul UOT 
-owoid 1oj UoTjeUTWMIexXe JO UIa4SAS 
@ pue uorjoNI4sul [oOYyOS BSuruseAe 
Aios;nduroo BurprAoid wia4sAs 901} 
-usidde poziuesio ue ysnoiyy 


‘uoTjONIysur [ooyos pue doys 
yj30q BurptAoid ureqsAs diyseorty 
-usidde peziuesio ue ysnoiyy 


“UOTJONIYSUT [OOYOS pue doys 
yj0q BSurpiAoid uleyshs_ dtysedry 
-usoidde paziuesio ue ysno1yy 


‘uotjonijsur doys pue 
jooyos y30q BulprtAoid pue sdoys 
[ereAes 94} Ye A[JUepuedepur peqe 
-redo dtyseorjueidde ysnoiyy 


“woTjONIysuT [OoYyos pue doys 
yjoq SurprAoid pue AemMIIel siyue 
IeAO0 Burpusyxe wayshs dryseory 
-usoidde poziuesio ue ysnoiyy 


petdde Moy 


"qeN ‘eyeuo 
ae yooyos sotyueidde 
BuUIUaAg ‘peolrer oyy 


jo soaAoldura [je 0} uedg 


*gAO0Oqe Se 39uteg 


“4,daq jeoturyoayy 
ayi, ut ssoueidde oy 


“4,daq [eolueyoayy 
ay} ut sesotjuseidde oF 


*ulo4sAS 911}U9 
IaAO0 ‘4,deq yeolueyoayy 
ay} ul seorjueidde oy 


‘sdoys Bedruut 
pue ojuoloy, ‘jearju0 yy 
ay} ye *4,daq eotueyoayy 
ay} Ul seotjueidde oy 


‘ulaysAs aitjua oy 
JaAo 4,daq [eomeyooyy 
ay} Ut seoljueidde oy 


petjdde s10y 


“Auedwog 


‘YM oped vorwy 


‘SOUIT [21JU9D “A 'N 


‘AY YUNIL purig 


‘peosrey aug 


‘Auedurosg 


uospny yy elemeleg 


5 *“AOM 


“AY OQ ByUeS 


39 «©6 eyodoy, = ‘uosTyoz 


peor jo sueny 


“MUOM TIVNOILVONGYE TIVIYLSNGNI dO LNGLXd ‘T 


INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


1346 


*A[UO BYeULC 
ye Joyoniysur =©jooyos 
BurusAo aonusiddy 


‘doys pure jooyosg 


jooyos 


*doyg pue jooyssg 


‘doys pue jooyosg 


‘doyg pue [ooysg 


‘doyg pue [ooy9sg 


sdoys 
[e007T 94} 72 SIOyONIYSUT 


‘pesyy doyg e007 
Io omeyosyy Josey 


prey doyg [ev007T 


‘peasy doyg [e007 


‘peop doyg [e007y 


*peay doys [voo07T 


*sdoys jo Juapuaqutedng 
io oleyosyy Josey 


sdoyg [e007 
ye aBieyD Ul Js9qJO 


“neoing [Buory 


-eonpg JO JaryD “3s8V 


‘soorquaid 


4ydng ‘“yssyv 


-dy jo 


“JoslAstodng queqsissy 


*1ojoniy4s 
-uJ jooyog suyaaely 


‘sesuey ‘exedoy 
ye ioyoniysuy [ooyog 


asieyg yold 
Ul 190YJO JUeISISSY 


*neaing 
[euoneonpg jo JeYO 


‘ssotjuaiddy 
jo quepusqutiedns 


*[Ba1] UO WW 
ye ueursyysneiq jeryD 


*IostAradng 

io ystyjetoadg doys 
‘Ia9uIsUuq 

AQuspy gy [eieuas) 
*I0} 


-oNIjsU[ [OOYDg JolUag 


*S9013 
-usiddy jo Jostaiadng 


*yuapIselg-301A 


‘IaMog 2ATIOW WEep 
-uajuuedng = [e1euax) 


*IaMOd 2AT} 


-OJY  yuapuazutiedng 


*quapuaqzutiednsg 
[eolueyoeyy = [@aua4) 


*Aueq|y 38 Jomodg 241} 


-O|W ywapuezuuedng 
‘I9MOd 9AT} 

-OW{ ywoapuezutiadng 
*Iamod 


aATIOP “3dng [eleuer 


asieyg ye Ul 1800 


asieyg 
ul Ja0JO JeysIy 


*Auedurog 


‘YM oyped vowyg 


*sOULT 
jeyquagQ «6 YIOR CMON 


*m1a4sAS 
Aemprey YUNIT, puri 
*-Aueduiog "YY eu 
*Auedutog 
uospnyH » seemed 
“AY oyloeg uvipeued 


‘aq ByUES 
3 eHyedoy ‘uosuIyoyy 


peoy jo amen 


“qdaAO TANGA 


NOILVZINVOUO 


1912] : INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 1347 


4. NUMBER OF INSTRUCTORS AND PUPILS 


Total No. of 
Name of road No. of points apprs. in- Total No. of 
reached structed on instructors 
system 
he ; A. T. & Santa Fe Railway......... 29 645 40 
Canadian Pacific Ry........-..+-- 3 353 School 5 


of whom 223 Shop 6 
are at Mon- 


; treal. 
Tbe rede (GOw = Sesale/ susie vain wiialais.egnie f8.5 3 95 School 2 
Shop 
eae see O Onde a eidssealatiatels abn oi 5 253 School 3 
Shop 3 (?) 
Grand Trunk Ry. System.......... 7 329 — 
rf N. Y. Central Lines..........2..+. 12 690 School 12 
Shop 12 
; 
r Witton PACIRG..< ciccsjars 2 mpayla oie 2700 —— 
; from all 
bs ’ branches of 
service. Ap- 
prox. 175 
apprentices 


included on 
entire sys- 
tem not all 
taking course 


1348 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION {June 27 


Discussion ON ‘‘ INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION ’’ (COMMITTEE RE- 
PORT), Boston, Mass., JUNE 27, 1912. 


Henry G. Stott: The work that we are doing in New York 
in connection with the companies which I represent, is a very 
modest one, but one which was forced upon us by very peculiar 
circumstances. We have men who are trained for switchboard 
operators in railroad work, who handle a large amount of power, 
and these men are brought in with practically only a common 
school education and are taught the ordinary methods of op- 
eration of switchboard apparatus, taking care of the apparatus, 
etc. We found after training up men in this way that they 
became highly expert, although they had apparently no theoreti- 
cal knowledge of what they were doing. However, a day of 
reckoning came to us when something went wrong with the op- 
eration or some trifling connection was broken, and these men 
failed lamentably. After a few experiences of that kind we 
discovered that no matter how well a man was able to carry on 
his routine duties, assuming everything was in first-class 
order, the least disturbance of that routine upset his whole idea. 
He was only an automaton. He could not think for himself. 
We thought we were using, perhaps, too poor a class of men. 
We tried a number of men trained at technical schools but it 
became very manifest that men who had received technical 
school education, while they met all the requirements of the case, 
could not be held there and we could not expect to hold them in 
work which soon becomes monotonous. We finally came to 
the conclusion that it would be necessary to establish a class 
to find out whether a man was an automaton or whether he had 
been really thinking and reading. 

The work started in this way, but we went on with it as we 
found there was some very good material in the men and it gave 
us an insight into men’s characters which we could not get in 
any other way. We started in the school by putting in the same 
kind of apparatus which men had to handle in their every-day 
work, with all the wiring and apparatus exposed. One of my 
assistants gave the instruction and began at the beginning of the 
electrical work, and found that the men took great interest in 
it. 

After trying this out for about a year we found that we were 
getting inside information in regard to the men’s characters, 
and their way of thinking, which was extremely valuable to us 
in promoting them. Promotions are now made from the bottom 
up. We then established the rule that unless a man took this 
course and passed the examination he could not be promoted. 
Nothing would be done to interfere with his present position, 
we announced, but he could not hope for promotion unless he 
took this course and passed the final examination. This im- 
mediately segregated these men into two classes; those who had 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1349 


no hope of promotion, who were indifferent, and those who were 
ambitious and wanted to get along. It has thus been the means 
of telling us which men were best fitted for promotion. 

The course is a simple one, a rudimentary course in mechanics 
and physics, then going on to show how current is generated, 
etc. We have a good laboratory there, showing how measure- 
ments are made, and calculations of various simple problems 
are made. In other words, a man is being taught to think and 
reason for himself, not simply to obey rules because he is told 
to doso. The whole endeavor in the department which I control 
is to avoid arbitrary rules, to encourage a man to act on his own 
judgment as far as possible. In this way we have achieved 
results by this simple course which | don’t think we could have 
reached in any other way. By encouraging these men to take 
courses more advanced in other institutions, we got a few into 
college, and I think they will make their mark in life. 

It has been the purpose of the company to find out the point 
of view of the man, whether he was simply there to get his pay 
at the end of the week, or whether he was ambitious enough to 
study and devote his time to progress. That has gone through 
a process of evolution, as I have said, so that it is a fairly good 
course of instruction now, and any man who leaves us is capable 
of performing good service in any company. 

J. P. Jackson: May I ask Mr. Stott where his school gets 
the men—what the class of men is that he gets? 

Henry G. Stott: The majority of men that we get have 
simply been through part of the grammar school; a few through 
high school, but as a rule with only grammar school education. 
We started in at one time to get men educated in technical 
schools, but naturally the monotony of the work, eight hours’ 
work, seven days in a week, with of course a day off now and 
then, was too great to expect a man to remain there who had spent 
time in getting a scientific education. They would stay a 
year or less and then leave us. So that practically all the men 
whom we put into these positions for operators are those who 
have had only grammar school educations. 

A. L. Williston: A great deal has been written or spoken 
from the public platform regarding the pressing necessity for 
industrial education, until it seems as though every thoughtful 
person must understand. And yet, as I work in this field, I find 
that we have not yet begun to make an impression on most 
persons of the seriousness of the need for this kind of work. As 
engineers, we are all interested in efficiency; and we are 1nter- 
ested in the conservation of natural resources; and we are inter- 
ested in all things that tend toward the greater economy in the 
utilization of all forces. As we commence to study actual 
conditions in almost all our large industries, we find waste of 
material, we find loss due to inefficiency in the use of power and 
machinery; but, gentlemen, as we study the conditions more 


closely we find that these losses are almost insignificant compared 


1350 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


with the greater human losses in almost all organizations and in 
all the industries. 

These human losses are of two kinds; first, those losses that 
arise from the mistakes, the errors, the blunders, the waste of 
time from not knowing what to do, or from not knowing how to do 
the work in hand in the right way. Such losses, as we all know, 
are great enough; but a second type of human losses is, I believe, 
still greater. This includes the waste of human energy that 
comes from having so often the wrong man in any particular job, 
having no natural aptitude or taste for it; and the waste that comes 
from having the great majority of men without any real vision 
of future possibilities that lie ahead of them, and, therefore, 
without ambition to do their work with the same spirit of energy 
and excellence as, when youths, they put into their play. It is 
the lack of ability to see and understand what is ahead, the lack 
of vision of the possibilities beyond the present that, more than 
all else, makes work uninteresting and makes workmen feel that 
it is not worth their while to do their best or cooperate cheerfully 
and loyally either with individual employers or with the corpora- 
tions that are furnishing them the opportunities. for work. 

If we could only estimate the value to society of having all 
the young people of the rising generation selected, or sorted in 
some way, so that the right persons would get into jobs for which 
they are fitted and for which they have some particular ability 
-and taste; and also could estimate the value of having all of these 
persons given the spirit that would make them feel that their 
work was worth putting their hearts into, and could add to this 
the value of special training that would enable them to do their 
work with skill instead of with indifference, I think we all would 
appreciate that, in comparison, all the other efforts that we have 
ned ar oe in the past toward increased efficiency would seem 
small. 

In discussing types of vocational schools and what vocational 
schools may accomplish, emphasis is too frequently placed upon 
the curriculum and upon details of methods of instruction. To 
my mind these are important, but there are at least two other 
things that are more fundamental and important. First, it is 
absolutely essential at the beginning to get the right boys to 
work on. If you are going to train young persons for a given 
industry, for example, to train them to be machinists or to be 
switchboard operators, or what not, it is of the utmost importance 
to select persons not only adapted to this kind of work, but also 
to select persons who, because of their natural environment, 
their previous life experience, their home traditions and surround- 
ings, will look forward to the kind of life and future to which the 
particular vocation will probably lead with enthusiasm, eagerness 
and interest. The first and all-important problem, therefore, 
for the vocational school to solve is to get the right fellow into 
the school at the beginning. This is not easy, in fact it is ex- 
tremely difficult; and there are very few precedents or guides to 


a ——<— 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1351 


go by. It is possible, however, as there are men who have had 
experience in selecting from the great mass of untrained people 
who are coming out of the elementary schools every year, those 
who will be, with training and experience, well adapted to differ- 
ent lines of work. Every capable factory superintendent employ- 
ing a large number of young persons and every experienced em- 
ployment director has some skill in this kind of selection. Men 
with such experience are needed in vocational schools to advise 
boys and girls regarding the future possibilities that are open to 
them, and to select from the applicants for admission those who 
by natural ability, home environment, etc., are well fitted to 
succeed in the several lines of work for which the school offers 
courses of instruction. 

The thing of next importance is that during the period when 
the boys and girls are in vocational schools, they should, in 
addition to the manual skill that is needed and the elementary 
technical knowledge that is necessary to enable them effectually to 
use such skill in their chosen vocation, receive the kind of in- 
dustrial discipline that will enable them to fit into their life work 
as efficiently as possible, and also that they should have their 
ambition stimulated by accurate and intelligent appreciation of 
the opportunities that will be likely to be open to them later. 
It is entirely possible to develop in school an atmosphere which will 
give just as good industrial discipline as any shop. It is possible 
to select tasks and occupations in the school which will cultivate 
a right attitude toward work, a spirit of co-operation with 
one’s employer and those other qualities of character which are 
essential for the best success in after life. And these things are 
more important, in my judgment, than are the questions of how 
to teach practical mathematics or elementary applied science, or 
of how many hours of shop practise of one kind or another to 
include in the curriculum. Yet, when we get together to discuss 
matters of industrial education, I find, too often, we spend our 
time on the latter questions of details regarding the curriculum 
and too seldom on the correct methods of getting the right boy 
to work with, or the best ways of developing in him the particular 
qualities of character and manhood that his chosen vocation re- 
quires. 

To some persons what I have just said may sound as if I were 
repeating what has always been the aim of all good schools. 
This, however, is far from the fact. Until very recently, and with 
very few exceptions, no schools have made aserious attempt to 
analyze the different vocations and to find out what particular 
qualities of character are essential to each, and no schools have 
seriously endeavored to develop the particular qualities that a 
chosen calling requires. It is this specialized kind of character- 
building which is the important function of the vocational school. 
There is in this country and abroad experience enough to prove 
beyond a possible doubt that this is not a visionary idea but is 


entirely practical if we set ourselves seriously to the task. 


1352 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


It is not necessary for me to take time to tell you gentlemen 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers or of the teach- 
ing profession—all of you earnest advocates of engineering 
education and of all the higher types of industrial schools—that 
mechanical skill is a good thing, or that technical training is a good 
thing, or that the spirit of open-mindedness, which makes one al- 
ways eager to search for truth and a better way, is a good thing. 
To youl have only to suggest that in the field of trade teaching, 
mechanical skill and elementary technical training adapted to 
the needs of the boys who may not have even a complete grammar 
school education, and the spirit of open-mindedness to new 
methods and new ideas, are as useful, in relative measure, as we 
ourselves have found them in our own particular field in the higher 
departments of education. 

Albert L. Rohrer: Tolstoi was very fond of describing labor 
as being under four heads, the first being that of muscular labor 
such as the ordinary laborer does, building roads and carrying 
the hod; the second class is that of the hand and wrist, done prin- 
cipally in factories; the third is that of the mind as shown by 
the work of the engineer; and the fourth is the labor of co- 
operation, that is, of all classes of labor working together, 
team work, as we are pleased to call it now. Until now both 
societies have been concerned from time to time in discussing the 
third class, the work of the engineer, the training of his mind, 
and the result of his work. Both societies, | say, because 
one society has discussed the education of the engineer, 
the man who is to do the thinking, while the other society has 
discussed his work; but it seems to me that the second 
class of labor, that of the hand and wrist, is of equal importance, 
and I am very glad indeed to see it given such an important part 
in the program. It well deserves and merits the joint session 
which is being held to consider it. 

Now the problem of training the hand and wrist has been at- 
tacked from a great many view-points. A great deal of good work 
is being done. The report of the committee just made indicates 
to you what has been accomplished, and I believe and agree with 
Professor Slichter that any man who takes the time to inquire ~ 
into the topic at all will become enthusiastic. And I think it is 
the duty of every engineer to get interested in this problem. 
He can serve his locality and his country to very great advantage 
by getting interested in the situation and assisting with his good 
judgment. 

Professor Jackson has asked me to describe briefly the work at 
Bridgeport which was referred to in the report of the committee. 
I spent a very interesting day there some time ago, and to any 
of you who are interested I think a few hours, even, spent in 
inspecting that school will serve to fill you with enthusiasm. 

The peculiarity about the Bridgeport school and the school 
at New Britain is that the two schools were started and are con- 
ducted by the state of Connecticut. The state alone is doing 


Oe ey ee OE ae it Cee ee 


we eee Ne Sem 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1353 


it, and the schools are doing some real constructive work. For 
instance, the school at Bridgeport, which I inspected, is located 
in a factory building. That gave me a very good impression 
at first sight. There is a certain atmosphere that prevails there 
which you could not possibly get in a school building. Four 
different branches have been taken up: that of metal working, 
or machinist; of carpentry and pattern making; of printing, 
and that of sewing. They have been particularly fortu- 
nate, I think, in selecting their teachers. They are all journey- 
men. They have attacked the problem, you see, from the stand- 
point of the practical man, and not from the schoolmaster’s 
idea, and I think in some cases where the problem has been at- 
tempted by schoolmasters alone that it has not worked out so 
satisfactorily. These men at Bridgeport are all enthusiastic. 
They also have two ladies who are in charge of the sewing division 
and they are really accomplishing things too. 

One feature impressed me very favorably in talking with the 
boys, and inquiring into what they had been doing. 

The boy does not usually know what he wants to do. Mr. 
Williston has referred to that. They are given an opportun- 
ity there to try themselves out, which is a very important 
thing. Several of the boys had tried two or three different 
trades. One boy thought he wanted to learn the printing trade. 
He did not work out well at that; he then thought perhaps he 
might want to be a carpenter. He entered that division for a 
time, but did not work out very satisfactorily there, and finally 
he landed in the machine shop, where he is doing very good work 
indeed. 

The work is all practical. They don’t do any show pieces 
which are put in a case or laid on a table. Everything that the 
boy does is put to practical use. The city of Bridgeport offers 
some very good opportunities for that work. The business of 
Bridgeport is very largely the metal trades, and it comprises 
a large number of small factories. Everything that they do in 
the way of carpentry and printing and sewing can be carried 
into any city in this country. The carpentry division took a 
contract a few months ago for building a $5,500 house. These 
boys, fourteen years or over, made their designs and have done 
all of the work. It seems to me a great inspiration for the boy 
because he sees that he is accomplishing things, and that is 
far better than making up forms and things of that sort. 

I don’t know that we can say that this Connecticut plant is 
the only solution of the problem, but it seems to me that they are 
working along the right lines and I was greatly impressed with the 
character of the work that they are doing. They are doing a 
great many interesting things. It is practical, every bit of it. 

Another feature that I should have mentioned earlier—any 


boy fourteen years or older can attend that school. I saw one 
“man there of some twenty-five or twenty-six years. And 


a great many boys go from the sixth grade into the 


1354 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


school and are doing very good work. It is possible that 
there should be a little closer affiliation between. the school and 
the municipality in which it is located, but I like the spirit they 
show. They don’t ask the boy if he comes from Bridgeport, 
or where he comes from. A great many boys come there from 
the farms outside, and they belong there as well as the boy from 
the city. It is certainly interesting, the way the plant has 
worked out, and I am very glad to call it to your attention this 
morning. If any of you can find time to stop off there I am sure 
you will be very much interested. 

J. P. Jackson: May I ask Mr. Rohrer whether, in the large 
number of young men that he employs, he has noticed any dis- 
tinct differences in the kind of men they are on account of the 
different kinds of education that they have? 

Albert L. Rohrer: I don’t know that I can answer that question. 
A great deal depends on the characteristics of the boy, how in- 
dustrious he is and how anxious he is to get on. We of course 
prefer boys—I am speaking now of the apprenticeship work— 
we prefer boys who have been through the eighth grade. But 
we have found boys who had dropped out before they were fairly 
started in the seventh grade and they got along just as well. It 
all depends on the characteristics. 

W. S. Franklin: I would like to ask whether the school is 
run the year round, or whether they have a vacation in the 
summer? 

Albert L. Rohrer: Fifty-two weeks in the year. And may 
I say a word more? Mixed up with this, they are doing several 
other things. They maintain a night school carrying along the 
same lines so that boys who are working in the city or elsewhere 
can come into the night school. They also have the continuation 
idea. A number of the small manufacturers in the city who have 
apprenticeship boys, but not in sufficient number to maintain 
a school for them, send their boys a half day each week and they 
receive instruction in shop work and mechanical work there 
You can see that they have a combination there where nothing 
stands in the way of the boy or man who really wants to improve 
his condition. 

W.S. Franklin: I would like to know whether the Bridgeport 
school attempts to reproduce the shop equipment in detail of 
the various industries for which they attempt to train the young 
man; or do they give the more elementary and fundamental 
phases of all industrial work? I ask that for a very practical 
reason. A number of us have been discussing in Bethlehem 
the question of starting a school of this kind, and the problem 
we are faced with at once is whether it is justifiable to reproduce 
at a large expense the machinery equipment in the existing shops, 
or whether we ought not to try to give the boy a beginning in 
his apprenticeship work so that he can afterward get the more 
detailed training in actual shops. I want to know simply, does 
the Bridgeport school have a complete shop equipment in the 
metal working industries? 


ee NR INV EAPE Gea eh NS NE YE A 


1912} DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1355 


Albert L. Rohrer: Very complete, including an assortment 
of lathes, milling machines, and one or two planers. Of course 
a boy fourteen years old has got to begin with fundamentals. 
But it is worked out in a very practical way. If they take, for 
instance, a repair job, a boy is sent to the place where the piece 
of machinery is located and he makes a pencil sketch. He 
comes back and makes a drawing of the part. Then a pattern 
is made and when the casting comes in the boy machines it and 
he is sent out to put the piece in position. 

Henry H. Norris: In a recent letter, Mr. Glenn, the super- 
intendent of the Bridgeport Trade School, states that the 
“day school runs nine hours a day, five days a week, four hours 
Saturday, fifty-two weeks a year, and that the length of course 
is 4800 hours, approximately two years, for boys.’ He also 
states that the manufacturers’ association has allowed two years 
on commercial apprenticeship for graduate machinists, exactly 
the time spent in school, so that the boys enter the trade of 
machinist with full credit for the time spent in this school applied 
to their period of apprenticeship. I also want to call attention 
to the ‘‘ Artisan,’’ a monthly publication of this school, entirely 
the work of the boys of the school. It gives a delightful picture 
of the school from the standpoint of the student. 

J. W. L. Hale: I think it is evident to you that within the 
last decade the subject of corporation industrial education has 
become significant. It is a matter generally of the conservation 
of mental as well as physical resources. As has been well said 
this morning, when the country’s resources become reduced it 
is necessary to turn more strongly toward development on the 
mental side. You can cite the example of Germany in this 
connection. Germany’s resources, compared with those of the 
United States, are poor, but particularly in the mechanical line 
Germany has endeavored to, and is, conserving mental resources. 
In the United States, within the last few years, considerable 
attention has been directed toward the subject of physical con- 
servation, and now we are discussing the question of mental 
conservation. One agency for mental conservation is the cor- 
poration school. The railroad school is one which I want to 
discuss for a few moments. 

The functions of this class of school are given in the Report 
as follows: 

“1. To improve the quality of mechanical skill available 
in shop work. 

“9° To make apprenticeship attractive to intelligent boys. 

“3 > To make it possible for the right kind of boys to rise 
from the ranks to positions as foremen and master mechanics.”’ 

As far as the speaker’s experience goes it seem that the third 
function is perhaps the most important. In order to make the 
third possible, the second must be carried out. That is, ap- 
prenticeship must be made attractive to intelligent boys. In 
the case of the Pennyslvania Railroad, which has recently taken 


1356 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


up the question of industrial training in shops, in the present 
stage of the work, it is impossible to hope to recruit the mechan- 
ical force in the shops entirely from apprentices. In Altoona 
alone there are approximately at the present time 12,000 em- 
ployees of the railroad. The apprentices number approximately 
three hundred. Therefore, my former statement, I think, is 


evident. However, it is highly desirable to develop the three ~ 


hundred for positions of responsibility in connection with the 
shop management. 

The growth of the railroad school in the last five years has 
been remarkable. There are at least eight representative roads 
through the Eastern and Middle States which are giving appren- 
tices well organized courses of instruction—l don’t like to say 
theoretical—but in underlying principles and in shop work as 
well, and they are getting results. The tables which are shown 
in the Report, given by permission of the Pennsylvania Railroad 
officials, are made up from data obtained in the spring of last 
year. However, they represent conditions at the present time. 
If we refer to these for a moment it might be well to note that the 
development thus far along the line of railroad schools has been 
confined to apprentices in mechanical departments, except in 
the case of the Union Pacific Railroad which is doing a general 
educational work by correspondence. They have an evening 
school at Omaha for apprentices, of, the Omaha shops only. 
They are doing a good work generally, but since the instruction 
is conducted by correspondence it has some disadvantages which 
are inherent in that method. 

So far as the organization is concerned, the shools giving in- 
struction to apprentices in the mechanical department are man- 
aged by the motive power officials. Instruction is given in both 
shop and school and includes elementary subjects from arith- 
metic to mechanics, and is presented in a severely practical way. 
The work of these schools is distinctly different from that of a 
good many other types of school from the fact that we have to 
change over the courses of the common school for specific trade 
purposes. This work opens up a new field in changing over from 
the general into more practical and definite subjects. The 
preparation of the boys that we get varies all the way from the 
sixth or seventh grade grammar to high school graduates. 

As has been well said, what we have to do, is to give 
the boys the proper degree of ambition, enthusiasm and 
interest. There is only one more point for which I will 
take your time, and that is to repeat the statement I made 
first, that we must conserve mental as well as physical energy 
and give attention to development and increase of efficiency on 
the educational as well as on the mechanical side. It is neces- 
sary to develop the human unit as well as the mechanical unit. 

W. S. Franklin: I happen to be quite familiar with 
a recent educational movement in the Pennsylvania Rail- 
road in the telegraph department, which is superintended by 


galled Bt 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1357 


Mr. Johnson, and the work that he is doing illustrates a 
matter which has been in my mind for a long time and which 
I had in mind when I asked the question of Mr. Rohrer as to the 
duplication of existing industrial equipment for educational 
purposes for schools. 

It seems to me, if I may preface what I want to say by a 
general statement, that one of the greatest problems we 
have in education at the present time is to make use 
of industrial and commercial establishments as schools to the 
extent that they are schools, and I think that they are schools 
to an extent which we scarcely realize. We have been going 
on for many years, detaching school work from practical work. 
And I think that one of the most serious faults of our present 
educational system is its detached character. We place a boy 
or girl in a seat, at a desk, with a book to study, requiring power 
of application they have not got and ideas that they have 
not got to understand. This seems to me to be the most un- 
fortunate thing that can possibly be imagined. . 

Now, what I want to say is this: if boys of fourteen years and 
older are able to earn money in industrial establishments by 
going in there against the law, or on the basis of perjury of their 
parents, why is it not possible to place them there under the 
supervision of the public school officer to see that they get a 
proper variety of work and to see that they work not to exceed 
a certain maximum number of hours? Why isn’t it possible 
to make use of the industrial value of that youngster at the same 
time that we are training him? 

Now what Mr. Johnson is doing is this: Mr. Johnson’s 
department in the Pennyslvania Railroad is the telegraph 
system, and his equipment, of course, is spread over the 
whole United States, pretty nearly; it is a distributed equip- 
ment which cannot be made use of for school purposes except it 
be organized as a part of a correspondence system, and Mr. 
Johnson is now establishing a correspondence school for all of 
the employees of this department. 

As I said a while ago a number of us in Bethlehem have been dis- 
cussing this question and the one thing that stares us in the face 
is this——what is the use of the town of Bethlehem buying a new 
lathe when there are about a million lathes in that town already? 
And what is the use of the town of Bethlehem doing a great many 
other things in useless duplication of existing devices which are 
already crying out for somebody to use them? We must study 
to some extent how to make use of existing commercial and in- 
dustrial establishments as schools to the extent that they are 
schools. 

And just one other thing I want to say: In order to realize 
my idea, let us devise, let us plan detached schools for babies, 
so that by the time our youngsters are fourteen years old they 
can do something that is commercially worth while in an actual 


establishment, instead of in detached establishments. 


1358 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


I am very glad to know, from what Mr. Rohrer says, that a 
nine-hour day with six days a week, or nine hours for five days 
and five hours on Saturday, is the rule in the Bridgeport school; 
for that means an approach to real discipline which is good 
TOusees 

A. L. Williston: I am somewhat familiar with the plan of 
the Fitchburg School. It is an adaptation to high-school con- 
ditions of the plan which Dean Snyder has worked out for uni- 
versity conditions in the city of Cincinnati. The boys enter the 
Fitchburg high school on very much the same terms as any other 
boys enter other high schools. They spend the first year in the 
high school giving their whole time to the school work inside the 
school building. During the second, third and fourth years, 
however, an arrangement is made with local manufacturers in 
Fitchburg by means of which the boys spend alternate weeks, one 
week in school and the next week in some shop in the city. 

There is an effort made to distribute the boys around in differ- 

ent shops during the different years of their four years’ course, 
so that each boy will get some experience in wood-working, some 
experience in foundry-work, and a larger amount of experience 
in machine shop practise. For some boys the plan is working 
admirably, especially for those who are fortunate in getting into 
shops where the conditions are such that they have a chance to 
work on a variety of tools and to get intelligent answers to ques- 
tions regarding how this work should be done or how that machine 
should be operated. 
_ Without doubt, there is in all the shops the endeavor to treat 
the boys as well as possible; and the school authorities endeavor 
to carefully supervise them in the commercial shops, so that all 
is being done in that direction that can be done. But neverthe- 
less, I think this statement is entirely fair: Many of the persons 
who provide places in their works for these “ part-time ”’ boys 
find it extremely difficult so to organize their shops as to make it 
possible for each boy to get the variety of work and the change 
of occupation that he ought to have for his most rapid advance- 
ment. The conditions in some of the shops make it necessary 
for a boy to do things which he already knows how to do, and to 
continue to do this week after week, wasting a good deal of his 
time. In other shops the atmosphere is not stimulating either 
to the boy’s intelligence or his ambition, and he does not learn 
from the workmen around him the spirit of co-operation. 

On the whole, however, I think the plan is working well, and 
I believe that the boys who are taking the part-time course are 
getting a far better industrial training than they could get with 
the facilities in Fitchburg in any other way; but I don’t think 
that it is by any means demonstrated that this is for all places 
the best way. The State Board of Education in Massachusetts 
recognizes the Fitchburg plan as one of the ways to give industrial 
education, but it has also encouraged in other cities, in Worcester, 
New Bedford and elsewhere, the establishment of schools of very 


———- 


, 
‘ 
q 
4 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1359 


much the type of the Bridgeport school which Mr. Rohrer 
described, in which the boys are kept all of the ‘time in an atmos- 
phere that is, I believe, just as honestly industrial as is the at- 
mosphere that the apprentice boy finds in the average commercial 
shop. ‘This enables the school to keep complete control over the 
situation at all times, and the boy to be transferred from machine 
to machine, or from department to department, as is necessary 
for his best advancement. 

The course of school instruction in the part-time school at 
Fitchburg is modified somewhat from the usual high school course 
in order to make it better fit the needs of these boys who are 
spending one-half of their time in commercial shops. This 
modification or adaptation of the school instruction to make it 
dovetail in with the shop practise and fit the special needs of these 
boys, is growing, but as yet it has not been developed as far as 
I believe the authorities in charge of that school feel is desirable. 
If further information is desired, I shall be glad to answer any 
questions which you gentlemen may desire to ask. 

W.I. Slichter: The states of Massachusetts, Maine and 
Wisconsin provide that this arrangement may be carried out and 
it is carried out in a number of instances, particularly in Massa- 
chusetts. In the report of your committee you will find a 
definition of the “ part-time school ’’ and this statement in the 
body of the recommendations: : 

“Tn the opinion of this committee, the feature of the Massa- 
chusetts and Wisconsin laws which causes them to excel those 
of all other states, is the provision that in order for a vocational 
school to receive state aid it must receive the state’s approval of 
many of its important features, such as courses, teachers, build- 
ings, methods, time and accounts. This clause is used as an 
inducement to encourage the local boards to consult with the 
proper representative of the state board from the beginning of 
the organization of the school, rather than await the exact 
period when money is requested of the State. T he State board 
includes an assistant superintendent who has made a special 
study of the subject of vocational training, and, as members of 
the board, are private citizens representing the points of view 
of employers and employees.” 

William McClellan: It was my privilege for several years to 
be in manual training school work as a teacher, and later to be 
connected with engineering education in one of our larger insti- 
tutions. With all due respect to those who favor industrial edu- 
cation, it ought to be recognized that, so far, it has been framed 
and worked out rather from the standpoint of the corporation 
than from the standpoint of the individual. 

Proof of this has been given this morning. For example, Mr. 
Stott said that he was forced into it, and yet Mr. Stott has proved 
that his thought and aim in every respect are philanthropic. 
The apprentice system has failed and corporations have been 
driven to take up some other means for getting their industrial 


workers. 


1360 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION . [June 27 


Again, when Mr. Williston spoke this morning of ambition, 
and the cultivation of it, it occurred to me that the necessary 
condition to cultivate it and to have it grow and accumulate is 
that in which there shall be not only an inlet but also an outlet. 

The man whom you expect to be an ambitious man should 
never find himself or be set in a blind alley. I am impressed in 
this discussion today with the distinction which is apparently 
made between the so-called vocational school and the so-called 
professional school. At the beginning we seem to be dividing 
men arbitrarily between those who must go into vocations and 
those who must go into professions. This leads me to think 
that correlation is really what we must strive for. 

Those of you who remember Plato’s “‘ Republic ”’ recall that a 
scheme was laid out by him in which men dropped out along the 
road. As their mental abilities were discovered by the state, 
they were arbitrarily side-tracked here and there, and there was 
a gradation of activities until, at the top, was government in its 
noblest sense. 

I have never framed a definition of the word “ professional ”’ 
as applied to professional schools, but it has seemed to me that 
the difference between a profession and a vocation is that as 
you deal more with the human element you get into what we 
designate ‘“‘ professional work.’’ That is the reason today, I 
think, that the occupations of the clergyman, the lawyer, and 
the physician are regarded as professions. We hear so many 
ask why engineering does not stand with the professions, and I 
believe that the answer is that we have not yet begun to deal 
sufficiently with the human element. 

I find, however, in our professional schools, so-called, that we 
are turning out four or five classes of men. We turn out the mere 
operative, the man who for all his life must stand at the drawing 
board, machine, or instrument and this is as far as he can get. 
Then we have the engineer business man. He is not an engineer 
in the true sense. Then we have the genuine engineer who 
really designs and constructs on original lines. And, finally, we 
have, from the same course of study, a type of man—for which I 
am really indebted to Professor Bedell for a name—the “ in- 
dustrial physicist’ who does not actively get into engineering 
but who applies science. 

Now, gentlemen, these classes are needed and we must arrange 
for their development. We must start with the boys and corre- 
late all these agencies for education in such a way that men 
will find themselves by natural selection. We cannot select 
them at the beginning. We have no business to assume that 
there is a certain class of vocationalists here and a certain class 
of professionals there when they are thirteen or fourteen years of 
age. We must provide means in our system for professional, 
industrial, vocational and what-not education in proper relation, 
so that the workers will drop into vocations and professions for 
which they are particularly adapted. 


> 


PLATE LXXI 
Pv, ha (ee 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


CLASS IN CARPENTRY AT PRATT INSTITUTE [SHELDON] 


[SHELDON] 


TANNING LEATHER AT PRATT INSTITUTE 


PLATE LXXIl 
Asal epee Ee 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


A wen’ 
goa te 


[SITELDON] 


[SHELDON] 


ENGINE ROOM At STUYVESANT HIGH SCHOOL 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1361 


In line with that, let me make one suggestion which I think I 
have made several times before, and that is, that as an engineer 
I do wish that,as far as professional and educational interests 
are concerned, we could get rid of the use of adjectives. 

_Yesterday President Dunn spoke, I think, of some thirty-four 
different kinds of engineers and of the fact that when we want to 
do anything in this country for engineers, we have to get joint 
committees for pretty nearly every one of the thirty-four organ- 
izations. Is it any wonder that we do not make more progress? 
I wish that the colleges would stop using the adjectives for the 
mere graduates, or bachelors, and call them graduates in engineer- 
ing. Later, let them grow into engineers—civil, sanitary, 
mechanical, electrical, bridge, industrial, and so on. 

Professor Diemer: Right in line with what the previous 
speaker has said I would like to call attention to a charting of 
industrial education along Plato’s line, only modernized, by 
Dean Pearson of the Tuck School of Finance in Dartmouth Col- 
lege. In a little book entitled ‘‘ Industrial Education ”’ he has 
outlined a chart in which the central path shows the continuous 
flow of the common school education, and he recommends there 
a branching off on one side or another, particularly the establish- 
ment of such systems of education in which a child can be 
branched off at any stage, we will say, after the seventh or eighth 
grade, and made to receive certain lines of education which will 
insure his becoming a better citizen in the line in which he is 
forced to go. 

For instance, we have here the continuation school after the 
seventh and eighth grade, and we advocate that the common 
school system should include constantly certain principles of 
fundamental work, we will say, in science or mechanics, simpli- 
fying those terms as will best suit, or manual arts, arts and crafts, 
which are not intended to be in any sense of the word educational, 
but general culture. Now we should supplement that common 
school, Dean Pearson says, by certain systems of education on 
the one side branching off for the men who have more ability 
with handicraft, and on the other side for those who have ability 
in accounting and clerical work. So that we branch off on the 
seventh or eighth year to provide a system of education which 
will better them in their lives. Then we must provide for trade 
schools or for industrial schools which will take the place of high 
schools which are intended as a system flowing into the college. 
Then he advocates in the college, also, a certain differentiated 
technical college course. He would have this college course 
divided, each side containing a predominancy of management, 
but the one side of a predominancy of the scientific technique 
and the other of instruction in accounting and financial technique. 
I simply call attention to that suggestion of Dean Pearson as 
carrying out a little further the idea of the previous speaker. 

Comfort A. Adams: I wish to endorse most heartily what Mr. 
McClellan has said, since it strikes at the very root of the prob- 


1362 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27° 


lem. This problem is not solved when we have provided in- 
dustrial education for those who, by accident of birth, cannot 
afford anything else, although that is doubtless a step in the 
right direction; the problem is not solved when we say to at 
least 80 per cent of our boys—‘‘ You may attain to the position 
of high grade mechanic but may never gain admission to the 
professional fields, no matter how much better your native tal- 
ents may be adapted to professional work.” 

At the same time, we are forcing through our technical profes- 
sional schools many young men who are there chiefly because their 
parents can afford to give them the higher education and not be- 
cause they are able to profit by it in any marked degree. Jamnot 
forgetting the numerous scholarships, evening schools, and other 
aids to bright boys of slender purse, but I think you will find on 
closer scrutiny that the beneficiaries of these various aids come in 
large part from the financial upper 10, or at outside, 20 per cent of 
the population. Neither am I overlooking the very exceptional 
men who cannot be kept down by any lack of opportunity; they 
make their own opportunities. If we were to base our educa- 
tional system solely on the needs of this exceedingly small group, 
our problem would disappear. 

We thus have a social order in which education beyond the 
rudiments is so restricted that we are practically wasting a large 
part of our raw material, in so far as the assorting of the men for 
the various occupations and professions is based largely upon 
accident of birth rather than upon real fitness; upon the extent 
of the parent’s pocketbook rather than that of the child’s intel- 
lect. 

The only factor which should control the opportunity for an 
education is the relative ability to profit by it, and while this may 
seem a millenial ideal to many, our talk of ‘‘ equal opportunity ” 
is hypocritical until we have definitely set ourselves the task of 
realizing that ideal. 

We talk much of efficiency in our engineering work, but we are 
apt to overlook these very vital considerations which affect so 
tremendously the efficiency of the whole social organism of which 
we, as individuals, are very small parts. 

I realize fully how far such questions reach, and that they in- 
volve the consideration of many subjects and problems neither 
primarily educational nor engineering in their nature, but they 
are problems which we as citizens must face, and many of which 
would be vastly simplified by the application of engineering 
methods. 

Therefore, while we are lending our cordial assistance to the 
promotion of the numerous extensions of our educational system, 
let us not lose sight of the ideal of ‘‘ equal opportunity ”’; let us 
work towards that ideal, first, as “‘ citizens of no mean country ” 
and second, as members of no mean profession. 

F. C. Caldwell: I am glad to say that in Ohio we 
are making a good start along this line of industrial educa- 
tion. Besides the general application of manual training to the 


— 


— 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1363 


grammar schools, we have manual training high schools in the 
larger towns and in Columbus, at least, they are also experi- 
menting with the alternate week cooperative plan in_connec- 
tion with manufacturing companies. I agree with Professor 
Williston that this is something which should be regarded as an 
experiment. It is certainly a good thing for some cases and 
always much better than nothing. But that it is better in the 
case where a man is able to put all his time into his school work 
is by no means demonstrated. 

This educational attitude, which the employers of labor form- 
ing the manufacturing companies are coming to adopt toward 
their employees, is exceedingly promising in one direction which 
has not been mentioned. When the personal employer was 
superseded by the corporation with its officers there was a great 
loss in the personal and friendly relationship with the employee. 
I suppose a good many here, like myself, have been through the 
shops and they probably found, unless under unusually favorable 
conditions, that the employees felt they were simply parts of a 
big machine, that their personality was of no consequence; that 
the corporation employed them to do a job and that it was a mat- 
ter of absolute indifference to the employer whether they stayed 
or went, whether they advanced or not. That there has often 
been some justification for this feeling cannot be questioned. It 
seems to me that what you might call the ‘‘ educational attitude ”’ 
of the corporation toward the employee may do something to 
fill the place of the old friendly relationship between the personal 
employer and the employee. 

One other point that one of the recent speakers brought out 
ought to be emphasized, and that is, that whatever we do in the 
way of industrial education for the masses should always have 
in view the possibility of carrying a man further, of giving him 
the very best education that any one can have. I do not like the 
idea that when a man selects the manual training high school or 
vocational school, he is thereby shunted off from the natural 
course of advancement into the university. We must find some 
way by which a man who comes to the vocational school and 
thereby develops and shows the qualities which will fit him for a 
position as an engineer should have the opportunity to go right 
on up to the top. 

M. J. McGowan, Jr: I-would like to ask a question with refer- 
ence to the relation of the engineering society to the state boards 
of education in the different states of the United States. Does 
this society cooperate in every state with the state board of 
education, to teach particularly the line of electricity? I ask it 
for this reason. In the state where I come from, New Jersey, 
the doctors are interested in the advancement of instruction in 
their line, the agriculturist is the same way, and all the different 
professions have colleges which teach their particular work. But 
T have never heard of anybody being interested through the state 
board of education to take up the technical courses in the schools 
of the state as to this line. Now having been connected with 


1364 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION [June 27 


the state government, I took great interest in watching 
the different schools, the different societies and professions 
which are interested, but at no time in the state of 
New Jersey have I seen anybody in the electrical line in- 
terested to sce that the scholar or student should get. the 
preliminary education which would bring him in touch with 
this particular line or profession. I think this is a very impor- 
tant point and I think this society, in this joint session, 
should arrange, in all states, committees who would wait on the 
state boards of education and show them that the electrical 
field today is one of the greatest and most promising of any pro- 
fession that has ever been known. In the city from which I 
come, Newark, New Jersey, I have installed in one school a 
switchboard apparatus, for technical training in the electrical 
field. It was the first time it had ever been done in this twentieth 
century. That is due to lack of encouragement to the state 
board to show that this particular line needs taking care of. 
You will notice that all these technical schools are situated 
nearby the different electrical industries. That shows, in my 
mind, that those industries are greatly interested in the par- 
ticular schools for their own convenience, for which I do not 
blame any man or any corporation. They further their own 
interests. We must try to eliminate if we possibly can any 
stated line of study being taught or the following of any particu- 
lar line of material or peculiar workmanship. Let the teacher 
be interested generally and go through it all from a to z. Don’t 
lay any stress on any company’s manufacture in any school. 
And I trust that in this way we shall undertake to cooper- 
ate with the heads of education in the different states. Go to the 
governor and ask him if he will appoint some representative 
from the engineering society or from this joint convention to 
attend to that matter, and by doing that you will put the re- 
sponsibility for the teaching of electrical science in the public 
schools of the different states up to the A. I. E. E. to see that the 
teaching will be right. 

W.G. Raymond: The time has almost arrived when we shall 
have to ask Professor Jackson to close the discussion, but the chair 
cannot forego this opportunity of relieving his mind of something 
which, perhaps, you will consider a heresy. You have been dis- 
cussing principally this morning the details of industrial educa- 
tion, and sometimes it is necessary to plan the details before we 
plan the general structure, but it is always necessary to provide 
the means before the general structure can be built. I do not 
know whether you all realize it, although you all doubtless 
know, that as far back as 1862, a plan was outlined and provision 
was made by the Federal Congress for putting us in a position 
that we are not now in. This committee says that we rank be- 
hind European nations in this matter of industrial education, but 
if it had not been that the funds derived from the act of 1862 
have been almost universally misapplied this country would not 
now be in that position. It makes no difference whether the 


; 
7 
2 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1365 


colleges of mechanic arts established under that act were 
separate institutions or combined with state universities, the 
money has never been used for the development of mechanic 
arts. I think without exception there has been no school of 
mechanic arts created in any state under that act which pro- 
vided distinctly for schools of agriculture and schools of mechanic 
arts. Dean Jackson will now close. 

J.P. Jackson: I suppose from the remarks made by Professor 
Raymond that he is not familiar with the basis of organization 
of the Land Grant Colleges. The measure passed by Congress 
in 1862, in regard to the establishment of these useful institu- 
tions, is as follows: 

“The leading object shall be, without excluding other scien- 
tific and classical studies, and including military tactics, to teach 
such branches of learning as are related to agriculture and the 
mechanic arts, in such a manner as the Legislatures of the States 
may prescribe, in order to promote the liberal and practical edu- 
cation of the industrial classes in the several pursuits and pro- 
fessions of life.” This includes everything, I believe, that is 
being taught by the great bulk of our State and United States 
supported, or, to use the official title, Land Grant institutions. 
These institutions have always been alive and vigorous, have 
been leaders of educational thought along the applications of 
science, and have proved of prime usefulness to the nation. 

W. G. Raymond: I agree with you. 

J. P. Jackson: If that is the case, I need say no more on that 
subject. I think there is a great deal in what Mr. McGowan 
said; his plea is similar to that contained in this morning’s report 
by the educational committee. It is a necessary preliminary to 
have such discussion as we have had among engineers, in 
order to arouse sufficient interest to do what Mr. McGowan has 
asked. His plea was made with reference to a specific act. Let 
me broaden it. If each one of the eleven thousand members of 
these two societies will use his influence in his local community, 
to get in touch with the school authorities—get himself appointed 
to some committee or otherwise place himself where he can be of 
service—he can, or the eleven thousand members can, do much to 
raise the efficiency, improve the happiness, and remove the dis- 
content that seems to be growing among the hand laborers of 
this nation. If the TRANSACTIONS containing the discussion of 
this morning persuade only five hundred of the eleven thousand 
members scattered out over the country, who are now inactive in 
educational matters, to engage in the movement under discus- 
sion, this meeting will have been well worth while. It will have 
been the incentive to cause men of intelligence in our industries 
to become more active in doing what Mr. McGowan suggests; 
that is, going actively and practically into the machinery of the 
state to help develop our people in a proper manner. I say to 
the electrical convention here assembled and to the American 


‘Institute as a whole, that I believe there is no other way in which 


the electrical industries can be so rapidly improved, as by prop- 


1366 INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION (June 27 


erly solving this very question, which we are discussing this 
morning, with reference to producing the greatest efficiency in 
our young people. There is apparently no specific answer re- 
quired to any of the other discussions of this morning, as the 
papers presented were really not under discussion, but rather the 
general problem. 

Harry Barker (communicated after adjournment): Professor 
Williston has pointed out the vital necessity of securing the 
proper boys for the various vocational school courses and the diffi- 
culty that such schools have in selecting from the candidates 
presented. 

It ought not to be necessary for the vocational school instruct- 
ors to have to step out of their true sphere to do this work. 
They cannot hope to have the available time or the data and 
information at hand to make the wisest selections. They need 
not perform this unwilling function if the cooperation which Mr. 
McClellan and others have spoken of, is secured with the pres- 
ent public school systems. The organization of vocational 
guidance based on the boy’s manifest aptitude, on his environ- 
ment and heredity, and based somewhat on a psychological 
study also, has advanced to such a stage that it is a necessary 
link between the existing graded schools and vocational courses. 
The work has risen to its highest development, so far, in voca- 
tional bureas such as found in Boston. Trained and experienced 
men now find out what work or study the various pupils seem 
best fitted for and how far they seem capable of progressing; the 
counselors advise what paths pupils may well follow and what ends 
they should aspire to, and finally keep track of them for a greater 
or less number of years, to see that they do not stagnate either 
from inherent tendency or outside influence. 

While this work has been carried out to the greatest extent 
with bureau organization, there is much of the work within 
the ability of the grammar and high-school teachers and even 
such modest beginnings are better than waiting for the organ- 
ization of a completely equipped bureau. Indeed the largest 
success will be greatly hastened by an early start. This func- 
tion, moreover, is one very properly tied in with the work of the 
local superintendent of schools, acting as the general adviser 
of other teachers who are striving to make some safe beginnings 
at vocational guidance, and as the collector of information about 
local industries and opportunities. 

There is not time here to describe the work in detail; it can be 
studied, however, by those interested. In reaching out for co- 
operation with state boards and local educational authorities, 
this is a chance for immediate effort and practical benefits, not 
to be neglected. Where there is a vocational school, it is a neces- 
sity for efficient work; where there are no vocational courses, it is 
of the greatest possible good in preventing misfits. Once under- 
taken, it will lead logically to such vocational courses as are best 
suited to the local situation. 


Wee, | 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 27, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


THE WIRING OF LARGE BUILDINGS FOR 
TELEPHONE SERVICE 


BY FREDERICK L. RHODES 


In modern office buildings, hotels and apartment houses large 
numbers of telephones are required. It would be inconvenient 
and impracticable to run a pair of wires through one of these 
large buildings each time a telephone is installed, in order to 
establish connection with the outside wire plant of the telephone 
system, as is ordinarily done when telephones are installed in 
residences or small business buildings. To overcome this diffi- 
culty, when the plans are prepared for an office building, hotel 
or apartment house, a forecast should be made of the probable 
future requirements of the building as a whole for telephone 
service, and facilities provided for a certain amount of cabling 
with the necessary terminals and subsidiary wiring. All large 
cities contain many buildings that are cabled and wired for tele- 
phone service according to a comprehensive plan, and, of the 
smaller places, there are few that do not have some buildings of a 
character requiring more or less provision of this kind. 

Building Plans Should Include Provision for Telephone Wiring. 
Owing to the type of building construction generally employed, 
and the large number of telephones to be served, unless suitable 
facilities are provided in advance for accommodating the cables 
and wires, and for running them through the walls and floors, 
the work will either be unsightly in spite of all precautions to 
the contrary, or expensive and costly alterations will be 
required after the completion of the building to enable the wires 
to be effectively concealed. 

It is therefore of prime importance to owners and architects 
that, in preparing plans and specifications for office buildings, 

1367 


1368 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING [June 27 


hotels or apartment houses, suitable arrangements should be 
made for such telephone wiring and terminal boxes as the 
character and use of the building will demand. As every large 
building to a certain extent presents problems of its own, advan- 
tageous and economical arrangements can frequently be sug- 
gested by those who are specially familiar with work of this 
kind. It is to the advantage of telephone companies as well as 
building owners to have adequate facilities provided for the 
cables and wires, and telephone companies are glad to place 
their experience freely at the disposal of those who are planning 
the erection of buildings that require special provisions to be 
made. It is now the general custom for architects to send for 
the telephone company’s experts in these matters to give them 
such information as they need to plan this work in the best way. 

Classification of Buildings. In the following pages are des- 
cribed the general methods that have proved satisfactory for 
wiring buildings for telephone service. From this standpoint 
buildings may be divided into two classes: 

1. Office and loft buildings. 

2. Hotels and apartment houses. 

The conditions that make a broad distinction between the 
two classes are these: In office and loft buildings the telephones 
do not remain fixed either in number or location for any extended 
period, varying with the requirements of the individual tenants, 
who will use more or less of the telephone service according to 
their respective kinds of business. In hotels and apartment 
houses the number of telephones is fairly definitely fixed, being 
almost invariably one for each room in a hotel and one or two 
for each apartment in an apartment house. 

The office or loft building requires a permanent cable system 
supplemented by a multitude of branches consisting of pairs 
of wires whose function it is to connect the individual telephones 
or private branch exchange switchboards with the permanent 
cable system. This permanent backbone of cable extends upward 
from the basement, branching out and terminating at suitable 
distributing points on the several floors. These distributing 
points or cable terminals must be sufficiently numerous and so 
located that the changing requirements of the tenants can readily 
be met by running individual pairs of wires as needed to connect 
the telephones with these terminals. 

It is, therefore, apparent that an office building must have a 
more comprehensive and flexible system of wiring than a hotel 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 1369 


or apartment house on account of the different character of the 
telephone service required. In the office building only a portion 
of the wiring system is permanent. In a hotel or apartment 
house practically all of the wiring is permanent. 


OFFICE BUILDINGS 


General Scheme of Wiring. In large office buildings one or 
more cables from the nearest telephone central office are brought 
to some convenient point, usually in the basement of the building. 
At this point the house cable system begins. A main terminal 
box (Fig. 1) is furnished and placed by the telephone company 
at this point so that cross-connections can be made as required 
between pairs in the house cables and pairs in the central office 
cables. 

These main terminal boxes in the case of large buildings are 
necessarily somewhat bulky and the question of the size of the 
box that will be needed in any particular case may well be taken 
up with the telephone company by the architect or builder in 
order that sufficient space for it can be provided in a convenient 
and appropriate location at the foot of the riser shaft or conduit, 
as the case may be. A dry, clean and accessible place should be 
selected. In some sections of the country, where buildings are 
in localities subject to floods, it will be well to provide space 
above the basement so that the telephone service will not be 
interrupted due to water getting into the basement. 

From the main terminal box one or more riser cables are run 
to the top of the building. The riser cables gradually diminish 
in size as they extend up through the building. From the riser 
cables, subsidiary or branch cables of proper size are taken to 
distributing centers on the several floors. The locations of these 
centers should be chosen so as to admit of the shortest practicable 
wire runs to the offices, without making objectionable work 
necessary to conceal the wires. 

Each subsidiary cable ends in a subsidiary terminal box, the 
purpose of which is to enable connections to be made readily 
between the cable and the individual pairs of wires that are run 
to each telephone. These subsidiary terminal boxes, when placed 
by the telephone company, are fastened against the walls of 
corridors near the ceiling and constitute the ends of the permanent 
wire system. Not infrequently the owner of the building desires 
to own the subsidiary terminal boxes in order that he may provide 
recesses for these boxes, and small doors to match the trim of 


1370 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING June 27 


the building so that the boxes will be concealed from view. 
Where the boxes are built into the walls it is important that they 
should be of ample capacity,on account of the trouble andexpense 
that would result if they should prove inadequate and have to 
be replaced. It is customary to allow a greater margin for 
growth where the boxes are built in than where they are merely 


WIRES TO 
TELEPHONES 


FLOOR CABLE 


it}-— ~ BRANCH 
Zz 
M85 


Wy eee, 
CROSS SECTION OF 
TERMINAL WITH WIRING 
REMOVED 


rs 
NY 


FRONT ELEVATION WITH DOOR 
OPEN TO SHOW THF WIRING 


TERMINAL RECESSED IN WALL TERMINAL NOT RECESSED 
rT) Es i 


Lo 


ELEVATION 


pe 
i 
q 
i 
1 
H 


f 
fo 


— 


packed ELEVATION LONGITUDINAL 
LONGITUDINAL SECTION 
SECTION 


Fic. 2—SuBSIDIARY TERMINAL Box—15 PAIRS. 


fastened against the wall. Where a conduit system has been 
installed on the various floors for the purpose of distributing 
wires to each office, the subsidiary terminals are located at the 
centers of the conduit system. Fig. 2 shows a subsidiary ter- 
minal box, recessed in a corridor wall, under the molding, and 
also a subsidiary box placed against the wall under the molding. 


PLATE LXXIll 


Aginen Es 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Seeeenece 


PP we) ee 


[RHODES] 


x, CAPACITY FOR TERMINATING 
AIRS OF WIRES 


NAL Bo 
A |p 


The sliding door is removed to show the cross-connecting wires between pairs in the feeder 


MAIN TERMI 


Fic, 1— 


31 


cable and the house cable. 


PLATE LXXIV 
ALI. ELE. 
VOL, XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 5—PERSPECTIVE VIEW OF TERMINAL BUILDINGS, [RHODES 
New York City. 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 1371 


Forecasting the Number of Telephones. In forecasting the num- 
ber of telephones that will probably be required in an office 
or loft building, the principal factors to be taken into account are 
the ‘‘ renting floor area’”’ of the building and the character of 
the business district in which it is situated, with special reference 
to its proximity to railway terminals, important streets and busi- 
ness centers. 

Buildings in the financial district of a city ordinarily demand 
more telephones per unit of floor area than do buildings located 
in the commercial districts. In computing the ‘ renting floor 
area,’ only the office floor space is considered; hallways, elevator 
shafts and light wells are omitted. In all cases a safe margin 
for growth must be allowed. The following table shows rough 
average figures for telephonic density in office and loft buildings, 
based on a large number of cases: 


Pairs of telephone wires 
Kind of building Character of district per 1000 sq. ft. 
of renting area 


Office Financial 4 tod 
Office Commercial 24 to 3} 
Loft |_— Commercial Hi isa 


Size of Riser Cables. By basing the size of the riser cables 
on the renting area and the expected telephonic density as influ- 
enced by the character of the locality (checking this by a study 
of the probable number of offices and the requirements of pro- 
spective tenants), the cable system for any office or loft building 
may be planned with reasonable assurance that provision will 
be made for the maximum service required. On account of 
the requirements for battery feed wires and ringing current for 
private branch exchanges, the riser cables necessarily contain 
more pairs than do the cables that run from the building to 
the telephone central office. 

Shafts or Conduits for Riser Cables. In buildings over 12 
stories in height or in buildings of less height, where large riser 
cables are required, it is preferable to place the riser cables in 
suitable shafts rather than in conduits, as the advantage of 
having the cable protected by conduits is offset by the difficulty 
of installing and properly fastening the large cables in the con- 
duits and making large complicated splices in the junction boxes 
that are required with a conduit system. 


1372 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING [June 27 


If properly installed, a conduit system is the best equipment 
for buildings less than 12 stories in height where small cables 
are to be placed, as the cables are effectually protected against 
injury. It is important, however, to remember that the success 
of a conduit system for installing vertical cables depends entirely 
on a perfect installation. The conduits must be of proper size 
and if possible free from bends. If bends are absolutely neces- 
sary, they should be made with a radius not less than three feet. 
The junction boxes at splicing points must be at least two feet 
square and the conduits must enter the boxes adjacent to a side 
in order that the cable may be bent and placed in a horizontal 
position for splicing. 

Cable Shafts. Cable shafts should extend from the basement 
of the building to the top floor and should be easily accessible 
at each floor for the placing and splicing of the cables. Usually 
the shaft can best be located in a corridor partition, or in the 
wall of some public space leading out from the corridor, so that 
an opening can be made into the shaft from the corridor and 
covered with removable paneling or doors. 

It is desirable to have a separate shaft for telephone cables 
and wires, as the placing of steam, water or gas pipes and light 
and power wires in the same shaft with the telephone cables 
renders the latter liable to injuries that may result in inter- 
rupting the telephone service. 

Underground Cable Entrance to Building. Repairing base- 
ment walls and their waterproofing, due to the necessity for 
cutting through them, can be avoided if architects will specify 
a three-inch iron pipe sleeve for each ultimate underground cable 
entering the building, these sleeves extending through the wall 
at the point of entrance. The location of the point of entrance 
should be taken up with the telephone company in order that it 
may suitably fit in with the underground conduit system outside 
the building. 

Junction Boxes. Riser cables ordinarily diminish in size as 
they go up the building. When a building is provided with 
conduits for both riser and subsidiary cables the conduit may 
diminish in size in the vertical section in the same relative manner 
as it is proposed to diminish the riser cable. Where a separate 
conduit is installed for each subsidiary cable a splice is required. 
between the subsidiary and the main cable and a junction box 
is required wherever one of these splices must occur. These 
boxes should be approximately 24 inches square by five inches 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 1373 


deep (inside dimensions) in order to enable the splices to be 
properly made and stowed away. In a system of this kind the 
subsidiary cables and the sections of the riser cable between 
floors are run separately and spliced in the junction boxes. | 

Terminal Boxes. The terminal boxes in which the subsidiary 
cables end must be large enough to accommodate the necessary 
connecting blocks. In most cases, boxes 18 inches square by 
five inches deep (inside dimensions) are sufficiently large. These 
boxes are installed on each floor as near the wiring center as 
possible, and where there is a conduit system on the floor, 
they are connected with each office by a 5/8-inch or 3/4-inch 
conduit which ends in the office at an outlet located either at the 
baseboard or the molding. Outlets should be Jocated at the 
baseboard when it is of wood. If the baseboard is of metal or 
marble the outlet should be located at the molding. 

In many cases owners of buildings do not desire to install 
conduits from the subsidiary boxes on each floor to every office. 
By providing suitable moldings, properly arranged to carry the 
individual pairs between the subsidiary boxes and the offices, 
wiring that is practically concealed can be done without the 
expense of conduits, and as the wiring is permanent only as 
far as the subsidiary boxes, the system is flexible enough to allow 
a suitable distribution of cable wires among the various rooms on 
a floor. 

Where this plan of wiring is employed the subsidiary boxes 
may be made smaller than where individual conduits to the 
rooms are installed. The following table shows the outside 
dimensions of the present standard sizes of subsidiary boxes: 


| Number of pairs of wires Height of box in | Width of boxin | Depth of box in 
terminated in box inches | inches inches 
Regular Extra | 
10 uh | 125 6% 2% 
15 1 | 16 64 25 
20 1 21 62 24 
30 2 16 12 2% 
40 2 21 123 24 


Fig. 2 shows a front elevation and section of one of these boxes. 
The equipment consists of a connecting block strip and a form 
or fanning strip. The connecting block is of insulating material 
and carries a pair of binding posts for each pair of cable wires to 


1374 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING [June 27 


be terminated in the box. The form strip is of wood and serves 
merely as a guide to preserve an orderly arrangement for the 
individual twisted pairs that run from the telephone to the box. 
These twisted pairs pass through holes in the form strip and are 
secured under the nuts and washers of the binding posts, as are 
also the wires of the cable. 

Cross-Connecting Boxes. Where a private branch exchange 
switchboard is to be installed, a cross-connecting box will be 
required. The wiring center in a case of this kind is at the cross- 
connecting box and not at the private branch exchange switch- 
board. 

Use of Moldings. As shown in Fig. 2, the subsidiary boxes 


ROOM MOULDING &®) 
YX 


ROOM IN OFFICE BLDG, 


PLASTER LINE 


Fic. 3—Cross-SECTION OF PARTITION SHOWING HALL MOLDING, 
Room MOo.LpING AND PARTITION CONDUIT. 


are placed near the ceiling and wide shell molding, Fig. 3, should 
be provided in the halls for carrying the paired wires from the 
subsidiary boxes to the rooms. A smaller molding should also 
be provided in the individual rooms for carrying the wires to 
the particular locations desired. The space for the wires at the 
tops of these moldings should not be enclosed but should be left 
open. The object is to provide a continuous trough from each 
subsidiary box, reaching out to every room that is to be fed from 
it. Fig. 3 illustrates a section of one of these moldings. 

Where it is necessary to make a concealed run across the ceiling 
of a hall, in order to avoid carrying exposed wires across the 
finished ceiling or to obviate making a circuitous run around the 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 1375 


hall to reach rooms on the opposite side from the subsidiary — 
box, conduit should be laid in the ceiling before the plastering 
is completed, to enable a small cable to be carried across the hall 
to provide for such lines. (Fig. 4.) ; 

Where the wires enter a room from a hall molding, a piece 
of 3/4-inch conduit should be placed in the partition to enable 
the wires to be carried through it from the molding in the hall 
to the molding in the room. This avoids the necessity for drilling 
holes through the partition after the building is completed, which 
would be likely to result in damaging the finished wall. The 
conduit should either be lined with insulating material or the 
sharp edges around the inside of the pipe should be rounded off. 
(Fig. 3.) 


CONDUIT BOX =I 
a1) 


Fic. 4—Metuop oF PLAcinG IRON CONDUIT ACROSS CEILING OF 
HALL. 


Kind of Cable. Paper-insulated lead-covered cables, such as 
are used by telephone companies in their outside plant, are the 
most desirable for use in building work. These cables are smaller 
andless costly for the same number of wires than cables of rubber- 
insulated wires. With this type of cable all of the terminals must 
be made with lead-covered silk and cotton-insulated cable, boiled 
out in beeswax or approved compound, and carefully shellaced, 
as the paper insulation will not stand handling if exposed, and 
moisture must be prevented from entering the paper-insulated 
cable. Should the terminal of necessity be in a particularly 
damp location it must be made with rubber-covered wires. 


1376 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING {June 27 


General Arrangement of Riser and Subsidiary Cables. From 
what has already been said it will be seen that the general 
arrangement of riser and subsidiary cables is practically the 
same, irrespective of whether conduits or shafts and moldings 
are provided. 

The splicing of the subsidiary cables for each floor to the riser 
cable is usually done so that a given pair of wires in the riser 
cable is available for use on more than one floor. This is termed 
“ bridging ” the conductors and furnishes a multiple system of 
distribution. By this means the flexibility of the system is 
increased and fewer spare pairs need be provided in the riser 
cable than would be required if there were no “‘ multipling.”’ 

From records of a large number of house cable systems it has 
been found that by bridging about two-thirds of the pairs in the 
riser cable at the subsidiary branches the most advantageous 
balancing of facilities is obtained. If less bridging is done it often 
happens that many of the subsidiary cables become congested 
before the riser cable. Owing to the use of standard size cable it 
is frequently necessary to make either risers or subsidiaries some- 
what larger than the exact number indicated by the density 
study. The use of such cables may cause the proportion of 
bridging to vary from one-half to three-quarters. 

In splicing the subsidiary cables to the riser cable in buildings 
of moderate size, it is not economical to open the large riser 
cable on each floor. In such cases, the plan followed is to take out 
from the riser cable at one floor the small subsidiary cables for 
several floors and to carry them from that point up or down to 
their respective floors. 

Methods of Installation. If the riser cable is placed in a shaft 
the main cable and its subsidiary branches are often spliced 
together on the roof of the building or in some upper story and 
then lowered into place. -In some cases the splicing is done in 
the telephone company’s shop and the cable shipped to the 
building ready to be installed. 

For supporting the cable a steel strand is used. Two or three 
wraps of iron wire are made about the cable at frequent intervals 
and these are attached to the strand by separating the individual 
wires of the latter and passing the tie wires through the inter- 
stices of the strand. If the subsidiary cables are more than 
about 30 feet in length only a short section of each is spliced to 
the riser cable before lowering. In this case the subsidiary 
branches are run and spliced to these stubs after the riser is 
put in place. 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 1377 


Special Conduit Work. In the methods above described the 
facilities provide for locating the telephones on or near walls or 
partitions, as this is the most common location. It can sometimes 
be foreseen by owners or architects that telephones will be 
required at some distance from a wall or partition, as would be the 
case with a desk placed in the center of the room. Where an 
arrangement of this kind is desired the owner should provide 
a duct in the floor extending from the location of the telephone 
to the picture molding on the wall or to some other place easily 
accessible for wiring. A duct of this kind should end at the floor 
in a floor box covered with a flush plate. 

It sometimes happens, particularly in buildings used by large 
corporations or firms, that entire undivided floors are occupied 
by large numbers of desks. Telephone service is frequently 
required at all, or a large part of these desks, and the locations 
and arrangement of the desks on the floor may from time to time 
be changed. The floors of these buildings are often of fire- 
proof construction. To meet a situation of this kind adequately 
it is necessary to be able to carry individual pairs of concealed 
wires to desks -placed at any points on the floor, so that great 
difficulty and expense would be encountered in providing con- 
cealed wiring if suitable facilities admitting of the utmost 
flexibility were not provided in advance. 

The best method of doing this is to carry branches from the 
riser cable in conduits to convenient building piers, placing 
subsidiary junction boxes at the bases of these piers. The entire 
floor is then provided with small floor outlets placed at the cor- 
ners of squares about eight feet apart, each outlet being connected 
by conduit in the floor with the nearest subsidiary junction box 
at a building pier. Where the floors are not of fireproof construc- 
tion, the individual pairs of wires are run in small channels 
- grooved out of the floor beams on their upper surface. The loca- 
tions of these channels should be accurately marked above the 
finished floors. Small brass nails are convenient for this purpose. 
When a telephone is required at a desk the flooring over the 
nearest channel is cut through, thus establishing a connection 
through the channel with a subsidiary terminal, conveniently 
placed, the wires being fished through the channel in the ordinary 

manner. 
: Arrangement of Conductors to Insure Flexibility in Operating 
the System. In order that the main terminal box may be as 
small as practicable the number of cross-connections to be made 


1378 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING [June 27 


in it should be kept at a minimum. This is also important from 
maintenance considerations. To enable this to be done the 
method of distribution is arranged in a similar manner to that 
employed in other portions of the telephone plant. A certain 
number of pairs of wires in the riser cable are directly connected 
to the cable entering the building from the telephone exchange. 
These connections are made in a lead-covered splice and the 
pairs of wires thus spliced directly through do not appear in the 
main terminal box. . 

Certain other pairs in the riser cable are brought to terminals 
in the main terminal box. The remainder of the pairs in the riser 
cable are directly spliced to pairs in the exchange cable and these 
same pairs are also brought out by means of a branch splice to 
terminals in the main terminal box. If there are any extra pairs 
in the exchange cable that are not directly spliced to pairs in the 
riser cable they also are terminated in the main terminal box. 

This arrangement, if the pairs have been skilfully distributed, 
permits of great flexibility and reduces to a minimum the 
number of cross-connections required in the main terminal box. 
The pairs that are connected straight through from the exchange 
cable to the riser cable without appearing in the main terminal 
box are used for the direct line telephones in the building and 
for private branch exchange trunk lines. The pairs of the 
exchange cable that appear in both the main terminal box and 
the riser may be used, first at the various floor boxes in the event 
of the congestion of the direct exchange pairs that appear in these 
boxes, and second in the main terminal box for battery and gen- 
erator circuits and for overflow of business, due to erratic 
growth in lines on the various floors in the building, by cross- 
connecting to the house cable conductors extending to these 
floors. House cable pairs terminating in the main terminal 
box are used for private lines and miscellaneous circuits and for 
providing battery and generator circuits between the box and 
the various private branch exchanges by cross-connecting to the 
exchange cable in the main box. 


EXAMPLES OF OFFICE BUILDING WIRING 
The Hudson Terminal Buildings in New York City, extending 
from Cortlandt to Fulton Streets, one block west from Broadway, 
afford an example of the facilities required for telephone service 
in the case of office buildings of the largest size. The two Ter- 
minal buildings are treated as a unit so far as the telephone wiring 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 1379 


is concerned. Together they contain nearly a million square 
feet of renting area and at the present time have about 3000 
telephones. These data, with Fig. 5, Plate LX XIV, a perspec- 
tive view of the buildings, will indicate the magnitude of the 
wiring problem. 

The cabling and wiring of these buildings is illustrated by the 
following figures: 

Fig. 6 is an elevation of the riser cables, showing the con- 
nections with the exchange cables and the general arrangement 
of the branch cables to each floor. Fig. 7 is a detail elevation 
showing typical ‘ multipling’”’ of the branches from the risers to 
the floors and of the subsidiary cables on the floor. Fig. 8 is a 
' typical floor plan showing the locations of the riser cables, the 
floor cables, the floor terminals and the wire runs in the hall 
moldings to each office. 

At the present time there are three 606-pair underground 
cables extending from the telephone central office to these build- 
ings. The central office cables are spliced to the house cables 
near the main terminal. About 16 per cent of the pairs in the 
central office cables are connected directly to pairs in the riser 
cables that do not terminate at the main frame terminal of the 
buildings. The remaining 84 per cent of the pairs in the central 
office cables are bridged to pairs in the riser cables which also 
appear at the main frame terminal. All pairs from the central 
office cables that are directly connected to house cable pairs are 
marked D F. All pairs from the central office cables that are 
connected to house cable pairs that also appear at the main 
frame terminal are marked F. The balance of the pairs in the 
house cables (marked H) have no connection with pairs in the 
central office cables except by cross-connection at the main build- 
ing terminal, where they may be connected as desired to pairs in 
the central office cables that are also bridged to riser cable pairs. 

As new cables to the central office are added to meet the 
demand for additional telephone service in these buildings, the 
existing central office cable requiring relief will be left directly 
connected to the riser cable system and the bridged pairs will 
be transferred to the new cable. » 

The riser cables, of which there are five in all, are located in 
cable shafts beside the elevator shafts, Fig. 8. On each normal - 
floor are provided conduits extending from the cable shaft to 
each of the five subsidiary terminals on that floor. In Fig. 8 
these conduits and the subsidiary terminals are shown by solid 
lines. Broken lines represent the runs of individual twisted 


” 


1380 


RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 


[June 27 


x 
CORTLANDT BLDG, FULTON BLDG. iv 
5 22ND FL. 22ND FL. = 
Pd 2 
cs = 
* 6 
= iS 
21ST FL, 21st FLX ie 
par 
uF sTuB |S 
ul Slit 
ta “io 
Br 20TH FL. 20TH FL. 3 
al + 
32 sTus F 3 
/ TH FI vr 
a 19TH FL. 19TH FL. 
70 2 
tes 2 
$55 18TH FL, 18TH FL. =|3 
© ale 
2 ou 
aia 
x 17TH FL. 17TH FL. u 
3 
ay 
————————— 2 
16TH FL. 16TH FL. FY 
Y 2 
t = 
s x ———— 45TH FL. o 
3 x fis 
tl o|~ 
ul § ES be 
uf 2 14TH FL. q 
3} 3 
3 3 : 
g r 
in STUe 13TH FL, 
q| 3 
3] 2 
3 12TH FlLe—— = 
. a 
& Bit 
3g K 11TH FL. 2 
Eafe 
a ole 
8 siz 
10TH FL. 10TH FL, 
t sTUa 2 
u & 
Fd 9TH FL. OTH FL sTus A 
3 stue_}}> 
F 8TH FL. ! 
ma 8TH FL. € eu *, 
5 as .o 
(3 gs Eh 
«| | 
g 7TH FL. TH FL. sTus &° 
x sTuB 3 
rd Mh = 
8 3 OTH FL CORT. BLOG. FULTON BLOG, 6TH FL. nS, 
gis RENTING AREA 646,000 8Q, FT. -378,000 SQ.FT. e 4 
rd @ RISER CABLE 1818 PAIRS = — 1212 PAIRS vg a 
ta Zi 1 PR. IN RISER FOR 3008Q. FT. 310 SQ. FT. z a. zt 
3 ° KEY ' etyle z 
X= PRIVATE BRANCH EXCHANGE 8W'B'D z $3ll ne 
F< BRIDGEO FEEDER CABLE PAIRS + i Ss 
im & H=HOUE CABLE PAIRS & = 3 
t 0. F.= DIRECT FEEDER PAIRS 2 z 
a PLL. > PRIVATE LINE PAIRG ° =| 
= Sagi INGIDE BUILDING SRO FL. g 
8 ie = 
ra 
2ND FL- PL q 
. Tol FR. A 2ND FL. S 
i 1-34=F  1-07=H stue /It z 
¢ 2 
£ 1ST FL. 16T FL. = 
AR : 
>< es : 
g MEZZ. FL. e e| MEZZ. FL. rs 3 
61PR, & 3 ¢ = I 
FS “a repre, 188 PAE va re as Csr eR, 
CONCOURSE ae 1819-1894 =H. TERM, a)5 ey S 
ae ROOM sls sls = 
S[2_26 PR, 1819-1844 =H = 26 PR.NYS 
Ta44-1694=H 7849-1669 =H 
606 PR. 1-303 =F 1213-1515=H 51 PR.| 100 PR 
2) 1-303=F 1516-1818= 304-600=0.F IA1A-18IS=H 
"0 ih MAIN FRAME 303 PR. 
“a bee ie PA8 CAPACITY 4000 PAIRS STUB 80858 
HOL! 608 PR, 1-008%8 §  BPLICING DETAIL NOT SHOWN 303 PR. 
608 PR. 1-606 =F2 804-606 =F 


Fic. 6—TERMINAL BUILDINGS, HousE CABLE DISTRIBUTION. 


606 PR. 


1-G06=Fy 


wy 


1912] 


RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 


1381 


pairs of wires in moldings from the subsidiary floor terminals 
to each office on the floor. 


606 PR. 203-404=F 405-R08=H. 


Detailed distrib 


distribut 
principles are, however, 


401 PH.371- 404=F- 
742-908=H. 


401 PR.345~a78=F 
688-754=H. 


54_PR. 260-286 = Fe 
5 50-573=H, 


=H. 


26PR.0. 
61 PR. 1-35= PL 
ras pte) 

269-278=F. 
B17-540= 4. 


101 PR.258-291= Fe 
517-583=H. x] 
61 PR. 1-38=" 
ve P.U.1-6= (4) Poba= 
269°278= Fe 
531°540= Me 


404 PR.260-404=F.560-808 


Fe 


10} PR. 203-236=F- 


401 PR, 169-202=F. 
338-404=H- 


401 PR. 143-1765 Fe 
284-350=H- 


51 PR. 62-84= F. STUB 
142° 169=H- 


107 PR.114- 147 Fe 
227-293= He 


101 PR.85-118= Fe 
17072365H> 


PR, 142-404=H.62-202= F. 


26 PR.26-51= PL, 
=P.Le 


16 PR-11-26=P-L- 


26 PR.394-404= F-T94-B0R=He 


26 PR, 384-394=F.780"794=H. 3 x 7 
26 PR.377°387= F+767-781=H~ A 
26 PR.371-991= F.754-768=H. 
5. = 
26 PR. 368: 37B=F.740-754=H_ 1 3 
rd 7 
26 PR.363-373=F.725-740=H~ $ = 
= 2 £ at 
26 PR.3S7-367 2 F.713-727=H. TH : y 
3 14THFLOOR “rt is 
26 PR. 351-361 F.700-71 4 ph ™ 
26 PR. 945-355=F-688-702=H. z ali} (3 
ml al le 
eats 26 PR.177-202=P.L 
STUB S =} |e 5 202=P.L. 
Ole 26 OR, 15a 1839=P.L. 
S 


26 PR. 199-164= PL. 
26 PR. 120-1457F, L, 
26 PR.102"127=P. Le 


101 PR.315-349= F» 
631-697= He 


aif-ais= Fe) DEAD! 
631-6392.) BR. 


SPLICE IN CABLE SHAFT 26 PR. 76 101=P.L- 
26 PR. 57-82 = P-L. 
26 PR. 38-63 = P-L- 


26 PR. i9-44 = PL 


101_PR.287-320= Fe 
S74+640=6~ 


'$84~609=H. 


16 PRsW 16=P.L, (2) 26 PR. 1-26 = PoC 


11 PR.1-10= PL.4 PRD. 

51 PR, 1-10= P-L.557-583=H. 278-25 
16 PR.171G=Pule x 
61 PR.1-30 & 1-6=P-L,541-554= He 

258-268= ee 


41 PR. S57*S83= Ms 278+2912 Fe 

31 PR, 19212 PeL.551-560= He 
y1TH 

31 PR, 1-6= P-L.541-554= Hs 2506268 = Fo 

26 PR. 21-35= PrL,627-537= H- 

26 PR. §-15-P.t. (A) $17-531=H- 


16 PR. 15-30 Pte 


26 PR.252-262= F. 512-526 =H. 
26 PR. 245-25 5=F.498-512=H. 
26 PR, 239-25 485-499=H~ 
26 PR.233-24 
26 PA, 229-239= 


10TH FLOOR 


472-486=H. 
~4607474=H, 


aeon = 


26 PR, 226-236=F-457-479= H- 
26 PR. 219-229: F. 44374 5/5 H- 


26 PR.213/2 


9TH FLOOR 


+430-444=H, 


sak V— 
X.= PRIVATE BRANCH EXCHANGE SWITCHBOARD 
=FEEDER CABLE PAIRS 


26 PR. 207-2 17=F AI7-43 
96 PR, 203-213=F-405-419=H. 


aren = 


Oh PR. 192-2 02=F. 3907404=H. 
26 PR, 185: 195= F.377-39 
26 PR. 179-189 = F- 364-37, 


F, L= PRIVATE LINE PAIRS INSIDE BUILDING 


8TH FLOOR D =DEAD PAIRS 


26 PR.173- 183= F-351- 365=H. 
26 PR. 1697179=F.33B- 352=H- 


aron= 


26 PR. 166: 176=F+335-350 =H. 
26 PR, 159- 169=F-322-336 = H- 
26 PR. 159-163=F. 209-32 


7TH FLOOR 


26 PR, 147- 157=F_296-310= H- 


onran= 


26 PR. 143-15a=F-264-298= Hs 


26 PR. 19771472 F 6279-293 =Hs 
26 PR, 130° 140= F-265-279= He 
25 PI124 134=F.252-206= He 


6TH FLOOR 


26 PRE 178 .6.239- 253" H. 


aorans 


26 PR.114-124 = F-227- 2417 He 


26 PR.108- 118=F- 222-236 He 
26 PR. 101-111: F-.%8-222= H~ 
26 PR.9S7105 = Fe19. 209= H+ 


26 PR.£9-99_ + F.182- 6 =He 


26 PR,85-95 = F.170-1845H- 


5TH FLOOR 


eoreon= 


Fic. 7—Hupson TERMINAL BUILDINGS. 


ution of cable pairs on the 5th to 15th floors, inc 


Street Building. 


ion for these buildings is not shown in full detail. 
illustrated in Fig. 7, which shows the 


complete lay-out of the distributing cables branching from 


On account of its complexity, the entire scheme of multiple 


1 
2 15TH FLOOR 


FLOOR 


lusive, in Cortlandt 


The 


two 


1382 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING [June 27 * 


points of the riser cable system of the southernmost (Cortlandt) 
building and feeding from the fifth to the fifteenth floors, inclu- 
sive. The distribution for the fifth to eighth floors inclusive 
represents one of the simplest cases in these buildings. That for 
the ninth to fifteenth floors is one of the most complicated, due to 
the special demands brought about by certain private branch 
exchange requirements. 

In portions of these buildings, on account of private branch 


@ =CABLE RISER 
{| —— =PRANCH FLOOR CABLE IN CONDUIT 
i GSSJ= HALL TERMINAL BOX 

-=--=WIRE RUN FROM TERMINAL TO OFFICE 


IN MOULDING 
—- ST ee 7 
= ee 
= a 


——* 


Fic. 8—TERMINAL BUILDINGS—TyYPICAL FLOOR PLAN IN CORTLANDT 
BUILDING. 


exchanges, some of the floor distributing branches from the riser 
cables that would be needed to supply individual tenants, are 
not required at the present time. Stubs containing the cable 
pairs that would normally appear on these floors are, however, 
provided and left in the cable shaft so that, merely by splicing 
subsidiary cables to these stubs, service on these floors of a 
different character could readily be established if changed office 
conditions should render this necessary. 

The requirements for telephone service in these buildings are 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 1383 


so large that a main distributing frame is installed to act as the 
main building terminal. This frame serves the same purpose 
as the terminal box equipment shown in Fig. 1, namely to enable 
the pairs from the central office cables to end in a compact series 
of terminal lugs, and the pairs from the house cables in another 
series of terminal lugs; the lugs being so arranged that, by short 
lengths of twisted pair wire, cross connection can readily be made 
between any pair brought to the frame from the central office 
cables, and any pair brought from the house cables. This 
permits great flexibility of distribution. In the “ multipling 2 
diagrams, Figs. 6 and 7, the numbering of the pairs in the house 
cable system is on the basis of two groups. All feeder pairs in 
the house cable system, whether directly spliced to pairs in the 
central office cables and not appearing at the main terminal, or 
bridged to pairs in the central office cables and also appearing 
at the main terminal, are numbered from one up and designated 
either DF for direct feeder or F for bridged feeder pairs. 

All pairs in the house cable system that terminate at the main 
terminal without being directly connected or bridged to the 
central office cables are numbered as a separate group from one 
up and are designated H for house pairs. 

Eleven-Story Store and Office Building. This building is 
chosen as an example of a complete conduit installation. Fig. 
9 is a plan of one of the office floors and Fig. 10 shows elevations 
of the conduit system and the cable system. The diameters 
of the conduits are indicated in order to show how the conduits 
decrease in size with the cables as they rise up through the 
building. 

Owing to the lower portion of this building being arranged 
for stores, the office distribution on certain of the riser cables 
does not begin until the sixth floor is reached. 


Lort BUILDINGS 


Conduits for wires or cables are rarely provided in loft build- 
ings. The riser cables are placed in shafts and the wires are 
distributed on each floor along the baseboards. The wire center 
on each floor is usually at the baseboard near the passenger 
elevator shaft. Although this arrangement is undesirable in 
many cases, it is difficult, on account of the floors being undivided 
and the locations of the telephones not being known until the 
premises are occupied, to make any provision in advance for 
distributing the wires. A system of conduits and floor boxes 
would be expensive and is not considered necessary. 


1384 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING ° [June 27 


Where one firm occupies the entire loft building, the size 
of the riser cable is determined entirely by the equipment of the 
private branch exchange switchboard and the probable future 
requirements of the firm as to telephone service. In a case of 
this kind the center of the wire system is at a cross-connecting 
box located close to the private branch exchange switchboard. 

A modification of the method of distribution already described 
for office buildings is usually employed in loft buildings. The 
riser cable is divided into two parts termed “ bridged feeder ” 


RENTING AREA 1ST, TOVITH FLOORS INCLUSIVE 200,000 SQ, FT. 
1ST TO 5TH i bi: 100,000 ‘+! (STORES & LOFTS) 
100,900 «* «. (OFFICES) 


[ 1 PAIR TO 385 SQUARE FY C erices)___ 
is e LU 58% OF PAIRS BRIDGED Te] fe [e lel 
KE pt HERE | 
\y 


KEY mer 
(=) 1 =HALL TERMINAL EOX NEAR RISER CABLE 


i (——— —-— =SEPARATE CONDUIT RUN TO EACH OFFICE 
| FOR CARRYING WIRES, f =F 
pitldks nel fax ee eT be 
{tt he : 
dolg di K eS a 
mrtg ise happen wit | 
ti ee ae oh: ieee an eet 1; tl; 
La PI ili i 
pr idee eee d be ars 
Waits aes i = cay -— ob | ct 
fe] Ha! | as 
E ru | =) ] : 
=| lhe «pees Pate a = 
AT ee] 
Ci R —— | i] HL ae gal = be aa | e) ere 
€ i Se en ae oe Sealine eee 
ely ft Ze bly i mf | 


ers be psd mth bowel stl ot mel 


Fic. 9—11-Srory OrricE BUILDING, TyPICAL FLOOR PLAN. 


and ‘house cable.’’ The house cable pairs are terminated 
in the main terminal box near the foot of the riser, and the 
bridged feeder pairs are directly connected to pairs in the ex- 
change cable and also by a branch splice are terminated in the 
main terminal box. 

Example of Loft Building Wiring. Fig. 11 shows the floor plan 
and cable distribution of a twelve-story loft building. It will 
be noted that the arrangement of pairs does not agree with the 
preceding statement that in loft buildings the riser cable is 
divided only into bridged feeder and house cable groups. This 


KEY 
A = X=PRIVATE BRANCH EXCHANGE SWITCHBOARD 
F = REEDER CABLE PAIRS c 
H=HOUSE CABLE PAIRS : 
D=DEAD PAIRS 
P,L.=PRIVATE LINE INSIDE BUILDING 
B,F.= BRIDGED FEEDER PAIRS 
Ww CONDUIT SYSTEM x 


Vv 
41TH FLOOR ea : x 
10TH FLOOR ie ou Te] 


114" 
9TH FLOOR cs 


Ht 


a 
uw a 
~ 
cs a 
= 
me 
= 
* w 


~ 


<} 
= 


8TH FLOOR 


= 
7TH FLOOR eae 


Er 14 1 
ery FLOOR [__| az 
+: 
‘5TH FLOOR e4 - is s ee] 
on 2 
4TH FLOOR oe jams 
8rp FLOOR 6 
= PRIVATE _ e 3 mel 
2ND FLOOR ES phate ape foal 


SWITCHBOARD 


(SPARE) 
| 


(SPARE) 


(SPARE) 


Mezz. FL. [ PS 4 
g 
ist FLOOR is 
BASEMENT is ae 
nod ” 13g” 
SUB- 2 3” bed 
BASEMENT Elo he re) (Se ores 


CROSS-CONNECTING TERMINAL 
IN SUB-BASEMENT 


CABLE DISTRIBUTION 


se : “ ra é 
wa Boar “ee ae sage 
MW vid Ww vat x Rares Y ene v4 alee 
e + ow ie: Wo ft 
21 PR.A70-176=F. B24 PR128-134—=F. NS 24 PR.e6-92=F, aha 21 PR6I67=Fe a 21 PR36-42= Fe ve 
11TH FLOOR 948-354= Tee 306-s12= ert ~ 264-270=8 ene OPS ~ 219-218=B.F. |vas 
170-176=H. [Ba % 128-134 b28 86-92 Ooh 23 2 36-42 eo & 
AOTHIFLOOR) CUPRste7=179=F- |= SS 21 pe tgs tater |= Be 21 pRB 99: 2 CS" 04 PRea3-39=F. (CS 
344-350=B. Fe glee = 260-266=8-F. ¢ 208214=8.F. & 
Ver 173=H. Gl = A 83-89-H. El §8-64=H- hae SADE 
21 PR. 152-16) &l 5 24 PR. 120-12) 1 21 PR.79-85=F. m|/x 21 PR.54-60 fF. 21 PR.28-34=F. SL: 
9TH FLOOR oe 298-304 oo 256-262=B.F. I. ~"230-236=68.F- 204-210=B. Fe ri : 
nie 120-12 BSS 79°85=H+ Rae 54-60=Hy 28-34-H. oo 
8TH FLOOR 22 21 PR.116-122 a 21 PR.75-B1=F. 2° 21PR.50-56=F. F. ae 
294-300= = 252-250=5.F. | © | 
ves 116-12 oes 75-81=H-e & Fi 
Wa | 21 PR.112-11 uh = 21 PR.71-77=F. &G 21 PR,20-26=F, 5 
EC RLOOR 992-038=5.F- \ leo 2 290-296 ok 248-254—8.F- foo-202=B-F. \| u , 
154-161 at 112-11 r aa? rs 20:26=H. od x 
21 PR. 150-15) oY > 21 PR.108-114=F. \I 54, 21 PR.68-74=F. 24.PR 16-22=F. Vil 
6TH FLOOR 328-334=0.F. Hee DAG 29 = ay) aes ee es 
150-156=H. 108-1 - [Fen 18-22=H, [IS & 
STH FLOOR 21. PR-146-152=F. »\ ag 2LPR.104-110=F. 21 PR.12-18=F- le 
-330=6,F. oly 
ae isctn: Fata 70 eee 
fin : ri’ 
21 PR.142°148=F, OT C) 4 24 PR.8-14=F, so 
4TH FLOOR 320-306=B.F. , atten 7a4-190=8-F. \| = 
142-148=H> \| ut mete Lge B-14=H. \}.e | 
-144= o u 5x on - 21 PR.4-to—F- \Y Or 
aro FLooR «eee le aay 8/52 s mah Nat 
1AB+144 Soe 2x P| aw & ee ES? 
ov preiss-14i=r./ 2% 24 pr.gs-99=F./ [47% z 3) 21 PR. 7=F- ot 
2Np FLOOR 73-319= pic BTia77=b eae ow Shon © 
i. Ke ‘een, |T2 aes 177-183=8.F+ = 
435-141 o 93-99=H; a Fae fez 
. + wl 
EZZ. FL. ns 2/5 a 
MELEE : tt 16 PRe36-51=P-L. | 3]ez 26 PR. 
i ie aac 3 : N [aee-a7e= 
jee eae elzl3 Sled | ag6ca78= 8. Fe 
4st FLOOR? | elcie ae 16 SIEg | 2a0-e42=H. 
hoa es es olen ol, 7 (262 PR. PR. o olen 
16 PR. wml ofr an S13 2© 405-606=F I-36 rs 
Bete ta SRP 8 =|? ER” 405-606=F Lea eS Ey, elt 26 PR. 
17-97 = PLP hn are SUE He co Eee oa 205-280=H. 
BASEMENT |?" Atte z 126 PR. 505 PR. i-99=F. 
SUB- 355-365=B.F. 177°404=B.Fs 
BASEMENT Bet: 
=51=Pale ’ > 
eS 51 PRsaGe- 31855 5F + 
| ot 205: 2429=H. 
court aoe &) 77% SPLICE LOCATED AT s 
37 9-404=8.F- | Sa OROSS-CONNECTING 
S| Tae TERMINAL 
Cara 
per 
R 


MANHOLE 


P C) 606 PR.1-606—F. Sq) 


CABLE CLAMPED ON 


~ F BASEMENT 700 PR. CROSS 
pEING Sees CONNECTING TERMINAL 


- Fic. 10—11-Story OrricE BUILDING, CONDUIT SYSTEM AND CABLE 
- DISTRIBUTION. 


1386 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING [June 27 


diagram shows, in addition to these groups, certain direct feeder 
pairs. The reason is that it is expected that this particular loft 
building will sooner or later be partitioned off for office use, 
and this condition has been anticipated in planning the cable dis- 
tribution. 

Horers AND APARTMENT BUILDINGS 


General Scheme of Wiring. The telephone systems for hotels 
and apartment buildings differ from those for office and loft 
buildings in one important respect. Hotels and apartment 
buildings can be wired in advance on a permanent basis on ac- 
count of the probability that there will be no essential change in 
the number of wires needed, the ultimate requirements being 


KEY 
@ = CABLE RISERS 


STUB LEFT FOR FUTURE STUB LEFT FOR FUTURE fe — HALL TERMINAL BOX 


: EXTENSION EXTENSION 
ce OF BUILDING OF BUILDING F == FEEDER CABLE PAIRS 
a 
t WEST RISER EAST RISER hg H = HOUSE CABLE PAIRS 
Se OMIAITEH ry lean ee i-50=4 “rua D = DEAD PAIRS 
hi Viee ome 1178-188=8-F, 44°50=F \Gi I | Il B.F.= BRIDGED FEEDER CABLE PAIRS 
et 2t PR. 108-N2=H ye Bt Re g9-45=H NOOR TYPICAL FLOOR PLAN 
ge ca 106-112 =F #1737179 =8-F. 39°45=F Sea P ese oS va 
ree ea A 4 
& &P\ 27 PR. 102-108=H 21 PR. a5-41=H = 
8], = 
oFie aa52a2 102-108 =F OTH FL.y69-174=8-F. 35-41=F a 
gq = BF. 
S|, 21 PR. 99-105=H 21 PR. ao-3a=H_ fg Il II 
~|° [2335 go-t05=F OTH Fleqes-179=BF. 32 {ss 
~ Fe ge 
Say + __94=100=H 21 PR. Sas 
af Baas 94-100=F 8TH Fl.q6o-166=0-F. 2 oe 
Wil Re 89-95 =H | 21 PR. 2 = 
2% ao Borgs=r | 7TH FL.g55-162=8-F- 2 eee 
aad PR. e5°91=H Py 21 PR. = a | 
© wut 220-228 asegi=r | OTH Fleq5o-45e—8.F. 18-24=F | Il ne 
= BF, ja 3 
| 21 PR, g1-87=H 21 PR. 14-20=H Reo 
be LY AL piea7=rp OTH Fl-qag-154=8-F. ieee 
sle/ =F 3 
S\c/ eter. 76-82=H 21 PRs E s 
bee 76782=F 4TH Flsyaq-150=6-F, 9-15=F = 400 PAIR 
J oi PR. 72-78=H 21 PR Wy! CROSS-CONNECTING 
; fe 207-218 7a-78=F SRO FL«qa9-145=6-F, 5-11= A TERMINAL BOX IN 
t \ 21 PR. 68°74=H 21 PR. q-7=H /L|. BASEMENT 
@\= Soa-200 2ND FL ba . 9 
r= 2038-2) -74= *435-191=8+ == : a ; 
Le Le 68°74=F 135-141=B8-F, 17 7=F i Seu 
wol® W = a 
gf Por ta 
f : 2 
ay 68-72=H BAS 16 PR i-s=H 1 = : 8 
& 205-208 68-72 =F Spee ee oe ee ee a Sha 
by Go 134=H 203-270=8.F. 68-1391=F 195 070= BF TS4=F () MANHOLE 7 
o 271-404=0 


(FoR FUTURE USE) 


Fic 11—12-Srory Lort BUILDING. 


closely determined by the number of rooms or apartments. 
The locations for the telephones in the various apartments or 
rooms are also generally permanent and the relative locations 
of the telephones are the same on each floor. 

The telephone system installed in these buildings consists of 
a private branch exchange switchboard located at some con- 
venient point, usually on the ground floor. In hotels this private 
branch exchange switchboard is placed in or near the office. 
Telephones are installed in each room or apartment and wired 
to this switchboard. The latter is connected by the necessary 
number of trunk lines with the nearest central office of the tele- 
phone company. : 


ee 


+ 


Pe Oe ee wy MEN eee 


\ 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 1387 


The wiring problem is simple in comparison with that in office 
buildings. It consists of running a pair of wires from the tele- 
phone location in each room or apartment to a common center 
in the cross-connecting box near the private branch exchange 
switchboard. It is important to make provision so that the 
telephone company can run its wires from the cross-connecting 
box of the private branch exchange switchboard to some point 
in the basement where connection can be made to the central 
office cable. The latter cable is generally not run in conduit but 
is clamped to the ceiling of the basement. 

Subsidiary Conduit. Conduits for distributing wires on floors 
in hotels or apartment buildings should not ordinarily be over 
50 feet in length nor should they have more than three bends 
with a minimum radius of five inches. Any conduit 100 feet in 
length should not be less than one inch in diameter: 5/8-inch 
conduit should be provided for a maximum of two pairs of wires 
and 3/4-inch conduit should be provided for a maximum of four 
pairs of wires. For more than four pairs of wires it is preferable 
to run cable. 

Hotels. In laying out the wiring system for hotels, in addition 
to one pair of wires for each room, as mentioned above, provision 
has ordinarily to be made for a small percentage of spares to 
provide for defective pairs and for a few direct lines. 

From the wire center at the cross-connecting box near the 
private branch exchange switchboard a cable is extended through 
the basement or sub-basement to the foot of the riser shaft. The 
riser cable extends up this shaft as a diminishing cable with sub- 
sidiary terminals located at convenient points on each floor for 
reaching the various rooms. The wires are distributed on the 
floors either by molding or through conduits, as the case may be. 
In many of the modern hotel buildings complete conduit systems 
are provided for concealing the telephone wires and cables. In 
such cases the vertical conduits are installed at some central 
point and junction boxes are provided on each floor for splicing 
and terminating cables. From the junction boxes separate 5/8- 
inch conduits are extended to each room. The outlets in the 
rooms should be located four feet 10 inches above the finished 
floor for wall sets, this having been found by wide experience to 
be the most satisfactory height at which to place the telephone. 
For desk stands the outlets should be at the baseboard near the 
proposed location of the telephone. Where the floor area and 
the number of rooms are large it is often economical to have more 
than’ one terminal{box on a floor. 


1388 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING [June 27 


EXAMPLES oF HoTEL WIRING 


18-Story Hotel. Fig. 12 shows the floor plan of this hotel with 
the locations of the riser cables and the individual telephones 
in each room. The separate conduit runs from the riser termi- 
nals to the rooms are not shown in order to avoid confusion on 
the drawing. Fig. 13 shows elevations of the riser cables with 
the branches at each floor. 

In this installation the riser cables (five in number) are placed 
in shafts and the wire distribution on each floor is in separate 
conduits to each room. It will be noted that no feeder pairs are 
provided in the riser cables. 

17-Story Hotel. This is a complete conduit installation. 

KEY 
G=SI=HALL TERMINAL BOX AT CABLE RISER SHAFT : 
© =TELEPHONE INSTRUMENTS ea 


NOTE:- ASEPARATE 34” PIPE 
EXTENDS FROM THE NEAREST 


= 
2 FSG) pr 
eel | |SECICU| © Sw 
cemane sas apa 


ee ee 


Fic. 12—18-Srory Horei, TyprcAL Floor PLAN. 


Fig. 14 shows the riser cable terminal boxes and. individual 
telephone locations on a typical floor. Fig. 15 gives the eleva- 
tion of the house cable system. This hotel has an apartment 
section which is cared for by the north riser cable. This section 
of the house has its separate switchboard. The other two riser 
cables feed the hotel portion of the house. 


ELEVATOR APARTMENTS 
Elevator apartment buildings are generally wired on the 
basis of two telephones to an apartment, one connecting to the 
private branch exchange switchboard and the other, when 


desired, directly to the central office of the telephone company. 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 


In most of the high-class elevator apartment buildings it is 
the practise of owners and architects to provide conduits for 


concealing the telephone wires and cables. 


vertical shaft is provided instead of vertical conduit. 


N.W. SHAFT S.W, SHAFT 
16 PR. 16 PR. 
389-404 18TH FL, 


11 PR, 
981-391 17TH FL 179-189 


411 PR. 17 PR. 
<= 370-380 16TH FL, 168-178 
S WW = 
als \ 
sl 11 PR, 11 PR. a 
8 / 350369 15TH FL, 157-167 yy 
8 
11 PR. 11 PR. 
348-358 «914TH FL. 146-156 
11 PR. 11 PR. 
i 337-347, T3TH FL. 135-145 = 

: It 
|S a 
PS a 41 PR. 8 
2 

& / 326-336 V2TH FL, 124-134 ix 
11 PR. 11 PR. 
315-325 J1ITHFL, 113-123 
11 PR, 11 PR. 

ii 304-314 OTH FL, 102-112 Se 
ia . 
els ap 
Sly 16 PR. 16PR. S/o 

3 a 
2291-308 = OTH FL. |e 
r>) 
11 PR, 
280-290 8TH FL. 
11 PR, 

|= 269-279 «= 7TH FL, 67-17 r 
|! 
o|3 Fan 
aly als 
lm 11 PR. 4) PR. BIS 

% [258-268 6TH FL. 65-66 \" | > 
11 PR. 11 PR, 
247-257 5TH FL. 45-55 
11 PR, 11 PR, 

I 236-246 4TH FL. 34-44 3 

HI « 

& ba eS u 
g|t 11 PR. ~ 11 PR. lied 

8 [225-235 3RD FL. 23-33 \ \> 
1h PR. 47 PR, 

214-224 2ND FL. 12-22 
11 PR. 11 PR. 
203-213 187 FL, 1-10 Aes 
c 
an 
/ 202 PR. 
HMHOUSE CABLE PAIRS 203-404= 1H HOTEL 
D= DEAD PAIRS ee BOARD] 
STORE ROOM 
LAUNDRY tle 
4, 2 {3 = 
S 2 
2 a 
2 CABL eg 
yen. O/B vee. swig 
MANHOLE CELLAR opt 10231061 =H 


e) 101 PR. ae 


In some cases a 


CENTER SHAFT 6.E. SHAFT N.E. SHAFT 
16 PR, 11 PR. 11 PR, 
691-606 18TH FL, 900-910 18TH FL, 748-758 
11 PR. 11 PR, 11 PR. 
583-593 17TH FL. 893-803 V7TH FL. 741-751 
x \11 PR. IPR. 11 PR, 
|i) 572-582 16TH FL..:|I| 885-895 16TH FL. 733-743 
oc = 
alo a|/2 : 
al5 = |! 
=|? SIs o18 
F]S 11 PR. 2 11 PR, 11PR. oh 
[61-671 ISTH FL. |*/ 876-886 15TH FL. 724-734 3 
2 
11 PR, 11 PR. 41 PR, 
550-560 14TH FL. 369-879 14TH FL, 717-727 
11 PR. x \11PR. 41 PR, 
fj) 539-548 13TH FL..Jj) 861-871 13TH FL. 709-719 x 
o flo z} Ul 
a a c 
© |? ale 
fe 11 PR. mld 11 PR, WPR. oie 
2 F 
528-538 12TH FL, }@/ 351-86) 12TH FL, 699-709 S 
17 PR, 11 PR, 117 PR. 
817-527 11TH FL. 843-853 = LITH FL. 691-701 
x \14 PR. x \ 11 PR. 11 PR, 
{ll 606-516 10TH FL..| Il 836-845 OTH FL, 683-693 x 
a/g Blo sft 
=|® bod EE &] 2: 
ols wle o 
“13 16 PR. “3 11 PR. PR ALS 
493-508 OTH FL. 825-835 OTH FL, 673-683 2 
11 PR, 11 PR. 11 PR. * 
8TH FL. 818-528 8TH FL, 666-676 
ja LAL PR. 11 PR. 
fii 477-487 7TM FLA) 810-820 7TH FL, 658-668 t 
© alo alll 
a 5/2 oe 
SIS 44 pr. F1S 11 PR. PR. 5/5 
460-470 6TH FL. |*/a00-810 GTHFL. 648-608 \|9 
11 PR, 11 PR. 11 PR. 
449-459 5TH FL. 793-803 5TH FL. 641-651 
11 PR, 11 PR. 41 PR. 
|= 438-448 «94TH FL, [x 785-795 4TH FL. 633-843 x 
e|\! | ll | Il 
al als als 
S}.5 11. PR. Sle 11 PR. J4:PRo- Sire 
2 BRD FL.” (2 [774-784  3ROFL. 622-632 |") 
11 PR. 41 PR, 
416-428 = =2ND FL 766-776 2NOFL, 614-624 
11 PR. 11 PR, 11 PR. 
1sT FL. 759-769 \STFL+ 607-817 
«|S 
ale 
ald 
als 152 PR 
759-910 =H 
152 PR. 
; 7-758 =H 
& TERMINAL 16 PR. 16 PR. Roe RMINAL 
PARLOR FL, me PARLOR FL. W. TERMINAL 
a CAFE CENTRE ROTUNDA 
|, TERMINAL a fod re 
Mezz.rL. 22 PR. id er PAY STATION 
= Bll ewe’ 
122 PR. © E, SIDE 
911-1028 =H D11-971=H_ -881-97T=H 951-97 
4 PR. O =H 


EROSS CONNECTING FRAME 
TERMINAL ROOM IN CELLAR 


Fic. 13—18-Story HoteL, HousE CABLE DISTRIBUTION. 


Where the floor space occupied by each apartment is small 
and the horizontal runs on each floor are short a riser or dimin- 
ishing house cable is placed. This cable is extended up through 


1390 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING [June 27 
the building in a conduit or a shaft, as the case may be, and 
branches containing a sufficient number of wires to provide two 
pairs for each apartment are terminated in junction boxes located 
at central points on each of the floors. From each junction box 
5/8-inch or 3/4-inch conduits are extended to the location of 
the telephone in each apartment, the outlets being located, as 
in hotels, at the baseboards for desk telephones, and in the wall, 
four feet 10 inches above the finished floor, for wall telephones. 
This arrangement provides a flexible system, as the wires between 
the apartments and the subsidiary branches may be drawn in 
whenever service is required. As the horizontal run of conduit 


HOTEL Ps APARTMENT 
NRA! > 4 
(ei jee es i E ner 
LOBBY a 


KEY ania ee a: 
(5) =HALL TERMINAL BOX rl SALON | 
AT CABLE RISER pari 
pa TELE @ =TELEPHONE x =) t 
Fo i= i t INSTRUMENTS 
tsi os 7 | 
=n et iUls an TA cE 
5 a, 4 
2 Be 
|BATH i CHAMEER 
wets ee 
A SALON 
NOTE:- A SEPARATE “{ FIPE EXTENDS — SALON 
FROM THE NEAREST HALL TERMINAL TO : > dlp t 
EACH TELEPHONE FOR CARRYING A PAIR ee pie 
Je OF WIRES, gigi al 
=, Te Tbe i r 
| BiG > coe 
LX, oe * 15 ] 
bes poco \— st ere t CHAMBER 
a —l ROOM ME ae Te" 1% fra 
i 
ROME UE | Si sq seo ste amved Lisrary | — [e|, HALL = 7? 
o JL saton | 2 [L] =I |p SUL ae, BATH 
Fr < raat fs Room = iE A i Jams) si 
er | JL mt_}=_, te ae! Oey | bramee 
AS r #10 ‘U ao ee 
ns e ct ——, 
aH oe a a ah Se 
{ ls ——| 
It 


oe 
> 
= 
° 
2 
evevator 
LoBeY 


ROOM |p =p eines 
" > ey i I oe BATH =| rover 
i BED [—"—" BED BED) ae fsx“ rhs 
|= = <a a 5 KM ae SALON 

Paes s CHAMBER mae 

yy —— - . —— i — sboom | 

FIG. Pog ones Pees Hore, AND APARTMENT cna 
TYPICAL FLOOR PLAN. 


= 
Lelie 


on each floor is comparatively short, the cost of the conduit 
installation is minimized. There is a further opportunity for 
economy in installing conduits from the junction box to the 
apartments, as it is frequently possible to use a single run of 
conduit for two apartments instead of a separate conduit to each. 

In apartment buildings where the floor space occupied by 
each apartment is large, the above arrangement would necessi- 
tate long runs of small-size conduit on each floor. In such cases, 
to avoid the excessive cost of this conduit, the wires are usually 
distributed to the apartments by a vertical system of conduits 
extending from the basement up through each tier of apartments. 


a 


PE ee NT Ce en EN 


PERERA CN 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 1391 


These vertical conduits diminish in size as they approach the 
upper portion of the building, and the outlets in the apartments 
are located in the walls at the points where the telephones are 
to be placed. 

In the basement, cables are extended from the cross-connecting 
box near the private branch exchange switchboard along walls 
and ceilings to the foot of each line of vertical conduits. At 


KEY 
X= PRIVATE BRANCH EXCHANGE SWITCHBOARD 
F=FEEDER CABLE PAIRS 
H= HOUSE CABLE PAIRS. 
P.L.= PRIVATE LINE PAIRS INSIDE BUILDING 
0 = TERMINAL AND JUNCTION BOX 


CONDUIT SYSTEM CABLE DISTRIBUTION APARTMENT 
#16 
- . - NORTH RISER 
1 1 a Oe ame ion a 31 PRe 
WEST RISER EAST RISER (a ret 
WEST RISER —EAST RISER LOWER 21 PRs 21 PR. Sls eter. 
EDORMITORY SERVANTS 283-303 586-606 £(S 216-276 
FLOOR * FLOOR ar as 
12TH FLOOR 1% > TH 21 PRe 21 PR. 5/3 os er, 
e 12TH FLOOR 260-202 65-585 fg 208228 
1% gs 
TH TH 21 PRy 21 PR. S/S _27 PR. 
Mu FLOOR ul FLOOR 242-262 645565 “187 102-202 
TOTH FLOOR 10TH FLOOR g|2“aeraiz treats gS Teer 
1 =|o =| 
als als 
T a S|g_asPAr, 2ipR, 2h | A 22 PR 
STHFLOOR B 9TH FLOOR 208-222 Bosr525 E|S —tse0172 
uy at 
8TH FLOOR “4 8TH FLOOR 21 PR, 21 PRe £19 oy eR, 
. 9B2°202 485*605, 136°156 
TH alee 24 PR. 21 PR, 21 PR. 
774 FLOOR 77H FLOOR e|3 62-169 Teraes 3 ~ t2¥44t 
b 
SIP orem aipR, 3/2 21.PRy 
6TH FLOOR 6TH FLOOR "|" Pamir aasaes\ | lg oesze 
Sly 
et PR. 24 PRe 8]o 21 PR, 
5mH FLOOR 5TH FLOOR 1299142 426-445 Orit 
THE: A2t eRe sien. |, 21 PR, 
4 4 FLOOR 47 FLOOR g|g torn a0s425 3 TE96 
5 ale 
oO RD So 21 PA. 21PR, SIS 4 21 PRy 
3R0 FLOOR é 3R0 FLOOR 8" ay Sa els “erei 
2% fe 
5 5 1 °R, 
2NO FLOOR 2N0 FLOOR = |//-ennt ae Vim 
21 PR. 21 PR. 21 PR. 
1sT FLOOR 1st FLOOR ai-6t Bai-364 Ne 
PIPE 1 MAIN FRAME 43 PRAI044 
; PIPE aoser. [1 _303 PA. 21 PRY 
REY GALLERY §1-309-H 4-Y BG Ryu obe a 16*36 
°, 
orery ot eAatSt os Woe NOe., [SL PR.I0¢-988 21 Phe 
2Nb MEZ2. eoreeK ee Ff la "es, PS iat 
26 PR.60?-632 &/ ” LP [se pmoe-7a3 + 
1st MEZZ. APT FL wv |? HOTEL clio rd 
GROUND 2 SF ewircw ele 3 =| SWITCHBOARD 
Me wal: mae EET a EC eg RM kdl 5] ey sRAPARTMENTS 
‘GROUND | 200M sox in \\2 SLOOR: 2 3 es .) 
| SERVICE FRONT »)) © < o © We 
FLOOR Jj}y, OFFICE = = woh Yr 
a fe 26 PR,657- 682] _ er Ba “> CROSS. 
KITCHEN GRILLE BASEMENT pr J * CONNECTING 
1 TERMINAL 
26 PR.662-707 26 PR.783-B08) 50> 5 5yX 
SERVICE CELLAR 
POINT # 4 
SPLICING BOX 
TO POINT IN CELLAR 303 PR. 1303 =F 202 PR,G8-302 = F_1-51 = Pty 
OF ENTRANCE rele POINT #4 
HOI 


Frc. 15—17-StorY COMBINATION HOTEL AND APARTMENT BUILDING, 
ConpuIt SYSTEM AND CABLE DISTRIBUTION. 


these points terminals are established with sufficient conductors 
to provide two pairs of wires for each apartment to be cared for 
by the riser. The pairs of wires between these terminals and the 
apartments are pulled into the conduits as the service is required. 

The size of the vertical conduit varies with the number of 
apartments to be served. Generally a conduit two inches in 
diameter in the basement diminishing gradually to 3/4 of an 


1392 


WEST 
11 PR. 
91-101 


17 PR. 


4 
a 
3 
a 
6 


1-101 


PARLOR 


DINING 
ROOM 


PARLOR 


CHAMBER 


CHAMBER 


——IFOYER 


RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 


——) 


CABLE DISTRIBUTION 


12TH FLOOR 


11TH FLOOR 


10TH FLOOR 


9TH FLOOR 


8TH FLOOR 


7TH FLOOR 


6TH FLOOR 


5TH FLOOR 


4TH FLOOR 


3RD FLOOR 


2nD FLOOR 
SWITCH eB! 


CROSS CONNECTING 


11 PR, 


11 PR, 


411 PR. 


ON 1ST FLCOR 


[June 27 


KEY 
@ =RISER CABLE 
TERMINAL BOX 


H.= HOUSE CABLE PAIRS 
F.= FEEDER ‘ « 
FLOOR CONDUITS & TERMINALS 
EAST WEST RISER EAST RISER 
u 
a 12TH FLOOR Xx" 
167-177 ts 
y 
ates. Vth FLoor| Xa 
i1 PR. J ” y M 
Stasvet = 1 v4 10TH FLOOR \y 
5 a = 
. a E 
3 9TH FLOOR A142 
148°158 = Ss Ws 2 
a - 
11 PR, a 8TH FLOOR Z\% 
141-151 c = ie % Pa 
< < 
= < zx 
= TPR 6 @ 7TH FLOOR) & Ih} y/! i 
135°145 es « 6)u 
8 ° digg, 
17 PR, : < + 6TH FLOOR] < ne 
q2e-138 =| Fa = a | 
Er Pr 5 au : 
40 PR Al S 51H FLOOR "io 
122-132 | “1a & % rt 
3 
eee 4TH FLOOR , 
115-125 2 
11. PR 3RO FLOOR 
109-119 LA 
ai ° ” 
ee 2ND FLOOR v 
Do. 2 
Kd 
TERMINAL NOTEi+ THE WIRES TO EACH REAR APARTMENT 


ARE CARRIED {N CONDUIT WHILE THE 


IN BASEMENT 
=H, 76 PR, 102-177=H. WIRES TO THE FRONT APARTMENTS 
101 PR. ARE CARRIED IN MOULDING, 


1-101=F, 


| CHAMBER 
CHAMBER 


Fic. 


DINING 
ROOM | 


PARLOR 


CHAMBER 


TO MANHOLE 


es a 


CHAMBER 


DINING 


ee. 


PARLOR 


tees | 


PUBLIC HALL 


SER, 
ROOM 


KITCHEN 


DINING 
_ ROOM 


| | | 
CHAMBER | 
| 


bo 


CHAMBER 


DINING 
ROOM 


PARLOR 


PARLOR 


CHAMBER 
CHAMBER 


| CHAMBER 


STREET 


16—12-Story ELEVATOR APARTMENT HOUSE. 


1912] RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING 1393 


inch at the upper floor is sufficient to care for buildings 10 to 12 
stories in height, and a conduit 11 inches in diameter in the base- 
ment diminishing to 3/4 of an inch at the top for buildings from 
six to 10 stories high. 

The number of vertical lines of conduit depends on the number 


TYPICAL FLOOR PLAN 


0 
INING partor || parton P/NING}] DINING Banton |} PARLOR DINING 
ROOM ks ROOM ROOM ROOM 
= = ot = bs alo —] 6 
H } ee <= 
wronen PKITCH, vlkinor = 
Re 
==! CHAMBER | cHaMBerR 
Ale i ‘i 
Woxameer |) L__ eS 


COURT ia 
—— 


i 


——————— 


: TT Tm 

ao: mt im. , 
KITCHEN. | joa] LIVING LIVING [ai 

I @lf Room Room || |S 
DINING p——' |[_i] DINING 


SS 
ia 


ROOM 


PARLOR 


PARLOR 


ll CHAMBE 


CABLE DISTRIBUTION IN BASEMENT 


N.W, N, CENT. N,E. 
DUMBWAITER DUMBWAITER DUMBWAITER 


He 


TO TELEPHONE 
CENTRAL OFFICE 


17-42=H. 


94-109 


B4 = =DUMB WAITER SHAFT 
©  =TELEPHONE 
---- =WIRE RUN FROM DUMB 
WAITER TO TELEPHONE 


F 


ey 
5W'B'D. ON le 
1ST FLOOR [a KEY TO CABLE DISTRIBUTION 
ie % F = FEEDER CABLE PAIRS 
: 7 H=HOUSE « ¢ 
rd ran D=DEAD sé «6 
es elt [2 =TERMINALS 
Sie 


41 PR. sigior PR. 

69-109 =H 26 PR. 

CROSS-CONNECTING 
TERMINAL 


43-68 =H. 


BETWEEN 
S.E. DUMBWAITERS 


BETWEEN 
S.W. DUMBWAITERS 


Fic. 17—6-Story Non-ELEvATOR APARTMENT HOUSE. 


of apartments on each floor. Usually a separate line of conduits 
is required for each tier of apartments, but it is often possible 
to care for two adjacent apartments on each floor by a single 
line of conduit when the telephones in both apartments are 
to be placed on the dividing wall between them. This arrange- 


1394 RHODES: TELEPHONE WIRING [June 27 


ment is, however, open to the objection that installers must 
gain access to one apartment for the purpose of installing the 
telephone in another. In spite of this objection, from the stand- 
point of the owner this method is probably the best for buildings 
of this class as it minimizes the cost of installation of conduits and 
is flexible enough to admit of direct lines being installed when 
such service is required. 

Example of Elevator Apartment Building Wiring. Fig. 16 
shows a 12-story elevator apartment building with six apart- 
ments to a floor and stores on the front of the first floor. The two 
riser cables are run in the elevator shafts. 

A diagram is given showing the junction boxes on each floor 
and the sizes of the conduits used for distributing the wires on 
each floor. 

Non-ELEVATOR APARTMENTS 

Apartment buildings of the non-elevator class do not as a rule 
exceed five or six stories in height and frequently have as many 
as 10 apartments on each floor. Buildings of this class are wired 
by extending lead-covered cables from the cross-connecting box 
near the private branch exchange switchboard through the 
basement to the foot of each dumb-waiter shaft where terminals 
are established. The terminals are made large enough to provide 
approximately for a direct line and an extension telephone for 
each apartment cared for by the dumb-waiter shaft, when it is 
thought that direct service will be required. The allowance 
made for direct line service depends upon the neighborhood. The 
wires to the various apartments are extended up through the 
dumb-waiter shafts from the terminals in the basement as 
service is required. 

In some cases these buildings are wired in advance by forming 
the wires into a cable and taping the cable to protect it against 
mechanical injury, one or two pairs being brought out at each 
apartment. 

Example of Non-Elevator A partment Building Wiring. Fig.17 
illustrates the case of a six-story apartment building having 
eight apartments to a floor. The wiring diagram shows the 


cable distribution in the basement to terminals at the foot of the 


dumb-waiter shafts. 

The author wishes to acknowledge the valuable assistance of 
Mr. E. S. Worden and Mr. W. A. Taylor in preparing the illus- 
trative examples of this paper. 


s 
4 
: 
ae 
= 
¢ 
= 
a 
; J 
a 
4 
: $ 
4 
; 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1395 


gS 


DISCUSSION ON “ THE WIRING OF LARGE BUILDINGS FOR TELE- 
PHONE SERVICE” (RHODES). Boston, Mass., JUNE 27, 1912. 


Edwin M. Surprise: I noted in reading Mr. Rhodes’s paper, 
that in New York City, at least, and probably in other places 
where very large and tall office buildings are under considera- 
tion, the scheme of attenuation is employed; that is, a large 
cable is brought in at the basement and branches taken off 
from that cable at necessary intervals. In our New England 
territory we have leaned a good deal toward the extension 
of small risers, one, two, or more, as may be required, to each 
floor, with the idea that it would result in economy, not only on 
account of the first cost of extending the cables, but also by reason 
of flexibility. 

I am very much interested to get Mr. Rhodes’s opinion re- 
garding one method as against the other, of the advantages, 
if there are any, of small risers, and the exact point, if it is pos- 
sible to give it, where perhaps small risers would prove best and 
where the large riser would not. 

George K. Manson: Mr. Surprise referred to the question of 
comparative costs, or comparative conditions when the attenua- 
tion system proves economical as compared with the small riser 
system, and to supplement Mr. Surprise’s remarks, before Mr. 
Rhodes gives us that information, it may be proper to say a 
little something about the building conditions in Boston that have 
led to the very general adoption of the small riser system in pref- 
erence to the attenuation system. 

Mr. Rhodes stated, I think, that twelve years ago there were 
very few buildings in New York City which were over twelve 
stories in height, and, to-day, I believe, he said there were 1500 
or more. I believe somewhere in his paper, in reference, per- 
haps to the Hudson Terminal buildings, he has spoken of a floor 
space of nearly 2,000,000 sq. ft. Now, we have in Boston, we 
think, a fairly large city, especially if we are allowed to take in 
the suburbs which properly belong to it. In Boston today I 
think I am not mistaken in saying that there is only one building 
which is over twelve stories in height, and that was built before 
the present building laws were in existence. If there are more 
than that, they also were built before the present building ordi- 
nance. As to the area, I presume it is very doubtful if there are 
half a dozen buildings in Boston that have, we will say, over ten 
per cent of the total rentable floor space referred toin Mr. Rhodes’s 
paper in connection with the Hudson Terminal buildings. 

The building law in Boston, briefly, is that no building in the 
city shall exceed 125 feet from the average sidewalk height to the 
roof line. If the width of the abutting street is so narrow that 
two and one-half times the width of the abutting street is less 
than 125 feet, then the building must be correspondingly less in 
height, and must not exceed two and a half times the width of 


1396 TELEPHONE WIRING [June 27 


the abutting street, and is not to exceed 125 feet as a maximum, 
and in some parts of Boston there are special ordinances that 
restrict the height to even less than that. 

You will see, therefore, that our problem of providing wiring 
for office buildings is a little different from that in New York 
and other cities where the development in terms of lines and per- 
haps subscribers may be no greater than the development in 
many of our medium-sized New England cities. Itis by reason of 
that fact that in office building wiring we have found it is expedient, 
to a very large extent, to use the single riser system, perhaps one 
cable feeding a single floor, a 30-pair, or a 60-cable, or, perhaps, 
initially, one cable feeding two floors, and later to be tapped in 
such a manner as to supply a cable for each individual floor. I 
cannot quote figures at this moment, and possibly we could not 
back up our position, but I think under these conditions the single 
riser cable has proved economical; at least it is very convenient 
to install, and leads to very efficient results in the use of the main 
cables and in the use of the office cables. I trust Mr. Surprise 
will pardon me for enlarging on his question to that extent. 

There is one other point that I will mention, and that is the 
vast reduction of the fire hazard that has been brought about by 
the modern methods of wiring buildings as compared with the 
older methods. 

F. L. Rhodes: I think that Mr. Manson has, in supple- 
menting what Mr. Surprise said, very well pointed out the wide 
range of conditions to be met in work of this kind. In building 
wiring, the reason why it is not the best practise to run separate 
cables to separate floors is principally a matter of economy, 
both as regards the cable itself and the space occupied. For a 
given number of pairs of wires, the most economical cable is 
secured by placing these all in one sheath. This is true, not 
only as regards the cost of the cable itself, but also true as regards 
the space occupied. One cable of 600 pairs occupies less section, 
and has less cost per pair than 10 cables of 60 pairs each, and these 
conditions of economy, both of cost and space, are intensified 
in the case of tall buildings as compared with the conditions that 
prevail in the case of buildings of comparatively few stories. 


ye ee TT Ne Me ON ey EM ON 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 27, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


THE VIBRATIONS OF TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 


BY CHARLES F. MEYER AND J. B. WHITEHEAD 


HIsTORY 


Investigations of the vibrations of telephone diaphragms have 
been published by Rayleigh,1 Wien,” Kempf-Hartmann,? Taylor,* 
Gati® and others. Rayleigh and Wien measured the value of 
the simple harmonic current which would just produce an audible 
tone in the receiver at different frequencies. They found that 
at certain frequencies the current required was a minimum, and 
Wien concluded that these minima showed the existence of 
natural vibrations of the diaphragm, but realized that the varia- 
tion in sensibility of the ear with pitch played possibly a larger 
part in the difference of current required at different frequencies 
than the natural vibrations themselves. 

Kempf-Hartmann fastened a mirror on the diaphragm of a 
receiver and photographed on a moving film the oscillations of a 
spot of light reflected from the mirror. By passing direct current 
interrupted about 100 times per second through the telephone he 
was able to photograph the natural oscillations of the diaphragm 
which were produced at each make and break, and showed also 
that when the diaphragm had been given an impulse its reaction 
could be detected after about 1/2000 of a second. 

Taylor has plotted curves showing the connection between 
the least current producing an audible tone and the frequency, 
his work being similar to that of Rayleigh and Wien. He noticed 


1. Rayleigh. ‘‘ Theory of Sound,” I, p. 473. 

Wien. Annalen d. Phys, IV, p. 450, 1901. 

Kempf-Hartmann. Annalen d. Phys., VIII, p. 481, 1902. 

Taylor. Transactions A.I.E.E., 1909, XXVIII, IT, page 1184. 
Gati, Electrician, LXVI, p. 456, 1910. 


1397 


oe Ww bw 


1398 MEVER AND WHITEHEAD: [June 27 


that as the alternating-current generator from which he obtained 
his current accelerated or slowed down there were certain fre- 
quencies at which the sound from the receiver was very much 
increased, and he plotted rough curves showing this. 

Gati has worked with transmitters. He produced before the 
diaphragm a sound of which the frequency was varied, but the 
amplitude was kept as constant as possible. The transmitter 
wasin circuit with a battefy and the primary of a transforming 
coil. To the secondary of the coil he connected the capacity 
required to produce electric resonance at each frequency and 
measured the current in the secondary circuit. Plotting curves 
between frequency and current a decided maximum is obtained 
showing resonance at about 700 vibrations per second. 

The mathematical theory of the free oscillations of circular 
membranes and plates has been developed. It shows that the 
nodes are either circles about the centre, or diameters symmetric- 
ally distributed®, this holding true for plates with either a free 
or a clamped boundary; the boundary of membranes is, of 
course, necessarily fixed. Rayleigh gives the following formula 
for the frequency of the lowest natural vibration of a clamped 
plate. 


3.2 V gh 
0 On @ V3 9 (low) (1) 
p(1—p*) 
where g = Young’s modulus. 
& = Poisson’s ratio. 
p = volume density. 


2h = thickness of plate 
a radius of plate. 


He applied the formula to the case of a receiver diaphragm which 
he measured, and found 991 as the fundamental frequency. No 
experimental verification of this seems to have been attempted. 


OBJECT 
The present work was undertaken to obtain further and more 
accurate information concerning the way in which the dia- 
phragms in the transmitter and receiver vibrate when acted on 
by periodic forces of simple wave form of different frequencies. 
Also to obtain quantitative data on the influence of the free 
periods, and to determine to what degree of approximation the 


6. Rayleigh. ‘‘ Theory of Sound,” Vol. I, pp. 331, 366. 


x 


. ais . “WAS 


EEN NY ee a Ce ee ee 


1912] TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 1399 


form of the vibration of the diaphragm follows that of the im- 
pressediforce. The question of the localization of the nodes and 
loops at the higher resonance frequencies is also interesting, 
but it has thus far evaded solution. 


WoRK ON THE RECEIVER 

Arrangements and Apparatus. The receiver is simpler in 
construction than the transmitter and is therefore more easily 
investigated. With the receiver the problem is to pass through 
it an alternating current of simple wave form, as nearly simple 
harmonic as obtainable, and to record the form of the current, 
and the corresponding oscillation of the diaphragm. The ampli- 
tude of the oscillation of the diaphragm for the same current at 
different frequencies, plotted against frequency, would then give 
the resonance curve for the diaphragm. For producing the 
alternating currents two special generators with smooth body 
armatures were used for low frequencies. For the principal 
range a third generator was used. With these three machines 
frequencies from 16~ to 3000 ~ could be attained. The current 
wave form was recorded by a Duddell double high-frequency 
oscillograph, used simultaneously as oscillograph and ammeter. 
An oscillograph of this type has a free period of from 8000 to 
10,000. It may hardly be relied upon to record with any accuracy 
a wave of over three or four hundred cycles. In the present case, 
however, the current wave is, with a few exceptions, very nearly 
pure, and the question of wave form does not enter markedly 
into the results of the work. 

The method adopted for recording the oscillations of the 
diaphragm was as follows: A small fragment of mirror was 
mounted directly on the diaphragm by means of wax or cement, 
and its vibrations recorded by a spot of light reflected upon 
a photographic plate. It is easy to mount the mirror rigidly, 
and its mass, which may be 0.007 of a gram or under, is too 
small to influence the motion of the diaphragm greatly. There 
can further be no doubt that the angular deviation of the mirror 
is the angular deviation of the diaphragm at the point where 
it is mounted. 

DIAPHRAGM A 


The first receiver worked with was one of the ordinary bipolar 


type. Its characteristics were: Total diameter of diaphragm 


5.42 cm. (2.14 in.). Inside diameter of clamping ring in cap 
4.98 cm. (1.96 in.), this being the effective diameter of the dia- 


1400 MEYER AND WHITEHEAD: [June 27 


phragm. Thickness of diaphragm with enamel on front face 
0.03 cm. (0.012 in.). Thickness bare at edge 0.023 cm. (0.009 
in.). Distance between pole pieces and plane of clamping ring 
of diaphragm 0.05 cm. (0.02 in.). The air gap between pole 
pieces and diaphragm is less than this as the diaphragm is 
permanently bent inwards by the attraction of the magnet. 
The part of the cap extending over the diaphragm was cut out in 
order to make room for the small mirror which was fastened on. 
See Fig. 1. The mirror was placed about half way between the 
center and edge. The diaphragm was so oriented over the pole 
pieces that the mirror came on the perpendicular bisector as 
shown in Fig. 2. The receiver was then set up so that the mirror 
came on a horizontal diameter. Pulling in of the diaphragm 
corresponded to a motion to the right of the light spot on the 
photographic plate. 

Some of the photographs obtained for this diaphragm are 


Fic. 1—Car oF RECEIVER—THE Fic. 2—THE X MARKS THE 
SHADED PorRTION was Cut AWAY. POSITION OF THE MIRROR ON 
THE DIAPHRAGM 


shown in Figs. 3 and 4, with frequencies noted for each set. The 
curves on the left are the oscillograph records of the current 
through the receiver, the number at the side giving its value in 
milliamperes (effective), calculated from a knowledge of the 
sensibility of the oscillograph. The curves on the right are the 
traces from the diaphragm, the accompanying figures giving the 
value of the angular deflection in radians X 10~‘, calculated from 
the dimensions of the optical system. As these latter curves are 
unsymmetrical it is impossible to speak of their amplitudes, so 
the total deflection from one extremity of swing to the other is 
given; this quantity will henceforth be referred to as the “‘range”’ 
of the oscillation. The numbers on the extreme right-hand 
side of the figure give the frequencies of the vibration in cycles 
per second. In all of the photographs time proceeds upwards, 
as shown by the arrow. In the first traces a break is noticeable 
about the middle of the vibration, which indicates the rest 
positions of the spots of light. This break was produced by 


: 


S 
“i 


Time 


38.4 


32.6 


18.8 


23.6 


MILLI- 
AMPERES 


CURRENT DIAPHRAGM 


[MEYER AND WHITEHEAD] 


Fic. 3—RECEIVER DIAPHRAGM A 


PLATE LXXV 


A.1. E. €, 


VOL. XXXI, 1912 


RADIANS 


15.8 x 10-4 


13. 


or 


12 


“I 


19% 


13. 


on 


wo 


se 


60 ~ 


232 ~ 


332 ~ 


403 ~ 


540 ~ 


Time 


PLATE LXXVI 
A, |..&. E. 


VOL. XXXI, 1912 


36.7 MILtI- 


20. 


20. 


53. 


1s 


61. 


41. 


31.6 


37.! 


ee) 


bo 


AMPERES 


DIAPHRAGM 


CURRENT 


[MEYER AND WHITEHEAD} 


Fic. 4—RECEIVER DIAPHRAGM A 


RADIANS 
26.5-x 9104 
ise 
220) ee 
20.1 
7.<2 
9.8 


~l 


to 


6 


to 


610 ~ 


1066 ~ 


1814 ~ 


2600 ~ 


2700 ~ 


2794 ~ 


PLATE LXXVII 
Aol. Boies 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


CURRENT DIAPHRAGM 
Noload. 3.68 MILLI- RADIANS 
AMPERES OC ae 
18.0 x 10-4 
820 ~ 
Bempets- 3.56 tl a : 19.0 « 
No load. 23.0 ss By Ole 
1440 ~ 
Same,“ 23.0 “ Bo@) 1 
No load. 34.5 ae isjpoha 
2840 ~ 
8mg. ‘ 34.5 : Begs ts 
[MEYER AND WHITEHEAD] 
Fic. 5—RECEIVER DIAPHRAGM B 
EXCITING TRANSMITTER 
CURRENT CURRENT 
Time 
288 ~ 
600 ~ 


(MEYER AND WHITEHEAD] 
Fic. 6—TRANSMITTER 


PLATE LXXVIII 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


EXCITING TRANSMITTER 
CURRENT CURRENT 
= — 


TO00 ~ 


794 ~ 


940 ~ 


1014 ~ 


1350 ~ 


tmMLYER AND WHITEHEAD] 


Fic, 7—TRANSMITTER 


1912] TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 1401 
placing a fine wire in the path of the beam of light when there 
was no current, but the wire was soon abolished as it introduced 
. unnecessary complications. 

The diaphragm trace for 60 cycles is seen to be somewhat 
unsymmetrical, the curve being pointed on the right, that is, 
when the diaphragm is nearest the pole pieces. At 232 cycles 
for a range of 13.6 the curve is rather unsymmetrical, but for 
a range of 6.7 the irregularity is less marked. At 332~, and 
1292~ also, the irregularities are seen to be greater for greater 
ranges while for most of the other curves this is not noticeable. 
The development of the dimple in the curve for 332 and 1292 ~ 
at the point where the diaphragm is furthest from the poles is 
rather surprising; it will be seen later that 332 ~ shows a 
peculiarity in another respect. It might be expected from the 
following considerations to find greater regularity in the photo- 
graphs for small ranges. 

The force on the diaphragm is proportional to the square of 
the induction. If we consider the induction B as made up of a 
constant part By due to the permanent magnetism, and a variable 
part B,, due to the current, we have for the original force 


Fo = c BY? 


and for the variable force 


Paes B= Clee 2B, By +.B.) (2) 


The increment of the variable force over the original force deter- 
mines the motion of the diaphragm. Its value is 


KP =P — Fo="c (2B) Bi + Br] 
If B, is sufficiently small we may neglect its square and write 


Dor s. 26 Bo Bi (3) 


So that, if B; is made to vary harmonically, A F will do so. In 
the present work the currents have been kept nearly harmonic 
in all cases. The variation in the air gap between the pole pieces 
and the diaphragm would prevent B, from being strictly pro- 
portional to the current, but for sufficiently small vibrations 
the influence of the variation in the air gap may be neglected. 

The ranges of all the traces were carefully meastired. The 
results obtained for the first diaphragm are plotted in the curves 


1402 _ MEYER AND WHITEHEAD: {June 27 
o 

of Figs. 8, 9, and 10. The abserssas are current through the 

receiver, expressed in milliamperes (effective). The ordinates 


are the angular range of oscillation of the diaphragm, expressed * 


in radians X 10-4. Each curve gives the relation between cur- 
rent through the receiver and oscillation of the diaphragm at a 
given frequency which is marked beside it. The curves are all 
plotted to the same scale and put in separate figures to avoid 
crowding. They show that an approximately linear relation 


8 


cS] 
So 


10 


RANGE (RADIANS X 1074) 


0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
CURRENT (MILLIAMPERES) 


20 


10 


RANGE (RADIANS X 1074) 


0 ~ 10 20 30 40 50 60 
CURRENT (MILLIAMPERES) 


Fic. 8—RELATION BETWEEN CURRENT THROUGH THE RECEIVER, 


AND RANGE OF OSCILLATIONS OF THE DIAPHRAGM AT DIFFERENT FRE- 
QUENCIES. 


exists between the current and deflection of the diaphragm, even 
to the large values of current here used. The sound of the tele- 
phone for the greater currents was sufficient to be heard all over 
the room. 

From each of the curves of Figs. 8, 9, and 10, the angular 
oscillation corresponding to a current of twenty milliamperes, 
at the frequency for which the curve is taken, can be read off. 
In Fig. 11 a curve is plotted between the frequency as abscissa, 
and the angular oscillation as ordinate, showing the effect of 


a ah A) 


ee ea fe ie 


. ube we eh ee ee hol On 


1912] TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 1403 


change of frequency on the angle of oscillation, this being the 
so-called resonance curve for the diaphragm. It will be noticed 
that the curve starts out horizontally, then drops to a minimum 
at 300 ~ from which it rises and reaches a maximum at 720 ~, 
at which the range of oscillations is about five times that of the 
minimum, and about four times that at the lowest frequency. 
After 720 ~ there is no other maximum until 2600 ~, and then 
shortly after this there appears to be another, but this was not 


ros) 
i=) 


10 


RANGE (RADIANS X 1074) 


30 40 
CURRENT ( MILLIAMPERES) 
#680 ~ 


40 


30 


20 


10 


RANGE (RADIANS X 1074) 


50 


0 10 20 30 40 60 


CURRENT ( MILLIAMPERES’ 


Fic. 9—RELATION BETWEEN CURRENT THROUGH THE RECEIVER, 
AND RANGE OF OSCILLATION OF THE DIAPHRAGM AT DIFFERENT FRE- 


QUENCIES. 


quite reached as it was not desired to overspeed the machine 
at the time these records were obtained. It is rather surprising 
to find the minimum at 300, before the first maximum. At first 
its real existence was doubted but the appearance of a similar dip 
in the curve for the next diaphragm, with an entirely different 
make of receiver, seems to indicate a real effect. It should be 
remembered that the damping of the diaphragm in a receiver 
is not purely mechanical, but is partly electromagnetic and this 
may havea bearing here. The mechanical effect can be expressed 


; ° 
1404 MEYER AND WHITEHEAD: [June 27 


dx 
dt 
motion of the diaphragm. The electromagnetic damping we 
may consider to be made up of two parts. One of these is due to 
eddy currents set up by the motion of the diaphragm in the per- 
manent magnetic field. It would be present if the diaphragm 
were executing free vibrations. This also could be expressed by 


a term of the form k Se The other part is due to hysteresis 


by a term of the usual form k in the differential equation of 


ee 
o 


Ao 
‘= 


ry 
Co 


RANGE (RADIANS X 1074) 


0 10 


40 


30 


RANGE (RADIANS X 1074) 


0 10 50 60 


40 
CURRENT (MILLIAMPERES) 


Fic. 10—RELATION BETWEEN CURRENT THROUGH THE RECEIVER, 
AND RANGE OF OSCILLATION OF THE DIAPHRAGM AT DIFFERENT FRE- 
QUENCIES 


and eddy currents caused by the current in the receiver. This 
would increase with the frequency,so that we are dealing here 
not with a constant damping coefficient, as is usually supposed 
in the treatment of forced oscillations, but with one that 
increases with frequency. The minimum in the resonance curve 
appears at about 300 ~ and it is the trace at 332 ~ to which 
attention was called above, which shows the dimple. The plate 


nian‘ ewes = eee Le ee Se Ne eT 


1912] TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 1405 


for 296 ~ (not reproduced) was exposed in two sections, giving 
traces very similar to the lower two of 332 ~. This plate was 
obtained before the one for 332 ~ and the range was not carried 
high enough to get the dimple. It cannot be definitely said that 
the minimum of the curve and the dimple in the trace are causally 
connected, but the coincidence is rather striking. 

The resonance curve Fig. 11 covers the range of the important 
frequencies existing in the human voice. The lowest tone reached 
by man in singing is about 65 vibrations per second. The highest 
reached by a woman is 1036, but this tone contains harmonics of 
higher frequencies. A number of investigations have been per- 


40 


20 


RANGE (RADIANS X 107*FOR 20 M.A,) 


1000 150 N00 2500 3000 
FREQUENCY (CYCLES PER SEC.) 

Fic. 11—RESONANCE CURVE FOR DIAPHRAGM A. GIVING THE 
RELATION BETWEEN FREQUENCY AND RANGE OF OSCILLATION FOR A 


CONSTANT CURRENT. 


formed on the vibrations contained in vowel sounds. According 
to results obtained by Bevier’ the prominent frequencies are: 


AO CHM AS ENIAMITC Det retacete tency aie cay ato tevel soot «fe 650 1050 1550 
oe glo ila Dae 7 (i nalaess aT ESR RO 620 1050 1800 
Ca AEST eae cae eR 575 1850 

Camm oa DOC Tema ni aa seis siette “Neusiexerel 2050 


In the consonants, especially those of the hissing type, very 
much higher frequencies exist, going in some cases as high as 
10,000. These consonants have not the importance in speech 
that the vowels have, and it may well be said that the prominent 
NL NODS EO ae 


 — 


Teebiiys. Rev, 1901, 1902, 1903. Quoted by Barton “ Text-Book of 
Sound,” p. 672. 


1406 MEYER AND WHITEHEAD: [June 27 


vibrations are included between 300 and 3000, probably not 
many lying above 2000. 

We may obtain a comparison between the fundamental 
frequency of the diaphragm determined experimentally, with 
that to be expected from Rayleigh’s formula. The greatest 
ordinate of the resonance curve comes at 720. This ordinate 
for any system lies at a somewhat less frequency than its free 
vibration. Further, the actual frequency is somewhat less than 
it would be if there were no damping. It is this last value which 
is given by Rayleigh’s formula. By applying the theory of a 
system with one degree of freedom to the resonance curve of 
Fig. 11, a simple calculation shows that if there were no damping 
the free frequency of diaphragm ‘‘ A ’’ would be 732. This is 
12 vibrations a second higher than the point for the maximum 
ordinate of the curve. The difference is not greater than the 
error in measuring the frequency. Let us now substitute in 
equation (1). We may take 


q-=.2.0 X 10% 
M= 
p=7.7 
which gives 
2h 
n=2. 41 X 1X 
a 


from the measurements of the present diaphragm, 


2h = 0.023 cm. 
a=2.5 = 
Hence 
n = 890 


this being the value required by Rayleigh’s formula, whereas the 
value obtained experimentally is 732. The agreement is not 
very good but a better result is hardly to be expected. The 
diaphragm has 0.007 cm. (0.003 in.) of enamel on its front face, 
which probably loads it down without adding much to its stiff- 
ness, thus causing the actual value of the free frequency to be 
lower than the calculated one. The measurement of the thick- 
ness of the diaphragm is not very accurate, only a small spot 
at the edge being available for this, and moreover ‘the value 
of Young’s modulus substituted in the equation may not be the 
correct one for the iron of the diaphragm. It cannot be told in 


— 


a 


aN eT 


TS oe ia et *\ 


i 


\ 


Se ee Oe eS RR NY Ee hee Ne ee 


1912 TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 1407 


what direction more accurate values for these last two quantities 
would change the result. 


DIAPHRAGM B 

Another receiver designated as No. 122 W, also of the bipolar 
type, was next investigated. Its characteristics were: Total 
diameter of diaphragm 5.51 cm. (2.17 in.). Inside diameter of 
clamping ring 5 cm. (1.97 in.). Thickness of diaphragm over 
enamel and varnish 0.028 cm. (0.011 in.). Thickness bare at 
edge 0.023 cm. (0.009 in.). Distance between pole pieces and 
plane of clamping ring of diaphragm about 0.03 cm. (0.012 in.). 

It seemed desirable to ascertain whether the mirror had any 
noticeable effect on the form or range of the oscillation, so in 
this set of exposures the current was kept as nearly constant as 
possible for each plate. One section was exposed with a load of 
8 mg. wax placed on the diaphragm as near to the mirror as 
possible, and the other section was exposed without the load. 
Some of the photographs are reproduced in Fig. 5. In none of 
these is there any noticeable difference in wave form when the 
load is on and off, nor is any difference shown in the other photo- 
graphs which are not reproduced. The traces were all carefully 
measured. The differences in width are of the order of the errors 
of measurement, which range from, say, 5 per cent when the 
traces are as wide as those for 820 ~ to 15 or 20 per cent for 
narrow traces, as for 1440 ~. The measurements on the same 
trace usually check up to one or two per cent if the range of the 
trace is a centimeter or more, but in measuring traces of different 
photographic intensity the accuracy is probably not so great. 
The figures for 820 ~ show an increase of 8 per cent for the loaded 
case over that for no load; this may be a real effect. 

Fig. 12 gives the resonance curve as nearly as it can be plotted 
from the scant data obtained for this diaphragm. Frequency is 
plotted as abscissa, and the ratio of diaphragm oscillation to 
current as ordinate. If we assume the linear relation of current 
and diaphragm oscillation for a fixed frequency this gives 
the same curve as Fig. 11 to within a constant factor. We see 
that the minimum before the first maximum is again present, 
and in a more marked degree than for the first diaphragm. The 
maximum ordinate is about five times that at the minimum as 
before, but only three times that at the lowest frequency. How- 
ever, itis not entirely certain that the maximum comes at 820 ~ 
as drawn. When watching the light spots this appeared to the 


1408 MEYER AND WHITEHEAD: [June 27 


eye to be about the maximum and so the photograph was made 
at this frequency. If more points had been obtained they might 
have shown that the maximum really lies at a somewhat different 
frequency, and has a 10 or 20 per cent greater value. The curve 
shows no further resonance points up to the highest speed the 
machine attained, but they doubtless would have been found 

“if it had been possible to go high enough. This diaphragm had 
approximately the same characteristics as the first, so if we apply 
Rayleigh’s formula we again get 890 as the natural frequency, 
the agreement with the experimental value being somewhat 
better this time. 


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 


More diaphragms, and diaphragms of different characteristics, 
might have been examined by the method here used, but it was 


RANGE (RADIANS X 10°*PER M.A) 


0 S00 1000 1800 2000 2500 8000 
FREQUENCY (CYCLES PER SEC.) 


Fic. 12—RESONANCE CURVE FOR DIAPHRAGM B. 


thought that before the investigation was extended in this 
direction further knowledge should be obtained about the motion 
of some one diaphragm. It was pointed out above that when a 
circular plate is vibrating freely, the nodes are circles and dia- 
meters.2 In the case of a clamped diaphragm this means that 
the nodes may be located as shown in Fig. 18. These drawings 
are for the five lowest modes of vibration and are given in the 
order of ascending frequency. We may expect that in the case of 
a telephone diaphragm some of these types of vibration will be 
present. It cannot be said in advance which ones will occur nor 
to what extent they willdoso. This depends on the frequency of 
the impressed force and on the way in which it is applied, and 
can only be found by experiment. Hence we may suppose that 


8. Winkelmann’s ‘‘ Handbuch der Physik, II,” p. 372, ed. 1909. 
Rayleigh, “ Sound,” Vol I, pa dst. 


1912] TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 1409 


by fixing a mirror in one spot (e.g., over the perpendicular bi- 
sector of the pole pieces), we cannot learn all that should be 
d known about the motion of the diaphragm, and this is borne out, 
, even to a more marked degree than was expected, by visual 
observation of the spot of light at certain frequencies. The spot 
ordinarily vibrated in a horizontal direction. This is what would 
: be expected if the vibration consisted of a motion of the diaphragm 
J as a whole (Fig. 13a,) or if there existed an internal circular 
; node (Fig. 13d). We may refer to this as a “ circular ”’ vibra- 
tion. At certain frequencies the spot of light vibrated, not hori- 


; zontally, but obliquely. An oblique motion would be produced 
a vb. c 

s 

: d. e, 

4 Fic. 13—REPRESENTING THE Five LowrEst MODES OF FREE VIBRATION 


OF A CIRCULAR DIAPHRAGM. 


a.—The boundary as the only node—diaphragm vibrating as a whole. 

b.—One diameter as node—the two halves of the diaphragm vibrating in opposite phase. 
c.—Two diameters as nodes—adjacent quadrants are in opposite phase. 

d.—Two circles as nodes—the inner and outer areas are in opposite phase. 

e.—Three diameters as nodes—adjacent sectors are in opposite phase. 


yeh ek 
‘ 


if there were superimposed on the circular vibration a vibration 
having one or more diameters as nodes, as in Fig. 130, c, or e. 
We may speak of this motion as a “‘ diametral” one. The mirror 
need not be located on a node to show this component, but would 
do so to some extent if it were located anywhere except on a 
loop. This component cannot be symmetrical about the center 
of the diaphragm. 

It is not at once evident why the diametral vibration should 
be introduced at all. If we assume the complete symmetry of 
the diaphragm about its center, and of the pole pieces about the 
diameter bisecting them perpendicularly, there is no reason to 


ee Te ENT ns 


‘ 


j 


‘ 
1410 MEYER AND WHITEHEAD: [June 27 


expect it. We must look for a lack of symmetry somewhere. 
The mirror on the diaphragm suggests itself, but the weight of. 
the mirror was only 4 mg. and it seems improbable that so small 
a’ load could be responsible for the vibration. It was thought 
that some sort of asymmetry must exist in the poles, and if this 
were the case then a rotation of these behind the diaphragm ought 
to make the nodal diameter rotate in the diaphragm, keeping 
a fixed position with reference to the poles. This would allow an 
exploration of the motion, so to speak, around the diaphragm 
without moving the mirror or the diaphragm itself. A receiver 
(122 W) exactly like the one used with diaphragm “ B ” was 
fitted up to allow the rotation of the poles. With this instrument 
it was found that the diametral component recorded by the spot 
of light changed markedly as the pole pieces were rotated; it 
passed from zero through a maximum and back to zero in about 
half a revolution. But it was also noticed that there was a de- 
cided change in the intensity of the sound as the rotation took 
place, which, of course, should not exist if the diaphragm were 
symmetrical and the nodal diameter were merely being turned 
therein. Moreover the maximum diametral components recorded 
by the image coincided with the maximum sound, so that possibly 
the main thing shown was that the amplitude of the diametral 
vibration of the whole diaphragm depended on the orientation 
of the diaphragm over the poles. Three things presented theth- 
selves in explanation of this fact: First, mechanical imper- 
fections in the 10tating part might cause the poles to approach 
the diaphragm in certain positions and recede at others. Second, 
the influence of the*weight of the mirror might make one direc- 
tion in the diaphragm different from another. Third, the grain 
of the diaphragm may be the cause. This was suggested by 
Kempf-Hartmann® as a possible cause of asymmetry. Some 
rough experiments were at once instituted to decide between 
these three possibilities, and it is certain that mechanical imper- 
fections play only a small part if any at all. No decision could 
be made between the influence of the mirror and grain, but it is 
thought that this can be done in the future. If it develops that 
the orientation of the grain in the diaphragm over the poles 
plays an important part in determining to what extent the 
diametral vibrations are introduced, it would appear to be a 
matter of some importance. 

Whether these vibrations are a help or a hindrance in the 


9. Kempf-Hartmann. Annalen, VIII, p. 492. 1902. 


PTT ER NT 


1912] TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 1411 


transmission of speech it is difficult to say. It is generally con- 
sidered that the fundamental tone of the diaphragm falls within 
the range of the principal frequencies of the voice, and this is 
borne out by comparison of the curves of Figs. 11 and 12 with 
the data given on the frequencies for different sounds. The 
amplitude of the circular vibration is small between the funda- 
mental and the next higher resonance tone. Sounds of certain 
pitch are therefore very much magnified in relation to others. 


-The frequencies of the vibrations with one diameter and two 


diameters as nodes lie below the frequency for the second circular 
vibration. From the observations discussed above it appears 
that a telephone diaphragm may be made to take up these modes 
of vibration by properly orienting it over the pole pieces or by 
properly loading it. Now, might it not be possible by deliber- 
ately introducing the diametral vibrations, both in transmitter 
and receiver, and choosing the sizes of the diaphragm in such a 
manner that the maxima of the resonance for the one diaphragm 
coincide with the minima of the resonance for the other, to 
maintain more nearly the relation between the amplitudes of 
sounds of different frequencies? 


WorRK ON THE TRANSMITTER 


Arrangements and Apparatus. For the transmitter the 
general problem is similar to that for the receiver, namely, to 
exert an oscillating force of known form on the diaphragm and 
record the vibration produced by it. As in actual use the trans- 
mitter is acted on by sound waves, the most natural thing would 
be to use these for the impressed force, but experimental diffi- 
culties arise which make this impracticable. It is difficult, if 
not impossible, to get a source of sound which is sufficiently 
loud, and at the same time gives a pure tone of which the pitch 
and intensity may be easily varied and measured over a wide 
range. Moreover when working with sound sources in an en- 
closed space, such as the room of a laboratory, there are always 
standing waves set up between the walls of the enclosure which 
would introduce a further uncertainty in determining the inten- 
sity of the sound which is incident upon the transmitter dia- 
phragm. For these reasons no attempt was made to use a sound 
source. From the work on the receiver the conclusion seemed 
justified that the pull produced on the diaphragm by the receiver 
magnet is nearly harmonic for a harmonic current, and the 
amplitudes of the force and current are proportional if the 


1412 MEVER AND WHITEHEAD: [June 27 


current is not too great. It was accordingly decided to use a 
receiver magnet for producing the force acting on the transmitter 
diaphragm, as this allows the frequency and amplitude to be 
easily varied and measured. The magnet of a receiver was 
mounted rigidly in front of the transmitter. A small iron disk 
was shellaced on to the diaphragm to have some magnetic 
material for the magnet to act on, as the transmitter diaphragms 
themselves are of aluminum. The necessity of using the disk 
and the fact that the magnet produces a central force instead of 
a distributed one, as does a sound wave, are disadvantages of 
this method. (The weight of the disk was 0.81 gram.) 

The current from the alternating-current generator was passed 
through the coil of the receiver magnet, and the current wave 
recorded on the oscillograph. R 
For recording the vibration of 
the diaphragm the mirror 
method would have had cer- 
tain advantages, but with a 
system as stiff as the trans- 
mitter the amplitude would 
not be great enough. Current 
from a storage battery was 
passed through the _ trans- 
mitter and the second vibra- 
tor of the oscillograph in 
series, and the variation of 
current in the transmitter due 
to the vibration of the dia- 
phragm was recorded on the same photographic plate on which 
the curve of the current through the magnet was recorded; the 
variation of current in the transmitter was taken as a measure 
of the oscillation of the diaphragm. The electrical connections 
are shown in Fig. 14. In one electrical circuit, which will here- 
after be 1eferred to as the “ magnet circuit, ’’ the high-fre- 
quency generator G, the oscillograph O,, the coil on the 
magnet F and the resistance R are in series. In the other 
circuit, which will be called the ‘transmitter circuit,’’ the 
current flows from the storage battery B to the diaphragm D, 
through the carbon granules box of the transmitter C to the 
oscillograph O2, and through the milliammeter A back to the 
battery. The battery consisted of three storage cells; the voltage 
remained constant at 2.9 volts throughout. The two circuits 


o> 
Fic. 14—ELEcCTRICAL CONNECTIONS 
IN WORKING WITH THE TRANSMITTER. 


Pa SC he er 
. 
‘A \ 


1912] TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 1413 


had the point Z in common at which they were connected to 
earth. The action of the apparatus is simple. The alternating 
current in the coil of the magnet F causes the diaphragm D to 
vibrate. Before the beginning of the vibration the current in 
the transmitter is steady and can be read on the milliammeter 
A. This steady current causes a steady deflection of the oscillo- 
graph Oz. When the motion of the diaphragm begins the current 
undergoes variations which are recorded by O2. During the 
time of making an exposure the milliammeter is shunted so as to 
do away with all possible self-induction in the transmitter 
circuit. 
PHOTOGRAPHS AND MEASUREMENTS 

Some reproductions of the photographs are shown in Figs. 6 
and 7. The trace on the left shows the current in the magnet 
coil. The zero line is not shown but would traverse the middle 
of the trace, as this is due to a simple alternating current. The 
straight dark line on the right gives the line for zero current in 
the transmitter. The trace to its left gives the variation of 
current through the transmitter when the diaphragm is oscil- 
lating. That is, the distance from the zero line to the trace 
at any point gives the instantaneous value of the current, and 
the difference between the maximum and minimum distance 
gives the range of oscillation of the current. The frequencies 
are given to the right. 

On the plates for 600, 700, 940 and 1014 cycles, and on most 
of the plates not reproduced, the traces are pointed for maximum 
current (granules compressed) and flat for minimum current. 
In these cases the steady current line runs nearer the minimum 
than the maximum. This was shown by an asymmetrical 
broadening of the light spot toward the left when the exciting 
current was turned on, and also by a rise in the reading of the 
milliammeter A. In the first plate shown, namely for 288 cycles, 
this is reversed. The points are for minimum current and the 
flat side for maximum. In this case the steady current line runs 
nearer the maximum, the broadening being asymmetrical to the 
right, and correspondingly, the milliammeier fell on making the 
exciting current. The plate for 1350 cycles gives a more symmet- 
rical trace than 288 ~, but showed the same anomalous behavior 
in the broadening of the light spot toward less current, and the 
dropping of the milliammeter. These two plates were taken 
one after the other. This anomalous condition had been observed 
visually on one occasion when observing the oscillations by means 


1414 MEYER AND WHITEHEAD: [June 27 


of a ground glass and a rocking mirror, but the transmitter had 
gone back to its normal condition before a photograph was 
obtained. After this no amount of tapping and exciting would 
bring it back. The plates in question were obtained when at the 
end of a series of exposures this condition was found to exist 
accidentally. After these two plates the transmitter returned to 


415 
ce . 
a 
bas | 
° 1.0 
Ww 
(e) 
5 
=» 
= 
a 
$ 
Lege Sa Smee eens Tae | pares Va Fano | mes meg 
CURRENT (MILLIAMPERES) 
5 Hs} 
uw 
[ac 
ao 
21:0 
Ww 
[e) 
ae he 
oO wo 
= 
oa 
= 
Sil ane A PULEM, CORERE ON AGTCORE TES Seeds aL ee 
CURRENT (MILLIAMPERES) 

2.0 
eS 
oe 
WwW 
1.5 
ra 
oO 
we 
51.0 
“4 
° 
Be 
a 
ne 5 
c @ 
> 


2 4 6 8 10-513." 1 16 «618 - 20 


CURRENT (MILLIAMPERES) 
Fic. 15—RELATION BETWEEN CURRENT THROUGH THE COIL OF 
THE MAGNET, AND THE VARIATION OF THE CURRENT THROUGH THE 
TRANSMITTER, 


its normal state. Later one more anomalous trace was obtained 
at 660 but this does not fit in well with the others. The peculiar- 
ity did not seem to occur at any definite frequency, but seemed to 
depend entirely on the arrangement of the granules, for when 
once present it showed over a wide range of frequency, and when 
absent the same frequency could be gone over with normal results. 
It is not to‘beZconfused with ordinary “ packing” but may be 


4 


CT ENN ee ee ee cat ead 


1 


44 


hit Rat Ne ie ee et 


Yager he 


a 


Pe Se ee ee eR RT aT 
.) "y a ‘ 4 5 \ . 


1912] TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 1415 


closely allied to it. The traces for the transmitter in general 
show a great deal more distortion than do those for the receiver. 
The actual range of force on the diaphragm is considerably less 
for the transmitter, as the air gap between the magnet and disk 
is greater, and the amplitude of the current in the magnet is less. 

Plotting for each frequency the current in the magnet as 
abscissa, and the variation of current in the transmitter, per 
milliampere of steady current, as ordinate, we get the curves of 
Fig. 15. This relation between the two is seen to be approxi- 
mately linear. The point farthest out usually shows a somewhat 
steeper slope, but in several cases the reverse is true. The 
accidental errors due to changes in the transmitter are, of course, 


VARIATION OF CURRENT 


: 1000 
FREQUENCY (CYCLES PER SEC.) 


Fic. 16—RESONANCE CURVE FOR THE TRANSMITTER, 


great, so a straight line running between the two points 
was considered a fair locus for the curve. In Fig. 16 a 
curve is plotted having frequencies as abscissas, and as ordi- 
nates the variation of current in the transmitter per milliampere 
of steady current, when the current in the magnet has a constant 
value of four milliamperes. This is the resonance curve for the 
diaphragm. The points all fall fairly well into line except the 
one for 660 ~, which is the one exposure made when the trans- 
mitter was for the second time in the anomalous state. The two 
plates obtained when it was for the first time in this state fall 
into line very well. The resonance curve certainly does not 
include the point at 660 ~, as the light spots were watched vis- 


1416 MEYER AND WHITEHEAD: [June 27 


ually, when the granules were in normal condition, and no drop 


in amplitude at that frequency was ever noticed. The light _ 


spots were watched time and again as the generator accelerated 
or came to rest; and it was easy to see the marked continuous 
rise and fall in the width of the oscillation. Whatever errors 
may have crept into the determination of one or two of the 
points, the general nature of the resonance is certainly that of 
Fig. 16. 

We notice in the curve the slight fall before the first maximum 
which was present in the receiver diaphragm curves, and is 
probably due to the losses in the magnet. Next the sharp maxi- 
mum at 700, the minimum at 800, the second maximum at 940, 
and after this the drop to a fairly constant value. It is regretted 
that the investigation could not be pushed above 1350, but 
at higher frequencies conditions became very unsteady; especi- 
ally is this true of the average current through the transmitter. 
It is a great surprise to find such sharp maxima in the curve, and 
two so close together. The ordinate of the first maximum is seen to 
be about eight and a half times that at the minimum, and six and 
a half times that at the lowest frequency; at the second maxi- 
mum abouc eighteen times that at the minimum just before it, 
and about four times that at the lowest frequency. The loca- 
tion of the fundamental vibration at 700 cycles is in good agree- 
ment with Gati’s work. It is to be regretted that no data can 
be obtained from his results regarding the sharpness of the 
resonance. His curves having as ordinate the current in a 
secondary circuit have a zero ordinate for zero frequency, 7.e., 
they start from the origin. Hence no comparison between the 
amplitude at resonance with that at zero frequency can be made. 

The first resonance of the diaphragm we would naturally 
suppose to be due to its vibration as a whole. The second may 
be introduced by one of the so-called damping springs. The 
diaphragm in most modern transmitters, and in the one here 
worked with, is held in place by two pieces of spring steel about 
s in. wide, 13in.long and0.O1in. thick. These have rubber tips on 
the ends. One presses against the diaphragm at the edge; and 
the other one, some distance in towards the center. Now the 
point where the second one presses is more firmly supported than 
the points in its vicinity, so the second resonance may be due to 
a vibration of irregular configuration with this point lying on a 
nodal line. If this is the case one of the actions of the damping 
springs is just the opposite to that commonly supposed. Accord- 


a. 


reo rT cue 


1912] TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 1417 


ing to Kempster B. Miller: ‘‘The object of these damping 
springs is to prevent too great an amplitude of vibration of 
the diaphragm, and also to keep it from vibrating in separate 
parts instead of as a unit.’’ The inside damping spring may also 
have considerable influence in raising the fundamental period 
of the diaphragm as it adds to its stiffness. It should be possible 
to settle these questions by placing both springs on the edge and 
taking another resonance curve. Itis hoped to do this in the near 
future. 


SUMMARY OF RESULTS 


Photographs have been obtained showing the vibration of 
receiver diaphragms when approximately harmonic currents 
are passed through the receiver. These show considerable dis- 
tortion at some frequencies and very little at others. At any one 
frequency the distortion is less for smaller currents. This is what 
would be expected from a priori consideration. 

-An approximately linear relation has been shown to exist 
between current and amplitude of oscillation of the diaphragm 
over the range of work, which extends well beyond that of prac- 
tise. Resonance curves for two receiver diaphragms have been 
plotted giving quantitative data of the influence of the natural 
period of the diaphragm. 

The effect of a small load on the form and range of the oscilla- 
tion was examined. Its influence could not be detected except in 
one instance in which there was possibly a slight effect on the 
range of oscillation. 

Diametral vibrations of the diaphragm were observed in cases 
in which they would not have been expected from the apparent 
symmetry of the instrument. The orientation of the diaphragm 
over the pole pieces was observed to have a marked effect. It 
has not been experimentally settled whether this is due to the 
mirrot or the grain of the plate, but it is difficult to see how a 
mirror weighing only 4 mg. could cause the vibrations. It is 
suggested that by properly introducing ‘‘ diametral ”’ vibrations 
the transmission of speech might be improved. 

Photographs have been obtained showing the variation of 
current in the transmitter when an approximately harmonic 
force acts on the diaphragm. These show a rather marked dis- 
tortion even for the lowest exciting force used, which was very 
much lower than the lowest force used on the receiver diaphragm. 


10. ‘‘ American Telephone Practice.” 4th edition, p. 56. 


1418 MEYER AND WHITEHEAD: [June 27 


These distorted curves may be just reversed from their normal 
form when the microphone is in a certain abnormal state. 

An approximately linear relation exists over the range exam- 
ined between the variation in current and the exciting force. 
The resonance curve of the transmitter is given, showing very 
marked maxima and minima. The first maximum is attributed 
to the fundamental period of the diaphragm vibrating as a whole. 
The second maximum is attributed to the diaphragm vibrating 
in an irregular configuration on account of the damping springs. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1419 


DIscussIoNn ON ‘“‘ THE VIBRATION OF TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS ”” 
(MEYER AND WHITEHEAD), Boston, Mass., JUNE 27, 1912. 


George D. Shepardson: Attention is called in the paper to 
the irregularities in the oscillograph curves at the values 332 
cycles and 1292 cycles. I examined that ‘‘ dimple,” as it is called, 
with considerable interest, and found two possible explanations 
for it. In both cases the dimple occurs where the diaphragm is 
at the greatest distance from the magnet. The first explana- 
tion which occurs is that the diaphragm is there in a compara- 
tively weak field where the diaphragm is more free to vibrate 
in its own natural periods. Another more plausible explana- 
tion is that the actuating current in this case is several hundred 
times greater than the normal current. Now, that means, if 
we refer to the equation which is given here for the performance 
of the diaphragm, a very strong m.m.f., due to the current in the 
coil. At the “dimple,” the current in the negative or demagne- 
tizing direction becomes dominant and neutralizes the m.m.f. 
due to the permanent magnet; as the current passes the critical ° 
value, its pull becomes positive, being proportional to the square 
of the current, and thus causes the ‘‘ dimple” at the extreme 
value. I think this second reason is much more plausible 
than the first, that is, that it is the m.m.f. of the current 
overcoming and reversing the permanent field. 

That suggests a point in connection with the equations (2) 
and (3). You will find that all of the discussions of the theory 
of the telephone transmitter are based on the assumption that 
the current in the coil actually changes the value of the perma- 
nent field. Ithinkthatisentirely erroneous. Ifyou place acoil 
about the heel of the magnet, at the most remote distance from 
the coils, you will find that the variation in the permanent flux 
is almost nil; it amounts to from 1 to 10 per cent with the greatest 
possible variation in the inductance you can get, by removing the 
armature entirely away from the soft iron pole pieces. It seems to 
me, the real action of the current in the coil ona telephone re- 
ceiver is not to change the total amount of flux but simply to 
change the distribution of it. I doubt very much whether the 
total flux passing through the diaphragm is even changed, but 
the action of the coil is to concentrate that force. 

Inquiry is made about the discrepancy between the natural 
period as observed and that as calculated, 890 in one case and 732 
in the other. I suggest that that discrepancy may be due to the 
fact that Rayleigh’s formula does not take very much account of 
the temperature effect. The temperature acts very much like 
the cords of adrum. You tighten up the cords on the drum and 
the tone of the drum rises, and so in the case of the telephone re- 
ceiver, as the temperature rises it strains the diaphragm 
and raises its natural period of vibration. Rayleigh’s formula 
does not specifically cover that point. In the case of the trans- 


1420 TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS [June 27 


mitter diaphragm, clamped only at one or two points, and 
if there are other points these are usually in a straight line, 
the temperature effect is almost nil. Ihave applied tempera- 
ture variation of 100 deg. fahr. to a transmitter diaphragm and 
found no appreciable difference in the sensitiveness to sounds of 
varying pitch. 

Mention is made of the effect of the damping spring. I have 
experimented recently upon a transmitter where the source of 
sound was a siren whose speed and whose pressure were separately 
controllable, and I found in almost every case a curve of sen- 
sibility which bears a general family resemblance to Fig. 16 of 
the paper. The effect of the damping spring upon the natural 
period does not seem to be as great as one might expect, although 
it does seem to have some influence. In one case I found a 
minimum sensitiveness at 1115 vibrations, with the damping 
spring removed clear off to one side. With the damping spring 
shifted back to its ordinary position, and with the ordinary 
tension, the maximum point was at 1070 vibrations. By tight- 
ening the damping spring, moving the screw in about one-quarter 
turn, the maximum point was shifted over to 975, so that the 
presence of the damping spring seems to affect the pitch for 
maximum sensitiveness. These results were not repeated, and I 
do not attach great importance to them. 

Regarding the positions of maximum sensitiveness in the curve 
of Fig. 16, experimental work shows that these positions vary 
according to the construction of the transmitter; that is, trans- 
mitters of different manufacture will show these points of max1- 
mum sensitiveness coming at varying positions. Different 
transmitters from the same factory will show marked differences 
in the positions of the peaks. For example, one transmitter 
showed minor peaks at about 500 cycles per second, and major 
peaks at some 925 cycles per second, another at 1065, another at 
1655, and another at 2100, so you may expect a series of peaks 
of maximum sensitiveness. In another case the peaks came at 
1600, 900, 1065, and 1640, and this case of 1640 was what I 
would call the swmmum maximum, that is the highest, higher than 
any of theother peaks. Another transmitter had equal maxima 
at 1050 and 1700. 

I would say that these experiments were made with 
sound as the source of the disturbance, and there was con- 
siderable difficulty experienced in getting rid of reflections 
from the walls. In some cases these brought in phenomena 
me were very puzzling until means were found to eliminate 
them. 

George W. Pierce: I have been very much interested in 
this paper, particularly as Professor Kennelly and I have re- 
cently been making some experiments! which include as a part 
of the work the determination of the period of vibration of the 
telephone diaphragm. First, as to temperature. One of our 


1. Published in full in Proc. Am. Acad. (Boston), Vol. 48, No. 6, 1912. 


i An b Set ed i de ad oo 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1421 


laboratory mechanics, Mr. Greaves, who was trying to make a 
telephone of particular pitch, found when he breathed on the 
diaphragm he changed the period perhaps fifty per cent. The 
period changes enormously if the diaphragm is rigidly clamped 
into a metallic frame, but if the diaphragm is_ loosely 
clamped, as in the case of the ordinary telephone receiver, with 
eae or gaskets, the temperature does not have so great an 
elec, 

In regard to the occurrence of the dimple in two or three of 
Meyer’s and Whitehead’s oscillograms, also with some oscillo- 
grams similar to these, I found that the dimple occurred when 
the current was large, independent of the pitch, and it seems to 
me to be the phenomenon that Professor Shepardson has men- 
tioned, of the preponderance of impressed force over the direct- 
ing force of the permanent magnet. To avoid that effect I 
found that, if you use a permanent magnet for the field and 
attach a coil to the diaphragm, so as to link with the magnetic 
flux of the field magnet, and send alternating current through 
the coil, you can vary the pull on the diaphragm to any extent, 
yet get no dimple at all, because there was no change in the 
B, magnetic field by the effect of the impressed current. 

In regard to the period of the diaphragm, Professor Kennelly 
and I have been measuring resistance ‘and inductance of the 
telephone receiver at different frequencies, and the result is very 
interesting and indicates the marked effect of periodicity of the 
diaphragms as Messrs. Meyer and Whitehead have found. If 
you measure the resistance and the inductance with the tele- 
phone diaphragms damped you get one value, and then, if you take 
your finger off the diaphragm, and allow it to vibrate, you get 
a different value of inductance and resistance. 

With the diaphragm vibrating, the inductance and resistance 
may differ by 50 per cent from the inductance and resistance with 
the diaphragm damped. Let us call the excess of the inductance 
or resistance when the diaphragm is free over the inductance or 
resistance when the diaphragm is damped the motional inductance 
or resistance of the receiver. The motional inductance multiplied 
by the angular velocity we shall call the motional reactance. If 
now we plot motional resistance and motional reactance against 
the angular velocity of impressed e.m.f. we get —for a particular 
receiver—the curves “‘reactance’’ and “‘ resistance” in Fig. 1 here- 
with. At the pitch of 5700 radians per sec. the vibration of the dia- 
phragm increases the resistance by a large amount (220hms). At 
a slightly different pitch—5900—the vibration of the diaphragm 
decreases the resistance by 45ohms. The reactance may follow 
a curve somewhat like the resistance curve, but in general, 
with the change of pitch, the vibration of the diaphragm causes 
the reactance to decrease to a minimum and then to go up again, 
as shown by the curve marked “reactance.” 

Now, if we measured the inductance, calculated the reactance 
and measured the resistance, we had the impedance, we also knew 


1422 TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS [June 27 


the current—and, multiplying the square of the current by the 
resistance, we get the power, and taking the difference between 
the power when the telephone is free and vibrating, and the 
power when the telephone is damped, we get the curve marked 
“power” of Fig. 1. The change-of-power curve, the amount of 
power supplied to the telephone when free in excess of the amount 
when damped, is very large when you approach the resonant 
period of the diaphragm, and attains its maximum in the neigh- 
borhood of natural period of the diaphragm, which in the case of 
Fig. 1 was 5820 radians per second. This change of power 
amounted to as much as 68 per cent, when the telephone was 
making a pretty good noise. That is, if you put your finger on 


+8 
Ss 


i 
1 
8! 


fof 


= OSE 


fs! 
io ~~4====4o5- aioe 
Be eecrrerit.f 


s 


PHASE OF 
MOTIONAL IMPEDANCE 


[oq 


cles & 
MOTIONAL POWER 


o 


8 


MOTIONAL RESISTANCE AND REACTANC 
e 
i=) 


3000 4000 5000 6000 7000: 
ANGULAR VELOCITY IN RADIANS PER SECOND 
Fic. 1 


the diaphragm and measure the power input at constant 
voltage, and take your finger off the diaphragm, and then mea- 
sure the power input, you will find that the power input has 
increased by 68 per cent. 

The telephone was free in a room, and the room was full of 
sound, when we were using current of frequency near the reson- 
ance point, and the sound interfered by reflection, producing 
stationary waves in the room. If an assistant walked through 
the room, so as to go through the different points of maxima and 
minima of sound, the effect was a reaction on the telephone, so 
that its inductance and resistance changes with the position of 
the assistant in the room, and if you had a bridge balance for 
inductance and resistance and allowed a man to walk through 


with angular velocity zero, 


1912) DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1423 


the room, the bridge would be variously thrown in and out of 
balance. The reflected sound, coming back and striking the 
diaphragm, determines in part the work by the diaphragm, so 
‘that a shift of the stationary wave system in the room affected 
inductance, resistance and power. With a given e.m.f. the re- 
sistance of the diaphragm would usually increase with the amount 
of work done by the diaphragm, and that would depend upon 
the stationary wave system. 

_If you plot the motional reactance against the motional re- 
sistance—meaning by the motional values the excess of reactance 
or resistance when the diaphragm is free over the corresponding 
value when it is damped—if you plot one of these quantities against 
the other, R being plotted horizontally and L being vertical, 
you get a circular locus, asin Fig.2. The resistance and induct- 
ance change in relation to each other. The position of the 
center of the circle is deter- 
mined by the mechanical and 
electrical constant of the 
diaphragm, and if you plot 
angular velocities of im- 
pressed e.m.f. around the 
circle, you begin at the origin 


and as the angular velocity 
increases to infinity the vec- 
tor ‘‘motional’’ impedance 
goes once around the circle 
in a negative direction. The 
frequency of e.m.f. which 
gives this point of the im- 
pedance circle diametrically 
opposite to origin is the 
natural frequency of the dia- 
phragm; and the periods of 
the diaphragm differ in differ- 
ent instruments and also the sharpness of these resonance curves 
differs in-different instruments. If you take a curve like that 
which Messrs. Meyer and Whitehead have in their paper—or the 
resonance curve of the excess power put into the telephone when 
the diaphragm is free, you find that with an ordinary Bell receiver, 
the change of frequency to throw the diaphragms well out of reso- 
nance may be as much as 100 radians per second, but if you take 
a diaphragm rigidly clamped around the periphery by a heavy 
metallic clamp a change of period of 10 radians per second in 
five thousand would throw it completely out of resonance and 
reduce the amplitude of vibration so as to give almost complete 
silence. If you breathe on the rigidly-clamped diaphragm 
when it is actuated by a resonant current, the heat of the breath 
may so change the natural mechanical period of the diaphragm 
as to produce complete silence. 


1424 TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS [June 27 


Professor Kennelly and I find that the curves that I have shown 
agree closely with theoretical values obtained by considering 
the reaction of the moving membrane on the magnetic circuit. 
The theoretical treatment resembles the theoretical discussion _ 
of refraction and absorption in the neighborhood of the absorp- 
tive band in optics, except that in the telephone diaphragm prob- 
lem account had to be taken of the fact that the magnetization 
of the iron lags behind the magnetizing forces, consequently the 
shift in phase in the telephone problem differs from that in the 
optical problem. We determined experimentally the shift 
of phase, and found that it was equal to twice the angle of lag 
of the magnetization behind the magnetizing force as was de- 
manded by the theory. ; 

Alan E. Flowers: I ask what bearing your results have on 
the values that have been given for the principal frequencies 
in telephone currents; and also, if it is possible in further experi- 
ments to use a diaphragm which would be free from enamel or 
other non-elastic substances, so that the period could be calcu- 
lated more accurately, and if possible have the surfaces polished 
so that you would get the reflection from different portions at 
will without loading any particular spot. The very small 
mirror may or may not have some effect upon some particular 
laws of diametral vibration, depending, of course, on the relation 
of the weight of the mirror per unit area and the weight of the 
diaphragm itself per unit area; and, further, I ask if it would be 
possible to carry out further experiments with different dia- 
phragm thicknesses. 

A. E. Kennelly: There seems to be a difference of phase 
indicated in some of the oscillograms, judging from a merely 
random examination, between the currents and the motions, and 
we should be glad to know whether that difference actually exists 
or not. 

John B. Taylor: Dr. Kennelly asked the question I was about 
to ask; that is, whether the apparatus is set up with sufficient 
exactness so that measurements made from the current to the 
diaphragm displacement line can be taken as indicating the 
relative phase between the two. Some of the records at low 
frequency seem to show more pronounced lags than those at 
higher frequency, and one of the records, in Fig. 4, seems to show 
almost a reversal. It is possible in this case they may have taken 
their Rees ie down and set it up again with connections re- 
versed. 

John'B. Whitehead: Which one? 

John B. Taylor: The one I call a reversal, as it appears so 
to me, is 9.8 radians. 

John B. Whitehead: What is the frequency? 

John B. Taylor: It is 1066, as given on Plate LX XVI. 

John B. Whitehead: There are some of these which are 
quite extreme. 


JohnB. Taylor: 9.8X10-‘radians deflection under 1066 cycles 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1425 


on 2a show a distinct reversal. Some appear to lag and others 
o lead. 

Another point is, whether the natural period has not been 
modified by cutting out so much of the receiver cap. I should 
think that the records might have been taken by boring a small 
hole in it. The air cavity is likely to have some effect on the 
period. When sound is produced, energy must come from some- 
where, but, as a rule, the efficiency of sound production is con- 
sidered to be so low that the energy consumed is not given much 
attention. Just as an induction motor, clamped and at a stand- 
still, will show different characteristics from a motor running, 
whether lightly loaded or heavily loaded, so will a telephone 
receiver show different electrical properties if the diaphragm is 
not allowed to move. It would be interesting to compare these 
records with others taken with the receiver held against the ear, 
in which case the “load ”’ conditions would be those for which 
the apparatus is designed. 

George D. Shepardson: There is one further point I want to 
call attention to in connection with the performance of the trans- 
mitters. In Fig. 6 the curve for the transmitter current is 
considerably flattened on one side; that is just what we should 
get if we had superimposed upon the fundamental wave a second 
wave having twice the frequency, but with the zero corres- 
ponding with the zero of the fundamental wave. That is 
just what is demanded in what is sometimes called the inverse 
theory of the transmitter, that is, the motion of the transmitter 
diaphragm which would be required in order to give a sine wave. 
That theory calls for a strong component of double frequency, 
and that is exactly what is shown in this experimental investiga- 
gation, coming about from an entirely opposite direction. I 
think Mr. Anderegg was the first one who called attention to this 
in:an article which appeared in Telephony in January, 1909, 
and his double frequency component, which he obtained mathe- 
matically, is exactly what is brought out in this oscillogram 
of the transmitter. 

Frank Wenner: There is one point which I should like to 
call attention to, and that is that the motion of the diaphragm 
produces an e.m.f. in the circuit just as in any other dynamo- 
electric machine the relative motion of a part of the magnetic | 
field and the winding results in an induced or generated e.m.f. 
This e.m.f. is a back e.m.f. and at the resonating frequency of 
the diaphragm may amount to as much as 90 per cent of the 
impressed e.m.f. 

This is a matter to which I wish merely to call your attention 
now, as I expect to take it up in the discussion of the vibration 
galvanometer, the telephone receiver being one form of vibra- 
tion galvanometer. wae 

George W. Pierce: This whole effect of the shifting of react- 
ance and inductance is the reaction of the diaphragm on the 
coils and that is taken account of in our theoretical treatment. 


1426 TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS [June 27 


I have no doubt the treatment is the same as for the vibration 
galvanometer, except for the lag in the iron, which will shift our 
change of resistance curve to where our change of induction curve 
ought to be if there were no magnetic lag; that is, the double 
angle of lag amounts to enough to almost interchange these two 
curves. 

As to this amount of power, perhaps my illustrations were not 
clearly explained. I said that this 68 per cent increase of power 
occurred when we got at the resonant point of the diaphragm. 
That does not mean that we have the measure there of the energy 
of the moving diaphragm; it merely means that with a given 
e.m.f. we draw more power under one condition than under 
another condition. The excess of power drawn amounted to a 
considerable quantity, and no doubt a good deal of it went into 
sound and energy radiation from the diaphragm, a part of which 
is not sound. The experiments were made with 0.3 of a volt 
in the telephone circuit, 7. e., under conditions which were 
somewhere near normal. The strength of the current in the tele- 
phone varies with the frequency, but it is in the neighborhood of 
one milliampere. 

This reaction of the absorption of the sound upon the sounding 
body is a matter that Professor Sabine, at the physical labora- 
tory, of Harvard, has emphasized and pointed out to me by means 
of an experiment of that kind. He had a tuning fork electrically 
driven in a room and measured the energy of sound all over the 
room, everywhere, and integrated it so that he got the total 
amount of energy in the room. He then put felt, which is an 
absorber of sound, in the room, with the intention of reducing 
the sound and measuring it again. He measured it again, and 
he had more energy than before. Although the felt absorbed 
a lot of energy, there was more energy than before. The explana- 
tion was that, putting the felt in the room shifted the wave zones 
in the room. He set his tuning fork at a constant amplitude, 
but the power drawn electrically happened to be increased 
by the shift of waves due to the introduction of the felt. 

On the question of the absorption of energy by an observer, 
Professor Sabine has measured the absorption of energy by a 
person—that is, he got the energy in the room, and measured it, 
and then got the energy absorbed per person. It is interesting 
that he found that a woman absorbs more sound than a man, 
the difference being due to the difference in the character and 
amount of clothing of the woman and the man. 

John B. Whitehead: Referring to the explanation for the 
“dimple ’’ in the diaphragm curves—although I could not 
follow the first speaker very closely, I understand his suggestion 
is that the dimple was caused by the actual killing of the flux of 
the magnet itself, yet in the further progress of his remarks, he 
says that so far as he has been able to observe the total flux of 
the exciting magnet of the diaphragm changes very little through- 
out the range of operation due to the first current in any event. 


i) 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON . 1427 


George D. Shepardson: I distinguished between the ordinary 
operation of the receiver and that with a current some hundred 
times greater than the ordinary; in this case the current was 
unusually large. 

John B. Whitehead: That may be true, and is certainly 
a very interesting suggestion. 

As to the relation of frequency to pitch, Mr. Flowers explained 
that, I believe. It is quite obvious that if we depend upon the 
natural frequency of vibration of the diaphragm for telephonic 


_ communication it is, therefore, desirable to have the peak 


spread out as far as it possibly can be, and as high up as possible 
toward the peak of the curve itself. So that, if I understand the 
question correctly, I should think we would aim to get a dia- 
phragm with resonance curve broad at its base, rather than ex- 
tremely narrow, such as the one that Professor Pierce has de- 


* scribed. 


I think that great difficulty would be met with in attempting 
to polish the surface of the diaphragm itself in order to use it as 
a mirror for reflecting spots of light. The definition on the plate 
resulting from a reflection from the tiny mirror is really got by 
the size of the mirror itself. All the light reflected from the 
mirror itself goes to the plate, and the polishing of the whole 
surface would lead to a good deal of difficulty, diffused light 
spoiling the definition. 

As to the thickness of the diaphragm, that would be an inter- 
esting line of investigation. Doubtless something has been done in 
this direction but so far as we know no results have been published. 

As to the cutting out of the receiver cap, it is practically impos- 
sible to carry out any very extensive investigation of this kind 
without removing the receiver cap. We did nothing to check 
the influence upon the vibrations of the removal of the cap, but 
I do not believe, from the progress of the experiments, and from 
the absence of any evidence of an upsetting of any of the results, 
that it is an important factor. 

It is proper in closing to state that the bulk of the work involved 
in the preparation of this paper was done by Dr. Meyer, in our 
laboratory, at Johns Hopkins University. 

Charles F. Meyer: The explanation of Mr. Shepardson re- 
garding the “dimple ’”’ in the curve obtained at 232~, for a 
range of 21.8X10~‘ radians, seems very plausible. His explana- 
tion is corroborated by an examination of the curve at 1292~, for 
arange of 9.8X10~ radians, which also shows a slight dimple. 
It will be observed that the values of the current corresponding 
to these two photographs were 68.0 and 61.1 milliamperes, and 
for no other records did the current have such high values. It 
would therefore seem as though the “‘ dimple ”’ were due to the 
high value of the current. 

In setting down the equations (2) and (3), page 1401, it was 
not desired to convey the idea that the current in the coils of 
the receiver actually changes the induction in the permanent 
magnet, for there is no reason to believe this. There is a cer- 


1428 TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS {June 27 


tain amount of induction present due to the permanent magnet, 
and there is a variable induction, due to the current, superim- 
posed on this. Equations (2) and (3) hold good independently 
of how far back into the pole pieces the variation in the induction 
extends. . 

The observation of Mr. Pierce upon the variation of power 
consumed by the telephone, accompanying a variation of the 
system of standing waves in the room, is very interesting. He 
did not state the proportionate magnitude of the change in power. 
In the present investigation no effect of the standing waves upon 
the amplitude was observed. The photographs were all obtained 
with the experimenter in one position, which was necessary for 
manipulating the apparatus, but no variation in amplitude due 
to walking around the room was visually observed. It is thought 
that a variation of ten per cent could not have escaped detection. 

It was questioned as to how far the photographs might be 
relied upon to give the phase relation existing between the excit- 
ing current and the motion of the diaphragm. There was no 
attempt made to adjust the apparatus so that reliable measure- 
ments might be made, but the photographs give a general idea 
of the phase relation. According to the ordinary mechanical 
theory of forced vibrations the force and the vibration ought to 
be in phase when the frequency is low compared to the natural 
frequency of the system. As resonance is approached the phase 
of the vibration begins to fall behind and when the resonance has 
been well passed the vibration lags half a period behind the im- 
pressed force. In the present case the impressed force is that 
due to the magnetization, which lags somewhat behind the 
current, the amount of lag being small for low frequencies and 
increasing with the frequency. The vibration of the diaphragm 
ought, therefore, to be practically in phase with the current at — 
the very low frequencies, then fall gradually behind as the fre- 
quency is raised, and when the resonance point has been well 
passed it ought to lag over half a period behind the current. 
Close scrutiny of the photographic reproductions of Figs. 3 and 4 
will show that the vibrations are in phase for the low frequencies, 
and that the vibration falls behind as resonance is approached. 
The curve for 1292~, to which attention was called by Mr. 
Taylor, is beyond the resonance point. It seems to lag about 
half a period behind the current. The lag between the magneti- 
zation and the motion should, at this frequency, be almost half 
a period, and the real lag between current and vibration is prob- 
ably more than half a period. The fact that the photograph 
shows only half a period may be due to lack of adjustment. The 
adjustment would have to be quite good in order to record the 
phases for the high frequencies with accuracy. 

In answer to the question of Mr. Flowers it may be said that, 
before the small mirror was resorted to, attempts were made to 
reflect ‘the light directly from portions of the diaphragm by 
silvering them, but even very small areas of the diaphragm 
are not optically true, and will not give a good image. 


Pe \ 


A paper presented at ihe 29th Annual Convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Boston, Mass., June 27, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. 7. £. E. 


MILITARY TELEGRAPH LINES USING THE 
POLARIZED SOUNDER AS RECEIVING 
INSTRUMENT 


BY GEORGE R. GUILD 


It is well known that, in time of war, the army has consider- 
able difficulty in keeping up its overland telegraph lines, and 
especially so if these lines are operated on the ordinary Morse 
system and with wet cells. In actual warfare, in the field, all 
impedimenta must be reduced to a minimum, and consist of 
as little perishable material as possible. If, for example, it is 
desired to operate a closed-circuit line of say 300 miles in length 
about 150 gravity cells would be required, and if the line were 
to be operated on open circuit it would require about 100 dry 
cells per station. On the other hand, induction telegraphy, 
so-called, allows such a line to be successfully operated with 
from four to six dry cells per station. This fact and other fea- 
tures of simplicity which it possesses explain the existence of 
army field induction telegraphy. 

Ordinarily the United States Army induction telegraph kit 
consists of a polarized relay, a four-ohm sounder, key, induction 
coil, and four dry cells. These instruments are installed in a 
portable box weighing about 12 pounds. The induction coil 
is small and the ratio of the winding of its coils is as one is 
to one hundred, the primary coil consuming about 12 watts 
at four volts. New sets are being experimented with by the 
United States Signal Corps with a view of simplifying the 
present set by replacing the polarized relay and the four-ohm 
sounder by a polarized sounder, and as the results obtained so 
far have been very successful it is believed that a new type of 
kit will soon be adopted somewhat along the lines described in 

1429 


1430 GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH [June 27 


this paper. The writer has conducted a series of tests with 
induction telegraph circuits with the object in view of obtain- 
ing suitable kits and circuits in order that induction telegraphy 
may be used more extensively in the field than heretofore, to 
displace some, or many, of the closed-circuit lines which must 
now be used. 

This paper will describe some of the important phases of single- 
impulse induced current circuits, and at the same time will also 
indicate the instruments which the writer has found to be best 
adapted to these circuits. In some cases these instruments 
may be advantageously used with other than induction circuits, 
and instances of these circuits are included in this paper. 

It has been deemed advisable first to outline briefly the op- 
eration of an induction telegraph circuit. For the sake of il- 
lustration only, suppose that it is possible to construct an in- 
duction coil having an efficiency of 100 per cent. With such 
a coil as many watts could be obtained from the secondary coil 
as are expended in the primary. As watts are the product of 
volts and amperes, and as the voltage of the secondary coil to 
that applied to the primary coil is in direct ratio to the number 
of turns in each, it will be evident that it is possible to obtain 
a small current in the secondary circtiit at high voltage, sufficient 
to operate a line, and still do this by drawing only a moderate 
amperage from the battery in the primary circuit at low voltage. 

Of course it is known that current in the secondary circuit 
exists only while there is an increase or decrease of intensity of 
current in the primary coil, and further, that the direction in 
which the current flows in the secondary at the closing of the 
primary circuit is opposite to that at the opening or breaking 
of the primary circuit. Consequently, in order to operate a tele- 
graph relay or sounder by a momentary induced or secondary 
current of reversed polarity, it is necessary that the armature 
of the instrument respond to direction of current flow, and 
the armature having thus responded it must remain at rest 
until a current in the opposite direction passes through the 
instrument and causes the armature to reverse its position. In 
other words, the relay or sounder must be a polarized instrument. 

To overcome resistance of any considerable amount and yet 
have sufficient current on a line to operate relays, a compara- 
tively high electromotive force is necessary. One way to obtain 
this electromotive force is to use sufficient cells in series with the 
line. Another way is to use an induction coil and a few cells 


oe 


1912] GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH 1431 


with more frequent renewals, drawing a heavy current from 
these cells at low voltage and increasing the voltage and decreas- 
ing the current in the secondary circuit, thus obtaining enough 
voltage to overcome the considerable resistance of the line and 
sufficient current to operate polarized relays. For example, the 
army field kit previously referred to will operate well through a 
non-inductive resistance of 50,000 ohms with three dry cells, 
and can even be made to operate, under favorable conditions, 
through 100,000 ohms. 

A type of telegraph sounder employing the well-known prin- 
ciples of the Hughes* relay lends itself so readily to induction 
telegraph circuits that the writer has used it exclusively in his © 
experiments, either as a sounder, main-line or local, or as a relay. 
An illustration of this instrument (in this case a relaying sounder) 
is shown on Plate LX XIX. 

Referring to this illustration it will be noticed that the instru- 
ment is in appearance very similar to the standard American 
sounders, except that a permanent horseshoe magnet of con- 
siderable strength is bolted at right angles to the lower cores 
of the electromagnets, one leg of the magnet to each core. The 
armature is a piece of soft iron. It follows that this use of the 
horseshoe magnet normally gives a certain polarity to the poles 
of the electromagnet cores. When a current is passed through 
the electromagnet coils it will either increase or lessen the strength 
of this induced magnetic polarity, and will cause the electromag- 
net cores to attract their armature more strongly if the current 
through the coils is in such direction as to work in conjunction 
with the magnetism of the cores due to the horseshoe magnet, 
or, if the current be in opposite direction, the magnetic effect on 
the armature may be neutralized, or at least nearly so, allow- 
ing the spring to raise the lever. 

The sounder is made adjustable so that the lever will remain 
up until pulled down, and vice versa. This is termed * adjust- 
ing the sounder to its neutral position.” Or a bias can be 
given to the lever so that it can be pulled down, but when released 
will return to the ‘“‘ up ” position (and conversely). This latter 
adjustment enables the sounder to be used as an ordinary main 
line (or local) instrument. 

There appears to be nothing that the ordinary sounder will 
accomplish that cannot be equally well accomplished with the 
polarized sounder, while on the other hand the position of the 


EEE! 


*Maver’s ‘‘ American Telegraphy,’”’ p. 240, edition 1912. 


1432 GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH [June 27 


lever of the latter will be reversed by reversals of current flow, 
which is not the case with the ordinary sounder. This feature 
makes the polarized sounder desirable for the following reasons. 

Due to the fact that the sounder is polarized and may be dif- 
ferentially wound, the instrument can be readily duplexed, re- 
sponding (Fig. 1) to a current flowing into it from the line, but 
not responding (Fig. 2) to a current flowing through it from its 
own station, provided R (non-inductive resistance) equals the 
resistance of the line and that the capacity of the line is also 
balanced in accordance with the usual arrangement of duplex 
circuits. 

It will respond to a current flowing for an instant in one direc- 
tion, and its armature will remain attracted (or repelled) until 
acted upon by an instantaneous current in the opposite direc- 
tion. Such a current would be produced by the secondary coil 
of an induction coil when the primary circuit is made or broken. 


i 


RESPONDING NOT RESPONDING 


Fics. 1 AND 2 BiG 


It will operate in the same manner on certain lines in series with 
a condenser, as shown in this paper. 

“It can be placed directly in the line circuit without a relay 
or a local battery, and will give firm, readable signals similar 
to those obtained in a local circuit, with line currents of the 
ordinary strength used for operating ordinary relays. It gives 
excellent results on underground lines. As it can be adjusted 
to operate perfectly through a condenser it is a valuable instru- 
ment on lines subject to disturbances by earth currents. 

Tests of this sounder seem to show that it is superior in action 
to an ordinary main-line sounder; that it can be used as a local 
sounder with good results; that it can be operated equally well 
on closed or open circuit lines, condenser lines, and induction 
lines; that used as a polarized relay it is very sensitive. 

The following are a few circuits with which the sounder can 
be advantageously used. 

Fig. 3 shows the method of connecting the sounders on simplex 


PLATE LXXIX 


VOL. XXXI, 1912 


INDUCTION REPEATER SET 


[GuILp] 


{(GuILD] 


SIMPLEX INDUCTION SET 


RELAYING SOUNDER 


4 
~ Pr 
= 


7 
» > 
4 ft 
* 
a 


1912] GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH 1433 


double-current split battery open-circuit working. The sounders 
are adjusted to the neutral position, and a double contact key is 
used. Ten milliamperes are required to operate the instruments. 
A switch to throw from sending to receiving is shown. Con- 
densers may be placed in series with the line at a if desired. 
In this figure East is sending and West is receiving. 

Fig. 4 represents a central battery system; the battery C B is 
located at the central station. The line is taken from the point 
O through a resistance of some two thousand ohms, and the first 
set is at the central station. Other lines may be connected at 
O as shown, each one of them being first carried through two 
thousand ohms of resistance. Polarized sounders are used at the 
central and at the way stations, and a two-microfarad condenser 
is in series with each sounder as shown, the sounders, condensers, 
and keys being bridged between the line and ground. 

The action of this current is as follows. When the line is 


u 
2 
i ERTS MF, 
C.B > 


; = POLARIZED SOUNDER POLARIZED SOUNDER POLARIZED SOUNDER 
= CENTRAL STATION STATION 
= STATION A B 


ul 


Fic. 4 


at rest the battery C B charges all of the condensers on the line, 
then when any one station, Station A for example, depresses the 
key a short path to ground is furnished through Station A for the 
discharge of all the other condensers on the line, which actuates 
their polarized sounders. . A path to ground for battery Co Beis 
likewise furnished through Station A when this station depresses 
its key, hence the necessity for the resistance of about two 
thousand ohms in order that the battery be not short-circuited. 
The sounder at Station A is not affected by the depressing of the 
key at this station because its condenser is not discharged. When 
the key at Station A is raised all the condensers on the line are 
again charged, due to the fact that the path to the ground is now 
interrupted. 

This circuit operates nicely, an objection to it being, however, 
‘that the sender does not hear his own instrument while sending, 
unless another sounder is added. 


1434 GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH [June 27 


The use of the sounder with closed or open circuit lines is 
identical with that of the ordinary sounder. The use of the 
sounder as a repeating relay for repeater stations is shown later. 
It is admirably suited to this use, due to the particular manner 
in which it is made and to its sensitiveness. Most of the cir 
cuits due to the writer that appear in this paper are based upo1 
this use of the sounder. 

Although the use of this sounder with closed, open, and 
condenser circuits has been briefly mentioned in preceding pages, 
the real purpose of this paper is to deal with this instrument par- 
ticularly with reference to its use with induced currents, for it is 
in the field in time of war that this sounder excels, due to the 
fact that ideal conditions of line cannot be maintained and that 
the transportation of means for development of electrical energy 
is a difficult problem. The ordinary semi-permanent lines and 
field lines will seldom be over 300 miles in length, and, as will 
be subsequently shown, the induction field set now in use, or 
one of improved type, will operate over this distance on three 
dry cells without difficulty. If greater distance is required, the 
new sets devised by the writer can be employed as induction 
repeaters, allowing induction telegraphy to be used over any 
reasonable length of line on three dry cells per set. 

The writer has devised two induction telegraph sets designed 
to displace the induction telegraph set now used by the Signal 
Corps. One of these sets is intended for simplex working only, 
and is composed of the least number of instruments possible for 
efficient working. The other set is more complicated and is in- 
tended as a general repeater and also as an induction telegraph 
duplex set. Both of these sets will now be described. 

The simple set consists of one polarized sounder, one key, 
one induction coil and three dry cells, all suitably and compactly 
boxed. This set will operate on simplex only, and has a range of 
about 300 miles on a line strung on poles, and will operate a few 
miles over a line of bare wire laid on the ground. 

Fig. 5 shows the circuits of this set. 

B, battery, three dry cells connected in series. 

K, closed-circuit key with switch removed. 

P, primary winding of induction coil, 2-ohm resistance. 

S, secondary winding of induction coil, 200-ohm resistance. 
PS, polarized sounder, 200 ohms per coil. 

The ratio of winding of the induction coil is 1 to 100. The 
illustration on Plate LX XIX shows this simplex induction set. 


a4 


1912] GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH : 1435 


The action of the polarized sounder (simplex circuit) in either 
of the induction sets just mentioned is as follows, reference 
being made to Fig. 6. 

This figure represents a battery B, key K, an induction coil 
with primary P and secondary S, and a polarized sounder P S 
adjusted to the neutral position. 

When the key K is depressed the current will flow through 
the primary coil in the direction a to 6 and will continue to flow 
until K is released. While this current is building up in the pri- 
mary coil an induced current will flow in the secondary coil 
from, say, a’ to b’ tod through polarized sounder coils in series 
to e and back to a’, and will continue to flow until the current 
in the primary coil has reached a maximum, when the current 
in the secondary will cease, and the secondary coil then becomes, 
for the time being, totally independent of whether current is or 
is not flowing in the primary. Hence with the key depressed 
current may be sent from the distant station through the sounder 


<a | 


i 


6 3) 0 


Fic. 5 Fic. 6 


in the same manner as could be done were the key not depressed. 
This shows that the key K may be either a closed or an open cir- 
cuit key, and battery B may be either wet cells or dry cells, 
that is, a current may or may not be flowing through the primary 
coil continuously, and the only effect on the polarized sounder 
in the two cases is that if the primary circuit is a closed cir- 
cuit the armature of the sounder will be left at rest on reverse 
contact to that when the primary circuit isan open circuit. Bear- 
ing this in mind it is evident that in all of the induction circuits 
herein shown the primary circuit may be a closed circuit if de- 
sired, care merely being taken to see thatt he battery is connected 
to the primary coil with the correct polarity, and no further 
remark concerning this point need be made. For the sake of uni- 
formity and brevity, however, all induction circuits herein are 
shown as operated on open primary circuit. 

Now, returning to the action of the sounder; it will be recalled 
that when the key Kis depressed, an instantaneous induced current 


1436 GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH [June 27 


passes through the sounder froma’ tob’. This current, though 
brief as to length of its duration, is sufficient to give enough 
electromagnetism to the sounder’s coils to attract the armature, 


_——— 
apa 


CONDENSER PLUG 


= = G7 TREN CLT SENT CALI Wy Y YYW Uy, 7] 
Ho Sm «7 a 
Y pon y q ] y, i ea 

5 2560 y | 3 ere A <i 
Vi) AN: PTT CIN 
& el | (I A | {lint } 
sly MU Mpa IDG.) Gale thy 

GY) Yyy Z' Pea || Hg eco’ inl 
20 30 ' SHU GAN eI} Il lit iibul 

ie YG \\ rene 4 A =| 

ZH QF | Ul anny Ty 

WY Y) 4 a : — 2 == 
Aso GZ / = q 

G YONDENSER 
MF, ie 


ae 
@° '150-oHm 


7 
oO PONY 
RELAY 
jINDUCTIO 
|LINE WIR CLOSED; 
1 lorrcuir | 
' JLINE WIRE | 
i} 


“== EARTH 
Fic. 7—FIELpD INDUCTION TELEGRAPH REPEATER SET 


which is held attracted upon the disappearance of the secondary 
current by the permanent magnetism of the sounder’s cores. 
Upon releasing the key K the primary current rapidly falls 


1912] GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH 1437 


off to zero, and while doing so induces another momentary 
current in the secondary coil and circuit. This second induced 
current is now in the direction opposite to that caused by the 
closing of key K, and passes through the sounder coils in an 
opposite direction to the former induced current. Depending 
on its direction, the electromagnetic effect of this current in 
the coils of the sounder is either totally or partially to neutralize 
the effect of the permanent magnetism of the cores, leaving 
little or no induced magnetism to act upon the armature, and 
consequently the spring on the lever has time to raise the lever 
and its armature to the “up” position. In the “ up ” position 
the armature is too far away from the cores of the coils to be 
affected much by the permanent magnetism in them, and hence 
when the lever is allowed to go up it remains there. Thus 


pores 


by closing and opening the primary circuit by means of the key 
K the armature is made to respond to these actions and the 
sounder gives the desired reading. 

As the sounder operates on direction of current, it will be 
noticed that connecting the battery to primary coils with reversed 
polarity or reversing the terminals of the secondary coil will 
have the effect of causing the induced current to pass through 
and operate the sounder reversely. 

In using the sounder as a repeating relay on certain circuits 
use is made of the fact that current may be passed through each 
coil separately, the lever being so adjusted that the armature 
will be held by the current in but one coil. . 

The illustration on Plate LX XIX shows the induction repeater 
set. 

In discussing the operation of the induction repeater set 
shown in the illustration reference will be made to Figs. 7 and 8. 


1438 GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH [June 27 


Fig. 7 shows the actual wiring and apparatus of this repeater 
set and Fig. 8 shows the wiring diagrammatically. | 
PRS, polarized relaying sounder, 200 ohms per coil. 
I, induction coil: 
p, primary of induction coil. 
s, secondary of induction coil. 

R, resistance box. 

C’, condenser. 

R’, 150-ohm pony relay wound with No. 34 enameled wire. 

b, battery, consisting of three No. 6 dry cells. 

A, double-throw double-pole switch for reversing the di- 
rection of the secondary current through the polar- 
ized sounder. 

B, double-pole double-throw switch for throwing from 
simplex to duplex, as desired. 

C, double-pole double-throw switch for reversing the direc- 
tion of the primary current through the primary of the induction 
coil. The handle of the switch has a slight lateral motion on 
a horizontal axis so that as the switch is being thrown by hand 
a contact is maintained by this handle in order to keep the pri- 
mary circuit closed while the switch is being reversed. This 
action of the switch is necessary only when the set is used as 
the terminal station of a simplex induction line which is repeating 
into a closed-circuit line. The switch thus serves to leave the 
distant polarized relaying sounder on proper contact when the 
induction line is finished working, in order that the closed-circuit 
line will not be left open at the repeater station. 

IL, binding post for induction line wire. 

IG, binding post for induction ground wire. 
CL, binding post for closed-circuit line wire. 

CG, binding post for closed-circuit ground wire. 

x, contact point on under side of handle of switch C. 

h, single-pole single-throw switch for opening the line. 

m, single-pole single-throw switch for opening the primary 
circuit of battery b to prevent its being closed by relay armature 
when relay is not in use. 

The induction repeater set just referred to is so constructed 
that it may always be ready for use on the following circuits, 
by merely throwing certain switches: 


As the terminal station of a simplex induction line. 

As the terminal station of a duplex induction line. 

As the repeater station of a simplex induction line repeating into a 
simplex closed-circuit line, one set used at the repeater station. 


1912] GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH 1439 


As the repeater station of a simplex induction line repeating into an 
open-circuit line, one set used at the repeater station. 

As the repeater station of a simplex induction line repeating into an- 
other simplex induction line, two sets being used at the repeater station, 


By using the instruments of the set and slightly altering the 
wiring these sets may be used as follows: 


As the terminal or intermediate station of a closed-circuit line, simplex. 

As the repeater station of a simplex closed-circuit line repeating into 
another simplex closed-circuit line, two sets used as repeater. 

As the repeater station of a simplex closed-circuit line repeating into 
a simplex open-circuit line, two sets used as repeater. 

As the repeater station of a simplex open-circuit line repeating into an- 
other simplex open-circuit line, two sets used as repeater. 


The following is a brief description of the various circuits 
included in the repeater induction ‘kit to which reference has 
just been made. 

Fig. 9 illustrates the operation of a simplex induction circuit 
using a polarized sounder. 


Fic. 9 Fic. 10 


This figure is the terminal station of a simplex induction line. 
On depressing the key K of this station a secondary current 
is caused to flow through the polarized sounders of this and the 
distant station, causing the armatures of these sounders to be 
actuated. As these sounders have been adjusted to the nettral 
position the armatures remain attracted at the cessation of the 
secondary current. On opening the primary circuit by means 
of the key K another secondary current in the opposite direction 
is caused to flow through both sounders, allowing them to release 
their armatures, which armatures remain released at the ces- 
sation of this secondary current. Either station may break 
by opening the switch h. 

Fig. 10 illustrates the theory of one terminal station.of a 
duplex induction line, using a polarized sounder. 

Rand C are artificial line resistance and capacity respectively, 
and the secondary current induced by the closing of the key 


1440 GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH [June 27 


K divides equally through the differentially wound coils of the 
sounder and does not actuate its armature, but the portion of 
this induced current that goes out on the line does actuate the 
distant sounder as it does not divide through the coils of that 
sounder. In the same manner the distant station may operate 
this station’s sounder without interfering with its own, and the 
line becomes an induction duplex. One feature of this duplex 
circuit that should commend it is the fact that the resistance and 
capacity of the artificial line need only approximate that of the 
line; the instruments will operate perfectly on a considerable 
discrepancy between the two lines, the real and the artificial. 
The experiments that the writer has had an opportunity to 
conduct with this circuit seemed to show that it makes little 
or no difference whether the resistance of the line is increased 
or decreased within reasonable limits, limits such as would ordi- 
narily affect the closed-circuit duplex quite seriously. 


REPEATER STATION 


Figs. 11 and 12 illustrate the theory of an induction to an in- 
duction repeater. 

The repeater station is composed of two induction repeater 
sets, X and Y, battery b’ being of the closed circuit type. The 
terminal stations are each composed of one of these repeater 
sets, with switches thrown to “‘ duplex ”’ but in reality operating 
as simplex sets. This is accomplished as follows. 

West is sending—the make and break of the primary current 
at West’s station induces a secondary current through West’s 
polarized sounder, and this current divides through the coils of 
this sounder, thus not operating it. The portion of the induced 
current that goes to line passes through the coils of the polarized 
relaying sounder X in multiple and operates X, causing the lever 
of X to rise when West’s key is depressed. The rising of the 
lever of X opens the circuit of battery b’ and causes pony relay 


1912} GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH 1441 


R’ to release its armature. This causes current to flow through 
the primary of X’s induction coil and sends an induced current 
through the polarized sounder of X dividedly, not operating this 
sounder, but the portion that passes to line does operate the 
distant West sounder. Hence as West sends he hears his own 
sounder operate, with perhaps a very slight drag, but not enough 
to be bothersome. 

Returning now to the repeater station—ihe raising of the 
lever of X’s sounder, as has been stated, breaks the circuit from 
battery b’. This causes R2 to release its armature and the 
operation just described for X occurs with Y,and the distant 
East sounder is operated, the contact of Y being closed all of 
the time due to the dividing of the current through Y’s coils 
equally. East may break by closing his key. This causes the 
induced current from East’s station to release Y’s lever and open 
the battery of battery 0’ at Y’s contact, and the armatures of 


REPEATER STATION 


EAST-—> 


Fic. 12 


both pony relays, R; and R2, close the circuits for batteries 0. 
These contacts remain closed as long as East’s key is closed, 
and West’s sounder becomes and remains silent. Before West 
can read East he must close the contact on the polarized relaying 
sounder X. This is done by means of the switch C described 
in the discussion of Fig. 8. 

It is not necessary that the West and East stations be wired 
as for duplex as shown in Fig. 11, but if open-circuit cells are 
used, as they would be in army field kits, this manner of wiring 
is necessary. If, however, closed-circuit cells are used at these 
terminal stations, the simplex wiring shown in Fig. 9 will suffice, 
a closed primary circuit being used. Of course the latter would 
be much the simpler method. 

Fig. 12 differs from Fig. 11 only in the manner in which the 
pony relays of the repeater sets are connected to their closed- 
circuit batteries. Only the wiring of the repeater station is 


1442 GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH [June 27 


here given, the wiring of the terminal West and East stations 
being the same as that given in Fig. 11. 

Fig. 12 operates in much the same manner as just described 
for Fig. 11 except that when West is sending, his own sounder 
remains silent and operates when East breaks, for in this case 
West’s sounder can be operated only by the contact of Y being 
opened and closed. East may break in either of these two 
methods of wiring by merely opening his line switch. This 
destroys the balance of the line for the Y set of the repeater 
station, and in the first case West fails to hear his own sounder 
when he should hear it if East had not broken, and in the second 
case the opposite obtains. 

The choice of these two circuits depends on what is desired. 
For instance, Fig. 11 is the better circuit if the terminal stations 
are to be wired for duplex operation (using dry batteries) and 
if there is only one repeater station onthe line. Fig. 12 must 


WEST REPEATER STATION EAST 
SS 


be used if there is more than one repeater station on the line. 

Fig. 13 illustrates the theory of an induction to closed circuit . 
repeater. 

As described for Fig. 11, the polarized relaying sounder of 
the repeating set does not operate when East is sending. When 
West closes his key he causes the polarized relaying sounder of 
the repeater station to operate, thus breaking and closing East’s 
closed-circuit line at the contact point on the polarized relaying 
sounder of the repeater set. This has exactly the same effect 
on West’s sounder as described for the operation of Fig. 11, and 
West hears his sounder as long as_East does not break. When 
East sends to West the former opens his closed-circuit line at his 
key and consequently allows the pony relay R’ of the repeater 
station to release its armature and send an induced current over 
the line to operate West’s sounder, at the same time not inter-_ 
fering with the position of the lever of the polarized relaying 


1912] GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH 1443 


sounder of-the repeater station. West may break East by de- 
pressing his key or by opening the line. West must leave the 
lever of the polarized relaying sounder of the repeater station 
on down contact when through working. This is accomplished 
by means of the switch C previously referred to. As in Fig. 11, 
it is the “ back kick” of the repeater station that operates 
West’s sounder. 

The arrangement of circuits and apparatus shown in Fig. 13 
is operative on a line where there is only one repeater station 
on the line, but where a closed-circuit line repeats into an in- 
duction line and this line in turn repeats into another induction 
line the wiring given in Fig. 13 will not operate, and the repeater 
station must be wired in accordance with the arrangement shown 
in Fig. 14. 

Fig. 14 illustrates the theory of an induction to closed circuit 


REPEATER 
STATION 


EAST—> 


£ cLosep circuIT 


<—WEST 
INDUCTION LINE 


ails i MAIN LINE 
— 40 OHMS. == BATTERY 


Fic. 14 


‘repeater, the repeater station only being given. The terminal 
stations are shown in Fig. 13. It will be noticed that a 150- 
ohm pony relay is employed in this circuit as in the others, 
but that it is shunted with 40 ohms resistance. This is done 
merely to retain the instruments composing the induction re- 
peater set. This relay might be a 20-ohm relay and in this 
case it would not be shunted, and the battery b might be reduced 
in voltage. 

This circuit, Fig. 14, is composed of the induction wiring for 
duplex for the left half of the repeater set, while the right half 
utilizes the individual coils of the polarized sounder separately. 
The battery b’ may be either of the closed or open circuit type. 
In this circuit it is supposed to be the latter, consequently the 
armature of Y is given a natural bias that will cause it to re- 
main normally on down contact but the presence of a current in 
either one of its coils will allow the spring to draw it upward. 


1444 GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH [June 27 


If battery b’ were a closed-circuit battery the armature of Y 
would be adjusted reversely. The operation of this repeater 
requires that X shall remain unaffected while East is sending 
and that Y shall remain unaffected while West is sending. The 
method whereby the former is accomplished has already been dis- 
cussed for other repeaters, and it remains only to show how Y re- 
mains silent when West sends. The closed-circuit line is brought 
into Y at post 4 and passes through one coil of the polarized relay- 
ing sounder, leaving that coil at post 2 and passing to ground | 
through the armature of the pony relay R’. As long as the arma- 
ture of X is closed battery } discharges current through the pony 
relay R’, and holds the armature of this relay closed, and as the cir- 
cuit from a through the contact points of X toc is practically 
short-circuited no appreciable current will flow through the left 
coil of Y as long as contact at X remains closed; hence the arm- 
ature of Y will be affected by the presence or absence of current 
in the right coil of Y only. 

As East opens the closed-circuit line he removes current from 
this right coil, and the armature of Y being no longer drawn up 
by current in Y, as stated, this armature goes to down position 
and closes the circuit of 6’ and causes an induced current to- 
flow over the West induction line and throws West’s sounder to 
up contact. Therefore as East closes and opens his key he 
causes West’s sounder to respond. On the other hand when West 
sends he causes the left polarized relaying sounder X to operate 
and when X releases its armature it removes the low-resistance 
' shunt from around the left coil of the polarized relaying sounder 
Y and battery b now discharges current into this left coil which 
keeps the armature of Yup. At the same time the armature of 
the pony relay R’ is released, due to the fact that its spring is 
so adjusted that when the contract of X is closed the battery 
b gives R’ sufficient current to attract its armature, but when 
the contact of X is open and the resistance of the 200-ohm 
coil of Yis added to that of R’ the current from battery 0 is 
not sufficient to hold the armature of R’. The opening of 
R’ opens the closed-circuit line at this point and consequently 
operates East’s sounder accordingly. It will be evident that 
care must be exercised to see that the main line battery of the 
closed-circuit line and the local battery b are connected to Y with 
the correct polarity to cause Y’s armature properly to respond 
to current in either of the coils of Y. The spring of R’ must be 
so adjusted that the armature of R’ will remain closed on the 


1912] GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH 1445 


strong current but will be released on the weak current passing 
through the relay R’. This is amply sufficient to eliminate the 

necessity for a fine adjustment of relay R’. 
Fig. 15 illustrates the theory of the induction to open circuit 

repeater. — 
As this circuit differs very little from the theory of the induc- 
tion to closed circuit repeater given in Fig. 13 it is not considered 
necessary to discuss its opera- 
Corea tion. 

Fay ea = ‘ohrrehy Fig. 16 illustrates the theory 


. EAST—- 


<—WEST 
INDUCTION LINE 


of the open circuit to open cir- 
cuit repeater. 

This is the theory of an open 
circuit to open circuit repeater 
given in Maver’s ‘“ American 
Telegraphy,” except that polar- 
ized relaying sounders are used in place of ordinary relays. 
When West puts battery to line he causes the right pony relay 
R® to close its armature. This closes the local battery circuit 
of b’ and closes.the armature of Y, which in turn puts battery 
to the East line and operates East’s sounder. East may break © 
only by operating his key and interfering with West’s sending. 

Fig. 17 illustrates the theory of the closed circuit to open 


Fig. 15 


<—WEST EAST—> 


OPEN CIRCUIT | 
LINE 


OF =N CIRCUIT 
LINE 


MAIN LINE 
= BATTERIES 


il 


circuit repeater that depends for its action on the employment 
of a polarized relaying sounder. 

The instruments composing this repeater are one polarized 
relaying sounder, one 150-ohm relay and one 20-ohm relay. 

The closed-circuit main line battery C B normally holds the 
armature of the polarized relaying sounder on down contact. 
The breaking of this circuit throws this armature to up contact 
(by means of the upward bias previously given to the lever) 


1446 GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH [June 27 


and puts the open-circuit main line battery O B to the open-cir- 
cuit line unless the contact of relay R? has been broken, as would 
be the case if West were sending to East, for then the short 
circuit (the armature of R?) has been removed from the local 
battery b and this battery now furnishes current to the polarized 
relaying sounder as well as to R! and holds the polarized 
relaying sounder’s armature down, but releases the armature 
of R', due to the fact that R' will hold its armature only when 
battery L B has been short-circuited by means of the armature of 
R’; the releasing of armature R! opens East’s line. It must be 
remembered that the West line normally has no current in it, 
hence the armature of R? is normally on released contact as 
shown. The only way East may break West is to interfere’ 
with West’s sending, but West may break East in the ordinary 
manner. This repeater may be quite coarsely adjusted and 
yet give excellent results. 


Fig. 18 illustrates the theory of the closed circuit to closed 
circuit repeater using polarized relaying sounders. 

It will be noticed that two 150-ohm relays shunted with 40 
ohms resistance are used. This is only to allow the instruments 
in the writer’s induction repeater set to be employed; in prac- 
tise it would be better to employ two 20-ohm relays in place of 
the 150-ohm instruments. 

It will also be noticed that the armature of X is a shunt to 
relay Y and likewise the armature of X’ isa shunt to Y’. This 
repeater operates on the principle described for the one half of 
Fig. 14 and it is therefore not deemed necessary to describe its 
action more fully. However, as the setting up of this repeater 
is apt to give trouble to one not familiar with its operation, the 
method of doing so is here given. 

Adjust the armatures of X and X’ so that they will normally 


1912] GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH 1447 


remain on up contact, or stop, when no current is in either coil, 
but will be readily attracted by a current of from 20 to 40 milli- 
amperes flowing in one coil. Bring West line to post 1, connect 
post 3 with 0’, g’, and battery h’, to ground. This should cause 
the armature of X to be attracted or released as contact is made 
or broken at b; if X acts reversely transfer wires at posts 3 and 
1 or change the polarity of the main line battery h’. 

Do the same with X’ if necessary. Assuming the proper 
connections to be as in the figure, temporarily disconnect West and 
East lines from posts 1 and 4 respectively. Wire in relay Y 
as follows: relay tod,toa,tof,cto1,andtorelay. Ifa 150-— 
ohm relay is used, shunt with 40 ohms as shown. Now close 
and open armature X contact at f and adjust relay Y armature 
so that it will just respond to the closing and opening of f. Do 


Fic. 18 


the same with relay Y’. Now see that contacts at f and f’ are 
broken and kept broken temporarily and wire a to 3’. This 
connection should cause armature of X’ to close and remain closed 
but should not close relay Y armature. If X’ armature is re- 
pelled instead of attracted reverse the polarity of battery d. 
Close and open armature of X. This should cause the armature 
of X’ to open and close, and the armature of Y to close and open. 
Now disconnect wire at 3’ for a moment and see that armature 
of X’is up. Wire a’ to 2. This should attract armature of X 
but not that of relay Y’. If it repels, reverse the polarity of 
battery d’. Now close and open the armature of X’. This 
should open and close the armature of X, and close and open 
the armature of relay Y’. Now connect all disconnected wires 
(at 1, 4’, and 3’) and repeater should operate. 

The writer advocates the use of the polarized sounder exclu- 


1448 GUILD: MILITARY TELEGRAPH [June 27 


sively on all Army Signal Corps land lines in time of war, and 
believes that this sounder has widened the possible scope of 
induction telegraph circuits for the more advanced lines in the 
presence of the enemy, the closed-circuit system being used on 
only such lines as may be considered permanent lines. Con- 
sequently the writer has endeavored to produce a telegraph 
field set that will meet every possible telegraphic condition 
likely to be encountered by troops in the field. This set must 
be compact in size, contain few instruments, be simple in opera- 
tive principle and easy and ready of adjustment. 

It follows that such a set must combine the closed circuit 
and induction telegraph features. It must, either alone or in 
conjunction with a duplicate set, be able to repeat from any one 
kind of a simplex line into another kind, in order that a partially 
destroyed line can be hastily “‘ patched” or extended. It is 
not necessary, however, that such a set be used on duplex or 
quadruplex, as such lines cannot, as field lines, be well main- 
tained in time of war. On the other hand, an induction tele- 
graph line of this type may be easily duplexed, consequently 
it would be advantageous to have such a set capable of being 
used as a terminal station of a duplex induction line. 

Hence it will be seen from the foregoing that the set fulfills 
practically all the requirements of a station set for virtually 
any kind of a military telegraph line that might be employed 
by armies in time of war. 

In order to accomplish these results the writer determined 
upon the necessary instruments to use with such a set, then he 
adapted well-known circuits to these instruments wherever this 
was possible, and where not possible he either altered these cir- 
cuits to fit the instruments used, or devised new circuits to 
accomplish the desired results. 

Acknowledgment is therefore due the British Insulated and 
Helsby Cable Company for the circuit shown in Fig. 3; to 
Mr. Stephen Dudley Field for the circuit shown in Fig. 4; 
to Mr. William Maver, Jr., in his ‘‘ American Telegraphy,” 
for the circuit shown in Fig. 16, which has been slightly altered 
by the writer; and to Major Edgar Russel, U.S. Signal Corps, 
for valuable assistance given the writer in some of his experi- 
ments with these circuits. The other circuits in this paper are 
believed to be original circuits. Of course no originality is 
claimed for the principle of operation of an induction telegraph 
circuit, 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS IN UNDERGROUND 
PIPES 


BY CARL HERING 


The measurement of stray electric currents flowing through 
buried conductors, such as pipes, and generally originating from 
an electric railroad or other grounded system of electric distri- 
bution, is attended with various difficulties, particularly in the 
determination of the current which enters or leaves the under- 
ground pipe through the surrounding earth, and as it is the cur- 
rent which leaves a pipe in this way that corrodes it electro- 
lytically it becomes important to be able to locate and measure 
that current. Another important measurement is to identify 
the original source of the stray current. 

The purpose of the present paper is to describe several methods 
which the writer devised some years ago, for making these meas- 
urements, and which he used with success at that time in a prac- 
tical case. The present description is published with the per- 
mission of the party for whom the measurements were made. 

One of the problems given to the writer was to measure the 
currents in a pipe and to locate and measure the currents leaving 
it through the earth, by methods which were positive and not 
based on any questionable assumptions, and the results of which 
could be used as reliable evidence in court. Another was to 
identify the source of the stray currents flowing in pipes so as to 
establish the responsibility for them in legal proceedings. The 
methods therefore had to be unquestionably correct, and free 
from any questionable assumptions. 

The usual method which consists in measuring the drop of 
potential in millivolts between two fixed points on one length of 
pipe exposed for that purpose, and then calculating the current 

1449 


1450 HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


from an assumed resistance of the pipe, would not answer the 
requirements, as the resistance of the pipe is a mere assumption 
which may be far wrong, even when based on measurements of other 
presumably similar pipes before they are laid. A little thought 
will show that such a test at best is only a crude one and the 
results would not be likely to stand the usual attacks in court 
proceedings. Even though many pipes may have been measured 
before laying and found to agree fairly well, there is always the 
uncertain factor of the wall thickness of that particular piece 
of pipe in service on which the drop of potential was taken. It 
is customary for instance in laying water pipes over a rolling 
country to use varying thicknesses as the pipe crosses a valley 
or a hill, and it is of course impossible for the one making the 
electric tests to measure this thickness himself. Drilling through 
or cutting the pipe was not permitted, as it was in service. 

The method of using the academically interesting ground cur- 
rent detector, for measuring the current passing through a definite 
cross-section of the ground near the pipe, was also excluded, as 
it involves disturbing the very conductor through which the 
current had been flowing, as also the assumption that the dis- 
tribution of this current in the ground is uniform, which is not 
only not likely but highly improbable; in any case it is based on 
mere assumptions, and is therefore not positive and direct. 

’A magnetometer method was tried by suspending over the top 
of the exposed pipe an astatic couple having a long distance 
between the two needles; the lower needle was brought to a 
fixed distance from the outside of the pipe, hence within the field 
produced by the current in the pipe, while the other was far 
enough away to be practically outside of that field. The sys- 
tem will then tend to place itself perpendicular to the pipe, hence 
by bringing it parallel to the pipe by means of a torsion wire or 
a current in a neighboring coil, a measure of the external magne- 
tic field and therefore of the internal current is obtained. This 
would be an extremely simple method, but it was found that the 
magnetic field around such a pipe was extremely irregular, the 
surface of the pipe showing numerous irregularly distributed 
poles; it was therefore also abandoned. 

After trying out numerous other methods the following were 
found to be the best and were the ones actually used. 

The fundamental principle is as follows. Let P, Fig. 1, be 
a part of an underground pipe which has been uncovered and 
through which an unkown current J is flowing as shown; at first 


——_oe 


1912] HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1451 


let it be supposed that this current is steady, and of course a 
direct current. Let D be a sensitive galvanometer, millivolt- 
meter or any other form of detector of small differences of poten- 
tial, connected as shown; there should preferably be no variable 
resistance like an unbonded pipe joint between the two contact 
points. Let A be an ammeter, B a few cells of accumulators and 
R an adjustable resistance; the shunt circuit containing them is 
connected, as shown, anywhere outside of the points of application 
of the voltage detector, the farther away the better—they may 
even be on the other side of a joint. 

To find the current flowing in the pipe adjust the resistance R 
until D reads zero; then there will no longer be any current 
flowing in the shunted part of the pipe, hence the reading of the 
ammeter will give the current Jin the pipe. The current may be 
said to have been sucked out of the pipe by the battery, and made 
to flow through the ammeter, where it can be measured; as far 


as the current in that short section is'concerned the pipe circuit 
has in effect been electrically cut in two as though an insulating 
joint had been introduced. 

If D is a galvanometer with proportionate deflections, instead 
of a mere detector, then by taking a deflection immediately after 
the shunt circuit has been opened a reading proportionate to the - 
drop of voltage for that current will be obtained. The instru- 
ment D is thereby calibrated to read the pipe currents directly and 
can be used for this purpose thereafter; the test with the battery 
current is therefore merely of the nature of a preliminary cali- 
bration, and need be carried out only once for each station. 

If in addition this voltage instrument is calibrated to read 
directly in volts (usually in terms of milli- or microvolts as for 
instance a millivoltmeter,) then if the deflection reduced to 
millivolts is divided by the current it will give the resistance of 
the pipe in milliohms between the two points of application of 
the voltmeter; hence it enables the true resistance of the pipe 


1452 HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


to be measured. The distance between the two contact points 
is best made an exact number of feet, which standard length is 
then preferably kept the same for the whole series of tests on that 
line of pipes. From the resistance per foot obtained from tables 
a rough check of the measured result may be obtained. 

In most cases it is advisable to make these connections for the 
voltmeter permanent and to bring wires from them to the surface 
before filling in the hole (being careful to mark one of them with 
a knot), for having once obtained the constant from this test with 
care, the current in the pipe can be measured any time thereafter, 
correctly and very simply with a mere millivoltmeter. The 
most convenient form of this constant is the amperes per millivolt, 
which is numerically equal to the conductance in kilomhos. 

The current which leaves or enters a pipe between any two 
points or stations can then be determined by making this cali- 
bration at each of the two stations and then taking simultaneous 
readings of the currents in the pipe at the two stations with two 
millivoltmeters or calibrated galvanometers; the difference 
between these currents will then show the amount of this cur- 
rent, and whether it is leaving or entering. 

This becomes possible by this method because it is a positive 
one, involving no questionable assumption, and because the 
measurements can be made with all necessary accuracy, if one 
has sufficiently sensitive and reliable instruments ;it can therefore 
be depended upon to measure the current with sufficient 
accuracy at two neighboring stations so that the difference between 
the readings gives a reliable measurement of the entering or leav- 
ing current. If the pipe current measurements were dependent, 
as they often are by the older method, on an assumed pipe 
resistance, such a measurement based on taking the difference 

_between two currents would not be permissible, as the probable 
error would be so great that the results might even make it appear 
that the current was entering when it was in fact leaving the 
pipe. 

In this method shown in Fig. 1 there should be no current 
leaving or entering the pipe between the points of application 
of the shunt, hence the hole should be free from water and there 
should be no moist earth in contact with that part of the pipe. 

It is assumed in this method that the short length of pipe 
between the shunt contacts is too small a fraction of the whole 
circuit of the pipe line currents to alter these currents when that 
section is practically cut out of circuit, as it is when the current 


1912] HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1453 


flows through the shunt. This assumption is probably abso- 
lutely safe in all cases in practise. 

As this method is not in any way concerned with the nature 
of the circuit beyond the single pipe length under test, nor with 
the rest of the path of the current, it can be applied to the most 
complex network of pipes, even when the pipes are interconnected 
together elsewhere or bonded to the track. 

In measuring the pipe resistance by this method, or in general 
when the voltage drop is measured, it is of course assumed that 
the current is constant while the two successive readings are 
taken, hence it is recommended to repeat the two readings a 
number of times. When this constancy of current cannot be 
assumed, one of the modifications of this method described 
below may be used. 

A portable millivoltmeter with a full scale deflection of 10 
millivolts has divisions of 0.1 millivolt, hence can be estimated to 
0.01 millivolt. If a 16-in. (40.6-cm.) cast iron pipe has a resist- 
ance of about 0.00001 ohm per foot (30.5 cm.), then say 5 feet 
(1.5 m.) will give a drop of half a division per ampere. This will 
give a rough idea of the range of measurements that can be made 
with a millivoltmeter. Improvements may perhaps also be 
made in these instruments to make them still more sensitive. 

When a portable galvanometer is used instead of a millivolt- 
meter in order to get greater sensitiveness, like the mirror and 
telescope galvanometers that were used in these tests by the writer, 
it is necessary to calibrate it for volts while in place before each 
test, hence a convenient way of doing so should be provided. 
With the accumulator, ammeter and rheostat available in this 
test, this is easily done by passing a known current through a 
known low resistance, giving a known drop which is then used 
to calibrate the instrument. Such a galvanometer should be 
provided with the usual shunts, and if so it can also be cali- 
brated with a millivoltmeter which is always at hand for such 
tests. 

When such galvanometers are made extremely sensitive, as 
would be desired for instance when the pipes are very large and 
thick or the current very small, they are apt to have a loose zero 
or give somewhat indefinite deflections. Attention is therefore 
called to the fact that small deflections, when they are very 
definite and when the instrument has a rigid zero, as in a good 
portable millivoltmeter, may be more accurate and reliable 
than larger deflections in a galvanometer that is more sensitive 


1454 HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


but has a loose and unreliable zero and less definite or not 

strictly proportional deflections. Instead of using exceedingly 

sensitive instruments it may be better to use greater lengths of 

the pipe, even to the extent of including a joint, which in that 
case should preferably be bonded so that it is not variable. 

In practise there are various very desirable modifications 

of the method which is shown only in its simplest form in Fig. 1. 

Instead of attempting to adjust the current in the shunt to 
bring the’ voltage D to zero, it is far more convenient to use a 
regular measuring instrument for D instead of a mere zero 
detector, and then to pass a definite current through the shunt, 
say 10, 50 or 100 amperes, and read the two deflections of D 
when this current is on and off; this had best be repeated several 
times. The difference between these two readings then cor- 
responds to that current, from which data the instrument can be 
calibrated to read in amperes. The best current to use is that 
which will reduce the original deflection as much as possible. By 
thus using the difference between a large and a small deflection 
the errors due to a loose zero, which are so common with highly 
sensitive instruments, are reduced. 

This method also has the advantage that an observer can 
read both A and D, as he first adjusts the rheostat to give the 
exact predetermined current and after that can open and close 
the switch to throw this current on or off, without having to 
read the ammeter, this current being absolutely constant. He 
need, therefore, read only D. 

All the above applies to steady currents or to such as are 
steady long enough (a few seconds) to take two successive read- 
ings, as the voltage drop and the current cannot be measured 
simultaneously in the form shown in Fig. 1. In practise such 
stray currents are likely to vary continuously and often very 
rapidly. By waiting for a suitable opportunity when the current 
is practically constant for a short time, measurements of sufficient 
accuracy can often be made, and as this part of the test is only 
for the calibration, hence of a preliminary nature and needing to 
be made only once for each station, one is justified in taking 
more time for it. It may be facilitated by using an extra 
voltage detector applied somewhere outside of the shunted part 
(as in Fig. 3) and having an additional observer to call out 
when it is steady or to note whether or not it had been steady 
while the other pair of readings was taken. 

When, however, the fluctuations are too rapid, the following 


— 


1912] HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1455 


modification can be used; it proved to be very satisfactory in 
practise, although somewhat more cumbersome, and requiring 
additional apparatus, though no more observers. 

Let the left-hand side of Fig. 2 represent the same arrangement 
as in Fig. 1. A second voltage detector D is then added as shown; 
it may be a sensitive galvanometer and need not be calibrated. 
Sis a second shunt circuit containing a battery and an adjustable 
resistance which is operated by the observer of D, who keeps 
adjusting it continuously so as to maintain the deflection in D 
constant. During that time the current will be steady for the 
other observer, who then completes a set of readings with the 
other instrument V according to the method shown in Fig. 1. 

The purpose of the additional shunt S is to take up all the 
excess of the pipe current above a certain amount, thus acting as 
a sort of overflow, taking care of the peaks only. The observer 
of D must, therefore, use some judgment in selecting the deflec- 


tion at which the current is to be held constant; it should be kept 
at about the base of the average peaks, but should not be too low 
for the other observer to get good readings for his calibration. 
It may be a different deflection for each set of readings of the 
other observer; the only important point is that the current 
should be held constant in that length of pipe for a long enough 
time to take two successive readings, requiring only a few 
seconds. 

Or, if practicable, the observer of D could shunt off the whole 
pipe current, thus making D read zero, and leaving the pipe 
entirely free from current for the other observer to make his 


_ calibration or any other test for which it is required to have the 


pipe free from current. 

The adjustable resistance for this extra shunt S should be 
made of a pile of carbon plates which are compressed by means 
of a lever so that the observer of D may quickly follow the vari- 


1456 HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


ations of the current with it. Very good results were obtained — 
with such an arrangement after a little practise. As the ob- 
server of D knows whether or not the current has been success- 
fully kept constant he can discard the readings of the other 
observer for which the current had not been constant. By 
taking the mean of a number of good readings, very satisfactory 
results were obtained. 

Having thus calibrated the voltmeter V at each of two neigh- 
boring stations, the currents which enter or leave the pipe 
between them may be determined, with the fluctuating currents, 
by taking the readings of the two instruments simultaneously 
by means of visual or telephonic signals, preferably at times when 
the currents are momentarily steady. 

It may be of interest to state here that after making the cali- 
brations in this way over miles of the same line of pipe, at 
numerous stations, to determine the places where the current 
enters or leaves, and its amount, and also to measure the current 
in the pipe itself, the results were finally all reduced to the resist- 
ances in milliohms per foot of pipe, in order to see how they 
agreed, as the pipe had nominally the same outside diameter 
throughout the entire length. They were found, however, to differ 
very greatly, far too much to be due to errors of measurement. 
The writer, therefore, concluded that the pipes in different parts 
of the line must have different thicknesses, and upon examining 
the specifications according to which the pipe line was laid, this 
was found to be true, thicker pipes having been used in the valleys 
and thinner ones over the hills. Upon making comparisons 
with the specified thicknesses the results agreed very well with 
the measured resistances, showing the reliability of the method 
of measurement. 

Incidentally this also showed the serious errors which might 
arise by using the older method based on the assumed resistance 
of the pipe, it being often impossible to state, after the pipe had 
been laid and was in service, what thickness the particular piece 
under test had. In the present case those who made the 
electrical tests of this pipe line had not been informed that the 
pipe varied greatly in thickness. 

Another modification of the method for use when the currents 
are very unsteady is shown in Fig. 8. The apparatus is similar 
to that in Fig. 2, except that the additional shunt with its battery 
and rheostat is not required, but on the other hand three ob- 
servers are required instead of two. The positions of D and V 


1912] HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1457 


are now reversed, the important instrument V, to be calibrated, 
being now placed beyond the shunt, while D, which may be a 
mere detector or galvanometer, is connected to the points within 
the shunted part. The resistances R and R need not now be 
equal as marked on the diagram. 

The shunt current is first adjusted to some convenient average 
value of that flowing in the pipe, then as the latter fluctuates 
on both sides of this value there will be times when it is exactly 
equal to it; this is indicated by D reading zero, and at that 
moment the observers of A and V take their readings. This can 
be repeated for different currents. The quotient of A divided 
by V should then be a constant for all the readings; this cali- 
brates the instrument V as it gives the amperes per division, and 
it can therefore be used as a pipe current ammeter thereafter. 

This method was not tried. It requires a battery, leads and 
connections large enough for the whole pipe current, and a 


constant flow of the current for a long enough time to get a 
number of good readings; this may sometimes require rather 
large battery and leads. But if the observer of D manipulates 
a carbon plate rheostat rapidly to keep his instrument at zero, 
it ought not to take long to get a group of good readings. 

If in this method shown in Fig. 3, the instrument D is alsoa 
measuring instrument instead of a mere zero detector, then the 
following modifications can be used. The twoinstruments D and 
V need not then be calibrated in volts, hence they can be two 
uncalibrated galvanometers, provided only that they are exactly 
alike in giving the same deflections when connected in multiple; 
they may be adjusted to do so by a series resistance. Two good 
millivoltmeters would do in cases in which the deflections are 
large enough and accurate enough so that their difference may be 
relied upon as being an accurately measured quantity, for the 
present modification of the method is based on measuring this 


difference. 


1458 HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


Having two such instruments, adjust the points of contact for 
either D or V so that the two instruments always read alike for 
the pipe current alone, however fluctuating that current may be. 
This, of course, must not be done by an adjustable resistance 
in the circuit of the instrument, but by moving the contacts 
on the pipe, hence this method cannot be used directly when all 
four of these contacts are drilled or soldered, although it may 
then be used indirectly, as shown later. Three of them may be 
permanent and the adjustment made with the fourth. 

Such connections mean that the two pipe resistances shunting 
these instruments are equal, as any current then gives the same 
drop in both. If now any known part of the current be sucked 
out of the pipe by the battery shunt as before, then, as the two 
resistances are equal, the difference between the readings D and V 
must correspond with the difference between the two currents in 
these two parts of the pipe, and this difference between the cur- 
rents is of course equal to the known battery curent A. Hence, 
dividing this known battery current by the difference between 
the two deflections calibrates both of the instruments for reading 
pipe currents thereafter, that is, either of them will then give 
the amperes per unit deflection. It is precisely like the method 
described above, except that the two readings which then were 
necessarily successive are now simultaneous. 

It will be noticed that as only the difference between the two 
currents is now involved, and as this difference is always constant, 
the method does not assume even a momentary constancy of the 
pipe current, being entirely independent of it; this current in the 
pipe may therefore fluctuate over wide ranges, the only impor- 
tant point being that with such fluctuating currents the two read- 
ings must be taken simultaneously. And as the calibration 
depends on the difference between two readings, the larger one 
should be as large as possible and the smaller one as small as 
possible, hence the battery current should be made as nearly 
equal to the pipe current as practicable. 

As the battery current in the shunt is in practise governed 
entirely by the adjustable resistance in that shunt circuit, this 
local current will remain constant no matter how much the pipe 
current varies. Hence it can be adjusted and noted prior to the 
taking of the two simultaneous readings, thus saving one ob- 
server. Moreover, this shunt current can be adjusted to any 
convenient number of amperes, 10, 20, 50, etc., so as to simplify 
subsequent calculations. 


1912] HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1459 


As before, the above measurements will also enable one to 
calculate the resistance of those parts of the pipe which are em- 
braced by these two instruments, provided the latter are cali- 
brated to read in volts, and are not merely deflection instruments. 
The readings in millivolts, divided by the now known currents in 
amperes, give the pipe resistances in milliohms. 

If it is not convenient to adjust the contacts on the pipe so 
that the readings of the two instruments are alike, the inequality 
of these readings may be allowed for by calculation. For 
simplifying the rough mental calculations which a careful testing 
engineer should always make during a test to see that there are 
no grave errors, wrong connections or inconsistencies, it is advis- 
able to make the two distances between the pairs of contacts 
approximately equal, so that the ratios between the deflections 
will be approximately unity. 

A preliminary test is then made to determine this correction 
factor accurately. This is done by taking a series of simultane- 
ous readings on the pipe current only, or if too small, then sup- 
plemented by the battery current, which should then be reversed, 
so as to add to instead of deducting from the pipe current, and 
it must of course now flow through both pieces of pipe, and not 
as shown in the figure. 

From this preliminary series of readings a good average value 
can be obtained for the ratio of the readings of D divided by 
the corresponding ones of V. Call this. Then all subsequent 
readings of the instrument V in the main test must be multiplied 
by this correction factor x, to reduce them to what they would 
be if the two pipe resistances had been equal as at first described. 

In general, the modifications shown in Figs. 2 and 3 have the 
disadvantage, as compared with that in Fig. 1, that they require 
an exposure of a larger part of the pipe; the alternative of using 
shorter lengths for each instrument is not recommended—these 
lengths should be as great as conditions permit, preferably each 
a whole pipe length. 

In the writer’s tests the galvanometers had been designed for 
different conditions and were therefore somewhat oversensitive; 
the zero was too loose and the deflections were not as definite 
and accurate as desired to give the best results which these 
methods could give. The deflections of millivoltmeters under 
the existing conditions were considered to be too small and there- 
fore too unreliable for methods depending on calculations in- 
volving the relations of quotients and differences. The gal- - 


1460 HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


vanometers should have had stiffer suspensions, giving them 
more rigid zeros and more definite deflections, at a sacrifice of 
some of their sensitiveness. 

The present modification of the method was tried out with 
millivoltmeters in a single one of the tests of the above-mentioned 
series where the pipe current was greatest, and although the 
deflections were small, the calculated results seemed to be con- 
cordant, although there was no way of checking them with results 
from other observations or with repetitions under different con- 
ditions. In the laboratory this latter method may be a very 
satisfactory one, but whether it will be so on a series of outdoor 
road tests should be determined by the testing engineer when he 
knows the particular conditions of the test and the character- 
istics and reliability of his instruments. It has several very 
good features and might in some cases give very good results. 

Attention is here called to the great importance of having the 
directions of the currents correct in all these tests. 

In general, methods which give the final results as directly as 
possible and in intelligible form, are to be preferred to those 
of the indirect kind in which the readings themselves convey no 
meaning and in which the final results must be calculated from 
more or less involved mathematical relations, which it may not 
be convenient to work out during the test itself to see whether 
there are any grave errors, wrong connections, or inconsistencies. 
This is particularly true of road tests in which the apparatus is 
moved rapidly from station to station and in which holes are 
dug which must be filled in again as soon as possible; in such 
tests it would be awkward to find later, when the calculations 
have been made in the office, that there had been something 
wrong, requiring a repetition of an expensive test. 

Another objection to the indirect kind of tests, in which the 
final results are calculated from formulas, is that such formulas 
may involve quotients, differences and relations between them, 
and in such cases it may be the case that small inaccuracies in the 
readings mean very large ones in the final results, as for instance 
in taking the difference between two small and nearly equal 
readings. And such inaccuracies may not be included in the 
academician’s calculated ‘‘ probable error,’’ as they may lie back 
of the readings. A rigid zero, definite and strictly proportionate 
deflections, accurate and ‘strictly simultaneous readings, etc., 
may be necessary for such calculated results. The indirect 
- methods may be quite correct in theory and may give very good 


1912] HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1461 


results in laboratories where one may work out the best possible 
conditions, instead of having to take them as one finds them, as 
in road tests. 

The other test referred to in the introduction concerns the 
identification of the source of the stray currents in the pipes. 
This is often important in legal proceedings, for even if currents 
are shown to be flowing in pipes the question of where they come 
from still remains. 

The method devised by the writer, and used very successfully 
in a large number of tests, consists in taking a series of many 
simultaneous readings of the drop of potential or the current, 
in the pipe and in the track of the supposed source, especially the 
extreme high and low readings of the fluctuations, and plot- 
ting them together on the same sheet of cross-section paper, using 
different scales if necessary to make the average ordinates nearly 
equal. If the prominent peaks and troughs of these two saw- 
tooth curves then correspond approximately with each other, 
there is no doubt that both the currents originate from the same 
source. If the curves are radically different then that track is 
either not the right source or at least is not the only one. 

In the tests referred to, these identification measurements 
were made over long stretches of several miles, with the aid of 
telegraph wires, but it is possible that good results could also 
be obtained in certain cases with millivoltmeters applied to 
stretches short enough not to require the use of long telegraph 
wires. The readings need not be in volts or amperes. They 
merely need to be proportional to them; hence the instruments 
need not be accurately calibrated, but should give correct pro- 
portional deflections. Nor need the resistance of the telegraph 
wire leads be taken into account. 

Numerous other tests concerning such stray currents were de- 
vised by the writer which may be new, but those described above 
were considered to be the best. There were also a number of 
other tests proposed and in part used in this series, but as they 
were devised in conjunction with others the writer does not feel 
at liberty to describe them here. 

As the above-described methods for measuring the pipe cur- 
rents and resistances are entirely independent of the rest of the 
pipe circuit or the rest of the path of the current, they may also 
be applied to other tests than those of underground pipes, in 
which the rest of the circuit is also unknown or inaccessible, as 
for instance in measuring the resistance of a part of a circuit such 


1462 HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


as a busbar, a permanently connected shunt, etc., through which 
“current is flowing and which is in service and can therefore not 
be cut or have its current interfered with. Or the current may 
be alternating. There are of course numerous other modifica- 
tions of the same general principle, which may be made in special 
cases. 

The apparatus used for the pipe current tests consisted of two 
portable, low-resistance, suspension coil, mirror and telescope 
galvanometers on tripods, of the type used for outdoor insulation 
tests, with the usual set of shunts, but made very sensitive, as 
the original requirements were to include measurements of even 
relatively very small currents in rather large pipes. Their con- 


Fic. 4 


stants were about 0.001 millivolt per mm. For ordinary work 
they would not need to be so sensitive. Probably in many cases 
two sensitive but reliable millivoltmeters would be sufficient to 
carry out the above-mentioned tests; if so, they are of course 
decidedly preferable on account of their portability, especially 
‘when high-speed automobiles are incessantly passing along the 
road uncomfortably close to the instrument and observer. 

The rest of the apparatus consisted of a wire rheostat, a re- 
versing switch, a small portable two-cell accumulator capable of 
giving about 100 amperes, and a millivoltmeter with several 
shunts to be used as an ammeter also, all conveniently mounted in 
a portable box serviceable also as a writing table. A single cell 
would probably have answered nearly as well. For the preferred 


1912] HERING: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1463 


form of test shown‘in Fig. 2 there was in addition a carbon plate 
resistance with a lever for quick and strong compression, a 
second set of two cells of accumulators and a sensitive millivolt- 
meter. 

The form of the universal clamps finally adopted for making the 
contacts with the pipes is shown in outline in Fig. 4; these clamps 
proved to be very convenient. They spanned the pipe, making 
contacts for the same lead at two diametrically opposite points. 
The contact pins were made with hardened points which with a 
light hammer blow entered the pipe slightly and made serviceable 
contacts even for currents of 100 amperes. These pins were in- 
sulated from the frame so that they could be used for different 
circuits if desired. The clamps were made of light bicycle tubing 
and ordinary T-joints. 


1464 MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS [June 28 


Discuss1on on ‘ MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS IN UNDER- 
GROUND Pipes ” (HERING), Boston, Mass., JUNE 28, 1912. 


‘ 


Albert F. Ganz: In electrolysis surveys it is important to 
measure the currents flowing on pipes. The most common 
method used for this measurement is to treat part of the pipe 
length as a shunt, and to measure the drop across this shunt with 
a sensitive millivoltmeter, and then to compute the current 
from the measured drop and from an assumed resistance of the 
included pipe length. The methods which Dr. Hering gives 
in his paper for measuring pipe currents involve essentially the 
actual measurement of the resistance of a length of pipe, which is 
part of a piping system. These methods are in fact special 
cases of a general method based on Kirchhoff’s first law, namely, 
that the sum of the currents flowing towards a junction point is 
equal to those flowing away from the point. This principle 
has been used before for measuring pipe resistances, and is 
mentioned on page 67 of the American edition of Dr. Michalke’s 
book on ‘‘ Stray Currents from Electric Railways ’’ published in 
1906. For a number of years 
I have also used in special 
cases what is practically the 
last modification of the 
method described by Dr. 
Hering in the second para- 
graph of page 1458. In carry- 
ing out the method I have 

Wis} used the connections shown 
in Fig. 1 of this discussion. 

The two millivoltmeters are similar and highly sensitive 
instruments, one scale division representing 0.1 millivolt. 
They are shunted across equal lengths of pipe, and a battery 
current is introduced in the middle, as shown in the diagram. 
I have found it convenient to use a battery current larger than 
the pipe current, so that the currents J; and J» flow in opposite 
directions. The two instruments are first read simultaneously 
with the battery circuit open, in which case the readings are due 
to the stray current on the pipe. If the readings are alike, which 
is generally the case, the two included shunts have the same 
resistance; if the readings are not alike, the two included shunts 
have resistances proportional to the readings. The battery 
circuit is then closed, and the ammeter and the two millivolt- 
meters are read simultaneously. If the two millivoltmeters 
previously read alike, the resistance of the pipe between contacts 
is 


~ doy dig 
aes 


Where trolley rails are accessible I have frequently dispensed 
with the battery, and have connected from the middle of. the 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1465 


pipe through an ammeter directly to the rails, thus drawing 
current from or to the pipe. The use of battery current has, 
however, the advantage of giving steadier readings. 

I have used the above method for measuring the resistances 
of pipes and of lead cable sheaths in special cases. Such cases 
arise, for example, in long cable sheaths or in long individual 
pipe lines, where it is desirable to measure current flow simulta- 
neously at two or more points for the purpose of determining the - 
change of current between the points; where the changes are 
small the individual readings must be taken with considerable 
accuracy. 

Stray currents on pipes fluctuate violently from moment to 
moment and also vary greatly during different periods of the 
day. Great accuracy in measuring stray currents is therefore 
generally unnecessary. This is particularly true in the case of 
pipes forming parts of interconnected networks, where the 
method of determining the flow to or from a pipe from simulta- 
neous readings is not generally applicable, and where variations 
of 10 per cent or even 20 per cent would not be serious. For such 
cases it is abundantly accurate to measure the millivolt drop in 
a measured length of pipe, and divide this by the resistance of 
the included length of pipe, estimated from its known size and 
material. 

I have found in the case of long individual pipe lines or long 
cable lines, that a fair estimate of stray current leaving or flow- 
ing to the pipe or cable sheath can only be obtained from a com- 
parison of simultaneous 24-hour records of the current flow at 
successive points. These records can be obtained by means of 
suitable recording millivoltmeters. 

Dr. Hering states, in the third paragraph of page 1456, that 
after he had completed a series of resistance measurements at 
many points over miles of a pipe line, he had found that the 
computed resistances per foot of pipe differed very greatly 
from each other. Upon examination, however, it was found that 
some portions of the pipe line had been laid with heavier pipe 
than others, and when a correction was made for this the results 
agreed very well. He concludes that this is a proof of the relia- 
bility of his method of measuring resistance. It seems to me, 
however, that it really proves that the method of estimating the 
resistance of a pipe from its dimensions is reasonably accurate. 

I am convinced from my experience that in about 95 per cent 
of the cases met in practise, the method of measuring drop 
between two contacts on a pipe, and dividing this by the resis- 
tance of the included length of pipe estimated from its dimen- 
sions, is sufficiently accurate for practical purposes, and on 
account of its great simplicity it is to be preferred. I am prepared 
to admit that I have used, and am still using, this method for a 
great many pipe current measurements, and believe it is a 
perfectly satisfactory and practical method. _ 

Where current flowing from or to a pipe is obtained from 


1466 MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS [June 28 


simultaneous current measurements at two points, I have found 
it very necessary that the two instruments have the same period 
of vibration, as otherwise they will not fluctuate together, and 
the instantaneous readings cannot properly be compared. 

Dr. Hering also states that he has devised a method of identi- 
fying pipe currents, consisting of simultaneously measuring 
drop along a pipe and drop along rails, and comparing the 
fluctuations in these curves of drop. I would like to say that 
I have used this method, but find it better to obtain simultaneous 
24-hour records of the drop on a pipe and on the rails, and then 
to compare the characteristic variations of these drops. I have 
found it satisfactory to use a few feet of pipe and of rail for this 
purpose. I have also found, where there is an extensive piping 
network, and where there are several individual rail lines, that 
the current on any one pipe may not fluctuate with the current 
in the neighboring rail, because the pipe is receiving current 
from a number of rail lines. The method of comparing the 
twenty-four-hour records of drop on the pipe with the rail drop 
is therefore safer in such cases. 

Dr. Hering also states that the ground current detector is 
academically interesting but could not be used because it dis- 
turbs the very conductor through which the current to be meas- 
ured is flowing. I presume that he refers to the Haber earth 
ammeter. It is true that this earth ammeter is not satisfactory 
as a means of measuring the total current leaving a pipe. I 
have, however, found it exceedingly useful as a means of proving 
that stray current is actually leaving a pipe which is found 
corroded, and by using the earth ammeter with a recording 
instrument for identifying the source of the current leaving the 
pipe. - 

Edwin F. Northrup (by letter): In this paper Dr. Hering has 
made a valuable contribution to the literature of a class of 
electrical measurements which is commercially important. 
A word on the history of the development of these methods is 
not out of place. According to the writer’s best knowledge 
(and he has informed himself with considerable pains), the origi- 
nal conception and original execution of the methods of measur- 
ing currents in underground pipes and the resistance of sections 
of such pipes as Dr. Hering describes in connection with Figs. 1 
and 2 of the paper, belongs wholly to the author of the paper. 
The method, rather vaguely described on page 1459, intended as 
a modification for avoiding the difficulties which arise from the 
fluctuations of the currents in the pipes, was quite independently 
devised, fully worked out, generalized, and tested in the labora- 
tory and in the field, by the writer of this communication. The 
present writer has tried no other method, as he believes 
thoroughly, both from theory and tests in laboratory and field, 
that it is the best method for the purpose, that it is quite general 
in application and is not at all deserving of the criticisms made 
in the paper, beginning with the third paragraph of page 1460. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1467 


Its independent conception was undoubtedly stimulated by a 
full knowledge of what Dr. Hering had accomplished by the 
method described and shown in Fig. 1 of his paper. But the 
writer of this communication feels that he has added precision 
and generality to the methods which Dr. Hering has described. 
The importance of the subject is such that the writer thinks 
his viewpoint and additional contributions should be presented 
to the Institute for permanent record in full. What follows is 
taken from the writer’s notes, which were prepared over one 
year ago. 

Resistance Measurement of Closed Circuits. The problem is 
often presented in commercial practise of obtaining the resist- 
ance of a portion of a circuit which is closed upon itself and which 
may contain a source of current, either alternating or direct. 
If the circuit could be opened even momentarily the problem 
could be solved by well-known methods. But if the circuit 


MV. NO.3 
READS Y. 


MV.NO.2_, 
READS Ex, oR Eg, 


Fic. 2 


cannot be opened, the problem is still solvable in more than one 
way. The following methods have been carefully tested out by 
the writer in practical cases, and have been found to give such 
satisfactory results as to warrant a detailed description. 

We shali first consider a general method applicable to measur- 
_ ing the resistance of a section of aclosed conductor loop, such as 
the rim of a cart-wheel, which may be assumed to have a cross- 
section which varies in an unknown way from one portion of 
its circumference to another. Referring to Fig. 2, we have the 
following dispositions of circuits and instruments. 

P is a closed metallic circuit of medium or very low resistance 
which cannot be opened. It is required to determine the resistance 
x of adefinite length of this closed circuit, as between two points 
a and b. For this there are required three deflection instruments 
which deflect proportionally to the current through them. The 
constants of these instruments need not be known but must be 
the same for all three. In the present application of the method 


1468 MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS [June 28 


there is required one known resistance R provided with potential 
terminals. This resistance R should be chosen, for the best ac- 
curacy, of the same order of magnitude as the resistance x which 
is to be determined. A cell of storage battery and a rheostat r 
to adjust the current from the battery to a suitable value, are 
required, also a key K. The deflection instruments would 
ordinarily be miullivoltmeters, though three galvanometers 
having the same constant could be used. Millivoltmeter No. 1 
is joined to the potential terminals a, 6, between which the 
resistance is x. Millivoltmeter No. 2 is joined to the potential 
terminals f, d, between which the resistance is y, and the 
terminals of millivoltmeter No. 3 are joined to the potential 
terminals g, s, between which the resistance is R, which is 
known. The current terminals of R are joined to the points 
p, g, of the loop, and in circuit with R is the key K. The cell 
of storage battery B a, which includes in its circuit the rheostat 
r, is joined to two points, such as m and 7, of the closed metallic 
circuit. This supplies to the system the current required for 
the measurement. 

The procedure in making a measurement is as follows: 

a. With the key K open, read at the same moment millivolt- 
meter No.1 and call its deflection d,’ and millivoltmeter No. 2 
and call its deflection dy’. 

b. With the key K closed read simultaneously the three 
deflection instruments. Call the deflection of millivoltmeter 
mia de d;, of millivoltmeter No. 2,dz,and of millivoltmeter No. 

ue BF 
Then, in case (a), 


= = 1 which call N; thenx =Ny (1) 
2 


In case (b), since the deflections D,d, and dz are proportional 
respectively to e.m.fs. V, £1, and Ey, we have 

fy =Kdp=Cix (2) 
and: Fx, =Kd,=Cy (3) 


Here K is a constant and C is the current through y, and C; is 
the current through x. We also have 


C = C, + J, where J is the current through R. 
But 
KD KD 


V 
As SRR en at Tr DE BOR SY tem hey ae (4) 


In the relations (1), (2), (8) and (4) we have the unknown 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1469 


quantities x, y, Cand C, and hence, there being but four unknown 
and four equations, both x and y can be determined. 


. d,N-—-d 
We finally derive x = aoa peeks Ren (5) 
and 
d2! 
y. = dy’ x (6) 


Equation (5) is obtained as follows: 
From (3) and (4) 


Kad D 
a eC (7) 


From (2) and (7) 


or 


D 
a ae ae R (8) 


Putting in (8) the value of y from (1), we obtain 


fire SEND 
Coe R (9) 


and from (9) we find the value of x to be that given in (5). 

The above method possesses four special merits: The circuit 
of the resistance being measured does not have to be opened; 
the resistance of no contact enters, and hence the contacts at 
points p, g, m, n and k need not be made with any special care, 
while the points a, b, f, d, gq and s are merely potential points 
and contact at these places may be made with a sharp point or 
knife-edge pressed against the conductor; the constant of the 
deflection instruments need not be known, it being only necessary 
that all three instruments have the same constant; two instru- 
ments are read simultaneously in case (a) and the three instru- 
ments are read simultaneously in case (b), hence the current in 
the loop P may be very variable, and accurate results still be 
obtained. 

This method was tried by the writer, using a brass ring a 
little over one meter in circumference and of No. 0 B. and S. 
wire. The ring was placed over an open-core alternating-current 
electromagnet of very great size. By exciting the alternating- 
current magnet induced alternating currents were sent through 


1470 MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS [June 28 


the ring. It was found that the teadings of the three instruments, 
and hence the resistances measured, were in no wise affected 
by the presence of the alternating current induced in the ring, 
hence the method applies whether the closed loop is or is not 
carrying an alternating current. 

In the above trial the actual readings observed and the results 
obtained were as follows: 

d, = 20.54; dp = 25.18; D = 18.51; R=0.0lohm. The 
tatio of d;’ to de’, or N, was 0.9940. From these readings the 
value obtained for x was, by equation (5), 


25.18 (0.994 — 20.54) 


.01 = 0. hm. 
18.51 0.01 = 0.002425 ohm 


The ring was afterward cut open and the resistance x was deter- 
mined by an ordinary method, and found to be 0.002439 ohm. 
Hence the error in the measurement of the closed ring was 0.57 
of 1 per cent. 


Fic. 3 


This method has a useful application when applied to the 
determination of the resistance between two points in a d-c. 
busbar while this is carrying its current. 

To Measure the Resistance between Two Points on a Busbar. 
The arrangement to emplcy is represented in Fig. 3. The 
potential points a, b, and c, d, may be obtained by drilling and 
tapping small holes in the busbar and inserting in these holes 
small screws to which the terminals of the mullivoltmeters may 
be secured. The terminals of the resistance R may be attached 
to the busbar at p and q by means of iron clamps, as the precision 
of the method is not affected by contact resistances at these 
places. The distances between the point a and the clamp p, 
and the point b and the clamp q, should be at least three times 
the width of the busbar. It is also desirable to have the clamps 
p and g make contact with the busbar across its entire width. 
The purpose of these two precautions is to insure that the stream 
lines of current are parallel with the busbar at the potenial 
points a and b. For the same reason the potential point c should 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1471 


be as far to the right of g as the potential point b is to the left. 
The distance from ¢ to d should be chosen about equal to the 
distance from a to b in order to bring the ratio N near unity. 

If there is direct current in the busbar, supplied by the gener- 
ator, then there is no necessity of introducing additional current 
from storage cells, as is required when measuring the resistance 
of a section of a loop as in the example above. 

The standard resistance R should be supplied with potential 
points and should be not over ten times the resistance of the 
busbar between the clamps p and q. Greater accuracy will be 
obtained if this resistance is about equal to the resistance of the 
busbar between the clamps. Since the drop of potential over the 
resistance R is read to give the value of the current I, which 
flows in the branch circuit, one may substitute an ammeter for 
the resistance R and the millivoltmeter which reads the drop 
over this resistance. In this case, however, the other two 
deflection instruments must read, not in arbitrary units, but in 
volts or millivolts. 

The procedure is the same as in the case of the ring, described 
above. Giving the symbols the meanings designated in Fig. 3, 
we have: 

With the key K open, 


=R = (1) 


With the key K closed, we have, from readings taken simul- 
taneously by three observers, 


Ey => Ci x (2) 
and E,=Cy (3) 


We also have the relation 
V 
GET Fare BOI ori ee (4) 


From (1), (2), (3) and (4) we deduce, as in the case of the 
measurement of the resistance of a ring, 


Fics Ey ee (6) 
or x= EAN ® R (6) 


If equation (6) is used, F1, Zz and V can be multipled by the 
same constant, a, and hence the deflection instruments may be 


1472 MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS [June 28 


calibrated in arbitary units, provided the same arbitrary units 
are used for all three instruments. 

The purpose to be fulfilled in finding the resistance between 
two points in the busbar is to enable the current in the busbar 
to be measured at any time by reading the drop of potential 
between the points with a millivoltmeter. A portion of the 
busbar is made in this manner to serve as a shunt for a milli- 
voltmeter, which thus becomes an ammeter for reading the 
current in the busbar. As busbars are made of copper or 
aluminum, which have a large temperature coefficient, we have 
to consider to what extent, if any, their change in resistance with 
temperature will affect the precision with which the current may 
be read. Let Fig. 4 represent an arrangement to be employed. 

Here, B -—B, isasection of a busbar. We shall suppose that 
the resistance Ro» has been accurately obtained at 20 deg. cent., 
between the two points a and b, by the above method. The 
millivoltmeter MV is joined to the points a and 6. 


Let tr = to (1 + aT) (1) 
be the resistance of the millivoltmeter at T deg. cent. above 20 


deg. cent. when ro is its resistance at 20 deg. cent. and @ is the 
temperature coefficient of its winding. 


oj let Ri=Ro(l1t+ Be) (2) 


be the resistance between points 

a and b of the busbar at ¢ deg. 

cent. above 20 deg. cent. when 

Fic. 4 Reo is its resistance at 20 deg. 

F cent. and B is the temperature 
coefficient of the material of the busbar. 

The busbar may change in temperature both from changes in 
the temperature of the room and from the heating due to the 
current which it carries. The millivoltmeter MV can only 
change in temperature from changes in the temperature of the 
room. Hence, in general, the temperature T of the millivolt- 
meter will not be the same as the temperature ¢ of the busbar. 

We wish to determine the nature and magnitude of the errors 
produced by these temperature changes in reading the current. 
If Jis the current in the busbar, the fall of potential from a to b, 
when the temperature of busbar is #, will be 


E, = FR; (3) 
The current through the millivoltmeter will be 


_ 2 


ry 


=e (4) 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1473 


where D is the deflection of the millivoltmeter and K isa constant. 
Hence 
E; =K Dry (5) 


By equations (3) and (5), 


i ae roo (1 + @ T) 
SCONE EM O00 se crear (6) 


Since the busbar and the winding of the millivoltmeter are 
both of pure metal, as copper or aluminum, the temperature 
coefficients a and 8 would be practically the same and may be 
taken, approximately, as 0.004. Equation (6) can therefore 
be written: 


K D roo 1 + 0.004 T 


Reo 1 + 0.004 ¢ D 


ide 


The error in the measurement of J is now seen to depend directly 
upon the amount by which the last term of equation (7) departs 
from unity. In the case of no heating, by the current, of the 
busbar above room temperature, (as would be very approximately 
realized for a loading of the busbar of 50 per cent full load or 
less) ¢ = JT; and there is no error, whatever the room tem- 
perature becomes. Now ¢ can never be less than T, but may 
assume a value T + 0 T, where 0 T represents the temperature 
of the busbar above the temperature of the air. In this case 
equation (7) becomes 


I= x 


°K Drag 1 + 0.004 T (8) 
Ro ~ 1+0.004T + 0.0040T , 


As a rather extreme case we may take JT = 10 deg. cent: 


above 20 deg. cent., and dT = 5 deg. cent. Then 


1 + 0.004 x 10 1.04 
a Bost eL: 
(PE avonsci0d o00d or 1.06 eT 


Thus the true value of the current would be, in this case, about 
two percent less than one would read it upon the millivoltmeter. 

The following estimate shows that the fall of potential in a 
busbar is large enough to apply the above method of measuring 
the current in it; though the writer has not had an opportunity 
of putting the method into practise as was done in the other 
cases here described. The resistance of 100 per cent conduc- 
tivity copper at 20 deg. cent is 67.7 x 10° ohm per linear inch 


1474 MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS [June 28 


(25.4 mm.) per sq. in. (6.45 sq. cm.) of cross-section. It is 
good practise to allow 1000 amperes per sq. 1n. of cross-section 
of copper conductor. Then, with 1000 amperes to the sq. in. 
of cross-section, the drop of potential per linear in. becomes 
10° X 67.7 X 10-8 = 0.677 X 107% volt, or 0.677 millivolt per 
linear inch. If the full scale reading of the millivoltmeter 
is 20 millivolts, the distance between the potential points a 


: 20°. : 
and 0 (Fig. 4) would need to be 0.677 > 29.2 + in. 


This length of busbar, to be used for the purpose of a shunt, 
could be obtained behind most any switchboard, and it is probable 
that a shunt for the millivoltmeter of this character would serve 
quite as well and perhaps be superior to the shunts ordinarily 
used. For these latter have a very low temperature coefficient 
and changes in the temperature of the room will increase the 
resistance of the millivoltmeter without increasing in like degree 
the resistance of the shunt, and hence there is no automatic com- 
pensation, as in the case discussed above, where the busbar itself 
serves as a shunt. 


Fic. 5 


To make the millivoltmeter read directly in amperes requires, 
of course, that the constant K, in equation (8), be correctly 
chosen. As we are at liberty to give any value to the resistance, 
roo, it will always be possible to do this. 

Measurement of the Resistance of Underground Mains. An 
important application of the methods above described for meas- 
uring the resistance of a portion of a closed circuit is the deter- 
mination of the resistance between two selected potential points 
upon an underground gas or water main. Underground pipes 
are subject to deterioration from electrolysis, caused by “‘ tramp ”’ 
currents which get into the pipe line from neighboring electric 
trolley roads. The electrolysis occurs when current leaves the 
pipes. It becomes important, at times, to be able to measure 
quickly and accurately the current which flows in some selected 
section of a pipe line. It is evident that this can be easily ac- 
complished by measuring at any time, with a millivoltmeter, 
the potential drop between the points on a section of pipe, 
provided the resistance between these two points has been pre- 
viously determined. The method shown in Fig. 5, which is 
a slight modification of those described above, enables this re- 


1912] z DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1475 


sistance to be measured with considerable precision while the 
section of pipe is in place in the pipe line. a | 

The measurement is made with two millivoltmeters and an 
ammeter. One or two cells of storage battery are also required. 
The cells of storage battery, a key K (Fig. 5) and the ammeter 
A are joined in series and connected at two places,as shown 
in the diagram, to a section of pipe. These connections are best 
made by drilling }-in. (6.3-mm.) holes about half way through 
the pipe wall, and driving brass plugs into them. Heavy 
copper wire connections may then be soldered to the brass plugs. 
The other connections, which serve as potential points, may be 
made in a similar manner, but smaller holes and plugs will serve. 
There should be as much separation as possible between a 
potential point and the place of connection of a current lead, 
and these should, preferably, be located at the ends of diameters 
of the pipe which form with each other an angle of 90 deg. 

It is well to take one set of readings and calculate the resist- 
ance with the polarity of the storage cell in one direction and then 

‘take a second set with the polarity of this cell reversed. In the 

mean of the two resistances thus obtained, the error, which 
results from the flow lines of current from the storage cell not 
being parallel with the section of pipe between the potential 
points, is largely eliminated. This is specially the case when 
there is considerable current flowing in the pipe from other sources 
than the storage cell. 

This error will be small, however, in any case, if the distance 
between a potential point and the point of connection of a cur- 
rent lead is, say, twice the diameter of the pipe and _ these 
terminals are located as above suggested. Referring to Fig. 5 
for the meaning of the symbols, we have, as in the cases given 
above: 


With the key K open, 

A Ey 

neta nny t 

aay (l) 
and with the key K closed, 

Ey = Cix (2) 

Ey, = Cy (3) 
and | C=C; +.A, (4) 
from which we find 

#N—* “(6) 


A= Tor ee 


1476 MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS [June 28 


1 
EF, == Fy N 
Also Y Sie ape ae (6) 
ep, 7 
or NF (7) 


In applying the method, one is not in the least troubled by the 
sudden variations of the current in the pipe which constantly 
occur, because E;’ and EF,’ are read simultaneously to obtain the 
ratio N and then, again, E,, Ez and A are read simultaneously 
to obtain the other necessary values. Three observers, reading 
at the same moment, obtain correct values; for when the 
current varies, a variation occurs in all three instruments at the 
same time, the proper relation between the readings of the three 
instruments being always maintained. 

This method was carefully tested by the writer upon an actual 
pipe line with excellent results. The essential features of the 


READINGS TO LEFT=+ 


FORMULA ASSUMES 
CURRENT -FLOWS THUS 


' EAST 


: Le») ha -8845! «1.010 —§a | 
! it 


i) im 
WEST 141,958 }<—T016 ; 
| 1 .oo4 191 


Fic. 6 


test are given to show how the measurement works practically, 
and are recorded below: 

The diameter of the pipe was 15 in. (88 cm.). Two pipe lengths 
were uncovered and the connections to the pipe sections were 
made at distances and in the manner shown in Fig. 6. The 
method embodied the use of two cells of storage battery, which 
would yield on short circuit, when joined in parallel, 125 to 150 
amperes, and also one ammeter reading to 200 amperes and two 
millivoltmeters giving a full scale deflection with 20 millivolts. 
In circuit with the ammeter and storage cell a single-pole current 
switch K was used. The following readings were taken: 

E’, and E’, were read simultaneously. The current in the 
pipe was sufficient for the purpose. The mean of nine readings 
of E;’ was 7.511 millivolts and the mean of nine readings of Eo’ 


was 7.122 millivolts. Hence the value of the ratio e was 


ee 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1477 


There were then taken seventeen sets of readings of H,, EH. and 
A with the positive pole of the battery cell joined to No.7 
terminal (Fig. 6), and a like number with the negative pole to 
this terminal. 

The following table exhibits a few sample readings. 


Current + to No. 7 Terminal jero Current — to No. 7 Terminal 

Ey | Ex | A | X& = ohms Fi Ss )\ A X = ohms 
milli- | milli- jamperes | for 7.916 ft. milli- milli- | amperes | for 7.916 ft. 
volts | volts | | volts | volts | 

23 

—6.8 1.6 | 116 | 0.0000731 7.60 0.4 —102 0.0000703 
—6.2 1.8 110 0.0000736 7.8 0.8 — 98 0.0000709 
—8.3 0.9 | 127 | 0.0000728 8.2 1.0 —101 0.0000707 


The mean value deduced for X with the current from the stor- 
age cell positive to terminal No. 7 was 0.00007315 ohm, and with 
the current from the storage cell negative to terminal No. 7, 
it was 0.00007077 ohm. The mean of these two results was 
0.00007196 ohm for a length of the pipe of 7.916 ft. There 
were 40 ft. (12.2 m.) of No. 14 wire used, as potential leads, to 
each millivoltmeter. Calculation showed that to correct for 
the resistance of these leads the final value of X should be mul- 
tiplied by 1.088. Doing this and reducing the resistance to a 
length of one foot (304.8 mm.) of pipe, the final value found was: 
9.91 microhms per foot, at 65 deg. fahr. 

The test was defective in that the distances between potential 
points and points of attachment of current leads were not chosen 
as great as they should have been and were all made on the top 
side of the pipe. The “ tramp ”’ currents in the pipe were large 
and very variable at the time of the test. In spite of this the 
resistance measurement is probably correct within 1.5 or 2 per 
cent, and should have been better. 2 

It was found in this test that care had to be exercised to give 
the readings of the three instruments the proper algebraic signs. 
By making a diagram, like Fig. 6, before beginning the test, 
errors of this character may be avoided. 

George F. Sever: Assuming that this method of Dr. Hering’s 
is correct, which it undoubtedly is, and perfectly available for 
measuring current in pipes, what are we going to say in court 
to the jury, or to the judge, when we do find current in the 
pipe, and it is recognized that current, when leaving a pipe, 
under most circumstances, causes corrosion? A cooperative 
test by the parties in interest will undoubtedly show current on 
the pipe, and if both parties in interest go into court with this 
statement, it becomes a very difficult matter, at least for the 
railroad company, to defend the presence of current on these 

ipes. 
Tf we agree that one ampere on a pipe causes a certain amount 
of electrolytic effect when leaving it, and then find 100 or 200 


1478 MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS [June 28 


or even 500 amperes on a pipe, it becomes a very difficult matter 
for the railroad company to say that there is no damage. In 
other words, if there is found any current on the pipe, might 
it not cause damage at all sorts of places, and can the railroad 
company, which is alleged to put the current on the pipe, defend 
its position? 3 

All of these measurements lead up to interesting technical 
conclusions, but the real common sense question is, how are we 
going to interpret the results? 

Edward B. Rosa: We have been making some study of this 
subject at the Bureau of Standards. Several years ago we 
tried the method Dr. Hering has outlined, before we knew that 
it had been used by him, but we believe that it is not generally 
necessary to determine the resistance of the pipe. You cannot 
determine the current, with precision, as has been said, as it is 
so variable, and therefore, it is not necessary to determine the 
resistance with precision. We have found that the resistances 
of different kinds of pipe are sufficiently near together, so that we 
believe it is practicable to prepare a table of resistances for 
different sizes and different kinds of pipe. We have obtained 
samples of different kinds of pipe used for gas and water, and have 
measured the resistance, and will shortly have a table prepared, 
which will be in practical form for the use of engineers, so that 
they may be required only to measure the drop in potential and 
take the resistances out of the table. That is not expected to be 
accurate, as the pipes may have corroded to some extent, but it 
may be used for approximate purposes, where approximate 
determinations will be satisfactory, and the table will, un- 
doubtedly, be of very considerable value. 

Alexander Maxwell: I do not think that Dr. Hering does 
entire justice to Haber’s earth ammeter, in describing it as 
merely of academic interest, or in stating that its use involves 
many assumptions. I have used it extensively, and with very 
good results. 

By means of this instrument, earth currents are intercepted 
and measured; and while it is true that the soil conditions are 
somewhat altered, that is of little importance if the path of the 
current through the soil is of any considerable length, which is 
nearly always the case. However, it is generally not of the first 
importance exactly to reproduce the normal conditions quantita- 
tively. It is of much greater importance to determine whether 
current does flow or not, and: to determine its direction and its 
source. The actual normal value of the current is only a matter 
of secondary importance, since the total amount of current lost 
from an entire pipe line may be quite accurately determined by 
other means, where it is necessary to determine it at all. 

In my opinion, too much stress is sometimes laid upon the total 
amount of current lost from a particular pipe, or from a system 
of pipes, since this is often a matter of no particular importance. 
A comparatively small amount of current escaping from a pipe 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1479 


may produce corrosion over a limited area, and yet the whole 
pipe will be made useless, just as though it had been corroded 
over its entire surface. 

The earth ammeter is actually a very useful instrument, and 
when properly used it is capable of indicating conditions which 
are otherwise obscure. Moreover, when its indications are 
observed simultaneously with other quantities, such as potential 
difference, or the main current flowing in the pipe, the source 
of stray current may be identified by means which involve no 
questionable assumptions. Thus, as in Fig. 7, where it is sus- 
pected that current is escaping from a pipe and flowing to a 
street railway rail, the earth ammeter may be placed in the earth 
between the two structures, and by setting it successively in three 
planes the direction of the stray current may be quite definitely 
determined. A still better way to do this is to employ three 
instruments, set as above, and read them simultaneously. 

Measurements such as these, taken simultaneously with 
measurements of potential difference between the two structures, 
constitute good evidence of the existence of the suspected stray 
current, and good evidence of its identity. It is even better to 


Fic. 7 Fic. 8 


obtain 24-hr. records of the quantities, by means of recording 
instruments. 

The main object of tests of this character is to prove that 
stray currents from some suspected source do actually escape 
from the pipe being tested. The earth ammeter can be used to 
indicate the escape of currents much smaller than those which 
could possibly be determined with any accuracy by even the most 
refined methods for measuring the total current in the pipe. 
The loss may be even less than one per cent of the total current 
in the pipe, and still produce measurable indications in the earth 
- ammeter. It is well understood that even such small currents 
may produce serious corrosion, and, in fact, it is the usual con- 
dition that sttay currents flow on to pipes, and escape from them, 
in very small amounts, as reckoned for units of pipe surface. 

Another useful application of the earth ammeter for the 
identification of stray currents consists in shunting the conduct- 
ing path through the soil, by means of a heavy bond connection 
between the two structures which, with the soil, constitute the 
circuit for the stray current. This general arrangement jis 


1480 MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS [June 28 


shown in Fig. 8. In this case, if the earth ammeter shows a 
certain current flowing between the pipe and the rail with the 
shunt circuit open, and this earth current is reduced in value 
when the shunt circuit is closed, excellent evidence is obtained 
of the actual flow of stray current through the earth. 

I am of the opinion that stray earth currents can be detected, 
measured and identified by means of the earth ammeter, in cases 
where a survey based merely on measurements of total current 
in the pipes would not adequately indicate all of the places where 
current enters or escapes from the undergound structure being 
investigated. 2 

With regard to the main feature of Dr. Hering’s paper, namely, 
the methods of calibrating the pipe resistances, I have employed 
the last method described in the paper since 1908, generally 
utilizing the stray current itself, by means of a temporary bond 
connection to the street railway rails. I have, however, only 
found it necessary to calibrate pipes in this manner for very 
special cases, generally finding the calculated resistancé amply 
accurate, since measurements of such fluctuating quantities as 
stray railway currents cannot be even observed with great 
accuracy. 

This same consideration of accuracy affects the choice of in- 
struments, and I have found that portable pivoted instruments 
of relatively high sensibility for their class are decidedly prefer- 
able to reflecting instruments as used by Dr. Hering. In short, 
a large number of significant readings of moderate accuracy 
provides a better basis for preparing a case than a few observa- 
tions of wholly unnecessary precision. 

Frank Wenner: This method that Dr. Hering has described 
for measuring currents in pipes seems to be a perfectly obvious 
method. I personally know of a number of persons who have 
thought of the method, and I should like to point out that it was 
used by Professor Adams in Columbus about fifteen years ago, 
and in that particular case—it was a court case in which the 
matter of resistance of the pipe was brought into question—he 
used the method for measuring the resistance as well as measur- 
ing the current. 

In this particular method, a high degree of accuracy cannot 
‘always be obtained, especially in large gas pipes if the current 
to be measured is comparatively small. The difference in 
temperature between the two points of the pipe to which the 
potential connectors are attached may amount to a degree or 
even to two degrees. Since the thermo-electromotive force 
amounts to about fifteen microvolts per degree difference in 
temperature, if the potential connections are copper, serious 
errors may be introduced where the currents are small and the 
pipes large and of low resistance. The thermo-electromotive 
force may cause errors either when the method described by Dr. 
Hering is used or when the ordinary method, using a sensitive 
millivoltmeter, is used. 


—-— 


1912} DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1481 


Clayton H. Sharp: In electrolytic surveys and studies all 
methods are useful, at some times. Conditions are varied, and 
while in general the method of estimating the resistance of the 
pipe is sufficient, yet there are times when a method like the one 
which has been presented to us in this paper is bound to be use- 
ful. I think that we are indebted to Dr. Hering for bringing it to 
our attention, and for smoking out a whole lot of people who have 
been using it and saying nothing about it. 

Carl Hering: Dr. Sharp has already answered one point 
which came out in the discussion; when members of a profession 
like ours keep their methods of measurement secret, they are 
not doing their duty to their colleagues and it is not creditable to 
them to come out afterwards with claims of priority when some- 
one takes the trouble to publish a description. Moreover I 
do not admit that the alleged prior methods described in the 
discussion were really the same; Professor Ganz’s certainly was 
not. 

It has been said in the discussion that such precision as is in- 
dicated in this paper is not necessary; in most of the ordinary 
cases it is not, but in a legal case, in a suit in court, it is neces- 
sary or else the results will not be sound legal evidence. Further- 
more, one of the principal points in this case was to find the 
current entering or leaving the pipe, and unless the original 
currents are measured accurately, you cannot depend on their 
differences. If, for instance, one is 100, and the other 98, an 
error of only 3 per cent in these measurements may even change 
the sign of the result. 

Professor Ganz upheld the method of assuming the resistance 
and then measuring the current with a millivoltmeter. I do 
not believe in virtually assuming the thing you are going to 
measure; it is a very easy way to get results, but I do not approve 
it. Itis moreover dangerous to assume a resistance for a pipe, 
for the reason that pipes are laid much thicker in the valleys than 
at the tops of hills, and the gradations are rather small; for 
that reason alone it is unsafe. to assume that any particular 
length of pipe has any particular thickness, unless you have 
laid the pipe yourself and know just what the thickness is. 

As to the 24-hour measurement that Professor Ganz spoke of, 
it is hardly necessary, in most cases, to run such identification 
tests for 24 hours. In fact, a measurement continued over a 
period of one hour will generally give you two saw-tooth curves 
that are so nearly alike that you have enough evidence to show 
the court that the street railway is the offending party. 

I do not wish to say anything against Haber’s earth ammeter, 
as it is very ingenious and undoubtedly very useful for certain 
purposes, but it will not do for the purpose for which I wanted 
these measurements. 

As to who originated the system, that is of little general in- 
terest. I agree with Dr. Sharp that a person who has used some 
system which is valuable to others and does not make it public 


1482 MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS [June 28 


in a paper or some other form of announcement, has no moral 
right to come out afterwards and claim originality. 

Carl Hering (communicated after adjournment): In examin- 
ing more carefully such broad, vague, general and sweeping 
claims of priority as those made in this discussion, I have often 
found, in other cases, that the alleged prior method was not the 
same one at all, but that it lacked the very elements which char- 
acterize the method whose originality is disputed. Several 
of the speakers evidently overlooked the important statement 
that this method was devised specifically to determine the cur- 
rent which enters or leaves a pipe, as distinguished from the 
current flowing in the pipe; for the latter purpose I admit that 
the very simple method of assuming the pipe resistance would 
be good enough for many purposes, and perhaps even for some 
legal cases; but I do not believe that any of those speakers will 
claim that a method based on assumed resistances would be 
satisfactory or reliable when the result sought is a difference 
between two readings which may at times be nearly equal, and 
when a lawyer attempts to discredit it to the court. 

I grant that Dr. Northrup devised the particular modification 
described on page 1459 without knowing that I had devised ex- 
actly the same one a year or two earlier; I preferred to use the 
others in most of the tests because the instruments I had to use 
were not considered to be sufficiently reliable for this method. 
I cannot grant him, however, that any ‘‘ precision and gener- 
ality ’’ was “‘ added ” when he devised it independently; as they 
are identical, one cannot be more precise or more general than 
the other. Whether my description of it in this paper was 
“vague,” as he claims, I am willing to leave to others to judge. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


A TUBULAR ELECTRODYNAMOMETER FOR HEAVY 
CURRENTS 


BY P. G. AGNEW 


THEORY OF INSTRUMENT 

To obtain the same current distribution for both alternating 
and direct current it is usual to strand the windings of the field 
coils of electrodynamometers, and the strands should also be 
thoroughly mixed so that all shall have the same effective resist- 
ance and inductance. For very heavy currents this becomes a 
matter of extreme difficulty. 

In the present instrument an entirely different means of ob- 
taining the same end is employed. Evidently the ultimate 
requisite in an instrument for transferring from alternating to 
direct current is that the torque shall be the same, and it is 
immaterial whether we make the current distribution the same, 
or the field due to the current the same. The latter is the 
method adopted. There is no theoretical reason why the current 
distribution and the magnetic field could not both be allowed 
to vary if it could be shown that the torque did not change. 

The field ‘‘ coil ’’ of the instrument consists of two coaxial 
copper tubes, thus giving a circular magnetic field in the space 
between the tubes. On direct current the distribution may be 
assumed to be uniform over the cross-section of the tubes, but 
on alternating current, as is well known, the stream lines are 
crowded toward the outside of the inside tube and toward the 
inside of the outside tube, and the amount of this change depends 
upon the frequency. But it may easily be shown that if we 
have axial symmetry the magnetic field at any point is independ- 
ent of the current distribution. Expressed in the usual terms, 
there is no magnetic field between the tubes due to the outside 

1483 


1484 AGNEW: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS {June 28 


tube, and that due to the inside tube is independent of the skin 
effect, but it is better to consider the arrangement as a special 
case of a more general principle. 

Let us consider a generalized toroid such as would be formed 
by rotating any closed circuit such as A (Fig. 1) about an axis. 
We may think of the circuit A as consisting of a wire carrying 
a current, and similarly of the surface of revolution as being 
a current sheet. Or we may think of the surface as being - 
wound with a layer of wire with no space between turns and thus 
becoming an endless solenoid. 

It has been shown by Maxwell! and by Gray? that the field 
at any point, as at O, isindependent of the size, shape and thickness 
of the conductor and depends only on the total current and the 
distance of the point from the axis. This may be shown by a. 
very simple process of reason- 
ing. The all-important con- 
dition is axial symmetry. 

Consider a circle perpen- 
dicular to the plane of the 
paper, and cutting it in the 
points O and O’. This circle 
links once with the current. 
Henc2 the line integral of the 
magnetic field around this 
circle, or the work required Pic. 1—THe GENERALIZED ToROID. 
to carry a unit pole around 
it, is 4 m times the total current, or, if we remember that H 
is uniform around the circle, 

27RH=471 
H= 21/R 

The value of H at any point within is thus entirely independ- 
ent of the dimensions of the conductor, provided there is axial 
symmetry. Hence an approximation to such a form for the 
current coils is admirably adapted for alternating-direct-current 
transfer dynamometers, since it is independent of the current 
distribution.® 

It will be seen that the concentric tubes form an approximation 


1. “ Electricity and Magnetism, ”’ Vol. II, Art. 681. 

2. ‘‘ Absolute Measurements, "’ Vol. II, page 278. 

8. For a detailed discussion of this principle and its application to 
electrodynamometers, see Agnew and Fitch, Elec. Rev. (Chicago), 60, 
p. 767, 1912. 


1912} AGNEW: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1485 


to a toroid or an endless solenoid of one turn. It can only be 
an approximation since it must be open at one end in order to 
introduce the current. 
CONSTRUCTION © 

Fig. 2, which is a vertical longitudinal section through the 
instrument, shows the general arrangement. The tubes are 
horizontal in order to allow a vertical suspension, and the moving 
coils are placed astatically, one above and one below the inner 
tube. These are shown in the plane of the section instead of 
in the mean working position, which is nearly perpendicular 
to the plane of the paper. This is done in order to show the 
shape of the coils, which are wound on ivory frames. They are 


MIRROR 


DAMPING VANE WOODEN DAMPING BOX 
<= 


QUALIZING 


GROOVE FOR E 
STREAM LINES 


DAMPING VANE 
( WOODEN SUPPORT FOR | 
TELESCOPE AND SCALE i} 


it ™ WOODEN DAMPING BOX 
i ~ 
SUSPENSION 


WOODEN SUPPORT FOR 
TELESCOPE AND SCALE 


WOODEN SUPPORT—T 


Fic. 2—TuBULAR DYNAMOMETER. 


held together by fine silver wires, one on either side of the inner 
tube, as indicated in the figure. 

Phosphor bronze strip suspensions are used, and two air damp- 
ing vanes are provided. The damping boxes are of wood and 
are mounted directly on the outside copper tube. The instru- 
ment is read by telescope and scale. 

Massive copper slabs placed parallel and 4 cm. apart serve as 
current terminals. They are provided with 5 bolts so arranged 
that any number of parallel leads up to 5 may be connected 
symmetrically. These at the same time serve as supports for 
one end of the instrument, and the closed end is supported by 


an oak upright. 


1486 AGNEW: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


Water cooling is provided for the inside tube by passing water 
through it, but no special means are provided for cooling the 
outside tube. 

While the very heavy copper slabs used for current terminals 
tend to equalize the stream lines in the larger tube about the 
axis as a line of symmetry, this was deemed insufficient for the 
most precise work. Accordingly a groove 5 cm. wide was turned 
eccentrically in the large tube near the open end, so that the 
groove was 2 mm. deep on the top of the tube and 3 mm. deep 
on the bottom. When finally mounted a current was passed 
through the instrument and equipotential surfaces laid off on 
the tube. By a small amount of filing the eccentricity of the 
groove was adjusted so that the equipotential surface was a 
plane perpendicular to the axis. It was found that the re- 
lation held very accurately throughout the length of the tube— 
the distances between equipotential surfaces measured at dif- 
ferent points on the circumference differed but one millimeter 
in 800. 

From the principle of axial symmetry outlined above, it may 
easily be seen that no error due to skin effect in the closed end 
will enter. For this reason the moving coils were placed one 
third of the length from this end so as to minimize the effect 
of the leading-in cables, etc. Perhaps a fourth or even a fifth 
would have been better. 


PERFORMANCE 


It is of first importance to determine whether the instrument 
is affected by distribution errors. Rosa has described an indirect 
method! for making this determination by the use of capacity 
in the moving coil circuit. If the moving coil circuit be short- 
circuited on a resistance shunted by a condenser having such a 
value that 

L=CR 


where L is the self-inductance, R the external resistance and 
C the capacity shunted around it, then there should be no de- 
flection on closing the circuit, no matter what the position of the 
coil. But if there is such an error then there will be a residual 
deflection. 

When the instrument was first set up it showed no such error 
up to 300 cycles. But after it had been in service some time 


4. Bulletin of the Bureau of Standards, 3, p. 43, 1907. Reprint No. 48: 


1912] AGNEW: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1487 


this same test showed a slight error. This was found to be due 
to an extremely slight flexure of the inner tube brought about 
by clamping heavy cables and lugs to the massive terminals, 
although considerable care had been taken to obtain a secure 
mounting. The trouble could be removed by springing the 
tubes by means of clamps placed on the copper slabs which 
serve as terminals. In other words a slight departure from the, 
condition of axial symmetry introduces a distribution error, 
and this can easily be detected and corrected by a purely elec- 
trical test. Strong clamps and struts (shown in dotted lines 
in the figure) have been arranged to hold the copper slabs in 
proper position. 

Measurements of large currents by means of a current trans- 
former whose ratio had been carefully determined were in 
substantial agreement with the indications of the tubular 
dynamometer. It is believed that the instrument is accurate 
to 0.05 per cent. 

It was found necessary to put loose-fitting diaphragms across 
the tube on each side of the moving coils to prevent air currents, 
for such currents of air caused considerable unsteadiness of 
the reading, even for comparatively small temperature dif- 
ferences in the mass of copper composing the instrument. The 
diaphragms effectually removed the trouble. 

A more serious difficulty was encountered with magnetic 
impurities in the moving coil. The requirements here are 
even more exacting than in the sensitive moving coil galva- 
nometer, for the parts of the moving coils nearest the inside 
tube are in a field comparable in magnitude to the flux in the 
air gap in the permanent magnets of such galvanometers. The 
whole directive magnetic force exerted on the coil must be 
vanishingly small or the zero of the instrument will not be 
the same with current on that it is with current off. In the 
galvanometer, on the other hand, the requirement is merely 
that the magnetic force on the coil shall not vary appreciably 
through comparatively small angles. 

Finally special coils were wound which were entirely satis- 
factory. These were of silver wire 0.2 mm. in diameter, silk- 
covered, and were stated by Mr. W. N. Goodwin, Jr., of the 
company which made the coils, to be actually diamagnetic.° 

5. Mr. Goodwin found the torque acting on the coils and tending 
to maintain them at right angles to a magnetic field having a strength of 
1175 gausses to be 0.286 and 0.238 dyne-centimeters per radian, re- 
spectively. 


1488 AGNEW: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


They were mounted with great care to prevent magnetic 
contamination from dust. The zero is precisely the same 
with current on or off. 

It might have been better to have made the instrument with 
two independent sets of moving coils, one set for the smaller cur- 
rents, placed very close to the inside tube where the field is 
strongest, perhaps even decreasing the diameter of- the tube 
for the purpose, and a second set for heavier currents, placed 
near the outer tube. This would extend the range of the in- 
strument. In addition, current and power could be measured 


simultaneously. 
CONSTANTS AND DIMENSIONS 


~ 


Copper slabs for current terminals: 


Thickness aio - oso. seats © acnete oceeeeneet- 235° ‘em: 

Widthins Sone Ae OS a re ees 20 ~ 
Outer tube: 

Wen gth:. csals <wiennake wd taeda le pb eee ae 101 cm. 

Readily ccceeee skh iis Se enke! ac Bae OO ek Lee Ce 
Inner tube: 

Lengthsccd ae) iy ah ection Se ete seoe sae cm. 

Readis. Seek alge a ree Magione 1.03.and 1.66 “ 


Total weight of instrument (approximately) 80 kg. 
Moving coils: 


Diameters (approximately)........... 2.5 and 5 cm. 

116 turns of 0.2-mm. silver wire 

Weight of each: oothoy. sau. voleoiiie. erm Godage 

Moment. of inertia, Gach. siian- . aseoemtiser nes eee g-cm.? 
Resistance: 

Goilstalone scale. ange: desis oe i Re eee 12.2 ohms. 

PT GLa TOL SYSUEI hc aiyter cre cette aj arerie eer se na cares 14.4 “ 
Selfiinductanée 02 CRG. 2 aA, Pa, TE ee 
Resistance: 

Outer tEbesd.ck eg ces cake oeehet i GET aeRtChonaies 

Taner ‘tub@itisraiss caowerd oes ee te ano 42 ky 

Complete instrument: x. 5. cache se ee ae bs 
Power consumed (at 5000 amperes): 

Otter taberties.. Oo... 960, Ae 00 watts 

Inner itubésss..iieia. ei. Orie: ee ees 1050. “ 

Complete aistrumien tyne bec. tt ire ronnie 1325“ 
Magnetic field at center of coils (approximately)... 300 gausses_ 
Sensitivity: 


100 cm. deflection at 86 cm. scale distance requires 100 amperes 
with 0.06 amperes in the moving coil. 


Capacity: 
With water COOlng. so ae teeters 5000 amperes 
Without water cooling: ... sve us semen een ae 1200 =.“ 


Of moving coil, circuit, «x ccasdas eee ae 0.06 “ 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


MEASUREMENT OF ALTERNATING CURRENT OF 
LOW VALUE 


BY M. G. NEWMAN 


Alternating-current ammeters of the dynamometer type when 
used for measuring small currents are usually connected so 
that the moving coil is in series with the stationary or field coils. 

As the instrument has no iron in its magnetic field, the in- 
stantaneous values of the flux densities in the moving and 
fixed coils will be proportional to the current. The torque 
will, therefore, be proportional to the square of the current 
and the instrument will indicate the effective value of the 
current. 

In order to increase the sensibility of the ammeter, suspen- 
sions are used in place of pivot and jewel bearings. The weight 
of the moving parts and the size of the suspension are made as 
small as possible without having the period too long or the instru- 
ment too much affected by external disturbances. 

The determination of small alternating currents is usually 
required in circuits of low voltage. It is, therefore, necessary 
that the impedance of the ammeter shall be small, as the volt- 
meter reading must include the potential drop in the ammeter, 


REFERENCES 

“Study of the Current Transformer with Particular Reference to 
Iron Loss,”’ by P. G. Agnew; National Bureau of Standards, Reprint 
No. 164. 

Electrical Measurements on Circuits Requiring Current and. Potential 
Transformers, by L. T. Robinson, Transactions A. I. E. E., 1909, 
KOCVil IL pe L005. ' 

National Bureau of Standards, Reprint No. 130, “The Determination 
of the Constants of Instrument Transformers,” by P. G, Agnew and 
T.°T. Fitch, 

1489 


1490 NEWMAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


and this should be negligible within the limits of accuracy required 
by the test. 

In examining an ammeter for sensibility, two things should 
be considered, the ampere sensibility and the impedance. 

The square of the current multiplied by the impedance of the 
instrument gives the volt-amperes. If the weight of the moving 
coil and size of the suspension have been reduced to the mini- 
mum limit, the ampere sensibility can only be increased by in- 
creasing the number of turns in the coils; but if the size and 
weight of the coils are kept the same, the resistance and induc- 
tance of the instrument will increase approximately with the 
square of the number of turns. 

The voltage necessary to give a deflection of a certain 
amount, therefore, will increase as the current sensibility is 
increased. Thus for very low reading ammeters the impedance 
is high, and if measurements are to be made in a circuit of low 
electromotive force the error in the voltmeter reading, due to 
the potential drop in the ammeter, will be considerable. 

Separately Excited Dynamometers. By separately exciting 
one of the elements of the ammeter by current from a phase- 
shifting transformer, the sensibility of the instrument is very 
muchincreased. Its deflection then is proportional to the product 
of the amperes in the moving and fixed coils times the cosine of 
the phase angle between them. 

The instrument is calibrated as a wattmeter. 


W = krd, where (1) 
W = watts 
yr = total resistance in the potential circuit 
d = the deflection 
k = constant of the instrument 


ll 


The phase position of the current in the separately excited 
element is changed by the phase-shifting transformer until 
the reading of the instrument is a maximum. 


In the equation: W = EI cosine 6, (2) 
if 6 is zero, Wis eT 


Wave Distortion by Phase-Shifting Transformer. The angle 
of shift of the secondary potential of the phase-shifting trans- 
former is determined by the position of the secondary winding 
relative to its primary winding, and is independent of the fre- 
quency. If the impressed wave is not sinusoidal, there will be 


° 


1912/ NEWMAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 149] 


a distortion due to the fact that each harmonic wave which makes 
up the complex wave is shifted the same number of degrees; 
but each with reference to its own length and not to that of the 
fundamental. For this reason it is better, in general, to use an 
approximate sine-wave generator. 

There may also be present a small wave distortion due to the 
leakage reactance of the phase-shifting transformer. This, 
however, is very small and in general may be neglected. 

Errors Due to Wave Form. If the wave form of the currents 
in the two elements of the dynamometer is the same, the above 
equation (2) is strictly correct, but this is seldom the case. A 
brief discussion of the errors of the method is necessary. 

Harmonics of current present in only one element of the 
instrument produce no torque. Taking an example: consider a 
sine current wave in the potential circuit of the dynamometer, 
and in the current coil, a current wave with a fundamental, 
the effective value of which is 10 amperes, and a third harmonic 
with an effective value of 1 ampere; the effective value of the 
complex wave will be V10? + 1? = 10.05 amperes, but the dyna- 
mometer will measure only the fundamental and the error will 
be 0.5 per cent. 

If harmonics other than the fundamental are present in both 
elements, torque will be produced by those of the same frequency 
which may be either negative or positive, the sign and magni- 
tude depending upon the phase position of the harmonics. 

As the errors pointed out above depend upon the wave shapes 
of the current in the two circuits of the dynamometers, it is 
impossible to make corrections without knowing the wave forms. 

The following current measurements were made to inves- 
tigate the errors of the method and a comparison was made 
with the readings of a dynamometer ammeter which was used 
as_a standard. 


TESTS 

Exciting current tests were made on a telephone transformer 
at 60 cycles: 

(a) Using the separately excited dynamometer as an ammeter. 
The diagram of connections is shown in Fig. 1. 

(b) Using the dynamometer ammeter with connections as 
shown in Fig. 2. 

Power was supplied from a three-phase Thomson-Houston 
smooth-core alternator. The potential waves are given in Curve 1. 

The voltage of the generator is 575 at 60 cycles, and was 


1492 NEWMAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


stepped down through 5:1 step transformers with their primaries 
and secondaries connected in delta. 

With the amplitude of the complex wave taken as 100, 
the following amplitudes of the harmonics were obtained by 
analysis: 


Amplitude of the fundamental...........-+-++++:: .99.34 
4 “2 & 8rd harmomcr.y aes ee ok 0.25 
= been ELL Taree Se Rs ogee he Phe 1.44 
ki: po Kes sr dah SAE. Se ee eee ica! 
ei eS Ot ety BR a esos 0.44 
‘ {Sal th Coen Sh py Peery Seeger ae 0.21 


A one-ampere reflecting dynamometer wattmeter was used 
separately excited. The resistance of the current element of 


PHASE 


3 PHASE 
SOURCE 


TRANSFORMER SEAN 
bane ts) 

\—) FORMER Cy 

QTY 


Fic. 1—DIAGRAM OF CONNECTIONS. 


this instrument is 4.8 ohms. The resistance of the moving 
coils, including suspension and spiral, is about 30 ohms. The 
constant of the instrument when expressed by equation (1) 
is approximately 7 X 10-7, where dis the deflection in mm. with 
the scale one meter distant from the mirror. 

The moving element of the instrument was separately ex- 
cited, as is shown in Fig. 1, and the current was maintained 
constant by means of an adjustable non-inductive resistance 
(Ri) and voltmeter (V1). 

The voltage on the telephone transformer was changed by 
changing the taps on the auto-transformer. The excitation of 
the generator was held constant. The voltage applied to the 
telephone transformer was measured by (V2). This included 


1912] NEWMAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1493 


the potential drop in the current coils of dynamometer, which 
was negligible. 

The tests were repeated using a reflecting voltmeter as an 
ammeter, with connections as given in Fig. 2. The resistance 


PHASE 


3 PHASE 
SOURCE 


> 
Prone a 

. TRANS- by 
i) hy 
QD 


Fic. 2—DIAGRAM OF CONNECTIONS. 


of this instrument is 60 ohms with the stationary coils con- 
nected in parallel, and in series with the moving coil. The 
instruments were calibrated by potentiometer with direct cur- 
rent. 


TABLE I 
EXCITING CURRENT OF TELEPHONE TRANSFORMER AT 60 CYCLES 
Ammeter method Separately excited dynamometer method 
Flux density Flux density 
lines per Volts Amperes lines per Volts Amperes 
sq. cm. sq. cm 
328 22.2 0.00357 346.8 23.48 0.00382 
406 27.5 0.00402 416.5 28.2 0.00400 
488 33.05 0.004425 490.5 33.2 0.00442 
569 38.5 0.00475 560 37.9 0.00469 
650 44 0.00505 632 42.8 0.005015 
730 49.4 0.00537 694 47 0.00525 
811 54.9 0.00554 765 51.8 0.00547 
892 60.4 0.00580 834.5 56.5 0.005612 
961.5 65.1 0.00595 978 66.2 0.005932 


The results of tests are given in Table I and Fig. 3. 

On the average, the agreement of the two sets of readings 
is close, but variation in individual readings is considerable. 
It is believed that this trouble may have been due to the 


1494 NEWMAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


unstable magnetic properties of iron at low densities. It 
would have been better to have connected the instruments 
so that the measurements could have been made simul- 
taneously. 

The above tests cover a range of densities from 300 to 900 
lines per sq. cm. In order to carry the measurements to higher 
densities and to obtain larger values of current so that oscillo- 
graph records could be taken, additional measurements were 
taken on a 20-lb. (9.07-kg.) core of high silicon steel made up 
of 7 by 10 by 0.014 in. ring punchings. 

This core was wound with 1000 
140 turns of No. 12 B. and 
S. gage copper wire, the re- 
sistance of which was about cit ane cachaneh Gxtriaeres be 
0.1 ohm. oehnupercs gles 

A diagram of connections 
is given in Fig. 4. Portable 
instruments were used alto- 
gether in taking readings on 
the 20-lb. core. 

A potential of 100 volts 
was impressed upon the po- 
tential coil of the wattmeter. 
The readings of the watt- 
meter were divided by 100 to 
obtain the current readings 
given in Table II, column 4. 

It can be seen from Fig. 4 
that the current in the volt- °0 
meter (V2) was included in 
the reading of the ammeter, 
but as this was not a test on the iron, it was unimportant. 

The method of procedure was the same as before. The phase- 
shifting transformer was adjusted until the reading of the watt- 
meter was a maximum. The voltage on the potential coil was 
then adjusted to read 100 and A, V2 and W were read. 

The results are given in Table II and Fig. 5. 

From Fig. 5, it is seen that below a density of 6000 lines 
per sq. cm. the error is very small. Curves 2 and 3 show the 
exciting current, and the potential waves impressed upon the 
wattmeter from the phase-shifting transformer. Curve 2 was 
taken at 5090 lines per sq. cm. The effective value of the ex- 


EXCITING CURRENT OF TELEPHONE 
TRANSFORMER AT 60 CYCLES 
(0) DYNAMOMETER AMMETER 


SELF EXCITED 


Smee 


3 


es 


E 


3 


FLUX DENSITY-LINES PER SQ.CM. 


S 


S 


: 3 4 5 6 
EXCITING CURRENT-MILLI-AMPERES 
Fic. 3 


PLATE LXXX 
An Ese. 
VOL. XXXlI, 1912 


PorenTriAL - Waves —- 


[NEWMAN] 
CurvVE 1—PoTENTIAL WAVE OF THREE-PHASE —THOMSON-HOUSTON 
GENERATOR AT No Loap—60 CYCLES. 


SOF ame aesprenconemme nemo REA RR OREN 


NEWMAN] 

CURVE 2—POTENTIAL WAVE OF PHASE-SHIFTING TRANSFORMERJAND 

CuRRENT WAVE IN MAGNETIZING WINDING OF RING SAMPLE AT 5090 
LINES PER SQ. CM. 


PLATE LXXXI 
A, t.. Es Es 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


POTENTIAL 


[NEWMAN] 

CuRVE 3—PoOTENTIAL WAVE OF PHASE-SHIFTING TRANSFORMER 

AND CURRENT WAVE IN MAGNETIZING WINDING OF RING SAMPLE AT 
15,400 LINES PER SQ. CM. 


[NEWMAN] 
CuRVE 4—POTENTIAL WAVE OF PHASE-SHIFTING TRANSFORMER AND 
CHARGING CURRENT WAVE OF CONDENSERS. 


1912] NEWMAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1495 


citing current was 0.271 amperes. Analyses of the current 
and potential waves give the following results: 

(The amplitude of the harmonics is expressed in percentages 
of the amplitude of the complex wave.) 


Current Potential 
vincdamenttalsme sears cbrust ef OA 98.0 
aE Guelea pi Oi Cubwnaien hide ccs wa mG w eee 5 Weel 0.9 
5th EWS ean ooh Catenin "3 3.82 PEAY 
7th é Sete sas oo von at cis ar oy ere hs eel negligible 
9th ss "ib bie) SPOR See SECO 1.58 0.4 
11th € tn ss ae Oe, Mee OT RoR 0.88 0.4 


3 PHASE 
SOURCE 


AUTO- 
TRANSFORMER 


Fic. 4—DIAGRAM OF CONNECTIONS. 


The effective values of the harmonics of the current are given 
below: 


Effective 

amperes 
COMME ZEW AVE pncbifem sj cin sees ene es yee te 0.271 
MCAT CTICANC TT eae ie aati be ccsaials @ pls ce wee aeyele ess 0.266 
OM Arin OCA mee iar. eer aces os = ere ie 0 oles 0.048 
5th £ Tee oe Oe i ae emer a nets oe 0.010 
7th (pel het i ORs eee ae ener oe ere 0.005 
9th ee Te. Ce A ies ou 8 8 ace sod 0.004 
11th TR eR Be ae ccssere odie aw aern Shes 0.002 


Assuming that no torque is produced by the harmonics in 
the current wave, an error of 1.8 per cent will be introduced. 
This agrees very closely with results obtained by tests. 

Curve 3 was taken at a density of 15,400 lines per sq. cm. 
The effective value of the exciting current was 4.85 amperes. 

The analysis of the current wave gives the following results; 


1496 NEWMAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


TABLE II 


EXCITING CURRENT OF RING SAMPLE OF HIGH SILICON STEEL 


AT 60 CYCLES 


Exciting current—amperes 

Reading of 

Flux density Separately excited phase-shift- 

lines per Volts Ammeter dynamometer Error ing trans- 

sq. cm. former 
Per cent Degrees 

812 5.39 0 0902 0.0885 129 45 
2,542 16.88 0.1665 0.1642 1.4 45 
| 3,300 21.9 0.1948 0.191 1.9 45 
3,375 22.4 0.1975 0.197 0,25 45 
4,200 27.9 0.232 0.2279 1.75 48 
5,090 33.8 0.271 0.2667 1.5 48 
6,070 40.3 0.321 0.3183 : 0.85 48 
6,900 45.8 0.372 0.363 2.4 52 
8,610 57.17 0.506 0.4895 | 3.2 52 
9,520 63.2 0.614 0.589 4.0 53 
10,120 67.2 0.692 0.659 4.7 53 
10,950 72.66 0.851 0.794 6.7 55 
11,930 79.16 1.086 1.019 6.2 58 
12,780 84.85 1.396 1.257 10.0 58 
13,950 92.6 2.2 1.88 14.5 60 
14,800 98.3 3.49 2.815 19.3 60 
15,400 102.2 4.85 3.91 19.4 64 


WATTMETER 


EXCITING CURRENT OF RING 
SAMPLE OF HIGH SILICON STEEL 
A (0) PORTABLE AMMETER 

B (+) SEPARATELY EXCITED 


FLUX DENSITY: KILOLINES FER SQ.CM. 


EXCITING CURRENT-AMPERE 


Festi) fv fF fe pach fap 
6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3,6 3.8 4,0 4.2 4.4 


6 8 LOL TAL 13 2.0 222426 A 


Fic. 5—ExXcITING CURRENT OF RING SAMPLE OF HIGH SILICON STEEL 


AT 60 CYCLEs. 


1912] NEWMAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1497 


(the amplitude of the harmonics is given in percentages of the 
amplitude of the complex wave) 


Current 
Pune mal, # < oS Se ae ee Bin eS Os nee AL} 
SLOMMATTMOMNIC i ccch cowie Mots Re oe om ee OTe 
5th * ST een se TOE. ad. cok ana iselOs9 
7th - SR Fh co OER ln oh eink Se ee ES 8 4.5 
9th “ Ag BOIS Caan EIR S PONE <P eT eer ed 1.6 
11th SO Ee mA eon Ree ke ON MOEA rt RP dT 0.2 


The effective value of the fundamental in this case is 4.05 
amperes, which would, if the potential wave from the phase- 
shifting transformer were sinusoidal, make an error of 16. 5 per 
cent in the results. 

The actual tests gave 3.91 amperes, or an error of over 19 
DEL RCeN Lt: \ 

Measurements of Capacity Current of 0.5-Microfarad Con- 
densers. Readings given in Table III were made by the separ- 
ately excited dynamometer and by the dynamometer-ammeter. 


TABLE III 


CAPACITY OF MICA CONDENSER AT 60 CYCLES BY SEPARATELY 
EXCITED DYNAMOMETER AND BY AMMETER METHODS 


Volts Amperes sie Microfarads 


By DYNAMOMETER 


1@0 0.0184 0.485 
100 0.0183 0.485 
100 0.01848 0,488 


By AMMETER 
50.8 0.00946 0.493 


The values of capacity were calculated from the current 
readings, using the following formula, which is for a sine wave: 


I 
C= 9e7E 


The difference in the results by the two methods is less than 


2 per cent. 
The condenser previously measured at 0.6 sec. charge and 


1 sec. discharge by ballistic galvanometer gave a capacity of 


0.4990 microfarad. 
Sensibility of Separately Excited Ammeter. In order to obtain 


comparative measurements, it was necessary to use currents 


1498 NEWMAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


of comparatively large value. For this reason the one-ampere 
coils were used in the wattmeter dynamometer. 

By varying the excitation of the moving coil, it is possible to 
make current measurements over an enormously large range 
without changing the current coils. 

The sensibilities of the instrument with different field coils 
are given below: 


Rated current- 


carrying capacity Resistance Amperes Deflection 
| 0.17 amperes 154.0 ohms Sexo 10 mm. 
| 1.0 “ 4:8 5 % 2 oO tO: 
| Tee gtg lt ts 0.53 “ 1 x 103 10 “ 


By using the stationary coils as the separately excited 
element with full excitation, the following sensibilities may be 
obtained: 


Resistance Amperes | Deflection 
500-turn moving coil 400 ohms Sea10-4 | 10 mm 
65- * < “ 65 « S10 | 10e56 
| 


From the above values it is seen that an ammeter of very 
great sensibility is easily obtained. It has the advantage over 
a great many high-sensibility ammeters, in that the suspension 
and moving parts are comparatively rugged, and the instru- 
ment is not easily troubled by outside disturbances. 


DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 


It has been shown by the above tests that comparatively 
large errors may occur if the separately excited ammeter is used 
to measure the exciting current of sheet steel at high densities. 

The complex exciting current wave may be considered to be 
composed of a sinusoidal component and a distorting component. 
At high densities this distorting component is large and the sinu- 
soidal component is small in comparison. This large distorting 
component is due to the rapid rate of change of reluctivity during 
the magnetic cycle. At extremely low magnetic densities the 
reluctivity may be even higher than that above the knee of the 
curve, but the distorting component is not great because the 
reluctivity remains more nearly constant. As the density is 


lowered the exciting current wave approaches the sinusoidal 
form. 


1912] NEWMAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1499 


The results of test indicate that below a density of 6000 
lines per sq. cm., the errors obtained when using the separately 
excited dynamometer do not exceed 2 per cent. The results 
are always low since harmonics other than the fundamental 
produce no torque. The total range of measurements covered 
densities from 300 to 15,000 lines per sq. cm. 

Of course, the wave distortion will vary with different 
samples of steel, depending upon the shape of the saturation 
curve. : 

CONCLUSIONS 


The sensibility of a dynamometer-ammeter is greatly in- 
creased by separately exciting one element from the phase- 
shifting transformer. 

Large errors are introduced when such an instrument is 
used to measure exciting current of sheet steel at high densities. 

Measurements may be made of the exciting current of sheet 
steel at densities below 6000 lines per sq. cm. with very small 
error. 

Because of the limited time available for making these 
tests several parts of the original outline had to be omitted, but 
although the investigation is limited and incomplete the useful- 
ness of the method is apparent for measuring exciting current of 
sheet steel at low densities. 

The writer wishes to acknowledge the great assistance 
rendered by Mr. F. Dakin in making the tests and preparing 
this paper. 


- eae Bad ty ~~ 
“05 4 - =" dey 
- 1 ~ ee Ee 
MAPS 
~ Pur ‘ge — Cae tae oe ‘A 


rd 


Coa. eS oa rap 
OY Lis oy ainoit age TO aie we as 
2 etpihd, £3 rit St, std 92 toe 
4 let lap) aw 
lit CORTE 
& sagy) ain.” 


; aaa , 


iA = P abhi rth 
oie 4 art ae ag * . ena 
= ' eo wz et “i ong ay / ; 5 . siteianeaes ee 
° : } a} non 3 ' * * It tiem nna” {3 coated 


“7 
BS. a 
awh ~ resriaiana tt + yodeteslar 
wemks 


ry 
~ 
+ 
a 
4 


enh Deadheads stig laaigho est ierahag inovera 
Anivsyaly stag tet “itil et nobisytfee wink odd Ayeoe 
i bg Faure iire ibiten: 10? Fete of Tieden ot Tae 
2 Fine titled: wot se Joa 
= wGeferes ue) 34> subotwodia ot sacle teriyeogit 
Shey “Sik vie S not yh ORI “Ear 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


TO MEASURE AN ALTERNATING-CURRENT 
RESISTANCE AND COMPARE IT WITH THE 
DIRECT-CURRENT RESISTANCE— 
ELECTRODYNAMOMETER 
METHOD 


BY EDWIN F. NORTHRUP 


For comparing an alternating-current and a direct-current 
resistance by the electrodynamometer method in a precise 
manner, the apparatus required is a frequency meter to measure 
the frequency of the current used (which must be known, as the 
quantity being measured will vary with frequency), an alter- 
nating-current ammeter to give roughly the value of the current 
(for the alternating-current resistance will also, in general, depend 
upon the value of the current), a three-point double-throw 
switch for quickly changing connections, resistances, and an 
electrodynamometer. This last piece of apparatus should have 
sufficient capacity in its current coils to carry, without 
heating, the full current. Its hanging or potential coils should 
be two in number, and so arranged as to form a system which 
is perfectly astatic in respect to the earth’s field. The constant 
of the instrument will then be the same for direct and alter- 
nating currents. All good electrodynamometers are constructed 
in this way. Either the Rowland deflection type or Siemens type, 
constructed to be astatic, may be used. The method to be 
described was tested with a Rowland deflection type electro- 
dynamometer. 


DESCRIPTION OF CIRCUITS AND THEORY OF METHOD 
In I and II, Fig. 1, G, G, are the fixed coils and h, h, the hanging 
astatic system of the electrodynamometer. The hanging 
1501 


1502 NORTHRUP: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


system has an ohmic resistance, @, and there is joined in series 
with this a non-inductive resistance, p’. Let p’ + a = p, the 
entire resistance of the hanging coil system. In the instrument 
referred to, the resistance a@ is about 18 ohms. It has a minute 
inductance, which is approximately 0.00045 henry. When p’ 
is moderately large and non-inductive, we may consider, without 
sensible error, that the alternating current through the hanging 
system is in phase with its e.m.f. even when the frequency is 
high. We shall so consider it in all that follows. 

A represents a coil which contains iron. It is assumed that this 
coil has a certain ohmic resistance, Ra, as measured by direct cur- 
rent, and a different resistance, R, as measured by an alternating 
current of a given value, wave form, and frequency. It is this 
latter resistance (not the impedance or inductance of A) which 
the method will enable us to determine. The resistance, 7, is any 
resistance capable of carrying the full current. It may be a coil 
inductively wound but it must not contain iron or have such a 


BiG 4h 


section and resistivity that its resistance on alternating current 
will be different from its resistance on direct current, due to 
hysteresis, skin effect, or other cause. By a sliding contact, 
p, means must be provided for tapping this resistance at 
any point along its length, as the diagram illustrates. p is a 
non-inductive resistance, which is equal to a+ p’, the re- 
sistance of the hanging coil circuit. As will be shown later, 
the connections can instantly be changed from the arrange- 
ment shown in I to that shown in II and vice versa. 

We wish first to find the general expression for the power 
which the wattmeter measures when the connections are those 
shown in I, Fig. 1. Call J the current in the fixed coils of the 
dynamometer. Call 7 the current in the hanging coil circuit. 
Call g the phase angle between the currents 7 and J. Then 
the deflection of the dynamometer is 


D= Ki licos¢ (1) 


1912] NORTHRUP: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1503 


where K,is the instrumental constant of the dynamometer. 
This constant in the case of a deflection instrument of the Row- 
land type will change slightly with the magnitude of the deflec- 
tion. There is also an inductive action of the current in the 
fixed coil which tends to induce a current in the hanging coil 
circuit when the plane of the movable system is not vertical 
to the plane of the fixed coils. This inductive action may vary 
in a complicated way, so equation (1) cannot be taken as strictly 
true. If, however, the system is deflected by means of the tor- 
sion head when there is no current through the instrument, so 
that when current is introduced the system is brought back to 
the position where its plane is vertical to the plane of the fixed 
coils, then the inductive action is null and the relation given by 
equation (1) may be considered to hold very exactly. In the 
use of. the dynamometer which follows, the system should be 
deflected by means of the torsion head when there is no current 
flowing, to such an extent that, on introducing current, the 
instrument reads roughly at the zero of the scale. With this 
precaution observed, the theoretical relations will be found to 
hold very exactly. 

If we call V the impressed e.m.f. between the points a and 8, 
I, Fig. 1, then the current through the hanging coil circuit will 
be 


V V 
at pp (2) 


4= 


As above stated, the current 7 will be approximately in phase 
with the e.m.f., V, because the inductance of the hanging coils is 
very minute. 

By equations (1) and (2) we have 


Ky 
D = — I Vcos 
p ve (3) 


But I V cos ¢ is the entire power, Wi. ‘This power is the sum of 
two parts, W, the power consumed in A (I, Fig. 1) between the 
points a and 6, and W’, the power consumed in the hanging coil 
circuit. The value of this latter is 


ie er (4) 


1504 NORTHRUP: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


Thus we have 


Dae 6) 
or 
D= = ( W+ Y) (6) 
From equation (6) 
Wap Da G 
and from equation (5) 
Wi = xP 8) 


2 
a is generally a small quantity. p is known very precisely 


and V can be obtained with a-voltmeter, hence equation (7) 
enables the true power spent in A to be accurately obtained. 
It is equation (8), however, which we wish to use in measuring 
the alternating-current resistance of A. 

With the connections as shown in I, Fig. 1, the torsion head is 
turned, so that, with the current (as steady as possible) which is 
flowing, the deflection reads near the zero of the scale. The total 
power then being registered is given by equation (8). 

The connections are now quickly changed to those shown in 
II. The main current will not be altered by this change in con- 
nections, for the resistance p is simply made to change places 
with an equal resistance. The total power which is registered, 
however, will now be 

ft p D ‘ ; 
Mor eae (9) 
when D’ is the deflection which the dynamometer now gives. 
The contact, p, is moved along the resistance, 7, until the deflec- 
tion D’ is made equal to the deflection D, then W;’ will be equal 
to W;. 

Since the main current, J, is the same for the connections I 

and II, we have 
We Roars (10) 
or 


R' =r’ (11) 


1912} NORTHRUP: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1505 


Here the quantity R’ is not the alternating-current resistance 
of the coil A but it is the alternating-current resistance of this 
coil when shunted with the non-inductive resistance p. Sim- 
ilarly r’ is the alternating-current resistance of r when shunted 
with the non-inductive resistance p. 

We can write 


mee) eae t 
Sta 5 5h and r Se: 


The alternating-current resistance of two parallel circuits when 
one or both of the branches contain reactance is not given by the 
same expression as applies when the branch circuits are without 
reactance; hence the ordinary expression for branch circuits 


without reactance, namely must be multiplied by some 


pR 

poe ses 
factor K the value of which we now have to determine: also the 
factor k. It is shown in ‘‘ Alternating Currents ’’ by Bedell and 
Crehore, pages 238 to 241, how the alternating-current resist- 
ance, or, as they call it, the equivalent resistance of any number 
of parallel circuits having self-induction and carrying alternating 
current, may be expressed. It is there shown that in general 


. A 
TRY = A Bo where 
x Ry R, ak Lets Seas 
Se See ne ee er 
and 
men X1 v2 = ie 2S 
eg ee es a tal aot R? + x? 


in which expressions Ri, Re, etc., are ohmic resistances and 
x4, X%2, etc., are reactances of the several branches. 
We can now find expressions which will give the values of 


K and k. 


Here we have 
R 


TR at 


i 
p 
and 

x 


BiOinpa ne 


1506 NORTHRUP: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


We cannot, because of the necessity of brevity, give here the 
purely algebraic processes required for obtaining the final ex- 
pressions, so we shall present only the final results, which are 
as follows: 

px? 


[((R+ p?P+x2]R 


K=1+ 


k=1+ paey 
et py xe ly 


Call the fractional expressions a@ and a, respectively, then 
K=l1l+aandk=14+ a). 
This gives 
R 
Tg Ch ee Et en 

It will be shown that, in general, when a sensitive electrodyna- 
mometer is used, a and a are very small quantities which in most 
cases can be neglected. 

We have the following cases: 

1. a and a are negligible. Then 


R=r (12) 


2.a and a are not negligible but are very nearly equal. 

Then again R = 

In these two cases Lee Semaine -current resistance sought 
may be taken as numerically equal to the resistance 7. 

3. a, = 0 but @ is not negligible. In this case 


Rare 


1 ea Sa (13). 


4. a and a, are not negligible and are unequal, but p is very 
large. Then again we can take R = 

Consideration of a single example of the third case will suffice 
to show the magnitude of the error which may be introduced by 
omitting the correction. The example chosen is from an actual 
measurement. With the electrodynamometer available, only 
1/10 ampere could be passed through the fixed coil and hence, 
the potential drop over the coil A and over the resistance r being 
small, the resistance p had necessarily to be taken very small to 


1912] NORTHRUP: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1507 


give the requisite sensibility. If the dynamometer coils could 
have carried (as is ordinarily the case) several amperes, p would 
have been much larger and the error would be much less. In 
the example a; = 0, and 


pa tinerAd2imGN 1) 
[OK te. piv (2 mNV.L)? LR 


300 (2 X 3.14 X 60 X 0.036)? 
[ (11 X 300)? + (2 x 3.14 X 60 X 0.036)?] 11 


or a = 0.052 nearly. 


Hence 


a 
ll 


1 
aca 311 = 0.948 r. 
: 300 


Thus if we had called R = r the error would have been about 5.2 
per cent, R being assumed too large. This conclusion was 
checked experimentally. Without changing the ohmic resistance 
of the coil A, its inductance, which was capable of variation, was 
varied from 0.003 to 0.036 henry, and in the first case, using 
the uncorrected formula, R = 10.94 ohms, and in the second 
case, using the same formula, R = 11.62 ohms, or six per cent 
too large, which is in fairly close agreement with the calculated 
result of 5.2 per cent. 

If the fixed coils of the dynamometer had been made to carry 
10 amperes instead of 1/10 ampere p could have been 100 times 
as large, in which case the correction factor would reduce to about 
0.05 per cent. 

The above adjustments having been made, direct current can 
be made to replace the alternating current and in the same way 
we find the direct-current resistance of A. It will be 


Ra. = fi (14) 
Hence 

Reo it 

Hees (15) 


is the ratio of the alternating-current to the direct-current resist- 
ance of the circuit A. This ratio may take a value of two or more. 


i508 NORTHRUP: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


It should be clearly understood just what is meant by the 
quantity R which this method measures. It is a quantity 
which, expressed in ohms and multiplied by the square root of 
the mean square value of the alternating current through the 
circuit, expressed in amperes, will give the square root of the 
mean square value of that component of the impressed e.m.f. 
expressed in volts which is in phase with the current. Or, it is 
the quantity which, when multiplied by the mean square value 
of the current, will give the power in watts which is being dissi- 
pated in the circuit. In drawing the triangle of e.m.fs. of an 
inductive circuit one sometimes represents the component of 
the e.m.f. which is phase with the current by the product of 
the current and the direct-current resistance, Ra. This pro- 
cedure may lead to considerable error in circuits in which there 


Fic. 2 


are other losses than the J? Ra, losses. In such circuits the alter- 
nating-current resistance, R, should always be used. 


METHOD OF EXECUTION 


For making the above measurement the apparatus is assembled 
and connected as shown in Fig. 2. 

D is the electrodynamometer with its hanging system h. 
The heavy or light wire fixed coils are used according to the mag- 
nitude of current with which the measurement is to be made. 
The light wire fixed coils will carry (in the Rowland instrument) 
0.1 ampere and the heavy wire coils will carry 50 amperes. 

C is the alternating-current ammeter and F the frequency 
meter. P isa rheostat to control the main current; sis a switch 
to shift from direct current to alternating current and vice 


1912] NORTHRUP: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1509 


versa. Sis a three-point double-throw switch which in position 
(1) makes the connections shown in I and in position (2) makes 
the connections shown in II, Fig. 1. ris best obtained from a slide 
wire rheostat of considerable current capacity. It does not need 
to be non-inductive, but must contain no iron. If its re- 
actance is just equal to that of the coil being measured, a@ = ay 
and R = r exactly. 

After the settings for p have been found, the connections are 
broken at (3) and (4) and the direct-current resistance value 
of r is measured with a Wheatstone bridge or by any other con- 
venient means. ° 

The resistances p and p’ may be obtained best from plug or 
dial decade resistance boxes. These may be high, 10,000 ohms 
or so, depending entirely upon the current used, the magni- 
tude of the resistance being measured, and upon the sensibility 
of the instrument. 

The torsion head may be turned so that the no-current deflec- 
tion is between 100 and 200 divisions of the scale. By then 
adjusting p the deflection with current on may be made to come 
near the zero of the scale. 

It will be found, if A consists of an ironless variable standard 
of inductance, that the variable standard may be set to any 
inductance value without much altering the deflection. The 
change in the deflection will be less as p is made larger. 

This method will be found useful in measuring the alternating- 
current resistance of steel-cored copper or aluminum cables, 
which differs considerably from their direct-current resistance. 

The following test of this method was made for the purpose of 
showing how large a correction would be required when p was 
chosen only 300 ohms and L was varied between 0 .003 and 0.036 
henry. 

The resistance measured was that of a variable standard of 
inductance, which should, of course, show the same value on 
direct and alternating current, at whatever value its inductance 
is set. 


(a) L = 0.003 henry. 
With alternating-current in circuit. 
D; = 244 (no current). 
D’ = 0 (current flowing). 
y = 10.94 ohms. 
0.08 ampere. 
60.2 cycles. 
300 ohms. 


I 


to ll 


> ee) 


I 


1510 NORTHRUP: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


(b) L = 0.036 henry. 
With alternating-current in circuit. 
D,; = 253 (no current). 
D =D’ = 0 (current flowing). 
R =r = 11.62 ohms. 
I = (0.08 ampere. 
N 60.2 cycles. 
p 300 ohms. 


With direct-current in circuit. 
D, = 244 (no current). 


D =D’ = 0 (current flowing). 
Rac = 7 = 10.94 ohms. * 
Id¢ = 0.08 ampere. 


p = 300 ohms. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1511 


Discussion on “A TuBULAR ELECTRODYNAMOMETER FOR 
Heavy Currents ” (AGNEW), 

““ MEASUREMENT OF ALTERNATING CURRENT OF Low VALUE ”’ 
(NEWMAN), 

“To MEASURE AN ALTERNATING-CURRENT RESISTANCE 
AND COMPARE IT WITH THE DirREcT-CURRENT RESIST- 
ANCE—ELECTRODYNAMOMETER MeEtTHOD” (NORTHRUP), 
Boston, Mass., JuNE 28, 1912. 


W. H. Pratt: Dr. Agnew’s paper tells about the usual pro- 
cedure in making a wattmeter for high current measurements, 
by stranding the conductor. Now, stranding the conductor 
must necessarily be done in a very careful manner, otherwise 
troubles will be encountered, but it performs two functions: 
it prevents the formation of eddy currents due to the field 
of the current coil itself, and it also prevents the formation of 
eddy currents due to induction from the moving coil. In an 
instrument in which you are going to get the highest possible 
sensibility it would seem that this should be taken account of. 
-I see no reference to this in the paper. 

In a discussion of the paper presented by Sharp and Crawford, 
at the Jefferson meeting of the Institute, in 1910, I gave a brief 
description of a reflecting.-dynamometer which we constructed 
some two and a half years ago for doing substantially the same 
work that the instrument described here is intended for. The 
two instruments differ in this way: The instrument described 
in Dr. Agnew’s paper is evidently an attempt at making an 
instrument of which, from its geometrical constants, the accuracy 
characteristics can be determined. The instrument which we 
constructed was an instrument so designed that we were able 
to compare its performance directly with instruments of very 
small capacity in order to determine the limits of its accuracy. 
The instrument that we constructed, I think, is much more 
flexible than the one here described, because we can use it with 
the highest kind of accuracy in currents as low as 50 or 25, or 
even 10 amperes, and then can immediately go to 2000 amperes 
capacity. The heating of the conductor is negligible in any case. 

The limits of accuracy of this type of instrument would seem 
to depend fully as much on the character of the suspension as 
on the other characteristics, and I am very much surprised 
at the statement that one-half of one-tenth per cent is thought 
possible, although one-tenth of one per cent certainly is definitely 
possible with the instrument that we worked with. 

J. D. Ball: In reference to the paper Measurement of 
Alternating Current of Low Value, mention is made of the use 
of a portable wattmeter as an ammeter, by which Fig. 5 was 
derived. 

This arrangement is of considerable value for measuring low 
currents, below the range of the portable alternating-current 
ammeters. An ordinary portable wattmeter with full field 
utilizes in the moving coil about 0.04 amperes for full scale 


1512 CURRENT MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


deflection. Separately exciting the field coil to the full rating, 
and passing the current to be measured through the moving 
system, gives an ammeter scale of 0 to 0.04, which is consider- 
ably better than an ordinary alternating-current portable am- 

meter, having the advantage of a uniform scale, instead of a 
’ scale of squares. When the current is smaller than can readily 
be measured by this means, the reflecting dynamometer is, of 
course, the correct instrument to use. 

It is often the case that measurements of this kind are 
desired, and there is no phase shifter convenient. In such an 
event, good results may be obtained by the use of resistance 


and reactance in series with the separately excited coils and . 


“juggling ” until maximum reading is obtained. 

When using the phase shifter, instead of obtaining a maximum 
deflection, it is perhaps more satisfactory to obtain zero deflec- 
tion and to read the ammeter after a phase shift of 90 degrees. 

It also happens that small currents are to be measured when 
the circuit is non-inductive, or the phase relations are definitely 
known, in which cases the separately excited wattmeter may be 
used without phase shifter or resistance and reactance in circuit. 

Small voltages may be measured by the same general method, 
by exciting the current coils of a reflecting dynamometer and 
connecting on the moving coils. 

Frank Wenner: Dr. Agnew asked me to make a few remarks 
in regard to his paper, and particularly in reference to a change 
which has been made since the paper was sent in. In the paper 
mention is made of the fact that the clamping of heavy lugs in 
making connections with the instrument had sprung the inner 
tube in such a way as to throw the arrangement out of symmetry, 
and that later the end terminals were clamped to prevent this. 
It was found very difficult always to prevent a slight amount of 
springing in connecting very heavy leads, so a change has been 
made. A slight flexibility is secured by cutting a circle 10 cm. 
in diameter from the outside copper slab which serves as a cur- 
rent terminal. The inside tube passes centrally through this 
10-cm. disk of copper, and the latter fits into the hole in the cop- 
per slab from which it was cut, the electrical connection being 
obtained by amalgamating the joint. This gives the desired 
flexibility. 

M. G. Lloyd: In connection with the measurement of very 
small alternating currents, it may be of interest to mention 
another instrument for that purpose, known as the thermo- 
ammeter, which has some particular characteristics which make 
it valuable for that purpose. Besides being a very sensitive 
instrument, it can be constructed without appreciable inductance, 
if necessary, and that is particularly valuable in many classes 
of high-frequency work, such as wireless telegraphy. The 


thermo-ammeter has a heating element which is in the main. 


circuit. The heat developed in this resistor is applied by radia- 
tion to a small thermocouple which is in the moving-coil circuit 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1513 


of an ordinary d’Arsonval movement. You consequently get 
the characteristics of the direct-current instrument in the 
indicating part and have all the advantages of the hot-wire 
instrument in the energy-producing or actuating part of the 
instrument. The great difficulty which I found with such an 
instrument, however, was the extreme slowness of the action. 
I think, perhaps, that could be improved by a better design; 
but it had that feature, which is to some extent common, per- 
haps, to all hot-wire or heating-element instruments. 

In using a dynamometer, of course, great gain can be made 
by having an auxiliary current in the field, as the author has 
pointed out in this paper. The great disadvantage comes in 
in the case of wave distortion, which is always found, of course, 
in the use of coils containing iron. It occurs to me that the instru- 
ment might be used to great advantage in that case, by putting 
a similar coil in the field circuit. By using iron of about the same 
quality and saturated to about the same amount with flux, the 
wave distortion might be made approximately the same, and the 
instrument might then be used for that purpose. As the author 
has shown, it can hardly be so used under the conditions which he 
described. 

It seems to me a word of appreciation of Dr. Agnew’s work 
would be in order here. This dynamometer for heavy currents 
which he has designed seems to have eliminated all the ordinary 
sources of trouble in a dynamometer for such extremely high 
current. He has covered all the heretofore practical objections 
in the design and use of such an instrument, and it looks as 
though he had really solved the problem of the measuring of 
large currents. 

Taylor Reed: With reference to Dr. Northrup’s paper, he 
has indicated the measurement of alternating-current resistance, 
to use his term, to a considerable degree of refinement; in fact, 
to a greater degree of refinement than is necessary for most 
measures at commercial frequencies. Dr. Northrup speaks in 
particular of the unsteadiness of the circuit, and the difficulties 
arising from that, and he uses a very quick switch thrown back 
and forward, which, of course, eliminates nearly all of the error. 
In making similar measurements I have sometimes found it 
convenient, where two dynamometers are available, or where the 
measurements are being made with commercial instruments, 
like wattmeters, to use two, one connected to what you might 
call a self-calibrating resistance continually, and the other 
switching back and forward from the calibrating resistance to 
the unknown, or measured, resistance. Any violent fluctuation 
in the alternating-current source, to which the line may be 
very much subject, is readily shown, and in case the current is 
persistently unsteady can even be allowed for within moderate 
limits. 

This subject of measuring conductors under alternating- 
current conditions is increasingly important. For instance, the 


1514 CURRENT MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


old discussion has gone on for a long time between copper and 
aluminum until it has come to seem as though there were no 
other conductors; whereas if we run over the elements, one 
after the other, we come to the fact, which is a very true one, 
although very ludicrous in its impracticability, that metallic 
sodium is a great deal cheaper than either of them. But, of 
course, the use of steel has been made necessary on account of 
its strength for long spans, copper-clad steel, in particular, 
having become of practical value. Also, considering the whole 
range of measurements at high-frequency alternating-current, 
it does seem as if some better term for this quantity which is 
measured than “ alternating-current resistance ” or “ effective 
resistance ’’ should be provided for general use. 

A. L. Ellis: I have been very much interested in the tubular 
electrodynamometer reported by Dr. Agnew for measuring 
heavy currents, as I have met the necessity for a dynamometer 
of this type very frequently in my work. I have also used the 
water-cooled dynamometer referred to by Mr. Pratt and can 
testify to its accuracy. 

There is one point that seems difficult to overcome in the 

tubular dynamometer and that is the distribution of the current 
through the tubes and the location of the tubes to bring every- 
thing coaxial, and maintain this condition. 
- In case of the water-cooled dynamometer, such disturbances 
do not exist, because the current terminals, themselves, are two 
heavy copper bars that can be placed one directly over the other, 
with sufficient insulation between them, and securely bolted to 
the base, making a rigid construction. Attaching the leads 
does not disturb the location of any of the parts affecting con- 
stant of instrument to an observable extent. The tubes forming 
the field coils of the dynamometer are attached to the further 
ends of the heavy copper bars. The turns of the current coil 
can be so arranged that the astatic moving coils can be readily 
removed from the field without disassembling. The great 
difficulty with all of these instruments is the suspension. If 
we could only get rid of this suspension, we would get rid of 
practically all the trouble in connection with the water-cooled 
dynamometer. There is one other point in connection with the 
water-cooled dynamometer that must be borne in mind, and 
that is, you must be sure iron does not get into the pipe forming 
the current coils. Iron will sometimes get into the circulating 
water from the iron service pipes, but this is readily over- 
come by passing the water through a glass vessel, used as a 
settling chamber for the circulating water. 

Edward B. Rosa: One very great advantage of the tubular 
dynamometer that has not been mentioned is the fact that there 
is such a small stray field. The magnetic field is between the 
tubes, and there will be absolutely no stray field, if the tubes 
are long enough. There is, of course, some around the end, but 
the stray field at those places is extremely small. With an 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1515 


electrodynamometer using coils of such character that the 
magnetic field extends a considerable distance from the instru- 
ment, errors may be introduced due to the presence of metallic 
masses in the neighborhood of the instrument or in the parts of 
the instrument. In the case of a dynamometer for measuring 
heavy currents, such as several thousand amperes, the stray 
field may be very considerable. In the tubular dynamometer, 
however, the magnetic field is almost completely included 
between the inner and outer tubes, and this is a very great 
practical advantage. This instrument has been thoroughly 
investigated, and there is no serious difficulty in respect to the 
centering of the tube. Fortunately, there is a definite test that 
can be applied to show that the current is symmetrically dis- 
tributed. 

L. T. Robinson: With regard to the measurement of small 
alternating currents, I think I might bring out one point quite 
clearly. We have three things which have been referred to in 
the discussion: the series-connected dynamometer, the thermal 
instrument in which substantially a D’Arsonval galvanometer 
is used on the thermocouple, and the separately excited dyna- 
' mometer, which is, of course, as has been mentioned, subject to 
some errors. The conditions as to sensitiveness, etc., that can 
be met with these instruments do not conflict. The series 
dynamometer can be used up to a certain point. After that 
we can use the thermal instrument, and away beyond that in 
sensibility, as I have found it in my work, is the separately 
excited dynamometer. 

P. G. Agnew: In regard to the tubular dynamometer, Dr. 
Wenner has already mentioned the fact that a somewhat flexible 
connection to the inside tube has been secured by cutting one of 
the heavy copper slabs serving as current terminals and using 
an amalgamated joint. 

Mr. Pratt has raised the question whether there may not be 
errors due to eddy currents in the copper tubes caused by cur- 
rent in the moving coil. At commercial frequencies no error 
whatever could be detected due to this cause. Even at 900 
cycles, with full rated current in the moving coil and the field 
system short-circuited, the deflection does not exceed 0.1 mm. 
at any part of the scale. a) 

The point made by Mr. Ellis in regard to iron impurities 
settling in the copper tubes which form the field system of his 
instrument is a very interesting one. The only part of our in- 
strument which needs water cooling is the inside tube, and as 
there is no magnetic field inside this tube there is not much 
chance of the sediment causing trouble by becoming magnetized. 
However, it may be well to adopt the suggestion as an added 


precaution. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS WITH SPECIAL 
REFERENCE TO LAMP TESTING 


BY EVAN J. EDWARDS 


Perhaps there is no kind of testing for commercial results 
that requires more accurate electrical measurements than the 
testing of incandescent lamps. All incandescent lamps are 
very sensitive to changes in the electrical conditions of the cir- 
cuit. A change of 1 per cent in pressure brings about a change 
of 5.7 per cent in luminous intensity for carbon lamps and 3.7 
per cent for tungsten filament lamps. There is a corresponding 
change in the life, but of a magnitude four to five times as 
great. 
An average deviation of luminous-intensity readings of 0.4 
per cent from the arithmetical mean is obtainable with good 
photometric apparatus, calling for a voltage accuracy of 0.1 
per cent in the same precision measure. 0.1 per cent is generally 
considered good enough for life testing also, even though the 
life is affected more than the luminous intensity by a given 
change in pressure, the justification being that the individual 
variation, inherent in a group of supposedly similar lamps, is 
‘considerable. 

It seems safe to say that photometric and lamp testing labora- 
tories should maintain an accuracy of 0.1 per cent in their 
electrical measurements, that is, the electrical measurements 
should furnish results which have little probability of being 
in error by more than 0.1 per cent. Not only should the in- 
struments be capable of better than 0.1 per cent accuracy in 
reading, but also calibrations should be sufficiently accurate 
and frequent and with sufficiently well established standards 
to insure an accuracy of 0.1 per cent in the final result. 

1517 


1518 EDWARDS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


It may be of interest to consider the things upon which ul- 
timate electrical accuracy depends and the methods made use 
of, in the engineering department of the company with which 
the writer is connected, for obtaining this desired degree of 
electrical accuracy. 

The accuracy of electrical measurements may be said to 
depend first on the accuracy of the instrument, and second on 
the care and skill exercised by the observer. 

An investigation of instrument accuracy involves first the 
testing of the mechanical characteristics. A voltmeter must 
have a friction drag of less than the accuracy desired in the result 


+ 3.0 


+ 

~ 

i=] 
T 


241.0 
= 
fe) 
> 
z 
SOS 
° 
aie 
oO 
WW 
c-1.0 
a 
fe) 
< > CURRE 
2.0 = 
sath be i m= 
~3.0 —|_1+++—++ 


L_ der] 


L 4 
30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 
INSTRUMENT READING IN VOLTS 


Fic. 1—CALIBRATION OF LABORATORY STANDARD ALTERNATING- 
CURRENT VOLTMETER No. 33. 


in order that it may be safe and convenient to use. The elec-* 
trical and mechanical characteristics must be such that the 
reading corresponding to a given pressure is closely the same 
throughout a range of temperature and change in position such 
as will be encountered in use. Also, the process of calibration 
and the basic standard must be of sufficient precision. A care- 
ful comparison with a potentiometer, using standard cells of 
proved accuracy, taking readings up and down scale and for 
both directions of current, combined with a close inspection, 
furnishes a complete test of the instrument. Fig. 1 shows re- 
sults from a test on an a-c. instrument. 


1912} EDWARDS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1519 


Surely all electrical instruments inja lamp testing laboratory 
should: be tested periodically and, moreover, it is desirable 
that the results be recorded in chronological order. The ad- 
vantages of maintaining a record are self-evident. All instru- 
ments in the engineering department are calibrated periodically 
according to a fixed schedule and the results are recorded in 
a graphical form which furnishes at a glance the past history 
of the instrument. The frequency of calibration depends upon 
the use to which the instrument is put; for example, a laboratory 


+ 0.3 | le 


+ 0.2 1 a 


+ 0.1 "i j 


OCT. NOV. DEC. JAN. FEB, MAR. APR. 
1911 1912 


Fic 2—CALIBRATION OF LABORATORY STANDARD ALTERNATING- 
CURRENT VOLTMETER AT 120-VOLT POINT. 
Voltmeter No. 33. 


standard alternating-current voltmeter used for checking the 
voltage on the life test racks is checked with the potentiometer 
daily. The curve of Fig. 2 shows the record of this particular 
instrument, over the past six months. Since this instrument 
ig maintained at nearly constant temperature, being in con- 
tinuous service, and is undisturbed in position, it is interesting 
to note that the record is what may be termed a life curve of 
the dynamometer type of instrument. The change of cali- 
bration is no doubt due to the weakening of the spring. 

A new standard cell is obtained regularly twice per year, 


1520 EDWARDS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


in addition to others obtained as needed. ‘Two are kept apart 
at all times as reference standards and are used only for check- 
ing the cells used regularly on the potentiometers. This pro- 
gram in connection with the continuous graphic history in the 
calibration of a large number of instruments, practically elim- 
inates all possibility of error or drift in the value of the unit 
used as a basis for the laboratory work. 

The subjective factor which enters into meter reading is an 
important one and one seldom given sufficient attention. 
Aside from the ordinary care and judgment required in the use 


26.0 
24.0 


22.0 
20.0 


18.0} 


F TOTAL READINGS 
Se —_- 
oe aoe 
os ©¢e 


fe) 
ma 
S 
=) 


PERCENT 


4.0 os 


2.0— -- ——— 


0 : —a— 
DIGITS 


Fic. 3—EsTIMATION OF TENTHS. 
Test A—600 readings. 


of electrical instruments, the accuracy depends on the skill of 
the observer in precise reading. The reading involves two 
kinds of subjective errors, the accidental or indeterminate such 
as occur in all measurements, and the error due to a mistaken 
idea as to the scale position corresponding to the various tenths 
between smallest division. Among untrained observers there 
is also a favoritism shown for certain digits as is shown by Fig. 
3, which records the percentages of various digits representing 
the estimation of tenths for a large number of readings for one 
particular observer who has a preference for certain digits, 
especially zero. 


1912) EDWARDS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1521 


Fig. 4 shows two meter setting curves which were obtained 
by averaging the curves for a large number of observers, and which 
are fairly typical. The deviation of the “‘ setting’ curve from 
the straight line is a measure of the error in the average obser- 
ver’s idea as to the position of the various tenths, and the devi- 
ation curve is a measure of the accuracy which the average 
observer can attain in the setting of the pointer in the posi- 
tion which he thinks is the correct one. No doubt the setting 
curve is what would be expected, the positions between 
five tenths and ten tenths being in error by about the same 
amount as those from zero to five tenths, but in the opposite 
direction, showing that the average observer obtains the upper 


EY 
ay 
a 
i 
a 


111.9 Sz 
za 
os 

(5 111.8 ES 
Zz oe 
111.7 26 
if gz 
< 
ra 
z° 
0. 


So 
co 


111.3 


TRUE VALUE OF 
= 
cs 


| : 
11.0 ay 7A. 2111 3111.4 111.5 111.6 111.7 111 8111.9 112.0 
ATTEMPTED SETTING 


Fic, 4—PRECISION OF METER READING. 
Estimation of tenths between smallest divisions. 


values by subtracting a certain distance from the upper line, in 
the same manner that he obtains the lower ones by adding the 
same distance to the lower line. The five-tenths point is about 
right, as would be expected. Tests have shown that various 
observers show vastly different but reproducible characteristics 
both from the standpoint of error in idea as to position and 
of precision of setting. This is especially true of the precision 
of setting. Some havea low average deviation from the mean for 
the line and midway positions and others at the intermediate 
values. This test is valuable in that it furnishes a measure of 
both the directional and unavoidable errors to be expected; 
more than that, it allows the observer to correct his mistaken 
idea which previously was not known to exist. 


1522 EDWARDS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


It was found that for every-day use on photometric equip- 
ment, the precision attainable with portable instruments was 
not sufficient to furnish the desired accuracy, and as a result 
large laboratory standards and deflection potentiometers were 
substituted. The scales of these can be, in most cases, read to 
the nearest 0.1 per cent without estimation of tenths. . 

The indicating instrument used for the continuous obser- 
vation of life test voltage, at the laboratory with which the 
writer is connected, is an interesting feature in itself, apart 
from the laboratory standard used for periodic comparisons. It 
is well known that a switchboard operator prefers an instrument 
to which no calibration correction need be applied, that is to say 
he prefers to adjust the voltage to a line which is labeled as 
the voltage at which he is instructed to run. This feature of the 


Fic. 5 


subjective problem finds no application in most laboratory 
precision work, but is worthy of consideration in this particular 
instance as in central station operation where a constant con- ; 
dition of operation is desired. 

It is well known that no instrument can be made which will 
maintain a zero correction, even though initially adjusted very 
carefully to that value. Many instruments on the market can 
be made to read correctly at one point on the scale by shifting 
the zero point by means of the adjustment of the spring. Such 
instruments are difficult of accurate adjustment, however, and 
moreover furnish no means of recording the calibration for a 
history of the performance of the instrument. Fig. 5 shows 
the scale of the instrument designed to overcome this diffi- 
culty. The scale can be shifted by means of a rack and 
pinion at the top (not shown) to the proper point to make 


1912] EDWARDS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1523 


the indication correct at the 120-volt point, the one used 
in this case. The calibration is indicated by the stationary 
pointer near the bottom of the scale. The instrument is cali- 
brated daily and the correction recorded, and when the trend 
of the calibration curve shows a drift of more than 0.05 volts the 
scale is shifted and the new reading of the stationary point 
is made a new addition to the history of the instrument. 

This instrument is of the dynamometer type, air-vane-damped 
and practically free from jewel friction. It has been in service 
only a short time, but promises to fulfil the requirements very 
well. 

A graphic recording voltmeter is used in connection with the 
indicating instruments, but cannot be depended upon as a pre- 
cision instrument, due to the comparatively large friction in the 
movement and the tendency to wear a rut, so to speak, in the 
movement, at the one point where it is constantly used. It is 
useful only in that it records any comparatively large change 
which may take place, and the time at which service is inter- 
rupted and resumed. 

All must agree that in a photometric and lamp testing labora- 
tory a great deal of thought and much time must be continually 
applied to the question of electrical measurements in order that 
those in charge may be assured that the desired accuracy is 
maintained at all times. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


INCANDESCENT LAMPS AS RESISTANCES 


BY T. H. AMRINE 


Incandescent lamps have long been used as resistances in 
electrical measurements, but they have not been used Over nearly 
as wide a range and variety of work as they might be. The 
reason for this is probably that information as to the resistance 
values and characteristics is not generally available and for 
that reason the proper lamps can not be easily selected. It 
is the purpose of this paper to emphasize the value of incan- 
descent lamps as resistances, to give some information regard- 
ing the resistance characteristics, ranges of resistance and current 
carrying capacities available, and such other information as will 
a&ist one in the selection of the proper lamps for any particular 
purpose. 

The principal advantages of lamps as resistance are, of course, 
their general availability and their low cost. These are of 
especial importance in experimental work, where delays and 
expense under the best conditions often seriously impede pro- 
gress. A wide range of lamps suitable for use as resistance 
can be kept in stock in a laboratory with a very small outlay 
of money and if properly selected and used will to a large extent 
take the place of a much more expensive equipment of rheostats, 
resistances, etc. The list price of a lamp which will carry 0.11 
amperes and has a resistance of 2150 ohms is only 18 cents, 
which is probably less than the cost of an equal amount of resis- 
tance of like carrying capacity in any other form. 

The fact that a very wide range of temperature coefficient of 
resistance is available in incandescent lamps is well known, 
perhaps, but is taken advantage of to a much less extent than 
is possible. Commercial lamps are now being made with un 

1525 


1526 AMRINE: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS _ [June 28 


treated carbon, treated carbon, metallized carbon, tantalum 
and tungsten filaments. These materials range in temperature 
coefficient from a pronounced negative to a large positive value. 
In Figs. 1, 2 and 3 are given curves plotted between per cent 
normal current and per cent of cold resistance, for lamps with 
the various filament materials which are now in commerical use, 
and for a few forms of treated carbon (Fig. 3) that are not in 
commercial use but which have been made specially. These 
give an idea of the range in temperature coefficient available. 
It is seen from these curves that for limited ranges almost any 
desired change of resistance with change of current can be select- 
ed, ranging from a pronounced decrease to a very large increase, 
as well as a practically negligible change of resistance with cur- 


132 —- 98 
| 
if =. Wz 
sia | 0 2 
Gir s | = 
© 120 | ie 
7 | 36 oO 
W116 : 
9 L 82 wi 
<2 ‘A’! GEM( NORMAL AT 2.5 W.P.C.) 78 = 
< 
9108 + ‘* BY) CARBON (NORMAL AT 3.0 W.P.C.)/-—1 74 UR 
wl + i179 ® 
ea - 7 70 w 
2100 — 08 
4 . T 1 66 oO 
oO = = te + 62 S 
ue 92 =a. a Bo 
fo) | | Eg (Paet bay ar ee 38 uw . 
~* 88 95 hee mis a=as a? 
| | 7 Be 
om = ‘a | eres ® * 
so|—t- _| OF NORMAL CURRENT] _ 
p ; 100 | 120 | 140 


rent. In connection with these curves it may be necessary to 
explain that in undergoing the “flashing” or “ treating ” 
process carbon filaments decrease in resistance an amount de- 
pending upon the amount of treatment given. Hence, the curve 
marked ‘50 per cent treatment ’’ would refer to a filament 
which had been treated until its resistance had decreased to 
50 per cent of its initial resistance. Commercial carbon fila- 
ments are treated to approximately 60 per cent of their initial 
resistance. 

Below is given, for the various commercial filaments, a table of 
exponents X in the equation z = (FR) which gives the change 
in resistance R with changes in F, where F represents the various 
quantities, candle power, efficiency, volts, watts and current. 


1912] AMRINE: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1527 


TABLE I 
Values of X for 
F Untreated | Treated | Metallized 
carbon carbon carbon Tantalum | Tungsten 
Wan gle POWEr srrsjcnin acre sien —0.045 —0.015 0.050 0.060 0.115 
GICLOTICY fare wie eeersilelnila a a1 0.070 0.020 —0.075 —0.100 —0.200 
NOUUSPPSES «Ra Sg-:0f4 20 ald Lone —0.310 —0.075 0.230 0.260 0.420 
NVRUS Metre ste ai sins cis Ceaeccun all =eUlLoo, —0.035 0.130 0.150 0.260 
Tren bikie wien egies fees 8 —0.235 —0.070 0.300 0.350 0.720 


These are average exponents which are approximately correct 
over a range of 20 per cent either side of the normal voltage of 
the lamps. By their use the resistance corresponding to any 
value of the function F can be determined, knowing the resistance 
at some other value, say normal, of the same function. 

Below is given a table which shows the maximum resistance 
which is available in commercial lamps for various ampere 
capacities. ue 


TABLE II 


Maximum 
resistance 
obtainable 
Type of filament Amperes at given Commercial rating 
amperes 


Untreated carbon 0.077 1690 10-watt 130-volt 
. os 0.110 2520 BQ=a eco 1% 
Treated carbon 0.154 845 20 ee L3Olee! 
& s 0.365 754 LOO) 52% 1275) * 
< & 0.920 141 LEXUS Ge RY 
o . 1,00 75 l-ampere resistance lamp 
e s 2.00 13 = GO “ 5 
cs 3.00 8 3 & a Md 
e . 3.85 36 500-watt, 130-volt heater lamp 
Metallized carbon 0.231 563 30-watt, 130-volt “ 2 
fe a 0.462 282 60-watt 130- “ 
¢ G 0.77 169 100 130552 
Tungsten 0.077 1690 10°2-24-130> 3° 
tS 0.145 1900 40 4 A275) Se 
# 0.218 1260 GOmr wae Aen 
‘s 0.364 760 10045275 * 
& 0.510 530 150% 2 “327-55 * 
=) 0.910 300 250% _-*-275 
by 1.18 110 150222130" * 
be 1.92 68 250- —“ 130 0% 
- 3.84 34 500° *130 °# 
4 tf 5.00 20 500 “ 100 “ 
eS nl 


1528 AMRINE: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


The resistances given above are ‘‘ normal” resistances, that 
is, the resistances at the rated normal voltages of the various 
lamps. The resistances at other currents can be obtained by 
reference to the curves of Figs. 1, 2 and 3 or by use of the expo- 
nents given in Table I. 

In almost all cases lamps of lower resistance, but having about 
the same ampere carrying capacity, can be obtained in regular 
commercial lamps. 

In order to select the proper resistance lamps for any purpose 
it is necessary to have the following information: 

1. Resistance. 


A-TUNGSTEN - NORMAL 

1400;——_ AT 1.23 W.P.C. 

B-TANTALUM - NORMAL 
AT 2.00 W.P.C. 


Ho A 


n 
1000 
WwW 
c 900 + 
} 
5 800 i] 
8 700 iBa-4 
WL ¢ t | 
45 600 -__ i 
re 500 a 
400 
200 Aa be | 
oe 
1000-3940 60~«~O80~C*S*=C*«a, «WHO 
% OF NORMAL CURRENT 
Fic. 2 


2. Current carrying capacity. 

3. Degree of incandescence permissible. 

4. Change in resistance with change in current that is al- 
lowable. 

In selecting the lamp it is first necessary to know the per cent 
normal current at which the various types of lamps will give 
the desired degree of incandescence. Table III will enable one 
to choose these values. 

The degree of incandescence permissible depends upon whether 
or not light is objectionable, upon the desirability of constancy 
over long periods of use and upon the necessity of long life of 
the lamps. The average total life of an incandescent lamp at the 
commercial efficiencies can be assumed at 1000 hours. A one 
per cent decrease in current below normal will increase the life 


———— 


1912] AMRINE: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1529 


from 11 to 24 per cent, depending upon the type of filament, 
so that if the lamps are operated a few per cent below normal 
they will give a very satisfactory life. Operation above normal 
will, of course, decrease the life in the.same ratio. 


TABLE III 


Per cent of normal current 


Untreated | Treated | Metallized 
carbon © | carbon | carbon Tantalum | Tungsten 
| | 
| 
Dalene deed ene tc ct 12 | 14 17 20 23 
Wherry. redancswteetes cate oe ors 18 20 24 26 28 
Vellow reds cuiiseceaseles ogiladicw igo 33 35 38 


From the curves of Figs. 1 and 2 one can select the type of 
lamp which will give most nearly the desired current-resistance 
change at the proper degree of incandescence. Knowing the 
per cent current at which the lamp is to be operated one can 


sw} | 4 je | | | 
t Re 
“A” 1¢ TREATMENT 
90 “BY” 50¢ TREATMENT 
“C” 60% TREATMENT 
ut “D” UNTREATED CARBON 
w 80 
9 \ | 
ae eee = 
xt 
a 70 I 
g | . 
[acs 
9 D 
g@ 
2! 
3 ; 
® 50 B ice 
| D 
A 


305 Mo i) = 6 8 100 120 140 «160-180 
% OF 3.0 W.P.C. CURRENT 


Fic, 3 


obtain from the curves the corresponding per cent resistance, 
and from this can be calculated the normal resistance of the 
proper lamp. From the normal resistance and normal current 
the voltage and wattage of the lamp can be determined. When 


1530 AMRINE: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


possible, of course, it is very desirable to select a lamp which 
is a regular commercial product and so avoid the inevitable 
delay and increased cost of a special lamp. 

As examples of uses to which incandescent lamp resistances 
have been put, other than the familiar laboratory use in lamp 
banks, etc., a brief description of some of the methods which 
have been utilized in the laboratory with which the writer is 
connected will be cited. 

Carbon lamps seasoned at about 109 per cent of their normal 
voltage for a period of 12 hours* are carefully rated for volts 
at various ampere values and are used in the factories for check- 
ing ammeters. By this method, with a calibrated voltmeter 
and a few lamps one can check portable voltmeters and ammeters 
in as satisfactory a manner as with both standard voltmeter 
and ammeter. 

Extensive use is made of a four- 
lamp bridge which is essentially the 
same as the old Howell indicator. 
In this bridge four lamps are arranged 
as shown in Fig. 4, in which A and D 
represent lamps having a different 
current-resistance relation from lamps 
Band C. For instance, A and D may be 
carbon lamps, and B and C metallized 
carbon lamps, the most sensitive 
combination which utilizes commer- Fic. 4 
cial lamps being with untreated 
carbon lamps for A and D and tungsten lamps for B ang Co Cit. 
by means of the small adjustable resistance R, the galvanometer 
Gis brought to zero for any current through A BCD, then any 
change from that current will produce a deflection of the gal- 
vanometer. This arrangement is used to enable one to hold the 
voltage on a given circuit constant by putting the terminals 
a d across the line, bringing the line to the desired voltage by 
the use of a voltmeter and then adjusting the galvanometer to 
zero by means of R. With a proper bridge and an ordinary 
portable galvanometer, a small change, say 0.1 per cent, in the 
voltage of the line is made evident by a considerable deflection 

*Before being used as resistances for any purpose which requires 
careful resistance adjustment, all incandescent lamps should be seasoned 


by burning for a period sufficiently long to bring them to a constant 
resistance value. 


1912] AMRINE: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1531 


of the galvanometer. By placing a bridge arrangement such 
as this in series with a line the line current can be held to a con- 
stant value in a similar way. 

A photographic recording alternating-current voltmeter of 
high sensibility which was developed by Mr. L. T. Robinson 
utilizes a four-lamp bridge similar to the one described, in connec- 
tion with a reflecting dynamometer. 

A temperature control device has also been made by using a 
small tungsten lamp as one arm of a bridge and placing it in 
the oven whose temperature was to be kept constant. The 
bridge is brought to a balance by adjustment of the other arms 
while the temperature is held constant at the correct value by 
means of a thermometer. After-being set thus the oven can 
be readily held at the proper temperature by reference to the 
galvanometer. 


1532 LAMP TESTING {June 28 


Discusstonvon ‘“‘ ELEcTRICAL MEASUREMENTS WITH SPECIAL 
REFERENCE TO Lamp TESTING” (Epwarps), AND “ IN- 
CANDESCENT LAMPS AS RESISTANCES ” (AMRINE), BosTON, 
Mass., JUNE 28, 1912. 


Clayton H. Sharp: Speaking of the paper by Mr. Edwards, 
the author gives a curve of corrections for the alternating-current 
voltmeter as used in checking the voltages on the life testing 
rack. He emphasizes the importance of that correction curve. 
I do not think he emphasizes it quite enough and I doubt if 
a laboratory standard voltmeter alone, even though carefully 
checked, is quite sufficient to maintain the very high degree of 
accuracy which is called for in the measurement of life testing 
voltages. One-tenth of one per cent on the life testing voltage 
will make several per cent difference 
in the life of the lamp, and may have 
very serious commercial results un- 
der certain circumstances; so that 
in all lamp testing, the most im- 
portant thing is the accurate de- 
termination and checking of these 
voltages. No single method is suffi- 
cient, but rather, various methods 
must be used and checked against 
each other. For instance, in our 
own laboratory, we use a multi- 
cellular electrostatic voltmeter 
with a mirror and scale, a method 
introduced by Dr. Kennelly some 
years ago. This is used as a trans- 
fer instrument to check directly 
against the potentiometer, so that 
the chances of errors of the instru- 

Fic. 1 ments themselves are as nearly as 
possible eliminated. Other instru- 
ments%are used in the same way. 

More recently we have been trying the method suggested by 
Mr. Amrine, namely the use of the old Howell indicator. See 
Fig. 1: 

The bridge which we have used is made up of tungsten and 
carbon lamps in opposite arms. At one diagonal of the bridge 
is placed a resistance of zero temperature coefficient. About 
this is looped a rheostat of high resistance with a rotating 
switch, making a very great many contacts. 

The bridge is placed on the circuit the voltage of which is to 
be measured and in series with it is a fixed coil of a sensitive 
electrodynamometer. The moving coil, which is supported on 
a suspension wire and carries a mirror, is placed across the 
bridge in the usual connection for the galvanometer, excepting 
that one connection from it is made to the rotating switch of 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1533 


the rheostat. With this arrangement properly adjusted, the 
different positions of the rheostat arm correspond to different 
voltages on the bridge and the rheostat may be calibrated to 
read in volts. It is used as a transfer instrument, being. cali- 
brated on direct current. On account of the slight lead which 
the current has in a tungsten lamp on alternating current due 
to the considerable changes of temperature of the filament, 
the bridge does not give correct results as a transfer instrument 
if the lamp filaments are too fine. It is necessary therefore 
to use lamps of fairly high candle power in the construction 
of the bridge. The lamps must be of the same quality and 
character as are used for precise photometric standards; that 
is, all loose or variable contacts in the interior of the lamp must 
be eliminated and the lamps should be properly seasoned or 
aged before put into the bridge. 

It should be noted that an arrangement of this kind is ex- 
tremely sensitive to differences in voltage. Differences of 0.0001 
of a volt in 100 volts, that is, differences of one part in 1,000,000, 
are shown by the deflection of the electrodynamometer. 

Referring again to Mr. Edwards’s paper, he says that in com- 
mercial testing the ordinary portable instruments are insuffi- 
cient. That is quite true, and a larger type must be used. 
For more careful measurement it is better to use two 
potentiometers, one for measuring voltage and the other for 
measuring current. 

As to the indicating instrument on the switchboard for the 
life test voltage, another possible modification of that scheme 
is to give the man who regulates a single positive mark to go by, 
so that he has not any chance to estimate or to do anything 
else. He merely holds his needle on that mark, which relieves 
him from a large amount of mental exertion. 

A. E. Kennelly: This description which has been given wus 
by Dr. Sharp is very interesting, in regard to that kind of 
voltmeter, and I quite agree with the opinion he expressed, that 
no one particular instrument should be taken as the exclusive 
court of appeal in deciding the calibration of an alternating- 
current voltmeter. Checks should be obtained in all cases. 
We have found that the alternating-current potentiometer of 
Dr. Drysdale is a very useful and convenient check, which, by 
means of the vibration galvanometer, gives a high degree of 
sensibility, enabling a difference in voltage of one-twentieth 
of one per cent to be easily determined. 

M. G. Lloyd: I should like to ask Mr. Edwards a few ques- 
tions, and to have him elucidate Fig. 3 a little further. First, 
in regard to how the settings were made on which these readings 
were taken. There might be three ways of making these settings: 
In one way they would be evenly scattered across the entire 
scale; in the second way, they might be set on the exact tenths 
rigidly, and the same number of settings made on each tenth 
division; and in the third way they would beleft to chance, and, on 
account of something in the set-up, they might fall more fre- 


1534 LAMP TESTING [June 28 


quently in one region than in another; so I should like to know 
how the settings were made from which these readings were taken. 

Secondly, I think the width of the space is a very important 
thing in a study of this kind, as it seems to me the tendency 
exhibited in these results would very largely depend on the ratio 
of the width of the pointer to the width of the space. 

Paul MacGahan: I wish to point out an interesting applica- 
tion of the tungsten lamp used as a resistor. This is in connec- 
tion with contact-making voltmeters, such as are often used 
for potential regulators, or in relay type graphic meters, in 
which the tungsten lamp is used as a resistance between the 
contact and the magnet or motor. The idea is to introduce a 
low resistance just when the contact is made, giving a good 
starting characteristic to the device, and improving the contact 
action. As soon as the contact is made, the lamp lights up and 
increases in resistance ten times, and thus greatly reduces the 
current and sparking when the contact is broken. 

T. H. Amrine: In Mr. Edwards’s paper, he mentions the use 
of graphic recording voltmeters on life testing lines. He is 
correct, of course, in his statement that the ordinary graphic 
voltmeter cannot be depended upon for anything more than to 
show very large changes in the voltage and to show interruptions 
inthe service. The photographic recording voltmeter which is 
mentioned in my paper is being developed for this service and 
the indications are that it will serve the purpose well. It is 
sufficiently sensitive and has a sufficiently wide scale so that 
variations of one to two-tenths per cent in voltage are plainly 
indicated on the chart. 

A couple of records from this photographic recording volt- 
meter are presented herewith, which show what can be done by 
the instrument. They also serve to show the sort of voltage 
regulation that can be obtained on alternating-current lines by 
means of the automatic voltage regulator under the best con- 
ditions. The original of chart No. 1 was taken with the volt- 
meter adjusted to give a scale of 1.8 in. (45.7 mm.) per volt. 
ie original of chart No. 2 hasascale of 1.5 in. (38.1 mm.) per 
volt. 

Evan J. Edwards: Referring to Dr. Lloyd’s question as to 
the method used in obtaining the readings of Fig. 3, I would 
say that these figures were taken from old photometric data 
which were obtained with no thought that they might be used for 
the purpose of this investigation. Only such readings as were 
obtained in a straight estimation of tenths between smallest 
divisions, were selected; that is to say, only such groups of 
data as could be expected to show a nearly equal number of 
occurrences of each digit for a large number of readings were 
included. 

The width between smallest divisions used in obtaining the 
curves of Fig. 4 was that of a standard portable voltmeter 
having 150 scale divisions. The ratio of width between di- 
visions to the width of pointer was probably about 10. Dr. 


PLATE LXXXIl 
AWK E, E. 
VOL, XXXI, 1912 


1A 74 


/ vor —> 


2 PA 


[AMRINE] [AMRINE] 


CuHart No. 1 CHART No. 2 
[Reproduced oneehalf size of original] 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1535 


Lloyd is, of course, right in saying that the results depend on 
this ratio. They probably also depend on the actual length 
as well as the ratio. The curves were intended as illustrative 
in the analysis of the various errors involved in meter reading. 

Dr. Sharp has expressed the opinion that no single method 
of connecting alternating-current measurements with stand- 
ard cell values is sufficient. Dr. Kennelly states that he con- 
curs in that opinion. The author did not intend to give the 
impression that one single method or one single criterion was 
in use. It is true that only one method, the dynamometer 
method, is used as aneveryday means of calibration. But 
before adopting this method, a careful comparison was made 
with a hot-wire instrument. Having proved the results to 
be the same by two very different methods and knowing that 
the wave form must remain unchanged, it seems justi- 
fiable to adopt as an everyday method the more convenient 
and sensitive one. Making measurements by using many 
instruments and many methods, of course, should give added 
assurance in the result, always, but it is possible to reach the 
point where additional measurements are not worth what they 
cost. 

The modification of the special indicating voltmeter suggested 
by Dr. Kennelly was considered when designing the instrument. 
It was decided to add the divisions in order to enable the oper- 
ator to make exact readings on the even hour when the regular 
log readings are taken. 

It is my understanding that the photographic instrument 
mentioned by Mr. Amrine consists of a dynamometer movement 
carrying a small mirror which reflects a beam of light with a 
long throw, to a sensitized paper driven by a clock mechanism. 
Such an instrument should, of course, be as reliable as the in- 
dicating instrument described in the above paper. The re- 
cords show it to be very sensitive and free from friction. 


vilwert. ,clé-vet boeokingiebs 
aie ® ye ivr forme a MW heed. ~ 
ay re Here 2 ol pots wy ihe = 
ete inti, Roguaten) oie eee 

r aad, Jteoeeiaa ath ae 


ot t ‘ah oo te yeaa @iety 


A paper presented at the 291h Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright 1912 By A.I. E. E. 


ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION OF ELECTRICAL 
MEASUREMENTS 


BY O. J. BLISS 


The unique arrangement of standard instruments described in 
this paper was made for the purpose of transmitting and re- 
producing at a distance a direct electrical measurement, the 
distance in point being 35 miles (56 km.), the measurement the 
indicated kilowatts input to a 12,000-volt, 60-cycle, three-phase 
transmission line, and the medium of transmission a telephone 
line owned by the local telephone company but used as a private 
line by the central station companies. 

The conditions which led to the necessity for the arrangement 
were these: First, a contract for power to be furnished by a 
large central station company which we will call A, to a smaller 
central station company called B, over a 35-mile (56-km.) three- 
phase transmission line, the smaller company being a customer 
of the larger and having substations of its own tapped off the 
connecting line. Second, a form of contract requiring that billing 
be done from the readings of a polyphase watt-hour meter in- 
stalled in central station A, equipped with a printing device 
adjusted to print automatically the dial readings on a paper 
_ribbon at intervals of 15 minutes, the charges to include a certain 
rate per kilowatt-hour for all energy delivered, a kilowatt-year 
charge based on the average of the three highest one-half hour 
peaks occurring during the year and a guarantee of a certain load 
factor. 

With a contract of this kind it is evidently very much to the 
advantage of the customer to keep the load curve free from any 
peaks which would increase the kilowatt-year charge. But as 
the customer can only regulate at his own station and in the case 

F 1537 


1538 BLISS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS. [June 28 


in question the operators at B had no means of knowing what 
the input to the line was by central station company A, it be- 
came apparent that instruments must be installed in the stations 
of the smaller company which would indicate this input. Con- 
siderable advantage would also result if some permanent record 
could be obtained in order to check the watchfulness of switch- 
board operators, and as a comparison with the printed registra- 
tion of the polyphase watt-hour meter instation A. It was desir- 
able therefore to install a curve-drawing as well as an indicating 
instrument. 

CENTRAL 


STATION 
COMPANY A 


TELEPHONE 
EXCHANGE 


POWER HOUSE 
CENTRAL 
STATION 

COMPANY A 
SUBSTATION 
CENTRAL 
STATION 
COMPANY B 


SUBSTATION 
CENTRAL 
STATION 

COMPANY B 


HYDRAULIC PLANT, | CENTRA: 


STATIO! 
COMPANY B 


TELEPHONE 
EXCHANGE 


Map SHOWING LOCATION OF TELEPHONE STATIONS. 


In developing a scheme permission was first obtained from the 
telephone company to use the private line for the transmission 
of signals between the stations, it being understood that any . 
arrangement installed for that purpose should in no way interfere 
with the telephone service nor should an e.m.f. of over 50 volts 
be put on the line. 

Standard types of meters were then modified and installed as 
follows. On the switchboard of central station A was mounted 
a graphic recording wattmeter, with relay type of movement, 
connected through the regular equipment of current and potential 
transformers to the transmission line. Alongside the wattmeter 


1912] BLISS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1539 


a small special variable rheostat was installed, the movable con- 
tact of which was connected, by a brass rod provided with an 
insulating joint, to the recording mechanism of the graphic meter 
so that the position of this contact at all times corresponded 
exactly to the deflection of the meter. 

If now a direct-current source is connected across the rheostat 
terminals, and one terminal and the movable contact connected 
to the telephone line, the e.m.f. across the line has a fixed relation 
to the deflection of the graphic meter, or the input to the trans- 
mission line, and the reading of a direct-current instrument 
connected in the telephone line may therefore be made to indicate 
this input. 


CENTRAL STATION B 


INDICATING 
D.C. VOLTMETER 
B uy S 
SUBSTATION CURVE DRAWING 
D.C. VOLTMETER 
0.Cc, 
CONTROL 
CIRCUIT 


= I o- 
—_1_ | | é REACTANCE 


CENTRAL STATION A 3 PHASE TRANSMISSION LINE LENGTH 35 MILES 


COILS 


S 


E 
1 


=> 
CONDENSERS 


Sh -- } 
CONDENSERS TELEPHONE LINE 


DIAGRAM OF CONNECTIONS FOR TRANSMISSION OF ELECTRICAL MEASURE- 
MENTS OVER TELEPHONE LINE. - 


The rheostat as made up has uniform resistance per unit of 
length and does not therefore give uniform increments of e.m.f. 
for equal distances of travel of the movable contact. By making 
the current through the resistance large as compared to the - 
instrument current the error is, however, negligible, and the 
e.m.f. is considered directly proportional to the deflection of the 
graphic meter. 

The source of direct current is a 36-volt storage battery of 
small capacity located near the switchboard. The continuous 
discharge rate through the rheostat is about 150 milliamperes. 
The direct-current instruments, one an indicating voltmeter in- 
stalled in the steam plant of central station company B, the other 
a curve-drawing voltmeter with smoke chart recorder installed in 


1540 BLISS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


the waterpower plant of central station company B, are in 
series, are adjusted to the same full scale current, about 7 milli- 
amperes, have scales marked in kilowatts and have series re- 
sistances adjusted to give full scale deflection corresponding to 
the graphic meter in central station A. 

One-half of this resistance is in one of the meters in central 
station B, and one-half is mounted on the rheostat in central 
station A. This is necessary because the signaling system forms 
at both ends of the telephone line a shunt across the line, which 
must. be of at least 1000 ohms resistance in order not to interfere 
with the telephone service. 

Interference with the telephone by the direct current of the 
transmitting system is prevented by the installation of con- 
densers in the line at each telephone station, and interference 
with the meters by the telephone ringing current is prevented by 
the installation of reactance coils in the instrument leads. 

The operation of this system has been so satisfactory, is sO 
simple in its various parts, and has given such a small amount 
of trouble, that it leads one to believe the scheme practicable 
for many other applications. For instance, any two stations, 
whether belonging to the same company or not, if feeding into 
the same load, might use a system of this kind to advantage. 
A central office could have a continuous record of total output 
or that of any more important line or machine. Regulation of 
machines for synchronizing operations where the switch to be 
closed is in a station remote from that in which generators are 
located, as is sometimes the case in interconnected systems, 
could be easily arranged, or the more important positions on the 
load dispatcher’s board might be made automatic, showing switch- 
ing operations without waiting for the telephone call and the 
subsequent plugging or marking of the board. 

In short, the installation here described seems to show that 
. any points connected by telephone lines may be equipped for the 
transmission of measurements or direct-current signals at a low 
cost, without interference with the telephone system. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Conven- 
tion of the Agnerican Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


METERING LARGE DIRECT-CURRENT 
INSTALLATIONS 


BY F. V. MAGALHAES 


The question of properly metering electrical energy when it 
is used in the form of high values of direct current is one that 
can profitably be discussed at this meeting. The following 
brief paper is intended as a summary, for the purpose of dis- 
cussion, of various methods now being used, with suggestions 
for the development of apparatus that would eliminate certain 
disadvantages and errors now encountered. 

We will consider the methods of metering currents of 1000 
to 10,000 amperes at 100 to 600 volts. These limits are arbitrary 
but they cover a great many conditions which are comparable 
in metering both the energy for light and power from central 
stations and the energy from electric railway substations. 

Below is given a list of four headings which will in turn be 
dealt with in detail. 

Method 1. Install a single watt-hour meter between the source 
of supply and the distributing switchboard. 

Method 2. Install in parallel in the main source of supply 
several watt-hour meters with an aggregate capacity sufficient 
for the total load. 

Method 3. Divide the main service supply and meter sep- 
arately any natural component parts of the total load. 

Method 4. The development and the use of the shunt type 
‘of watt-hour meter both for the metering itself and for test 
purposes in connection with any of the three foregoing methods. 


MetHop 1 
The practise of installing only a single watt-hour meter is the 
easiest, best appearing and cheapest from the standpoint of 
1541 


1542 MAGALHAES: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


switchboard design, and the cheapest from the standpoint of 
initial meter cost. The method, however, has the least to recom- 
mend it from the standpoint of meter accuracy, and is the 
most difficult and expensive to maintain after installation. 

The advantages that may be claimed for this method are the 
registration on one set of dials of the total energy for the instal- 
lation; also, as indicated above, the low initial meter cost as 
compared with other methods. This latter condition, however, 
is open to argument if careful consideration is given to the fact 
that a system of using several small meters permits more flexi- 
bility from the standpoint of exact assignment, as the rated 
ampere capacities of large meters are, from the manufacturing 
standpoint, necessarily arbitrary and in large steps. 

The disadvantages that may be listed are: the possibility of 
complete interruption of registration or inaccurate registration 
due to a defect or to poor performance of the meter, such in- 
terruption or inaccuracy of registration applying over the energy 
for the total installation; extreme difficulty of proper testing, 
involving the insertion of instruments in the main circuit, the 
possible shunting of the customer’s load and handling of an 
artificial load; the expense of owning and calibrating standards 
of very high current capacity; and the loss of registration due 
to the shunted load during the time of test. 


Meruop 2 

The practise of installing several meters in parallel, while 
increasing somewhat the initial meter cost and possibly the 
switchboard cost, tends to eliminate or improve several of the 
disadvantages of Method 1. 

In case of defect or inaccuracy in a meter only part of the 
total registration is affected. 

Testing is greatly simplified over Method 1, as the meters 
may in turn be.disconnected on the house side for test and the 
remaining meters allowed to carry the load. The test connec- 
tions, artificial load and capacity of the standard instruments 
will all be of smaller ampere capacity than in Method 1, witha 
corresponding decrease in initial cost and cost of maintenance. 

This method is subject to one disadvantage in common with 
Method 1, namely, the poor performance of the aggregate meters 
at very light loads. A light load may exist for several hours 
which would be of considerable significance from the stand- 
point of energy, but which might be inaccurately metered, as 
it would be only a small percentage of the total meter capacity. 


1912] MAGALHAES: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1543 


One disadvantage peculiar to this method is that the separate 
meters, due to differences in the resistance of the connections, 
may not register their proportionate part of the total energy. 
Such difference in registration, even when the meters are en- 
tirely accurate,: can give rise to tmnnecessary question or 
criticism of meter accuracy. 


METHOD 3 


The practise of installing individual meters for the natural 
component parts of an installation, such as separate floors in 
a building, separate buildings in a group, separate motors in 
a large power installation or separate synchronous converters 
in a substation, is, if the meter sizes are carefully assigned and 
the meters properly maintained, the best method for most 
conditions. 

This method is open to the same objections that may be 
advanced against Method 2 as to the increased installation and 
meter cost. 

Method 3 has a distinct advantage over the first two methods 
in that the assignment of each meter may be made very closely 
by considering the performance of its particular installation. 
The aggregate light load and overload performance of the in- 
dividual meters will then be better than the performance of a 
‘single large meter or group of parallel meters on the total load. 

The development of a mechanical or electrical totalizing dial 
of some description would, in connection with Methods 2 and 3, 
provide a single totalized record of registration of the various 
meters. Such a record might be desirable or even essential in 
the case of a synchronous converter substation, with the individ- 
ual converter meters installed near the converters and a total- 
izing dial located on the switchboard. 


“Mertuop 4 


Method 4 is a proposed practise based on the development 
of an accurate shunt type of watt-hour meter. 

Assuming the availability of such a shunt type of watt-hour 
meter for service purposes and a carefully designed shunt type 
of portable watt-hour meter for test purposes, the metering of 
large direct-current installations would at once present other 
possibilities. It would be possible to meter a large power in- 
stallation, consisting of a few units, with a single meter. This 
meter could at frequent intervals be compared quickly and ac- 
curately with the rotating standard. The service meter and 


1544 MAGALHAES: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


the standard being of similar types and characteristics would 
permit the use, for test purposes, of the regular service load, 
even if of a very fluctuating character. 

One marked advantage of the shunt type of meter in the large 
capacities would be its flexibility from the stock standpoint. 
The meters themselves could be all of five or ten amperes capacity 
and the range for the large capacities maintained by a stock of 
shunts. This feature is comparable with the flexibility which is 
possible with the standard five-ampere induction meter in 
connection with any ratio of current transformer. 

For an installation of small power units or a large lighting 
installation, Method 3, namely, metering separate parts of the 
installation, would still be desirable even with the availability 
of the shunt type of meter. Such a type of meter would, how- 
ever, increase the ease of testing and thus indirectly increase 
the accuracy of registration. 

In conclusion it can be stated that the requirement of a brief 
paper has necessarily resulted in the discussion of only one 
narrow phase of the general subject of metering. The possi- 
bilities of the shunt type of meter have by no means been com- 
pletely covered. No mention has been made of the proper 
assignment of the present type of astatic and four-pole meters 
for different installations and switchboard designs. Nor has 
the subject of proper instruments and artificial loads for test 
purposes been dealt with, although all of these points are related 
and essential to the proper metering of large direct-current 
installations. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


MEASUREMENT OF ENERGY WITH INSTRUMENT 
TRANSFORMERS 


BY ALEXANDER MAXWELL 


A good deal has been written concerning the determination 
of the ratio and phase angle of instrument transformers, and 
several methods are now available which are of good accuracy. 
Also, there is considerable matter available regarding the design 
of such transformers, with reference to the production of sat- 
isfactory ratio and phase angle characteristics. Comparatively 
little has appeared, however, concerning the effect of ratio and 
phase angle upon the accuracy of watt-hour meters. 

The effects of ratio and phase angle upon the indications of 
switchboard instruments can generally be provided for without 
much difficulty, and where these éffects become important in 
connection with special measurements made with portable 
instruments, such as precise measurements over a wide range 
of currents or voltages, or at low power factors, correction may 
readily be made for them, the only requirements being a 
knowledge of the ratio and phase angle characteristics of the par- 
ticular transformers used, and some rather tedious calculations. 

With watt-hour meters, however, the problem is more diffi- 
cult. It is not possible to adjust such meters to compensate 
automatically for changes in ratio and phase angle for different 
loads and different power factors within the range of the meter. 
Legal and commercial considerations require that such meters 
be maintained within certain specified limits of accuracy. It 
is the purpose of this paper to consider, briefly, some aspects 
of the problem presented by the use of instrument trans- 
formers in connection with watt-hour meters. 

1545 


1546 MAXWELL: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


POTENTIAL TRANSFORMERS 


Deviations from stated ratio and ideal phase relation are small 
in potential transformers, aS compared with current trans- 
formers. Furthermore, in a large majority of cases, potential 
transformers are used in connection with constant potential 
systems, and at constant secondary load, and therefore the de- 
termined values of ratio and phase angle for that particular 
load remain unchanged. Ratio may be taken into account 
once for all in the calibration of the meter. Phase angle may 
not be compensated, except for a particular value of load power 
factor, as shown later, but in most cases the error due to this 
deviation from the ideal phase relation will be negligibly small. 


CURRENT TRANSFORMERS 


Generally speaking, modern current transformers of the best 
design, under favorable conditions of use, show quite satisfac- 
tory ratio curves for secondary currents down to 10 per cent 
of rated current. Similarly, the angle by which the secondary 
current differs from the ideal 180-deg. relation with the primary 
current is small over a quite wide range, but may still introduce 
serious errors at low loads. 

Current transformers of special design, such as those intended 
for portable use, or in other cases where special efforts are made 
to reduce the weight of the transformer, generally have ratio 
and phase angle characteristics which render them quite un- 
suitable for use in connection with watt-hour meters. 

Ratio. Where current transformer ratios have the same 
value from full secondary load to a small secondary load such 
as 5 or 10 per cent, the meter accuracy is not affected, since 
this ratio, whatever its value, is accounted for in the calibrating 
constant of the meter. 

Where the ratio curve bends upward at low loads, or in the 
occasional cases where it bends downward, as shown in Fig. 1, 
the meter accuracy is affected if some compensation is not 
provided. 

It is possible to compensate within somewhat narrow limits 
for this variation in ratio, by utilizing the light load adjustment 
of the meter; that is, for the commonest case (ratio increasing 
with decreasing current) causing the meter to run slightly fast 
at light load, to compensate for the increase in ratio, which tends 
to make the meter under-record. 

The obvious objection to this procedure is that it may cause 


1912] MAXWELL: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1547 


the meter to creep. A number of experiments made on many 
different types of induction watt-hour meters indicated that 
such over-compensation might be carried out without any tend- 
ency toward creeping, up to amounts corresponding to 101 to 
103 per cent of ‘‘ normal ”’ speed, and at 5 per cent load. Some 
results of such tests are shown in Fig. 2. It is true that these 
tests refer to rated voltages and frequency, but since the per- 
missible range of compensation seems to be considerably greater 
than that required to correct for transformer ratio errors such 
as those shown in Figs. 2 and 3, it is possible that this method 
of compensation may be applied without disturbing the stability 
of the meter with respect to creeping. In cases where the trans- 
former ratio curve bends downward at low load, it is of course 
very easy to adjust the meter to accommodate the ratio. 


elf Q 
E E 
& 102 & 
pat | al 
2101 eae = 
3 5 
2100 2 
6 5 
- 99 b 
= Zz 
3 98 } 3 
c [4 
pe Ses = a 

0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 

PER CENT SECONDARY CURRENT PER CENT SECONDARY CURRENT 
Fic. 1—RATIO CURVES OF CUR- Fic. 2—EFFECT OF LOADING 
RENT ‘TRANSFORMERS, ALL WITH CURRENT SCORER. 
A—Watt-hour meter series coil only. 
MINIMUM SECONDARY Loap. B—A plus ammeter and relay coil (about 


60 per cent of rated volt-amperes.) 


Another limitation of this method lies in the fact that trans- 
former ratio curves are not always of the same form as the ac- 
curacy curve of the meter, and in this case, of course, complete 
compensation cannot be obtained. However, the most satis- 
factory current transformers have, when lightly loaded, ratio 
‘curves of the form shown by curve A in Fig. 3. The form of 
this curve reasonably approximates the form of the meter 
curves shown in Fig. 2. Curve B in Fig. 3, which is fairly 
typical of the change produced by loading the transformer, is 
of a form unsuitable for compensation. This indicates the 
desirability of restricting the load upon the secondary of the 
current transformer to a minimum, preferably the meter series 

— coil and short leads only. 

Phase Angle. Phase angle cannot be compensated by anv 

means which will operate automatically. Since the meter 


PER CENT ACCURACY 


& 


1548 MAXWELL: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


torque depends upon E I cos (9 + ) where ¢ is the transformer 
phase angle, the error will vary with the line power-factor, and 
since the transformer phase angle will vary with the current 
the error will also vary with the line current. 

A few curves showing typical phase angle characteristics 
of modern current transformers of various types are given 
in Fig. 4. Fig. 5 shows the errors of measurement produced 
for various values of transformer phase angle, for different 
line power factors. These curves are computed for the con- 
dition where the secondary current leads the primary current 
in phase. 

From Figs. 4 and 5 it will be seen that for ordinary commercial 
range of line power factors, the errors produced by transformer 


Wo 


LEAD | 


to 


5 


PHASS ANGLE 
o 


a = 


o 20 40 60 380 100 


PER CENT LOAD 0 20 40 60 80 100 
RATED VOLTAGE AND FREQUENCY PER CENT SECONDARY CURRENT 
Fic. 3—WatTt-HoUR METER Fic. 4—PuHasE ANGLE, CuR- 
OVER-COMPENSATED BY MEANS RENT TRANSFORMERS, ALL WITH 
or Lignut Loap ADJUSTMENT. MINIMUM SECONDARY LOAD. 


phase angle are comparatively small with transformers of good 
design. Where great accuracy is required, or where loads having 
low power factor are to be measured, errors due to this cause 
become troublesome. Apparently the remedy for this (besides 
selecting transformers having minimum phase angle) is to load 
the transformer as little as possible. Reactance may be added 
in the secondary ci1cuit, to correct for phase angle, but only at 
the expense of the ratio. The writer’s experience has been that 
with several different types, the ratio errors have increased 
faster than the phase angle errors diminished, and the former 
finally became unmanageable. On the whole, it seems best 
to reduce phase angle as much as possible, by reducing the load 
upon the transformer. 

A common difficulty, which constitutes another reason for 


} 
/ 


1912] MAXWELL: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1549 


supplying watt-hour meters from separate transformers, lies 
in the practise of assigning over-size transformers for relay 
work. This over-size assignment is desirable, or necessary, 
for the relay, since the only function of the latter is to operate 
at overloads generally much greater than the normal load of 
the circuit, and it is important that the actual secondary current 
in the relay windings shall not attain excessive values. The 
result, however, where a meter is in series with the relay, is 
that the meter may actually be assigned at from one-half to 
two-thirds of its rated current and load; at very low loads 
on the circuit, corresponding to 5 or 10 per cent of rated 


6 ata ees i 
H 3° & 
. 2° 
i= 4 3 
2 1 
os | 30/ 
pa sf 
fe : 15 
ae [ 
wi 0 Hi 
a 
wi ce i 
bo 15° : 
= raw ee 
30 
e ‘aa | Jl 
54 i ¢ | mae 
bat 2 | : 
D BI ig a 


-60 .50 : é .60 40 20 
LEAD LINE POWER FACTOR LAG 


Fic. 5—Error PRopUCED BY TRANSFORMER PHASE ANGLE, FOR 


Various LinE Power Factors, SINGLE-PHASE OR POLYPHASE WATT- 
HOUR METERS. 


circuit full load, the meter may actually be operating at 2 to 
7 per cent of its rating, with all the attendant exaggeration of 
ratio, phase angle and meter errors. 

A question of design arises in connection with transformers 
for use in power supply systems of great magnitude. Here 
it has been found that transformers of small primary capacity 
are unable to withstand the enormous mechanical forces pro- 
- duced on short circuit, and under these conditions they have 
been destroyed. This condition has called for the development 
of special types of transformers, and in these the necessity for 
preserving the desirable ratio and phase angle characteristics 
of normal designs results in a great increase in weight. 


1550 MAXWELL: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


In conclusion, it may be said that the best commercial types 
of current and potential transformers show characteristics 
which make them satisfactory for service in connection with 
watt-hour meters, under ordinary conditions of use. It appears 
further that some sources of error may be at least partially com- 
pensated, and that the more serious errors may be largely 
avoided by loading transformers only with the meter which they 
supply. It is also true that very serious errors may be pro- 
duced by the use of transformers having poor ratio and phase 
angle characteristics, and that such transformers should there- 
fore not be used for energy measurements, however satisfactory 
they may be for less exacting service, such as the operation of 
trip coils or relays 


A paper presented at the 29th Annuat Conzren- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


WHEATSTONE BRIDGE-ROTATING STANDARD 
METHOD OF TESTING LARGE CAPACITY 
WATT-HOUR METERS 


BY C. H. INGALLS AND J. W. COWLES 


There are two general classes of large capacity watt-hour 
meters, alternating-currént and direct-current. The meters 
used for alternating current are almost invariably of the induc- 
tion type, generally five-ampere meters used in conjunction with 
current transformers, or both current and potential trans- 
formers. A facile and accurate method of testing these meters 
is by means of an induction type of rotating standard which by 
means of standard instrument transformers may be made 
available for testing any alternating-current meter of any ca- 
pacity, with a precision well within commercial limits. 

Where large capacity direct-current meters are to be tested, 
however, the problem is somewhat more difficult. The method 
usually chosen is the indicating instrument-stop-watch method, 
by which method the energy delivered to the meter under test 
is measured by indicating instruments (voltmeter, millivolt- 
meter and shunt) and the speed of the meter determined by a 
stop-watch. Where the load is constant, this method is satis- 
factory, but for power circuits similar to street railways, where 
there are rapid fluctuations of considerable magnitude, this 
method is not desirable. 

The rotating standards have many advantages when used on 
loads of this character, but unfortunately they are not made 
commercially of a capacity exceeding 150 amperes and, unlike 
millivoltmeters, it is not advisable to use them directly with 
shunts, with the possible exception of the mercury flotation type 


of standard. 
1551 


1552 INGALLS AND COWLES: [June 28 


In order.to adapt the rotating standard to the testing of meters 
of 1000 or 2000 amperes capacity a differential galvanometer 
was devised by Prof. F. A. Laws, of the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, which was so arranged that a standard of 
moderate capacity could be used. It consisted essentially of 
two current coils wound in opposition, having between them a 
pivoted coil of fine wire. The apparatus and connections are 
shown diagrammatically in Fig. 1. The coil a is of few turns 
(actually a straight copper bar) but of sufficient capacity to 
carry the full line current. Coil 6 has the same current capacity 
as the rotating standard and with such a number of turns that 
by adjusting the resistance d the effect of the current in 6b will 
counterbalance the effect of the current in a on the coil c. 

With this condition of balance, —a— 
which is indicated by the pointer g@/ 
e, the ratio of the two currents 
Ta 1 Ia + Ib 

oe a 
stant, and the rotating standard 
will measure a definite per- 
centage of the total energy 
delivered to the meter under 
test. This ratio and percentage 
are determined in the laboratory 
by actual measurements. The 
differential galvanometer as de- 
scribed above is subject to 
the influence of external fields, 
and a modification of this method was devised by the writer, 
based on the general principle of a Wheatstone bridge. The 
arrangement of the resistances and the rotating standard is shown 
diagrammatically in Fig. 2, where a, b, and c are fixed resistances 
forming three arms of the bridge, the rotating standard and the 
adjustable resistances d and e forming the fourth arm. When 
the potential differences between the terminals of the two resist- 
ances a and b are the same (and since they have one terminal 
in common, this is indicated by the galvanometer reading zero), 
the current in a is to the current in 6 as the resistance of b is to 
the resistance of a, or 


, iS a con- 


Fic. 1 


Ia _ Rb Ia+Ib.. Ra+Rb 


Ibcm Rad es 1b: See 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1553 


Ia + Ib 

THH0« 
long as the galvanometer indicates a zero reading. Ja + Ib 
is the current measured by the meter under test and Jd is the 
current measured by the rotating standard, therefore the rota- 
ting standard measures a certain definite percentage of the cur- 
rent supplied to the service meter. This percentage may be 
computed from known values of Ra and Rd or preferably by 
actually measuring the values of Ja and Jb. The condition of 
balance between a and 0 is obtained by adjusting the resistances 
d and e, d being a strip of resistance metal used for coarse adjust- 
ments and e a carbon compression rheostat used for the fine 
adjustment. The three resistances a, b, and c are preferably made 


Ra and Rb are constant, therefore is a constant as 


CARBON COMPRESSION 


pW ANA Sg eae . 
ADJUSTABLE RES / RHEOSTAT © 


of manganin in the same form as instrument shunts, as manganin 
has a negligible temperature coefficient and low thermal effect. 
a and c should be of a current capacity sufficient to carry the 
full line current and b approximately 40 to 50 amperes. The 
full load drop in potential is 100 millivolts each for a and 6 and 400 
millivolts for c. Any change in the resistance of the rotating 
standard due to the temperature coefficient of the copper-current 
windings or change in the contact resistance is readily compen- 
sated for by the rheostat e, but in practise it is found that after 
the preliminary adjustment very little further change is required. 
It is quite necessary for accurate work, however, to use materials 
that have very small thermoelectric effect upon each other, as 


1554 INGALLS AND COWLES: [June 28 


in the first apparatus made up for trial more trouble was expe- 
rienced from this source than any other. By using manganin 
for the resistances no difficulty from this source will be expe- 
rienced. 


ROTATING STANDARD 


ADS USTABLE | ROT. STD. 
RES. —— 


k caf FROM METER 


© NT- 
FIXED RESISTANCE \ | 
(©) ee 1000 hoo | fo 
E a Re 
ane 3) 
E 


ARRANGEMENT OF SHUNTS 
AND RESISTANCES FOR TESTING 
1000 AMPERE METERS 


fe} 
Oo 
° 
Oo 


ie) 
O° 
O° 
oO 
O° 
oO 
° 
fe) 


Fic. 4 


FROM METER 


ARRANGEMENT OF SHUNTS 
AND RESISTANCES FOR TESTING 
2000 AMPERE METERS 


GALVANOMETER 


ROT. STD 


Fig. 3 shows the arrangement of the resistances for testing 
both 1000-ampere and 2000-ampere meters, Fig. 4 the con- 
nections for testing 1000-ampere meters and Fig. 5 the con- 
nections for 2000-ampere meters. Fig. 6 is a reproduction of a 


PLATE LXXxXill 
A. I, E. E. 
VOL. XXXi, 1912 


[INGALLS AND COWLES] 


Fic. 6 [INGALLS AND COWLES] 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEAS UREMENTS 1555 


photograph of the entire equipment, except the chest used for 
transporting the resistances and cables. This chest is approxi- 
mately 32 by 19 by 14 inches (81 by 48 by 35 cm.). 

In using the direct-current rotating standard care should be 
exercised to guard against the influence of external fields, and 
since this apparatus is designed for use in places where large 
currents are involved, precaution should be taken either to 
take two series of readings, one series to be with both the current 
and potential leads of the rotating standard reversed, or to 
change bodily the position of the standard 180 deg. and take a 
series of readings in both azimuths. In either case the average 
of the two series should be used. 

Following are the results of tests on various 550-volt meters 
supplying street railways. In some instances the current varied 
from zero to the full capacity of the service meter during the 
test. 


TEST NO. 1—2000-AMPERE, 550-VOLT TWO-WIRE METER 


Position of Revs. of Average ) Correct Per cent of accuracy 
standard standard | revolutions | of service meter 


A 0 deg. 23.42 | 


23.46 23.42 | 24.18 103.2 


B 90 deg. 23.41 


23.52 23.45 24,18 103.1 


(S 180 deg. 24.20 


bo 
> 
_ 
a 


24.02 24.07 24.18 99.5 


D 270 deg. 24.17 


Pe TES NE VA Og, Braeacifchs ee epsesocets) 9.8 ein prec lar alle bie ei shee oehes es 101.35 
DSS CT MEME SSL 1B): Sse o BERSIB OO Oe ACO OOOO CC abe 20s aa 101.45 
ESSE GL IN USA ONT Wa FAD) 8 2 SCRE MRE cc cee ach ORS ka te ace 101.4 


1556 INGALLS AND COWLES: [June 28 


TEST NO. 2—600-AMPERE, 550-VOLT TWO-WIRE METER 
Very FiuctuatinG Loap ON THIS METER. 


Position of Revs. of Average Correct Per cent of accuracy | 
standard standard revolutions of service meter 


A 0 deg. 10.81 


10.79 10.87 11.48 105.6 


B 90 deg. 11.45 


11.39 11.42 11.48 100.6 


Cc 180 deg. 11.79 


11.76 11.77 11.48 | 97.6 


D 270 deg. 11.31 


hi Be DP a Diet oe ees aoe e os ce Se oe ee eters 101.30 
ys “ A,B, C and D 


TEST NO. 3—2000-AMPERE, 550-VOLT TWO-WIRE METER 


| 


Position of Revs. of Average Correct Per cent of accuracy, 
standard standard revolutions | of service meter 
| 


A 0 deg. 19.52 


19.59 19,41 19.36 99.8 


B 90 deg. 19.46 


19.75 19.59 19.36 98.8 


Cc 180 deg. 20.13 | 


20.04 19.97 19.36 97.0 


D 270 deg. 19.71 


19.50 19.57 19.36 99.0 


Averaze-Gt A and) Gaiceiots «wie mi s/o) eteue ete ianatal sUrefoeeayaameneyals 98.4 
. BE ard Die asec 0/56 ocseei pista rehvhb eats onan une omaren aierstaas 98.9 
¢ €X AS BC rand iD yc. egceincn tine here on ana etanten 98.65 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 


1557 


TEST NO. 4—1200-AMPERE, 550-VOLT TWO-WIRE METER 


Position of 
standard 


Revs. of 
standard 


Average 


Correct 
revolutions 


Per cent of accuracy 
of service meter 


A 0 deg. 


B 90 deg. 


CG 180 deg. 


D 270 deg. 


. “Band D 


14.71 
14.60 
14.74 
14.62 


14.51 
14.63 
14.62 
14.65 


13.88 
13.74 
13.74 
13.73 


13.82 
13.94 
13.80 
13.85 


13.77 


14.50 


14.50 


14.50 


99.0 


99.2 


e ANS, Cc, and 'D 


1558 ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


Discussion ON ‘‘ ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION OF ELECTRICAL 

MEASUREMENTS ” (BLIss), 

‘“ METERING LARGE Drrect-CuURRENT INSTALLATIONS M 
(MAGALHAES), 

‘MEASUREMENT OF ENERGY WITH INSTRUMENT TRANS- 
FORMERS ” (MAXWELL), 

‘ WHEATSTONE BRIDGE—ROTATING STANDARD MeTHOD OF - 
Trstinc LARGE Capacity Watr-Hour Meters ” (INGALLS 
AND Cow Les), Boston, Mass., JUNE 28, 1912. 


William J. Mowbray: It is somewhat presumptuous for me to 
congratulate Mr. Ingalls on this paper, but I will presume to 
do so, because I think that I can elaim being the originator in 
the United States of the rotative watt-hour test meter. 
Seven years ago, in 1905, the chairman of this meeting, Mr. 
Robinson, presented a paper entitled The Oscillograph and 
Its Use at a meeting of the Institute held in New York 
City, and at that same meeting I had the honor of present- 
ing a paper which disclosed for the first time the method of 
testing watt-hour meters with a rotative watt-hour test meter 
having several current and potential windings. The paper was 
entitled Maintenance of Meters, and brought in the rotative 
test meter. At that time this method of testing service meters 
was not generally used at all, having just been started in Brooklyn 
and New York. Boston was then using a standard resistance, a 
voltmeter and astop watch. But I see that Boston has now fallen 
into line, and is not only using the rotative watt-hour test meter, 
but has added to the method of using it a degree of refinement 
that is characteristic of Boston. I congratulate Mr. Ingalls on 
this method, which is very clever and just the thing for testing 
large meters on fluctuating loads. 

F. P. Cox: I have been familiar for some little time with the 
work that Mr. Ingalls has been doing with this method of testing. 
I do not feel I could pass the paper without saying it is a good 
and useful method. 

Referring to Mr. Magalhaes’s paper, and method 3, it seems to 
me the object of meters is to get a record of the energy used, 
and if this is the most accurate, as it certainly is, it is worth the 
money the extra meters cost. 

As to getting a totalizing dial, this is quite a problem. I have 
done a little work on it in the past, by magnetic contact from 
different meters, to record the sum of the impulses, but the 
trouble in that case is that sometimes many impulses come in at 
once from the different meters and they must all be recorded. 
To do that, you find it necessary to record on the totaling dial 
one impulse, and then the others will have to wait and stand 
there until they get a turn to record; it can be done and has 
been done, but the device is rather expensive and rather com- 
plicated, and if you should add this to the already large expense 
of the separate meters, I am afraid the man who is paying the 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1559 


bills would object. But the separate meters and adapting the 
meter to the circuit, is the right way to do it, and if the job is 
worth doing at all, it is worth doing right. 

In regard to the shunt meter, that has possibilities; it also 
has its troubles. I do not know how Mr. Magalhaes proposes 
to connect these things so’ as to do away with the troubles of 
the division, because if you are using the shunt meter as_ the 
total carrying meter, you still have the problem of one large 
meter against several small meters, and you have additional 
things to look after in regard to contacts. When you are shunting 
five or ten amperes, you have the larger losses in the higher 
capacity meters, because you would have the drop which would 
come from the low capacity. If these temperature effects and 
loads come in, while you would get a system which would be 
more flexible, I doubt very much if it would add to the accuracy 
of the meter. It has not been overlooked or forgotten, but it has 
troubles. We cannot say they never will be worked out, but I 
have not. yet seen anything that is entirely satisfactory. 

J. R. Craighead: First, with reference to Electrical Trans- 
mission of Electrical Measurements. There has been a con- 
stantly increasing call for various kinds of measurements which 
are to be recorded at a considerable distance from the place 
where the actual measurement is made, and it seems to me this 
paper shows a method of doing this in a very satisfactory way 
with a certain class of instruments. However, there is an 
alternative way of doing the same thing, namely, getting the 
measurement at the point where you want to have it, which 
consists in designing a special type of current transformer, in 
which the secondary current shall be reduced, for instance, to 
0.5 ampere, instead of 5 amperes. It is perfectly practicable to 
make a current transformer with 0.5-ampere secondary of 
practically the same qualities as the 5-ampere secondary. 

It is also perfectly practicable to make an instrument employ- 
ing most of the standard types, of 0.5-ampere capacity, instead 
of 5 amperes capacity. The load of this instrument on the cur- 
rent transformer is about the same fraction of the capacity of 
the transformer in one case as in the other. This leaves the same 
difference, which may be used up in the line drop. If we take an 
ordinary current transformer, of 5 amperes capacity, we are 
limited by considerations of load to a small line drop, so that 
the practicable distance with the usual size of wire is only a 
few hundred feet if satisfactory accuracy is to be secured. 
By cutting the secondary down to 0.5 ampere, we multiply the 
length of the line using the same wire, and consequently the 
distance to which we can transmit over that wire, by 100, in 
some cases running to 10, 15, 20, or even 40 miles, the size of 
wire necessarily increasing with the length of the transmission. 
There is one difficulty in connection with this method of 
building current transformers which ought to be considered, and 
that is, that the secondary has naturally a very much larger 
number of turns than the standard current transformers, and 


1560 ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


in consequence, if the secondary is accidentally open-circuited, 
the voltage on the secondary will be ten times larger than on the 
corresponding 5-ampere secondary. This implies rather special 
care in insulating the secondary to avoid damage. 

As far as the potential transformers are concerned, for ordinary 
purposes, the line drop may be considéred as part of the resistance 
of the instrument, and the ordinary potential transformer will 
therefore answer in many cases. For extreme cases, a higher 
voltage secondary may be used. 

In regard to the paper on Measurement of Energy with 
Instrument Transformers, I want to say one or two things. 
One thing, particularly, is in regard to the use of the light-load 
adjustment for compensation. That has been argued a number 
of times, and I do not think we can say very much that is new. 
If we are going to cut down the safety against creeping by 
calibrating the meter to run fast on low load, we are going to 
increase the percentage of meters which actually do creep. It 
does not mean that the meter will necessarily creep because that 
is done to it, but simply means that out of a large number that 
are so calibrated, the number of meters that would creep is 
increased, and the result is that this method should not be used 
where a large number of meters are to be without examination 
for long periods. If the meter can be inspected frequently, as is 
usually the case where high accuracy is desirable, then this 
method of correction may sometimes be used with good results. 

F. V. Magalhaes: I wish to emphasize the value of the 
apparatus Mr. Ingalls has developed. It is a combination of 
instruments and apparatus which are commonly used and 
owned by most of the large operating companies. He obtains 
an instrument which will properly check the watt-hour meters 
on fluctuating service loads. Stating the point in another way, 
he has produced an instrument by using apparatus which is at 
present developed and in use, and does not involve the design 
or development of new instruments. It is merely a combination 
of existing apparatus. 

In connection with Mr. Maxwell’s paper, the errors in perform- 
ance of meters used with well-designed current transformers 
are small. It must be borne in mind also in analyzing these 
errors with a view to reducing them that with the present knowl- 
edge of current transformer design and performance any appreci- 
able reduction in these errors is obtained only at a practically 
prohibitive increase in the physical dimensions of the trans- 
formers. 

W.H. Pratt: Mr. Magalhaes’s paper brings out a point which 
I wish to emphasize, and that is, in using current transformers 
for meters, the best current transformers should be selected. 
Meters ordinarily are expected to work over a very long range, 
in fact, I think that the meter has to take care of a longer range 
of observation, you might say, than almost any other piece of 


apparatus which is used in ordinary work. There is a vast dif- 
. 


1912} DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1561 


ference between the good qualities of the current transformers 
that are available on the market, and by selecting those that have 
the best characteristics you have almost no trouble. Slight 
errors in ratio can be taken care of in the calibration of the meter, 
and likewise the phase angle can be taken care of by an adjust- 
ment of the lag angle of the meter, if limiting accuracy is required. 

In Mr. Craighead’s discussion, I think he undoubtedly has 
in mind current transformers which have also come under my 
own observation, which depart so far from ideal accuracy that 
correction would be unsafe. 

L. T. Robinson: I may interpolate a comment here that 
will perhaps straighten out things. The papers of Mr. Maxwell 
and Mr. Magalhaes and the comments of Mr. Craighead and 
Mr. Pratt, are largely considerations of special cases that have 
come up. You must not read into the papers that all these 
things apply to all the work which we have to do ordinarily. 
If you give close attention to what the author says all the way 
through, it has been plainly brought out that for ordinary 
service and in general the present conditions are fairly satis- 
factory. 

T. W. Varley: Mr. Ingalls pointed out in the sketch the 
bridge method of keeping track of the variation of temperature 
in the meter tested. He says that the drop in each zone is practi- 
cally 400 millivolts. I would like him to explain how he adjusts 
these loads. 

C. H. Ingalls: The resistances may be measured by a bridge, 
and from the ratio of the two resistances, the ratio of the current 
with a balance on the voltmeter, can be readily determined. 
It is preferable, however, to use two ammeters and then, by 
adjusting the resistances, get the galvanometer to read zero, 
and then take the ratio of these currents. Repeated tests have 
shown that the ratio remains very constant. There is another 
method. If the two shunts are not electrically connected in a 
very permanent manner, of course the instrument will get out of 
calibration. In order to get around that difficulty, if you want to 
use two ordinary shunts, that are not specially made for the 
purpose, by using a differential millivoltmeter you can obtain 
the zero reading. 

T. W. Varley: Would it not be better to use a double bridge? 

C. H. Ingalls: A differential voltmeter that is suitable for 
that purpose is on the market, I believe. 

T. W. Varley: Would it not be better to use a Thomson 
double bridge? That is an easy way of using it. 

C. H. Ingalls: Yes, but this method was also devised by 
Prof. Laws in his laboratory, but never used outside commercially. 

Albert Ganz: If you have the two ammeters, why do you 
need to know the resistances of the shunt? 

C. H. Ingalls: You do not, in that case. Three ammeters 
may be used for measuring resistances, or you can use two 


ammeters. 


1562 ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS‘ [June 28 


Alexander Maxwell: I think that reference to my paper will 
take care of most of the comments made upon it. It is there 
stated that for all ordinary cases, commercial transformers are 
quite satisfactory. Further than this, almost all other cases can 
be solved by lightly loading the transformers. The difficulties 
referred to generally occur where extra load is imposed upoa the 
transformers, such as additional indicating meters, or relay 
coils. The manipulation of the meter light-load adjustment is 
altogether a last resort, which, I suppose, would only be employed 
very rarely. For all ordinary cases of reasonable loading com-. 
mercial transformers are quite satisfactory. 

Paul MacGahan: I agree with Mr. Maxwellas to the desira- 
bility of using separate transformers for relays and for watt-hour 
meters. There is a strong tendency on the part of some switch- 
board builders to connect too many devices to the series trans- 
formers so as to economize in cost or space. This practise has 
been very hard to discourage, as the evil effects were not thor- 
oughly understood by operating companies. It has been the 
invariable practise of one large company building switchboards 
to insist on separate series transformers for relays and for watt- 
meters, and nothing else in series with watt-hour meters when 
intended to be used for accounting purposes. 

An ammeter of low internal drop, and possibly a power 
factor meter, may be also connected in if the watt-hour meter is 
merely used for operating purposes, and may also be used in 
connection with an indicating watt-meter, as the latter does not 
require the light-load accuracy of the watt-hour meter. 

Although large enough series transformers might be built to 
take care satisfactorily of a watt-hour meter and several other 
instruments, this would be inadvisable, as two separate smaller 
transformers would be cheaper. Series transformers with two 
separate secondary coils on separate cores have been used, one 
secondary operating the relays and the other the watt-hour 
meters. 

A convenient grouping of instruments on two sets of trans- 
formers would be as follows: 

One set operating relays, ammeters and power factor meters. 
One set operating wattmeters. 

Elmer L. Kyle: Independent of the fact that shunted type 
watt-hour meters may be used in future installations of large 
capacity meters, there are a comparatively large number of 
the series type still being built and many are in use at the 
present time. The testing of the present type is rather awkward 
and in many cases inaccurate, especially in testing those of 
extremely large capacity. In the latter case it is practically 
impossible to test them except by the use of switchboard -instru- 
ments. 

The method devised by the authors of the paper is funda- 
mentally simple in principle, easily manipulated, and the device 
is conveniently transported, making it possible more readily and 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1563 


more frequently to test and maintain the accuracy of the large 
capacity meters. 

The importance of this class of testing may not be fully 
appreciated but the increasing demand for large loads makes it 
quite a matter of importance to electric lighting and power 
companies. 

I might also add that although certain types of shunted 
meters possess the redeeming feature of testing in service with a 
comparatively low current, the method outlined by Mr. Ingalls 
and Mr. Cowles is much more desirable since it possesses many 
of the ideal features in meter testing. 

John Gilmartin: It frequently happens that the diversity 
factor of the natural component parts of an installation is 
large enough to permit of a much smaller kilowatt capacity of 
meters to be installed if the total load is metered at one point 
than if method No. 3, as described by Mr. Magalhaes, were 
followed. 

The light and full load accuracy of registration will be higher 
on the main meter or meters than on the sum of the individual 
meters. 

For example, in an installation large enough to come under the 
heading of this paper, it is unlikely that janitor work, etc., would 
be performed only on one floor or in one building at the same 
time. 

The usual result would be that instead of the individual meters 
working at favorable loads, they would each operate at a com- 
paratively small load, and*it is probable that if main meters had 
been selected with proper consideration of the diversity factor 
they would operate at a more favorable point on the accuracy 
curve than the individual meters. 

The same reasoning holds for large installations having a 
number of motors, the diversity factor of which is frequently 
large. 

Method No. 3, as pointed out in the paper, is very well adapted 
to metering separate converters or, as was shown in a recent 
case that the writer investigated, to the metering of separate 
generators in a power station. 

It is the usual practise to operate generating units up to at 
least half-load rating, thus giving a very favorable condition for 
high meter accuracy, while on the other hand, if meters are 
installed in the station bus they will operate at small loads a 
considerable part of each twenty-four hours, because the load 
curve of the meters will follow the station load curve. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


INDUCTION TYPE INDICATING INSTRUMENTS 


BY PAUL MAC GAHAN 


The modern switchboard, controlling as it does large amounts 
of power, and often situated where space is at a premium, 
demands a different type of switchboard instrument from that to 
be found on older switchboards. Moreover, modern generating 
equipments, generally turbine-driven, have resulted in a readjust- 
ment of the comparative importance of the different kinds of 
electrical errors to which indicating meters are subject. For 
example, the frequency of a modern system does not usually 
vary more than one or two cycles from the normal speed, and 
therefore frequency characteristics are less important, whereas 
formerly this was one of the great sources of error. Again, 
due to operation with larger currents or higher potentials, the 
external magnetic or electrostatic field effects are greatly in- 
creased. 

The tendency of the designer should now be toward prin- 
ciples of operation or construction that are rot greatly influenced 
by external fields instead of those free from frequency errors. 
In addition to this, the questions of compactness, readability, 
aperiodicity, ruggedness, and simplicity are equal in import- 
ance to accuracy. Ordinarily the operator does not hesitate 
to repair or readjust a piece of electrical machinery, but due to 
the fact that early meters comprised “ feather-weight ’? move- 
ments, delicate wires, pointers, and connections, the operators 
have developed a superstitious dread of breaking “‘ seals’ and 
making readjustments. The modern meters should be sufh- 
ciently rugged and simple to be readily handled by an operating 
company’s ‘‘ meter man.” 

1565 


1566 MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


Various PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION 


For alternating currents the three principles of operation 
found in the best instruments today are as follows: 

Moving Iron Electromagnetic Type. Good initial accuracy of 
calibration. Approximate freedom from frequency and tem- 
perature errors. Ratio of torque to weight—low. Some makes 
too delicate. Easy to repair. Subject to both alternating- 
current and direct-current external fields unless heavily shielded. 
Short scale length. 

Moving Coil Electrodynamometey Type. Highest in initial 
accuracy of calibration and freedom from errors due to frequency 
and temperature. Ratio of torque to weight—low. Delicate. 
Difficult to repair. Subject to external fields of same frequency 
unless heavily shielded by internal laminated iron shields. Short 
scale length. 

Induction Type. Good initial and continued accuracy. Ratio 
of torque to weight—very high. Rugged and simple movements. 
Easy to repair. Extremely long scales and high readability. 
Frequency errors greater than in moving coil or moving iron 
types. External field errors due only to fields of same frequency, 
in certain directions, and are slight. 

Other principles have been from time to time employed, 
but the race has now narrowed down to the above three types. 

The fundamental or distinctive advantage of induction in- 
struments for switchboard use is their unequalled scale length. 
It should be borne in mind that the moving coil or moving iron 
meters, as now manufactured, evidently represent very nearly 
the highest state of development to which these principles can 
be brought, whereas in the case of the newer induction principle, 
much can be expected in the future in the way of greater refine- 
ments. It is the writer’s opinion that the induction principle 
will eventually supersede the other types for switchboard work, 
for the same reasons that this principle has superseded all others 
in the case of a-c. watt-hour meters. 


ACCURACY 


Induction type instruments are especially free from external 
field influences. Nor are they as deficient in frequency error 
characteristics as is often assumed. Induction type ammeters 
and voltmeters having an error of less than 1/20 per cent per 
cycle are now obtainable, so the error due to this cause in a 
modern plant would not be noticeable. 


1912) MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1567 


Moving iron and moving coil instruments, although prac- 
tically free from frequency and temperature errors when properly 
designed, are extremely subject to external field effects, and the 
best practise is to insert heavy shields of iron within the thin iron 
cases to overcome this. Without such shields the thin iron 
cases quickly get saturated by an external field, after which the 
further shielding effect ceases. Their light torque also causes 
them to be very susceptible to external electrostatic effects 
which cause the pointer to be attracted to the glass or case, 
introducing troublesome errors. It should be noted that moving 
coil meters have an advantage over moving iron types in being 
influenced only by external magnetic fields of the same frequency ; 
whereas moving iron meters are affected by both alternating 
and direct stray fields. 

Temperature errors in instruments are important, as varia- 
tions in the temperature of switchboards may be considerable. 
Alternating-current instruments of either induction, moving 
coil, or moving iron construction are readily obtainable whose 
temperature errors are within satisfactory limits. Self-heating 
errors due to heat liberated in the meters themselves should 
be carefully avoided, and are not found in properly designed 
meters. 

The mechanical sources of error are probably of greater im- 
portance than purely electrical ones in switchboard instruments, 
as the causes which produce them also reduce the life of the de- 
vice and greatly increase the errors with usage and time. In- 
struments having the highest ratio of torque to weight of move- 
ment will have the greatest accuracy and longest life if equiva- 
lent in other respects, and if the movement is not sufficiently 
heavy to damage the jewels. Experience and tests have 
shown that 15 grams maximum is a safe limit for horizontal 
shafts in ““V” sapphire jewels, and that a ratio of torque to 
weight of 0.15 is a satisfactory minimum, whgn torque is expressed 
in centimeter-grams, and weight in grams, in the case of switch- 
board meters. The disadvantages of very light movements, 
even if the torque ratio be high, is that the slightest mechanical 
strain due to overload, or even precipitation of moisture on the 
pointer, will throw the movement out of balance; thus such 
meters must necessarily be provided with external means for 
zero adjustment. The exceedingly delicate threaded rods, screws, 
and other parts visible only under a glass, render such meters 
difficult to repair outside the factory. 


1568 MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


CoMPACTNESS 


A form of construction considered desirable for these induction 
meters consists of a round pattern 7-in. diameter case with a glass 
front. Thescale length is 143 in., subtending an arc of 300 deg. 
This gives the maximum possible compactness and readability. 
A compact arrangement of large switchboard equipment is con- 
sidered important on account of the cost of space (particularly 
in large cities), reduced attendance, location in operating galleries, 
reduced cost of marble or busbars, and visibility of all instru- 


<—1-FT.8-1N.—>! 


<A-FRS8-IN— >) | 


THREE 7 IN- 


ROUND TYPE METER THREE HORIZONTAL 


THREE HORIZONTAL 
EDGEWISE METERS “OGEWISE METERS 


THREE 7 IN. 
THREE 9 IN. ; 
RORRAUTC EET EAR ROUND TYPE METERS 
THREE VERTICAL 
EDGEWISE METERS 
(WIDE TYPE) 
THREE 9 IN. cag 
ROUND TYPE METERS THREE VERTICAL 
EDGEWISE METERS 
(NARROW TYPE) 


SIX 9 IN. SIX 7 IN 
ROUND TYPE METERS ROUND TYPE METERS) 


—_—2-FT.8-IN._— 

SIX VERTICAL 

EDGEWISE METERS 
(Wide TYPE) 


SIX VERTICAL EDGEWISE METERS 
(NARROW TYPE) 


S'tX HORIZONTAL 
EOGEWISE METERS 


Fic. 1—DIAGRAM SHOWING COMPARATIVE AREAS REQUIRED BY VARIOUS 
Types OF METERS ON SWITCHBOARD PANELS. 


ments from point of operation. These features are of such 
importance that it is not unusual to find that the meters have 
been made to suffer in consequence by a reduction in scale length, 
as in previous types of 7-in. meters, or by the use of rectangular 
cases with curved glass, as in vertical or horizontal edgewise 
meters. 

The principal types of switchboard indicating meters are given 
in Table I, the area occupicd on the marble by the circumscrib- 
ing rectangle being tabulated compared to the scale length. 
To facilitate comparisons a schematic layout of various panels 


1912] MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1569 


is shown in Fig. 1, using 7-in. and 9-in. round pattern, and edge- 
wise m-ters. The limitations of round type 7 in. meters have 
heretofore been short scale length, and the fact that complete 
lines including wattmeters, frequency, power factor meters, and 
synchroscopes, as well as d-c. and a-c. ammeters and voltmeters, 
have not been available. The induction principle applied to 
the 7-in. ammeter, voltmeter and wattmeter has apparently 
placed this 7-in. construction on an entirely new basis, the scale 
length being equal or greater than in any previously designed 
9-in. meter. 


TABLE I 

_ COMPARISON OF SCALE LENGTHS AND SURFACE COVERED 
‘ages Type of meter _ av _ Area marble __ Scale length 
Round pattern 73 in. diameter 58 sq. in. 5 to 143 in. according to make 

. «OF ink eee eS ate 64 to 144 in. ts « td 
Horizontal edgewise 6 x 8} in. oi Se 6 in. 
Vertical is 4 x18in. fs He ten 12 in. 

a $ 4 x18 in. FD Aas 12 in 

- + 5ix 153 in. 82 Be * 12 in. ; ' = 


TABLE II 
COMPARISON OF AREA ON PANEL REQUIRED PER INCH OF SCALE 
Square inch area of panel 
Type of meter required per inch length 
of scale 
7% in. round pattern (average).............- ie oe re 1d 
1; a a si Gaduction: type) cic cians sores 3.9 
9s “« “ “ “« «“ - Vans) 
gs “ ) ¢ (GhICHETH pool ocucke ood bootie es 15 
6x 8}in. horizontal edgewise....... 8.8 
4x18 in. vertical Geis SO bb cood came eer eon 6 
51 x 154 in. vertical ee SER cate A coicy te Seg eke 6.8 
Illuminated dial (CAVETARE)\ sos. tee 16 
READABILITY 


Under this heading we may consider scale length and distri- 
bution, form of scale, reflections from glass and illumination. 
In a true comparison it should be noted that if the long scale 
takes a larger case the distance from the operator is increased 

‘by aless compact arrangement of panels. A basis for comparison 
is the ratio of area of circumscribing rectangle to the scale length 
in inches. Table II shows such a comparison. 

In voltmeters, readability at the normal point should be high; 
in ammeters, readability should be a maximum at the high 


1570 MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


points of the scale, as overloads should be indicated with the 
greatest accuracy. Table III gives a comparison of the inches 
per volt,on the scale, at the 115-volt point, in various types of 
150-volt scale voltmeters. 

A consideration of importance as affecting readability is that 
of the proper scale and pointer illumination. The tendency 
is now to limit the so-called “‘ illuminated dial ’’ meters to switch- 
boards of a highly decorative character, and to heavy capacity 
d-c. panels whose size is determined by the other apparatus 
mounted on them. Moreover, rear illumination is not of much 
value in an operating room in which the general illumination 
has been worked out upon proper lines. Full glass front plates 
instead of metal covers with curved slots in them for showing 
the scales, greatly improve the readability by thoroughly il- 


TABLE III 
COMPARISON OF VOLTMETER POINTER DEFLECTIONS 
| | 
Full scale | Inches | 
capacity Size / Type Point ~ | per ) 
| volt 
150-volt 7§ in. | Round pattern (induction type) a-c. 115-volt | 0.16 
s pS 7$ in. . * (average) a-c. « | 0.035 
? * 9% in. tc: (induction type) a-c. - = 0.16 
: . 9% in. + . (average) a-c. a “ 0.05 | 
z é 9% in. |. - - (D’Arsonval type) d-c. ee P BOCORe | 
S hy 6x 8hin. | Horizontal edgewise a-c. = . | 0.023 | 
- « | 4x18 in. | Vertical edgewise a-c. oe Onto 


luminating the dial and by allowing the whole length of the 
pointer to be seen instead of showing only an “ index ” through 
.aslot. By proper arrangement of the illumination, troublesome 
reflections from flat glass fronts can be entirely eliminated and 
readings can be taken accurately from any angle, a matter of 
much greater difficulty in the case of the curved glass used in 
edgewise meters. 

Fig. 2 shows a novel arrangement of a black dial with white 
figures and pointer which in certain instances will be found 
advantageous. A white mark on a black ground is much easier 
to see than a black mark on white. A white object causes a 
certain amount of “ halation”’ in the eye or through a photo- 
graphic lens, causing the mark to look larger. This halation thus 
tends to blur black lines on white dials. The eye automatically 
tends to adjust itself to this, causing a certain amount of strain. 


PLATE LXXXIV 
iNew Gal Sol ets 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


vED 20.98 JULY 1,08 
TYPE SM 
A.C, AMMETER 


SME WOCA4 776 


25 CYCLES 
SENAL WW IS5SO39 


[MAC GAHAN] 


Fic. 2—Briack Ditat METER. 


[MAC GAHAN] 


Fic. 83—BLack AND WHITE DIALS COMPARED. 


PLATE LXXXV 
Ae tesies 
VOL. XXXi, 1912 


[MAC GAHAN] 
Fic. 4—MovEMEN?T oF INDUCTION TYPE AMMETER. 


MAC GAHAN 


Fic 5—ELECTROMAGNET ASSEMBLED ON BASE. 


1912] MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1571 


As a lens cannot adjust itself to such varying conditions, a 
photograph of a white dial alongside of a black dial meter under 
identical conditions of illumination will show the real difference 
in readability.. The photograph reproduced in Fig. 3 was taken 
with every possible precaution to insure’an exact comparison, 
and the result is in favor of the black meter. Meters thus ar- 
ranged with black dials have been used very successfully on 
electric locomotives operating often at-night or in tunnels, where 
the glare from a white dial would seriously interfere with the 
driver’s view of the track ahead or the signals. 


THEORY AND PERFORMANCE OF INDUCTION INSTRUMENTS 


The ammeters, voltmeters and wattmeters with which the 
writer is most familiar consist of a movement comprising an 
aluminum drum rotating in the 
air gap of an electromagnet, 
through the coils of which pass 
the currents to be measured, in 
the manner generally known as 
the “induction type’ construc- 
tion. Such instruments may be 
said to differ from the moving 
coil electromagnetic  instru- 
ments in that the currents in 
the movable element which 
react upon the field of the 
stationary element, thus pro- 
ducing torque, are induced in 
the moving element by the 
transformer action of the pri- 
mary coil and core, instead of 
being conducted intoit by means 
of flexible spring-conductors. 

In analyzing the action of this instrument it is clearer to con- 
sider it in the light of an ordinary moving coil electromag- 
netic instrument than as an induction motor, although it is in 
reality a special form of induction motor. 

Thus in Fig. 6 the laminated iron circuit of an ammeter is 
shown, with its annular air gap in which the aluminum drum is 
free to rotate. P represents a primary winding through which 
passes the current to be measured. S- Sis a secondary winding 
short-circuited on itself. The dotted lines marked ¢ represent 
the various magnetic fluxes produced by currents in the coils. 


Fic. 6—DIAGRAM OF AMMETER 
ELECTROMAGNET. 


1572 MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


The windings P and S are the same in relation to each other 
as the primary and secondary windings of a current transformer, 
and their currents are similarly related. Thus the functioning 
of this type of induction ammeter can be said to be due to a 
combination of the actions in a current transformer and an _ 
induction motor. In this respect it differs from all previous 
types of induction meters, the result being an exceptional free- 
dom from frequency and temperature errors, as explained further. 

Fig. 4 shows the movement of such a meter, and Fig. 5 shows 
the electromagnet assembled on the base. 

Considering the induction type ammeter from the moving 
coil meter standpoint, we have, 


Torque = I cos yk (1) 
in which 


p flux produced by stationary coil, passing through 
the moving coil. 

I = current, moving coil 

y = angle of lag. 

k = constant. 


; é : : volt in d 

In the induction meter, J indrum J) is equal to _ AR ro 
impedance of drum 

dN 


or proportional to Zo (N = frequency. Z) = impedance of 


drum.) If ¢ were oscillatory, such as due to single-phase currents 
in primary coil P only, the secondary currents induced in the 
drum would be in the plane O P only, and thus would not be in 
a position to cause rotary torque in connection with the pri- 
mary flux dp». 

If, however, an additional flux, differing in phase, is intro- 
duced by means of additional coils S, this flux @, will in the 
instrument as constructed be in a direction at right angles to 
dp», and will thus cause torque by reacting upon the secondary 
currents in the drum which flow in the direction OP. At the 
same time the flux ¢, will cause secondary currents in the drum 
in the direction OS, which are in a position to react upon ¢y» 
to produce torque. Any secondary currents induced in the drum 
in intermediate directions may be resolved into components in di- 
rections O P or OS and thus are represented by currents in these 
directions only. It is understood that the fluxes ¢» and @, do 
not actually exist separately, but act in combination to produce 
a resultant flux @, which rotates with a frequency equal to that 
of the circuit. They may be treated separately for purposes 


1912) MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1573 


of analysis, however. Thus the law of torque of such an instru- 
ment can be written: 


Torque = ¢» I, cos a+ ¢.1, cos B (2) 
a = angle between ¢, and I, 
B = “ é gb. and I, 


It is assumed throughout this discussion that the values I», 
I,, I', I’, etc., for currents are stated in terms of equal turns, 
or as “ ampere-turns.” 

In order to produce currents in the coils S, differing in 
phase from those in the primary coils P, and thus produce the 
fluxes ¢, and gy», the “transformer ”’ arrangement of coils is 
used in the ammeter. The coils P are wound directly over 
secondary coils, which are in turn short-circuited through the 
distributed pole-piece coils S. The relations between the cur- 
rents and fluxes are the same as 
those in current transformers, 
shown graphically in Fig. 7, 
where J’ = current in primary, 
I” = secondary current, and 
In = magnetizing current. 


Fic. 7—DIAGRAM OF TRANS- Fic. S—VEcTOR DIAGRAM OF 
FORMER RELATIONS. METER RELATIONS. 


The flux due to the magnetizing component of the primary 
coil is in the direction O ¢». The flux produced by the current 
in the secondary coils is in the direction O ¢., in phase with the 
current I” in the secondary and pole-piece windings. It is seen 
that the phase angle between the fluxes @, and @, is, roughly 
speaking, 90 deg., thus producing a rotation of the moving ele- 
ment as previously explained. 

The d», as in a current transformer, is inversely proportional 
to the frequency, but ¢, is independent of the frequency, being 
only proportional to I’. 

In the vector diagram Fig. 8, let O¢» = the primary and 
O ¢, the secondary flux. At right angles to each are the voltages 
O V» and O V, induced by these fluxes in the moving drum. Lag- 
ing behind these voltages are components of the current in the 


1574. MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


drum, O Ip, due to op, and OI, due to @,. (See equation 2). 
Let 6 = angle between @» and @s. 
vy = lag of currents in drum behind V, and V,. 
Then we havea = y+0-+ 90 deg. 
B= y —0+ 90 deg. 
Whence, cos @ = sin (y+@) and cos B=sin (y—@) 
Substituting in (2), 
Torque = dy I, sin (y+0)+¢; Ip sin (y—-@) (3) 
The currents in the drum being proportional to the voltage 
induced in it divided by the impedance of the drum circuit, 
we have 


Fe eG phe 

yee Ass, (4) 
1 A N > |» Se 

re 2” (5) 


in which K’,K”,K’”, are constants which will hereafter be omitted 
for clearness. 


As dp = ~ and @, = J’, J’ being the current in the primary 


coil, we obtain by substitution 


Ni 

tue ee (6) 
th 

Las ie (7) 


Substituting in (3) 


1\2 
Torque = oa [sin (y + 6) + sin (y—6)]; whence, 
[3 . 
Torque = ue (cos y sin @) (8) 


It is evident that Zy ,y and @ are functions varying with the 
frequency and therefore in order to make the meter independent 
of frequency we must make cos y sin 8 = Z, ; that is, the func- 
tion cos y sin 8 must vary as the impedance of the drum. 


1912] MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1575 


This condition for independence from frequency variations 
can in reality be only approximated. The actual design is 
necessarily the result of extended experimentation and labora- 
tory work, combined with calculation, so as to secure the greatest 
possible range over which the meter will be independent of 
frequency. The performance curves on the ammeters in ques- 
tion show a maximum difference in readings for any two fre- 
quencies between 25 and 60 cycles of 4 per cent. (See Fig. 9). 

In the case of the voltmeter, the primary coil is wound with 
fine instead of coarse wire, and an external series non-inductive 
resistor is used, wound with wire having a zero temperature 
coefficient. 


102 


| 
FORGUE AT FULL LOAD= 3000 MILLIGRAM- CENTIMETERS 
WATTS CONSUMED ‘* ** ro =3.-4 
VOLTS DROP BETWEEN TERMINALS =1. 4 
RESISTANCE =0. 114 OHMS 
WEIGHT GF MOVING ELEMENT=10 GRAMS 


PER CENT INDICATED 


30 40 50 60 70 
CYCLES, FOR CURVE NO.1 WHICH SHOWS THE EFFECT OF CHANGES IN FREQUENCY 
MINS. INCIRCUIT “ “ can, 3 ue i s “ SELF-HEATING AT #4 LOAD 
AIR TEMP. INC. “ o a) “ ze ae Bs “ VARIATIONS IN ROOM TEMP. 


Fic. 9—PERFORMANCE CURVES, AMMETER. 


The proportion of series ohmic resistance to the total imped- 
ance is made very high and the current in the primary coils 
of the voltmeter is almost independent of the frequency, thus 
approximating the results found in the ammeter. (See Fig. 10.) 

In the above discussion, only the effect of the variation of 
frequency upon the torque was covered. In addition an error 
may be introduced by the varying temperature, changing the 
resistance of the drum and thus the currents I, and I, induced 
in the drum (see equation 3). In order to correct for this 
variation, the secondary coil circuit is arranged to have a tem- 
perature coefficient of resistance such as exactly to cancel the 


1576 MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


effect of increased resistance of the drum. To do this advantage 
is again taken of the effects taking plac? in current transformers. 

If in a current transformer the primary current be kept con- 
stant, the secondary current will remain approximately constant 
for a considerable variation in secondary resistance. Thus any 
increase in secondary resistance causes a proportional increase 
of the flux in the core. 

In the particular induction ammeter construction described, 
the secondary circuit is wound partly with copper and partly 
with wre of low temperature coefficient, the resulting temper- 
ature coefficient of the circuit being such as to increase the fluxes 
in the iron when the temperature of the aluminum drum rises. 


102 


ile} 
a 


| 
TORQUE AT FULL LOAD= 2800 MILLIGRAM-CENTIMETERS 
WATTS CONSUMED ‘* +* ‘<< = 88 
CURRENT a4 ** =>,088 AMP. 
RESISTANCE= 1136 OHMS 
WEIGHT OF MOVING ELEMENT = 10 GRAMS 


| 
| 
| 


& 


PER CENT INDICATED 


20 30 40 50 60 70 


CYCLES, FOR CURVE NO. 1 Write SHO} US EFFECT OF CHANGES IN FREQUENCY 
MINS. IN CIRCUIT « ei 2 " “* SELF-HEATING AT % LOAD 
AIR TEMP. IN°C. «* ws #3 sé sf Bd a“ ‘ VARIATIONS IN ROOM TEMP. 


Fic. 10—PERFORMANCE CURVES, VOLTMETER. 


By a proper proportioning of temperature coefficient of the sec- 
ondary winding the temperature compensation is effected with 
great exactness. 

The equations (4) and (5) show the effect of a variation of 
temperature, and consequently Z,, upon the induced currents 
in the drum. 

From equation (3) by substituting (4) and (5) and omitting 
constants we have 


Torque = Bo 5 oe sin (y + @) + os Oe ee sin (y —6) 
=x iN Baste (cos ¥ sin @) 


1912] MAC GAHAN: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1577 


From this we see that the condition for zero temperature error 
of meter is that 


ob» 6: =Zp (considering the frequency as constant). 


As @, is virtually independent of the resistance and thus of 
temperature, we may for simplicity write this condition, 


dp = Zp 


At a fixed current, @» is a function only of the impedance of 
the secondary coil circuit. From this it is evident that the tem- 
perature coefficient of the secondary winding must be the same 
as that of the drum, in order to make the temperature error of 
the meter zero. 

In actual practise, there are a number of factors tending to 
complicate the above relations, such as the temperature varia- 
tions of the iron and of the control spring, etc., so that the proper 
proportions of copper wire to resistance wire in the secondary cir- 
cuit can best be determined experimentally. The actual tem- 
perature errors are shown in Figs. 9 and 10. 

It will be noted that the results as to temperature coefficient 
and as to frequency errors compare very favorably with those 
in meters operating on the moving iron or moving coil principles. 

A similar arrangement for temperature and frequency com- 
pensation has been worked out in the wattmeter. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


COMPENSATING WATTMETERS 


BY A.-L. ELLIS 


In these days of large units and stupendous engineering 
undertakings one is apt to overlook the problems involved in 
assigning to little things an accurate valuation. 

The output of a very large generator can be determined within 
one per cent by means of instruments easily obtainable, if not 
already at hand; yet assigning a value to the energy delivered 
to a small metal filament lamp or the potential circuit of an 
induction meter presents some difficulties not readily overcome. 
This is chiefly due to the low watt consumption which gives a 
very small deflection on the scale of wattmeters designed for 
other than laboratory use. 

There are a number of cases where a suitable indicating watt- 
meter is greatly needed, as for instance, in measuring the core 
loss of small transformers, bell-ringing transformers, compensa- 
tors for metal filament lamps, small fan motors, small three- 
phase motors running light, shunt losses in induction meters, 
etc. It is generally desirable to make such measurements when 
a given e.m.f. is applied to the terminals of the devices. As low- 
capacity wattmeters are produced by increased turns in the coil 
in series with the load it is also desirable to connect the volt- 
meter and the “ potential terminals ” of the wattmeter across 
the load itself, in order to avoid the phase displacement andJ R 
drop which occurs in the wattmeter current coils. 

This arrangement has the disadvantage that the potential 
circuit losses of both the voltmeter and wattmeter are then 
included in the watts indicated by the latter instrument, thus 
making it necessary to apply corrections to the readings. It 
frequently happens that the instrument losses are many times 

1579 


1580 ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


greater than the loss to be determined, hence the result obtained 
is the difference between two nearly equal quantities. This 
together with small scale deflection makes accurate determina- 
tions practically impossible. 

An instrument for this work should possess the following 
characteristics distinguishing it from the ordinary low-reading 
wattmeter. 

1. It should be so designed that its errors can be readily 
computed for all conditions of load, power factor of load, scale 
position, etc., and readings corrected for these errors. 

2. Its indications should be compensated for its own losses. 

3. Its indication should be compensated for loss in the volt- 
meter or other instruments which may be connected across the 
terminals of the device being measured. 

4. It should have a large current capacity in terms of its 
full scale watt value, as a great many of the small energy 
consumers operate at low power 
factors. 

5. It should possess high 
torque in order that its life of 
unimpaired accuracy may not be 
shortened. 

6. Its moving system should 


be damped. eo ee 
7. It should be shielded to a ee  /f 
protect it from stray magnetic Fic. 1 


and electrostatic fields. 

Fig. 1 shows diagrammatically the compensated wattmeter as 
commonly constructed. 

The moving coil A is pivoted between two similar spools 
upon which are wound the series or current coil E and the com- 
pensating coil H. 

The spool comprises the brass supporting casting B, into 
which is soldered a brass tubing C, having a flang> D to form a 
channel for winding. The spool is split radially by one saw- 
cut to reduce error due to eddy currents. 

The turns of the series coil E should be concentrated about 
the moving coil in the most effective position, the available space 
should be filled with copper, and as little insulation used as will 
insure freedom from short circuits. Some of the available space 
must be given up to the compensating coil; hence it is usually 
composed of fine wire, 0.005 to0.010in. (0.125 to 0.254 mm.). 


1912] ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1581 


In Fig. 1 the compensating coil H has approximately the 
same number of turns as series coil & and is wound beneath 
because, being fine wire, it is best supported when wound directly 
upon the metal spool. 

Sometimes the compensating coil is wound upon the series coil 
either directly or on a separate support. In either case, the 
adjustment of the compensating coil is obtained by adding or 
subtracting turns, until no deflection is obtained when the current 
for the moving coil is taken through the series and compensating 
coils connected in series and opposing. 

Since the coils E and H have not the same radius they will 
not affect the moving coil equally for all scale positions; con- 
sequently the compensation can be made exact for one scale 
position only. This is also true for more than one layer and 
the error becomes more pronounced as“the layers increase, or if 
the compensating circuit is wound outside of the series coil, 
e ther directly or as a separate coil. 

When constructed as in Fig. 1, an average in equality of 4.5 
per cent and a maximum of 6 per cent has been observed for 
the different scale positions. 

True compensation for all scale positions can only be obtained 
by using a concentric cable when winding the series coil, the 
wire of the compensating coil forming the core upon which the 
strands of the series coil cable are laid up. Such an instrument 
possessing a 150-watt scale has been made. 

There are, however, structural difficulties which preclude 
the general use of this method, namely: (1) the problem of 
bringing out the compensating core and securing same so that 
it will not break off at the point where it enters the finished 
coil; (2) the difficulty of securing sufficiently high insulation 
between core and cable to permit the use of the instrument 
upon 150-volt circuits; (3) the fact that, because where small 
conductors are concerned cable construction greatly reduces 
the amount of copper that can be wound in a given space because 
this is still further reduced by the compensating core, the cur- 
rent is so limited that the instrument is suitable for measurements 
around 100 per cent power factor only. 

Very good results have been obtained by winding the series 
coil in several layers and at the same time winding one or more 
fine compensating wires so distributed that their respective 
magnetic effects in relation to the moving coil are substantially 


equal. 


1582 ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


Fig. 2 gives the departure from the compensation for various 
scale positions. The curves are plotted from observations, using 
a wattmeter like that in Fig. 1, and one having specially wound 
coils. 


ee 
ca 


i 
— 


t=-}) 
|OVER-COMPENSATED 


DEIFIGIENCY iN 


XGESS OR]! 
COMPOUND! a 


UNDER-COMPENSATED 


oor wh Swe Fr Fo & 
‘ 


O)Y=FOR COMPENSATIN ATTMETIER AS COMMONLY MADE. 
4)FFO COMPENSATING W. es R OF SPECIAL TYPE: 


E 
S 
eS 


~ 
to 


14/- t-—_|— i 


0 oU)) 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
POSITION OF POINTER UPON SCALE PER CENT OF FULL.SCALE. 


Fic. 2—CurveEs SHOWING COMPOUNDING BETWEEN CURRENT AND 
COMPENSATING WINDINGS 


Fic. 3—CoMPOUNDING BETWEEN CURRENT CorILs AND COMPENSATING 
WINDING IN WATTMETER OF SPECIAL TYPE. 
Curves drawn to twenty times the scale of those in Fig. 2. 


Fig. 3 is interesting, as it shows the accuracy to which the 
actual compensation was observed. The curves are for the 
specially wound wattmeter of Fig. 2 and are plotted to a scale 
twenty times larger. The second set of observations was taken 


1912] ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1583 


four months later than the first, during which time the moving 
coil had been replaced by a new one and a new scale marked for 
it. The greatest differexce between observed points on the two 
curves does not exceed 0.2 per cent of the compensation, show- 
ing that between 0 and 25 per cent of full scale the compensation 
is correct within 0.2 per cent and, excepting one observed point, 
within 0.3 per cent for the remainder of the scale. 

Equally good results can be obtained with a second fine wire 
wound in the series coil, which may be used to feed a voltmeter 
or other device and automatically subtract from the wattmeter 
indication the energy so delivered. The connections in this case 
are shown in Fig. 4, which is self-explanatory. 

Table I gives the percentage difference in the watts observed 
when measuring a given load first “‘ direct ’’ and then compen- 


25 MOVING 
__laas AY) Meo 


WATTMETER 


Fic. 4 


sating; the number of watts obtained when used direct is taken 
as standard. This shows much better compensation in the case 
of the special type, under all conditions. 

The “computed variation”’ at the bottom of the table is 

‘the difference in per cent one would expect to observe, based 
upon the potential circuit losses and the departure from exact 
compensation, neglecting the effect of mutual induction. 

While the wattmeter can be closely compensated for the 
voltmeter losses, the voltmeter indications must be corrected 
for the added ohmic resistance and the disturbance due to mutual 
inductance between series and compensating coils; the resultant 
self-inductance of these coils is equal to zero. 

Fig. 5 gives the e.m.f. due to mutual induction at 60 cycles for 
two capacities of wattmeters, showing how this e.m.f. varies 
with the current taken by the load. 


1584 ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


Fig. 6 gives the error in the indication of the voltmeter in volts 
at 60 cycles for all load power factors, when the particular watt- 
meter considered is loaded with its maximum rated current 
(2..25 amperes), and operated upon circuits of 100 volts or over 


with either 


lagging or leading current. It is to be noted that the 


error is roughly constant for all low power factors up to 50 per 


TABLE I.—TEST OF COMPENSATING WATTMETERS 
THE OBSERVED VARIATION IN CALIBRATION WHEN SHIFTING FROM 


DIRECT TO COMPENSATING 


(Variation given in terms of the ‘‘ direct ’’ calibration taken as standard.) 


On unity power factor On power factor = 0.1 
| — 
Watts Wattmeter No. 2 Wattmeter No. 2 
read on | Wattmeter (Special type) Wattmeter (Special type) 
test No. 1.9 ,._-—_____—__ | No. 1 
instrument | common Alone With common | Alone With 
type voltmeter type voltmeter 
(Per cent) | (Per cent) | (Per cent) | (Per cent) | (Per cent) | (Per cent) 
— | S| a Raeaieeeans i.’ “ae MARR Sa CAPS — 
60 CycLES PER SECOND; CURRENT LAGGING 
25.0 —1.25 —0.16 —0.27 —0.88 +0.15 +0.02 
20.0 —0.71 —0.07 —0.17 —0.87 +0.11 —0.11 
15.0 —1.12 —0.09 —0.30 —0.95 +0.05 +0.01 
10.0 —0.90 —0.25 —0:26 —0.75 +0.16 +0.18 
125 CycLEs PER SECOND; CURRENT LAGGING | 
25.0 —1.03 —0.07 +0.07 —0.30 —0.07 —0.19 
20.0 —0.73 +0.03 —0.05 —0.39 +0.09 +0.15 
15.0 —1.01 —0.19 —0.34 —0.70 +0.49 +0.28 
10.0 —0.50 —0.06 —0.06 —1.18 +0.41 +0.26 
125 CycLEs PER SECOND; CURRENT LEADING 
25.0 —0.66 —0.14 —0,22 —0.56 +0.29 +0.33 
20.0 —0.64 —0.08 0.31 —0.48 —0.20 —0.17 
15.0 —1,31 —0.46 —0.41 —1.05 —0.10 —0.21 
10.0 —1.138 —0.12 —0.12 —0.89 —0.11 —0.16 
COMPUTED VARIATION OR ERROR 
‘(Based upon potential losses and per cents on Fig. 2.) 
25.0 —0.59 —0 07 
20.0 —0.70 —().10 
15.0 —0.68 —0.02 
10.0 —0.83 —0.03 


Note: The theoretically perfect wattmeter should show no variation, neglecting mutual 


induction. 


cent power factor, the total variation amounting to 0.2 volt. 


Beyond 80 


If the ratio 


per cent power factor the error falls rapidly to’zero. 
mutual e.m.f. 


ine ee is less than 2 per cent, the indica- 


tion expressed in volts is approximately equal to the mutual 
e.m.f. X sin 0, where @ is the phase angle of the load. The effect 


1912] ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1585 


R | 
| 
_| 
| 


AE 
Ww 


A 
ms 


ee Se 
or w 
1 aaa ea 
| COMPE 
sae 
TANC 
a 
Lest 
— Un 
=i 
fe} 
(= 
< 
jee 


INDUG 
) 


ED IN 
TUAL 
Vou 


= 
a 


| 


Es 
el vt 
| 


CURVE #2 


Ss 
o 


MU 
ii 


B 


im 


(ee ie 
w we oF 


CURVEIJ= 1! RATED CAPACITY=2. 25 AMPERES. 
ou; vere al RATED CAPACITY = 4.5 AMPERES. 


.M.F. IDEVELOP 


=e 
Ba 
= 


J 


10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
CURRENT IN LOAD 


(PER CENT OF RATED CAPACITY OF INSTRUMENT) 


Fic. 5—CurvVES GIVING THE E. M. F. INDUCED IN VOLTMETER COM- 
PENSATOR BY MuTuAL INDUCTANCE. 


= 


1.2/4} | | 
1.0 it mi + 


=| (1 lab j 
ee 
a ‘i desta igo ae H is : | 
Fig 3 
e ibe al} 
Pa a Ye 
é AL ease Se: ae |__| vaccine ct ange Mahal 
me Elol | a L LE onl CURRENT! eal 
bel ey: 
0.4 si | Cee | i 1 | |—+ 
: g (v. mREADS ean | | 
0.6 zi T i 
A 
ies a f NOTE:|- cuRVE oven ts FOR WATTMETER|HAVIN | 4 
1.0/2. al fa te al | 
9 RATEE care OF 2125 AMPS. 
aber : z 
pe t | 


5 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.0 
: i POWER ee OF Coad 
co 


Fic. 6—CALCULATED CURVE, GIVING THE ERROR IN VOLTAGE INDICATED 
BY VOLTMETER WHEN USED WITH VOLTMETER COMPENSATOR. 
With full load current upon the wattmeter. 


1586 ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


of added resistance on the voltmeter indication is easily computed 
to any accuracy required. 

The mutual inductance due to the compensating coil causes 
no appreciable error in the wattmeter at any load or any power 
factor. The reason may perhaps be better understood by referring 
to the vector diagram shown in Fig.7, which, while not completely 
representing all that takes place in the operation of the watt- 
meter, shows the principal reason why the indication is not 
affected. In this diagram 

I, = phase of true load current. 

En = phase of the e.m.f. induced by mutual inductance 
which leads J; by 90 deg. in time phase (considering 
that compensating winding is reversed). 

E, = phase of true load potential. 

0 true angle between phases of J; and E;. 

E; = the total effective volts impressed upon the potential 
circuit = resultant of Ey and En. 

Read E’ for lagging and FE” for leading current. 

It will be seen at a glance that, since a line can be drawn 
perpendicular to J; and common to the vectors of the true load 
and the resultant instrument potentials, and since the distance 
of this line from the origin along J; represents that component 
of the potentials in phase with J;, or in other words determines 
the watts, whatever the value assigned E,, the wattmeter 
indication will not be affected for any given relation between 
E;, I, and @; 

This is not strictly true when all factors are considered. The 
diagram considers only the e.m.fs. due to mutual induction, and 
neglects the effect of the moving coil, as also the current flow 
into the load and into the source, due to Em. These disturbances 
are very slight; their combined effects do not produce an 
observed error. This is fortunate, as it would be difficult to 
correct for the current flow into the load and source, because, 
while the constants of the load can be measured, the constants 
for the source would be difficult to determine and are ever chang- 
ing. 

The common type of wattmeter designed for use on voltages 
around 110 has a maximum capacity of 150 watts; the ampere 
capacity is limited to 1.5, in some cases as high as 2 amperes. 
An instrument of this type, upon low power factors, does not 
produce a deflection such that the distance of the pointer from 
zero can be determined very accurately. The capacity of 150 


I 


1912] ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1587 


volts is of little value, since the devices to be measured have 
been designed to operate upon commercial circuits; hence the 
voltage most frequently used is 110, with probable maximum of 
120 volts. On this basis the full scale deflection would be 
obtained at 62 per cent power factor. 

The sensibility of the instrument and its field of usefulness 
can be enhanced by so proportioning the potential circuit that 
it will be limited to potentials of 125 volts or less. The series or 
current coil sHould be rated as high as possible and the activity 
of the moving coil increased by increasing the ratio of the 
inductance to the resistance. 


<—_A—> 


inves %h 


The special wattmeter previously and subsequently referred 
to has an ampere capacity of 2.25 amperes, a potential limit of 
125 volts and a full scale of 70 watts. On the basis of 120 volts 
the full scale deflection would be obtained at 26 per cent power 
factor as compared with 62 per cent power factor for the common 
type. Deflections around 1 scale can be obtained at power 
factors below 10 per cent within the rated capacity. If left 
continuously in circuit at rated load a small correction will be 
necessary, due to the heating effect, but no noticeable disturb- 
ance is produced if left in circuit for five minutes at a time with 
short intervals of rest. 


1588 ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


In the design of an instrument, metal affords the most certain 
readily obtainable and eminently satisfactory mechanical means 
of definitely locating the various vital parts with respect to one 
another; yet, when utilized as found in the common type of 
wattmeter (illustrated in Fig. 1), it becomes a serious source of 
error due to eddy currents. 

The error is greatest at low power factor, because the eddy 
currents are then nearly in phase with the current through 
the moving coil, the deflection of the instrument is small and 
the current producing eddy currents is large. 

The magnitude of the error varies with the frequency, power 
factor, amperes of load, voltage across instrument terminals, 
and position of pointer on scale, making it practically impossible 
to correct readings for errors of this nature. The effect of this 
error is to cause the indications of the instrument to be too 
small or too large when the load current lags behind or leads the 
impressed é.m.f. 

A comparatively large amount of metal can be used to secure 
mechanical stability and be so placed with respect to the station- 
ary and moving coils that practically no error results due to 
eddy currents, even when the sensibility is greatly increased 
as in the case of the “‘ special ’? wattmeter. 

The “special’’ wattmeter, besides having robust metal 
supporting frames, was equipped with magnetically damped 
moving system and massive iron magnetic shields. Table II 
gives a comparison between the calculated errors and the 
observed total accumulation errors at 10 per cent power factor, 
for 60-cycle lagging current and 125-cycle lagging and leading 
current, for both the common and special type wattmeter, when 
used direct (as an ordinary wattmeter) and when used compen- 
sating. The calculated errors as given take nothing into account 
except the phase displacement caused by the self-inductance of 
the potential circuit—the theoretical effects which mutual induct- 
ance might produce being completely disregarded. 

Referring to the errors observed in the common type of watt- 
meter, the effects of eddy currents are plainly in evidence. 
Where it would be expected that the instrument should read high 
due to the phase displacement of the moving coil circuit, the 
instrument actually reads low due to eddy currents. This is 
true whether used compensating or direct; the lack of correct 
compensation amplifies the error on lagging current and reduces 
the error on leading current. The magnitude of the error varies 


1912] ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1589 


with the scale position, being more pronounced when the com- 
pensating coil is used, except on leading current, where the varia- 
tions in the errors due to the different positions tend to neutralize 
one another. A useful correction factor cannot be supplied with 
wattmeters of the common type, because where we would expect 
it to read 0.53 per cent high it actually reads anywhere between 
0.77 per cent and 2.15 per cent low. 


TABLE If. TEST OF COMPENSATING WATTMETERS 
THE TOTAL ACCUMULATIVE ERRORS OBSERVED ON POWER FACTOR 
LOADS 


(Figures in table are corrected for scale errors.) 


Power factor of load eo it oe 
Used direct Used compensating 
Watts | | Wattmeter No. 2 
read on Wattmeter | Wattmeter Wattmeter Special type 
test instrument No. 1 No. 2 No. 1 | | 
Common | Special Common Alone With 
type | type type | voltmeter 
Kier a | (Per cent) (Per cent) (Per cent) | (Per cent) | 
60 CycLES PER SECOND; CURRENT LAGGING 
25.0 { —0.92 +1.54 —1.85 +1.68 +1.62 
20.0 —0.77 +1.55 —1.82 +1.41 +1.30 
15.0 —1.10 +1.48 —2.15 +1.54 -+1.60 | 
herent 0.0 —1.15 +1.67 —1.51 +1.56 +1.58 
*Calculated errors +0.53 +1.69 +0.53 +1.69 +1.69 
125 CycLES PER SECOND; CURRENT LAGGING 
PAS) —1.18 +4.70 —1.21 +4.63 +4.55 
20.0 —1.02 +4 .32 —1.29 +4.33 +4.47 
15.0 —2.05 +3.47 —2.42 +4.09 +3.88 
10.0 —2.00 +3.91 —3.14 +4.33 +4.18 
*Calculated errors +1.12 +3.63 +1.12 +3.63 +3.63 
z “125 CycLEes PER SECOND; CURRENT LEADING 
25.0 +1.63 —2.94 +1.01 —2.62 —2.58 
20.0 +1.58 —2.95 +1.09 —3.16 3.34 
15.0 +1.42 
10.0 +1.68 —2.67 +1.02 —2.78 —2.83 
*Calculated errors —1.12 —3.63 J 1.12 —3.63 —3.63 


*The calculated errors take nothing into account except the self-inductance of potential 
circuit. 


The wattmeter having special coils shows no observable error 
due to eddy currents, the calculated error and observed error 
have substantially the same magnitude and sign, while the 
error for the various scale pos tions is practically the same. The 
excellence of the compensation is to be noted in the good agree- 
ment between the errors when used direct and compensating, 
and even when compensating for a voltmeter in addition. A 


1590 ELLIS: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


correction factor can be applied with advantage to the readings 
of this instrument, namely the phase angle of the potential 
circuit. 

The correction factor is large, compared with that calculated 
for the common type, because in providing the large volt-ampere 
capacity the torque was kept up at the expense of the small 
time constant of the potential circuit rather than increase the 
impedance of the series coil, as doing the latter would be likely to 
disturb the condition of the circuit upon the introduction of the 
wattmeter. This would be undesirable, for it is a prime requi- 
site, as pointed out in the beginning, that the design be such that 
its errors can be readily computed for all conditions of load, etc., 
to be useful as a wattmeter on low power factors. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


HOT WIRE INSTRUMENTS 


BY A. W. PIERCE AND M. E. TRESSLER 


In this paper we shall point out the special field for use of hot 
wire instruments, and support our statements by facts and figures 
drawn from long association with this particular type of instru-. 
ment. 

There is a large gap between pivoted instruments of the dyna- 
mometer or moving iron type, and the sensitive reflecting 
dynamometer, voltmeter or ammeter. This gap can be reduced 
by the use of hot wire instruments. 

-The lowest range pivoted voltmeter of the dynamometer 
type for use on alternating currents, with which we are familiar, 
requires 7.5 volts for full scale deflection, and has an appreciable 
frequency error even at 60 cycles per second, in addition to a 
temperature coefficient which 
must be taken into account aint 
in accurate measurements. 3 \\\ysss 

The voltmeter scale shown 9". 
in Fig. 1 was traced from one 
of several three-volt hot wire Fie’ 1 
instruments which have been 
in use in a large testing department for several years. These in- 
struments have no temperature coefficient, and when made with a 
properly aged hot wire have a very small zero error due to changes 
in temperature of the instrument as a whole or in: part.. The 
inductance of the hot wire is practically zero, and the instruments 
give equally accurate indications on direct and alternating 
voltages at all frequencies lower than 500 cycles per second. 
These voltmeters can be relied upon within one-half scale divi- 
sion as low as 1.2 volts, as shown by the following check made 

1591 


fy Oia, 2 
4 2 


VOLTMETER 


1592 PIERCE AND TRESSLER: [June 28 


on direct current against a carefully calibrated laboratory stand- 


ard voltmeter: 3 


TABLE I 
Standard reads..| 3/ 2.8 ,| 2.6 | 2.4 Sj paras Mey Fem ares 
Instrument | | | 
reads;..!.06+- 3.00| 2.795 | 2.60 | 2.395 | 2.195/2.00) 1.795 | 1.60 | 1.40 [|1.195) 


These voltmeters can be used with suitable series resistance 
to measure higher voltages than three volts and require about 0.2 
ampere for full scale deflection. 

Hot wire ammeters can be made for a full scale range of 0.25 
ampere, which will indicate 0.1 ampere with an accuracy closer 
than 1 per cent. 


Fig. 2 shows a scale traced 2 4 16 tg 
from one of these instruments ; 
in actual use. AS Oy 
0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1,1.5, 3,5 S$ AMMETER y 
and 6-ampere instruments can Fic. 2 


be made which will take all of 

the current measured through the hot wire and are not affected 
by wave form, frequency below 500 cycles per second, or stray 
fields. The IR drop and J?R losses of these instruments will 
compare favorably with those of moving iron ammeters of 
corresponding ranges, as shown in Table II. 


TABLE II 
rs > 1 s 2 ! 
Capacity in amperes IR volts I?R watts 
Iron vane ammeters 
5 0.63 3.15 
2 1.52 3.04 
7 9.34 6.54 
Hot wire ammeters 
6 0.25 1,5 
5 0.3 1.5 
1S, 1 1.5 
ps 0.75 0.75 
0.75 1 0.75 
0.5 | 1.5 0.75 
0.25 3 0.75 


‘Table III, which was copied from the calibration record of a 
hot-wire ammeter adjusted for a series range of 0.25 ampere with 
shunts for 0.5, 1, 2 and 4.amperes, gives a fair idea of what can 
reasonably be expected from such an instrument when carefully 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1593 


used. These checks were taken on the one-ampere scale against 
a potentiometer and standard resistance. 
TABLE III 


The first line gives the settings of the standard; the dates and corresponding instrument 
readings follows. 


Date 1.000 { 0.900 | 0.800 | 03700 { 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.400 | 0.300 | 0.200 
2-25-11 0.999 | 0.900 | 0.800 | 0.700 | 0.601 | 0.501 | 0.400 | 0.300 | 0.201 
3-18-11 0.998 | 0.899 | 0.800 | 0.699 | 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.400 | 0.298 | 0.200 
4-7-11 0.999 | 0.899 | 0.800 | 0.699 | 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.399 | 0.298 | 0.199 
5-5-11 0.997 | 0.898 | 0.798 | 0.699 | 0.599 | 0.500 | 0.399 | 0.298 | 0.200 
6-3-11 0.999 | 0.900 | 0.800 | 0.699- | 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.399 | 0.299 | 0.200 
g=13—11 1.000 | 0.900 | 0.800 | 0.699 | 0.599 | 0.499 | 0.398 | 0.298 | 0.199 
8-4-11 1.000 | 0.900 | 0.800 | 0.700 | 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.399 | 0.298 | 0.199 
9-6-11 1.000 | 0.901 | 0.801 | 0.700 | 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.400 | 0.298 | 0.199 
9-29-11 1.000 | 0.902 | 0.802 | 0.701 | 0.601 | 0.501 | 0.400 | 0.299 | 0.200 
10-25-11 | 0.999 | 0.900 | 0.801 | 0.699 | 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.399 | 0.298 
11-25-11 | 1.000 | 0.900 | 0.800 | 0.700 | 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.399 | 0.298 
12-29-11 | 0.999 | 0.900 | 0.800 | 0.700 | 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.400 | 0.298 
2-1-12 0.999 | 0.900 | 0.800 | 0.700 | 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.399 | 0.298 
2-21-12 1.000 } 0.901 | 0.801 J 0.700 | 0.600 | 0.500 | 0.400 ) 0.299 


For ranges higher than six amperes shunts can be used with 
the instruments, and currents as high as 2000 amperes have 
been measured in this way. A high range hot wire ammeter 
has an energy consumption greater than that of a good moving 
jron ammeter and current transformer. But it has the advan- 
tage over such a combination that it can be checked on direct 
current and used on alternating current of commercial frequencies 
without any appreciable error. It costs less, is easier to read and 
manipulate than a Kelvin balance or Siemens dynamometer. 
It is therefore well suited for use as a working standard for the 
calibration of moving iron instruments and current transformers. 

Because of their very small inductance and capacity, hot wire 
instruments are better suited for measuring high frequency 
currents than any coil instrument, particularly for currents 
which come within the six-ampere range of the self-contained 
instruments. Even where shunts have to be used, the errors 
caused by unequal distribution of current between the instrument 
and shunt on direct current and at high frequencies will be less 
than those caused by the self-inductance of series transformer 
and coil instruments. 

Conclusion. Hot wire instruments can be used to good advan- 

tage (1) in measuring small alternating currents and voltages; 
(2) as general utility instruments for indiscriminate use on alter- 
nating and direct current and for checking iron vane ammeters, 
(3) for measuring high-frequency currents where coil instru- 
ments would be useless. 


(inti. « 


+ 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrica: 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


RESONANT CIRCUIT FREQUENCY INDICATOR 


BY W. H. PRATT AND D. R. PRICE 


The object of this device is to supply a method for accurately 
measuring the frequency of a circuit, to give a large scale deflec- 
tion on the instrument for a small percentage change in frequency 
and to obtain readings which are accurate under all ordinary 
conditions of wave form, voltage variation and temperature. 

The electric circuit whose impedance is the most sensitive 
to a change in frequency is that circuit which contains inductance 
and capacity connected either in series or parallel; the degree of 
sensitiveness of such a circuit can be changed and varied through 
a wide range at the convenience of the designer. These two 
characteristics admirably adapt this circuit to the construction of 
a frequency indicator and indirectly to the construction of a 
speed indicator, provided that it can be applied in a practical 
form. 

Being extremely sensitive to a change of frequency it follows 
that it is also sensitive to a change in the constants of its own 
constituent parts (although in this case to a less degree, as will 
be shown) and the application of this circuit in a practical form 
for this reason presented some difficulties at first. 

The theory of resonance is of course well understood, but in 
practise certain limitations are presented which in some cases 
make it very difficult to approach theoretical values of current in 
a tuned or partially tuned circuit. Theory presupposes a perfect 
inductance, a perfect condenser, and a perfect resistance, when 
as a matter of fact a perfect inductance and a perfect condenser 
are never realized. By a perfect inductance is meant a circuit 
having inductance alone with no losses—the same applies to a 


perfect condenser. 
1595 


1596 PRATT AND PRICE: [June 28 


In order that the circuit be resonant or tuned, or partially 
tuned, the inductance and condenser must be of such a nature 
that the excess lines of force must be free to collapse as soon as 
the current flowing in them begins to diminish. On this charac- 
teristic the degree of success in tuning and the approach to 
theoretical values of current depend entirely. Numerous 
mechanical analogies of elastic and inelastic bodies will suggest 
themselves. 

It is possible to reach almost theoretical conditions and to 
obtain almost theoretical frequency impedance curves by using 
an air core inductance and an air dielectric condenser. Space 
_ limitations, however, place them entirely out of the question for 
use on instrument work. 

Owing to this limitation of space it is necessary to adopt an iron 
core inductance and a compact condenser with a solid dielectric 
of a specific inductive capacity somewhat greater than that of air. 
These two substances, iron and a solid dielectric, introduce losses 
and variations and other difficulties. An iron core inductance 
has the following faults: hysteresis loss, eddy current loss, mag- 
netization curve not a straight line, and the variation in form 
due to temperature and mechanical trouble. 

Of these the all-important one is hysteresis loss. Not only 
does this loss appear as an added resistance to the circuit, but it 
absolutely destroys all resonance if present beyond a certain 
degree; for if the lines of force which are once established in a 
circuit do not collapse when the source of current is withdrawn 
there can be no resonance whatever. This also will suggest 
mechanical analogies. It is then very important to keep down 
the hysteresis in the inductance element. On account of hystere- 
sis it was found impossible to tune a closed magnetic circuit 
inductance. 

The eddy current loss tends to lower the inductance of the 
circuit and acts as an added resistance. The amount of lower- 
ing of the inductance will have a temperature coefficient and for 
this reason the eddy currents should be kept as low as practicable. 
However, the eddy currents do not affect the tuning, like hys- 
teresis, and this loss can be calibrated with the other parts of the 
circuit. . The other variations due to the use of iron can be re- 
duced to a low value by proper designs. 

All the other troubles inherent to condensers can be overcome 
by proper design, so as not to affect this work, and all the other 
troubles met with in high-frequency tuning are not apparent in 
frequencies such as 60 cycles. 


=< 
: 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1597 


The constituent parts of the circuit were, therefore, designed 
as follows: 

The inductance was wound on a laminated iron core which had 
an air gap in its circuit, and the flux was kept low so as to be 
well below the saturation point. 

The condenser was made by the vacuum process, which 
insures a permanent high insulation, and low internal heating. 
It was designed to operate at a voltage well below the safe work- 
ing voltage. The resistances 
| were all zero temperature co- 


efficient metal. 

A standard instrument was 
used with the capacities, induct- 
ances and resistances in a sepa- 
rate box. Thisstandard instru- 
ment was essentially a field and 
two armatures set at an angle 
with each other and having a 
common diameter through which 
the shaft passed. 

The external box contained 
three separate circuits, each hav- 
ing an inductance, a capacity 
and a resistance in series. Two 
of these circuits were identical 
and the third was designed for a 
much smaller current carrying 
capacity, for a reason to be ex- 


plained. 
; One of the main circuits was 
© cc__CONDENSERS j k 
L LL INDICATORS adjusted so as to be in resonance 
R R R-_RESISTANCES s 
ae Neva can. OF eT he at about 70 cycles; the other 


F____FIELD COIL OF INSTR. . S 4 
main circuit was adjusted so as 


; to be in resonance at about 58 
cycles. The third circuit was adjusted so as to be in resonance 
at about 36 cycles. This last circuit was connected in parallel 
with the circuit adjusted to be in resonance at 58 cycles. The 
circuit adjusted at 70 cycles was connected to that armature coil 
on the instrument which tended to move the needle up. The 
other two circuits were connected to the armature which tended 
to make the needle move down. The armatures were in series 


with the field coil. 


Fre. 1 


1598 PRATT AND PRICE: [June 28 


The center of the scale was marked for 60 cycles, the left-hand 
end being 55 and the right-hand end 65. It was possible to get a 
6-inch (15-cm.) movement for a change in frequency from 55 to 
65 very easily, and it was also possible to get a 6-inch movement 
for a change in frequency from 60 to 61, on the same instrument. 
There appears to be almost no limit to the sensibility of this ar- 
rangement. The actual working of the apparatus is self-evi- 
dent and needs no explanation. 

When the frequency drops very low, for instance, 30 or so, the 
small auxiliary circuit supplies torque to prevent the needle from 
again going on the scale, due to the absence of torque from the 
main circuits, since both are far away from their resonant fre- 
quency. 

When made up in a practical form, this instrument exhibits only 
a trace of variation, due to wave form, voltage or temperature. 

The connections of the instrument are shown in Fig. 1. 


1912] - DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1599 


Discussion on “ INpDucTION Type INDICATING INSTRUMENTS ”’ 
(MacGaHan), 
““ COMPENSATING WATTMETERS ” (ELLIS), 
e Hor Wire INSTRUMENTS ” (PIERCE AND TRESSLER), AND 
RESONANT Circuit FREQUENCY INDICATOR”? (PRATT AND 
PricE), Boston, Mass., JUNE 28, 1912. 


F. P. Cox: Taking up the paper on hot-wire instruments 
first, it seems to me that there are limits to the use of this 
instrument, and yet there are occasions and circumstances where 
this particular type of instrument is better suited than any other 
type. For the ineasurement of low voltages, and particularly 
for the measurement of circuits of high frequency, I think we 
must all agree that it has no peer. But beyond those particular 
fields, it seems to me that its usefulness is rather limited, and 
limited, indeed, by the very reason that Mr. Pierce mentions, 
its high energy loss, which, for the 2000-ampere meter mentioned, 
for the voltage given would come to 600 watts, which would be 
quite out of all reason. I would also mention, not from my 
personal experience, but a statement that I have very direct 
from some wireless people, that when you use it on the very high 
frequencies, it is desirable to use an air transformer rather than a 
shunt. I cannot give you any figures at all on that, but Mr. 
Price, who was with Fessenden, at Brant Rock, had very 
considerable experience with it, and strongly recommended the 
use of air transformers, in place of shunts, for high frequency. 

So far as maintaining accuracy is concerned, the table that is 
given in the paper leaves little to be desired in this or even in any 
other type of instrument. It is well within the limits you would 
normally expect to find in the calibration of an instrument over 
a period of years, but I do not feel that this instrument will ever 
have a field except for service under the conditions for which it is 
particularly suited. I do not think it can “ come back.” That 
is almost too much to expect. 

In regard to the induction type of instrument, I feel that here, 
too, we have an instrument of exceedingly valuable character- 
istics for certain fields, but of decided limitations for other fields, 
which will prevent it from “coming back.” The long scale, 
which is inherent in the type, is a desirable feature, but we must 
not neglect to take into account that what we want to know is 
the current in the circuit, that if you can read an instrument 
beyond its limits of accuracy, or if you have an instrument which 
has an error greater than its reading capacity, you equally get 
into trouble. What you want is an instrument which will give 
you, so far as you can read it, the combination of being readable 
and possessing an accuracy which will give the closest approxi- 
mation to the actual condition of the circuit. The longer scale 
is characteristic, and in itself, if obtained without any sacrifice, 
is good. 

in regard to the question of the light moving element, I do 


1600 ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


not feel at all that a light moving element necessarily means a 
weak element. The small threads referred to are definite threads 
—it is all in proportion to the part you are using, and light 
weight does not mean that you necessarily have a weak part, 
or a part which is liable to be injured in operation and in service. 
It does mean that the average meterman cannot handle it. 
The delicate, light moving parts must be handled by human 
hands with great care and skill, and with much experience, but 
so far as their operation in the instrument is concerned, I do 
not feel that there is anything to be worried about in that respect; 
because the mass you are handling, the forces you are dealing 
with, are, after all, comparable with the lightness of weight which 
you have, and are not necessarily likely to give trouble. I fully 
agree that shielding is essential, that strong shielding, double 
shielding, is essential, where you can have it, and that the 
magnetic disturbances which you find in your circuit are the 
most impcrtant things to look out for. 

As to the black and white scale, I believe that is properly a 
question of illumination. For tunnel work, there can be no 
shadow of a doubt that the black scale with a white figure is 
superior. For other conditions of illumination that may not .be 
true, and for certain conditions of illumination it certainly is not 
true, but after all you must adapt your scale to the conditions 
of illumination, and should not expect that the illustrations 
given in the paper will be a true representation of average 
conditions. There will be conditions of illumination where 
you will get that, and as Mr. MacGahan says, the camera may 
be more accurate than the eye, but you are putting up your 
instrument to be used in connection with the eye, and not to be 
used in connection with the camera. Therefore, it seems to me 
that we cannot say definitely that the white letter is better, or the 
black letter is better, but there will be conditions of service 
where one will be superior and different conditions where the 
other will be definitely superior. 

W.H. Pratt: I will speak on the paper by Mr. MacGahan. 
This paper is entitled Induction Type Indicating Instruments, 
but for the most part it deals with the ammeter. The 
switchboard instruments of particular importance are the 
ammeter, voltmeter and wattmeter, and their importance, I 
should say, is in the order of the voltmeter, the ammeter and the 
wattmeter, that is, it is absolutely certain that the voltmeter 
should be accurate, it is essential that the ammeter be accurate, 
so that you are sure you do not overload the machines and lines, 
and the wattmeter is of little use unless it is accurate. As I 
understand these various induction type instruments, the 
ammeter is the most easily susceptible of giving accuracy, the 
voltmeter comes second to the ammeter, and it is with difficulty 
that the wattmeter is made to perform its work. The perform- 
ance of the indicating wattmeters, of course, must not be 
confused with that of the rotating watt-hour meter, in which 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1601 


there are automatic compensations coming in, which would make 
a remark of this character entirely inapplicable. I am sure that 
a light-weight moving element is to be trusted rather than a 
heavy-weight moving element, where it is properly designed, 
because a greater amount of structural strength can be given to 
a light-weight than a heavy-weight element in proportion to the 
strains to which it will be subjected. 

Albert F. Ganz: I should like to confirm the statement made 
by the previous speaker to the effect that it is highly desirable 
to have the moving system in an electrical measuring instrument 
as light as possible, because this means a small moment of 
inertia requiring only a light damper, and also correspondingly 
small wear on the jeweled bearings. It is, of course, true, as 
already stated, that a light movement is much more difficult to 
repair by the ordinary meterman, but on the other hand an 
instrument with a very light movable system is much less likely 
to get out of order. In regard to the hot-wire instrument, I 
ask whether the instrument has a zero temperature coefficient, 
so that a series multiplier can be used with it having a constant 
multiplying factor. 

A. W. Pierce: It has. The hot wire used in the voltmeter 
has a zero temperature coefficient. 

F. V. Magalhaes: [ask Mr. Pratt to mention the temperature 
coefficient of the instrument, and it would be interesting to know 
if he has the figures, what the temperature coefficient is, and 
whether any attempt is made to compensate for temperature 
error. 

William J. Mowbray: Concerning the induction type of 
ammeter and the black scale, I would like to say that the black 
scale was tried by me in the original experiment on the rotating 
watt-hour meter. This was used in cellars where the light is 
usually very poor, and we found it to be a fact that with very 
low illumination the black scale and white division showed up 
better, so that I believe for very low illumination the black scale 
is the better. 

I would ask Mr. MacGahan to tell us just how he gets rid of 
the temperature coefficient in his induction ammeter. We know 
that the aluminum moving element will change some 4 per cent 
in temperature for every 10 deg. cent. change in temperature, 
and still the curve shows very little error due to temperature, and 
I have no doubt Mr. MacGahan can explain to us simply just 
how he does it. 

A. L. Ellis: There are two or three points in the paper by 
Mr. MacGahan that have not been touched on by the speakers. 
One is in reference to the electrostatic disturbance. There is no 
occasion for electrostatic disturbance, because the moving 
system can be put at the same potential as the surrounding 
apparatus, and the only source of trouble would. be static 
charges on the glass caused by rubbing the glass, and that 
certainly is not the thing to do, as it will affect the instrument. 


1602 ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


A little further on in the paper the statement is made: “« Ex- 
perience and tests have shown that 15 grams maximum is a 
safe limit for horizontal shafts in V sapphire jewels, and that a 
ratio of torque to weight of 0.15 is a satisfactory minimum, when 
torque is expressed in centimeter-grams, and weight in grams, in 
the case of switchboard meters.” I would like to ask Mr. 
MacGahan what line of reasoning led to that conclusion? It 
would seem to me, from what experience I have had with jewels 
and pivots, that it is vital that the moving system be made just 
as light as possible. 

It is impossible to make a V pivot and bring it down to a 
theoretical point, so if we take a cross-section at the point of 
contact between the pivot and the jewel, the point of contact 
will not coincide with the axis of the pivot, but will bear at a 
considerable radius from this axis, therefore, the pivot will roll 
in the jewel when the pointer is deflected up scale, the pivot 
rolling up hill. The action of gravity tending to roll the pivot 
down hill is in opposition to the torque of the instrument and 
in the same direction as the torque of the control spring, tending 
to make the instrument read too low. If the instrument has been 
operating with considerable deflection and the current is reduced, 
the pointer tends to read too high for the same cause, as in this 
case the action of gravity acts in opposition to the torque of the 
control spring. This is a source of error difficult to reduce below 
an observable amount or even an objectionable amount, unless a 
very large ratio of torque to weight can be obtained. I think the 
error will be very pronounced even with the ratio mentioned of 
1.5 (in gram-millimeters). 

The moving system should be as light as possible, for, although 
you can make the pivot out of hard steel, glass-hard in fact, and 
can use a sapphire as a jewel, which is very hard, yet a moving 
system of but very few grams weight is sufficient to deform the 
pivot and sapphire jewel. The pivot may be so hard and tough 
that it can be driven into a piece of brass or a spring tempered 
steel scale, without distorting the regularity of its surface, but 
if this pivot formed the support for a moving system, as for 
instance the D’Arsonval type weighing only 1.5 grams, simply 
dropping it a few inches, will be sufficient to crush the steel pivot 
or to force the point to mushroom. The changed form'of the 
pivot is substantially that of the jewel and, therefore, friction is 
increased to a noticeable amount, because a larger area is exposed 
to the jewel. 

Paul M. Lincoln: I am particularly interested in the paper on 
the resonant circuit frequency indicator, because some ten or 
twelve years ago I had an idea very similar to the one described. 
After I got the scheme pretty well worked out, a modification of 
the idea occurred to me depending on the same phenomenon, 
which seemed to me to be considerably better. That particular 
scheme was described in a paper which I prepared for the 
Institute and presented about eleven years ago at the Buffalo 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1603 


convention. I want to say a word or two to show the principle 
upon which it rests. As we increase the frequency on a circuit 
containing inductance and capacity in series, we come to a certain 
frequency that will give a marked peak in the current flow. 
This is the frequency of resonance, and a curve showing the 
variation of current with frequency is shown in No. 2 of the 
accompanying figure. The fact that there is a marked peak of 
current at resonance is utilized to actuate the instrument de- 
scribed. 

There is another phenomenon, which occurs at the same point, 
and it was on this other phenomenon that I based the instrument 
I speak of. At the same time that the current changes its value, 
the power factor of that current also changes its values very 
rapidly. This current leads when below resonant frequency 
and lags when above, while close to resonant frequency the power 


| sl heaps bps MS, 
a el a een ee = 
ae ol POWER FACTOR CURVE NO. 1 . 
i 60 & 1 St || 
qe 5] | | 
Iss algo Sse 
< | | } 
it es 7 i 
co al 2s tiga 
ro) 30 2.0 | 
5 5 + ie als 
ry load 
015 a aes ie 
ui | 
15 al | 
3 LR | CURRENT CURVE NO. 2 | 
ibe 1.0—> 4 
os ea | 
a 1 
60 5 +r 
% ve ‘a | 
I 0 i lla a 
30 40 50 60 80 90 


10 
FREQUENCY-CYCLES PER SEC. 


factor changes very rapidly. This is shown in curve No. 1 of 
the accompanying figure. Hence, a standard power factor 
meter in a circuit that is adjusted for resonance at normal 
frequency makes an ideal frequency indicator. The sensitiveness 
of such an instrument may be varied as desired simply by 
varying the amount of resistance in the resonant circuit. All 
these points are brought out in my paper published in the 1901 
TRANSACTIONS of the Institute. 

F. H. Bowman: The hot wire instrument achieved a large meas- 
ure of popularity some years ago, due, I think, to two causes. The 
instrument originally was imported from Germany, and on its 
way to America it did not lose its fine finish, which is character- 
istic of all fine instruments. Its fine finish was not lost when the 
instrument came to this country, and I ascribe the major portion 


1604 ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


of its popularity to the fact of this fine finish and its very splendid 
appearance. The other cause to which I ascribe its popularity 
is the fact that it is interchangeable, as between alternating 
current and direct current. That last feature has lost much of its 
importance in the last few years, due to the increased knowledge 
of the art of measuring alternating current. The fact that it 
is interchangeable between alternating current and direct current 
is not so important as it was some years ago, and on that account 
the hot-wire instrument had a certain lapse in favor which is 
now about at an end, and I believe there is a new lease of life, 
we might say, for the hot-wire instrument on account of the 
wireless telegraph which, of course, is growing very largely. 
In reading Mr. Pierce’s paper the thing that appeals to me 1s 
the marvellous accuracy which is obtained in the use of the hot 
wire instruments in Mr. Pierce’s hands, and I think I can state 
here, without danger of being accused of fulsomeness, that Mr. 
Pierce is a very skilful man in handling hot-wire instruments. 
People who read this paper will assume, naturally, that by the 
use of hot-wire instruments they will secure the same degree of 


accuracy which Mr. Pierce reports, or if they fail to do so, they - 


will condemn the instrument. Hence the conclusions I draw are 
these: Where the hot wire instruments are used skilfully, by a 
skilful man, who is aware of the tricks of the hot-wire instru- 
ments, such a man will procure excellent results from them, 
whereas another man who is less skilful in their use will get into 
more or less difficulty with them, and will be disappointed in 
the results obtained. 

The question was brought up about the effect of the temper- 
ature coefficient in hot-wire instruments. We will take a volt- 
meter 0.03 in. in diameter, that is the smallest we can use. 
That wire is made with practically zero temperature coefficient, 
so the first thing is—the hot-wire instrument has a zero tem- 
perature coefficient. But this point I will make, and it may be 
new—the hot-wire instrument, although it has no general tem- 
perature coefficient, has an apparent temperature coefficient 
that is of considerable magnitude, and can easily be determined; 
that is to say, although the wire in itself has no temperature 
error, when you put a load on it, and heat the hot wire up to a 
point where it expands, it increases in resistance, and although 
the specific resistance of it is still the same, the apparent resist- 
ance changes, due, I believe, to a decrease in the cross-section 
of the hot wire, on account of the heating. For high voltages, 
150 volts, I call that high for hot wire, that is negligible on 
account of the considerable resistance in series with the hot 
wire, but as you drop down, and the series resistance becomes low 
in the hot-wire instrument, the errors increase in importance, 
and when you have a low-voltage instrument, five volts or three 
volts, the apparent temperature coefficient is something you 
have to take into account. 

F. P. Cox: There is a point which has a bearing, not only 
on the types of instrument under discussion, but also on the 


Ee 


1912} DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1605 


general instrument problem, and that is where Mr. MacGahan 
mentions the desirability of opening the scale at the top. I 
do not agree with him, not only as that point is applicable to 
induction types of instruments, but to any instrument. You 
have control of the scale of distribution. An ammeter put upon 
the circuit of a generator must take care of overloads, and that is 
rated at 100 per cent in excess of the capacity of the generator, 
and normally is working much below one-half of that. Therefore, 
within a certain limit as we have the scale at our disposal, it 
seems to me, we should not spend too much of our scale length 
in getting wide open divisions at that portion of the load which 
the instrument rarely meets and only for very short periods. 
Therefore, it seems to me that the equi-crescent scale is more 
suited to this purpose, or a scale which closes slightly in the 
upper portions, and remains open in those portions where the 
instrument is used nine hundred and ninety-nine times out of 
a thousand. 

' N. Monroe Hopkins: Are there any data on the weight in 
grams of the rotating member of the induction type meter as 
used? 

Paul MacGahan: Referring to Mr. Mowbray’s question: 
The method of compensating the ammeter for temperature 
changes is very simple. The windings consist, in fact, of a series 
transformer, wherein the secondary coil is wound on an electro- 
magnet, the primary coil wound right over same, and the pole- 
piece coils short-circuited across the secondary. As the tempera- 
ture of the aluminum drum increases its resistance increases, 
tending to reduce the torque in the ratio of the temperature 
coefficient of the aluminum. At the same time, however, the 
resistance of the secondary winding, which is partially or mostly 
copper, increases which is equivalent to introducing resistance in 
the secondary circuit of a series transformer, which of course 
increases the magnetic flux. The increased magnetic flux gives 
greater driving power, and exactly compensates for the increased 
resistance of the drum. This is explained, somewhat theoretic- 
ally, in the paper itself. 

As regards the relative accuracy of the voltmeter and the 
ammeter, it is true that the ammeter has a greater accuracy than 
is possible with the voltmeter. This is at the same time true 
with all other principles of operation, so that it cannot be said to 
be exclusively a feature of the induction meter. 

With regard to the errors of the wattmeters, the wattmeters 
as developed have temperature and frequency errors closely 
approximating those of the voltmeter and the ammeter. As 
stated by Mr. Pratt, accuracy of slightly lower order than of the 
ammeters or voltmeters is permissible in a switchboard watt- 
meter. : 

Messrs. Pratt, Ellis and Cox express themselves very much in 
favor of a very light weight moving element for indicating meters. 
In this I concur, only provided the lightness is not obtained at a 


1606 ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


sacrifice of torque ratio and staunchness. As a comparison it 
may be pointed out that in a-c. watt-hour meter practise certain 
manufacturers have greatly favored a movement of 30 grams 
weight rather than one of 15 grams and have argued that the 
increased torque obtained thereby is an advantage. Ifa weight of 
30 grams upon one jewel is considered satisfactory by them, for 
watt-hour meters, should not they consider a weight of 10 grams 
distributed between two jewels satisfactory in every respect for 
an indicating instrument? The average of three makes of 
moving iron instruments made in this country and abroad, 
shows a weight of two grams for the movement, with a torque 
of 1/19 centimeter-gram; the induction type movement described 
by me weighs 10 grams, with a torque 28 times as great, which 
shows quite a predominance in favor of the induction type, with 
regard to ratio of torque to weight. 

It has been pointed out on one or two occasions, that the 
weight, acting upon the theoretical point of contact on the jewel, 
results in a pressure of several hundred thousand pounds per 
square inch. This is surely an academic point, otherwise the 
jewel would give way on the slightest impact. As a matter of 
fact the bearings operate very satisfactorily. 

As regards scale length in switchboard indicating instruments, 
the readability of the scale should be of a higher order of accuracy 
than that of the meter element itself. This is on account of the 
fact that readings are often required to be taken hurriedly from 
a distance, and thus the condition is different from that obtaining 
in portable instruments, where a close observation may be made 
and thus a scale no more accurate than the inherent accuracy of 
the mechanism, is permissible. 

W. H. Pratt: There was a question asked as to temperature 
errors in the frequency indicator which I described, and I may 
say that there are three elements in this device whose tempera- 
ture coefficients must be considered. There are the condensers, the 
reactances and the resistances, besides the mechanical parts. 
It is easily possible to make the mechanical structure so that 
there are no temperature errors introduced thereby. The 
errors due to change in resistance can be reduced to negligible 
quantities, because the resistance does not come in as a large 
factor, and what there is of it can be made to have a low tem-— 
perature coefficient. The reactance can also be made to have an 
entirely negligible temperature coefficient, and by properly 
designing the condensers these also can be made to have zero 
temperature coefficient so that the instrument, as stated, has a 
ie ails coefficient that is almost exactly zero. It is extremely 
small. 

A. W. Pierce: The question has been asked whether the 
voltmeter has a zero temperature coefficient. The voltmeter 
has a small temperature coefficient, but any slight alteration in 
resistance that may arise, or any other change of drop in the 
wire, is taken care of in the method of calibration, and automatic- 
ally corrects itself when the instrument is calibrated. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1607 


It has also been stated that the results shown in the paper 

are those where extreme care was used. Personally, I had 
nothing to do with the checking of these instruments. This is 
the routine calibration of our standard as it was taken by men 
in the laboratory, most of whom have been there only a short 
time, and some of them less than two months, though they have 
been instructed in the care of hot-wire instruments and have 
been told something of their limitations. 
John Gilmartin: (communicated after adjournment): It 
1S very interesting to note how the many obstacles to an accurate 
induction type instrument have been met and skilfully overcome, 
as is so ably shown in the paper on induction type meters. One 
characteristic of the induction type instrument not mentioned 
by Mr. MacGahan is that the torque developed on severe over- 
loads is excessive and may shift or break the pointer. 

A certain central station switchboard has the feeder panels 
equipped with induction type instruments and it has been found 
that circuit disturbances occur quite frequently that are severe 
enough to cause the pointers of the instruments to bend and in 
some cases break off when the pointer hits the stop and in others 
to slip on the armature shaft and thus shift zero. Attempts to 
overcome these effects by improving the spring stop have been 
only partly successful. 

A brief discussion of the characteristic action of the other 
types of instruments on overload is of value in bringing out the 
comparative effects. 

The magnet vane and dynamometer type instruments have a 
limited scale movement, that is, the vanes or moving coils 
usually, as the load increases, move from a position across the 
field of the fixed coils to a position parallel to it, after which 
there is no further torque no matter how excessive the overload. 
Such instruments, as is well known, usually have scales whose 
divisions become very small at both ends, that is, the torque 
per scale unit decreases rapidly as the pointer approaches the 
maximum scale point. 

Induction type meters, on the contrary, by reason of the rotat- 
ing field principle, have a constantly increasing torque with 
load, and the divisions and torque per scale unit become larger 
at the maximum point of the scale. The pointer is not naturally 
limited in its length of throw as are the other types referred to; 
that is, if the stops were removed the moving part would rotate 
at a definite speed as an induction motor. 

In a test made on a modern switchboard type induction 
ammeter it was found that if 300 per cent of full load current 
was thrown on the meter the pointer was thrown so hard against 
the stop as to cause it to shift its zero position. On the other 
hand 500 per cent of load thrown repeatedly on a magnetic 
vane instrument caused no zero shift. Both types of instruments 
had magnetic damping. The inferior results given by the induc- 
tion meter on this test were not considered due in any sense to 


1608 ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


poor design or workmanship, as both were excellent, but rather 
to the relatively tremendous overload torque inherent in the 
rotating field principle. 

Paul McGahan (by letter): Referring to Mr. John Gilmar- 
tin’s communication after adjournment, the effect of overload 
upon the pointers of induction meters is more severe than in 
other types, due to the increase in torque, but the movements 
can be made strong enough to withstand it. 

Although trouble as stated appeared in certain cases, this can 
be said to be part of the development of the type, for the matter 
has been satisfactorily corrected. The ammeters described will 
withstand fifteen times full load current throwrm on repeatedly 
without damage—in fact, the coils will burn out on overload 
before the pointer or other parts of the movement become 
damaged. This compares very favorably with the overload 
capacity of moving iron or moving coil meters. Although it is 
true that in moving iron vane instruments, the iron moves to a 
position parallel to the lines of force through the coil, this takes 
place only after an appreciable length of time, as the meters have 
inertia and damping. The overload effect takes place instantly 
while the iron is still in its position of maximum torque and thus 
the result is that an enormous torque is developed, the same as in 
induction instruments. 

A. W. Pierce (by letter): The statement that hot wire volt- 
meters have no temperature coefficient was made on the strength 
of tests made some years ago, records of which have not been 
preserved. Since presenting the paper we have made a careful 
test on a hot wire voltmeter, with the following results: 


Amperes through instrument Volts at terminals Ohms resistance 
0.0009202 0.01403 15.25 
0.01536 0.2343 15.25 
0.01539 0.2348 15.26 
0.04527 0.6904 15.25 
0.1044 1.5937 15.26 
0.1515 2.303 15.20 
0.1774 2.7292 15.38 
0.1861 2.8430 15.28 
0.1970 3.0093 15.27 


Current measurements were made with standard resistances 
and potentiometer. 

Volts at terminals of the instrument were measured by the 
same potentiometer used for the current. 

The two readings showing the greatest variation from the 
mean value of the resistance may be in error due to the difficulty 
of keeping the current constant while reading current and voltage 
on the same instrument. 

The lowest current given was not large enough to cause any 
detectable deflection of the voltmeter needle and the highest 


current was slightly more than that required to produce¥full 
scale deflection. ; 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


PERMEABILITY MEASUREMENTS WITH 
ALTERNATING CURRENT 


BY L. T. ROBINSON AND J. D. BALL 


In testing samples of sheet iron to determine whether or not 
the material is suitable for the specific purpose for which it is 
intended, it is desirable to know the core loss in a unit volume 
of the material. The total core loss obtained may be separated 
by well-known means into hysteresis and eddy losses or the total 
core loss without separation may be used as a measure of the 
quality of the material. 

In designing apparatus it is also necessary to know with some 
degree of accuracy the permeability of the material. 

Accurate measurements of permeability may be obtained by 
various methods, and approximate methods of practical value 
have been employed in which the ballistic galvanometer is not 
used, but for the most part these methods require that the sample 
under test be put through the permeability tests on direct cur- 
rent. 

It is desirable to find means to measure permeability with 
accuracy and speed comparable with core loss measurements, and 
as core loss measurements are made on alternating current, a 
method using the same current supply as that used in making 
this test is sought. 

The present paper deals with the general relations between max- 
imum flux density, maximum exciting current and magnetizing 
current.(1)* The method has not been completely developed 
to deal with samples in the form of bundles of strips. The 
preliminary work referred to was confined to ring samples, but 
the general principles involved may be used later in dealing with 
samples of standard form.(2)* 


*Soe references (1) and (2) at end of paper. 
1609 


1610 - ROBINSON AND BALL: [June 28 


In a sample of iron magnetized by an alternating current 
the maximum magnetizing current occurs quite obviously at 
the point of maximum flux, which is the point of zero induced 
voltage. The total primary current, however, contains eddy com- 
ponents which may include currents for supplying instruments, 
e.g., a voltmeter for measuring the magnetic density, connected 
to a secondary winding, as well as eddy currents in the iron. 

We will write I, for the maximum magnetizing current. 

I, for the maximum exciting or total current. 

Iw for the maximum eddy current, including 
any currents in the secondary. 

im, te and ty Will be used to represent the instan- 
taneous values of the above quantities. 

For the present only sam- 
ples will be considered in 
which the laminations are 
thin enough so that appreci- 
able ‘‘ screening ’’ does not 
occur. The eddy current 2 
may be considered to be 
exactly in phase with the in- 
duced voltage and therefore 
to pass through zero when 
the magnetizing current is at 
a maximum. 

Therefore the instantaneous 
value of the primary current 
1, Which occurs at the instant 
that the induced e.m.f. passes 
through zero represents Im, 
the magnetizing current to be used in plotting the B-H curve. 
B may be directly determined by voltmeter if sine wave of 
e.m.f. is employed and wave distortion does not occur in the 
apparatus. The distortion of secondary e.m.f. wave has been 
carefully considered in connection with the commercial ap- 
paratus already referred to and need not be discussed here. 

Under some conditions the maximum magnetizing current . 
very closely coincides with the maximum total primary current. 
The condition of coincidence will occur when the sinusoidal 
eddy and secondary component of the total primary distorted 
wave does not at any point exceed the difference between the 
magnetizing current at that point and the maximum magnetizing 
current. 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1611 


While this relation is somewhat difficult to express concisely 
with words or symbols it is very quickly shown by reference to 
the figures and oscillograms which follow. 

Fig. 1 shows an induced e.m.f. wave, a magnetizing current 
wave 1, derived from a hysteresis loop and an assumed energy 
wave tw in phase with the induced emf. A wave of total 
current 7, derived from the magnetizing and eddy waves is 
also shown. It will be seen from this figure that I, is identical 
with J,, because the eddy current is at no point greater than the 
difference between 7, and In. 

Fig. 2 is the same as Fig. 1, except that the eddy current has 
been assumed to be larger and in consequence the exciting current 

is larger. In this assumed case 
YTS TT] itisseen that I, is greater than 
[ @|.| 4m and the assumption that 
he jon they are alike would lead to an 
| mA TL SN error of about 12 per cent. 


L_| 
| 


T— 


a Figs. 3 to 7 inclusive are 
‘+, records of current and in- 
iN duced e.m.f. at various induc- 
tions. The sample, of high- 
||| resistance iron 0.014-in. (0.035 
i eae cm.) thick, weighing about 22 
7 Ib. (10 kg.), was selected be- 
rt / i cause several careful ballistic 
a / | cae : 
\ Pi | | determinations for permeabil- 
ee —+ + ity and hysteresis had been 
Fic. 2 made on the sample in connec- 
tion with some earlier work. 
Perpendiculars have been drawn from the point of zero voltage 
intercepting the exciting current curve at the point of maximum 
magnetizing current. From these and similar records the as- 
sumption for this sample that J, = J,, is in error by the following 


ees! ee || 


percentages: 60~ 25 ~ 
. B per cent error per cent error 
14,150 0 0 
12,140 0 0 
10,075 2.5 0 
8,315 2.52 0.81 
5,000 1.8 0.64 
2,861 sigh 0.53 
2,020 1.41 1.41 
999 0.78 0 


1612 ROBINSON AND BALL: [June 28 


In order to show the relationship more fully, the current and 
voltage of Fig. 4, B = 10,075, 60~, are plotted together with the 
magnetizing current wave derived from its hysteresis loop, Fig. 8. 
Subtracting the values of 7, from 7, and plotting the differences 
gives, as expected, a wave in phase with the induced e.m.f. and 
of form approximately sinusoidal. 

Taking the effective value of this wave and of the voltage 
wave we obtain a value for the watts loss, which was found to 
agree closely with the watts consumed in the voltmeter plus 
the eddy current loss as determined by separation tests. The 


+2 
| | \ 
z= 1 = [ = 


poe LH 


ay al | 
H pv 60 _§ 1 ib 140 160 1 240 260 80 500 
x 
} 


9 


Fic. 8—SAME SAMPLE AS FIG. 3. 
CURVES FOR e AND tig TAKEN FROM Fic. 4. CURVE FOR tm DERIVED 
FROM HysTEREsIS Loop (BALLISTIC). 
Points marked X on iy curve are derived from ij and ie. Points marked 0 are for sine wave. 


loss on the oscillograph circuit was included with the voltmeter 
loss. In order to reduce this loss as much as possible the os- 
cillograph vibrator used for taking the voltage wave was con- 
nected to a separate winding having two to four turns and a 
very small resistance was included in the vibrator circuit. 

Oscillograms for all densities given in the preceding table were 
taken both at 60 ~ and 25 ~ but only representative ones are 
shown. 

The accuracy of these results was tested by determining B-H 
curves in the usual manner with ballistic galvanometer and the 
general agreement between the results is shown in Fig. 9. The 
agreement is not what could be considered entirely satisfactory, 


PLATE LXXXVI 
A. 1. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 3 [ROBINSON AND BALL] 


Primary current wave (lower curve) and secondary induced e.m.f. (upper curve) on 
22-lb. ring of 0.014-in. iron at 60 cycles per sec. Voltmeter resistance 1800 ohms—Induced 
voltage 116.5—B maximum 14,150, Im 5.27, Ie 5.27, H = 14.63. 


Fic. 4 [ROBINSON AND BALL] 


Same sample as Fig. 3. Voltmeter resistance 1800 ohms—Induced voltage 82 9— 
B maximum 10.075, Im 0.707, Ie 0.730. H = 1.98. 


PLATE LXXXVII 
Av la Eek 
VOL, XXXI, 1912 


kes os [ROBINSON AND BALL] 


300 ohms—Induced voltage 41.2— 


Same sample as Fig. 3. Voltmeter resistan 
imum 5000, Im 0.260, Ie 0.264, H = 0.72: 


Fic. 6 [ROBINSON AND- BALL] 


Same sample as Fig. 3. Voltmeter resistance 42)0 ohms (reflectiag dynamometer)— 
Induced voltage 16.6—B maximum 2020, I 0.178, Je 0.181, H = 0.496. 


PLATE LXXXVIII 
A.1. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 7 [ROBINSON AND BALL] 


Same sample as Fig. 3. Voltmeter resistance 2000 ohms—lInduced voltage 8.16— 
B maximum 993, Im, 0.137, Ig 0.138, H = 0.381 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1613 


as final values, but is sufficient to establish the fact that the 
preceding general conclusions are substantially true. 

There remains to be determined by convenient means the 
value of J,. The taking of an oscillogram for each induction 
is prohibitive in practical work, therefore tests were made 
with the oscillograph by observing for each induction the 
width of the band of light coming from the vibrator which was 
connected into the current circuit. The width of this beam 
corrected for the width of the spot as observed in the zero position 
is a measure of twice the maximum exciting current, which is 


wa% 
0 1000 2000 3000 1000 5000 6000 7000 
= acne 
7 } fee | 
15000 |_| : | 
B-i 
Q 1 
= 1 = i 
= | | ae | | Nee} i 
B-M | 
10000 a 
| — wag —! 
B is ity uf | L_ FA _lox! H 
LHe : 
Hi i Sage 
j —t— 
5000 3 
| 
t | i 
[ aa 
; 
pe teen eee ~ | 
o Tere 10 15 20 
H 


Fic. 9—SHOWING B—H anp PERMEABILITY CURVES. 
SAME SAMPLE As Fic. 3. 
X = 60 cycles per sec.; O = 25 cycles per sec.; 0 = direct current. 


evaluated by means of a d-c. calibration.of the vibrator: Ad- 
ditional tests, similar to Fig. 9, were made on similar material, 
observing the width of the beam, and better results were obtained 
(see Fig. 10) than those found on the sample of Fig. 9, which was 
shown because waves and ballistic loops were available on this 
sample. A sample of low-resistance unalloyed iron was tested, 
showing a-c. and d-c. results not in good agreement between 
B = 4000 and B = 10,000. This would be expected in a sample 
having high permeability accompanied by relatively large eddy 
loss. 


1614 ROBINSON AND BALL: {June 28 


CONCLUSIONS 


The measurement of maximum current (I) by elementary 
oscillograph, observing the width of the beam, is satisfactory 
and furnishes a convenient and fairly accurate means for deter- 
mining the values in any work where the maximum rather than 
the average or effective value of a current or voltage is required. 

The assumption that J, represents Im, in all cases, is not war- 
ranted, due to the causes explained, and further investigation is 
required before the limits of thickness of lamination, permea- 
bility, relative eddy loss, shape of hysteresis loop, etc., which 
can be successfully handled, are definitel ydetermined. The 
samples experimented on, particularly Fig. 10, were, by reason 


ea] 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 


4 
eee 
|_| | 
15 20 25 28 


H 


Fic. 10—SuHow1nc B-H AND PERMEABILITY CURVES, SAME DATA 
as Fic. 9, ON A DIFFERENT SAMPLE. 


of relatively high hysteresis loss, low eddy current and medium 
permeability, well suited to obtaining good results by the method 
used, although the oscillograms show that the total primary 
current tends to reach a maximum in excess of the maximum 
magnetizing current. 

The investigations will be continued in the hope of finding 
that the limits of practical application are not too narrow to be 
of value. 

REFERENCES 

1. During the progress of this work some results of a similar 

investigation were published under the title ‘“‘A Method of 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1615 


Measuring Permeability by Means of Alternating Currents” by 
R. Beattie, D. Sc., and H. Gerrard, M. Se., Electrician (London), 
Vol. LXVIII, No. 11, pp. 436-438, Dec. 22, 1911. 

A very interesting method is there presented for determining 
the maximum primary current by measuring the watt loss in 
a small iron core which has been calibrated previously and whose 
primary winding is included in series with the exciting winding 
of the sample to be tested. 

The fact that the maximum primary current may not always 
represent the maximum magnetizing current is not referred to 
in the article, and the authors of the present paper believe that 
the determination of maximum current by observing the width 
of band on the elementary oscillograph is more convenient than 
the method proposed by Messrs. Beattie and Gerrard. The 
fact referred to in a footnote by Beattie and Gerrard that B-H 
curves on alternating current lie below those of direct current may 
be accounted for in part by the fact that secondary and eddy 
current may raise the maximum of the exciting current and con- 
sequently cause too large H values to be plotted on alternating 
current. 

2. The standard sample according to the specifications of the 
American Society for Testing Materials is the same as that used 
in the Epstein apparatus, viz. 50 by 3 cm. (19 11/16 by 1 3/16 
in.) weighing 10 kg. (22 lb.) and divided into four equal bundles. 


° nd re 

: 1 ve e 4 be) ans TA 
= : = ~ et wv) Ya : 7 7 
ol eilnderares gia 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


MEASUREMENTS OF MAXIMUM VALUES IN HIGH- 
VOLTAGE TESTING 


BY C. H. SHARP AND F. M. FARMER 


The breakdown strength of insulating materials is measured by 
the maximum voltage which they will withstand under given 
conditions. Tests are ordinarily made on alternating voltages, 
and the measurement of the maximum voltage is effected by 
indirect rather than direct means; that is, by measuring the 
virtual value of the voltage on either the primary or the sec- 
ondary of the transformer and arriving at the maximum value 
by using a measured or assumed value of the peak-factor* of the 
wave. It is unfortunately true that this peak-factor is more 
often assumed than measured, and no doubt many tests of dielec- 
tric strength are inaccurate because of unsuspected changes 
in the wave-form produced by conditions of the test. Only 
in the spark-gap bas an apparatus been available whereby a 
measure of the actual maximum value of the high voltage could 
be obtained. The spark-gap is however, a most uncertain 
piece of apparatus, the vagaries in the behavior of which have 
by no means been accounted for. Installed according to the 
Standardization Rules of the Institute, a spark-gap for measur- 
ing 250,000 volts requires a space such that no “ extraneous “ 
body comes nearer than 4 ft. 3 in. (129.4 cm.); that is, a clear 
space or room 8} by 84 by 8% feet (259 cm.) is required. In view 
of this requirement, the spark-gap is a very large and cumber- 
some, as well as uncertain and unsatisfactory apparatus. 

The arrangement here described is designed to give readings 
on a voltmeter of the maximum value of a high-voltage, wave. 


mn aseaice ois url Ueityse rr Fd 
* The term “‘peak-factor” is used for the ratio of the maximum voltage 
of the wave to the virtual voltage. 
1617 


1618 SHARP AND FARMER: [June 28 


The scheme is shown in Fig. 1. A series of condensers C, serv- 
ing as a voltage divider, is connected across the high-voltage 
line or from one side of the high-voltage line to ground, if the 
transformer secondary is grounded. In parallel to the con- 
denser C,, which is grounded, is connected a rectifier or 
commutator R driven by a synchronous motor, the rectifier be- 
ing connected in turn to an electrostatic voltmeter V. The 
commutator is adjusted to make instantaneous contact between 
the condenser and the voltmeter at the peaks of the waves. The 
voltmeter thus becomes charged to a potential corresponding to 
the maximum of the voltage waves and indicates this value. In- 
asmuch as the voltmeter is always charged in the same direc- 
tion, it reaches its maximum charge after a few contacts of the 
brushes and after that draws no charging current from the con- 
denser with which it is in parallel, except such as is necessary to 
supply leakage loss and to change the potential of the ungrounded 
side of the voltmeter with respect 
to the earth. Both of these 
charges should be relatively 
small. Hence the capacity of the nen HHH 
electrostatic voltmeter does not H HHH 
change the multiplying ratio of 
the train of condensers, which is 
equal to the ratio of the capacity 
of the end condenser to that of Rice 

the entire train, and the absolute 

value of the capacity of these condensers, be it large or small, 
has no influence. Of course for practical reasons the absolute 
capacity should not be too small. 

The calibration of the arrangement may be carried out in two 
different ways, both of which assume that the virtual value of 
the high voltage can be measured. 

Method 1. The synchronous motor is stopped in such a posi- 
tion that the brushes are making contact. Then the electro- 
static voltmeter indicates a value proportional to the virtual 
value. By comparing this value with the known high-tension 
voltage a calibration of the arrangement in volts, high tension, 
is obtained. The calibration is not, however, exactly the same 
for volts maximum unless the capacity of the voltmeter is negli- 
gible in comparison with that of the condenser with which it is 
in parallel. Otherwise, when connected permanently in parallel 
with the end condenser, it alters the multiplying ratio of the 


Ci 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1619 


train, which, as explained above, is not the case in measuring 
maximum volts. By properly proportioning the condensers, 
the capacity of the condenser may be many times that of the volt- 
meter, and this method may be used, or in any case where the 
capacity of the voltmeter is known, a correction corresponding 
thereto may be applied. 

Method 2. The position of the contact brushes may be shifted 
and their positions read on a_ graduated disk. By 
shifting these brushes to different positions and taking corre- 
sponding readings of the voltmeter, data may be obtained for 
plotting a wave-form curve. By finding the r.m.s. ordinate of 
the curve and comparing it with the value in volts of the virtual 
voltage applied to the series of condensers, the multiplying power 
of the condensers is determined. This method of calibrating 
makes no assumptions as to the capacities and other properties 
of the condensers. 

When once the calibration has been carried out, the electro- 
static voltmeter may be graduated to read directly values of 
high-tension volts; with the brushes set to the right position, the 
apparatus reads the maximum voltage used in a breakdown 
test. 

The actual apparatus constructed and used in applying the 
above method is as-follows: 

The condenser train (Fig. 2) consists of 21 glass plates 9 by 9 in. 
(23 cm.) coated on each side with tin-foil 5 by 5 in. (13 cm.) and 
having a capacity of about 0.0006 microfarad each. These 
are supported on a rack of dried hardwood impregnated with oil 
and are immersed in a metal tank filled with transformer oil. 
The tank is grounded and serves to prevent variations in the 
capacity of the condensers due to changes in outside conditions. 
The oil is required to prevent corona discharge at high tension and 
leakage due to dirt, moisture, etc., on the plates, either of which 
would cause a change in the impedance and introduce an error. 

Since the electrostatic voltmeter has a comparatively short 
useful working range, the train needs to have a variety of mul- 
tiplying ratios. For this reason a subdivided mica condenser 
is used as the grounded condenser, the one to which the volt- 
meter is connected. This condenser can be adjusted to give 
any required multiplying ratio. It need not be placed in the oil 
tank. 
The commutator (Fig. 3) consists of a disk of hard rubber 
into which thin brass contactors are set in such a way that they 


1620 SHARP AND FARMER: [June 2& 


strike the brushes. The brushes must not touch the rubber sur- 
face, for if they do they are liable to get a difference of potential 
through difference in friction, and to affect the voltmeter read- 
ing. The brush-holder is adjustable and its position can be 
read on a divided circle. A slow-motion tangent screw is pro- 
vided for adjusting the position of the brushes accurately to the 
peak of the wave. T he commutator is driven through an in- 
sulating coupling by a small synchronous motor. A Kelvin 
multicellular electrostatic voltmeter is used, fitted with a mirror 
and scale for exact reading. This is surrounded by a grounded 
electrostatic shield. The capacity of this voltmeter is very low, 
being approximately 0.00007 microfarad. 


Fic. 4 


This apparatus has been tested on a transformer rated at 
50 kv-a., 250,000 volts, having the middle point of the secondary 
grounded. The condenser train was connected from one leg 
of the transformer to earth and thus was affected by one-half 
the total voltage. Calibrations were made by both methods 
given and the results were concordant with each other on a 
smooth wave form, nearly sinusoidal, and on a badly distorted 
wave; also on frequencies of 25 and 60 cycles per second. During 
the tests, which are not as yet completed, voltages as high as 
140,000 volts, peak value, have been impressed on the apparatus. 

The wave-forms and peak-factors as found with this apparatus 
were checked by tracing the wave-form by the standard in- 
stantaneous contact method and also by the oscillograph. 


PLATE LXXXIX 
ASE. Es 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 2 [SHARP AND FARMER] 
Fe a 


i 


names nee, ANTE 


qos 


Fic. 3 [SHARP AND FARMER] 
Is 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1621 


With the smooth wave (Fig. 4) of the 25-cycle current, the 


peak-factor as found by the standard method was 1.50; as found 
from the wave-form traced with this apparatus it was 1.51; 


T 


Fic 5 


as found from maximum and virtual voltage readings of the 
electrostatic voltmeter it was 1.52. 


With the distorted wave (Fig. 5) difficulty was encountered 


See eeeceeuuTEEEEE 
| z : fede 
EEEEEr 
; aI = 
| H 

rs 


Ses 


Fic. 6 


in tracing the form by the electrostatic voltmeter. This arose from 
the fact that the readings of the voltmeter, being proportional 
to the square of the voltage, become very small at low voltages, 


1622 SHARP AND FARMER: [June 28 


and from the further fact that the instrument gives no indication 
of a change of polarity. Hence it was practically impossible 
to say, from readings of the voltmeter, on which side of the zero 
line the additional loops of this wave lay. To apply this method, 
therefore, to a wave which is badly distorted near the zero value 
would require more delicate means for measuring voltages. 

The peak-factor of this wave as determined by the standard 
methods was 2.00; as determined from maximum and virtual 
voltage readings on the electrostatic voltmeter it was 2.00; so 
that this simple method of calibrating held even in this extreme 
case. 

With the 60-cycle smooth wave (Fig. 6) the wave-form by 
the standard method gave a peak factor of 1.354; the voltmeter 
‘wave-form gave 1.36 and the maximum and virtual voltage 
readings gave 1.36s. 

The agreement of the results of the different method is suffi- 
‘ciently close for work of this character. There seems therefore 
to be no difficulty in calibrating the apparatus to give either 
maximum or virtual volts of the high-voltage line. The use of 
this apparatus should relieve high-voltage tests of the uncertainty 
as to the actual maximum voltage which is being applied. The 
elimination of guess-work as to this fundamental quantity can- 
not fail to give more satisfactory results in this important class 
of testing. 

It may be noted that if the testing transformer has low-volt- 
age measuring taps from the high-voltage winding, the com- 
mutator and voltmeter may be used directly without the con- 
denser train. The change in range of the voltmeter cannot 
then be effected so easily, but considerable complication is 
avoided. 

The above work has been performed at the Electrical Testing 
Laboratories with a view to realizing improvements in the 
accuracy of testing. The writers desire to express their high ap- 
preciation of the very efficient and enthusiastic assistance of 
Mr. E. D. Doyle in carrying out the experimental work. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1623 


DISCUSSION ON “‘ PERMEABILITY MEASUREMENTS witH ALTER- 
NATING CURRENT” (ROBINSON AND BALL), AND “ MEas- 
UREMENTS OF Maximum VALUES IN HiIGH-VoLTAGE TEST- 


ae (SHARP AND FARMER), Boston, Mass., June 28, 


E. D.{Doyle: As has been suggested in the paper by Messrs. 
Sharp and Farmer, the electrostatic voltmeter should have 
small leakage losses. If the voltmeter has low insulation resist- 
ance, it will not hold its charge but will discharge according to 
the exponential law 


where @ is initial voltage, 

e is the voltage at time f, 

c the capacity of the voltmeter 
and __r the resistance of the leakage path. 


Fic. 14 


Hence the voltmeter will not indicate the maximum voltage, 
but one depending on the root-mean-square charge on the 
voltmeter between times of contact. 

The effect of leakage can be largely eliminated by connecting 
a large condenser in shunt across the voltmeter terminals. 
The condenser acts as a storage reservoir and takes a large 
enough charge during the instant of contact to supply the leakage 
losses during the remainder of the cycle without an appreciable 
fall in potential. 

A double-pole, double-throw switch connected as shown in 
Fig. 1a allows the condenser in shunt to be used for maximum 
indications and to be cut out for virtual indications. This 
arrangement has the further advantage of enabling all readings 
to be taken without stopping the synchronous motor. 

In order to show the effect of the condenser in shunt, tests 
were made on a given voltage wave with various artificial leakage 
paths between the voltmeter terminals. The results were as 
follows: 


1624 ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS iJune 28 


Leakage path— Shunting condenser Peak factor 
megohms microfarads 
16,000 none 0.87 
1,000,000 i 1.35 
50 0.1 1.35 
1,000,000 0.1 1.35 


From the above it can be seen that with a 0. 1-microfarad 
condenser in shunt the resistance of the leakage path may be 
as low as 50 megohms without causing trouble, whereas opera- 
tion is impossible without the shunting condenser if it is 16,000 
megohms. The insulation resistance of the voltmeter was 
originally 8,000,000 megohms but has fallen to approximately 
1,000,000 megohms. However, with the capacity in shunt, 
little trouble is anticipated from surface leakage. 

The operation of the apparatus is now very satisfactory. 
The voltmeter is nearly dead beat and readings can be taken 
rapidly. Unless the voltage wave is very peaked, brushes do 
not need to be shifted until the voltage has passed through a 
wide range. The apparatus should be very useful in high-voltage 
tests. 

M. G. Lloyd: A method for determining permeability by 
alternating current seems very important. I am glad to see a 
method proposed for doing that. Of course, methods have 
already been proposed along that line, but cannot be regarded 
as entirely satisfactory. In many cases, no doubt, the designer 
would prefer to have the value of the exciting current rather 
than the permeability curve, to use in designing; in other cases 
it is valuable to know the actual permeability at each value of 
flux density. This paper by Messrs. Robinson and Ball seems 
to indicate a way in which they may eventually be combined, 
at least in certain cases. 

I think it ig necessary, however, to bear the limitations very 
strongly in mind. It isshown, in the first place, that the maximum 
exciting current does not correspond to the magnetizing current 
which gives the maximum flux. This is brought out in the curves 
of the paper, and can be illustrated very well, if the hysteresis 
curve, or perhaps more properly, an energy-loss curve, is 
plotted in cases where there are eddy currents or energy supplied 
to secondary circuits. In some curves that I determined some 
time ago under such conditions* the difference from the static 
hysteresis curve was brought out in a very pronounced way. 
When the static curve is determined for hysteresis, it is found 
to go up toa sharp point at the corner of the loop. On the other 
hand, if the curve is determined with alternating current, and 
with the existence of eddy currents, that corner becomes rounded 
off, showing in a very marked way that the maximum exciting 


nnn ESE 


*Bulletin of Bureau of Standards, V, page 402; 1908. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1625 


current does not correspond with the maximum flux-density. 
The oscillographic curves in this paper bring out the same thing. 
Some of the limitations have been expressed by the authors. 
One of them which is emphasized, is that the specimen must be 
thin enough to avoid magnetic screening. Another one, which 
is perhaps not emphasized enough, although it is definitely 
stated, is that the assumption is made that the eddy currents 
are in phase with the e.m.f. which produces them. Now, as a 
matter of fact, that is not generally true, and, of course, the 
more prominent the eddy currents become, the greater the effect 
which would be occasioned by the fact that the assumption is 
not entirely warranted. So that this method, while it may prove 
to be practicable in certain cases, is likely to be very limited 
in its application. 

We have been in the habit of thinking. of the oscillograph as 
an instrument for simply drawing curves of wave form. In one 
of the papers presented at the Boston convention, by Professor 
Harding, we saw how it could be used in making measurements 
of other quantities than wave form, and here we have an instance 
of its use in measuring the maximum value of a quantity, and in 
a case like this the maximum value can be determined without 
actually drawing the curve, merely observing the deflection 
on the oscillograph scale. It occurs to me that in the case of 
maximum voltage, as in the paper presented by Dr. Sharp and 
Mr. Farmer, it might prove a very convenient means of getting 
the maximum value. I do not think it would have the accuracy 
of the method presented by them, but in cases where the highest 
accuracy is not needed, and the oscillograph is sufficiently accur- 
ate, my experience with rotating commutators would indicate 
that it might be a much more satisfactory method for doing 
rapid work. 

Clayton H. Sharp: I wish to point out the. difference that 
the method I have referred to is one which requires no current. 
I do not know how you can use the oscillograph without consum- 
ing current. The electrostatic voltmeter, once charged, stays 
charged. There is the difference between it and the oscillograph, 
and it is a fundamental difference. 

As to the rotating commutator not being satisfactory, the same 
statement applies—the poorest kind of contact is sufficient, 
because it is only a question of charging the condenser. Not 
only that, but the use of an actual voltmeter rather than an _ 
oscillograph is obviously a desirable thing. 

T. W. Varley: What percentage of your contact is the width 
of the contact relative to the width of the sign? How much of 
the contact do you lose? 

Clayton Sharp: Probably not over one per cent. It is very 
narrow. 

L. T. Robinson: I was much interested in the term used in 
Dr. Sharp’s paper, ‘‘ peak-factor.”’ It seems to me to be a very 
good one, but I think it is new. We have used the term “ ampli- 
tude-factor ”’ that was coined some years ago by Dr. Fleming, 


1626 ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


which, if I understand correctly, is the reciprocal of this term, 
and previous to the use of the term “‘ peak-factor,” we have had 
employed in some English publications the term “ crest-factor.” 
I like “‘ peak-factor” better because it is quite commonly 
stated when things happen to the wave that the wave becomes 
peaked, and the fact of its becoming peaked could be, I think, 
properly expressed as “ peak-factor.” 

It was intended to point out in Mr. Ball’s paper, with which 
I had some slight connection, that this method never can be 
exactly right, but we were dealing with practical matters entirely, 
that is, there was no intention to enter into it from the stand- 
point of exact theory. 

With reference to the eddy currents being out of phase, the 
best we could figure out along that line was that if there were 
appreciable screening the eddy current would be out of phase. 
If there were not, it would be in phase. If there is appreciable 
screening the method gives incorrect values, because the magnetic 
density determined by the voltage on the secondary winding 
would indicate the average value over the sheet. The average 
value, so determined, would not be the uniformly distributed 
induction through the sheet, which must of necessity be known 
in order to plot correctly the B values against the maximum 
magnetizing current. 

The intention of the paper was not to speak of the advantages 
and wide scope of the method, but to call attention to the fact 
that. even in the cases shown, which seem to be the most favor- 
able kind of samples, that is, samples of iron with low eddy 
loss, very low indeed, and thin sheets, etc., there is found a 
tendency of the maximum primary current to exceed the mag- 
netizing current which should be plotted in connection with the 
B-H curve. At least, the total current had a definite tendency 
to be so large at maximum as to exceed the magnetizing current, 
but at the same time the difference was not so large but that it 
still looked a little hopeful to us. 

Elihu Thomson: I would like to say a word about the term 
‘“‘ peak-factor.”” I think it is a good suggestion, but I would 
like to see ‘“‘ wave-peak-factor ”’ the term, which would define 
the peak-factor intended. We use the word “peak” in 
so many significations, peak of the load, etc., that I think 
the term should be qualified. Of course, if the context of the 
paper shows what it means it is all right, but as Dr. Sharp has 
coined the term, it seems to me as a measure of prevention of 
confusion it might be well to put the word “ wave ”’ before it. 

Clayton H. Sharp: Regarding that term ‘‘ peak factor,” I 
did not mean to coin anything. It seemed to be a rather obvious 
term to use, and I simply used it, without considering whether 
it was new or old. I doubt if it is a new term, although it may 
be. I agree with Professor Thomson in his suggestion that the 
pat might be more specific, and it might be made ‘‘ wave peak- 
actor.” 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- . 
vention of the American Instilute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


POTENTIAL TRANSFORMER TESTING 
NOTE ON THE EFFECT OF THE RESISTANCE OF THE DETECTOR 
CIRcUIT, IN- DETERMINING THE RaTIO oF Two ALTER- 
NATING VOLTAGES, AND THE PHASE ANGLE BETWEEN 
THEM, BY THE BALANCE METHOD 


BY J. R. CRAIGHEAD 


In the use of the balance method of determining the ratio of 
the primary and secondary voltages of potential transformers, 
certain variations in the result were noted which appeared to be 
dependent on the relation of the resistance of the detector 
(Ry in Fig. 1) to the balance resistance Ri and R.. A short 
theoretical investigation and a few tests were made to determine 
the cause and the order of magnitude of the errors involved, and 
to ascertain safe limits of operation. As the measurement of 
the detector voltage has frequently been suggested as a means of 
determining phase angle between voltages, the relation of the 
detector resistance to this measurement was also considered. 

The cause of error is the current drawn in the detector circuit. 
If the two voltages to be compared are in phase and of the same 
wave form, no current flows in the detector circuit when a balance 
is obtained, and no error can result from this cause. In the usual 
condition, however, as in determining the voltage ratio and phase 
angle of a potential transformer, the voltages are slightly out of 
phase and may even differ slightly in wave form. Then the 
balance is obtained when the detector indicates minimum or zero, 
but a current flows in the detector circuit proportional to the 
voltage across the detector (practically in quadrature with the 
voltages compared) and inversely proportional to the resistance 
of the detector circuit. This current evidently passes through 
one section of the bridging resistance placed across the 

1627 


1628 CRAIGHEAD: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


greater voltage, but not through the other. Since the balance 
will be obtained when the voltages across the two resist- 
ances reach a certain relation, and since the currents in these 
resistances are unlike, the ratio of resistances is in general not 
an exact representation of the ratio of the voltages compared ; 
and since the detector current, taken in quadrature from the 
current in one of the bridging resistances, causes it to differ in 
phase from the current in the other bridging resistance, the 
minimum reading of the detector will be representative of an 
angle (a in Fig. 2) which is not identical with y, the phase 
angle between the voltages compared. 

The nature of the detector employed has an influence on the 
result. This may be (a) a simple voltmeter (see Figs. 1 and 2) 


DETECTOR 


Fic. 1 Fic. 2 


or (b) a dynamometer separately excited. The excitation may 
be in phase with Es, Fy, Iz or I). The error with excitation in 
phase with Jz is the same as under (a). If the excitation is 
supplied in phase with 1, E2 or J;, the balance is obtained under 
slightly different phase relations, and the errors enter into the 
results in slightly different ways. 

To obtain an idea of the order of magnitude of the errors 
involved, it will be sufficient to analyze case (a) where the 
detector is a simple voltmeter, reading a minimum at balance, 
and where the phase angle may be obtained from this minimum 
reading. 

Referring to Figs. 1 and 2, assume E,; and Ez» to be two sine 
wave voltages differing in phase by the angle y, balanced for 
comparison as indicated in the sketch. The voltage Ep across 


1912] CRAIGHEAD: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1629 


the detector is in quadrature with the voltage I, Rs across Rg, 
since the contact point K which marks the division of the total 
bridging resistance into R; and R»2 has been shifted until the 
reading of the detector is a minimum. If J,, I2, and Jp are the 
currents flowing in the resistances Ri, R2 and Rp respectively, 


T, Ry SS VE? — E,? 


Saas 


whence 


— Ey 
I hese Ro 
VOOR creere te WN = Es Ee 


Fee 


The angle between J, and Jo, or between J,R, and J.Rz, is 


oe 4) 
@ = cost (7 


= VI? R?2 + [2 Re + 2 1, Ri Ip Ro cos 0 


Now 


and for true ratio of voltages 


Eas, Spent eda Re 7 ta A dy Ry G08 
Es Es 


Substituting and simplifying, 
_./ Ee — Ey Ri py Ey Ri ) 
Es _\/ Bf x oe (ee (1) 


Equating to conan and solving for Rp, 


2 


fd Ry R2 

> Ri + Rs (2) 
That is, if the resistance of the detector is adjusted to the 
value obtained from equation (2), the reading obtained from 


1630 CRAIGHEAD: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


R, and R, will accurately represent the ratio of voltages without 
correction for phase angle, the errors in ratio due directly to phase 
angle and those due to the detector current offsetting one 
another. When R; is large compared with Re, this formula 


becomes approximately 
Rp = Re 


For instance, in testing a transformer rated 2200 : 110 volts, 
the values of resistance used were Ri = 19,000 ohms and R2 = 
1000 ohms. 

R, Re 


Row R, = 950 ohms. 


ie 


If Ry is kept at 1000 ohms, the error in ratio determination is 
negligible, amounting to 0.0006 per cent for y = 1 deg., 0.0016 
per cent for y = 2 deg., and 0.006 per cent for y = 4 deg. 

The maximum limits to which the error may reach are shown 
as follows: If a is the angle between EF, and J: Re, equation (1) 
may be rewritten 


aes Ait)! 2 (2) sin 
Ey -V( Rs cos at(z sin? a 


Rit & A pe fue Vt el ok 
he 04 7 cos a1 + (22) (a4 p,) ema 


If @ is the angle between FE, and I, Re, equalling y — a, 


Ie Ro + I; Ri cos 8 


cos ¢ = E 
1 


Since cos 6 = a and Iz Re = Ex cosa, 
1 


FE,cosa + E. cosa a 
cos p = ; <b ee ies nite Soa. ake Soe Bs ~~ 
Ra Ro Ren Vifutoka : 
R Ez cos a V+ (3 ) (te) tan? a 
cos @ = a jemen) : 


Ry y( Rex. y'ta 2 
Rio) ARpehaRsvit a (3) 


Vi + ( 


1912] CRAIGHEAD: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1631 


whence 
Fy. Rit Ry cosa 
EF, Re cos @ (4) 


Now since y = a+ 9, 


cos @ varies from | to cos y, while 
cos @ varies from cos y to 1; 


at the same time R2/Rp varies from 0 to infinity. 

Hence the correction factor to be applied to the ratio. of resist- 
ances varies with changes of Ry, from cos y as one limit through 
unity to 1/cos y as the other. It will evidently be equal to unity 
(no correction necessary) when a = @ = y/2. Inthis case, from 
equation (3) 


which, solved for Ry, gives 


Ry, Re 


Rk = => 
Rit Ro 


which is equation (2) again. That is, the same value of Rp which 


gives a correct ratio reading, gives also a phase angle obtainable 
from the minimum reading of the detector by the formula 


a@ = sin"! (=) 
FE 


which is one-half of the actual phase angle vy. 

This method of obtaining phase angle, however, falls intoserious 
error if the resistance Rp varies more than a few per cent from 
the theoretical value, and correction is too complicated for 
practical use. Other methods which do not involve these errors 
(as, for instance, the use of two dynamometers whose fields 
have a common excitation adjustable in phase) are much to be 
preferred. If the excitation of the dynamometer is in phase with 
E, or with J,, the equations are more complicated, but the general 


1632 CRAIGHEAD: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS [June 28 


order of the errors is similar to the above. If the excitation is 
in phase with E», the equation for ratio takes the form 


Eyeaeios Be 1 
Eston cos a cos 


rap sar bce Re) x() x sin? a | (5) 


As the two factors indicating the error both have an effect in the 
same direction, there is no single value of Rp at which the ratio 
error is totally eliminated. 


If Ry = ~~~» equation (5) becomes 
1 


Fy PV Ricks 1+ sin’? a 


ioe Re cos a@ cos @ 


If a = ¢, which would be very nearly true with this value of 
Rp, 


Fy a R, +. Rs 1 a sin? a 


"Rs Rs 1 —- sin” [4 


This equation gives the following values: 


r a | Correction factor | Percenterror 
1 deg. 30 min. | 1.00008 0.008 
2 deg. 1 deg. | 1.00061 0.061 
3 deg. 1 deg. 30 min. 1.00137 0.137 


It is evident that a satisfactory accuracy can be attained with 
about 2 deg. phase angle. These results change but slightly for 
moderate changes of Rp. 


SUMMARY 
Ratio of voltages may be taken by the balance method with 


entire accuracy, if the detector is either self-excited or oe AS 
itt phase with J2, by keeping 


1912) CRAIGHEAD: ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1633 


If this value is even approximately maintained, errors are 
negligible. 

With excitation in phase with EF, or J;, the errors are of a 
similar order of magnitude, but the equations involved are much 
more complicated, and the exact errors are much more difficult 
to determine. 

With excitation in phase with E», the errors are never reduced 
to zero; but where the phase angle y is 2 deg. or less, the error 
in ratio is only about 0.06 per cent if Rp is kept equal to or 
greater than the value in the above formula. This amount is 
negligible for ordinary purposes. 

For phase angle, with any of the above connections, a result 
may be obtained by keeping R, equal to the value given above, 
and doubling the angle obtained by direct calculation. It is, 
however, subject to considerable error if Rp varies, and cor- 
rection is impracticable; therefore it is better to use some method 
which does not involve these errors, as for instance, the two- 
dynamometer method. 

It should be noted that the above results are calculated for 
sine wave voltage. With a distorted voltage wave, or with 
slightly differing waves, harmonic currents flow in the detector 
which greatly complicate the theory. The actual additional 
errors caused by this are in general negligible for practical work. 
Where inductive devices are used to balance the voltage in the 
detector circuit, they do not, on account of wave form, wholly 
prevent the flow of current, and consequently only diminish, 
without entirely avoiding, the errors described above. The fur- 
ther discussion of these methods is not properly a part of this 


paper. 


i t (3 
; 5a 
in}. robi ie wh 7h satin’ 
¢ « , 7 
: Pris tarsi aie 
nmi 4b 
4 a 
F ; Ont ey ie 
. 
b rit 7 
| ; ar WA » a: i“ 3% pi 
% 
yt 4 © Tt 8 decches 
a ort F- > ma 7 j (710 
‘ ; Nea i 
; . i i Piet utp Deily 2 See 
; ri My 3 oF 4 JA Suk buttiosto wh Wel 


in fOr ; "=> thigt ‘a ace } Let) ee « ea at Uae 
Abin seme masts TaLlodhei sr emp tornglay, palelaras aarti At apes ~ 


" 
- i Lat | ywts + is * 
7 F x 
ba ‘ 
- . 4 
> ’ 
; we ' rae Ane ‘ Teer pest yaliss : 
. , ii f 4 Lec VF ely WWst2 ri 
aire. 7 F ay ghiw/ : mala et ivi sey VITA 


wainitub Sitont, saith stint : gall, vy ‘tirtopinks ef hut 


lanGinhhweiictie ete ell “wl yotmiyrga vipnorg ite 
. SSuN LORNGT WT Obie Hine Hh ns dic-rd? 1 a 
| : a 
+}: ‘ 
5 a veh, A Fighel ie? Md DAN 63) dees Tet, eer uy avinsalils 


nats \ 
7 ¢ Mensbvr Pitot a7ew TO Tauern to 70m ofy yout ois 3 i) anes 
Pee yetninyi) wind tin HALA fide Lisi, hi nek ats ait 
os, I Tad eee sei tedremahy ener kein Stig he lyri rare 


“2 cst + cotices SiN nll ad 
race ane) SUR eect a 


ete a a SR ae 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


THE TESTING OF INSTRUMENT TRANSFORMERS 


BY P. G. AGNEW AND F. B. SILSBEE 


The determination of the ratio and phase angle of instrument 
transformers has now become a very important part of the work 
of electrical testing laboratories. The method now almost uni- 
versally used in accurate work depends upon the potentiometer 
principle. Various modifications of this method have been 
suggested and used*. A modification of the method has recently 
been developed at the Bureau of Standards which, while in- 
volving no entirely new principles, possesses some distinct ad- 
vantages over any of these. 


BiG ib 


The connections for the current transformer are shown in 
Fig. 1. Current from the source flows in series through the 
primary winding T of the transformer under test and through 
a standard non-inductive low-resistance shunt R;. The secondary 
current flows through the normal load of instruments, through 
the primary winding of a variable mutual inductance M and 
through a non-inductive resistance Ro, a variable part of which 


* Por a resumé of these methods and a bibliography, see Bulletin, 
Bureau of Standards, Vol. VII, p. 423, 1911, reprint No. 164. 
1635 


1636 AGNEW AND SILSBEE: [June 28 


may be included in the galvanometer circuit. The resistances 
R, and R, have values inversely proportional to the currents 
flowing inthem so that the J R drop is the same in both. The 
potential terminals are connected so that these equal voltages 
are in opposition and if there were no phase difference between 
them no current would flow through the vibration galvanometer 
G. On account of the phase-displacement in the transformer, 
however, it is necessary to introduce an e.m.f. in quadrature 
with I, Rs. This is done by the mutual inductance M. The 
procedure is therefore to adjust successively Re and M until 
the galvanometer shows no current. It can then be easily shown 
that the ratio of the currents is 


I; Ro 1 


Ts R, cos@ 


a, Re L b Ry 


SOURCE 


Fig. 2 


and the phase angle is 


6 =tan@ = PM radians = 349874 min. 
Ro Re 


In most transformers the factor 3 differs from unity by 


less than one part in 2000, and hence for most engineering work 
it may be omitted. It may be necessary, however, to correct 
the phase angle for the inductance of the shunts. 

The connections for the potential transformer are somewhat 
analogous and are shown in Fig. 2. A high resistance R; is con- 
nected in series with a smaller resistance R» and a self-inductance 
L across the high-voltage side of the transformer. The low-ten- 
sion winding is connected in a reversed sense to the points a and 
b of this resistance, the galvanometer G being in series with the 
low-voltage winding. The procedure is to adjust Re (or better 


1912] ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 1637 


R,) and L until a balance is obtained. It can then be shown 
that the ratio of transformation is 


Hy Ry its Re 
Fe Ro 


neglect'ng terms of higher order; and, assuming R, and R2 to be 
non-inductive, 


@=tand = PL(z l ) radians = 


R, Ri+R: 
1 1 
3438 PL (= — oe) in. 
le Rie P min 


The adjustment for the phase angle may be made by a variable 
self-inductance in R; or Rs, or by a mutual inductance, or by 
shunting a variable amount of Ri or Re by a condenser. This 
latter combination is sensibly equivalent to a negative self-in- 
ductance of magnitude C r*.. In practise it has been found best 
to use a self-inductance in series with Ro, together with a con- 
denser shunting a variable portion of Re. 

With this arrangement the effective inductance of the circuit is 


e see f 


and the resistance is 
RG Ver 
1 -F P C2 yr 


The term p2 Co rz is practically always negligible, compared with 
muity,.sce-thati/ = L—.Cr;-and Ks 1s unaffected by the con- 
denser. The advantage of this arrangement is that it is possible 
without changing the set-up to test a transformer in which the 
phase angle changes from leading to lagging. 

Considerable difficulty was encountered in obtaining a suffi- 
ciently sensitive self-contained detector in the case of the current 
transformer. At first sight this seems surprising, since one 
naturally associates instrument transformers with heavy cur- 
rents and high voltages. The trouble arises from the fact that 
the entire performance of the apparatus depends on the mag- 
netic properties of its iron core, and consequently it must be 
tested under exactly the conditions of use, and sensitivity can- 


1638 AGNEW AND SILSBEE: {June 28 


not be gained by forcing an abnormal amount of power into the 
circuit for a short time, as is possible with condensers, etc. 

For the current transformer, in order to obtain a sensitivity of 
1 in 10,000 at one-tenth load, it is necessary to use a detector | 
capable of responding to about 2 microvolts a-c. We obtain this 
sensitivity by using a vibration galvanometer of the Campbell 
type, the moving system of which was reconstructed largely in 
accordance with’ suggestions of Dr. Wenner. The moving coil 
consists of but 4 turns of No. 28 wire. The total resistance is 
0.66 ohm. The sensitivity is such that at 25 cycles one microvolt 
gives a deflection of 0.5 mm. at a scale distance of one meter. A 
range of frequency between 40 and 80 may be obtained by 
varying the length and tension of the suspensions. For lower 
frequencies between 40 and 20 cycles the moment of inertia is 
increased by the addition of a brass washer which may be dropped 
ona tiny cone at the top of the coil, thus automatically centering 
itself. 

The advantages of the method are that only a single instru- 
ment is needed for all ranges of transformers, but one observer 
is required, and neither a polyphase source of voltage, a phase- 
shifting device, nor a rotating commutator is required. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1639 


Discussion on ‘‘ PoTENTIAL TRANSFORMER TESTING ”’ (CRAIG- 
HEAD), AND ‘‘ THE TESTING oF INSTRUMENT TRANS- 
FORMERS ” (AGNEW AND SILSBEE), Boston, Mass., JUNE 
28, 1912. 


Clayton H. Sharp: Regarding the last statement of Dr. 
Wenner, in his abstract of the paper by Messrs. Agnew and 
Silsbee, I find it rather surprising, inasmuch as the identical 
method for testing current transformers, with the exception of 
the vibration galvanometer detector, has been in use in our 
laboratory for two or three years, and a description of it was 
presented to the convention of the Institute three years ago, I 
think, at Frontenac. The method is absolutely identical with 
the one described in the Transactions of the Institute, to which 
I refer, and we included a satisfactory detector, so that I do not 

_see how in presenting a description of this method the statement 
could be made that no satisfactory detector was at hand. It was 
indicated at that time. 

James R. Craighead: This paper on the testing of instrument 
transformers by Messrs. Agnew and Silsbee has brought forward 
the vibration galvanometer as a new device for use as a detector 
of small voltages on alternating-current circuits. A few points 
of comparison with the separately excited dynamometer may 
be worth consideration. First, in regard to the matter of sensi- 

. tivity, we find that Mr. Agnew’s galvanometer at 25 cycles 
gives a deflection of 0.5 mm. at a scale distance of one meter for 
one microvolt, or about 1.5 microamperes. The dynamometer 
which we are using for similar work requires about 4 microvolts 
or 0.1 microampere for the same deflection. This sensitivity 
can be considerably increased by simple changes, but has been 
found sufficient for the purpose. 

Convenience. “Che vibration galvanometer must be adjusted 
by a change of the length and tension of the suspension or by 
adding weights for each frequency. This would involve much 
handling of delicate parts and consequent trouble if applied to 
commercial testing where change of frequency is made at short 
intervals. Also, reading to a zero with return in the same direc- 
tion, presents a little more practical difficulty than reading a 
zero when the indicator passes through instead of to the point. 

On the other hand, the separately excited dynamometer 
requires a phase-shifting transformer and a polyphase supply. 
A shift of phase without the polyphase supply is not difficult 
to arrange, but is much less convenient and in general less 
accurate than the polyphase method. The same¥adjustment 
of the dynamometer is correct for all frequencies. The reading 
is through a zero so that there is never a doubt in which direction 
to change the adjustment in finding a balance. 

The use of condensers and reactance in connection with the 
resistances of a potential transformer outfit involves difficulties 
of commercial handling. Ordinary condensers are unsatis- 


1640 TRANSFORMER TESTING [June 28 


factory apparatus where permanent accuracy is required. 
Wherever a considerable amount of testing is to be done, this 
consideration alone may offset the advantage of using only one 
observer in phase-angle tests on potential transformers; espe- 
cially as the time required for adjustment of resistance, reactance 
and condensers would undoubtedly diminish the actual gain. 
The condenser-reactance combination, which does not make a 
satisfactory phase-shifting arrangement even for exciting a 
dynamometer, is here made a part of the measurement circuit. 

In general, the gain in using the vibration galvanometer 
appears to be the elimination of the polyphase circuit and phase- 
shifting transformer, and, in comparison with some other 
methods, of one observer. The loss is in the added complica- 
tion of the instrument, the probable increase of time spent in 
repairs and adjustment, and the difficulties involved in shifting 
the phase of the measured voltage by capacity and reactance. 

Edward B. Rosa: This discussion brings out pretty clearly 
that one cannot generalize and say that a given method is better 
than some other method, for a series of reasons, without going 
further and specifying the circumstances under which they are 
to be used. It may appear very difficult for one man, with 
certain routine surroundings, to use, for example, mutual in- 
ductances and condensers, whereas another man, having them 
at hand, may find them much more convenient than a polyphase 
source of power and phase-shifting devices or something else. 
The truth in this case is, that in one laboratory one method 
has been found to be much more convenient, and in another 
laboratory the other method is much more convenient. The 
writer of this paper, from his standpoint and training, thinks 
this is a very distinct improvement over previous practise, for 
the reasons he specifies; nevertheless another method may be 
much preferred in other surroundings by other experimenters. 

L. T. Robinson: I would like to endorse that view fully. The 
advantage of such papers and such discussions as this is to 
bring out these facts, and there is everything to be gained by 
the one man knowing the point of view of the other man. I 
feel very sure that all of us who have been working along the 
line referred to, appreciate the fact that perhaps unconsciously, 
but nevertheless quite truly, we have adopted a great many of 
the methods of other laboratories until there is more similarity 
than there was, at least in the test methods that are used. I 
know at the Frontenac meeting, three years ago, I had some very 
definite ideas myself on the subject, but they have become some- 
what modified, although we hold to substantially the same 
practise as was described then. 

Clayton H. Sharp: I want to say a word or two about the 
advantages and convenience of a synchronous reversing key or 
rectifier in measurements, not only of current and voltage trans- 
formers, but in some other alternating-current measurements 
as well. With the synchronous reversing key you can 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1641 


use the direct-current galvanometer, you can use as sensi- 
tive a galvanometer as you want, although beyond a certain 
point other troubles come in which will prevent the use of 
the highest sensitivity. 

This detector in transformer testing has the additional 
advantage that it is selective of the resistance and the re- 
active components in the e.m.f. In testing a transformer two 
operations are gone through with: First, the key is set so that 
it reverses in phase with the resistance drop from one shunt to 
the other. The deflection is then brought to zero. The brush 
holder is then shifted through 90 deg., becoming in phase with 
the reactive drop, and the mutual inductance is then shifted until 
the deflection comes to zero. These two adjustments are made 
separately and not simultaneously, and they do not get in each 
other’s way. The whole operation is performed in a moment with 
a high degree of certainty, whereas in the vibration galva- 
nometer you have an instrument which does not differentiate and 
a double adjustment is necessary. With practise, however, it 
may become easy, but there is still an advantage in the use of 
the other system. Thesynchronous reversing key can be readily 
used in measurements of inductance or capacity by the ordinary 
bridge methods, and it has the same advantages, that you can 
separate the resistance drop from the reactive drop. It has 
worked out as a very convenient and very sensitive and good 
instrument in alternating-current laboratory work. 

L. T. Robinson: I think Dr. Sharp’s remarks bring out Dr. 
Rosa’s point to the fullest value. I started first with the revers- 
ing commutator and direct-current galvanometer, and it did 
not suit me very well. We then took up the separately excited 
dynamometer. On the contrary, Dr. Sharp got a reversing 
commutator that went a little better than ours went, and it has 
remained his method. The Bureau of Standards has found the 
vibration galvanometer useful. I have never tried one. We 
bought some, and put them up in the cases, and they are there 
yet, but we never have had time to test them out and see what 
they would do. Therefore, it is only fair to say that ideas along 
these lines should be tempered with the influence of surrounding 
circumstances properly considered. 

Frederick Bedell: A word on the question of the synchronous 
commutator and the non-synchronous commutator—as Dr. 
Sharp has pointed out, with the synchronous commutator 
various adjustments are made which have certain points of 
advantage in manipulation and which make it possible to deter- 
mine the phase angle as well as the amplitude of the quantity 
measured. If the commutator is driven by a motor that is just 
off from synchronism, none of these adjustments are necessary, 
and one’s attention is free from other things in connection with 
the test. The galyanometer will then have beats and the deflec- 
tion will rise to a maximum and fall; the deflection may be 
reduced to a minimum or to zero, thus giving a very sensitive 
zero instrument. 


\ 


1642 TRANSFORMER TESTING [June 28 


Edward B. Rosa: I would like to say something in defense of, 
or rather in justification of the vibration galvanometer. We 
have used the synchronous commutator with a direct-current 
galvanometer at the Bureau of Standards. Years ago we under- 
took to make refined measurements of certain kinds with that 
combination, but while the sensitivity is high the sources of error, 
we found, were serious, the commutator being a serious dis- 
turbance. We have had most satisfactory results with the 
vibration galvanometers, and it is for that reason that we are 
using them in several of our laboratories. The fact that the 
vibration galvanometer, attuned to the frequency of the current, 
practically ignores the harmonics, is a very great advantage in 
much of the testing. The sensitivity is so small for harmonics, 
as compared with that of the fundamental, that it has a very 
great advantage over the other style of instrument; and as to 
being obliged to make two adjustments at once, or not knowing, 
from the fact that the deflection is both sides of zero, which 
kind of adjustment to make, I can assure you a little experience 
makes that difficulty seem very much smaller than it appears at 
first sight. 

We have used the vibration galvanometer, now, for ten years, 
and have a good many of them of different types in service, using 
them for very many purposes; we have also used the other 
styles of indicating instruments, so that we can speak from 
experience with both instruments. 

W. W. Crawford: In regard to Mr. Agnew’s paper on the 
testing of instrument transformers, I noted that Mr. Agnew 
states that he considers the method of connection which he has | 
used, that is, introducing a resistance in the secondary circuit 
of the current transformer, with a mutual inductance for balanc- 
ing phase displacement, is the best method that can be used. 
I believe I can verify that statement from practical sources, 
because we used the method some time back and we found it 
very satisfactory. We did not use the vibration galvanometers 
in connection with it, but we used, as I presume Dr. Sharp has 
already pointed out, a synchronous rectifier, which did not 
consist of a commutator with sliding contacts, which always 
give trouble. We used a rectifier consisting of a vibrating tongue, 
driven by a synchronous motor and a cam. The vibrating 
tongue carried platinum contacts which reversed the connections. 
The contact resistances were negligible so we were able to obtain 
the full sensitiveness of the direct-current galvanometer for 
alternating-current measurements. We were able to get the 
limits of sensitiveness which Mr. Agnew mentions with a 
synchronous motor of the type developed by Mr. Robinson, 
which could be carried in one coat pocket, and a portable gal- 
vanometer of the type made by R. W. Paul, of London, which 
could be carried in the other pocket. We could get a sensitive- 
ness of one microampere per division, or 50 microvolts per 
division, the apparatus being entirely portable and independent 
of telescopes, reflecting scales, etc. 


. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1643 


Frank Wenner: In regard to Mr. Craighead’s statement 
concerning the sensitivity of the separately excited dynamometer, 
I need only say that the sensitivity of the galvanometer used is 
sufficient for all purposes. If a higher sensitivity were needed, 
I do not think there would be any difficulty in getting ten times 
the sensitivity indicated. Dr. Agnew simply stated he would 
rather have a galvanometer of this sensitivity than one of higher 
sensitivity. 

In regard to the method Mr. Craighead described as compared 
with the method that Dr. Agnew is using, as I understand the 
situation, Dr. Agnew has used, for a period of four years, the 
identical method which Mr. Craighead has described, and I 
believe he considers the method he is now using as a decided 
improvement upon the former method. 

In regard to Dr. Sharp’s reference to the synchronous rectifier, 
Dr. Rosa has already pointed out some of the difficulties in 
regard to that. At the present time we have in the Bureau a 
synchronous rectifier, and have for sometime been trying to 
make it operate satisfactorily. Dr. Burrows, who is working 
on that subject, has had difficulties, so has called upon the rest 
of us for suggestions. The various suggestions have been tried 
out, and at one time he made a visit to Dr. Sharp’s laboratory 
to see if he could not get some more valuable suggestions there, 
but still the synchronous rectifier does not work satisfactorily. 

P. G. Agnew and F. B. Silsbee: The discussion seems to have 
centered about the use of the vibration galvanometer as a detector 
and the question of what constitutes the most satisfactory detec- 
tor. As has been very clearly stated by Dr. Rosa and Mr. 
Robinson, the answer to this question depends both upon the 
equipment and traditions of the laboratory and upon the train- 
ing and experience of the observers. Certainly, Dr. Wenner did 
not intend to imply that the arrangement used by Dr. Sharp and 
Mr. Crawford of a mutual inductance with a rotating com- 
mutator and d-c. galvanometer as detector was an unsatisfac- 
tory one. Probably no one would claim that any of the detecting 
devices which have been used in the work is ideal, whether he is 
using a rotating commutator, a dynamometer, a vibration gal- 
vanometer, or, as has been used at the Physikalisch-Technische 
Reichsanstalt, an electrostatic instrument. Most of the instru- 
ment transformer testing at the Bureau of Standards during the 
last four years has been done by a dynamometer method very 
similar to that used by Mr. Craighead. However, it was always 
felt that a self-contained detector would be decidedly preferable. 
Both ratio and phase angle are determined by a single balance, 
and the accuracy does not depend upon any subsidiary or external 
adjustment, and no quadrature current is drawn from the net- 
work. This surely minimizes the chances of error. The con- 
densers or inductances are used to shift the phase only by the 
small angle of the transformer, and the accuracy and permanency 
of such devices is far greater than that required by the precision 
which is desirable in phase angle measurements. 


1644 TRANSFORMER TESTING [June 28 


A point which has been entirely overlooked in the discussion 
is that the volt sensitivity is the essential consideration in current 
transformer work, while the current sensitivity is practically 
immaterial. In the case of potential transformers the reverse 
is true, but there is no difficulty in obtaining the requisite 
current sensitivity. Practically any commercial vibration gal- 
vanometer is sufficiently sensitive. In fact too sensitive a detec- 
tor is undesirable, as it is likely to allow errors to enter from ex- 
traneous sources. The galvanometer described was designed to 
give a high volt-sensitivity and a low current-sensitivity. 

It should be noted in this connection that a vibration galvano- 
meter is analogous to a motor and the volt sensitivity cannot be 
obtained directly by multiplying the current sensitivity by 
the resistance, but account must be taken of the back e.m.f., 
as is pointed out by Dr. Wenner in a paper presented at this con- 
vention. He cites a case in which the back e.m.f. was approxi- 
mately 40 times the J Rdrop. Our galvanometer was designed, 
to give a back e.m.f. approximately equal to the J R drop, or a 
current sensitivity twice the value computed by Mr. Craighead. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. FE. E. 


OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS OF LARGE TURBO- 
GENERATORS 


BY A. B. FIELD 


The requirements of the station engineer, with regard to the 
operating characteristics of large alternators, have materially 
changed during the last few years, concurrently with the rapid in- 
crease of size, measured in kw., of the individual power houses 
and of the individual generating units. Some characteristics 
which ten years ago were striven for, are now avoided and con- 
sidered actually detrimental. 

It is proposed here to consider briefly the trend of modern 
practise in respect of some of these requirements. 

The condition referred to is not merely the result of increas- 
ing size of units, and of groups of units, but has been effected, 
for instance, by the radical change in speed for a given output, by 
changed methods of operation, etc. It was not many years ago 
that the largest rating of turbo-generators offered for a speed of 
3600 rev. per min., was 500 kw., and even that was apt to be a 
troublesome machine on account of a design ill adapted to the 
speed. 

At the present time there are thoroughly satisfactory genera- 
tors in operation in this country having a continuous rating of 
5000 kv-a. at 3600 rev. per min., and in Europe 4000 kv-a. at 
3000 rev. per min. Eight years ago 750 rev. per min. was a high 
speed for 7500-kw., four-polé generators. At the present date 
six-pole turbo-alternators of over 20,000 kw. at 1000 rev. per min. 
in a single unit, have been constructed in Europe; and in this 
country two-pole generators for the same output at 50 per cent 
higher speed are under construction, and four-pole machines for 
19,000 kv-a. output at 87 per cent higher speed, or 1875 rev. per 

1645 


1646 FIELD: TURBO-GENERA TORS [June 28 


min. From an electrical point of view, these high speeds are 
not economically desirable for these ratings, but the advantages . 
to be gained when considering the set as a whole—turbine and 
generator—warrant their adoption, particularly as they entail 
no smaller factors of safety than have been tolerated in the 
smaller machines in the past. The size of the unit has been con- 
tinually pushed further, and if there should be a sufficient call 
from the steam turbine builder and the operator, for a speed of 
1500 rev. per min. for still larger sets there is little doubt but that 
30,000- or 35,000-kv-a. units for high power factor operation may 
later be built of the two-pole type, though possibly we may then 
no longer depend for cooling upon the methods at present in 
use. 

In a recent paper before this Institute, Mr. Samuel Insull ad- 
vocated the concentration of power generation for public services 
in each district, and pointed out that in Greater New York there 
was already a total developed load of 600,000 to 700,000 kw. 
Without discussing Mr. Insull’s arguments, we may note that 
the company of which he is the president committed itself 
more than a year ago to a 240,000-kw. station in Chicago, in 
addition to its two large stations at Fisk and Quarry Streets. 
Again, should the near future see any developments in Europe 
along the directions hinted at recently by Sir William Ramsay, 
with regard to the production of power from coal at the pit 
mouth, and turbine units be used, the size of these units would 
necessarily be much larger than any hitherto constructed. In 
fact, we must recognize that we have not yet reached the era of 
the ‘‘large’’ generator, though we cannot say, with quite the 
same assurance, that the high speed, relatively to output, at 
present in evidence, is to be similarly progressive. 

In the early days of alternating-current station practice, alter- 
nators were sometimes specified ‘‘ to be capable of running five 
minutes on a dead short circuit with normal excitation without 
injury,” and when clos? regulation was not also called for, this 
clause was generally agreed to by the manufacturers. Com- 
paratively little attention was paid to the way in which the short 
circuit was introduced, and such a requirement would have 
been considered to be met by short-circuiting the generator 
and then bringing up the excitation to normal value; in fact in 
the case of the type of generator involved, viz., slow speed, 
small rating, with many poles, the instantaneous current on 
short-circuiting would not be many times the sustained short- 
circuit current. 


1912] FIELD: TURBO-GENERATORS 1647 


Conditions are very different, however, with the machines 
built now, and operating engineers are frequently wisely speci- 
fying that the machines they buy are to be capable of being 
short-circuited suddenly, when running at full speed fully 
excited, without any mechanical or electrical injury resulting. 
They are aware that under such conditions the current flowing 
through the stator winding may be very many times the final 
steady value obtaining a minute or two after short-circuiting. 
This requirement is by no means an easy one to meet sometimes, 
and necessitates details of construction which are somewhat 
costly and have some other disadvantages as well. However, 
it is recognized by some of the manufacturing companies that 
the operator has a good case, and that even if, in an up-to-date 
station, the arrangements should be such that an involuntary 
test of this nature is rare, yet the ability of the generator to 
stand such a test is a good guarantee that the machine will meet 
a number of other conditions occurring in practise which cannot 
be covered in detail in a purchasing specification. 

The amount of instantaneous short-circuit current is of interest 
to the operating engineer from two points of view; viz., the effect 
upon his generator and that upon his circuit-opening devices. 
Both aspects have been simultaneously studied carefully by the 
manufacturers, so that now, while the current to be dealt with 
has been kept within moderate limits, and generator construc- 
tions have been developed which are amply able to stand the 
strains, at the same time switch gear is available which will meet 
the needs at present in sight. 

It is of interest to consider the features which influence the 
amount of the instantaneous short-circuit current, the way in 
which this depends upon size, speed, frequency and regulation, 
and to do so we must picture in a general way the process by 
which it is produced. These have been well recognized for 
some years, but to facilitate the argument they are briefly 
described below. 

Consider a generator running on no-load at normal voltage, 
on which a short circuit is developed between two terminals B C 
at the instant when the voltage BC is zero. At this moment, 
the windings of the short-circuited phase are inclosing their 
maximum rotor flux. If this flux were to be abstracted by the 
motion of the rotor and no self-inductive or other flux substi- 
tuted, the current would mount up toa value of say 300 times that 
corresponding to the rated current (assuming a full-load /?R 


1648 FIELD: TURBO-GENERATORS [June 28 


loss of 0.3 per cent). Actually, the current will rise at a rate to 
produce by self-inductive flux a voltage nearly corresponding 
to the phase voltage, and this self-inductive flux must to a large 
extent find a path clear of the rotor, as the rotor winding and 
solid metal form closed circuits hindering any rapid changes of 
enclosed flux. This stray flux, and the current producing it, will 
increase steadily in value until the rotor pole has abstracted its 
flux, and as the next pole comes forward with its flux, 
which similarly cannot be instantly quenched and must, there- 
fore be largely deflected, the short-circuit current will still further 
increase to produce a stator leakage flux nearly counteracting, 
as far as the stator winding is concerned, the addition of this 
reversed rotor flux. This case—short-circuiting at the zero 
point of the voltage wave—gives the worst condition as regards 
magnitude of the stator current, and gives a current wave 
which for the first few cycles is practically all on one side of the 
zero line. 

Considering the matter in this general way and leaving out re- 
finements, it is clear that the maximum change of current in a 
half cycle, that is, the amount measured from the top of the posi- 
tive peak to the bottom of the negative peak, will be that current 
which can produce a leakage flux nearly equal to twice the pole 
flux, and that this maximum change of current will be nearly 
independent of the point on the voltage wave at which the short 
circuit takes place. But the relative proportions of the current 
wave that lie above and below the zero line depend upon this 
feature. To be explicit, refer to a typical single-phase short- 
circuit oscillogram as given in Fig. 1. On this we have drawn a 
curve through the crests of the positive waves and similarly 
one through the crests of the negative waves and have ex- 
tended these back to the axis drawn for the instant of short 
circuit. The two curves intercept on this axis a length P Q cor- 
responding to 37,000 amperes in this particular case, and our 
statement is, that for a given machine, short-circuited under 
given conditions, this intercept depends chiefly upon the rotor 
flux and but little upon the particular point on the voltage 
wave at which the short circuit takes place; while, on the other 
hand, the proportions of this intercept above and below the 
zero line, viz. OP, OQ, depend considerably upon the instant of 
short circuit. Hence, the approximate maximum of the short- 
circuit peak that could occur, were the machine to be short- 
circuited at the least favorable point of the voltage wave (namely, 


1912] FIELD; TURBO-GENERATORS 1649 


voltage zero) can be ascertained approximately from an oscillo- 
gram taken at random, short-circuiting the generator at any 
point on the voltage wave. This would be represented by the 
value PQ multiplied by the decrement factor for a one-half 
period, viz., by the ratio cd/ab. 

It must be understood that this is true only in a general way, 
the whole phenomenon being affected by varying magnetic sat- 
uration of different parts and by actual J?R loss in the paths of 
the short-circuit current and eddy currents produced. . 

This brings forward a question upon which we are in need of 
some conventional agreement; this Institute might with ad- 
vantage formulate one. The ‘‘ momentary short-circuit current”’ 
of a generator is nowadays frequently referred to, and discussed, 
without a proper recognition of the fact that this is not a definite 
quantity, even for definite values of the load and excitation at 
the instant of short circuit. In the first place, it will be con- 
venient always to consider this quantity (as finally defined) in 
terms of the rated current of the machine, and for the sake of 
uniformity the ‘‘ rated current ”’ should be the maximum r.m.s. 
current which the generator is rated to carry continuously. 
In the next place, the peak momentary current should not be 
compared with the r.m.s. rated current, but rather the initial 
peak value divided by 1.414 should be thus compared. This is 
consistent with corresponding practise in other lines, as for in- 
stance, when an induction motor is specified to take from the line 
at starting a momentary current not exceeding, say, three times 
normal current. Finally, what is of real interest is the most 
probable ratio of initial short circuit to rated current, when the 
machine is short-circuited at random as regards the position on 
the voltage wave. If we wish, we can, in addition, very readily 
have a standard percentage to add to this, which will tell us 
approximately the highest possible momentary short-circuit 
current ratio under specified conditions. This would correspond 
to a current which would be approached, within a small percent- 
age, perhaps once in a hundred short circuits. 

The most probable momentary short-circuit current can be 
approximately determined from the value of PQ referred to above. 
Having adopted a definition for the momentary short-circuit 
current, it will be convenient to define the ‘“‘ momentary short- 
circuit current ratio ’’ as the ratio between this current. and the 
normal current of the machine for maximum continuous rating. 

From the oscillograms given in Figs. 1 to 4, we should say that 


” 


1650 FIELD: TURBO-GENERATORS [June 28 


the generator in question gives, with half voltage excitation at no 
load, a single-phase short-circuit current having a maximum pos- 
sible peak value of approximately 35,000 amperes, and a prob- 
able maximum peak value of 30,000 amperes. As the rated cur- 
rent of this generator is 2400 amperes (r.m.s.) having a peak 
value of 3400 amperes, we say that the probable momentary 
short-circuit current ratio under the conditions of excitation 
stated above is approximately 8.8 and the greatest possible 
momentary short-circuit current ratio under these conditions 
is 10.3 approximately. 

It has been stated above that the stator leakage flux pro- 
duced on short circuit must be nearly all clear of the rotor because 
it cannot penetrate suddenly the solid metal of the rotor and the 


} | ) EXCITATION AMP’ 
|FOR ears | 


= 


ZERO FOR FLUX 


Fic. 5 


closed field winding. This is largely true, but some proportion 
of the flux will pass into the rotor. This is illustrated by the 
oscillograms already referred to,in which it will be noted that 
the excitation current, after short circuit, rises in peaks, cor- 
responding in time to the stator current peaks, to values several 
times the steady excitation corresponding to the excitation volt- 
age and the resistance of the circuit. Fig. 5 is a reproduction of 
part of the oscillogram of Fig. 1 with a curve added to show the 
way in which the flux enclosed by the rotor winding is slowly 
quenched by the stator current. This curve was deduced from 
the excitation record. 

An idea of the extent to which the flux will penetrate the 
rotor can be obtained by measuring the impedance of the stator 


PLATE XC 


Av Ns Es Es 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


ja1a14] ANVLIOA TWNAON AIVEH LV LINOAID-LAOHS ASVH-AIDNIS—Z ‘SI 


RAP NA ett 


WVU iii 


duvasng ynrds poys. 


AOVLIOA IVWAON ATIVE LV LINDAID-LAOHS ASVHI-AIONIS 
fataig] SNOLVUANAD-OdUAL “V-AN-Q00‘OL JO INAANND AOLOY GNV YOLVLIS—f] “9Iy 


SE SS SS SS LS ST SS LS SS Sa es eee Oe 


PLATE XCl 


A. L&E, 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[aia] AOVLIOA TVNYON ATVH LV LINDUID-LUOHS ASVHG-ATONIS 


rg 


WAAAY» 
oof 


i 


2bopjo/ ->|4 oosez 
| o00b/ 


A a a 4 r’ r 4 r A | 
ampere eet etter AT 


VVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVV VAR 8 


. 
te 


ppoes 


prasana yrs? 1s > voces “¥ 
(atara] AOVLIOA IVWWYON ATVH LV LINDMIC-LYOHS ASVHqG-dTONIS—§ oly 
fuaseng P/tJ—+ 


MOUND JIM Pdl D JUS" 


AAA A 


Ce a areata oven oven Avera waa wa a A 
VVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVV VN TV UV VY 


\ Less is 4 
2bojjon as 


V 


1912] FIELD: TURBO-GENERATORS 1651 


with the rotor at rest, applying an external source of current. 
Such experiments, compared with similar ones taken with the 
rotor removed, show clearly the magnetic obstruction caused by 
the presence of the iron. 

For instance, we may refer to tests on the machine 
which furnished the short-circuit curves already given, a 
10,000-kv-a. 2400-volt, three-phase, 60-cycle, four-pole gen- 
erator having a solid steel rotor of cruciform section, an air 
gap of 4 in. (22.2 mm.) each side, and stator slots 0.86 in. wide 
(see Fig. 6 for the type of stator). With the rotor removed, 
and an external source of 60-cycle current applied to the stator 
terminals, the impedance was found to be such as to give ap- 
proximately 8.4 times normal current with full three-phase 
voltage applied, and 7.3 times normal current when rated volt- 
age was applied across two only of the three terminals, that is, 
single-phase. Similar tests made on this machine with the 
rotor in place indicated an impedance which was not strictly in- 
dependent of the magnitude of the current but which apparently 
would give about 12 times normal current with three-phase full 
voltage applied to the stator and about 104 times normal current 
single-phase. ® 

Comparing these tests, it will be noted that when the stator 
core was apparently magnetically short-circuited by the rotor 
with only a 3-in. (22.2 mm.) air gap, the impedance of the 
stator, instead of being increased, was only 70 per cent of that 
when the iron was removed and the stator flux found its path 
through the air. The power absorbed in this impedance test 
amounted to 340 kw. for rated current with the rotor in place, 
and less than one-sixth of this when the rotor was removed, 
again showing the effect of the heavy choking currents in the 
surface of the stationary rotor body. 

We see, therefore, that on the occasion of the sudden short 
circuit of such a turbo-generator a large air gap separating the 
rotor from the stator will be apt to aid the restriction of the stator 
current by increasing the available space for the stator and rotor 
leakage flux, and thus, contrary to the generally accepted idea, 

“changes of proportions which improve the regulation of the gener- 
ator do not of necessity in every case cause an increase in the 
momentary short-circuit current. However, as pointed out later, 
it is in general necessary to adopt poor regulation in order to 
restrict to a reasonable degree the momentary short-circuit 
current, and to obtain other advantages. 


1652 FIELD: TURBO-GENERATORS [June 28 


From such general considerations as the above, the truth of 
the following statements will be apparent. 

1. The momentary short-circuit current ratio is not directly 
affected by the frequency to any very large extent, if we consider 
for instance a 60-cycle turbo-generator operating at different 
frequencies, except by reason of the smaller penetration of the 
stator leakage flux into the rotor body at higher frequencies. 
However, comparing a 25-cycle design with a 60-cycle one, the 
changed proportions of design, such as the greater pole pitch, 
etc., involve a greater momentary short-circuit current ratio 
with the 25-cycle design. 

2. For the same general features of design, a two-pole gen- 
erator has a larger momentary short-circuit current ratio than 
a corresponding four-pole machine. However, the difference 
in this respect between the two- and four-pole machines is not 
greater than can occur between, say, two four-pole machines of 
considerably different design. 

3. Using a given frame for a definite rating, the momentary 
short-circuit current ratio is nearly proportional to the square 
of the flux per pole, i.e., if the number of stator conductors be 

aincreased 10 per cent for a given terminal voltage, the momen- 

tary short-circuit current ratio is reduced 20 per cent; at the 
same time the figure representing the full-load regulation at 
unity power factor is increased by an amount depending upon 
conditions, which may be as much as 50 per cent. 

4. The manner in which the momentary short-circuit current 
ratio increases with the rating can not be stated definitely; 
it is complicated by a number of features which influence the 
magnetic proportions of the design. 

It has been pointed out that by increasing the number of stator 
conductors for a given rating, the instantaneous short-circuit 
current is reduced; it might at first be supposed that on account 
of the increased number of conductors in a group, the mechanical 
forces on the end connections would nevertheless be increased. 
However, a little consideration will show that this is not so, and 
that the forces are decreased by nearly twice the percentage that 
the number of conductors is increased. 

The method of supporting the end connections which is 
seen in Fig. 6 allows of effective clamping and incidentally pro- 
vides a large space for leakage flux, while the field around the 
individual conductors is not excessive; thus the mechanical 
forces are minimized. The stator shown in this figure was re- 


1912) FIELD: TURBO-GENERATORS 1653 


peatedly short-circuited at full voltage, both on one phase and 
across all terminals, without any signs of distortion of the 
winding. 

A characteristic upon which great stress used to be laid, is 
close inherent regulation of the generator. It is not hard to 
see the reasons for abandoning this quality in the present-day 
purchasing specifications for large turbo-generators. In the 
first place, the price to be paid for it in efficiency, in heavy short- 
circuit currents, in inferior mechanical proportions, and in 
actual dollars of cost price, was altogether disproportionate to 
the supposed advantages. In the second place the advantages— 
for large units at any rate—are found to be of a more the- 
oretical than practical nature. With regard to the cost: In 
a turbo-generator of say 10,000-kv-a. rating (max.) the friction 
and windage plus core loss amount to several times the /?R 
loss plus excitation, the ratio depending upon speed and design, 
but varying from perhaps 3 to 7. Hence the point of maximum 
efficiency is always much outside the rating range, and any 
increase in variable losses with a reduction of fixed losses causes 
an increase in efficiency at the operating point. The place where 
limitations are most severely felt in a large turbo-generator 
is the rotor, and therefore, to obtain close regulation in such 
a machine, the flux is of necessity run up higher than it would 
be without this requirement, hence an impaired efficiency. 
The increased flux involves a momentary short-circuit current 
ratio, and mechanical forces on end connections augmented by 
twice the percentage by which it is itself increased. The rotor 
limitations preclude the possibility of obtaining the close reg- 
ulation with the low flux, by means of simply an increased air gap. 
In several existing installations the consideration of short-circuit 
current alone has necessitated deliberately spoiling the regulation 
of the generators by inserting external reactance, a procedure 
which not only does not take advantage of the improvement 
of efficiency possible with a reduced flux but introduces some, 
even if small, extraneous losses. 

In the case of large units the difference between close 
regulation and poor, will frequently represent the practicability 
or otherwise of a two-pole as compared with a four-pole design, 
or four-pole versus six-pole. This incidentally represents an 
even greater effect on steam consumption due directly to the 
speed of the turbine. Again, the increased flux required for 
close regulation represents increased rotor weight and changed 


1654 FIELD: TURBO-GENERA TORS [June 28 


proportions, which at certain stages will necessitate operation 
above the critical speed where before a stiff rotor was possible. 
As regards cost price, the closely regulating machine will be 
heavier, and while the cost per pound will be slightly less than 
that of the low flux machine, the total cost will always be some- 
what more, except where other sacrifices have been made. We 
have been assuming that the close regulation is to be obtained by 
ordinary methods of proportioning. The clever compounding 
device introduced by Miles Walker, and used to some extent 
in England for fairly high power factor work, is said to provide 
the close regulation without any consequent very heavy mom- 
entary short-circuit current ratio. 

With reference to the advantage obtained by close regula- 
tion, the following points must be borne in mind. Where close 
voltage regulation is required, an automatic regulator will 
be used whatever the regulation of the generator. Even with 
close regulation at unity power factor, that at lower power 
factors is poor. ‘The size of the stations, and of the units, here 
discussed is much greater than a few years ago when close reg- 
ulation was being insisted upon, and while it may be said that 
fluctuations of load on a section of the busbars will be cor- 
respondingly increased, this fluctuation is not generally so 
large a percentage of the total rating of the machines on the 
busbars. Further, in a large station, if the rapid changes of 
load are heavy enough to represent a considerable proportion 
of the connected generator rating, the problem of taking care 
of the sudden changes of demand for steam will be the principal 
one, rather than voltage adjustment. As regards parallel op- 
eration between machines of different regulations, there is, of 
course, some hand rheostat adjustment required, if all machines 
are-to share equally the wattless load at varying busbar loads. 
But even if the regulation of the parallel units is the same, such 
hand adjustment will still be necessary, unless the shapes of 
the saturation curves are also similar. Frequently it is desirable 
anyway to adjust by hand the division of current load between 
generators old and new. 

The greater rotative speed at which a given output can be 
handled now, as compared with earlier practise, is largely due 
to changes of design which increase the available output from 
a structure of given dimensions rather than to changes which 
allow of very much larger structures being run at the old speeds. 
The use of mica and asbestos for rotor insulation allows of op- 


PLATE XCIll 
AUIpE ae: 
VOL, XXXI, 1912 


Fia. 6 [FIELD] 


1912] FIELD: TURBO-GENERATORS 1685 


eration at temperatures which were near the limit with the older 
inflammable materials. Modifying our ideas on regulation 
requirements enables the limitations of stator and rotor more 
nearly to approach one another, and so on. 

As an illustration may be taken some 12,500-kv-a. 750-rev. 
per min. 25-cycle generators that have for several years done good 
service on one of our large traction systems. In these machines 
the stator is 127 in. (3.2 m.) in diameter, 81 in. (2.05 m.) long, 
and 85.3 in. (2.16 m.) bore, and the flux per pole is about 128 
mega-lines. With these stator dimensions the flux would now- 
adays probably be run up some 30 per cent, or so, but the 
stator ampere conductors would also be increased to give a 
maximum rating in the neighborhood of 25,000 kv-a. The full 
load -efficiency would be brought up from 96.4 per cent to 
97.8 per cent, each case referring to unity power factor and with 
friction and windage included among the losses. The reg- 
ulation at unity power factor, for say 75 per cent of maximum 
rated load, would be increased from 10 per cent to about 15 
per cent. The momentary short-circuit current ratio would 
not be appreciably increased in spite of the fact that we are 
dealing with a machine of much larger kilowatt capacity; all 
the details of design would, of course, be modified to suit, and 
the machine would be considerably more costly to build. 

With the increased ratings prevailing at speeds of 1500 and 
1800 rev. per min., it becomes increasingly difficult to provide 
satisfactory and efficient blowers mounted directly on the rotor. 
There is the further consideration that the axial length taken 
by the blowers, and end bell partitioned spaces, increases the 
span between journals and lowers the critical speed. Some 
far-sighted buyers of large units are now adopting a separately 
driven external fan, allowing of a very stiff rotor construction. It 
then frequently remains possible to keep the critical speed above 
the running speed for large machines too; and the smoothness 
of operation obtained, even if we magnetically unbalance the 
rotor by temporarily short-circuiting one coil, is a great asset 
in a large machine. The external blower has several advantages 
which will be readily seen and which will be accentuated when 
it becomes standard practise in this country, as in Europe, to 
install air filters. The writer believes that our central station 
engineers will follow this practise a few years hence, as it is 
rational to arrest the dirt on accessible surfaces, whence it can 
be removed at a cost which is a very small fraction of the expense 


1656 FIELD: TURBO-GENERATORS [June 28 


involved when the dirt is allowed to collect in the generators. 
One possible alternative to the separate blower handling all 
the air, is a small external direct-connected higher pressure 
blower producing the necessary low-pressure ventilation by 
an inducing jet in a properly shaped main duct, on the prin- 
ciple of the jet pump. The “ high-pressure ’’ blowers for these 
need not necessarily be direct-connected, but one could be in- 
stalled to feed into all the ducts of the station. 


oO 


— 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E." 


THE TRANSIENT REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 


BY WILLIAM A. DURGIN AND R. H. WHITEHEAD 


This paper is confined to demonstrating the existence of a 
characteristic of alternators provisionally named the transient 
impedance and to investigating the influence of this characteristic 
on 

a. The maximum and minimum currents flowing through a 
12,000-kw. turbo-alternator with and without external reactance 
coils, under various short-circuit conditions. 

b. The maximum and minimum currents into different classes 
of faults from a system operating several such units in parallel. 

c. The maximum cross currents obtainable when paralleling 
a unit to the system considered in (b), and 

d. The torque developed by the maximum currents of (a) 
and (b). 

SUMMARY 

From these investigations we conclude that the short-circuit 
currents of alternators are limited by reactances much more 
complex and much higher than the self-inductive reactances of 
the armatures, but which are constant for similar units and can 
be obtained for any size and type of generator by simple low- 
voltage short-circuit tests. By means of this test value the maxi- 
mum short-circuit current of a single unit may be readily com- 


puted from 
E,, Ss 
ee a : ) 


and the maximum torque from 
0)2 ae) 
tee Gal (1+. : ) 
2 2 
1657 


1658 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 


equations which show, when developed, that the current per 
unit in any given short circuit is less as the number of units in 
parallel increases; that the maximum current always results 
when the short circuit occurs at the zero point of the corres- 
ponding pressure wave, independent of the particular short- 
circuit conditions; that the maximum instantaneous torque 
merely varies inversely as the reactance in circuit and hence that 
instability of the system and generator stresses (except those in 
end turns) at times of short circuit, are only lessened by reactance 
coils in proportion to the resulting increase in total reactance; 
that the torque stress per unit with a given number of units 
in parallel may be greater or less than that with a smaller 
-number of units, depending on the resistance of the short cir- 
cuit; and that the maximum torque is entirely independent of 
the points of the pressure waves at which a three-phase short 
circuit occurs. Finally we find that the total reactance of an 
alternator should be at least 15 per cent per phase, divided 
about equally between the unit’ and external reactance coils, 
in order to secure protection of the unit from the system in 
cases of internal short circuit, and that even this reactance will 
not give complete protection from torque strains in the armature 
and field due to poor synchronizing and short circuits or from 
excessive power dissipation at faults or in oil switches in cases 
of breakdown. 
TRANSIENT IMPEDANCE 


The generally accepted theory of the short-circuit current of 
alternators is stated as follows by Dr. Steinmetz in ‘‘ Transient 
Electric Phenomena and Oscillations,” page 200, paragraph 113. 

“When suddenly short-circuiting an alternator from open 
circuit, in the moment before the short circuit, the field flux is 
that corresponding to the impressed m.m.f. of the field excita- 
tion, and the voltage in the armature is the nominal generated 
e.m.f., é) (corrected for magnetic saturation). At the moment 
of short tircuit, a counter m.m_.f., that of the armature reaction of 
the short-circuit current, is opposed to the impressed m.m-f. oflthe 
field excitation, and the magnetic flux, therefore, begins to de- 
crease at such a rate that the e.m.f. generated in the field coils 
by the decrease of field flux increases the field current and there- 
with the m.m.f. so that when combined with the armature reac- 
tion it gives a resultant m.m.f. producing the instantaneous 
value of field flux. : 

Immediately after short circuit, while the field flux still has 


_—_ a 


1912) REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1659 


full value, that is, before it has appreciably decreased, the field 
m.m.f. thus must have increased by a value equal to the counter 
m.m.f. of armature reaction. As the field is still practically 
unchanged the generated e.m.f. is the nominal generated voltage, 
and the short-circuit current is 


we ae €o ” (1) 


Reactance is used: in place of impedance in this equation as 
in comparison the resistance of the armature is negligible. It 
is to be remembered that x, is the self-inductive reactance of 
the armature due to flux linked only with the armature con- 
ductors and hence, as this can be calculated or at least approxi- 
mated from the design of the machine, an estimate of the short- 
circuit current corresponding to the theory can be made. The 
equation gives this current as an a-c. phenomenon, that is, 
with equal positive and negative half-waves, but since it is 
really a transient phenomenon and may, therefore, have the 
initial waves displaced entirely above or below the zero value, 
the true maximum possible value is twice that shown by the 
equation, or 
vee 

m1 (2) 


The short-circuit tests made during the early part of 1911 on 
a 12,000-kw., 9000-volt, 25-cycle turbo-alternator at the Fisk 
Street Station of the Commonwealth Edison Company, as 
described in Messrs. Schuchardt’s and Schweitzer’s paper on 
The Use of Power-Limiting Reactances with Large Turbo-A lter- 
nators, and Mr. E. B. Merriam’s paper on Some Recent Tests of 
Oil Circuit Breakers, both* in Volume XXX of the TRANSACTIONS 
of this Institute, gave an unusual opportunity for checking this 
theory, and the great discrepancy between the estimated values 
of short-circuit currents and those actually found led to the 
results now presented. 

In these tests 167 short circuits, through circuits with 0 per 
cent, 3.9 per cent, or 6.3 per cent external reactance, were thrown 
on the alternator at open-circuit voltages from 1000 to 9000 
volts. The peak value of the initial cycle of current in the three 
phases for each delta short circuit, as obtained from the oscillo- 
grams then taken, is plotted in Fig. 1 for 6.3 per cent external 


~*Vol. XXX, (1911), Part II, page 1143; page 1195. 


1660 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 


reactance, in Fig. 2 for 3.9 per cent external reactance and in 
Fig. 3 for 0 per cent external reactance. In Fig. 4 similar values 
are plotted for all single-phase and three-phase four-wire short 
circuits. The upper solid lines drawn in these plots thus 
represent the maximum currents from test, and making the 


ae ty 


= AMPERES 


— 
= 


0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7WwW0 8000 000 
GENERATOR DELTA PRESSURE 


Fic. 1—IniT1AL PEAK VALUES OF CURRENTS IN THREE-PHASE 
DELTA SHORT-CrIRCUIT TESTS. 
a Through 6.3 per cent external reactance. 


S AMPERES 


a 
= 


O00 
GENERATOR DELTA PRESSURE 


Fic. 2—INITIAL PEAK VALUES OF CURRENTS IN THREE-PHASE 
DELTA SHORT-CiRCUIT TESTS. 
Through 3.9 per cent external reactance. 


single assumption that current continues proportional to voltage 
beyond the limits of the plot, the figures of column 5, Table I, 
give the test results for the maximum peak values of short- 
circuit currents corresponding to the various values of external 
reactance, 


a=—_ Av se. 


1912] REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1661 


With external reactance in series with the armature the funda- 
mental equation becomes 


= 2088 
[,, = ——— 
%1 + Xext (3) 
30,000 
ae eal 
tf | {1 
aia r aa 
| 
cae T *| 
20,000 = | sa a 
| + T at 4 if 
Mi | i; | 
oe 
te calles elheownal sen tel |_+—}- 4 
= 
= ul Allee of + 
10,000}— ‘ina a Se ea T + 
BS 7a8 aB= : 
i EP op tt 
| [ 


Tooo 2000 3000 4000 5y09 6000 7000 ©8000 +=—9000 
GENERATOR DELTA PRESSURE 


Fic. 3—InitT1AL PEAK VALUES OF CURRENTS IN THREE-PHASE 
DELTA SHORT-CIRCUIT TESTS THROUGH ZERO EXTERNAL REACTANCE. 


+ =SINGLE PHASE TO GROUND SHORT CIRCUIT 
© = THREE PHASE GROUNDED SHORT CIRC 
| 


= AMPERES 


e 
i=) 
- 


0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 
GENERATOR DELTA PRESSURE 


Fic. 4—Init1AL PEAK VALUES OF CURRENTS IN Boru SINGLE-PHASE 
TO GROUND AND THREE-PHASE GROUNDED SHORT-CIRCUIT TESTS. 
Through 6.3 per cent external reactance. 


For the particular generator tested, x was estimated by various 
engineers as about 2 per cent or 0.135 ohms, and using this 
figure in equation (3) the values of column 4, Table I, were com- 
puted. The actual current without external reactance is seen 


1662 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 


to be only 28 per cent of this computed value, and making all 
due allowance for inaccuracies in estimating %1, it seems evi- 


dent that the current is limited by some reactance beside those’ 


contemplated in the original theory. Substituting the test 
values of Im? and E,® in equation (8) and solving for the denom- 
inator of the second member, we obtain the values given in 
column 6, Table I, and subtracting x-x from these, the figures 
shown in column'7 result for the value of the total effective 
internal reactance. The agreement of these last figures obtained 
from three series of tests made under different conditions of 
external circuit is striking. Indeed, the variation from a mean 
of 0.5 ohm is well within the experimental error of oscillograph 
work, and although the transient reactance, as the writers have 


TABLE I 
Star Maximum Peak Values 
External reactance Computed * 
<= ——_—_—_——__——_ | Observed Total Transient 
Per cent ohms Voltage Current current reactance reactance 
from test 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
0.00 0.000 7350 109,000 30,000 0.490 0.490 
3.93 0.266 7350 36,700 19,400 0.758 0.492 
6.26 0.424 7350 26,300 15,800 0.931 0.507 


*Throughout this paper the following values are used for the rated voltage and current 


per phase: . 
E = 5200 Em = 7350 
I = 770 Im = 1090 


called this quantity, probably varies somewhat with conditions 
of field circuit and armature current even during the middle 
third of the first cycle of short circuit, these variations are 
comparatively small and for the purposes of the paper the tran- 
sient reactance is taken as constant during this period under all 
conditions of short-circuit. Considered over the total period 
of the transient short-circuit phenomenon, it is, of course, a 
variable increasing from a lower limit:x, to an upper limit xo, 
where xo is the synchronous reactance developed when the 
machine is brought up to speed from standstill under short- 
circuit and normal excitation. 

The existence of such a transient reactance, or rather the 
existence of complex reactions which are conveniently grouped 
and replaced by a single fictitious quantity called the transient 


—- \ «4 


1912] REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1663 


reactance, is shown conclusively by the test results and has, 
indeed, been more or less clearly appreciated for some time. 
Miles Walker, in his paper on ‘‘ Short-Circuiting of Large Electric 
Generators,”’ Proceedings, Institution of Electrical Engineers, 
Volume XLV, page 295, states that in one case which he investi- 
gated the circuits of the eddy currents in the field poles had an 
equivalent inductance reduced to the armature, 2.4 times as 
great as x; and engineers in general have accepted the statement 
that the actual short-circuit currents obtained will be less than 
those indicated by theory on account of eddy current reactions. 
But the full significance of the large current induced in the field 
circuit does not appear to have been clearly formulated. 

Dr. Steinmetz’s statement of the original theory assumes a 
current induced in the field of such strength as to maintain the 
resultant flux constant against the effects of armature reaction. 
The induction of this current in the field, however, is so closely 
analogous to simple transformer action that the effects of its 
flow through the highly self-inductive secondary or field circuit 
may be considered equivalent to adding the field inductance 
multiplied by the square of the ratio of transformat‘on to the 
primary or armature circuit, or, if 


Xp = reactance of field circuit, reduced to armature, 

X%_ = reactance of eddy current paths in contiguous metal 
masses, reduced to armature, 

reactance representing decrease of total resultant flux 


Xe = 
due to energy dissipation, and 
x; = transient reactance, 
then 


Xp = Xr + Xo + Xe t+ Xe (4) 


Asxp and x, are only effective during the transient phenomenon 
or while alternating current is induced in the field, this equation 
for the permanent three-phase condition reduces to 


Xp = X1 + Xo" = Xo (5) 


In the above discussion reactance only has been considered. 
It is, of course, evident that the field circuit and especially the 
eddy-current circuits possess considerable resistance and that, as 
more definite data are obtained, investigations must be based on 
the transient impedance. But at present, unfortunately, no 
figures are available for the transient resistance, and the writers 


1664 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 


have been obliged to assume that as the known armature resist- 
ance of 0.03 ohms is negligible, the values of column 7, Table I, 
represent true transient reactance, and in the cases discussed 
below, to treat the total transient resistance as negligible or as 
replacing an unknown part of the external resistance. 


(a) The Maximum and Minimum Currents Flowing Through a 
12,000-kw. Turbo-Alternator With and Without External 
Reactance Coils, Under Various Short-Circuit Conditions. 


One of the principal advantages of considering all the armature 
reactions as a single transient reactance, practically constant 
during the middle third of the first cycle after short circuit, lies 
in the fact that the short-circuited armature then becomes 
strictly analogous for this period to a circuit possessing the same 
resistance and reactance upon which is impressed a constant 
e.m.f. equal to the nominal generated voltage eo (corrected for 
magnetic saturation). The current in such a circuit is given by 


=e [<°s (BE Os 0ieete" dos (+61) | 


‘= 


(6) 
in which equation, as applied to the short-circuited armature, 


E, = maximum nominal generated e.m.f. (corrected for satur- 


ation). 

g =vVPr iets x 

yr = transient resistance + resistance of external circuit. 

x = Xr + Xext 

§ = time from instant of short circuit. 

6) = phase of pressure at instant circuit is closed, in terms of 
6 from equation e = Em cos (9 — 4) or the time 
angle to the nearest positive Hn 

6, = tan-? a 


Considering first the case where r is negligible with respect 
to x, equation (6) reduces to 


ape HT cos (0-0-3 )—cos (6+ ) | , (1) 


‘ F ; T 
and gives maximum values for 7 when 0) = + 3 oF when the 


1912] REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1665 


short circuit occurs at the zero point of the e.m.f. wave, for under 
these conditions, 


x 


t=+ Ein! (cos 4 2 1) 8) 


and 
2 Ln’ 


8 = -— —— 
x 


this being the same value as obtained from the original theory 
with the initial wave completely above or below the time axis 
(equation 2.) If the short circuit occurs at@) = 0 or Oo=7, 
on the other hand, equation (6) becomes 


Bo 4 ies 1 
Sts a (0-3) 


or 


giving 
Ig = + Em 

i (9) 
that is, the minimum initial peak of the minimum phase when 
the short circuit takes place at the peak of the impressed e.m.f. 
wave for this phase.* Under these conditions the current wave 
is symmetrical about the time axis and the maximum is one- 
half that obtained when the wave is completely displaced. 

The test results are in satisfactory agreement with this last 
relation, the lower solid line of Figs. 1, 2, 3 and 4 being plotted 
for values one-half those of the upper line. The fact that a few 
points fall below the limit indicated by the theory is probably to 
be explained, aside from the unavoidable inaccuracies of oscillo- 
graph measurements, by variation in the resistance of the exter- 
nal circuit. The importance of maintaining this resistance 
constant did not appear until the tests were completed, and in 
consequence, as the contacts of the oil circuit breaker used to 
open the short circuit became pitted, a resistance was introduced 


*Initial peak is used throughout this paper as meaning the highest 
peak occurring in the first cycle. 


1666 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 


in each phase varying from several hundredths to perhaps a few 
tenths of an ohm as indicated by oscillograms of the pressure 
drop across the several contacts. The higher figure is by no 
means negligible in comparison with the reactance of the circuit 
and, together with the unknown transient resistance, introduced 
considerable variations from the purely reactive impedance 
assumed. 

Fig. 5 shows the effect of various external reactances up to 
20 per cent in reducing the current of one of the 12,000-kw. 
generators under short circuits of negligible resistance as com- 


AMPERES 


0 2 4 6 8 10 R 4 16 18 20 
PER CENT EXTERNAL REACTANCE 


Fic. 5—Maximum InNiTIAL PEAK VALUES OF CURRENT THROUGH 
12,000-Kw. ALTERNATOR AT 9000 VOLTS ON EXTERNAL ‘THREE-PHASE 
‘SHort Crrcuits OF ZERO RESISTANCE AND VARIOUS REACTANCES. 


puted from equation (2), the actual test values being plotted as 
circles. It is interesting to note that whereas an increase of 
external reactance from zero to 6 per cent results in a decrease 
in current of about 45 per cent, an increase from 6 per cent to 
10 per cent external reactance gives only about 12 per cent further 
decrease of current. 

If the resistance is not negligible, the analytical solution of 
equation (6) for maximum i becomes difficult and the investi- 
gation is carried out most readily by plotting various families of 
curves. For this purpose the variables of equation (6) may be 
grouped: 


1912] REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1667 


VatCOs [ g — (05 + 6;) | = €" F°cos (Oo + 61) (10) 


and 6, and 6) + 4; considered the new variables. 


Taking 6) + 6; = 7, the family of curves given in Fig. 6 is 
obtained, showing the values of (10) for representative values of 


= and all values of @ from 0 deg. to 180 deg. Similar families 


have been plotted for other values of 0) + 6; and the maxima of 


R 
x7? 
| al | 20.1 
a mary 
= + R292 
s ie r 0 
gro Z =) 
a | Bi1.0 
las =) j—}— 
ee [ 
oS im T zi 
ls 
ie ye a 
> 
wn | 
o A iL 
i | 
l ail 
Sheeal 
1.0 aa | a a 
ai + 


0° 30° 60° ae 120 150 180° 


Fic. 6—Vatues oF Y, Equation (10), FoR REPRESENTATIVE 


¥ 
VALUES OF - AND ALL VALUES OF 6 rrom 0 To 7 WHEN 8) + 6, = 7. 
x 


each of the several series made up of those curves having the 
same value of = but different values of 0) + 6: are combined 
in Fig. 7 to form one of a new family of curves in which, therefore, 
for each value of 0) + 4: and a 6 has the value shown by 


Fig. 6 and the similar families to be necessary to make (10) a 


maximum. 
The dotted line drawn through the peak of these last curves 1s 


: T 
found to pass through the points corresponding to = > 


1668 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 


and it is apparent, therefore, that under all circuit conditions 
the maximum current is obtained when the short circuit occurs 
at the zero value of the corresponding e.m.f. wave.* From Fig. 7 
too, it is seen that the maximum value of (10) for any value of 
6) + 6;, is in no case more than 2.5 per cent greater than that 
obtained for 6) + 6, =7, and as, when 0) + 4; is made equal to 
a, the maximum value shown by Fig. 6 for any value of @ is 
not more than 0.5 per cent greater than the corresponding value 


2.0 


Pcos(atay 


j-e 


Y=COS( 6-6-6, 


120°. 150° 180° 


0° 30° 60° 90° 
Bot O1 


Fic. 7—Vatues or Y, Equation (10), FoR ALL Vacuss or 4, + 6, 
T r 
FROM ot TO 7, AND REPRESENTATIVE VALUES OF — WHEN @ HAS SUCH A 
x 


VALUE AS TO MAKE Y A MAXIMUM. 


when 6 = 7, by taking both 0) + 6; and 6 equal to we may 
obtain a simplification of equation (6) which will result in values 
of J° within 2 per cent or 3 per cent of the absolute maximum. 
So simpl-fied, 


Tet = #2" (14€5") (11) 


*An analytical demonstration of this fact is given in Appendix A. 


1912] REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1669 


gives the approximate maximum of the maximum phase, the 
minimum initial peak of the minimum phase being given by 


z (12) 


Applying (11) and (12) to the 12,000-kw. generator with no 
external reactance, the upper double branched curve of 
Fig. 8 results, the two branches showing the decrease in 
the range of possible values for the initial peaks of the 
three phases as the resistance of the short circuit is increased. 


S AMPERES 


= 
oS 
BS 


NAU REACTANCE 


2.0 3.0 4,0 
RESISTANCE 


Fic. 8—Limits of CURRENT THROUGH SHORT CIRCUITS OF VAR- 
1ous RESISTANCES, SUPPLIED BY A 12,000-Kw. ALTERNATOR. 


Both when the unit is protected by 6 per cent reactance coils and when 
it is connected directly. 


It is noteworthy that a resistance of one ohm per phase eliminates. 
the transient term entirely, both for this curve and the lower 
double branched curve showing similar values when 6 per cent 
external reactance coils are included in the circuit. That is, 
for resistance greater than 0.8 or 1.0 ohm all three phases have 
equal initial peaks, or we have a simple a-c. phenomenon. As 
the unit is earthed through a 2.5-ohm neutral rheostat, cable 
breakdowns or faults from phase to sheath are thus purely 
a-c. phenomena, and from the closeness of the upper and 
lower curves of Fig. 8 at the 2.5-ohm point, are unaffected 
by any practicable amount of external reactance. 


1670 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: | [June 28 


(b) The Maximum and Minimum Currents into Various Classes 
of Faults from a System Operating Several 12,000-kw. Units 
in Parallel. 

With 2 units in parallel, feeding a short circuit beyond the sta- 
tion busbars, equations (11) and (12) take the forms 


ss i and EAE 
Tone oe 
es ye 
/ ( Rar mo) + (=) (14) 


The assumption that the transient resistance term is negligible 
as compared with the external resistance, however, becomes more 
nearly true as 7 increases, so that for several units these equa- 
tions may be simplified as 


N Vext 
0 ra 
Toi pee ape a 


V rat + (=) as) 


n 


Tv 


and 
Ee 


hd pers (z y 


From these latter equations the curves of Fig. 9 for five 12,000- 
kw. units in parallel are plotted similarly to those given in 
Fig. 8 for a single unit. With a three-phase short circuit on a 
standard 250,000-cir. mil cable fed from a five-unit system, if 
the breakdown is a mile or more from the station, the decrease 
in current due to 6 per cent external reactance coils is negligible 
and no transient term occurs, this critical distance being one- 
fifth that which obtains for a single unit. But for an appreciable 
resistance the three-phase short-circuit current of five units is 
considerably less than five times that of a single unit, so that 
although up to about two ohms per phase resistance those effects 


(16) 


1912] REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1671 


of a breakdown which depend only on the amount of current, 
increase in severity at the fault and in the feeder switch with the 
number of units in service, the effect on the individual units 
decreases as more units are operated in parallel. The applica- 
tion of these statements to a breakdown from phase to ground 
depends on the scheme followed in operation. If, as is usual, a 
single unit is earthed, that unit takes the entire short-circuit 
current and this is practically independent of the number of 
units on the bus. If, however, all units are connected to a 
neutral bus which is earthed through a neutral rheostat the total 


150,000 
= | = = r =f = = 
— T ii 7 5 + T 
| i ale Tia 
i: EET tle 
100,000 t 4 
Sa ER a aa | 
ce = e! t | { ps all 
td if | T + — ay =| 
a 
2 T |} T =r 
50,000 le i = = iF 
a es = | | 
wie 0% EXTERNAL REACTANCE 
| 
Tar ia f 
—s 7 
e 0.5 1.0 15 2.0 
RESISTANCE 


Fic. 9—Liuits oF ToTAL CURRENT THROUGH SHORT CIRCUITS OF 
Various RESISTANCES SUPPLIED BY FIVE 12,000-kw. ALTERNATORS IN 


PARALLEL. 
With and without the protection of 6 per cent external reactance coils on each unit, 


short-circuit current will be independent of the number of units 
and the strain per unit inversely as this number. 


(c) The Maximum Cross Currents Obtainable when Paralleling a 
12,000-kw. Generator to a System Operating several such Units 
in Parallel. 

As a special case of the the parallel operation of units, we may 
consider the cross currents flowing when an additional unit is 
connected to a bus supplied by similar units. Here ext 
is zero, rz is negligible and the e.m-f., assuming the pressure of 

‘the incoming unit to be equal to that of the bus, is twice the bus 


1672 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 


pressure, multiplied by the sine of one-half the phase angle 
between bus and the incoming unit. Taking the worst case [when 
the unit is thrown in 180 deg. out of phase and the switch closed 
at the zero value of the pressure waves, 

Fate, 2 (2 Bat) 


zm 
a (17) 
and the numerical values applying to the system under discus- 


sion for external reactances from 0 to 10 per cent and 7 from 1 to 
o are shown in Fig. 10. 


60,000 ] | T 
y) a ie | “Pe Teo Ee ) + ae s 
1?) 
50,000 t 7 a rT 43 
+ 1 — at 2 
| z 
> 
w» 40,000 i. Se 
s MEISE IR ase 
Ww a 
= i ‘ap ¢ 5 
S 30,000 5 
= = se ce seen ee rs 
T a) 
20,000 = ——t * 2 i 
1 = =" re | 4. —— 2 
| \ 

10,000 t — ——+ ¥ + + 

| _—— ee 1 = es) al Pe 

0 1 3 4 5 6 rs 5 ) 10 


PER CENT EXTERNAL REACTANCE 


Fic. 10—Maximum INITIAL PEAK VALUES OF CURRENT WHEN A 
SINGLE 12,000-kw. Unir 1s CONNECTED 180 DEG. OUT OF PHASE TO A 
Bus SuprPLteED BY ANY NUMBER OF SIMILAR UNITs. 

Each unit equipped with external coils having from 0 per cent to 10 per cent reactance. 


At the Fisk Street station with four units previously operating, 
the 6.3 per cent reactances installed would only limit current to 
26,000 amperes in the worst case of synchronizing. This, while 
little more than half that obtained with no external reactances, 
is still probably quite sufficient to wreck the incoming unit. 
Although, therefore, reactance offers considerable protection 
against poor synchronizing, no amount considered in any of the 
installations yet made will give complete security. 


(d) The Instantaneous Torque Developed by the Maximum Short- 
Circuit Currents of (a) and (b). 


Applying the conception of transient impedance to the investi- 
gation of the maximum instantaneous torque which tends to twist 


1912] REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1673 


or spring the shaft or to strain the entire armature-of a short- 
circuited alternator, we obtain the very simple formula 


a8 EP pehy 
m 5 oD) if 1- E€ « (18) 


For when r = ry + Pex; the torque is evidently the sum of the 7r 
losses for the three phases, and in a three-phase short circuit 
through any reasonable amount of external resistance 7; may 
be taken as equal in each phase, making, 


w = Maye a) F i 


! 1} [ cos (0- eer z cos (0, + 6 dal 
+ [ cos (6-6)-0,- 7" )—e=! cos ( + Ot )] 
+ [ cos (6-0.-6,-*)—e°=" cos (646.477) |} 


(19) 


Expanding these expressions and reducing by the formulas 
given by Dr. Steinmetz in ‘“‘Engineering Mathematics’’, page 105, 


PPE [lace etl eee] ap 


This expression does not contain 69, or, in other words, the 
torque is entirely independent of the point of the pressure wave 


at which the short circuit occurs. Furthermore, the transient 
term becomes practically negligible for s = or > 4 and (20) 
then reduces to 

‘yw = s ae = 3 EIcos fi, 


the fundamental power equation of the three-phase circuit. 
To obtain W,°, the latter part of (20), 


( cos 6 — ea V+ sin? 0, 


1674 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 


may be investigated graphically as is done in Fig. 11, where the 
solid lines represent the values of the expression for various values 


’ from 0 to ©, the dotted lines showing the component 


of 


terms for = (0.2. Here again, as in the case of the current 


curves of Figs. 6 and 7, the peaks are so flat that the absolute 


ar 
Fic, 11—VALUES OF (cos 0 -— €x” y+ stn? 8, Equation (20), 


r 
FOR REPRESENTATIVE VALUES OF —AND ALL VALUES OF 6 FROM 0 TO 7. 
x 


maximumt orque is never more than 4.5 per cent greater than the 
torque for 6 = m and hence, for all practical purposes, (20) 
may be written as in (18). It is interesting to observe that this 
equation can be derived from the three-phase power equation 


; : 3 ee: 
written in: the form W = al mf by substituting the approxi- 


mate value of J»° given in (11). That is, the maximum transient 


1912] — REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1675 ° 


torque is the same as the constant torque of a three-phase circuit 
in which the Im of the sine current equals the maximum possible 
peak of the maximum phase under short circuit. 

Using in equation (18) the values of x for the 12,000-kw. 
alternator, the curves of Fig. 12 are obtained, showing the de- 
crease of torque with increase of resistance. For any given 
resistance, the decrease due to the addition of 6 per cent external 
reactance is equal to the difference in ordinates of the upper 
and lower curves and is directly proportional to the decrease 
in the square of the current. The end turn stresses in the arma- 
ture winding are also proportional to the square of the current, 
so that in any specific short circuit all stresses on the alternator 


100,000 SSS se 
fn 
ely) 
ral iB | = 
k 7 2 
SHEN —|No EXTERNAL|REACTANCE 
oll 
eae | 
<I \ 
u nae \ 
50,000) 7--¥ - - 
‘ 
N 
NIN 1 
Ss 6 /JEXTERNAL REACTANCE 
Ss 
Bar| beet ee ae 
cna 


0) 


RESISTANCE 


Fic. 12—MaximumM INSTANTANEOUS ToRQUE DEVELOPED IN A 
12,000-Kw. ALTERNATOR WHEN SUBJECTED TO EXTERNAL SHORT CIRCUITS 


or VARIOUS RESISTANCES AND OF ZERO OR 6 PER CENT REACTANCE. 
_-—- Each of five units in parallel. Single unit system. 


are reduced in the same ratio by additional reactances. But 
the maximum possible end turn and torque stresses do not occur 
simultaneously, for the maximum current flows with minimum 
transient impedance, or in a zero resistance bus short circuit, 
while the maximum torque results when some considerable 
resistance—the exact value depending on the simultaneous 
value of the reactance—is in circuit. In the case considered in 
Fig. 12 the possible maximum torque is thus reduced only 45 
per cent by 6 per cent reactances or directly as the maximum 
current. This variation of the maximum possible torque in 
direct proportion to the short-circuit current at zero resistance, 
as suggested by the last statement, or in other words, a varia- 
tion of the maximum torque inversely as the total reactance wv 


1676 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 


so that maximum W,,° = = is found empirically to be a true 


property of equation (18) by plotting curves as in Fig. 12 for 
other values of x. The current curves of Fig. 5 may thus be 
redrawn to show the percentage decrease in possible maximum 
torque, as well as in short-circuit current, secured by the use of 
various external reactances, as is done in the upper curve of Fig.13. 
The lower curve of this figure showing the corresponding decrease 
in end-turn stresses is plotted to the same scale, but the great 
difference in the actual magnitudes of the end-turn and torque 
stresses must be kept in mind. Thus, with no external reactance 
the torque is 7.9 times, the short-circuit current 27 times, and 

ULL| LOAD TORQUE 


7.9 X FUL! t ; 
+00 = 27,0 X|FULL LOAD CURRENT 
LUUK 729.0 X FULL LOAD END TURN 


E 


PER CENT 
iS 


S 


= 
Ss 


6 8 10 12 li 16 18 20 
PER CENT EXTERNAL REACTANCE 


=) 
S} 


2 4 


Fic. 13—MaxiImMuM SHORT-CIRCUIT CURRENT, MAXIMUM TORQUE 
AND MAXIMUM END-TURN STRESSES IN A 12,000-Kw. ALTERNATOR, UNDER 
SHORT CIRCUITS OF VARIOUS EXTERNAL REACTANCES. 

Plotted in percentage of values without external reactance. 


the end-turn stresses 729 times, the magnitudes existing at full 
load. Hence, although the end-turn stresses are reduced 69 
per cent by 6 per cent reactance coils, and the torque but 45 
per cent, the torque is 4.3 times full load, while the end-turn 
stresses are still 226 times normal. Indeed, even 20 per cent 
reactance coils leave the end-turn stresses 58 times normal. 

As, however, external reactances have a large percentage effect 
in reducing end-turn stresses, the introduction of reactance coils 
evidently gives great protection to end turns even though still 
leaving these stresses large, but in lessening mechanical shock 
and retardation of the generator the percentage effect is con- 
siderably smaller and thus the protection much less than has been 
claimed. 


1912] REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1677 


With n units in parallel supplying a short circuit of fixed resis- 
tance the torque on each unit is equal to that produced in a 
-single unit short-circuited through m times the given resistance. 
The lower dotted curve of Fig. 12 thus shows the torque on each 
of five machines protected by individual 6 per cent reactance 
coils and short-circuited through various external resistances 
(the upper dotted curve showing similar relations for five units 
without reactance coils). Comparing the corresponding curves 
for one and five units it is seen that the answer to the question 
as to whether a unit will receive a more severe shock on a short 
‘circuit when it is operating alone or in parallel with other units 
depends entirely on the particular short-circuit conditions. 
For station short circuits, including cable breakdowns within 
a short distance of the station, the blow per machine will be 
much more severe with five units than with one, while the total 
power to be interrupted with five units—given by five times the 
ordinates of the dotted curves—may reach 265 megawatts with 
6 per cent reactance coils as against the 53 megawatts which 
can be supplied by one unit. For short circuits of more than 
0.25 ohms resistance the blow per machine with five units in 
parallel rapidly becomes less than that with a single unit, reaching 
full load torque for a short circuit of 1.4 ohms, at which point a 
single protected unit would experience a torque 3.5 times full 
load. With resistances of three or four ohms per phase, magni- 
tudes, that is, corresponding to substation short circuits, the 
total power to be interrupted, which has now decreased to about 
20 megawatts, is practically the same with five units as with one, 
and the blow per machine with three or more units in parallel 
is hardly more than may be met in normal operation. 

In review it will be noted that all the conclusions of this 
paper are based on two assumptions; first, that the transient 
reactance is constant at and near the middle of the first cycle; 
and second, that when this reactance is introduced in equation 
(6), true current values are obtained at and near 9 = 7. The 
- first of these assumptions is discussed under the heading Tran- 
sient Impedance. The second remains to be validated. The 
dotted curves of Fig. 14 represent the simultaneous three-phase 
current waves taken from oscillograms No. 317 and No. 318 
made in test No. 190—a three-phase short circuit at 9000 volts A 
with 6.3 per cent external reactance coils. Considerable dis- 
crepancies, due to the oscillograph, to current transformer 
distortion, or to other errors in measurement, exist in one or all 


1678 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 


of these wave forms, as is shown by the dashed curve which 
represents the sum of the dotted curves for A and B phases and 
should, therefore, coincide with the dotted or oscillograph curve 
for C phase, and these discrepancies must be remembered in 
judging the agreement between the oscillograms and the theory. 
From the oscillogram of the generator pressure (a curve not 
shown in the figure) 09 for A phase is found by actual measure- 
ment to be—72 deg., and substituting this figure and appropriate 
figures for B and C phases in equation (7), r being assumed negli- 
gible and x = 0.924 ohms, the full-line curves of Fig. 14 are 


wonreneoe OSCILLOGRAPH CURVES 
ALGEBRAIC SUM OF OSCILLOGRAPH CURVES A AND B_ 
CURVES GIVEN BY EQUATION (7) 6, FOR A PHASE=-72 


Fic. 14—-AGREEMENT OF EQUATION (7) WITH OSCILLOGRAMS. 


obtained. A considerably better agreement may be secured 
by trial, using various values of r, but at the 180-deg. point the 
coincidence shown in the figure appears quite sufficient for all 
practical applications of the work. 

These curves are fairly typical of all those investigated, 
and although the variations of the oscillograms from the 
mathematical curves show that the reactions are much too com- 
plex to be perfectly represented by a simple law of variation 
for the transient reactance, it is believed that the two main 
assumptions of this paper give a practical means of closely predict- 


1912] REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 1679 
ing from a single low-voltage short-circuit test the transient 
reactions of an alternator. 
APPENDIX A 


To demonstrate that the equation 


E 


1 = 


= cos (8 — 8) — 61) — ents ccs (6) + 81) 


‘ : : T aye 
gives the maximum value of 7 when 6) = 3 OT when the circuit 
is closed on the zero point of the e.m.f. wave for all values of 


= K a constant in any specific case. 


rand x. Let—— = (cot O;.= 
As @ and 0) are independent variables the expression is a 


are both equal to zero, but 


: a di ae di 
maximum when —79- Tee 


= cos 6 sin a4 tan [.« e “°_K {cos 0—sin 0 | 


dt 
d 0 
+ | €7*'—cos 6 + Ksiné || 
and when 
dt. pee cos Kysinf@ 
iM ee 0, tan,Oo = K e-*9—K cos 6 — sin 8 
also 
nee pee ese 2 | | [ -K§_ Kcos6—si 0 | 
he eee tan 0) | K € cos §—sin 
= as e-K8~cos 04+ K sin || 
and .°. when 
K? e-X9+ cos@ — K sin 0 


dt “i 
0, tan 00 = — KO K cos §@ — sin 6 


dé 


1680 DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD: [June 28 
Hence for the maximum value of 7 


—e~K94tcos9—Ksin@  K?e~**+cos @—K sin @ 
K e-*'—Kcos@—sinO K e-*'—K cosé-—sin 0 


tan Oo => 


This is only possible for real finite values of K and 6 when 


K e-*§— K cos 8 — sin #8 =0 
or when 
tan 6, = 0 
and 


i=) 
o 
f 
Ny 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1681 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘ OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS OF LARGE 
TuRBO-GENERATORS”’ (FIELD), AND ‘‘ THE TRANSIENT 
REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS ” (DURGIN AND WHITEHEAD), 
Boston, MaAss., JUNE 28, 1912. 


H.M. Hobart: I consider Mr. Field’s paper to be an excellent 
statement of the situation in regard to turbo-generators. Devel- 
opments of the last few years have made it quite necessary to 
introduce considerable deviation from what was formerly con- 
sidered the best design. This has come about largely from the 
necessity for better construction because of the stresses due to 
the large short-circuit currents, and for other reasons. 

My attention was attracted by the last paragraph of the 
paper, in which Mr. Field recommends the avo‘dance of handi- 
capping the design of the alternator to any extent as the result 
of incorporating the ventilating fans in the design. I am strongly 
inclined to believe that he is quite right. It always seems to 
me that a characteristic feature of almost all engineering methods 
is that the engineer’s work will be more in accord with the strict 
commercial line of progress when he is free to let each element in 
the engineering work be adapted to its own particular purpose. 
In large work at any rate, this policy is generally in the interest 
of true commercial economy, and I believe with Mr. Field that 
it will often be preferable, where the generators are of very 
large capacity, to provide completely independent ventilating 
apparatus. This plan has various advantages. If we try to 
incorporate the fans, we handicap the design of the alternator. 
The design of the alternator cannot be quite as good as if that 
requirement was not in the designer’s mind. Moreover, if the 
ventilating apparatus is distinct from the generator, that ap- 
paratus also can be made more efficient and appropriate. 

Occasions will often arise where a centralized ventilating plant 
can be successfully employed. One reason for that, as Mr. Field 
suggests, is that the air can be treated before it is sent on its 
way to the machine. Great developments are in store in this 
direction. It is a very important matter indeed that the air 
should be thoroughly cleaned. That can be best done as a 
separate department of the business. The humidity of the air 
may also with advantage be controlled prior to sending it on to 
the machinery through which it is to be circulated. Moreover, 
there are many otherwise fine stations which could be distinctly 
improved were the air taken from outside, as of course is done 
in many other stations, circulated through the machine, and 
sent—not into the engine room—but again outside, at any rate 
in many seasons of the year. In those seasons of the year where 
it would be useful to have it sent inside, it could be readily 
arranged. So that from every standpoint—from the standpoint 
of getting the very best generator for the money spent on it, the 
very best fans for the money spent on them, from the standpoint 
of having the air clean and in the most appropriate condition 


1682 TURBO-GENERATORS—ALTERNATORS [June 28 


before’entering the machine, and from the standpoint of having 
the most appropriate condition in the engine room, Mr. Field’s 
suggestions are excellent. 

B. G. Lamme: I wish to make a few general remarks on the 
paper of Messrs. Durgin and Whitehead. It is now, I believe, 
pretty generally accepted that all large alternators should have 
considerable reactance. You should put all you can inside, and 
if that is not enough, then put some outside. In some types of: 
machines it is difficult to get enough internal reactance. There 
are some advantages in both arrangements. For instance, if a 
short circuit occurs in one machine, an outside reactance between 
the machine and other machines will protect the other machines. 
On the other hand, if a short circuit occurs at the winding of 
one machine, you may save that machine by having a high 
internal reactance, regardless of the other machines. A good 
proportion of the short circuits that occur in turbo-alternators 
are in the end windings and, in many cases, in the terminals. 
In those cases, if a ground occurs on the machine, the internal 
reactance may still save the winding and it may damage the 
machine only slightly. If a machine has very little internal 
reactance, then in the case of an internal short circuit or ground, 
the whole machine may be ruined; so there are some advantages 
in having considerable internal reactance, and also some in 
having additional reactance for protection against other machines. 
I am a great believer in having high reactance in the machine, 
and also, wherever necessary, in putting some outside. 

In connection with the effect of armature short circuits on 
the field winding, in the New Haven Railroad power house, when 
we first installed the generators, we had many short circuits on 
the trolley system, and we had more trouble at first in the gen- 
erator field windings than in the armatures. Some of these 
troubles consisted of short circuits or grounds which we could 
not explain for awhile, but later we discovered that they were 
due to the high voltage generated in the field windings at che 
time of the short circuits on the line. We then put a low-resist- 
ance shunt across the exciter circuit. That helped matters. 
Somewhat later we equipped the rotors of these machines 
with very heavy copper dampers, of the cage type; after that all 
trouble with field windings disappeared. That was four years 
ago. The dampers on the machines have suppressed the voltage 
rises, as was expected, and the field trouble has entirely dis- 
appeared, thus showing the effect of the cage damper in protect- 
ing the field winding. 

P. M. Lincoln: I note that Messrs. Durgin and Whitehead 
in their paper have developed a formula by which they may 
obtain the maximum current in a short circuit and also the 
torque that is developed by the short circuit. I am not prepared 
to discuss the accuracy of this formula because I have not had a 
chance to study it sufficiently, but I would like to ask whether 
or not any of the members have really come across any diffi- 
culties due to the torque which has been developed on any 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1683 


generators due to short circuits. Generator shafts are usually 
so constructed that the amount of torque which can be trans- 
mitted is very much in excess of normal full load torque, and 
there is so much excess that, so far as my experience goes, there 
is sufficient so that, whatever abnormal torque is developed by 
short circuit or any other condition, there is no difficulty. 
This formula, I believe, gives a comparatively small excess 
above full load torque as the maximum that can be obtained, 
amounting to perhaps two or three times the normal full load 
torque. This seems to bear out the experience stated above, 
viz.: that no difficulty may be expected from the torques due 
to short circuits. 

Henry G. Reist: Some years ago, when we did not fully 
appreciate the stress of the high current that we get in generators, 
we had an experience with a generator which did shear coupling 
bolts, and I think there must have been nine or ten times the 
normal torque in the machine in order to have done this. Of 
course later machines are designed very much more cautiously 
and do not cause any harm. But there is no doubt in my mind 
that the torque in the older machines in the case of short circuits 
went up as high as ten or twelve or perhaps fourteen times the 
normal torque. 

B. G. Lamme: Inregard to the point Mr. Lincoln has raised 
regarding the torque, it may be said that the torque is developed 
in the alternator itself, but the transmission of this torque to 
other parts is a question of how much of it will be absorbed in the 
alternator rotor itself and how much in the other parts. In 
large high-speed turbo-alternators the rotor will absorb con- 
siderable of it. I know of one case of a turbo-alternator that 
had a special coupling on it, that was figured out to stand a 
maximum of three times the rated load. That machine was 
subjected to severe short circuits frequently, which in several 
cases affected the armature winding, yet the coupling was 
never injured. 

Henry G. Reist: I think that might be true on some 

-machines, but on a steam turbine generator the effect is large 
in comparison with the revolving part of the generator, so 
that a short circuit on the generator would transmit a great 
deal of stress to the coupling. 

* B. G. Lamme: The case I refer to was an engine-driven 

generator. 

Henry G. Reist: On engine-driven generators I might state 
that I have not found much sign of excess. 

In regard to Mr. Field’s paper, I heartily agree with the 
author and I would like to add that the engineers of this country 
should, I think, as rapidly as possible, filter the air for turbine 
alternators. It is done, if at all in this country, practically on 
a very small scale, but it is a matter of very great importance, 
a method of great merit, and this country is far behind what 1s 
being done in Europe. It is the almost universal practise, 


1684 TURBO-GENERATORS—ALTERNATORS [June 28 


abroad, to have the air for cooling turbine alternators filtered 
through cotton cloth filters. I think it is open to question 
whether the form of filter that they use in Europe is the best 
or whether some other form may not be better, but it seems to 
me it is a problem that American engineers should work out 
and then adopt the method which seems to be best adapted 
for the purpose. 

Comfort A. Adams: There is one point that I wish to consider 
briefly; it relates to the internal and transient reactances. 
The difficulty in dealing with the internal or leakage reactance of 
an alternator armature is twofold. Not only is this term very 
loosely defined and loosely used, but the quantity, when once 
defined as accurately as possible, is still practically impossible 
of even reasonably accurate measurement, unless defined in 
terms of the results of some specific tests, in which case the result 
is pretty sure to involve different phenomena in different types 
of alternators. It is even more difficult to compute than to 
measure, and there is no accurate method of checking the com- 
putations. For example, I seriously question the estimate of two 
per cent as the reactance of the machine in question. Ordinary 
short-cut methods of computing the leakage reactance are likely 
to give very erroneous results when applied to an extreme type 
of alternator such as that referred to in the paper. A method 
which serves very well for one type of machine may be useless for 
another, unless it is completely rational. For example, any 
method which groups the coil-end reactance with the slot 
reactance on the assumption that the former is relatively small 
or that it bears a fixed relation to the latter, will yield much 
too small results for this type of machine, since the slot reactance 
is inversely proportional to the peripheral velocity, other things 
being equal, while the coil-end reactance is roughly proportional 
to the ratio of pole pitch to gross core length, and otherwise 
independent of the frequency and peripheral velocity. There 
would thus be a comparatively small change in the coil-end re- 
actance in passing from an engine-driven alternato with a peri- 
pheral velocity of 100 ft. per second, to a turbo-alternator at 
400 ft. per second, while the slot reactance would be reduced 
to about one-fourth. This large change in ratio is only slightly 
neutralized by the considerable reduction of coil pitch common 
to bipolar machines, since this change affects both elements in the 
same direction, but the coil-end reactance in the greater degree. 
The belt leakage also becomes quite appreciable at high peripheral 
velocities, although it varies tremendously with the coil pitch, 
being a maximum at full and two-thirds pitch, and a minimum 
(practically negligible) ,at § and} pitch, for a three-phase machine. 
_ It should also be observed that the definition for xp given 
in the middle of page 1663 is merely descriptive or qualitative 
rather than workably quantitative, owing to the serious difficulty 
in defining and computing the field reactance, or what might for 
the present purpose be more appropriately designated the 
equivalent field reactance. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1685 


A question has been asked in this discussion as to the cooling 
effect of moisture in the air supplied to a piece of working 
apparatus. I have had recent opportunity to observe a case 
where the temperature rise of a machine under test was reduced - 
eight deg. cent. or 25 per cent by the presence of considerable 
quantities of condensed steam in the air supply. After the 
air had passed through the machine there were no visible signs 
of the moisture, which had obviously evaporated. 

A. B. Field: It is very satisfactory to find engineers of the 
experience of Messrs. Hobart and Reist standing out for air 
filtration in turbo installations. There seems little doubt that, 
if our manufacturing companies will strongly advocate the 
adoption of such processes, the operating engineers will be 
only too ready to see the advantages and install suitable 
apparatus. 

Professor Adams has referred to the reactance introduced by the 
end connections of the stator winding. A considerable propor- 
tion of the reactance which is effective on a sudden short circuit 
is due to the part of the winding external to the core. However, 
in large two-pole machines, it is generally not feasible to adopt 
a coil pitch which is equal to the pole pitch, or even nearly so. 
The length of coil external to the core is already much greater 
than that of the buried portion, even when the coil is chorded 
considerably; the difficulties of satisfactorily clamping the 
ends increase with too great a coil throw; the rotor span, between 
journal centers, becomes lengthened, and further, in those cases 
in which complete coils are used instead of half coils, it is neces- 
sary to proportion the coil so that it can be passed through the 
bore of the stator for assembly purposes. 

Sanford A. Moss (communicated after adjournment): Ex- 
ception must be taken to Mr. Field’s statement that it is diffi- 
cult to provide for efficient and satisfactory blowers mounted 
directly on the rotor. Considerable experience with direct- 
mounted blowers of the type shown* in Fig. 20 of the paper by 
Messrs. Hobart and Knowlton, The Squirrel-Cage Induction 
Generator, shows that they can be made very satisfactory. 

Blowers of this type, if properly designed, and if made with 
proper diameters, blade angles, etc., can be made fully as efficient 
as any separately connected blower, and often more efficient. 
The peripheral speeds are, of course, very high, but with proper 
design of blades this does not serve in any way to decrease the 
efficiency. One fact which makes a properly designed direct- 
mounted blower more efficient than a separate blower is that 
there are no separate rotation losses. The blower, being mounted 
directly on the rotor, has no disk losses of its own. Actual tests 
of machines with carefully designed blowers of the type above 
referred to, first with blower vanes removed and then with vanes 
in place, show that the increased power required for driving 
bears a very favorable relation to the theoretical power required 


“*See this volume of the TRANSACTIONS, page 1743. 


1686 TURBO-GENERA TORS—ALTERNATORS [June 28 


for compression of the actually measured volume of air to the 
actually measured pressure. 

The room taken by the blower itself is negligible and does not 
increase the length of shaft in the designs referred to. There must 
always be a certain space left for proper passages for carrying 
the air to the various parts to be cooled. These air passages 
must exist whether the blower is directly mounted or separately 
mounted. They, of course, take up some Toom, which is inevit- 
able and due to the necessity of ventilation, not to the direct 
mounting of the blower on the rotor. The use of air filters 
with the direct-mounted blower is as convenient as, if not more 
convenient than with separate blowers. In all cases air should 
be taken from some outside source by a conduit leading to the 
blower inlet. It is very bad practise to take air directly from 
the engine-room even with a direct-mounted blower. The air 
filter can, therefore, be placed at the beginning of the conduit 
leading the air to the blower. 

The method of ventilation by use of a high-pressure jet which 
Mr. Field mentions would be very inefficient. Most schemes of 
moving air by injector action entail large losses. 

H. R. Woodrow (communicated after adjournment): I would 
like to ask the question why the reactance of the field circuit and 
the reactance of eddy-current paths on contiguous metal masses 
reduced to armature are to be added, since they are in parallel? 
And also, is the reactance in the exponential function the value 
called ‘‘ transient impedance’? 

The maximum instantaneous torque is not the sum of the 
I2R losses of the armature, but many times that value, since 
there is considerable energy required to build up the field of the 
armature reactance. Also the field current rises to enormous 
values, requiring energy from the generator. 

Assuming that equation (6), in the paper by Messrs. Durgin and 
Whitehead, is correct for the armature current, although it cannot 
hold true for any appreciable length of time (1 to 2 cycles), that is, 


7 


Be) 
fe = [cos (@—O0.—0:) — € * cos (Oo + 41) ], 


where the voltage is 
e, = Ecos (6 — 4), 


the instantaneous power is equal to 


2 a 


cos (8 —4o) [cos (8 —60— 41) aia pe (8o+4:) | 


tit boae 
Pi it ¥ 


or, for any phase a in an m-phase machine, 


ba = eal = = cos( 0 ~ O + 272) 


n 


r 


[cos (a — 6-6 + me \I- ee cos (8 + Ot 2ze\l 


n n 


1912} DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1687 


The total instantaneous power on the shaft is the sum of that 
on the individual phases: 


» a=(n—1) 
p= eS €a 12 
a=0 
which reduces to 
Fe 
Zr. 


[ cos (0:)-0 * cos (8+ ;) J 


If z is represented in per cent, and on non-inductive full load 
Yr 


z=1, cos#;=lande * =0,and the full-load power P is 
ve 3 4 te Iz 
PS Oy KEN Or VE => 3 om 


Hence the instantaneous value of power in terms of full-load 
power is 


P aes 
p= = [cos 61 —e * cos(06+ 4)] 
and 
cos 6, = & 
Z 
Then 
pn Ser 
p=—[t-« “4 cos (0 + 61) | 


and the instantaneous power is independent of the point of the 
voltage wave at which the circuit is closed, but is pulsating in 
magnitude so long as the transient expression of current exists. 

Assuming the expression for current to hold true for the first 
cycle, and a condition where 


x =10r, 2 =7percent, 6, = tan! — = 84 deg. 18 min. 


| 


and 
Peas aT [0.1 — €°” cos (6 + 84 deg. 18 min.)] 


the instantaneous values of power or torque will be as shown in 
Curve 2, on the following page. 


1688 TURBO-GENERATORS—ALTERNATORS {June 28 


To determine the maximum point of the torque, differentiate 
the above expression with respect to time @ and equate to zero. 


ao mind 
i ee Pitre > one (OCP Oo e ‘ sin (0 + 6) | =0 


00 Zz 


and 
cos. (el Os) ten pei 
sin (8 + 6;) ae 
hence 
6 et Tv 
2 
Therefore 
F rf! 
max p = pire x2} 
pit TOTAL REACTANCE = ANCE OF 7 PER CENT 
g 7 PER fo T TOTAL RESISTANCE OF 0.7 PER CENT 
o 12, 2-125 
© a 
FE < 
a 10, O10; 
<= 
34 - 
ener ha ia —Ss 
a waxipaaonrralrs .07€ 0.07 7] oe 
ir S&F oS-6: 
ce Zz 
<a 
Org | ui_4. 
2) ze 
= 5 
> 1 zuk 
i 2 | 
= % 9. Q.01 0.02 0.03 0.06 0.05 0.060.072 ° £09" 1507 495° 
p=} 
cj 
oc 
Fs) 
F 
x 
<= 
ns 


Max. p with respect to the armature resistance is plotted in 
Curve 1, which shows that the maximum instantaneous power 
occurs with zero armature resistance in a circuit of constant re- 
actance. 

With » generators operating on a bus when a short circuit of 
resistance ry is made on the bus, the effect on the individual 
generator is the same as if mXr resistance were in each indi- 
vidual generator, hence the maximum instantaneous torque 
on the individual generators occurs with but one machine oper- 
ating on the bus. 

W.L. Waters (communicated after adjournment): The history 
of the turbo-generator has been one of continually increasing 
speed to meet the requirement of efficiency in the steam turbine, 
and it is only during the past few years that it has become pos- 
sible to operate the generator at any speed found advisable for 
the turbine. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1689 


An idea of the progress made can be obtained from the fact 
that 5000-kv-a., 3600-rev. per min. maximum rated units have 
been built in the United States, and 6000-kv-a., 3000-rev. per 
min. units with 25 per cent overload capacity have been built 
in Europe; while I understand that Mr. Field has designed and is 
prepared to build 30,000-kv-a., maximum rated, 25-cycle genera- 
tors to operate at 1500 rev. per min. The question of high speed 
vs. low speed for turbine sets is similar to the question of high- 
speed vs. low-speed steam engines. It is to be decided by the 
relative cost, floor space, maintenance, and efficiency of the sets. 
One handicap of the high-speed steam engine is that when it 
gets out of adjustment, trouble develops very much more rapidly 
than with the corresponding low speed; but the same criticism 
hardly applies to steam turbine sets, as there is practically no 
difference in this respect between an 1800-rev. per min. and a 
3600-rev. per min. unit. 

The phenomenon which takes place at the instant of short- 
circuiting an alternator was investigated by the writer a number 
of years ago, when it was found that on account of the eddy cur- 
rents there was a time lag in the effect of the armature reaction 
in reducing the flux. So that—as I think was first stated in the 
paper on Non-Synchronous Generators, which I presented before 
the Institute in February, 1908—the instantaneous rush of cur- 
rent at the moment of short circuit is equal to 


e. m. f. 
total impedance in circuit 


About the time this was published, it was found from the 
oscillographic records that the value of the first few waves of 
current is dependent upon the phase of the voltage at the moment 
of short circuit, and that—as stated by Mr. Field—the first 
current wave can have a value approximately double that given 
by the above equation if the short circuit occurs at the instant 
when the e.m.f. is zero. It is not clear to me what Mr. Field 
means by ‘“‘ most probable”’ value of the initial short-circuit 
current, as it is the maximum possible value that we most pro- 
tect against. . For this reason, a short-circuit test on an a-c. 
generator is often of no value, as it may happen that the circuit 
is closed when the e.m.f. is a maximum, which would give the 
lowest value of the initial current rush. In practical operation, 
the generator might be thrown on the busbars with a bank of 
similar machines, 180 deg. out of phase, and at a time when the 
e.m.f. is zero. In sucha case, the first rush of current would be 
four times as great, and the stresses on the end connections of 
the armature coils sixteen times as great, as those in the short- 
circuit test. As to the question of the capability of enduring 
the.short circuit likely to be met with in practical operation, 
the purchaser is to a great extent dependent upon the manufac- 
turer. Adequate tests are almost impossible to make, and in 


1690 TURBO-GENERATORS—ALTERNATORS [June 28 


addition, are somewhat dangerous, especially in large vertical 
units, on account of the mechanical shock to the machine and 
the violent flashing and consequent burning of the rotor, due to 
heavy induced currents. 

As Mr. Field points out, the modern tendency is to design 
large a-c. generators with high internal self-induction, and con- 
sequent poor regulation, in order to reduce the stresses on the 
generator and system generally caused by short circuits. A 
voltage regulator seems to have become a necessary adjunct of 
a modern power station, and since Mr. Stott has successfully 
overcome the difficulty of applying such regulators to a large 
system like the Interborough in New York, the day of closely 
regulated a-c. generators for power station work can now be con- 
sidered as past. 

The practise of using separate blowers and filtering the air 
through screens offers a number of advantages, but requires care- 
fulplanning. The over-all efficiency, including friction, windage, 
and blower losses, may be very materially reduced with an 
external blower, unless the station is very carefully laid out; and 
unless the filter screens are cleaned frequently, they merely 
obstruct the air supply, or allow all the dirt to pass through. If 
the air supply to the screens and generator is at all dusty, it is 
practically impossible to avoid frequent cleaning of the air 
ducts in the machine. 

I think that Mr. Field’s valuable paper would be more com- 
plete if he emphasized that fact that the operating engineer and 
purchaser must depend to a great extent upon the ability and 
integrity of the manufacturer for the most suitable design for 
large high-speed units, as it is almost impossible to make specific 
tests which are of any practical value. 

When the Cos Cob power station of the New York, New Haven 
and Hartford Railroad was first operated, five years ago, numer- 
ous short circuits on the 11,000-volt single-phase system were 
experienced; and this was probably the first occasion on which 
phenomena of high-power short circuits were urgently brought 
to the attention of engineers. A large number of experiments 
were carried out by Mr. Lamme and the writer, which covered, 
to a great extent, the subject of the present paper by Messrs. 
Durgin and Whitehead. After Mr. Lamme had decided to in- 
stall external reactance coils in the circuit of each generator (at 
that time quite an original idea), but before it was actually 
carried out, the operating engineers tried the effect of inserting 
a resistance in series with the generator—this being accomplished 
by connecting a feeder two miles (3.2 km.) long permanently in 
the circuit between the overhead line and the power house. The 
comparatively small resistance inserted had an extraordinarily 
good effect in reducing the shock of short circuits on the power 
house—so much so that it was even suggested that this resist- 
ance be left in circuit and the reactance coils not installed. These 
results started us investigating the relative value of resistance 


1912) DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1691 


and reactance in limiting short circuits. Oscillographic records 
of the current obtained under different conditions were found 
to check with those determined theoretically from the following 
well-known equation covering sudden changes in the impedance 
of a power circuit: 


VR + pL? 
pce tee OS Rs eh R 
sin @ —@ sin 0 —w on cates © 
= E Wires wl — as - g— 2) € 
Fa aaRate Dolactebl ws Yatvors Divs 


Where 

Ry and Ly are resistance and self-induction of circuit beyond 
the short circuit, 

R and L are resistance and self-induction of generator and 
circuit inside of the short circuit, 


a PL Sipe BEY 
= t i Ao = fa a Se 
®) an” R a tan R+Rp 
J =-current Ee=jexn.t. 

@ = value of p? at instant of short circuit 
p = 2m X frequency = exponential 


+ = time measured from arbitrary zero. 

Curves similar to those shown in Figs. 8, 10 and 12 in Messrs. 
Durgin and Whitehead’s paper, showing the beneficial results 
of the presence of resistance in circuit, were soon obtained—both 
theoretically and experimentally. The final decision to adopt 
choke coils, rather than resistance, to limit the short-circuit 
shock on any station, was decided by the disadvantage caused by 
the waste of energy in the resistance. This is of interest historic- 
ally as showing the steps that led up to the installation of choke 
coils at Cos Cob, which set a precedent for what has now become 
standard practise in almost all new large power stations. 

This paper is an extremely useful and complete explanation 
of the general phenomena of the a-c. generator short circuits and 
is especially valuable as being based upon a complete series of 
tests under practical operating conditions. The author’s re- 
marks in reference to “ transient reactance ’’ in an a-c. generator 
bring to mind the discussions that have taken place during the 
past twenty years involving the question of the self-induction 
of an alternator. Those who have followed these discussions 
know what was, I think, first pointed out fifteen years ago by 
M. Blondel, that the term “ self-induction of an alternator * 
is a meaningless expression until a definition is given of exactly 
whatismeant. Thee.m.f. of self-induction in any electrical cir- 
cuit is the e.m.f. caused by the time rate of change of the lines of 
force linking with the circuit, and due to the current in that circuit. 


1692 TURBO-GENERATORS—ALTERNATORS [June 28 


In any alternator, this is an extremely complicated phenomenon. 
The self-induction varies with the reluctance of the magnetic 
circuit, which again varies with the relative position of the iron 
and electric circuits of the field magnets and armature; 
and also depends on the permeability of each part of the iron 
circuit, which again varies with the value of the current. The 
fact that the “‘ transient reactance,” as found by experiments, 
appeared to be only 28 per cent of that calculated by the authors, 
is not surprising, and only emphasizes the necessity of depending 
upon experiments and actual tests, rather than upon calcula- 
tions based necessarily upon assumptions. 

William A. Durgin (by letter): Some confusion seems to 
prevail as to the purpose of this paper. It does not at all claim 
to give a method of computing the transient reactance from 
design data, nor to substantiate the existence of any actual simple 
inductive characteristic, but it is intended to show the value of 
the conception ‘‘transient reactance’ in certain useful com- 
putations, based on low-voltage short-circuit tests that can be 
readily made on any alternator without the slightest hazard to 
the unit. ; 

We fully appreciate the fictitious nature of the conception, 
and in such equations as (4) we have tried to show merely a 
descriptive relation, being under no delusion as to the possibility 
of actually computing the components. Transient reactance 
is no more real than the self-inductive reactance of the armature, 
the synchronous reactance of the machine or any of the many 
other terms which are commonly accepted as convenient names 
for covering complex relations which enter our work as a single 
quantity. 

The paper shows that the maximum initial peaks of short- 
circuit currents obtained on a large number of tests are limited 
by reactions having a reasonably constant combined effect, and 
results of practical value are obtained by considering the effect 
as due to a single reactance of transient character. 

The discussion of torque in the paper is in error in that it 
refers to the torque developed by conversion of energy into heat 
as the total torque on the unit. Under the conditions assumed, 
this torque is in reality only that portion of the total which is 
transmitted to the external circuit. Consequently, the torque 
curves shown in Figs. 12 and 13 indicate the magnitude of energy 
to be ruptured by main oil switches, to be transmitted through 
station buses and to be consumed in cables or at faults, rather 
than the total torque developed within the alternator. The 
true total torque contains, in addition to the J?R torque con- 
sidered, a term representing the storage of energy in the field, 
which can be shown to equal 


0)2 2 
w, ~ 3 Se) x eo [sin 6+ (00s GieTinwt )] 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1693 


The combination of this latter equation with equation (20) of 
the paper gives for the total torque developed: 


ae a r ae ; r 
es ais Re ae "(sin 8+ cos 0 ) | 


ee : ; T : 
This is easily shown to be a maximum when 6 = 3? and in con- 


: : r 
sequence, the maximum torque for any given value of — 
x 


2 nr 
Wi! : f(r + x e733) 


is 
esi 


a result which agrees with that derived by Mr. Woodrow, from 
a somewhat different line of reasoning. 

It is to be noted, however, that these latter results are in reality 
based on the assumption that the transient reactance is a true 
inductive effect from which the equivalent inductance can be 
computed and that, therefore, although the results may be taken 
as indicating maximum limits which the actual torque will never 
exceed, they are open to more serious question than those 
deduced for the values of current and J*R torque. 

The importance of short-circuit torque in practical operation, 
as has been indicated elsewhere in the discussion, is less with 
units. of more recent design, but a few years ago a generator 
armature sometimes sheared its frame bolts and turned perhaps 
90 deg. about its axis when subjected to heavy short circuit. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


DETERMINATION OF POWER EFFICIENCY OF 
ROTATING ELECTRIC MACHINES 


SuMMATION oF Losses Versus INPUT-OUTPUT TESTS 


BY E. M. OLIN ys 

Recently there has been a considerable movement on the part 
of several large buyers of electrical apparatus to the end that 
efficiency tests of rotating apparatus be made by input-output 
measurement rather than by the summation of separate losses. 

The National Electric Light Association has also lent its ap- 
proval to this movement. 

Paragraph 92 of the Standardization Rules of this Institute, 
headed ‘‘ Comparison of Methods ” (for the determination of effi- 
ciency), states ‘‘ The output and input method is preferable 
with small machines. When, however, as in the case of large 
machines, it is impracticable to measure the output and input, or 
when the percentage of power loss is small and the efficiency 
is nearly unity, the method of determining efficiency by meas- 
uring the losses should be followed.” 

The terms “small machines ” and,“ large machines ” in this 
paragraph are indefinite and unsatisfactory. The purpose of 
this paper is to discuss both methods and from a consideration 
of certain data to show that efficiencies can be satisfactorily 
computed from no-load losses in all cases, provided empirical 
correcting factors are used therewith to compensate for load 
losses, and that efficiencies so calculated will in general be much 
nearer the true values than those made by the average input- 
output test. 

It is well known that certain of the losses occurring in elec- 


1695 


1696 OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY [June 28 


trical machines can be accurately determined from no-load 
measurements. Some of the losses, however, cannot be so 
determined, as, owing to conditions which develop, as load is 
applied a gradual increase in these losses takes place. 

The difference between the total losses under load and the 
sum of the separate losses as determined from no-load measure- 
ments is commonly known as “‘ load loss.” 

It is proposed by the writer to indicate a method which will 
establish the ratio of this load loss to the losses indicated by the 
no-load measurements. This ratio will vary for different types 
of apparatus. 

Briefly stated, the method proposed is as follows: 

From a series of reliable input-output tests derive the actual 
losses of a large number of machines of varying types and sizes. 

Determine the losses of these same machines by the summa- 
tion of loss method without increasing the separate losses to 
allow for field distortion or other load factors. 

The difference in the losses as found by the two methods will 
be the so-called load loss. 

Having determined the magnitude of this load loss for different 
types and sizes of apparatus, derive multiplying constants which 
can be applied to the separate loss values to obtain their true 
values under load. 

It is highly desirable to use the separate loss measurements for 
computing efficiency for the following reasons: 

The necessary tests are simple and require but few observers. 
For that reason they can be easily and accurately taken. 

On the other hand the input-oatput test is complicated, and if 
the desired accuracy is to be obtained it must be carried on with 
all the safeguards and refinements employed in the most delicate 
laboratory work. For that reason only the most expert operators 
can be used. A large number of simultaneous readings are re- 
quired and the errors of observation are likely to be additive. 
Experience has shown that repeated tests must be made before 
consistent results are obtained. 

According to the Standardization Rules of this Institute (para- 
graphs 7 to 21) the term ‘“‘ Rotating Machines ”’ includes: 


. Direct-current generators 
. Alternators 
Double-current generators 
. Induction generators 

. Boosters 


eaasre 


1912} OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY 1697 


f. Direct-current motors 

g. Alternating-current motors 

h. Synchronous condensers 

i. Motor-generators 

j. Dynamotors 

( Direct-current converters 

| Synchronous converters (rotaries) 


k. Converters Motor converters 


| Frequency changers 
L Rotary phase converters 


(a) (b) (c) (d) and (e) may be driven by prime movers or by 
motors. When motor-driven they are included under class (i). 

The most ardent advocate of the input-output test would 
hardly recommend this method for generators driven by prime 
movers, involving as it would the determination of mechanical 
power delivered at the shaft of the generator, so we can at once 
dismiss the first five items from our consideration. 

The power efficiency of the synchronous condenser running 
idle is nil and when running under load this type falls under 
(g), so that we need not consider it in a special class. 

There remain then for our attention the following: 

1. Motors. 

2. Motor-generators. 
3. Dynamotors. 

4, Converters. 

1. Motors. The efficiency of motors may be determined by 
measuring the losses and subtracting them from the input to 
derive the output or by measuring the input and output directly. 
In the latter case the mechanical output is measured by some 
form of brake or other dynamometer. 

2. Motor-Generators; 3. Dynamotors; 4. Converters. The 
efficiency of a motor-generator, dynamotor or converter may 
be determined by measuring the losses and adding them to the 
output to derive the input, or by measuring the input and out- 
put directly. In the latter case simultaneous readings of the 
electrical input and output are taken with suitable measuring 
instruments. 

The losses which take place in rotating electrical apparatus 
are well known. Briefly stated they are: 

of shafts with bearings 
of brushes with commutators 


of brushes with collector rings 
of rotating element with air (windage) 


Frictional losses 


*. 


1698 OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY — [June 28 


a. Due to the resistance of windings, brushes and sliding 
contacts to useful current flowing in the apparatus. 
b. Due to the resistance of any part of the apparatus to 
non-useful current. These losses include the following: 
Tr losses Losses due to eddy currents in the copper conductors, 
laminations, pole faces, damper windings and other 
metallic parts. 
Losses in armature coils and commutator leads which 
| are short-circuited by the brushes. 
| Tr losses in multiple-circuit windings. 


Hysteresis or molecular magnetic friction. 


To derive efficiency by the separate loss method it is necessary: 


1. To determine the resistance of windings, brushes and sliding 
contacts at a known temperature. 


2. To determine the regulation with reference to speed, 
voltage, and current flowing in the various windings. 


3. To determine the frictional losses over the range of speed 
indicated by the regulation. 


4. To determine the ‘‘ rotation loss ’’ (commonly known as 
the ‘‘ core loss.’’) This loss includes hysteresis, the eddy current 
losses in iron, copper and other metallic parts, J*r losses in cross 
connections and J*r losses in armature coils and armature leads 
which are short-circuited by the brushes, so far as these losses are 
due to rotation. 


5. To determine the eddy current losses in the iron and espe- 
cially in the copper conductors, so far as these losses are due to 
stray fields set up by useful currents flowing in the windings. 


6. To determine the alternating or transformer loss. This loss 
occurs only in machines whose field windings are excited with 
alternating current, as in the case of a-c. commutator motors. 
It includes hysteresis and eddy current losses due to the alterna- 
tion of the magnetic field, J?r losses in cross-connections of 
armatures and /?r losses in armature coils and commutator leads 
which are short-circuited by the brushes, s> far as these losses are 
due to the alternation of the magnetic field. 


1. Resistances. The resistances of windings can be measured 
with the greatest accuracy by several well known methods, 
which need not be discussed here. 

The resistance of brushes and sliding contacts can also be de- 
termined with precision. The method is as follows: Current 
of normal characteristics from an external source is sent through 


1912] OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY 1699 


the brushes and sliding contacts while operating at normal speed, 
the fall of potential indicating the resistance. A commutator or 
set of collector rings, for example, is assembled for rotation with 
its brush holder and brushes, but without connections to one 
armature windings. In the case of the commutator the bars 
are short-circuited by band wires at the ends. The apparatus 
is then driven at normal speed and the brush holders placed in 
series with current of normal characteristics from an external 
source. The fall of potential across the brush holders indicates 
the resistance of brushes and sliding contacts. Such tests have 
been made repeatedly by various engineers, and the values for 
different grades of carbon or copper brushes with varying speed 
and brush densities have been accurately determined. So that 
in computing the loss due to the resistance of brushes and slid- 
ing contacts it is usual to refer to data already compiled rather 
than actually to measure the resistance in each particular case. 

" 2. Regulation. What constitutes regulation is defined in para- 
graphs 187-203 of the Standardization Rules and the conditions 
for and tests of regulation are covered by paragraphs 204-209. 

It is necessary to determine over the entire range of load, (A) 
speed, (B) voltage, (C) current flowing in the windings. 

The apparatus should be operated under normal conditions if 
possible, but when, as in the case of large machines, it is imprac- 
ticable to make actual load tests the regulation can be approxi- 
mately determined from data taken at no-load. Such regula- 
tions are sufficiently accurate for efficiency determination by the 
summation of loss method. 

3. Frictional Losses. Losses due to mechanical friction, in- 
cluding windage, are independent of the load. The most satis- 
factory method for measuring these losses is by separate drive 
from an independent motor, preferably of the direct-current, com- 
mutating poletype. The apparatus is driven at normal speed on 
open circuit without current in any winding. When so opera- 
ting, the input to the driving motor is greater than its own no-load 
losses by an amount equal to the frictional losses of the driven 
apparatus plus a small increase due to load loss in the driving 
motor itself. This load loss is composed as follows: 


a. The increased J?r loss in the armature circuit. 

b. The increased rotation loss due to field distortion. 

c. Eddy current losses caused by the stray fields of useful 
currents in the armature circuit. 


1700 OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY [June 28 


(a) can be computed by a simple calculation involving the 
known current flowing and the resistance of the armature circuit 
(copper conductors, brushes and sliding contacts). 

(b) cannot be satisfactorily determined by the separate loss 
method, as will be pointed out under ‘‘ Rotation Loss.” It is 
usually disregarded in figuring the increased power input to the 
driving motor. 

(c) is usually so small in motors of this type that it can be 
ignored. In fact it is customary to ignore (a) (b) and (c)in 
measuring frictional and rotation losses. It is to be noted, how- 
ever, that the error introduced by,so doing lowers the calculated 
efficiency, since the loss is incorrectly charged to the driven 
machine instead of to the driving motor. 

To determine the frictional loss at a given speed it follows that 
two power input readings to the driving motor are necessary, one 
when driving the machine under test and the other when run- 
ning free at the same armature voltage and speed. 

4. Rotation Loss. In determining the rotation loss of induc- 
tion motors the apparatus is operated at no-load and normal 
voltage, the power input under these conditions being the sum 
of the frictional losses, the rotation loss, and a small copper loss 
due to the no-load current in the windings. The rotation loss 
can then be segregated by subtracting from this result the fric- 
tional loss as determined above, and the copper loss as com- 
puted from the current flowing and the resistance. 

In all other rotating apparatus the rotation loss is best 
measured on open circuit by the separate drive method in a man- 
ner similar to that described under ‘‘ Frictional Losses.”’ 

The power input to the driving motor is noted with the 
fields of the driven apparatus charged, and with the fields un- 
charged, the difference in the input, when corrected for the 
driving motor loss, being the ‘‘ rotation loss.”’ 

This loss is composed of two parts: 

m. Hysteresis and eddy current losses caused by rotation 
through the magnetic field. c 
n. J*r losses in cross-connections of armature. 
Ir losses in armature coils and armature leads which are 
short-circuited by the brushes. 
Ir losses which may exist in multiple-circuit windings. 

That part of the “ rotation loss ’’ due to hysteresis and eddy 
currents will increase somewhat under actual load conditions 
over its value at no-load as measured above. This increase is due 


1912] OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY 1701 


to field distortion and may be a considerable percentage of the 
value measured at no-load. 

There is no satisfactory method of computing from no-load 
readings the increased rotation loss due to field distortion under 
load. 

The J*r losses in cross-connections of armatures and the J?r 
losses in armature coils and armature leads which are short- 
circuited by the brushes depend upon the voltage and are inde- 
pendent of the load. That part of the “rotation loss’ due 
to these factors may be assumed to be correct for all loads as 
measured by the separate drive method at no-load. 

5. The losses in the iron, and especially in the copper conduct- 
ors, due to eddy currents from stray fields set up by useful cur- 
rents flowing in the windings, are often a considerable item, par- 
ticularly in machines having deep slots with conductors of large 
cross-sections. 

These losses may be approximately determined in certain 
types of machines by operating them on short circuit at several 
different speeds and currents. 

Paragraph 167 of the Standardization Rules described this 
method as applied to induction motors. Some modifications 

must be made, however, in order to obtain accurate results. This 

paragraph states ‘‘ These losses (load losses) may for practical 
purposes be determined by measuring the total power, with the 
rotor short-circuited at standstill and a current in the primary 
circuit equal to the primary energy current at full load. The 
loss in the motor under these-conditions may be assumed to be 
equal to the load losses plus J’r losses in both primary and sec- 
ondary coils.” 

It is to be noted that with the rotor at standstill, and current 
of normal characteristics flowing in the primary, the frequency 
of the secondary current is the same as that of the primary. In 
practise, however, the frequency of the secondary (which is pro- 

- portional to the slip) is very low. Therefore the losses due to 
eddies in the secondary conductors will be greatly magnified 
during the above test because of the high frequency. 

To approximate these losses more nearly, a series of read- 
ings should be taken with currents of varying frequency in 
the primary windings. This varying frequency should be 
brought down to as low a value as practicable. A comparison of 
the values thus obtained will indicate the lossesfunder normal 


conditions. 


1702 OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY {June 28 


The power input during these tests will of course include the 
ordinary J2r losses of primary and secondary windings. These 
must be subtracted from the total input readings to arrive at the 
loss due to eddies. 

There is no satisfactory no-load method of measuring this eddy 
current loss in the case of direct-current motors and generators 
and in alternating-current machines of the synchronous type. 
When operating such machines on short circuit so many other 
losses occur that it is practically impossible to segregate the 
eddy current loss due to the stray fields set up by currents flow- 
ing in the windings. 

6. The alternating or transformer loss is measured simul- 
taneously with the ‘‘ rotation loss ”’ by noting the power con- 
sumed by a wattmeter connected across the field circuit. A 
wattmeter so connected will measure 


a. The J2r loss of the field windings. 


b. The 2r loss of armature coils and commutator leads which 
are short-circuited by the brushes, so far as these losses are due 
to the alternation of the magnetic field. 


c. Hysteresis and eddy current losses due to the alternation of 
the magnetic field. 


(a) can be computed from the measured resistance and 
known current flowing. . 

(b) can be separated from the other losses by running 
the machine with and without brushes on the commu- 
tator. 

(c) is the difference between the total watts and the sum 
of (a) and (b). 


The alternating or transformer loss is equal to the sum of (b) 
and (c).* 

This loss is a function of the alternating current in the field 
windings, and for any given current will be the same whether the 
motor is doing work or is running free, driven from a separate 
motor. 

The general expressions for calculating efficiency by the 
Summation of Loss Method are as follows: 


*An exception is to be noted in alternating-current commutating motors 
where commutating compensation is obtained by the use of a cross field. 
Under [this condition a portion of the loss ordinarily supplied by the 
alternating-current exciting current will be furnished by the driving 
motor. 


1912] OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY 


For Motors Efficiency 
Motor-Generators 
For Dynamotors Efficiency = 


Converters 


Losses = Wyr + We + Wa + Wa + We 


1703 


Input — Losses 


Input 


eeu 
Output + Losses 


Where Wyre = Watts lost due to the resistance of windings, 
brushes and sliding contacts to useful current 
flowing. 

W, = Watts lost in friction. 
W, = Rotation loss. 
W, = Watts lost due to eddy currents in iron and 
especially in copper conductors caused by the 
stray field of useful currents flowing in the 
windings. 


W, = Transformer or alternating loss. 


Before proceeding further we will examine some data relating 
to the separate losses of rotating apparatus as compared with the 
rated output. The no-load values of Wz are given in these 
data. No values of Wy, are shown, as this loss was not investi- 
gated in the case of machines given in these lists. 


Apparatus Description 


Direct-current | Commutating 
motors pole 


Rating 


Output 
h.p. 


25 
35 
40 
50 
60 
75 
75 
75 
100 
250 
270 
300 


Fre- 
quency 
cycles 


WNONADEAAK OD OW 


WrrR 


Per cent of rated output 


Wr Wr Wr 
Me Cite ele OO, 
1.95 | 2.74 
2.48 | 2.40 
1.87 | 2.08 
1.80 | 1.70 
1.64 | 1.64 
1.60 | 1.78 
1.02 | 1.81 
1.04 | 1.15 
0.61 | 0.96 
0.69 | 0.72 
0.89 | 2.41 


Total 
losses 


a 
oo 
wo 
of 


NJNomowmnnvonom 
Qo 
(oc) 


1704 OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY [June 28 
Rating Per cent of rated output 
Apparatus Description Guiee Pre- 
h.p. | quency | Wpp| Wp WR | Wy | Total 
cycles losses 
Direct-current | Non-commu- 6 13.20 | 2.07 | 3.46 18.70 
motors tating pole 90 11.30 | 2.38 | 0.95 14.68 
400 4.60 | 0.93 | 3.74 9.27 
Synchronous 290 60 1.47 | 1.94 | 2.43 5.84 
motors 720 25 HE89i| Java aces 7.41 
1080 25 1.29 | 1.25.) 1.99 4.53 
2860 50 1.65 | 1.28 | 1.90 4.83 
3000 60 0.70 | 0.73 | 2.73 4.16 
Alternating- Series type 150 7.60 | 3.18 | 2.39 | 3.16 | 16.33 
commutator 315 580 1°2.77.). 2.20: |. 3.42.) 13.69 
motor 
Induction Wound 7k 60 10.00 | 4.28 | 4.00 14.28 
motors secondary 50 60 3.60 | 3.22 | 3.63 10.45 
75 60 5.95 | 2.14 | 2.02 10.11 
150 60 2.19 | 1.87 | 2.38 6.44 
200 60 6.34 | 1.68 | 2.69 10.71 
350 60 5.40 | 1.46 | 2.30 9.16 
500 60 3.77 | 1.66 | 2.06 7.49 
1200 60 142). 1279 | 1 67, 4.88 
3000 25 5.20 | 0.90 | 1.52 7.62 
11 60 10.30 | 1.71 | 6.23 18.24 
18 60 9.26 | 1.87 | 6.13 17.26 
25 60 4.55 | 1.88 | 5.42 11.85 
35 5:15.) 2.530) 0.26 15.93 
75 60 3.85 | 1.34 | 5.80 10.99 
100 25 9.00 | 2.28 | 6.30 17.58 
125 60 10.50 | 1.29 | 5.15 16.94 
225 60 6.85 | 0.65 | 3.10 10.60 
Induction Cage | 5 60 10.82 | 2.28 | 4.50 17.60 
motors secondary 20 50 4.07 | 2.35 | 4.56 10.98 
20 60 11.35 | 2.15 |} 3.39 16.90 
40 50 4.82 | 1.68 | 6.22 12.72 
20 60 3.46 | 1.47 | 3.55 8.48 
50 60 3.78 | 0.50 | 1-96 6.28 
50 25 8.35 | 0.86") 2.:76 6.97 
75 25 3.74 | 0.82 |} 1.50 6.06 
150 60 1.90 | 2.32 | 3.22 7.44 
2 60 8.58 | 4.02 | 4.50 17.10 
5 60 4,22 | 6.30 | 2.98 13.50 
20 60 §.30 | 1.61 | 3.17 10.08 
30 60 2.37 | 5.35 | 1.45 9.17 
40 25 6.10 | 2.68 | 2.01 10.79 
100 60 2.07 | 1.72.) 1.96 §.75 
125 60 1.92.) 2.57 | 2.25 6.74 
200 25 4.71 | 0.87 7 2.69 7.50 
300 60 5.06 | 1.70 | 1.90 8.66 
450 60 4.08 | 1.67 | 2.91 8.66 
750 25 4.90 | 0.72 | 3.03 8.65 


1705 


1912] 


OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY 


sa DNOBANDHDONROCHDORHKRRORADMNHHANOMH BMBDWND OHOONNOHKONHHAGAASW © 
bp: gg CA BZSRBAMDOAMMDOWDHAHANMOMEREHNHTDHO COWM DAADRHDANANNHHHHOMWNM 
3 OB FODHDADHDNRGADNRORDHROEOHHDORNDOHDODOR NAME FPOAGSCHHOKHOWMHNH HMO Ht H 
a Eee a4 el a cal ca 
Bey 
x 
to) 
se) 5 SSOMWRSOHSVHAANSOAGABRASS 9PYNDOBHOW ASB HONK DOnRNYMOHONOKR ORMOND 
2 nal CHHAAODHHOODOHPHDAHDADHDSOCODHHANHNREHRYA WAND YOMAAMMDHWASOHAANADNAM OO WH 
3 = OANNHDHAHNANNHHA ANDAR HANA AANAANAHATH AHAAQA WDMAANDANAMANMANANAAAN 
Ga 
2 res OM AtHODMDMMONROOBRWMAHOMNHEOHROLNHOH HHOAM WBANOANAOHADGCAYWONSHH 
e i SBEGFASSEARAANDAOHDORHAAHDROBADCSOHAHNR OChRHYH SHORHKHAHOHOMANHNDD 
5 = DOAAMMANANNAANHANANTANA A AANA Nnorn AOMnA OF NROONMNNOONWHODO 
s a E ES, 2 =e 
» cI WDAONHMMHAMOHHRORADANHHODHHNHOHDH DNHDDR WHANDHAHMH OO HMO ANH 119 x 
AY fs 
ms SR DRRDODBOAAMDHHDADDNHHWOARRATHMD ARR KRPAAHHDWONOWDOMOMNOS 
= BOA MOH WOO HIDH OMG ODMDHDADANDANMDMDAANM BOOM NAODMAHHONNOSCKHANANOAA 
= i 
Po 
' 
oad Ooo ons Som olc oo Sooo So 
2 2 5 SSSSNSSCONSSESSSESSES 
oo oe 
| 
g “ . = 
Sous omoooencoocooeoe ope SeeSpOoOo Oe eee De NOCOSS SOoRvegogonaSoSoSSNgaegsese 
x ae ANS SHEHRRGESSSSHHSSSOSSSOSSEHHNSESESO HtOSO SSNSSOeosmooooervee #6 6 
Ie BAA HANAANAANBDDMAHHHOKNPKRSSSH HAM AHAAMDBDAMDHANOOHOSOrERSOOAN 
o ee | 
‘e) 
bo & 
qa » 
Bey 4 3 o 
er) S » E'S 
mY 34 ae 
5 Ea gt 
D & ate: 
o 5 B 
A O 3 
a 
2 F; 
n on on 00 n 
u & aru 
5 ES Pe cere 
g 33 5 38 sk 3 
3 1 7 Guu 
a » oO » vo BB oO 
a, o & 2 5 Ngan Sas 
ee 
< 4 b0 4 bo < bo 
(=) =) 


1706 OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY {June 28 
Rating Per cent of rated output 
Apparatus Description Output Fre- Wyre Wy WR | Total 
kw. quency losses 
cycles 
Alternating- 1500 60 0.66 | 3.16 | 3.16 6.98 
current 2000 60 1.03 0.92 2.10 4.05 
generators 2000 60 420°) £519 WL 83 4.22 
2500 60 0.56 | 2.00 | 2.40 4.96 
3000 60 0.95 | 2.01 | 2.46 5.42 
3000 60 OFZGep) 2247 4) 2b 4.80 
3000 25 0.51 | 3.73 | 2.00 6.24 
3000 60 1.13 42.6200 2.70 4.50 
3750 60 1.47 | 0.49 | 1.46 3.42 
4000 60 0.47 | 4.13 | 2.53 7.13 
5000 60 0.91 | 0.89 | 1.98 3.78 
6666 60 0.41 | 2.17 | 2.55 5.13 
8000 60 0.32 | 2.77 | 2.23 5.32 
10000 60 0.40 | 2.40 | 1.85 4.65 
lynamotors 10 4,18 1.2.33 | 5,42 11.93 
9 4.01 | 2.23 | 4.84 11.08 
£ ynchronous 100 2.9 2.64 | 3.10 8.64 
converters 200 1.91 | 2.69 | 4.73 9.33 
300 1.93 | 2.05 | 2.27 6.25 
300 2.61 | 1.33 | 0.99 4.93 
400 2.16 | 0.72 | 2.08 4.96 
500 1.67 | 2.07 | 1.48 5.22 
500 1.59 | 2.23: | 1.50 5.32 
800 1.51) 3.460 £.14 6.11 
1000 1.16 | 3.49 | 1.45 6.10 
1000 2.55 | 1.30 | 0.82 4.67 
1500 1.66 | 1.18 | 0.82 3.66 
2000 1.69 | 1.08 | 0.77 3.54 
2000 2.19 | 0.98 | 0.56 3.68 
3000 1.81 | 0.99 ; 0.79 3.59 
Motor- *A 200 4.97 | 5.30 | 4.97 15.24 
generators 500 5.82 | 4.71 | 5.74 16.27 
1000 4.98 | 4.07 | 3.94 12.99 
2000 4.47 | 2.98 | 3.92 11.37 
Motor- ¥*B 100 iis 3.93 | 5.64 21.37 
generators 150 9.45 | 7.05 | 5.10 21.6 
300 9.06 | 3.59 | 5.40 18.00 
500 4.88 | 2.74 | 6.26 13.88 
Motor- *C 160 8.82 | 3.73 | 3.19 15.74 
generators 300 5.57 | 3.58 | 5.28 14.43 
Motor- *D 94 5.95 | 2.68 | 5.83 14.46 
generators 750 4.32 | 1.36 | 3.67 9.35 
1500 2.69 | 1.55 | 3.96 8.20 


*A—Synchronous motor and direct-current generator. 
*B—Induction motor and direct-current generator. 


*C—Direct-current motor and direct-current generator. 
*D—Frequency changer. 


1912] ; OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY 1707 


From these figures it will be seen that in the case of single 
units, the total losses, as computed from separate loss measure- 
ments, vary from 3} to 20 per cent of the rated output, while 
the sum of the frictional and rotation losses ranges from 1.4 
to 10 per cent. Now the measured values of the frictional and 
rotation losses are likely to be slightly inaccurate due to obser- 
vation errors, as will be pointed out later. Since these losses 
are very small as compared with the total output, a considerable 
error in the no-load readings will affect the calculated efficiency 
but slightly. 

In the preceding paragraphs the following points have been 
brought out: 

(1) At any given load, Wirz, Wy and W, can be accurately 
determined from readings taken at no-load. 

(2) Wis composed of two parts, one of which (n) is constant 
at fixed voltage under all conditions, while the other, namely, 
the hysteresis and eddy current loss, increases somewhat with 
load. 

(3) The increase in the rotation loss due to the application of 
load cannot be satisfactorily determined from readings taken 
at no-load. 

(4) It is difficult, and in the majority of cases impossible, to 
approximate from no-load measurements the eddy current loss 
due to the stray field of useful currents. 

Owing to the difficulty of arriving at the true value of the 
rotation loss under load, it is the practise of most manufacturers 
to specify efficiencies on the basis of the no-load values of this 
loss. The eddy current losses due to the stray fields of useful 
currents flowing have also been generally disregarded in specify- 
ing and demonstrating efficiency, owing to the difficulty of ob- 
taining accurate values. 

Efficiencies as usually calculated by the summation of loss 
method are therefore slightly higher than the true values. This 
fact is now generally understood by those who use electrical . 
machinery, and for the reason that more exact information as 
to the actual power efficiency is desired by the users, the present 
agitation for input-output: tests began. 

To the uninitiated the input-output test appears to be a per- 
fectly simple and the only rational method of measuring efficiency, 
particularly when both input and output are electrical, as in the 
case of motor-generators and converters. 

From a purely academic standpoint nothing seems easier than 
to derive efficiency by comparing simultaneous readings of 


1708 OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY [June 28 


measuring instruments connected in the incoming and outgoing 
circuits of electrical apparatus. 

Those of us, however, who have conducted some of these tests 
on circuits other than those of college laboratories can tell a 
different story. Many factors contribute to invalidate the 
accuracy of the results obtained. Chief of these is the tendency 
of ordinary power circuits to fluctuate slightly. Because of 
this tendency it is extremely difficult to get accurate results 
when measuring the input to motors. This is especially true 
in the case of machines having heavy revolving elements ro- 
tating at high speeds. 

When operating from ordinary power circuits the indicating 
pointers of ammeters and wattmeters connected in the feeders 
of such apparatus will often oscillate 25 per cent each way from 
the mean of a large number of readings. 

This tendency of the current to fluctuate has a bearing on the 
accuracy of all input readings taken while the apparatus is re- 
volving, either with power applied to its own terminals, or when 
driven by a separate motor. 

Referring to the separate loss measurements and to the ex- 
pression for the losses, 


Losses = Wr + W, + Wa + W. + W, 


it is to be noted that W, and W, are measured while the ap- 
paratus is revolving and that their measured values, as deter- 
mined by power input readings, may be in error due to incorrect 
readings caused by fluctuations of the supply circuit. 

From the data given in the foregoing tables we find that the 
sum of these two losses ranges from 1.4 to 10 per cent of the rated 
output. Assuming an error of 5 per cent in the driving motor 
input due to incorrect readings of swinging meter pointers when 
measuring the no-load losses, the calculated efficiency at rated 
output will be in error by not to exceed 7/100 of 1 per cent 
in the one case and } of 1 per cent in the other. 

Referring now to input-output measurements, it is evident 
that an error of 5 per cent in the input reading will affect the 
calculated efficiency by approximately the same amount, that 
is to say the result will be in error by approximately 5 per cent. 

The complicated nature of the input-output test, the large 
number of observers required, and the discrepancies that appear 
in the results in spite of the exercise of the greatest care, are 
shown in the following data of an actual test made under the 
most favorable conditions by a corps of experts. 


1709 


POWER EFFICIENCY 


OLIN 


1912] 


,,SOSSO] PRO] ,, JO] opeur soueMOTIe ON x 


£8 


98 


0¢ 78 


Og 62 


OF OL 


Sasso| 
ayeiedas 
&q 
AQUI Tx 


89° €8 6g €8 8L°&8 OL €8 $9896 08° 892 

$6 °G8 {2 ' v8 OL’ €8 Th 8 06° 696 69° 99% 

8°38 OF'F8 02° &8 08°78 S8° TLS 68° 996 

60°48 09°€8 OF ' +8 OL’ F8 LS° CSS LG ESS 

cP €8 L0°%8 91°88 OF'F8 0° E36 £8 ° 16S 

SP s8 €L° 8 8F'€8 08 F8 OT ¥6S 19° 06S 

02° 8 bo F8 06° 8 6S F8 66° LLT SS LLT 

Lv €8 ¥0'F8 GP E8 ¥8 LV E8 ¥0'¥8 69° 6LT 67 SLT 
i OF ¥8 OF 'F8 OF F8 OF'F8 69 °9LT 69° 9LT 
28°28 Gees 89°¢8 LT°€8 6°28 8h €8 €L° SET 66° FET 
86°68 ST €8 go" cs 8° €8 €9 SET GE FET 

G8 82 08' 62 8° 8Z 08" 62 6°82 06°62 ST°S6 66° £6 
0s °8Z gS" 62 go" sZ e962 S76 LT #6 

0@°89 OL’ 69 89 96°89 ST°89 Ot’ 69 86° FS LB FE 
OL 89 08°89 06°89 06°89 8F Sg 06° FS 

4°ON 9 (ON 

Jeans OTP tees 2 pue r's} 9 pue b'Z| 2 puree ‘T | 9 pueg ‘T | JozourVem | Joqzomz;eM 
Buryerse4uy | Suryeorpuy 
UdAIB SIaquINU 0} BSutIpuodserIOD siajyeut JO SBUIpvel BUIS—) 
yndyno-yndur Aq Aouspiyga qndut ‘My 


OS FG aa 
06° E26 O€ F236 
08 °SZs O€ 92% 
OL °98T 08° Z8T 
OT’ 98T 08° 98T 
L8T OT’ L8T 
08 6F1 08 6FT 
06° 6F1 Ost Ost 
6FT 6F1 
0Z SIT 09° ZIT GGIt 
09° TIT rage 
cL OT eZ GL 
€6° FL GZ 
GP LE 8h LE co Ls 
6L° LE €8 LE 
FON € ON ¢*ON 
doyeurzoA | JozouTyJOA 1949UI4}EM 
Z ‘ON LT ‘ON uotsoelg 
Jeyamury jopuMy 
qgndqno ‘my 


‘dOVd ONIMOTIO’ NO WVUYOVIG UAd SV SNOILLOANNOO “‘AONVISISAU 
daldo—davot dO AANLVN 


‘SHTOAO 09 ‘ASVHd-AAUHL ‘LTOA-000F ‘“d'H-SZ—UYOLOW SNONOMHONAS ‘AIOd ONILVL 
“AWWOO GNNOM-CNNOdWOO ‘LNGYANO-LOTUIC “LTOA-093 “MM-0SI—AOLVUANAD “NIW Uad “AGA 00ZI—LUS YOLVUANAD-AOLOW 


V Glave 


— eof 


1710 OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY {June 28 


For location of meters see corresponding numbers on diagram of connections. 
No. 1—Direct-current millivolt-meter with 1000-ampere manganin shunt. 
No. 2—Direct-current millivolt-meter with 1000-ampere manganin shunt. 
No. 3—Direct-current voltmeter Range 375-750. 
No. 4—Direct-current voltmeter. Range 375-750. 
No. 5—500-ampere precision wattmeter. 
No. 6—60-cycle polyphase indicating wattmeter. 
No. 7—60-cycle polyphase integrating watthour meter. 
No. 8—Portable alternating-current ammeter. 
No. 9—Alternating-current voltmeter. 
No. 10—30 to 5 series transformer. 
40 to 5 series transformer. 
No. 11—4000 to 100 voltage transformer. 
No. 12—400 to 4000-volt, 250-kilowatt power transformers arranged for Scott two-phase 
three-phase connection. 


_ An observer was stationed at each of the instruments shown 
in the diagram. In addition several assistants were necessary 


TOUBAOKS SERIES FIELD 


E POWER 
——_——> SUPPLY 


E 400 VOLTS 
3 2 PHASE 


fe 


+e 


SHUNT FIELO 


2 4 
D.C. GENERATOR SYNCHRONOUS MOTOR 
150 K, W. 250 VOLTS 1200 R.P.M. 225 H.P. 4000 VOLTS THREE“PHASE 60-CYCLE 


Input-Outpur Tests, Motor-GENERATOR SET 
DIAGRAM OF CONNECTIONS 


in order to control properly the supply circuit and to maintain 
constant load. 
The test was conducted as follows: 


Having adjusted the voltage and current of the generator, 
and the power factor, voltage and frequency of the motor supply 
circuit, at each load a series of simultaneous readings was taken 
at definite time intervals. The signal to read was given by 
blowing a whistle. Ten readings, five seconds apart, were 
taken at each load and the average of these ten readings was 
considered the true value. 

Notwithstanding the precautions taken to insure accuracy, 
an examination of the tabulated results shows that the efficiencies 


1912] OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY 1711 


indicated by the readings of differentjinstruments differ by as 
much as 2 per cent. 

It is to be noted that the use of current and potential trans- 
formers or other multipliers necessary in tests of this kind in- 
creases the liability of error. ' 

In addition to the fluctuations of the supply circuit, another 
contributing factor tending to inaccuracy is the variation in 
the generator load due to changes in the resistance of that circuit. 
If grid resistance or water rheostats are employed for loading, 
fluctuations will occur due to slight changes in the temperature 
of the water or metal used. These fluctuations will affect all 
of the measuring instruments. Ifthe current is “ pumped back ”’ 
into a power circuit the tendency of such circuits to oscillate 
will be magnified, causing greater swinging of the meter pointers. 

The use of integrating instruments has been proposed as a 
solution of the difficult problem of accurately measuring the 
fluctuating currents during these tests. It is argued that if 
such instruments were used and comparative readings taken in 
both incoming and outgoing circuits over a long period of time, 
the true value of efficiency would be indicated. 

Tests which have been conducted according to this plan have 
not been satisfactory. In fact the results have been uniformly 
more unreliable than with indicating instruments. This is due 
to the inherent inaccuracy of the heavy capacity direct-cur- 
rent watt-hour meter. No heavy capacity instrument of this 
type with which the writer is acquainted can be relied on to 
give correct values within 2 per cent. 


InYdiscussing the derivation of efficiency by the summation 
of loss method it has been pointed out that at any given load 
the only losses which cannot be accurately determined from no- 
load measurements are the rotation loss and the loss due to eddy 
currents caused by the stray fields of useful currents. 

Therefore the empirical correcting factors which it is proposed 
to use in connection with the no-load values of the separate 
losses would be applied to: these losses only, and not to the sum 
of all the losses. 

The data given in Tables B and C, at the end of this paper, 
show the use of these constants in working up some actual tests. 
A comparison is made between the efficiencies obtained from 
input-output tests and those computed by the separate loss 
method using correcting factors as outlined above. 


1712 OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY [June 28 


The data cover tests of direct-current motors, induction 
motors, motor-generators and synchronous converters. The 
tests of motors are all average tests, that is, they have been 
taken at random from a large number of tests made by average 
men, who did not have in mind the determination of load-loss 
constants when making the tests. 

The constants used are the averages of those indicated by 
a number of very careful input-output tests of motor-generators. 
Two of these were made for the particular purpose of determining 
these constants. The same constants are used in all cases for 
the same types of machines, and it is worthy of note that the 
results throughout are fairly uniform. In some cases the values 
run higher by separate losses, and in some cases lower, than by 
input-output. 

Two different constants have been used, constant K, a mul- 
tiplying factor applied to the I’r loss values to compensate for 
eddy current losses under load, and constant K’, applied to the 
rotation loss values to compensate for increased losses due to 
field distortion. 

The values of K and K’ will vary over a considerable range 
depending upon the characteristics of the apparatus. 

In the case of both alternating- and direct-current machines of 
low frequency, K is in most cases but slightly greater than unity, 
but for the higher frequencies this constant is considerably 
greater, especially with machines having deep slots and conduct- 
ors of large cross-section. 

The value of K’ for compensated machines, such as induction 
motors and synchronous converters, is but little, if any, greater 
than unity, whereas in non-compensated generators and motors 
with large field distortion, K’ may be as high as two at rated load. 

Attention is called to the data in Table D relating to 
input-output tests of 15 induction motors made under average 
conditions. In working up the efficiencies from the separate 
losses no multiplying factors were used, as load losses were con- 
sidered negligible. When compared with the efficiencies ob- 
tained by prony brake, in nine cases the efficiency is lower by 
the separate losses than by input-output, showing not only the 
unreliability of the prony brake, but also that the load losses, 
if any, are so small that they can be ignored. 

In Table E, data are given relating to some careful input- 
output tests of a 50-kw. motor-generator and of a 1000-kw. 
synchronous converter. 


—_ dia 
- 


1912] OLIN: POWER EFFICIENCY 1713 


Considering first the motor-generator data, Table E, tests 
No. 1, 2, 3 and 4 refer to separate and distinct tests made on 
different days, by the same observers with the same instruments. 
Although the conditions were as nearly ideal as possible and 
extreme care was taken, the results, which should have been 
identical, showed a maximum variation of 2.3 per cent. 

In the case of the synchronous converter, four tests were made 
with different sets of instruments, each of which had been ad- 
justed and carefully calibrated immediately before the tests 
were made. As much care was exercised as in the case of the 
motor-generator, but the results show discrepancies of as much 
as 2.4 per cent in efficiency. 

In these synchronous converter tests, as in several others made 
under the writer’s supervision, the efficiencies by input-output 
very frequently show higher than by the separate losses, indi- 
cating that load losses in machines of this type are a negligible 
quantity. 

It is not contended that the constants used in working up 
these tests are the values that will finally be indicated after a 
large amount of data has been collected. The data submitted 
herein are given to demonstrate the method and not to indicate 
the values of the constants. It is conceded that an insufficient 
number of accurate test records are available at present to 
establish the values of these constants. It is doubtful if such 
records are in existence, as the writer’s investigations lead him 
to believe that surprisingly few accurate input-output tests have 
been made. This belief is based not only on his own experience 
but also on conversations and correspondence with engineers 
in different localities. 

It is urged that those who have data bearing on this subject 

will bring them forward and that hereafter the determination 
of these constants will be kept in mind when efficiency tests 
are being made. 

The fact that these figures are not available does not indicate 
that few input-output tests have been conducted. On the con- 
trary they have been made repeatedly. Few engineers, however, 
have had the time, the money, or the patience necessary to obtain 
accurate results. The average input-output test of motor-gener- 
ators and converters is perhaps accurate within 1} to 2 per cent. 
Motor efficiency by prony brake probably averages between 1 
and 14 per cent of the true value. 

In conclusion it may be stated that efficiency guarantees 


1714 OLIN: POWER .EFFICIENCY [June 28 


based upon the summation of the separate losses without change 
to allow for increases due to load, are entirely satisfactory as a 
basis for comparing one manufacturer’s machines with those of 
any other maker. It is true that the actual efficiencies in either 
case will in some types of machines be slightly lower than those 
indicated by the separate losses. But, for the same separate 
no-load losses, the load losses will be practically identical, pro- 
vided the temperatures, the regulation and’ the commutation 
correspond. 

It is of course desirable that the actual efficiencies be known, 
and it is the writer’s opinion that the simplest and most accurate 
method for determining the true values is by the summation 
of losses with some correcting factors as described in this paper. 
Ultimately he believes that this general method should be 
adopted as the Institute standard. ~ 


TABLE D 
INDUCTION MOTORS 
Kw. output Efficiencies | 
Kw. ee | | 
Input Discrepancy 

Input minus Input- *By separate| {By input- ! 

losses output test losses output test . 

| 

| 

40.3 36.7 37.3 91.1 92.5 +1.4 

42.2 38.0 37.3 90.0 88.5 = 1,6 09 

41.3 37.0 37.3 89.5 90.3 +0.8 | 
40.9 36.9 37.3 90.2 91.2 +1.0 
50 44.4 44.76 88.8 89.6 +0.8 
62.2 57.2 56.0 92.0 90.0 —2.0 
60.1 55.3 56.0 91.9 93.2 +1.3 
62.5 | 56.5 56.0 90.3 89.6 -0.7 
| 61.4 56.1 56.0 91.3 88.0 —3.3 
4.4 3.8 3.73 86.3 85.0 -1.3 
6.63 5.53 5.6 83.4 84.5 +1.5 
12.45 rig Se es} 11.2 89.3 90.0 +0.7 
16.34 14.78 14.92 90.2 91.1 +0.9 
119.5 119.5 111.9 93.5 93.5 0.0 
29.4 25.55 26.1 86.8 88.8 +2.0 


*No allowance made for “‘load losses." 
+Mechanical output by prony brake. 


1715 


POWER EFFICIENCY 


OLIN 


~ 1912] 


1°S9SSO] PRO] ,, JO} PpeUl VOUBAMOTIE ON 


L° 896 

9TG 
Vv PLT 
€° ET 


6° %6 


eOFT 


LTIL 


¢° 198 


¢°909 


SOSso] 
snjd 
qgndyno 


cO+| + F8 (Se 2) 48 | 6996 T' L196 
FO+| L 8 8°F8 | G°98 | €-022 8° 163 
LO+T| 21°48 %8 98 |S6°9LT | SLT 
V0=5) CESS ¢°$8 | $°F8 |7O SET 6° FET 
0 8°8L 8°8Z | 9°62, | 6 86 6°96 
} | 
60° 0-1 |/"% 28 “er 28) 9. 68! eer k SEPT 
0 €6° 18 | €2° 18 | $'88 SEIT gett 
83° 0- ¢°¢8 | 80°98 | 2°98 | 9628 ¢*eL8 
¢8°0- 6°18 | $24°S8 | 8°28 T° s19 409 
€3SI| squeqs | 4s04 sesso] | szueqs 
useM}} -uod | yndyno| oye -m090 4804 
-9q | joosn | -yndur | -edes jo esn | yndyno 
90ue Ag Ag Ag Ag -ynduy 
ERR TG | € G Ix 
serousloug | | qnduj [e}0L, 


PSST 


6° 686 


S'IgL 


¥°s0¢ 


"My Ul 
qndyno 
Te7OL 


19° 2 


63°F 


so"g 


FLT 


81°0 


gle 


If 8st 


80°ST 


SP) 


SOSSO] 
1-22} | 
JeIOL 


coz 8S LG 
9 VS gs 
99°F z £3 
2g. LT 1996 
€L°3 rT S61 
Jay vs ¥ LT 
SFE G T 21 
9°83 Lt 8°91 
1 &% ra gor 
aM MW Pl aAL 


1oze1oue3 qUsIINI-pooItd 


SUOLVAAENAD-AOLOW 
a ATaAVL 


c’s ee 89°¢ 
el'¥ Gur F6°€ 
LLG ET oo°S 
6F'T SO°T GPT 
£9°0 T £9°0 
T'61 Gil 6°ST 
ST TT hid FL OL 
wi) cot GL°S 
FS°S i F's 

(1074s) 

Ulm YW Bee cag, Gl 


Jojow snouolyouAS 


¥1 
tI 


¥/F 


¥/E 


G/T 


Peo] 
‘oeI 


10jOUuI sno 
-woryouAs 
WOA-000F 
‘D'Y-eZz 
1ojze19U8B 
ajod *urur0o3 
‘utur tod 
“A981 OOST 
JOA-OSS 
Eth! 


Iojouwl snou 
-uoryouAs 
H104-00Z'ET 
“DY-OFFT 
1042 
-I9u93 ajod 
“UTULOO "UTUT 
toed ‘Ad1 FTG 
WOA-0SS 
“3-000 


[June 28 


POWER EFFICIENCY 


OLIN 


1716 


£°0= ¢°38 8°88 0°16 oc°ZEe c9°SE cr sé 
0+ £°88 6°18 9°06 02°92 OL’ 9G £6°9% 
6°0+ @' 18 €°98 F' 68 08° 61 8¢° 6T 08°02 
o-t @°Ss8 2&8 0°28 oe’ é1 90°€T | 8S°8T 
tO 0°68 0°06 2°06 02° €& cc’ se -|- 18°F 
Z0— 3°68 6°68 6°06 O08 ' Lz C6'46 | 08°83 
0 Zz '68 3°68 4°06 8E°SS REIZS. 4 LE 0G 
€°0+ ¢’s8 6'88 8°68 88°91 08° 9T ELLE 
30° O— o'98 €°98 t'18 61° IT 02° TT ee° tt 
SS ost: ¢’ss 0° FS ¢° 18 TP 83 [6° Lz OL’ 62 
9°I+ 2°98 Iss €°88 GL ES Of €% El’ Fs 
0 t+ 1°98 1°98 F'88 $8 ST ¢g9'S8T 02° 61 
S107; Z°98 $°¢s 8°28 Tl’ ¢T 86° 1 88° FI 
Os 8°€8 0'€8 €°¢8 ZF'6 Ze 6 8¢'6 
$'O— v8 6° F8 0°98 S6' GS 8E°3S% OL'3s 
or O— L°S8 6°S8 0°28 £9°8T $9'8T 06 °8T 
§° 0+ 9°98 | £'98 1°18 66° FT 26° FL SI 'STt 
€°o+ 1°98 8°S8 €° 18 ¥2' IT 61° IT OF It 
7. o— 2&3 | I’ 8 1° ¥8 €P'L 9F'L oak 
UALS 1°98 | £8 9°28 C8°Gs 8E°6S SE" ssS 
¥0+ €°L8 | 6°98 1°88 GL°S8I c9°8T £061 
20+ T'88 6°18 3°68 16° FT 26° FI cT°St 
Eo ¢° 18 | 9°18 1°88 LE Lt 61° IT Ge It 
9°0+ 8'°¢s | Z'S8 6°98 TS°Z 9F'L T9°2 
| 4ndzno Sasso] SoSsO] 
€ pues iM jo. |) «-yndur oayeredas ADS REE 4897 snutut 
usaMjeq asn Ag Ag Ag asn Ag qyndyno qnduyt 
souetoHid € ON | ZON+ T ‘ON € “ON 3 ON} T ‘ON 
solouslD yyy qyndyno ‘my 


08° 9€ 
OL’ 6z 
OL°3S 
09° ST 


86° LE 
GI Té 
80° 
90°61 
46°61 


Of SE 
98°16 
SL 1G 
8€°9T 
€o' 11 


8E°9G 
€L° 1S 
og LT 
$0 €T 
18°8 


£9°9G 
og 16 
00° LT 
LL°G1 
92°83 


qndut 
‘My 


*exyeiq AUOIG Aq 4YNEPNO [eyibeyve Wt 
.S2SSO] PeOT ,, JO} apeur soUeMOTIE ON 


or'0 | Fz ¥/¢ 
ecL'0 0% +/¥ 
OLL'0 yap +/€ 
€82'0 a +/Z 
e620 | 8% +/9 
coro | F'8 ¥/¢ 
SIF'O | 10% */P 
8ZF'O 21 ¥/€ 
Sor ae 1 Per +/Z 
tag tie lacs */9 
oor0 FB +/S 
0ZF'0,.| 00% ¥/F 
OFF 0 jaye ¥/€ 
ost’ 0 rT +/Z 
siz'0 | 8°2 */9 
0&'0'| tz #/¢ 
S52 0) POS +/¥ 
e9°0 | Lt +/€ 
LEO | < ¥iTs fe FE 
| 
S020) So > Heer ee 
s1z0 | +z +/¢ 
0€z'0 OS +] .F/P 
OFZ 0 Eis) we 
| ¥F2'°0 rT $/Z 
| 
| 
| peoj-ou | ro) | speo] 
42 yueysuoo |[euoTOe1Yy 
am peunssy 
| 


itojyow aod 
BuljzeyNUIWIOD *O-p 
‘ulm Jed “A981 OSTT 
yoa-0Es “d-y-ce 


Iojyow ajod 
BUI}eINULUIOD *9-p 
‘ull Jed “Ael G16 
WOA-0ES *4°Y-OF 


iojow 3jod 
BuljeynNulwios *3-p 
‘ur Jad "Aal CZ 
yoa-eTT ““d-y-es 


iojyow aod 
BulyeqnuIUloD *o-p 
‘urut Jad “Ael geg 


WOA-CTt “d'Y-06 


itojow ajod 
BulzeyNUIUIOD *O-p 
‘ut Jad *Ael Q¢g 
WOA-0Ez “44-0 


auryor yy 


SUYOLOW LNa@aXano ~Lodaid 


Oo aTavL 


1717 


POWER EFFICIENCY 


OLIN 


1912] 


‘ayeiq Auoid Aq ynd4no [eolueyosyy f 
«S9SSO] PEO] ,, JOJ apeu soueMoOT[e ON, 


Sela ¢ 68 8°06 1°66 ST" 99 Or 49 | OS 89 
S0—— ¥'68 3°06 €°36 OF SS oe Go Ls 
i Om 8°88 3°68 ¥16 09" +7 91° VP 88° SP 
6/0— £18 6°88 8°68 a ok 09'S 02 7E 
hil ee ¥ 8 €°98 F°98 81% 8E°CS | OE GS 

| 
(He (We 0°06 £°06 S56By Sly (O08 389 99 5) J0e=2S 
Che 2 £68 6°06 6°16 06° SF 01° 9% So LY 
tO Z 68 6°68 y16 LE 08 LE G6 LE 
50 8°18 1°88 0°06 £6 ° 13 86 9° 8S 
ec'o+ L¥8 Z'¥8 ¥ 985.) ‘S480 ¢9°8T | OT’ 6I 
BiOa- 6°88 ols 1°06 Sikes OL tH | OF 9F 
9°0+ 0°88 vL8 T'06 09° LE 0g 28 | Sr Se 
2 Oa 9°18 6°98 (suateiy I SENS ¥8 6Z €L°0€ 
1075 T'98 0°98 8°18 OF SG 8E°SS 88°SG 
SO 8°68 0°€8 0°r8 06° FT 66 FI OE ST 
So 8°98 9°88 6°06 G83 €P 91° FP G8 °SP 
a 2, 98 3°18 T° 06 €8°9€ Oe LE 08° 8E 
Ye L198 ¢ 98 0°68 09°66 F866 0g 
GeO 8°€8 £78 1°98 GS GS 88°66 &@ 
iW ¢°08 4°08 8°28 £6° FT 66° FT 8é°ST 
yndyno Sasso] SOSSO] 
€ pur zs iM jo -jndut ayeredes ya JO 4soq snutut 
uw3a9M49q asn Ag 4g Ag asn Ag qnd4no qnduy 
pene heh eG € “ON Z “ON+ T ‘ON« € “ON G ONL T ON 

sepusDy” * qyndyno ‘My 


06° EL 
00°29 
0c ° 0S 
OT’ 83 
96's 


00°29 
crs 
Os Tr 
08 TE 
G1 SS 


0¢'T¢ 
OL SF 
OF VE 
0°96 
86° LT 


0g 0¢ 
O° SF 
0S PE 
0g 9G 
9¢°8T 


yndut 
“My 


PET 
Jepun 


aM 


SIV T 
OFF 'T 
oor Tt 
OS? 'T 
00¢ *T 


¢86'°0 
000°T 
0z0°T 
OFO'T 
090°T 


OTL'0 
0¢L°0 
0&0 
orl 0 
o¢cL0 


OTS 1 
Ore T 
096 T 
082 °T 
00€ T 


peoy-ou 
ye 
aM 


8:3 +/9 
aad $/¢ 
0s +/P 
ret +/€ 
PT +/G 


8's +/9 
$G $/¢ 
0S +/F 
Lt +/€ 
FT $/6 


Suc +/9 
PS +/G 
0% */¥ 
Dai +/E 
PI %/Z 
Sie +/9 
ake ¥/¢ 
0% */¥ 
LA. $/8 
rT +/Z 


Md Speol 
queqsuoo |euooesy 
peumnssy 


(panuyuod) SHOLOW LNAXANO -LOGAIAd—) ATAVL 


toyout 
quelino-qoolIp 
‘ulm Jed Aer geg 


3104-082 “d'y-09 


ojo 
yueiind-4oelIp 
‘utur Jod *AdI QC, 


HOA-0E% ‘““d'Y-0¢ 


Jojout 
queiimo-yoalIp 
‘ulu Jad ‘Aer Ogg 


Hoa ogs “44 OF 


2030 
queiimo-70911p 
“ulm Jod *Adl QOTT 


HOA-0EZ “A'Y-OF 


auIyOR yy 


=e 


[June 28 


POWER EFFICIENCY 


OLIN 


1718 


,S9SSO] PEO] ,, JO} epeUr soULMOTIE ONy 


6°96 £2 °96 82°96 246 2 E996 8666 seor £001 esol 8° 866 ee0r £00T 8g0ot 
£°96 €9° 16 92°16 | ¥3 16 €8° 16 9982 | gol FOL ¢°Z9L 9°98L SSL FOL L°LSL 
6 £°%6 86°96 9°€6 £1°96 8° F6P 9° Fo g° Log 62S 8° 467 L°82¢ ¢* LoS geo 
sassoT | $‘ON 189L| €°ON 389L | Z ‘ON 389.L . T‘ON 389 | 3ndjno . qnduy yndyno qnduy yndjno qnduy qgndyno qnduj 
eee ee Se ————— 
xSOTOUSTOIF A FON 4891 € “ON 489.L @ ON 489.L T “ON 489°.L 
; a10g-1HOIq ‘~ 9¢—ASVHq-XIG—INAWEND LoaUIG ‘SLIOA ¢19—'*M+-O00T 
LSHL LNdLAO-LAdNI UALUAANOO-SNONOUHONAS 
Sar ae: : = —— se 
9°08 7 Shel | 4208 SUS YS” ew ee |) Sapte | 9°0s eo" $9 1¢ 19 8F° 0S 6°29 
18 | ) | | 
8°08 SL°8L | 08 IeleT) og | 61S @ Tg 8° #9 ¢°os T'e9 o¢ Z°s9 
| | 
o°6L es. | GSE 4) S18). 4) ¥8E csr eo 6 8é L°8¥ 10°8€ SE 8F 3 LE 6° LY 
z°08 ° | / ; 
o’°S8L r'S8L L162 ¢*s8Z o°8E | L387 8€ Fh SF cese 1° 8F 6€° LE 9°LF 
LL e792 | SP'9L 16S) | ¢g°Ss cO'&é ) 6° F% 9°SE | 9°F% 3° SE 88° FS 8°Se 
6°LL 
8°LL o°9L OL 5a), £9292 SF 9% | LOVE ii 6° FZ 99°ZE I°Sz $0'S€ #9 °SS be 3 
| ee ae | _ 
| | | 
sosso’]T FON 389L |) G°ON 489L| Z°ON 389L) TON 389.1 qndyno qnduy | 4yndjno qndur gndyno qnduf yndjno qnduy 
| ‘ 
#SeTUstOyy | FON 3891 € ON 3S9L Z ON 3S9L I ‘ON 389°. 


MOLVUANA INAMAND-LoANIGg ‘GNNOM-daN 


AOAWOD ‘LIOA-G6 “MA-0G [YOLOW NOILINGNT L10A-008Z ‘~09 “ASVHd-AaNH] “d°H-oL 


LSAL LNdLNO-LAdNI WOLVAANAD-AOLOW 
a alavs 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1719 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘ DETERMINATION OF POWER EFFICIENCY OF 
ROTATING ELEecTRIc MACHINES’? (OLIN), Boston, Mass., 
JUNE 28, 1912. 


C. M. Green: I have had quite a little experience and diffi- 
culty in making efficiency tests on old arc machines—particularly 
the Brush arc generator. The input and output method, to the 
best of my knowledge, is the only method by which the efficiency 
of these machines can be determined, due to the fact of the large 
influence which the current in the armature has, at ordinary loads, 
on the eddy currents in the pole shoes and core loss. Furthermore, 
the field excitation on the Brush, etc., machines with no current 
in the armature, and rated volts, runs about 25 per cent of that 
with normal current and rated volts in the armature, so you 
may see that the effect of the armature current upon the field wind- 
ings is very abnormal. There is absolutely no question about 
the difficulty of making input and output efficiency tests. It is 
extremely difficult to get results which will check day in and day 
out. There is a continual variation of at least 2 or 3 per cent 
in the efficiency. 

B.G. Lamme: I have gone over this paper of Mr. Olin’s 
and discussed the matter with him personally to some extent, 
and I gather that the object of his paper was not so much to 
bring out a definite method of determining efficiency, as to show 
that there is a possibility of getting better results by the summa- 
tion of separate losses than by the input and output method, 
unless the latter is carried out under laboratory methods. He 
has made a pretty good case of it. I have gone into this matter 
pretty thoroughly myself, and have calculated the load losses of 
various machines, and it is a very complicated problem to cal- 
culate these losses with any great accuracy; too complicated to 
be practicable as a basis for an acceptance test. But such cal- 
culations indicate that there are certain relations of load losses 
in most machines to the other losses, so that by some form of 
correcting factor, which we will doubtless determine some day, 
we can add a correction to the known measurable losses and ob- 
tain a result which is more reliable than can be obtained with the 
input-output tests. I have seen some very accurate input-out- 
put tests made, and even in the case of the most accurate ones, 
I had no confidence in the first one made; I had to see a second 
test to verify the first, or possibly sometimes a third one to verify 
the other two. If they all agreed, then I considered either that 
they were all accurate, or that there were equal errors in each. If 
I knew, beforehand, what the true losses were, then I might accept 
the first test; otherwise I would not. I believe that, in practise, 
any method is an approximation; but what we want is an approxi- 
mation in which the principal items can be computed directly 
from simple and reliable measurements. I believe, as sufficient 
data are gathered a satisfactory method will be obtained for intro- 
ducing a correcting factor for load losses, which factor may be 
varied for different types of machines. 


1720 POWER EFFICIENCY [June 28 


E. M. Olin: In regard to the difficulty of testing the machine 
of which Mr. Green has spoken, by the input-output method, my 
recollection is that it does not have any efficiency anyway, and 
any method will do as wellas another. The point I make in this 
paper is that the input-output method is a laboratory method 
and as such is not adapted to an ordinary shop test. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


THE SQUIRREL-CAGE INDUCTION GENERATOR 


BY H. M.. HOBART AND E. KNOWLTON 


A careful examination of the various attributes of the induc- 
tion generator discloses its appropriateness for certain classes of 
work. It is the purpose of this paper to describe these attributes 
and to endeavor to deduce therefrom the correct economic 
field for such machines. 

In the design of induction generators, attention must be given 
to certain matters which do not come in for consideration in the 
design of synchronous generators. Notable amongst these is the 
requirement that the machine shall have a fairly short air gap, 
whereas it is usually preferable that the air gaps of synchronous 
generators shall be of considerable radial depth. In the induc- 
tion generator the fairly short air gap is rendered essential by 
the circumstance that the magnetomotive force occasioning the 
flux is provided in the same windings which supply electricity 
to the external circuit. The current in the stator windings is 
the resultant of this exciting current and of the main current 
delivered to the load. The greater the air gap, the greater is the 
m.m.f. required to overcome its reluctance, and the greater, con- 
sequently, is the exciting component of the total current in the 
stator windings. 

It is not alone with the object of reducing to a minimum the 
total current in the stator windings corresponding to a certain 
output, that we strive to minimize the exciting current, but it is 
also with the object of decreasing the size (and cost) of the appa- 
ratus from which this exciting current is obtained. 

Let us assume the case of a certain induction generator, in 
which the exciting current per phase (at full load) is 35 amperes, 
and the current output from the machine at full load is 100 

; 1721 


1722 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: [June 28 


amperes. These component currents and their resultant are 
shown in Fig. 1, and it is seen that the resultant current in the 
stator windings is 


35? + 100? = 106 amperes 


The J?R loss in the stator windings is 12 per cent greater 
(since 1.062 = 1.12) than 
would be the case had the we) 
windings only to carry the 
main current of 100 amperes. 
Nevertheless this superposi- 
tion of the exciting and main RENT Gn A 
currents is economical, for if 
two independent windings Fic. 1—D1aGrRaM SHOWING COoM- 
were provided for them as PONENT AND RESULTANT CURRENTS IN 
wt : : : THE WINDINGS OF ONE PHASE OF AN 
indicated in Fig. 2, it would Sars let tie kiana 
be necessary to provide an 
aggregate carrying capacity for (100 + 35) = 135 amperes in 
these two windings, whereas the carrying capacity of the single 
winding indicated in Fig. 3, need only be proportioned for 106 
amperes. Or, for the same aggregate weight (and outlay) for 


« 


EXCITING CURRENT 
35 AMP. ) 


Fic. 2—SKETCH OF STATOR SLOT AND DIAGRAM OF STATOR WIND- 
INGS OF A HYPOTHETICAL THREE-PHASE INDUCTION GENERATOR PROVIDED 
WITH SEPARATE WINDINGS FOR THE MAIN CURRENT AND THE EXCITING 
CURRENT. 


copper in the two cases, as indicated in Fig. 4, the losses would be 
proportional to 


1.35? = 1.82 for the two independent windings as against 
only 
1.06? = 1.12 for the single winding. 


A single winding is always employed, not only for this reason 
but on account of the high degree of simplicity attending the 


1912} INDUCTION GENERATOR 1723 
operation of such generators. But since it may be of interest to 


engineers who have not heretofore given much thought to the 
subject of induction generators, there are shown in Figs. 5 and 6 


oo 


406 AMP, 


Fic. 3—SKETCH OF STATOR SLOT AND DIAGRAM OF STATOR WIND- 
INGS OF A THREE-PHASE INDUCTION GENERATOR PROVIDED IN THE 
UsuaL WAY WITH A SINGLE WINDING IN WHICH THE MAIN AND EXxcItT- 
ING COMPONENTS OF THE CURRENT ARE SUPERPOSED. 


the connections which would correspond to the two respective 
arrangements which have been mentioned. 

In Fig. 5, the exciter A is shown as a synchronous polyphase 
generator. The excitation for A is, in turn, provided by the 


gl 


Fic. 4—SKETCHES OF SLOTS AND WINDINGS FOR Two CASEs, 
RELATING RESPECTIVELY TO Two INDEPENDENT WINDINGS FOR THE 
ExciTING AND MAIN CURRENTS AND TO A SINGLE WINDING IN WHICH 
THESE CURRENTS ARE SUPERPOSED. 


The J?R loss in the first case (represented at the left) is 62 per cent greater, for a given 
load, than in the second case (represented at the right). 


direct-current generator B. The polyphase exciter A supplies 
35 amperes to the independent exciting winding C of the induc- 
tion generator. D is the main winding of the induction generator 
and it delivers 100 amperes to the step-up transformers E of 


1724 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: [June 28 


a three-phase transmission system F. In Fig. 6 the synchronous 
generator A is shown as not only supplying the excitation to 
the induction generator J, but as also supplying current, through 
step-up transformers G, to the three-phase transmission system 
F. If the synchronous generator A also delivers 100 amperes to 
its step-up transformers in addition to the 35 amperes of excita- 


Fic. 5—CONNECTIONS FOR OPERATING A HYPOTHETICAL INDUCTION 
GENERATOR PROVIDED WITH A SEPARATE WINDING FOR ITs EXCITATION, 
THE EXCITATION BEING SUPPLIED FROM A’SMALL SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE. 


C is the induction generator's exciting winding; D is its main winding; A is the 
synchronous exciter and B is the latter’s continuous-current exciter. 


tion which it supplies to the induction generator J, then the 
current in its windings (if the 100 amperes is at unity power 
factor) will be ; 


V100? + 35% = 106 amperes. 


Fic. 6—CONNECTIONS FOR OPERATING A HYPOTHETICAL INDUCTION 
GENERATOR J WITH SEPARATE EXCITING AND MAIN WINDINGS, IN 
PARALLEL WITH A SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR A, THE LATTER ALSO SuP- 
PLYING THE EXCITATION FOR THE INDUCTION GENERATOR. 


Consequently, although the supply from the synchronous genera- 
tor A to the transmission system is at unity power factor, 
nevertheless the power factor of the resultant load on A is only 


100 
106 > 0.944 


1912] INDUCTION GENERATOR 1725 


As already stated, the induction generator is never, in practise, 
furnished with two independent windings for carrying respect- 
ively the magnetizing current and the main current. On the 
contrary, it is invariably supplied with only one winding and this 
winding carries the resultant current. The arrangement is 
shown in Fig. 7. The induction generator I still obtains its 
excitation from the synchronous generator A. 

The supply of the wattless component devolves entirely upon 
the synchronous generator A. Let us consider the case of 200 
amperes delivered at 0.80 power factor to the transmission sys- 
tem. We may proceed as follows: 


Energy component = 0.80 * 200 = 160 amperes 
Wattless “ = 2002 — 160? = 120 amperes. 


Fic. 7—ConnectTions USUALLY ApOPTED FOR AN INDUCTION GEN- 
ERATOR J OPERATED IN PARALLEL WITH A SyNCHRONOUS GENERATOR A. 


If the induction generator’s capacity is only 100 amperes 
output and 106 amperes input (the figures we have taken up 
to this point), then the synchronous generator must provide 
to the transmission line not only an energy component of 
160 — 100 = 60 amperes but also a wattless component of 120 
amperes. Furthermore it must provide to the induction generator 
a wattless component of 35 amperes. Thus the synchronous 
generator’s total output is made up of an energy component of 60 
amperes and a wattless component of 120 + 35 = 155 amperes. 
The resultant current from the synchronous generator is con- 
sequently 
602 + 155? = 166 amperes. 


1726 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: {June 28 


Furthermore, this current is supplied at a power factor of only 


We have now roughly examined two cases. These have both 
related to the supply of 200 amperes to a transmission system. 
In the first case this 200 amperes was at unity power factor and 
in the second case it was at a power factor of 0.80. In both cases 
the induction generator supplies 100 amperes at unity power 
factor. In the first case it devolves upon the synchronous gener- 
ator to supply 106 amperes at a power factor of 0.944 and in the 
second case, 166 amperes at a power factor of 0.36. For the 
second case the synchronous generator would be required to have 
a thermal capacity for a 57 per cent greater kilovolt-ampere 
output than in the first case. The point to be noted is that the 
induction generator’s limitation that it can only deal with a 
unity power factor load has for a consequence that the syn- 
chronous machines with which it operates in parallel must bear 
the burden of providing not only the entire wattless component 
of the load on the transmission system, but also the magnetizing 
current for the induction generator. In many instances, how- 
ever, the circumstances are much more favorable than in the 
case taken for the purpose of the above explanation. 

These examples emphasize the point that the induction gen- 
erator is, in general, much less useful in connection with supply- 
ing a circuit connected to a load of low and lagging power factor 
than it is for supplying unity power factor circuits. As will be 
made clear in the course of this paper, while the economic field for 
the induction generator is not necessarily exclusively limited to the 
supply of electricity to unity power factor circuits, nevertheless 
the requirements are more appropriately met by including in the 
generating station equipment a certain proportion of induction 
generators, when the supply is for a unity power factor system, 
or better still, for a system in which the power factor is less than 
unity and the current leading. 

So let us first consider the case of a large generating station 
for the supply of 60-cycle electricity to synchronous substations. 

For the high speeds corresponding to the preferable design of 
steam turbines, the induction generator is, in most respects, 
pre-eminently appropriate not only as regards its electrical but 
also its mechanical characteristics. Let us fix ideas by taking 
the case of a 5000-kw. unit for 60 cycles. Such a unit would be 


1912] INDUCTION GENERATOR 1727 


designed for a speed of either 1800 rev. per min., in which case the 
generator would be designed with four poles, or else a speed 
of 3600 rev. per min. would be employed, the generator being 
designed for two poles. In the former case, the generator could 
be either of the synchronous or of the induction type. In the 
latter case (t.e., when employing only two poles), while a design of 
the synchronous type presents such grave difficulties that 3600 
rev. per min. machines are rarely built for more than one-half this 
rating, the conditions are in most respects especially favorable 
for the design of an induction generator. Figs. 8 and 9 show 


Fic. 8—TyYPICAL CONSTRUCTION FOR A BIPOLAR SYNCHRONOUS 
: ; GENERATOR. 


the rotor construction of the synchronous and induction gener- 
ators respectively. The smaller amount of copper and the ab- 
sence of insulation, end connections, slip rings and brushes greatly 
simplifies the mechanical construction of the induction rotor. 
The advantages of employing for this output (5000 kw. at 
60 cycles) a speed of 3600 rev. per min. relate to the lesser weight, 


lower cost, or lower steam consumption of such a set as compared 


with a set for the lower speed of only 1800 rev. per min. 
Some estimates have been made regarding the cost of a com- 
plete turbo-generator set comprising such a 5000-kw. bipolar 


_- 3600-rev. per min. induction generator. Representing this cost 


1728 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: [June 28 


by 100, the cost of a turbine-driven synchronous set for the same 
output of 5000 kw. at unity power factor, but having four poles 
and operating at a speed of 1800 rev. per min., works out at 125. 
But the power factor of high-speed induction generators will 
be of the order of 0.95 to 0.97 (according to the radial depth of 
the air gap) and hence even when the power factor of the sys- 
tem supplied by the generating station is unity, nevertheless the 
synchronous generators will have a power factor of less than 


Fic. 9—TypicaL CONSTRUCTION FoR A HIGH-SPEED INDUCTION GEN- 
ERATOR. 


unity, since they must supply the magnetizing current for the 
induction generators. If we install 5000-kv-a. sets and if we have 
the same number of induction and synchronous generators, 1.e., 
if we have one synchronous generator for each induction gener- 
ator and if the load on the station at any time is equally divided : 
between the two types, then the load on the synchronous gener- 
ator will be of the order of, say, 0.95 power factor. When the 
generator is designed for an output of 5000 kw. at 0.95 power 


1912] INDUCTION GENERATOR 1729 


factor (or an output of 5250 kv-a.) the cost of the complete 
synchronous set increases to 129. The two sets (one with an 
induction generator and the other with a synchronous generator) 
cost 100 + 129 = 229. 

This is just about the cost of a four-pole, 10,000-kw., 100 per 
cent power factor synchronous turbine-driven set for a speed of 
1800 rev. per min. 

But certain very distinct advantages are in some cases at- 
tained by the use of two 5000-kw. sets in place of a single 10,000- 
kw. set when the capital outlay is as low for the two 5000-kw. 
sets as for the single 10,000-kw. set. Thus, suppose we have a 
station equipped with three synchronous and three induction 
generators, each of the six generators having a capacity for 5000 
kw. and the synchronous generators having the slight excess 
capacity required for exciting the induction generators. When 
the load does not exceed 5000 kw., the station can be operated 
with only one generator and this will be of the synchronous type. 
It will have better economy than a 10,000-kw. set operated at 
less than half load. When the load is increased to between 5000 
and 10,000 kw., one of the induction sets will be thrown on and 
will run up without requiring synchronizing. When the load 
exceeds 10,000 kw. but is less than 15,000 kw., a second induc- 
tion generator will be put in circuit and the two induction gen- 
erators will be excited by a single synchronous generator. Owing 
to their higher speed (3600 as against 1800 rev. per min.), the 
induction generators will have a slightly lower steam consump- 
tion than the synchronous generators and hence it will be in the 
interests of economy (and also of simplicity in operation) to 
have in circuit at any time a maximum of capacity in induction 
sets and a minimum of capacity in synchronous sets. In fact, 
of two alternative layouts for a generating station to supply a 
given load, two 5000-kw. synchronous and three 5000-kw. 
induction sets would usually be the practical equivalent (as 
regards adequate provision for spare plant), of three 10,000-kw. 
synchronous sets. The capital cost would be: 


Five 5000-kw. sets 3 X 100 + 2 xX 129 = 558. 
Three 10,000-kw. sets 3 X 220 = 660 


The initial outlay for generating sets would thus be consider- 
ably greater in the latter case and there would be no compensating 
advantage in the matter of lower steam consumption, but rather 
the reverse. Furthermore, the outlay for switch gear and control- 


1730 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: [June 28 


ling apparatus would be no greater in the first instance, owing to 
the greater simplicity in operating induction generators. A much 
smaller aggregate capacity of exciter sets would be required for the 
first proposition. But this superiority of the first proposition only 
holds for a system consuming electricity of unity power factor, 
or for a system requiring a leading current, as, for instance, a 
system in which all the electricity from the generating station 
is delivered to synchronous substations. To emphasize this 


7480 K.V.A. 


10000 K.W. 


Fic. 10—VeEcTOR DIAGRAM OF THE 
ENERGY COMPONENT, WATTLESS Com- 
PONENT AND RESULTANT KV-A. FOR A 
SysTEM CONSUMING 10,000 KW. AT A 
Power Factor oF 0.80. 


9090 K.V.A. 


5000 K.W. 


Fic. 12—VEcToR DIAGRAM 
OF THE ENERGY COMPONENT, 
WATTLESS COMPONENT AND 
5000 K.W. RESULTANT KV-A. IN THE 

WINDINGS OF A 5000-Kw. Syn- 

Fic. 11—VeEcTorR DIAGRAM OF THE CHRONOUS GENERATOR OPER- 
ENERGY COMPONENT, WATTLESS COM- ATING IN PARALLEL WITH A 
PONENT AND RESULTANT KV-A. IN THE 5000-KW. INDUCTION GENER- 
WINDINGS OF A 5000-KW. INDUCTION ATORIN SUPPLYING 10,000 Kw. 
GENERATOR. AT A POWER Factor oF 0.80. 


h. 
po 


1610 K.V.A. 


point let us carry through an estimate for a case where the power 
factor of the system is 0.80. Let us consider that there 
is one synchronous generator and one induction generator. 
The former has four poles, runs at 1800 rev. per min. and 
has an output of 5000kw. The latter has two poles, 
runs at 3600 rev. per min. and has an output of 5000 kw. The 
induction generator cannot supply the lagging component, con- 
sequently the synchronous generator must supply twice as great 
a lagging component as would be the case were both generators 


1912) : INDUCTION GENERATOR 1731 


of the synchronous type. Indeed, the synchronous generator 
must also supply the magnetizing current for the induction 
generator. The system supplied by the two generators consumes 
10,000 kw. at 0.80 power factor or (aco = ) 12,500 kv-a. The 
diagram conforming to these conditions is shown in Fig. 10 and 
it is seen that the wattless component of the electricity con- 
sumed by the system is 7480 kv-a. 

The induction generator only supplies 5000 kw. and is not 
competent to supply any part of the wattless component. Con- 
sequently this entire wattless component of 7480 kv-a. must be 
carried by the synchronous generator in addition to an energy 
component of 5000 kw. (its half of the 10,000 kw.). Furthermore 
the synchronous generator must supply the magnetizing kilo- 
volt-amperes for the induction generator. This is seen from the 
diagram in Fig. 11 to amount to 1610 kv-a., which brings the 
total wattless component of the load on the synchronous gener- 
ator up to 7480 + 1610 = 9090 kv-a. 

The total capacity required of the synchronous generator is 
seen from the diagram in Fig. 12 to be 10,360 kv-a. 


.. 5000 
Its power factor is 10,360 ~ 0.48. 


From similar calculations at other power factors and from some 
preliminary cost estimates, the following table has been derived. 


Power factor of the system supplied.... 1.00 0.90 0.80 0.70 
Power factor 3600-rev. per min. ind. gen. 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 
Power factor 1800-rev. per min. syn. gen. 0.95 0.61 0.48 0.39 
Kv-a. capacity of 1800-rev. per min. syn. 

Cine; bere HAAOOU EES WOO OU sora On Orns 5250 8200 10,400 12,900 
Excitation of syn. gen. (in kw.).....--- 26 42 50 60 
Initial cost of syn. gen. set (7.e., including 
PEturbine)....3....00ceee eect eee eens 129 155 175 196 
Initial cost of ind. gen set (#.e., including 

ichasiie(9) Savon On BOGS OF ade OOmmrcg 100 100 100 100 
Total for the two gen. sets......--++++- 229 255 275 296 


Cost for one 1800-rev. per min. syn. gen. 
set of 10,000 kw. rated output at the rar 
power factor of the system......---- 220 — 240 — 


This table has been deduced and included in order to direct 
into right channels the exploitation of the induction generator. 
While the simplicity of the induction generator and various other 
features relating to its operation to which attention will be di- 
rected in a later section of this paper, indicate for it an appro- 
priate field other than in systems of unity power factor, 
nevertheless, it is hardly possible to emphasize too strongly the 


1732 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: —__[June 28 


rapid increase in the burden which a decreasing power factor 
throws on the synchronous generator in a system supplied jointly 
by the two types of generating sets. 

A study has been made of a 30,000-kw. turbine-driven set in 
which the high-pressure stages are incorporated in a 15,000-kw. 
bipolar 1500-rev. per min. 25-cycle set of the induction type; 
the low-pressure stages being incorporated in a 15,000-kw., 


Fic. 13—GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF A 30,000-Kw. TURBO-GENERATOR 
COMPRISING Two COMPONENTS. 


These components consist of a 15,000-kw., 1500-rev. per min. induction set and a 
15,000-kw., 750 rev. per min. synchronous set. 


four-pole, 750-rev. per min. 25-cycle set of the synchronous 
type. Such a plan gives a self-contained set and permits of 
very material advantages, foremost amongst which are those 
relating to obtaining a high thermodynamic efficiency. The 
estimates indicate that such a set would yield a very fine per- 
formance. The general arrangement of this 30,000-kw. set is 
indicated in Fig. 13. 


1912] INDUCTION GENERATOR 1733 


Tue DESIGN OF INDUCTION GENERATORS 


Were it not for the fairly small radial depth of the air gap the 
design of the stator would not differ in any material respect from 
that appropriate for a synchronous generator of the same rating 
as regards output, speed and periodicity. But the appropriate 
radial depth for the air gap is a matter of only a few millimeters 
in the case of induction generators. instead of a matter of a few 
centimeters which is appropriate for large synchronous generators. 
In Fig. 14 is given a curve showing the variation in power factor 
for varying depths of air gap for a 2500-kv-a., 3600-rev. per min. 
induction generator. 

The small air gap precludes the employment of wide open 


+ 
2 0.90 ia -- 
VARIATION OF POWER FACTOR 

OB? WITH 


IR GAP 
ON INDUCTION GENERATOR | 


0.86 


4 5 6 7 8 9 
AIR GAP IN M.M. 


Fic. 14 


stator slots, for with such a construction, the surface of the rotor 
is the seat of serious losses. These losses consist both of eddy 
current losses and of hysteresis losses and correspond to a 
frequency depending upon the number of stator slots and speed. 
Thus in a 25-cycle, four-pole machine running at 750 rev. per 
min., and having 72 stator slots, the periodicity of the magnetic 
pulsations occasioned at the surface of the rotor as it revolves 
- 

past the stator teeth is tata 900 cycles per second. 

The losses are due to the local alterations in the reluctance of 
the magnetic circuit followed by the lines of self-induction of 
the stator winding. Consequently, while the losses are of but 


*The factor 2 app2ars on account of there baing a wave peak at each 
tooth, with a valley at the slot, making 900 cycles per second. 


1734 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: [June 28 


little consequence at no-load (since the current in the stator 
winding is then merely the magnetizing current), the losses at 
rated load would, with wide open stator slots, be very consider- 
able. Obviously, then, the stator slots should be closed (or, at 
any rate, overhung), so that the flux of self-induction of the stator 
winding shall not cross over into the rotor in any considerable 
quantity. Furthermore it is important to keep down to a 
reasonably small value, the magnetomotive force corresponding 
to the stator conductors in a single slot when they are carrying 
full load current, for the greater the magnetomotive force, the 
greater will be the amplitude of the disturbances giving rise to 
the parasitic losses. Thus in an induction generator it is much 
more essential than it is in a synchronous generator, to subdivide 
the winding amongst many small slots instead of concentrating 
it in a few large slots. 

Similar considerations should be observed in the design of 
the rotor. The rotor conductors are arranged, one per slot, in 
closed slots. If the magnetomotive force of each rotor conductor 
is sufficiently great, serious parasitic losses will be occasioned in 
_ the stator teeth. The periodicities of these disturbances in 
the stator due to the rotor will be proportional to the speed and 
to the number of rotor slots. Thus ina 750-rev. per min., four- 
pole, 25-cycle induction generator with 60 rotor slots, the perio- 
dicity of the magnetic disturbances will be 


2750 X 60 


120 = 750 cycles per second. 


Consequently it is important that, both in the stator and in the 
rotor, the conductors be well distributed. These considerations 
indicate that the European practise of employing hand winding 
in closed slots has a greater justification for induction generators 
than for synchronous generators. But if it is preferred to employ 
form-wound stator coils, it is feasible, after the windings have 
been placed in the slots, to close the slots by the insertion of 
magnetic wedges. Such wedges have been developed and em- 
ployed experimentally on one of the 11,000-volt, four-pole, 
25-cycle, 750-rev. per min., 7500-kw. induction generators built 
for the Interborough Rapid Transit Company’s 59th Street 
station. 

Tests of considerable interest were made on this generator, 
both with laminated magnetic wedges and with wooden wedges. 
There are five 7500-kw. induction generator sets in the station, 


1912} INDUCTION GENERATOR 1735 


driven by turbines supplied with exhaust steam from five 7500- 
kw. low-speed reciprocating sets. All the induction generators 
were originally equipped with wooden wedges and the radial depth 
of the air gap was 0.15 in. The arrangement of the stator and 
rotor slots is shown in Fig. 15. To study the magnetic disturb- 
ances occurring with increasing load, exploring coils were 
wound around the tips of four adjacent stator teeth. It was 
determined to supply four exploring coils for the reason that 
the machine had a fractional-pitch winding and the conditions 
differ to a certain extent in different teeth. The relation of the 
location of the exploring coils to the windings of the three phases 
is indicated in Fig. 16. Each exploring coil consists of a single 


| / 
age 
Pa 7 (ae Nes 
4 
1<4,08>! i 
ae 2 ss 
| 
\ 
Fic. 15—-ARRANGEMENT OF STATOR AND Rotor SLots oF A 7500-Kw. 
; INDUCTION GENERATOR. 


bet 


eee 


turn of number 18 B. & S. wire. Oscillograph records were 
taken at the terminals of these exploring coils and served to 
disclose the presence and amplitude of the ripples superposed 
‘upon the main flux. The amplitude of these ripples was very 
considerable, and their periodicity was 750 cycles per second, 
corresponding to 60 rotor slots and the turbine’s speed, which 
was 750 rev. per min. It must be observed that these ripples 
were present notwithstanding that the rotor conductors were 
located in holes, the upper surfaces of which were 12mm. (0.5 in.) 
below the surface of the rotor. It is fair to conclude that had 
a similar study been made by means of an exploring coil wound 
around a rotor tooth, we should have verified the presence of 
900-cycle ripples in the rotor teeth. The amplitude of the ripples 


1736 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: [June 28 


increased with the load. This is interestingly shown in the 
records in Figs. 17 and 18. Those at the left relate to the machine 
when the stator coils were retained by wooden wedges and those 
at the right were obtained from tests made after replacing the 
wooden wedges by a set of experimental laminated magnetic 
wedges. Both sets of records have been re-drawn to bring them 
to the same scale. In Fig. 19 are plotted two curves showing the ~ 
magnitude of the ripples in the stator as a function of the load, 
for a machine with wooden wedges and a 3.8-mm. (0.15-in., 


as a APU; L 


LOCATION 
Ns OF 
. EXPLORING COILS 


Fic. 16—Location oF EXPLORING COILS FOR INVESTIGATING RIPPLES 
IN STATOR TEETH. 


air gap, and also for this machine when re-fitted with the experi- 
mental magnetic wedges and with the air gap increased to 6.4 
mm. (0.25 in.). This increase in the air gap was accomplished by 
turning down the rotor. The heating tests on the machine did 
not indicate, however, that the change in the air gap materially 
affected the losses. The difference in the magnitude of the rip- 
ples is correctly ascribed to the substitution of the magnetic 
wedges. 

It must be especially noted that these experimental magnetic 
wedges were fitted to the stator slots for the express purpose of 


os \ 


1912] “INDUCTION GENERATOR 1737 


IRON WEDGES LOAD WOODEN WEDGES 
2 3 4 (INKW.) [ EX. C’L1 2 3 4 
EO pt et ht tt 
Sr tt tt] 600 ag 
i 
Lat gt 1800 
ka 4 | 
\\ it 
ta “tn ttt M3360 


hy Lt a 


All yA lt 


! 
ll i ia Ail t 
i ii f i i'n 
"aii 


Fre. 17—TootH RIPPLES ON 


7500-Kw. INDUCTION GENERATORS 


IRON WEDGES 


LOAD WOODEN WEDGES 


EX. C’L.1 2 3 4 (InikW.) EX. CLL, 2 3 i 4 
: 560 I 
Ha aA 5900 : 
ak ad 
6360 i i i 
al ai 
j 7200 yd oardinrrrs 
uti a Pam | AD 8400 
lt | ry 9360 i ] 


Fic, 18—TootH RIPPLES ON 


7500-Kw. INDUCTION GENERATORS. 


1738 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: [June 28 


studying, by temperature measurements, the decrease in the 
losses in the rotor due to the 900-cycle ripples occasioned in the 
rotor by the large concentrated magnetomotive forces in the 
stator slots. The slight diminution shown in Figs. 17, 18 and 19 
to have been occasioned in the amplitude of the 720-cycle ripples 
in the stator teeth was only an incidental gain, superposed upon 
the great diminution in the amplitude of the ripples which is 
brought about by embedding the rotor conductors 12 mm. (0.5 


& 


Ss 


Bi 


8 


AMPLITUDE OF RIPPLE 


15 aja BI 


| X=VALUES FOR WOODEN WEDG 
o= 8 & IRON " 


0, 2000 4000 6000 8000 10,000 12,000 14,000 
OUTPUT IN K.W. 3 


Fic. 19—CurvVES SHOWING DIMINUTION IN AMPLITUDE OF RIPPLES 
IN STATOR TEETH WHEN EXPERIMENTAL MAGNETIC WEDGES WERE 
SUBSTITUTED FOR WOODEN WEDGES. 


in.) below the rotor surface. So far as decrease in the losses in 
the stator is concerned, the addition of these experimental 
magnetic wedges is more or less analogous to deepening by a few 
more millimeters the location of the rotor bars. If it had been 
practicable to provide exploring coils around the rotor teeth, 
oscillograph records would assuredly have disclosed a diminution 
in the 900-cycle ripples in the rotor, in a ratio out of all propor- 
tion greater than the relatively slight diminution observed in 
the 720-cycle ripples in the stator as shown in Figs. 17 and 18. 


1912/ INDUCTION GENERATOR 1739 


No-Loap LossEs 

After eliminating the friction of the turbine wheels the bearing 
friction and generator windage was ascertained to amount to 
120 kw. The core loss at no-load was ascertained to be 175 kw. 
with the wooden-wedge. construction and 135 kw. with the 
magnetic-wedge construction. 

In each case the machine was cooled by the circulation through 
it of 30,000 cu. ft. of air per minute. 

The ultimate rise of temperature at no-load as observed by 
thermometric readings of the temperature of the outgoing air 
varied considerably in various tests, but may, for the magnetic- 
wedge construction, be taken as about 13.5 deg. cent. 

The internal losses to which the temperature rise of the air 
is due, aggregated 

bearing friction and windage + core loss = 120+ 135 = 255 
kw. 

The loss per degree rise of temperature was thus 


255 
13.5 => 18.9 kw. 


The loss per cubic foot of air per degree rise, is 


18,900 “S 3 
60 X 30,000 = 0.0105 watt-hours. 


Loap TESTS 
When tested at the rated load of 7500 kw. the temperature rise 
of the outlet air was 
25 deg. cent. with wooden wedges. 
20 deg. cent. with magnetic wedges. 
Employing for the estimation of the total losses at rated 
load the value of 18.9 kw. loss per degree rise, we obtain 
Total internal losses at rated load with wooden wedges = 
25 X 18.9 = 473 kw. ; 
Total internal losses at rated load with magnetic wedges 
= 20 X 18.9 = 378 kw. 
From the resistance of the stator aimiies and of the squirrel 
cage, the legitimate [?R losses are ascertained to be 
Full-load [?R loss in stator windings, 18 kw. 
Full-load J?R loss in squirrel cage windings, 30 kw. 
Thus the legitimate losses at rated load are made up as fol- 


lows: 


1740 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: [June 28 


Bearing and windage losses.....-..+-+++++++rrerrts 120 kw. 

Stator core loss... 62h. dle «aye oho otstaklg in ergs peers By 

Stator J2R lossins«.ociske ceuh ciaue Ole eget iets ete eee 1S. i= 

Rotor l2R LOSS eh cet cme Sie mere ees es ae Nea car 30. 

Allowance for legitimate core loss in rotor.....-..---- age 
Total of legitimate losses at rated loath. 2. el ove SM es eee 
Consequently 


Parasitic losses at rated load when employing wooden wedges = 
473 — 308 = 165 kw. 

Parasitic losses at rated load when employing magnetic wedges = 
378 — 308 = 70 kw. 


The results indicate that even with the magnetic wedges 
the parasitic losses, at rated load, still amount to 70 kw. The 
greater part of this 70 kw. could be eliminated in a design employ- 
ing a lower magnetomotive force per slot. In these machines there 
were 11 conductors per slot and at rated load the current in each 
conductor amounted to about 210 amperes. Consequently at rated 
load the crest value of the magnetomotive force concentrated 
in a single stator slot is noless than 11 X 210 x V 2 = 3270 
ampere conductors. 

In the rotor there are only 60 slots, each containing one con- 
ductor, and at rated load the current in each conductor is about 
2700 amperes. Thus the magnetomotive force per rotor slot 
has a crest value of 2700 X “2 = 3820 ampere conductors. 

These values represent undesirably great concentration of 
magnetomotive force and in spite of employing closed slots, will 
occasion such great periodic fluctuations in the flux distribution 
as to give rise to very considerable parasitic losses. The remedy 
obviously lies in employing a greater multiplicity of slots and 
less magnetomotive force per slot. This again emphasizes that 
in the case of induction generators it is of greater advantage 
even than in synchronous generators to wind the stator for 
relatively low pressure and employ compensators or transformers 
to step up to the line pressure. 

It appears the most reasonable plan to advocate any new type 
of apparatus for that range of work for which it is most eminently 
appropriate. Induction generators are the more appropriate 
and have the more favorable characteristics, the higher the speed 
and the greater the rated output. It should furthermore be 
observed that it is precisely for this range of work (extra-high 
speed in large capacities) that very grave limitations are met 
with in the design of synchronous generators. Yet this is an 
ideal rating for an induction generator, for it would require but 


1912) INDUCTION GENERATOR 1741 


a very small magnetizing current and would have a rotor of 
ideal mechanical and electrical simplicity, whereas a bipolar 
rotating field for excitation by direct current presents, in such a 
size and for such a speed, thermal and mechanical problems of 
a very serious nature. Consequently we consider that the most 
rational plan is to introduce induction generators at this upper 
end of the line and let the future decide how far they will 
win for themselves a useful field at lower speeds and for smaller 
capacities. Personally, we are of the opinion that the inherent 
merits of induction generators will secure for them a very con- 
siderable field of usefulness which is now fairly satisfactorily 
occupied by synchronous generators. But the place to intro- 
duce them first is where the synchronous design either fails to 
be feasible or involves very disadvantageous features, and where, 
moreover, the induction design displays its best characteristics. 

In large sizes of high-speed induction generators, it may be 
preferable to use a rotor in which the shaft and core are cut from 
a solid piece. Such a construction is not in any way objection- 
able for the rotor of an induction generator, for we can design 
it with a slip at rated load of, say, two-tenths of 1 per cent. This 
corresponds to a rotor periodicity of only (0.002 X 60 = ) 0.12 
of a cycle per second, or 7.2 cycles per minute, and under such 
conditions there is no necessity for employing a laminated core. 

The necessity for employing in induction generators a very 
small air gap renders it more important than in synchronous 
generators that the magnetomotive force per slot (expressed in 
ampere conductors at rated load) should be small. This requires 
the subdivision of the winding amongst a larger number of slots 
per pole than would be sufficient for a synchronous machine of 
the same rating. The subdivision of the winding in many slots 
increases the desirability of employing a low pressure and renders 
it especially advantageous to adopt the plan of stepping up to 
the line pressure through a compensator. The most economical 
ratio of transformation for the compensator is 2:1. Conse- 
quently if an induction generator is to supply a 12,000-volt sys- 
tem, it should be wound for 6000 volts and should supply the 
system through a 2:1 compensator. 

One of the important uses for the induction generator is 
the furnishing of additional capacity in stations which are at 
present equipped with synchronous generators. In general, the 
slower the speed the more adaptable is the synchronous genera- 
tor for use with induction generators. This is due to the fact 


. 


1742 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: [June 28 


that both field and armature can furnish, without dangerous 
heating, the extra current necessary for excitation. In engine- 
driven and slow-speed waterwheel-driven generators, built 
from eight to twelve years ago, the requirements of voltage 
regulation were such that the temperatures were low, conse- 
quently, such machines can easily perform the extra duty of 
exciting the induction generator. When the power factor of 
the system is near 1.00 the extra duty will not usually involve 
changes in the exciter or field winding. In other cases where 
the exciter voltage would be insufficient to give the extra field 
current the remedy lies in exciters of higher voltage or a change 
in the field winding. 

In power houses of the above class there is usually sufficient 
space for the installation of a high-speed steam turbine unit 
without the necessity of enlarging the station. Since the induc- 
tion generator is essentially a high-speed machine its use in such 
a station is an inexpensive means of greatly increasing the output 
of the station. 

A comparative study of two designs, one for a 2500-kw. syn- 
chronous generator, and the other for a 2500-kw. induction 
generator, both supplying a system at unity power factor, has 
led to results from which the following table of data has been 
compiled: 


Synchronous Induction 
generator generator 
GOrélOas8 derac: «cia licy nur aus e:hcitialy sins Wig elnotous Sin wy pies naw 30 kw 30 kw 
Printary FAR lO8S. 6c ic%s iscsiee isle oe ew moles oie eave eahy. sf sie calstnls Orb. f 10365 
Secondary 22 Rs 1Ogs verre icteres wick oe Gis Sere aieters av) vente verses Gy uF 278 
RY pS lel. Menor Ee re Smet Cen A SUL EN EROS 35 be 35 be 
Total loss, excluding friction of bearings...............| 81 F taza. ve 
Efficiency, excluding friction of bearings.............. 96.9 per cent | 97 percent 
Pericent.slip at tated loadiscus.» «osha manne’ ole hewbe 0.0 per cent | 0.11 per cent 


This indicates that the efficiency is practically the same for 
either type of generator. The ventilation of the two machines 
would be radically different. The large air gap of the synchro- 
nous generator permits of a design in which the air passes axially 
along the gap and out through air ducts normal to the axis of 
the shaft. The small air gap of the induction generator neces- 
sitates a different method. For this machine we should provide 
a single large air duct in the center of the armature core normal 
to the axis of the shaft and a number of axial ducts leading from 
this to the ends of the machine. These would be supplemented 


1912} INDUCTION GENERATOR 1743 


by the air gap and by small passages at the outer surface of the - 
core. By this method less cooling surface is required, since the 
temperature gradient parallel is only a fraction of that normal 
to the plane of the laminations. In both machines the movement 
of air would be produced by fans on the ends of the rotor. 

In Europe several other methods have been devised whereby 
it is unnecessary to pass the air axially along the air gap. By 
one method the air from the fans on the ends of the rotor is 


Fic. 20—A MeEtHop FOR VENTILATING ALTERNATORS. 


passed to a chamber at the external surface of the armature 
core. This chamber opens into air ducts in a plane at right angles 
to the shaft. Suitably shaped space blocks lead the air ina tan- 
gential direction to axial ducts just back of the stator slots. 
The air then flows axially through one section, to the next air 
duct and then outwardly in a tangential direction to a chamber 
at the outer surface of the core. ‘This chamber is adjacent to the 
one first mentioned and leads to the exit from the stator frame. 


_ Looking along the axis of the shaft, the air flows in a V-shaped 


1744 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: {June 28 


path, the axial duct back of the stator slots being at the apex. 
Thus the two legs of the V are separated axially by a single _ 
armature section. The method is illustrated diagrammatically 
in Fig. 20. 

Still another method which is independent of the air gap 
consists in dividing the stator frame into cylindrical chambers 
placed side by side. The air is forced into a chamber from which 
it first passes radially toward the shaft, then axially to adjacent 
air ducts, and finally outwardly to a chamber alongside the one 
first mentioned. This last chamber communicates with the outer 
air. The method is illustrated in Fig. 21. 

There are several other methods more or less similar to the 


Fic. 21—A METHOD FOR VENTILATING ALTERNATORS. 


above, any of which can be applied to the induction generator. 

On account of the small air gap of induction generators the 
value of the critical speed of vibration is especially important. 
If possible the critical speed should be at least 10 per cent above 
normal. If other important considerations require employing a 
critical speed below normal it should be considerably below, 
care being taken that the second critical speed is also removed 
from the normal, preferably above it. With such a design the 
rotor should have a very careful running balance before it is 
placed in the machine. A damping bearing could be used to 
prevent the rubbing of the rotor and stator if for any reason the 
machine should be subjected to abnormal vibration. 


1912] INDUCTION GENERATOR 1745 


It should be noted that in cases where the critical speed must 
be below the normal speed, the air gap cannot be so small as 
would be preferred from the standpoint of minimizing the magnet- 
izing current. A consideration tending to the use of a shaft with 
a critical speed below the normal running speed relates to the 
lower peripheral speed thereby obtained at the bearings. 

Let us now turn our attention to the application of the induc- 
tion generator in instances where its superiority rests upon its 
practically automatic operation. 

The necessity for the constant presence of attendants can be 
eliminated. This is of importance in such cases as districts 
where there are many small water powers. At each water power 
a generating installation should be provided. The output from 
each of these generating stations should be delivered into a 
transmission line feeding to a collecting station where all these 
contributions should be collected and delivered to a main trans- 
mission line. In each generating station should be installed an 
induction generator driven by a waterwheel. The excitation 
should be provided by synchronous condensers at the collecting 
station. It would often be desirable to locate the collecting 
station at a water power and install there one or two synchron- 
ous generators driven by waterwheels. It would not be neces- 
sary to have attendants at the small induction generator stations. 
Occasional inspection would suffice. The induction generator 
would be connected directly to the line and the energy delivered 
from the waterwheel would be transformed by the induction 
generator into electricity and would in this form be received at 
the collecting station. If the line should, from any cause, become 
open-circuited, the waterwheel would run up toward double 
speed and either this should be provided for in the mechanical 
design or else an automatic regulator should be provided. 

We wish in conclusion to call attention to the appropriateness 
of the induction type of generator when the supply must 
be in the single-phase form. It is well understood that in order 
to neutralize the pulsating armature reaction in a single-phase 
machine it is necessary to provide damping windings in the pole 
faces. It is usually found preferable that these damping wind- 
ings should take the form of an ordinary squirrel-cage structure. 
Roughly, but with sufficient exactness for practical purposes, 
we may say that if the aggregate cross-section provided by the 
face conductors of the squirrel cage equals the aggregate cross- 
section of the stator conductors, then the loss incurred in neutral- 


1746 HOBART AND KNOWLTON: [June 28 


izing the pulsations of the stator current is about equal in 
amount to the stator [2R loss. If the cross-section of the rotor 
conductors is half this value, then the loss in the neutralizing 
winding will be twice the stator I?R loss, and, conversely, if the 
cross-section provided in the neutralizing winding is twice that 
of the stator conductors, then the loss in the neutralizing winding 
will be only half the stator [?R loss. But in a synchronous 
generator there is rarely room to place a squirrel cage winding 
of greater aggregate cross-section than that of the stator wind- 
ing, for we are usually crowded for space even for the main field 
winding. Consequently the losses in the single-phase generator 
include, in addition to those in a three-phase generator, a loss 
in the neutralizing winding and this additional loss is usually 
of about the same magnitude as the stator J?R loss. This pulls 
down the efficiency very decidedly and leads to a very discredit- 
able result in that the single-phase machine not alone has only 
about half the capacity of the same machine when providing 
three-phase electricity, but it also has a much lower efficiency. 

But in an induction generator the squirrel cage winding is the 
only winding on the rotor and it isin any case exceedingly liber- 
ally proportioned in order that the rotor /°R loss shall be a mini- 
mum. This same squirrel cage will serve very effectively to neu- 
tralize the pulsating armature reaction and it would appear that 
the resultant J2R loss in the squirrel cage will be very small 
indeed. Thus, although in employing an induction design for 
the single-phase generator we still find it necessary to forego 
utilizing more than two-thirds of the stator winding, and must 
consequently rate the machine down by some 33 per cent below 
its three-phase rating, we shall have the advantage that, so far 
as relates to the rotor, we only require the regular squirrel 
cage winding and this will not be the seat of a materially greater 
loss than when the machine is employed for providing three- 
phase current. The stators would be supplied with normal three- 
phase windings and all three phases of these windings would 
receive magnetizing current from the corresponding windings 
of the synchronous generators. Only two of the phases would 
be employed for providing the single-phase current. 

The tests of the 7500-kilowatt induction generators of the 
Interborough Rapid Transit Company, some results of which 
have been incorporated in this paper, were to a large extent 
carried out by Mr. H. G. Stott and Mr. H. H. Barnes, to whom 
the writers wish to offer their hearty thanks for permission to 


1912] INDUCTION GENERATOR 1747 


employ this material. They also wish to express their thanks to 
Messrs. G. C. Hall and G. I. Rhodes of Mr. Stott’s engineering 
staff, and Mr. T. F. Barton of Mr. Barnes’s engineering staff, 
and to Mr. L. T. Robinson, for their cordial cooperation. 

In conclusion is added the following brief bibliography of 
some leading contributions to the literature of the subject. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE SQUIRREL-CAGE INDUCTION 
GENERATOR 


1892 
Danielson: Reversibility of the Polyphase Induction Motors. 
Elec. World, Jan. 21, 1898, p. 44. 


1897 
C. P. Steinmetz: Alternating-Current Induction Motor. TRANs. 
-A.I. E. E., Vol. XIV, p. 185, July 26, 1897. 
C. P. Steinmetz and E. J. Berg; Alternating-Current Phenomena. 
Chapter 15, paragraph 156, First Edition. 


1898 
A. F. McKissick: Some Tests with an Induction Generator. TRANS. 
A. I. E. E., Vol. XV, p. 409, 1898. 


1899 
Maurice Leblanc: The Induction Generator. L’Eclairags Elec- 
trique 18, pp. 161-167 and 376-379, 1899. 


1903 
A. S. McAllister: Excitation of Synchronous Generators by Means 
of Condensers. Elec. World and Eng., Jan. 17, 1903. 
A. S. McAllister: Asynchronous Generators. American Electrician, 
November, 1903. 


1905 
W. Stanley and G. Faccioli: Alternate Current Machinery—In- 
duction Alternators. TRANS. A. I. E. E., 1905, Vol. XXIV, p. 851. 


1908 


W. L. Waters: The Non-Synchronous Generator in Central Station 
and Other Work. Trans. A. I. E. E., 1908. Vol. XXVII, Part I, p. 157. 


1910 


T. Spooner and A. J. Barnes: Induction Generator—Effect of Short 
Circuits. Elec. World, Feb. 24, 1910. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTORS 


BY W. J. BRANSON 


The purpose of this paper is to develop a complete vector 
analysis of single-phase induction motor performance as the 
basis for an accurate circle diagram applicable to motors of 
even the smallest commercial sizes. To accomplish this, it will 
be necessary to derive mathematically correct formulas or 
graphical construction for several quantities and relations which 
have been treated very loosely heretofore. Of these the most 
important are 


1. The value of the secondary no-load current, as reflected in 
the primary. 

2. The construction of the current circle. 

3. The revolutions per minute. 


The analysis by which the required formulas and graphical 
processes are to be derived will be based on the transformer 
theory of the induction motor as distinguished from the rotating 
field theory. At the outset, therefore, it is necessary to consider 
some of the general problems involved in the phenomena of 
primary-secondary transformation as affected by magnetic 
leakage. 

I. PRIMARY-SECONDARY TRANSFORMATION 


Fig. 1 represents a transformer having magnetizing and leakage 
characteristics similar to those of an induction motor. For the 
purpose of simplification, it will be assumed for the present that 
the primary and secondary windings have 1 to 1 ratio and that 
the resistances of both primary and secondary, as well as the iron 
loss, are negligible. 

1749 


1750 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS {June 28 


=o permeance of mutual path 
permeance of mutual and primary leakage paths in parallel 


permeance of mutual path 

permeance of mutual and secondary leakage paths in parallel 

Li = coefficient of self-induction of primary. 

L, = coefficient of self-induction of secondary. 

M = coefficient of mutual induction. 

P =27 frequency. 

im = the primary magnetizing current, 1t.e., the current 
which flows in the primary with the secondary open. 

From the physical meaning of K, and K, as given above, 


K,li=M 


UC IbE = M 


Since, by definition, the reactance of a simple inductive circuit 
is equal to P L, it is evident that the reactance of the primary 
winding when the secondary circuit is open, 


Xo = PL 

Therefore, the magnetizing current 
prey 

ye NF 


and the e.m.f. induced in the primary winding is represented by 


the expression 


At the same time an e.m.f. is induced in the secondary equal to 


PR 
P M in 


or 


“1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1751 


In other words, the current 7, produces a flux which induces 
in the primary winding an e.m.f. equal to P Lit, and the portion 
of this flux which enters the secondary core induces in the 
secondary winding an e.m.f. equal to P Min. When the second- 
ary circuit is open, these are the actual e.m.fs. in the primary and 
secondary windings. When the secondary circuit is closed, 
however, the m.m.f. of the secondary current opposes and 
partially neutralizes the m.m.f. of the primary current. 

Under load conditions, therefore, the expressions given above 
do not represent actually existing em.fs. The actual e.m.f. 
values are obtained by taking the vector sum of the e.m.f. which 
the flux due to the primary current would induce if the second- 
ary current did not exist, and the e.m.f. which the flux due to 
the secondary current would induce if the primary current did 
not exist. 

The mathematical relation between the current values of these 
hypothetical e.m.f. values, which become actual values only 
when there is no reaction between the primary and secondary, 
are expressed by the equations which follow: 

If i represents the primary current and e, the primary e.m.f. 
due to the flux produced by 1, 


ead 


a mie (1) 
and K 
4 = C1 p P (2) 


If e2 represents the e.m.f. induced in the secondary by the flux 
produced by 1, 


@ =iPM (3) 
and 
one €9 
eH a (4) 


If i, represents the secondary current and é2 the secondary 
e.m.f. due to the flux produced by 1, 


tebe 
, mot 58K ye (5) 
and . 
: Ie 
Veep uM (6) 


1752 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


If e; represents the e.m.f. induced in the primary by the flux 
produced by 12, 


ey = 12 P M (7) 
and 

oT ned Al 

17" PM (8) 


In applying this method of analysis to the problems which 
immediately follow, and which lead to the derivation of an expres- 
sion for reactance, the resistance of both windings and the iron 
loss will be treated as negligible.* The hypothetical e.m.fs. will 
therefore be either in phase or directly opposed and may be 
added or subtracted directly. 

1. Relative value of primary and secondary currents when the 
secondary is short-circuited. 

Let 4 kh 

42x = secondary current. 
PM it, (equation 8) 
P M to 
reer 


primary current. 


Secondary e.m.f. due to 7, 


Secondary e.m.f. due to t2, = (equation 5) 

There is no resistance drop and there can be no induced e.m.fs. 
other than those represented by the above expressions, since all 
fluxes have been taken account of. Therefore the e.m.fs. cor- 
responding to the primary and secondary currents respectively 
are equal and directly opposed. 


P M ior 
K, 


12h — th K, 


P Mit, 


This shows that, when the resistances and iron loss are negli- 
gible, the secondary short-circuit current is equal to the current 
existing at the same time in the primary, multiplied by K,. 

2. Demagnetizing effect of secondary current. 


Primary e.m.f. due to 72, = P M 12, (equation 7) 


The above e.m.f. opposes and neutralizes an equal component 
of the e.m.f. due to the primary current which balances the 


*Primary resistance will be neglected in all’ discussions preceding 
Section VII, and iron loss will be neglected in all discussions preceding 
Section VIII. Both quantities will be correctly treated in the working 
diagram. 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1753 


impressed e.m.f. This leaves a portion of the impressed 
e.m.f. unbalanced and, as a consequence, a larger primary cur- 
rent flows. The primary current must increase until the balance 
is restored between impressed and induced e.m.fs., that is, until 
the e.m.f. due to the added primary current equals and neutral- 
izes the e.m.f. due to 72,4. 

The additional primary current required will be 


: IE ; 
PM ie, X PM (equation 2) 


or 
12h Ws 


This shows that the increase in the value of the primary cur- 
rent due to the demagnetizing effect of the secondary current 


equals 
secondary current X K»p 


3. Relative value of the primary current with the secondary 
open and the primary current with secondary short-circuited. 
From (1) above, 22, = tn Ks 
From (2), the increase of primary current due to the demagnet- 
izing effect of 22, equals 
1on Kp 
or, substituting from (1), 
th Kp Ks 


This is the additional primary current due to short-circuiting 
the secondary. 
Therefore, the total primary current 


pai i. hak. 
Ie 4 ROR, 
= 4, (1 — K,K,) 
5 din 
Be KER 


4. Equivalent reactances. Let X1 = equivalent reactance 
(total) reduced to primary, such that, neglecting the effect of 
resistance and iron loss, if E be impressed on the primary with 
secondary short-circuited, the current equals #/X3. 

Let X2 = equivalent reactance (total) reduced to secondary, 

such that if E be impressed on the secondary with primary short- 
circuited, the current equals E/X2. 


1754 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


By definition, 

a nS 

eerie 
3 tm 
~"T— Ke Be 

= * 

a Gok, Eo = 
Ah e! — K,K,) PLitm 
As = 
1 Kw) Pe 
aS K, 


By similar reasoning it may be shown that 


_(1-K,K.) PM 


Xe K 


IL. TRANSFORMER CURRENT LOcUS 


Neglecting the effect of primary resistance, the current locus 
of a transformer is represented by a semicircle drawn on M H 
(Fig. 2) as a diameter. The correctness of this construction is 
demonstrated as follows: 

Draw the base line O H equal to E/X, and locate M by making 
O M equal to im. Also draw the lines O L and M L to represent 
the primary and secondary currents.t| At right angles toOL 
draw the line O W to represent a primary e.m.f. equal to P L117 and 
the line O Y to represent a secondary e.m.f. equal to PM 1. 
Also, lay off at right angles to M L the line E W equal to P M 12 
and the line D Y equal to P Lz 12. 


*The product of. Ky Ks which is represented by the symbol (Kr) may 
be derived from im and X, as follows: 


1— K 
x, - GER KE 
tm 
Sad 
tm “1 = 1—K,)K 
E La 
tm X1 
1— — = K, K 
B: tutes dons 
= Ky 


tIt should be noted that M L represents, directly, the current which 
flows in the primary as a result of the demagnetizing effect of the secondary 
current. This equals secondary current multiplied by Ky. Therefore in 
terms of the primary current scale ML = 1; Kp. 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1755 


The vector sum D O of the two secondary e.m.fs. P Mi and 
P Lz i. is the resultant e.m.f. in the secondary and is, conse- 
quently, equal to the secondary resistance drop. 

Centering attention now on the triangle O W E, it will be noted 


that 


EW=P Mir 


PLE R: 
oe PLixX ML 


IMPRESSED E,M.F, 


CONSTANTS 
E = 100 


im = 1.8 


Kp = 8 
Ky = 38 
Xi1= 20 
Xs= 20 
2) LQ) 
4 = 0 
ey. 
\- 
Fic. 2 
and since 
Ow =f Lit 
oc IO VO; > OL 


it is evident that E Wisto ML as O W is to O L,-and since 
the angles at Wand L are equal, it follows that the triangle 
O W Eis similar to the triangle O L M and therefore OE is at 


right angles to O M. 


1756 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


Continue the line E O to intersect D Y at F. Since O F has been 
constructed at right angles to O M, O Y at right angles to OL and 
F Yatright angles to ML, it is evident that the triangle O Y F 
is also similar to O L M and therefore similar to O W E, and since 
the side EO of the triangle O W E is of constant length, being 
proportional to the impressed voltage, the corresponding side 
O F of the triangle O Y F is also of constant length. 

From the similarity of the triangles, it is evident that 


= P Mi PIE. 
= PMi.K, 
It will be noted by reference to the figure that 
FD =DY—FY 


therefore the voltage represented by 


HES 
K, 


, Q-KeR) EM 
2 a Kee 


FD.= ~ PMis Ky 


= 1, X¢ 


lI 


Zz times equivalent reactance re- 
duced to the secondary. 


That is, the voltage represented by line F D equals 7, multiplied 
by Xo, the latter being a constant. Therefore F Dis proportional 
to 72 and may represent it in value though not in phase. 

As regards phase, FD is, by construction, at right angles to ie, 
and DO, which represents the secondary resistance drop, is in 
phase with 72. Therefore F D Ois a right angle. 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1757 


It has now been shown that the line O F is of constant length 
and that the angle at D is a right angle. Therefore, the locus 
of the line FD, which is proportional to the secondary current, 
isasemicircle. It follows that the locus of the secondary current 
vector is also a semicircle. In other words, if the secondary 
resistance be varied from zero to infinity, the point LZ will move 
from H to M along the semicircle ML H. 

Inasmuch as the triangles FDO and M LAH are similar, it is 
evident that in value, though not in phase, the line ML may 
represent 72X»2, and the line L H may represent 7272. It is neces- 
sary, in connection with formulas to be developed later, to note 
the scale to which the reactance and resistance drops are repre- 
sented by these lines. 


Let ‘S, = volts per inch. 
S; = primary amperes per inch. 
So = S;/Ky = secondary amperes per inch. 


Since i2 Xo, the reactance drop, is represented by the same line 
(ML) as the secondary current (72), it follows that 


in aX 
So Se 

Sie — So © 

nse: 

= Kk 


This shows that the e.m.f. scale equals the secondary current 
scale multiplied by X2. In other words, 


reactance drop = ML X S2 X2 volts 
and 
resistance drop = LH X S2 X2 volts. 


It should also be noted that the secondary resistance drop is 
equal to the secondary current vector multiplied by 


To 
Xo Se 


1758 BRANSON: IND UCTION MOTORS |June 28 
This may be demonstrated as follows: 


tg sel Ne 


. VHS EE 
= ML Fry 


‘ Another relation which is important in practical work may be 
derived from the above. . Since 


ss aes 
LHXS.=ML YS. 


it follows that 
Ls H T2 


ALT wetek g 


In determining the starting torque of a single-phase induction 
motor, it is convenient to make use of the fact that the resultant 
flux in the secondary is proportional to 


LH S,VX2 


It was shown above that the secondary resistance drop, 
which is equal to the e.m.f. induced in the secondary, is repre- 
sented by the expression 


LH S2 Xe 


For a given flux the e.m.f. induced in the secondary varies as 
the turns, or as the square root of the reactance. 


LH Suk: 6 bX 


iH Se Xs 
[oo] a a —— oe 
Pec 
oLH Se We 
as stated above. 


J 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1759 


III. Errects or ROTATION IN THE Two-PHASE MOTOR 


Inasmuch as an induction motor, under locked conditions, 
is simply a transformer with a short-circuited secondary, the 
foregoing may be considered to be an analysis of the flux e.m.f. 
and current relations which exist when the rotor is at rest in 
either a single-phase induction motor or in one phase of a poly- 
phase induction motor. The next step is to include in this 
analysis the effects of rotation. 

The flux, e.m.f. and current relations in the rotor of a single- 
phase induction motor are very complicated and difficult to 
analyze directly. The most satisfactory method of procedure 
is to take the simpler relations of the two-phase motor as a basis 


PHASE B 


PHASE A 


or point of departure and consider the changes which must take 
place in the rotor when one primary phase is disconnected from 
the line. In order to make use of this method, we must make a 
preliminary analysis of the effects of rotation in the two-phase 
induction motor. 

Fig. 3 represents the electric and magnetic circuits of a two- 
phase induction motor, equipped with a squirrel cage rotor. If an 
alternating e.m.f. be impressed on phase B, a flux $y will appear 
in the rotor core and the e.m.fs. induced in the rotor conductors 
will cause a current to cireulate in the plane BB. Similarly, 
if an e.m.f. be impressed on phase A, the flux ¢. wi'l appear and 
a current will circulate in the plane AA. If the rotor be allowed 


1760 = BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


to rotate, these currents will continue to circulate in the same 
planes, passing through whatever conductors and whatever parts 
of the end rings happen at the instant to be in the right position. 
In other words, the two secondary circuits remain fixed in the 
planes A A and BB whether the rotor is in motion or at_rest. 
These two secondary circuits will be designated circuit A and 
circuit B respectively. It will be noted that circuit A is in 
inductive relation with phase A, while circuit B is in inductive 
relation with phase B. 

It will be evident from Fig. 3 that when the rotor is in motion 
the conductors constituting circuit A will cut the flux @, and 
also that the conductors of circuit B will cut the flux @.. An 
e.m.f. due to rotation will therefore be generated in each circuit. 


ae 
Eta 


-C 


Fic, 4—REPRESENTS CONDITIONS AT THE INSTANT WHEN IMPRESSED 
E.M.F. IS AT THE POSITIVE MAXIMUM, FOR PHASE B. 


It may easily be demonstrated that in each circuit the rota- 
tional e.m.f. is directly opposed in phase to the transformer e.m.f. 
which caused the rotor current referred to above, and also that 
at synchronous speed, the transformer and rotational e.m.fs. 
will be not only opposed in phase, but exactly equal, so that no 
currents will flow in the rotor. 
Throughout the following pages these rotor e.m.fs. will be 
designated by the letter E with the subscript ¢ or r indicating 
transformer or rotational and a or b indicating the circuit. 


FE. = transformer e.m.f. in circuit B 
E,, = rotational e.m.f. in circuit B. 
Eyq = rotational e.m.f. in circuit A. 
Eva = transformer e.m.f. in circuit A. 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS West 


Fig. 4 shows the phase relations of the fluxes and secondary 
e.m.fs. of a two-phase motor running at synchronous speed, 1.e., 
mechanically driven at synchronous speed by external power. 

The flux e.m.f. and current relations in one phase of a two- 
phase induction motor, when the rotor is at rest, are represented 
in the transformer diagram, Fig. 2. Assuming the resistance of 
both primary and secondary as well as the iron loss to equal zero, 
the primary current 

peels 
x1 


——— 
IMPRESSED E.M.F, 


ees B 


“CONSTANTS 


B E = 100 
im = 1,8 
Kp = 8 
Kg = 8 
X = 20 
Xo== 20 
Vie et) 
(al = 0 


reece! Y 


Fic. 5 


and is represented by OH. In case, however, of an actual motor, 
having a secondary resistance greater than zero, the end of the 
locked current vector will be at some point on the semicircle, 
as at L. When the motor is running at synchronous speed, and 
no current flows in the rotor, the primary current will have 
the same value i, = E/X» that would exist if the rotor were 


open-circuited. 


1762 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


From the last statement, it is evident that rotation at syn- 
chronous speed has the same effect on the primary current as a 
rotor resistance of infinite value. Similarly, as will now be shown, 
rotation at any speed below synchronism has the same effect 
on the current values as the introduction of a resistance of some 
finite value into the rotor circuit. 

Referring to Fig. 5, which represents the flux e.m.f. and cur- 
rent values of phase B under operating conditions, it will be noted 
that the resultant rotor flux @, is at right angles to the secondary 
current. The resultant flux of phase A will therefore be in phase 
with the secondary current of phase B. Consequently the 
e.m.f. (E,5) generated in circuit B by rotation through the flux 
of phase A will add directly to the resistance drop, and the 
effect of rotation on the current values is the same that would 
result from increasing the secondary resistance to such an extent 
as to make the resistance drop equal to 


2 t2 + Ew 
Since any rotational e.m.f. equals a transformer e.m.f. due to 

the same flux multiplied by 

rev. per min.* 

synchronous speed 
it follows that 
rev. per min. Ev 
syn. - Eg 


and since in a two-phase motor Eig is equal to Ez», the fluxes 
being equal, 


_Tev.permin. _ Erp 
syn. Deak 
td) a 
eRe 
ODD 
OFD: 


*For sinusoidal space distribution of flux. 
Si Xo. 
Se K 


tAs will be shown later, O D = TH Also, as shown below, 


ard 


DK Se =tarq = M Try and DK = M T— 
Kp SeKp 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1763 


This expression equals secondary efficiency, as will be evident 
from the following: 


Secondary input = Hip X te 
Secondary copper loss = (Ey, — Ey») t2 


Ey X t2 — (Ein — Exp) te 
Et, X 12 


Secondary efficiency 


Eee 


IV. SINGLE-PHASE PERFORMANCE—NOo-LOAD ROTOR 


CURRENTS 


Suppose, now, that with the motor running at synchronous 
speed, phase A (Fig. 8) be disconnected from the line. The flux 
¢_ and the two e.m.fs. due to it (E» and Eq) willdisappear. The 
two remaining e.m.fs., E,, in circuit B and E,, in circuit A, will 
then be left unopposed, so that currents will begin to flow in 
both circuits. It is especially important at this point to note 
the actions which take place in circuit A. Circuit A surrounds 
the magnetic path from which, at the instant we are considering, 
the flux of phase A has disappeared. Until the actions about to 
be described have been completed, no flux traverses this path. 

The e.m.f. E;q will act, therefore, just as an original impressed 
voltage. A current will flow; a flux, usually called the “ cross 
flux,’ will appear, and an e.m.f. will be induced. The phase 
relation of this induced e.m.f. (E12) will be approximate but not 
exact opposition to the impressed e.m.f. (E,«), as shown in Fig. 
6, which is the ordinary vector diagram of flux e.m.f. and current 
relations in a simple inductive circuit. 

The cross flux occupies the magnetic circuit of phase A and it 
is therefore cut by the rotation of the B conductors. Conse- 
quently, with the appearance of the cross flux, a rotational e.m.f. 
appears again in circuit B, and the phase relation of this rota- 
tional e.m.f. (E,») to the opposing transformer e.m.f. (Ei2) is 
such as to leave an effective or unopposed e.m.f. in the circuit 
so that a current will flow. 

It will now be shown that at synchronous speed the value 
and phase relation of the effective e.m.f. in circuit B is such 
as ot make the current exactly equal and at right angles to the 


1764 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


magnetizing current in circuit A. At synchronous speed, 
transformer and rotational e.m.fs. due to the same flux must be 
equal and in phase quadrature. The main flux induces in circuit 
B the transformer e.m.f. E,», represented by the line O D (Fig. 
7), and generates in circuit A the rotational e.m.f. Era represented 
by the lineOC. Therefore, O D must equal OC and COD must 
be a right angle. For similar reasons the lines O K and OG, 
representing e.m.fs. due to the cross flux, must also be equal and 
atright angles. Therefore, the angle D O K equals the angle COG 
and consequently the triangles DO K and COG are equal. 
From the above it is evident that D K, which represents the 
resistance drop in circuit B, is equal and at right angles to GC, 


ip 


da $y 


Fic. 6—REPRESENTS CONDITIONS AT THE INSTANT WHEN Fryg IS AT 
THE POSITIVE MAxIMuM. 


All other figures represent conditions, } cycle later, when the impressed e.m.f. in phase 
B is at the positive maximum. 


which represents the resi8tance drop in circuit A. Therefore the 
currents also must be equal and at right angles. These no-load 
rotor currents will be designated 74 and 7, respectively. 

The cross-field magnetizing current i, cannot react directly 
on the primary, since circuit A in which it flows is not in inductive 
relation with the active primary winding. The current is, 
however, which flows in circuit B—the working circuit of the 
rotor—reacts on the primary in the same manner as the working 
current, and as a result of its demagnetizing action, an additional 
no-load current im,—represented by the line M S, Fig. 8—flows 
in the primary winding. At a speed slightly above synchronism, 
as will be shown below, the current 7, becomes wattless and is 


ae 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1765 


represented by theline MV. The length of the line M V, which 
we shall now proceed to determine, is the first of the three 
problems enumerated in the opening paragraph. 

The lines O Sand M 8, Fig.8, represent the primary and second- 
ary currents when the motor is running at synchronous speed. 
The linesO W, EW, OY and DY represent, as heretofore, the 
hypothetical e.m.fs. corresponding to the primary and secondary 
currents. As in Fig. 7, which, it will be noted, is reproduced as 
a part of Fig. 8, D O represents Ey», the resultant or effective 
transformer e.m.f. in circuit B; O C at right angles to D O repre- 
sents the resultant main flux and also the rotational e.m.f. in 


Fic. 7—REPRESENTS CONDITIONS AT THE INSTANT WHEN THE IMPRESSED 
E.M.F. IS AT THE POSITIVE MAXIMUM. 


circuit 4; CG represents the resistance drop in circuit A due 
to the current i,; O G represents the transformer e.m.f. in circuit 
A: O K,at right angles to O G, represents the cross flux and the 
rotational e.m.f. in circuit B; while D K, the vector sum of Ets 
and E,», represents the unopposed e.m.f. which produces the 
current 71>. 

Since the rotational e.m.fs. vary with the speed, it is evident 
that at slightly above synchronism the value of E,» will be 
increased to such an extent as to bring D K into exact phase with 
OM. At this speed, as was stated above, ime will be represented 
by M V. The primary current will then be wattless and the rotor 
copper loss will be supplied mechanically. 


1766 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS . [June 28 


This condition is represented by Fig. 9. At the speed at 
which the current im, becomes wattless, that is, when the angle 
OD K is aright angle, the cross flux is equal to the main flux, as 
will now be demonstrated. 

Inasmuch as K O Gand D O C are right angles, it is evident 
that the angles D O K and G O C must be equal, and sinceO DK 
and OG C* are right angles by construction, 


cos 9 = —— sh 
OKO C 
Therefore 
OD As OK. En _ En 
G OG Jah x Toes 
and since 
rev. permin. Era _ Erp 
syn. RW RE OF. 
it follows that 
E Erin Lek Le (Eys)? 
Se Vii Era 
and 
(Era)? a (E,»)? 
Era — Evs 
Therefore 


Pe re Pa 


Further, since the triangles O G C and O D K have been shown 
to have a side and two angles equal and are therefore equal in 
all parts, it follows that the side G C, which represents the drop 
in circuit A, is equal to D K, which represents the drop in circuit 
B, and consequently the currents ig and 7, which cause the drops 
are equal. 

It has now been shown that at the speed at which the current 
tm coincides with MV, the cross flux equals the main flux and 


*The assumption that O G Cisa mont angle neglects the effect of the 
cross-field iron loss, which reacts on circuit A just as the main field iron 
loss reacts on the primary. Actually the angle OG C is slightly larger 
than aright angle. This fact does not, however, detract from the practical 
accuracy of the conclusions reached in regard to the value of the current 
tms- 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1767 


the current in circuit B equals the current in circuit A. For this 
speed the physical conditions which determine the value of 
ims May be stated as follows: 
The current 1m, 1s the increase of primary current due to the 
demagnetizing action of 14; 1» equals i; the value of ia is fixed 


— 


IMPRESSED E,M.F, 


i) 
=) 
A. 


Fic. 8—SyYNCHRONOUS SPEED. 


by the fact that it is the magnetizing current which produces the 
cross flux; the cross flux equals the resultant rotor main flux. 
Briefly, we have to determine the demagnetizing effect on the 
primary of a rotor current of such a value as to produce in the 
rotor core a flux equal to the resultant main flux in the rotor. 


1768 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


From the hypothetical e.m.f. vectors, Fig. 9, corresponding to 
the currents i and 7», we find that the effective e.m.f. in the rotor 
P M1, 


Ey, = P Ms eoKe 


The rotor magnetizing current required to produce the flux by 
which the above e.m.f. is induced, 


CONSTANTS 

E = 100 

= im=1.8 

Ww Kp = 8 

Ky, = 8 

X;= 20 

JD&P K X= 20 
1 <= 10 

y = 0 

OY =PMi 


Fic. 9—Tuis FIGURE SHOWS CONDITIONS Al THE SPEED, ABOVE SYN- 
CHRONISM, AT WHICH THE PRIMARY CURRENT IS WATTLESS 


~ (pmi—? ass) ye Ks 


K PM (equation 6) 
=Ki-— ty 
and since 7, and 7, are equal, 


K,. 


2 4 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1769 


It has been shown above that the increase of current in the 
primary due to the demagnetizing effect of a secondary current, 
equals the secondary current multiplied by K,. 


Therefore, 
y Kit hoe 
Ins = 2 4 
Se ee 
oF 2 Cs + tne) 
: — Be Be). Be Ke , 
Se ae 2 
Ims  ( 9 Xsoex) 
a. ' K,K, 
Po = OK Ki, 
a - Ky Ky 
MV m0 MAE te 
1 in 
= OM Ke 
1 =f Um Xj 
E 


It is interesting to note that the value of MV is independent 
of the secondary resistance. . 


* When this equation is used in practical work, it is necessary to take 
account of the fact that ims is affected less by saturation than im, owing 
to the low density of the cross flux in the primary core. 


total ampere turns : 
Z - for main field, 


ampere turns for air gap 


IfSFM= 


total ampere turns 
E for cross field, 


and S FC 


Il 


ampere turns for air gap 


the complete working formula for M V becomes 


| _ ink 
MV =OMxX see dekh 
1p ink SFM 


E 


1770 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


V. SINGLE-PHASE CURRENT Locus 
Neglecting the effect of primary resistance, the current locus 
of a single-phase induction motor is represented by a circle 
passing through V, LZ and H, Fig. 10. That the current locus 
passes through V and L is obvious, but that it is a true circle 
and also passes through H, requires demonstration. 


Hw wt 


Fic. 10 


In constructing Fig. 10, O Mand OH are made equal, asin 
the previous figure, to 7, and E/X, respectively, and 


From any point 7 on a circle passing through V and L, draw 
OT and M T to represent the primary and secondary currents, 
and lay off, as in preceding figures, the lines to represent the 
corresponding hypothetical e.m.fs. 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 177] 


At the outset it should be noted that the triangles F D O and 
M T H are similar, each line of FD O being equal to the corres- 
ponding line of M TH multiplied by the expression 


Si Xe 
Se 
jn which 
Si : 
Ke = secondary amperes per inch, and 


S. = volts per inch. 
Considering first the lines F D and M T, 
FDS, => 1g Xe and 


MeTe Ss oS tr Kp 


fo ay Xe 
MTS, x Ke => ae eke 
— 19 Xo 
Therefore, 
X» 
FD SES M hs ro GA 
and 
S Sr As 
FD= MT ck. , as stated above. 


Taking next the lines FO and M H, 


FOSS; = 2.4.4,2,,and 


E ‘ 
MHS, = (O84 - OM) 51 =~ — tm 


*From the similarity of the triangles OWE, O YF and OTM 


F O represents P Mi X OT’ which equals P M tm. 


/ 


1772 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


Substituting for X, and Xz the expressions 


(1— Kp K) PM. 7 = Ks Ko) PM 


respectively, 
K, K, p y 


we obtain 


As _PMin—K,yK, P M%m 
EE a Sap er Oe A ok 
Substituting | 
Ne tan 
ia for E, 
Xe _ PM in — PM in + Kp K.P M 
MH 8S, eae Ra Kc 
= PM tn 
Therefore, 
FOS,=MHS a 
i aaa 1 j= 
and 
is Si Xe 
FO=MH Saks as stated. 


The above results show that, in length, F D is to MTas FO 
is to MH, and since F D is at right angles to M T, and FO is 
at right angles to M H, the triangles M TH and FDO are 
similar. 

Therefore, the line D O is at right angles to T H and equals 


Si Xe 
THe 


In a similar manner it may be shown that O P is proportional 
to VH and equals 


Si Xe 


VH Sra 


Directing attention now to the e.m.f. and flux vectors, DO 
represents, as in preceding figures, the resultant induced e.m.f. 
in the rotor; O B, at right angles to D O, represents the resultant 
main rotor flux $y; O C, asection of O B, represents the rotational 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1773 


e.m.f. in circuit A, while C G and OG represent respectively the 
resistance drop and the induced e.m.f. in circuit A. OA, at 
right angles to O G, represents the cross flux, while E,», the rota- 
tional e.m.f. in circuit B, is represented by O K, a section of 
OA. 

It will be noted that £,, and the resistance drop D K are not 
in phase as they were in Fig. 5. This is one of the main distinctive 
features of the single-phase induction motor. It is due to the fact 
that the secondary current M T has a component M Q which is 
90 deg. out of phase with Ez), or, in other words, parallel to T H. 
The existence of this wattless component in the secondary current 
is the cause of the difference between the two-phase and the 
single-phase current locus. 

At a speed slightly above synchronism, as was shown on a 
preceding page, the secondary current in circuit B is wattless 
and MT coincides with MV. At lower speeds the wattless 
component of the secondary current is represented by M Q. 

The copper drops, due to the two components of the secondary 
current, are 


D MSi-= T O= 


and 


KS, 


T 
5 
c 
| 
| 


in which S,/K, = secondary amperes per inch. 
The angle DOA equals the angle G O B, which is constant, 
and since O J K is a right angle by construction, 


ES ONC I ERY A 


At the speed at which MT and NT coincide with M V, the 
line OJ coincides with OP. See Fig. 9.* Consequently, 


*In Fig. 9, J coincides with D because OD K is a right angle. D 
coincides with P because F D, which represents the secondary reactance 
drop, being proportional and at right angles to MT, must coincide with 
FP when MT coincides with MV. Therefore O J coincides with O P. 


BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


1774 
NT : Nis MV re xox 
on 
ieee gD Dal 
Since 
OD = TH OP VHS ae and D J=NMz a 


we obtain by substitution, 


S fig 9 4 
NT=MV SeK» SeKp 
Vos 
So K> 
To 
ony erin _ NM 
9 VH 


Fic. 11 


To simplify the analytical equations which follow, lete = N T, 
d=MV, R=TH,b=NM,c= VH, D= MH 4nd K = 


r2/Xe 
» ago 
; c 
R=e5+Kb (9) AE = cos @ (Fig. 11) (10) 
7. = sin 8, and b = D sin 8, alsoe = D cos 0 — R. 


*The analytical demonstration which follows is due to Mr. Harold 
W. Brown. 


1912) © BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 


CO 
Substituting in equation (9) we obtain 
R= (D cos @— R)-— + K Dsin 8 
R+R-—=Dcos0—+K Dsin0 
D 
R(i+>-1 =c% cos 6+ K Dsin 6 
D D 
Ra =¢ cos 8 + K D sin 6 
R =c cos 9 + Kd sin 0 (11) 


Let @ be an angle whose tangent = Kd/c, and M the denomi- 
nator of a fraction such that sin @ = Kd/M. 


Then 
Kd 
Emel? Es 8 
ey arignids | 2s Md 
C 
Dividing equation (11) by M we obtain 
R c Kd . 
Sr Jae cos 8 + —F sin 6 
= cos @ cos 8 + sin @ sin 8 
= cos (0 — ¢) 
R = M cos (6 — 6) (12) 


Since R is proportional to the cosine of a variable angle, the 
curve on which the point T (Fig. 10) lies must be a circle passing 


through the origin H. (See Cor. 2, Prop. 39, Nichols, ‘‘Analytic 
Geom”’., ed. 1893.)* 


*Inasmuch as the circle passes through three known points, V, L 
and H, an expression for the elevation of the center above the base line 


is not essential. It is easily shown, however, that the elevation of the 
center above the line O H is equal to 


0.5 MV — 
; X, 
From an inspection of Fig. 11, it is evident that the center is above O H 
a distance equal to the diameter X 0.5 sin @, and also that when R 
coincides with the diameter, 8 is equal tog. Equation (12) above shows 
that when 0 equals @, M is equal to R, and therefore to the diameter. 
It foliows that: 
Diameter X 0.5sin@ = M0.5sing@ 
= '0.5/Kd 


2 


Xe 


=0.5MV 


1776 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 : 


VI. REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE 
Attention has already been called to the fact that at synchro- 
nous speed, the rotational and transformer e.m.fs. due to the same 
flux are equal. That is, 


Eye - | OFS 
and 
Bes = Eta 
(See Fig. 8). 
At any speed below synchronous, 
rotational e.m.f. | rev. per min. 


transformer e.m.f. synchronous speed 


Therefore, i 
Ey. _ rev. permin. 
Ba is syn. 

and 
E,y. ~ rev..per min. 
ee, ph 


Substituting for the e.m.f. symbols, the e.m.f. vectors of Fig. 
10, we have 


OC _ rev. permin. 


OD “syn. 
and 
OK _ rev. per min, 
OG x syn. 
from which we obtain 
rev. per min. _ OC y, OK 
syn. ie OD OG 
iW OK OC 
OD OG 
Since 
OK = V(OD—DJ)*+ (JK)? 
we obtain . 


rev. per min. _ / VOD 2D) IPR Ree 
syn. OD web 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1777 


Since < 
OFC) es 
Gand 
_ V(OD—-D J)? + (JK)? 
OD—DJI 
we obtain 


rev.permin. _ 4/V(OD—D J+ (JK)? V(OD=D JP +(SK)* 
syn. OD OD—-DJ 


_/ OD=DIR+ IE 
OD(OD—DJ) 


It was shown above that 


4 S; Xe 
OD = T Gk. 
ae Si T2 
DJ = Rs 
and 
at Si To 
JK=WN ese 
Substituting, we obtain 
ras\a re 
rev. per min. _ (rH Nz) +(NT a 
ats 2 4 ri(rH- NM) 
Xe 


If NT X r2/X2, which represents the resistance drop due to 
the wattless component of the secondary current, be treated as 
negligible, this expression reduces to 


Ta uw 
rev. per min. = x 
syn. \ TH 


which usually gives the speed with sufficient accuracy for practi- 
cal purposes. . 


*It is assumed here that O G C isa right angle. As was shown above, 
the effect of cross-field iron loss makes the angle O G C slightly larger than 
aright angle. The effect on the speed is too small, however, for practical 
consideration. 


1778 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


VII. EFFECT OF PRIMARY RESISTANCE 

In developing the formulas and graphical processes, used 
in the construction of Fig. 10, the effect of primary resistance 
has in all cases been neglected. In other words, the induced 
e.m.f., O E, has been assumed to be equal to the impressed e.m_f. 
and constant. The advantage gained by constructing the dia- 
gram on this basis is that it gives the diameters of the semi- 
circles, FO and M H, as well as the lines OM, M Vand FP,a 
constant length. The fact that these lines are of constant length, 
so that the points M, H, etc. are fixed, renders possible the use 
of a number of processes, among them the rev. per min. formulas, 

developed above, which would otherwise be incorrect. 

' No error or inconvenience results from this method of con- 
struction, since the effect of primary resistance can be taken 


Z, CONSTANTS 


Fic. 12—WorKING DIAGRAM. 


account of, with all necessary precision, in a very simple manner, 
as has been shown by De Latour and other writers. 

We extend the primary current vector OT, Fig. 12, to Z, 
making O Z of such a length as to represent the resistance drop 
due to the current represented by OT. The vector sum Z E 
represents the impressed e.m.f. which would be required in order 
to make the induced e.m.f. equal to O E, and therefore 


OE a induced e.m.f. 
VBS impressed e.m.f. 


Correct current values are obtained from the diagram by 
multiplying each current vector by the corresponding value of 
O E/ZAE 
OF 


; Lae Soe 
primary curren CAP Sree ZE 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1779 
and 
secondary current = M TS, X > > 
Also, in determining the secondary input, the fact should be 


borne in mind that the e.m.f. impressed on the secondary is equal 
to the e.m.f. induced in the primary, multiplied by K >, that is, 


OF 
EX ase GIT 
and therefore 
2 ey OE OE 
secondary input = TR K, x FE 5 Ge 3) or TE Ki 


I 


OE \? 
pees ($=) 
The value of O E/Z E must, of course, be separately deter- 
mined for each value of the current vector O T. 


VIII. WorkinG DIAGRAM 
Fig. 12 shows a practical working diagram, based on the 
analysis of flux, e.m.f. and current relations represented in Fig. 
10. If the greatest possible degree of accuracy be, desired, the 
following data, in addition to the line voltage E, are required for 
its construction. 


Ia Main feld magnetizineicurrents ..o.)i.%..4.+..: On 
Den PYimMaryeleakave cOCiicient.. si. - pou ger coe he ene Fes 
o. secondary leakage coefficient... ....27.......... K; 
4. Reactance (total reduced to primary)........... sas (fy 
5. Reactance (total reduced to secondary)......... Xe 
ye pS ACES he ease in Gane are ara ry 
7. Secondary resistance (reduced to primary)...... fe 
Se TOnmosstatie COrmaim Meld ube cs s.r ne os oes jes 
Meeinon loss title LO-CrOSss MOI ee he ke ees Pe 
Oe hrieiion and windave loss. sy cere ee P; 


In practical work, however, it is not necessary to distinguish 
between the values of K, and K,. The product 
Ew, € 

E 


RR ae fo 


1780 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


and sufficient accuracy will be obtained by assuming that either 
K, or K, is equal to 


Vee 


If K, and K, are equal, it follows from the formulas previously 
developed that X,is equal to X». Only one calculation, therefore, 
is required for reactance. Also, it is not usually necessary to 
calculate separately the iron loss due to the main and cross fields. 
It will be sufficiently accurate to make the calculation of the 
total iron loss just as in the case of the two-phase motor and 
assign one-half to the main field and the same, or a slightly 
smaller value, to the cross field. 

The quantities, therefore, which it is necessary to determine by 
previous calculation are 


1. Main field magnetizing current...............-. 1m 
2». Reactance (totals). ac iaaen eae Aubbete-tel cei xX 
3.. Primary resistance vs. ner ate-t cnee e ae ry 
4. Secondary resistance... 20005 a0 spe wee we ro 
5. Iron loss (totalamaif.cjvea mie. «bd dom <2 =e P; 
64 Friction and -windage loss 4 1.30 <tep ye se ae 2} Py 
Let 

S, = primary amperes per inch 

Re) : 
SS. = Fe = secondary amperes per inch 
Pp 
S, = volts per inch, for the impressed e.m.f. (O £), 


and resistance drop (OZ). 


In reconstructing the diagram, 


O itr ea 
Otis a 
Mavs im 
Oma 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1781 


After the above lines have been drawn the larger semicircle 
should be constructed on M Has a diameter. The locked point 
L may then be located by making 


nde sf 
LH=MH Wit 
the factor L H/M H being obtained from the curve Fig. 13. 
When the location of L has been determined, the smaller circle 
may be drawn through V, Z and H. 
The next step is to select a point T for calculation and draw 
the line O Z of a length equal to 


OTS; 1 
Se 


(inte O lp, ONeaL EL 


Fic. 13—Curve ror LocatTinc Lockep Point (L) 
LH/M H is the sine of the angle of which r2/X is the tangent. 


In calculating the performance for various values of the pri- 
mary current, it will be convenient to use a data sheet similar to 
the one shown herewith. The measurements taken from the 
diagram are the lengths of the lines OT, MT, N M, Net iwi, 
and TR, which constitute the first six items on the data sheet, 
and the length Z E from which (O E being previously known) 
the ratio of primary induced e.m.f. to impressed e.m.f. may be 
obtained. This constitutes item No. 7 of the data sheet. When 
these values for a szlected load point have been recorded, the 
calculation may be completed without further reference to the 
diagram. The various formulas required are given on the data 
sheet. . 

The motor input is equal to the sum of the primary copper 
loss, the main field iron loss and the secondary input. 


1782 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


The losses fall into two classes: 

1. Losses supplied directly by the primera 

2. Losses supplied from the secondary input. 
The losses supplied directly by the primary are 

1. Primary copper loss. 

2. Main field iron loss. 


H.P. V 
dims — Ys 
“Kp fr r 


[MN "7% | @x 
NT '%x @ «x %%X 
TH-MN"™K| @)—@® 
P.M. cE eed 
PRIM. AMPS. oF 8 ; 


SEC. AMPS, 


SEC. C-LOSS A 


SEC. C-LOSS B < 
FE..LOSS CROSS PREVIOUSLY FOUND 


F. & W. LOSS 


FE.- LOSS MAIN 
PRIM, CU-LOSS 


SEC. INPUT 


INPUT 


TOTAL LOSSES 


TORQUE (0Z-FT,) 
leFFICIENCY 


DATA SHEET 


The losses supplied from the secondary input are 
1. Secondary copper loss in circuit A. 
2. Secondary copper loss in circuit B. 
3. Iron loss due to the cross field. 
4. Friction and windage loss. . 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 1783 


At synchronous speed the secondary copper loss in circuit 
A is equal to 


2 
(MV X Ss)? tr (33) 


At lower speeds the value becomes 


; 2 
(MV X Ss)? rs ( OE ye TeV. per min. ) 
LE syn. 


The derivation of the other formulas on the data sheet will 
be evident. 

The maximum torque is obtained when the end of the current 
vector is slightly beyond the center of the arc V L. The effective 
maximum torque, as determined by a brake test, is usually 
about 92 per cent of the calculated value. 


IX. STARTING TORQUE—SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTOR 
WITH AUXILIARY STARTING WINDING 

Neglecting the effect of friction, the starting torque of a two- 

phase induction motor in ounces at one-foot radius is equal to 


‘Db SOR rn 
syn. 


in which P, is the secondary input from one phase. 

The starting conditions of a single-phase induction motor 
equipped with an auxiliary starting winding differ from those of. 
a two-phase induction motor in two respects. 

1. The secondary flux ¢, due to the starting winding is not 
“necessarily equal to the secondary flux @, due to the main wind- 
ing. Other conditions remaining the same, the starting torque 
will vary with $./». 

2. The phase angle 0 between ¢, and ¢z is less than 90 deg. 
Other conditions remaining the same, the starting torque will 
vary as the sine of 0. 

Therefore the expression for starting torque ofa single-phase 
induction motor is 


DIOP x OX sin 8 
syn. X do 


1784 BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


Fig. 14 represents the secondary flux and the currents and 
induced and impressed e.m.fs. of the main winding, and, to a 
different scale, the same quantities of the starting winding. 

If S; = amperes per inch for main winding, 
then S: X X,,/X. = amperes per inch for the starting winding, 
since the same line O H represents E/X» and E/X,. 

The two secondary fluxes ¢, and ¢» are represented by the 
same line O B, while the e.m.f. impressed on the main winding 
isrepresented by O Z,, and the e.m.f. impressed on the starting 
winding by OZ,. Actually, of course, the impressed e.m.f. 
is identical in the two cases, both in amount and in phase, and 
there is a phase displacement equal to 0 between ¢, and @». 

When the working diagram, Fig. 12, has been constructed for 


“s 


Fic. 14 


the determination of running performance, it is only necessary 
to add the lines O Z, and O Z,* to obtain the values which enter 
into the starting torque formula. 

As was shown previously, 


ehekse LAH Ss Vax (65) 


*F Zs is parallel to O L and equal to 


OL XSi X rs X Xm 
Se X Xs 


OLXSXn 


EZ = $ 
é 


1912] 


Therefore 


Also, 


and 


starting torque = 225.4 X 


BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS 


Xx. =— OLE 
ee m / : HES 
Pa% Lid Se ae aaa 
@ = the angle Z,.0Z, 


Pn = 


LR X Si x ( 


x 


OF 


oz) 


Substituting these expressions in the starting torque formula 
given above, we obtain 


syn. 


On 


LERixXSixk 


OZ,X OZ, 


E 


) 


1785 


x VS" x sin 8} 


The effective starting torque is usually about 92 per cent of 


the calculated value. 


X. COMPARISON OF CALCULATED AND TEST RESULTS 


The results tabulated below were obtained in the course of 
regular commercial work on motors built to meet special require- 
ments. The reactances and magnetizing currents were calcu- 
lated by C. A. Adams’s formulas and the secondary resistances 
by DeLatour’s formula. 


Efficiency Power factor Max. torque* Starting torque* 
H.p 
Test | Calc. | Test | Calc. Test Calc. Test Calc. 
1 1 TSO || (Omar pal 68.8 | 144 141 not avjailable 
2 1/2 66.2 | 66.5 | 67.1 | 66.8 70 70 21 213 
63 1/2 70.4 | 71 T2260 TLe 49.5 51 not avjailable 
4 173 59.5 |:60.2 | 66.7.) 67.5 44.5 44.5 4 C 
5 1/12-) 51 48.6 | 62.6 | 64.2 8.1 7.9 e 3 
6 1/4 61.6 | 59.6 | 64.5 | 65.6 35 34 23 23.2 
7 1/6 66.5 | 57.7 | 72.5 | 75.5 17.25 17.2 16.25 16.6 
8 1/6 52 HL28 J 66. 3.) G50 4) 22.54 22.7 14 16.3 
9 1/10 63.5 65.6 16.6 16.4 12.25 12.55 
10 1/3 64.9 | 65.8 | 68.3 | 67 36.5 35.3 22),2 22.5 
11 1/4 61a | 6L S769 67.2 26 25.4 19 18.3 
12 1/12 | 49 46.8 | 58.2 | 62 13.25 11.6 9 9.5 


*Calculated values of maximum and starting torques, as given in the table, are the 
values obtained by the formulas multiplied by 0.92. 


NN 


+ In ounces at one-foot radius. 


1786 


BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 28 


The larger discrepancies between test and calculated values are 
due to errors in the calculation of the constants rather than to 
the diagram. As an illustration of this fact, the running 
performance of the 1/12-h.p. motor, which appears as the last 
item in the above list, was re-figured from test constants, with 
the results which follow: 


Efficiency Power factor Max. torque 
Horse power 
Test Cale. Test | Calc. Test Calc. 
[Sat ir 
1/12 49 48.7 58.2 | 59.5 13.25 13.3 
APPENDIX I—NOTATION 
E = impressed voltage. 
E., = transformer e.m.f. in circuit A. 
E,q = rotational e.m.f. in circuit A. 
E,, = transformer e.m.f. in circuit B 
E,, = rotational e.m.f. in circuit B. 
1 = primary current. 
im = Magnetizing current for main field. 
ims = secondary no-load current as reflected in primary. 
i, = primary current with rotor at rest, assuming 7; and fr 
= 0. 
12 = secondary current. 
ig, = secondary current with rotor at rest, assuming 7; and 72 
= 0. 
ia = cross-field magnetizing current in circuit A. 
4» = secondary no-load current in circuit B. 
P, = secondary input from phase B. 
P,» = secondary input from main winding. 
’, = primary resistance (main winding). 
Yis = primary resistance (starting winding). 
re = secondary resistance reduced to primary. 
X, = reactance (total reduced to primary). 
X_ = reactance (total reduced to secondary, but assuming a 
1 to 1 ratio). 
X = reactance (total, either X; or Xe, assuming X,= Xo). 
Xo = reactance with secondary open-circuited. 
Xn = 


reactance of the main winding (total reduced to pri- 
mary). 


a 


1912] BRANSON: INDUCTION MOTORS , 1787 


X, =reactance of the starting winding (total reduced to 
primary). 

od. = flux of phase A, or the cross flux of a single-phase 
motor (effective or resultant value in the rotor). 

os» = flux of phase B, or the main flux of a single-phase 
motor (effective or resultant value in the rotor). 

o@, = flux of starting winding (effective or resultant value 


in the rotor). 


permeance of the mutual path. 


ae permeance of mutual and primary leakage paths in parallel. 
oe permeance of the mutual path. 
permeance of mutual and secondary leakage paths in parallel. 
ere KOI 
M = coefficient of mutual induction. 
L, = coefficient of self induction of the primary. 
L. = coefficient of self induction of the secondary. 
P  +=2a X frequency. 
S: = primary current scale (amperes per inch). 
S, = secondary current scale (amperes per inch). 
S. = e.m.f. scale (volts per inch). 


AppENpDIx II]—Pius AND MINUS SIGNS 
All diagrams in this paper are constructed in accordance 


- with the following conventions: 
A flux entering the rotor from the top or left is assumed to be 


positive. 

A current which tends to produce a positive flux is assumed to 
be positive. Pes ok 

A voltage which tends to produce a positive x 
current is assumed to be positive. | 


- From these conventions it follows that: 

1. Ohmic drops are of opposite sign to the 
currents producing them. 

2. All voltage triangles of which two sides A 
are opposing induced e.m.fs. and the third ; 
side a resistance drop or an impressed voltage, must close with- 
out two arrows pointing toward any one angle. 

3. When duis positive, E,» is positive, but when ¢, is positive, 
Era is negative, for rotation as per sketch. 


% 


: s 
: i JAIL 4OETR Sy 


wtf, salt - re ait urpgarbs zig 
rrr Te yRoOS BY utrwoilo} ork yt Y 
roth aederr only ZAI NS 2H 

_ 


mgd shia! “LaktPsas 
WE: io 
vat thor ot choos dotiher agpd ct 
“yO Wg odo! Berttures Seon 
{Yai geruliod i Ruch nawston, ms 
“erat Star qo bee an equi: 


| 


. fakin, ows hist des 2 i 
| ets Pratt, pen bee ‘awa 
atitw % alo ye an Pyation, bee 


“Cord fu de - 


fsa ie 2 ae ne ie sete 


es mi mS 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


MOTOR STARTING CURRENTS AS AFFECTING 
LARGE TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 


BY P. M. LINCOLN 


From time to time those responsible for the operation of 
electrical systems have displayed a disposition to place a definite 
limit upon the size of motors which they will allow upon their 
circuits. Th’s tendency seems to be more pronounced 1n alter- 
nating-current than in direct-current systems, but is observable 
in both. Moreover, in alternating-current systems the tendency 
is not confined to central stations for city supply, but is spread- 
ing to the larger transmission systems that deal in wholesale 
power. 

So far as the writer has been able to analyze, the reasoning 
that has led to these restrictions is about as follows: 

1. A desire to avoid tying up too much load to a single piece 
of apparatus, thereby endangering a comparatively large in- 
come by the loss of a single motor. 

2. A fear that the starting currents and the fluctuations in 
the operating currents of relatively large motors will cause 
fluctuations in voltage. 

3. A fear, more or less undefined, that the cumulative effect 
of starting many large motors at nearly the same hour will 
cause so large a draft of current as to be beyond the ability of 
the generating plant to take care of it. : 

It may be of interest to analyze further these reasons and see _ 
just how much bearing they may have upon a typical large 
transmission system which presumably deals in wholesale power 
only. 

The writer recognizes the first of the above reasons as an 
entirely legitimate one. It is, no doubt, desirable to keep the 

1789 


1790 LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS (June 28 


power supply as much subdivided as possible, thereby avoiding 
the danger of a relatively large loss of revenue by crippling of a 
single motor. Its application, however, is wholly commercial 
in its nature. There are many cases where these same commer- 
cial considerations may make it desirable to advocate rather 
than deprecate the use of large motors, since on no other basis 
can some kinds of business be secured. Take for example an 
existing cotton mill or other industry that is already equipped 
with an engine connected to its load by shafting and belts. 
The most natural way of applying electric drive to such a 
case is simply to substitute one large motor in place of the 
engine. Commercial considerations will often demand that a 
given load be taken in this manner or not at all. This case is 
cited merely to indicate that commercial considerations are not, 
and of necessity cannot be, controlling in fixing the size of motors 
or in any ruling which looks toward the limitation of the size 
of motors which might be permitted on a given system. The 
size of the motor is simply a matter of expediency. Ifthe advan- 
tages of subdivision can be obtained along with electric drive 
well and good, but if circumstances forbid these advantages, also 
well and good. The decision as dictated by commercial consid- 
erations will be to take the business however it can be obtained, 
entirely independent of the size of the motor that may thereby 
be placed on the system. 

The second reason mentioned above, namely, the desire of 
avoiding voltage fluctuations, is also one that must be recognized 
as having a logical basis. However, this reason is one which 
appeals with much more force to the typical city supply system, 
whose main func ion is the supply of lighting, than to the large 
transmission system for the supply of wholesale power. In any 
event the logic of any ruling having this object in view demands 
not simply a limitation in the size of the motor but a considera- 
tion as well of other conditions that surround the installation 
of this motor. The point involved is simply the question of the 
voltage fluctuation which will be caused when a given motor is 
started or stopped or when its load fluctuates. The voltage 
fluctuation depends not only upon the size of the motor, but also, 
among other things, upon the size and regulation of the trans- 


formers supplying the motor and upon the size, voltage and _ 


length of the transmission line connecting it with the source of 
power. A logical restriction which has for its object the elimina- 
tion of voltage fluctuation, should depend even more upon these 


eee 


1912] LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS 1791 


other features than upon the size of the motor. A five-h.p. 
motor, for instance, supplied along with some lighting customers, 
by a three-kw. transformer at the end of a comparatively long 
and low-voltage transmission might be more of a menace to 
lighting in its neighborhood than a 100-h.p. motor close to the 
power station and supplied by large-capacity, high-voltage 
transmission lines and good regulating transformers. 

Any restriction which has as its basis the elimination of volt- 
age fluctuation is, as indicated above, much more applicable 
to a central city supply station than to a large transmission 
system dealing in wholesale power. It is highly important for 
the city supply station to maintain voltage as steady as possible, 
since a large part of its revenue is derived from the supply of 
lights. With the transmission system supplying wholesale power, 
however, the conditions are far different, the revenue from 
lighting being a very small proportion of its total revenue. The 
responsibility for voltage fluctuations at customer’s premises is, 
therefore, by no means as heavy as it is with the city supply 
system. 

In general there are two effects that must be borne in mind 
when considering the question of voltage fluctuations that may 
be caused by the presence of motors, and these two considerations 
hold whether the primary object of the circuit in question is the 
supply of lighting or the supply of wholesale power. These two 
effects are: first, the transient fluctuation of voltage due to 
starting current or to a change in running current, and second, 
the permanent voltage which is due to the permanent assump- 

“tion or rejection of load by these motors. In dealing with the 
wholesale supply lines much of the first-mentioned variety of 
voltage fluctuation may be forgiven, since it is confined to a few 
relatively short and predetermined periods of the day, namely, 
the regular morning, noon and evening starting and quitting 
hours of the mills and factories that are supplied with power. 
This is particularly true since the customers who make use of 
wholesale power supplies directly for lighting, invariably recog- 
nize that they are applying it to a use not primarily intended 
and are willing to make allowances therefore. It is sometimes 
necessary to take some special means to care for the permanent 
voltage change where the power circuits are used directly for 
lighting, since the difference in voltage between loaded and 
unloaded line may reach such a value as to be destructive to the 
lamps. However, where the typical individual mill draws a 


1792 LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS [June 28 


starting current from the line that is less than the running cur- 
rent (as will be shown later in this discussion), it is evident that 
the question of motor starting current and transient voltage 
fluctuation caused thereby is of secondary importance. 

The third cause for contemplating the limitation of the size 
of motors mentioned in the opening paragraph, namely, the fear 
that the draft of starting current of many motors starting about 
the same time may be beyond the capacity of the power plant, 
is the question whose investigation has led to the preparation 
of this paper. The conditions which led up to this investiga- 
tion are, briefly, as follows: 

A certain large transmission system operating in the south 
at one time in the course of its growth experienced considerable 
difficulty in picking up its load at the time of the usual morning 
start of the mills. In this case, as is usual with southern trans- 
mission systems, most of the load consisted of cotton mills, 
which started up nearly the same hour of the morning all over 
the system. From certain effects noted it seemed that the start- 
ing currents taken by the motors at these periods were the cause 
of the failure to pick up the load and it was largely this consider- 
ation that led this particular system to consider a restriction 
in the size of the motors which might be allowed upon its circuits. 
This attitude led in turn to taking up for systematic investiga- 
tion the general question of starting conditions which might 
actually be found in the mills that were taking power from this 
company’s lines. An investigation of this character was, there- 
fore, undertaken. 

The method of making this investigation was extremely simple. 
Graphic recording meters were placed in the supply circuits of 
the mill under test. Meters showing the draft of both current 
and kilowatts were used in each case, so that both the kilovolt- 
amperes and the kilowatts of the mill could be secured. The 
effect during starting periods of the mill could thereby be readily 
observed and record thereof made. Nine typical mills were 
selected and tests of this character made upon each of them. 
A number of starts, both morning and noon, were made, in order 
to avoid the possibility of observing some condition which was 
not entirely typical. ; 

A summary of the results which were obtained upon these nine 
mills by these tests is contained in the following table. 

In addition to this summary, some of the more representative 
records made by the graphic meters are reproduced herewith. 


———— OO 


1912) LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS 1793 


{ 
| Total Capacity | Percentage | Excess of demand 
| capacity of largest of total in starting period 
| Mill | Number | of motors ‘| Type of | motor in | capacity in | over running period 
| No. | of motors | in h.p. motors h.p. a ——————— 
| motors | In kv-a. In kw. 
| Wound | | 
1 37- 981 secondary 100 10.2 None | None 
| Wound 
2y 4 257 | 2440 secondary 125 5.0 None None 
| | Squirrel | 
3 31 1284 cage 150 hea, | None None 
Squirrel | | 
ca 37 3055 cage 150 4.9 | None None 
| Squirrel 
5] 24 457 cage 35 Cert None None 
| | Wound | | | 
Pe. ht ee 2626 secondary| 175 6.7 | None | None 
| Squirrel | | 
Went Bee |. 480 cage 75 50.0 25% 25% 
| Wound | 
By 12 | 1125 secondary 175 15.5 | None | None 
Squirrel | | 
9 3 300 cage | 200 66.7 50% None 


It was recognized that in obtaining records of the starting 
conditions there was a possibility of error owing to the time lag 
of the graphic meters behind the actual current and kilowatt 
conditions which produced the meter indications. This matter 
was given careful attention in the taking of these particular 
records. The speed of the pen was adjustable in the graphic 
meters used, and this speed was so fixed that on the one hand the 
pen did not move so fast as to overshoot the amperes per kilo- 
watt it was endeavoring to follow and on the other hand it had 
sufficient speed so as not to have too great a discrepancy between 
actual amperes or kilowatts and the position of the pen at the 
same time. The range of adjustment was such as to allow 
a speed of pen which would travel over the entire range in less 
than five seconds. Since the process of starting a large motor 
is one which always requires a period several times as long as 
this, and further since the travel of the pen is never but a fraction 
of the entire scales we may rest assured that the graphic meter 
indications which are shown here give a reasonably accurate 
indication of the starting conditions which we are observing. 

Figs. 1 a and 1 8 show, for instance, the starting conditions 
in a cotton mill, equipped with total of 1284 h.p. in motors. 
This is the mill given as No. 3 in the foregoing summary. In 
this mill there are two motors of 150 h.p. each and three of 100 


1794 LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS [June 28 


h.p. each. All motors in this particular mill are of the squirrel 
cage type. An inspection of the records reproduced in Figs. 
1 a and 1 B shows at once that the maximum demand during 


Fic. 14 


the starting period as compared to the demand during the 
running period is less than 70 per cent in kilovolt-amperes and 
about 50 per cent in kilowatts. - 


Fic. 13 


Figs. 2 a and 2 8 show the conditions in another mill, No. 
8 in the summary. Here the maximum demand during starting 
period is about 70 per cent of the running kilovolt-amperes and 


1912] LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS 1795 


about 62 per cent of the running kilowatts. The motors in this 
case are of the wound-rotor type instead of squirrel cage as in 
the preceding case. The result of this difference in type of 
motor is shown in the fact that the kilovolt-amperes and kilo- 
watts during the starting period come nearer together than is 
the case with the squirrel-cage motor. On the other hand a com- 


KV.-A, 
966 


Fic. 2a 


parison of the charts indicates that the kilowatts of the wound- 
rotor motor taken during the starting period are higher than for 
the squirrel-cage type. It is, of course, possible to obtain much 
more rapid acceleration with the wound-rotor type than with the 
squirrel-cage type, and this power placed in the hands of a mill 
operator who is in a hurry to get started in the morning may 


4 


KW, 
960 


Fic. 2B 


lead to drafts of current during the starting period that are 
considerably greater with the wound-rotor type than with the 
- squirrel-cage type. This is a fact which does not seem to have 
been properly appreciated by those who are using motors for 
mill purposes. 

Figs. 3.4 and 3.8 illustrate mill No. 6 in the foregoing 
summary. The capacity of the largest motor in this mill is 


1796 LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS [June 28 


the same as in No. 8 just described, but the total capacity of all 
motors is more than double that in mill No. 8. Although the 
actual kilovolt-amperes and kilowatts taken for starting a 
single motor are about the same they become a smaller propor- 
tion of the running conditions. 


Fic. 3A 


Figs. 4 a and 4B show by far the most severe condition of 
any that was found in these tests. This mill is No. 9 in the 
summary, and is provided with only two motors, one a 200-h.p. 
and the other 100-h.p., both of the squirrel-cage type. In this 
case, therefore, the largest motor amounts to two-thirds the 


KW. 
1200 


7AM. 6A.M 5 A.M 
Fic. 3B 


total motor capacity. However, even in this most severe case 
the kilovolt-amperes during the starting period exceed the run- 
ning kilovolt-amperes by only 50 per cent and the kilowatts dur- 
ing the starting period does not exceed the running kilowatts at 
all. If this mill had had a total of 500 h.p. instead of only 
300 h.p., the starting kilovolt-amperes would not have exceeded 


1912] LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS 1797 


the running kilovolt-amperes. We might note that if this mill had 
been increased to a total of 500 h.p., its total capacity would 
have been only about 20 per cent of mill No. 4 and only about 25 
per cent of mills No. 2 and No. 6. The foregoing records are 
typical of those for all of the other mills taken. On account 


KYV.-A. 
608 


of this similarity no further records are here reproduced. There 
are some conclusions which may readily be drawn from an inspec- 
tion of these records and the foregoing summary of the nine mills 
that were observed. 

In the first place it is evident that so longjas the largest motor 


KW. 
576 


388 


192 


Fic. 48 : 


in a mill is less than a certain percentage of the total capacity 
in motors, the power demanded for starting purposes will always 
be less than for running purposes and this will be true no matter 
whether the demand be measured in kilovolt-amperes or in kilo- 
watts. The evidence of the foregoing records indicates that the 
largest motor may be at least 25 per cent of the total capacity 


1798 LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS | {June 28 


in a given mill and still this relation will hold. Possibly the 
largest motor may be even higher than this percentage of the 
total, but 25 per cent is certainly a safe figure, judging by the 
actual records taken. 

It is further evident that so long as the current during the 
starting period is less than during the running period the draft 
of starting current cannot be a menace so far as ability to pick up 
load is concerned. A power plant that can pick up and carry 
the running current can also pick up and carry the starting 
current, provided this starting current is less than the running 
current. What is true of one mill is, of course, still more true 
when many of these mills are carried upon a given transmission 


KV.-A. 
8300 


Fic. 5 


system. The foregoing summary shows three mills that have 
total capacity of more than 2000 h.p., one of them exceeding 3000 
h.p. Twenty-five per cent of the total capacity of any one of 
these mills will mean a single motor having a capacity of 500 
to 750 h.p. Therefore, in any one of these mills a motor of 500 
h.p. could have been started and still the draft of current during 
running conditions would have been more than that during 
starting conditions. If the starting of a 500-h.p. motor can be 
accomplished in one mill without exceeding a safe limit, there 
is no reason why the same thing cannot be done in another 
independent of the total capacity. In other words, so far as 
picking up the load-is concerned, this particular system can 
certainly take care of single motors as large at least as 500 h.p. 


1912] LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS 1799 


The writer does not mean to say that he advocates motors of 
so large a size as this, since he believes that they are objection- 
able for other reasons, but so far as the ability to pick up the 
load is concerned there seems to be no doubt that motors of this 
size are entirely feasible. In fact, if necessary, the writer sees 
no reason why from this standpoint the size of the maximum 
motor cannot be increased considerably if such a step were ever 
found necessary. 

While the foregoing records were being taken on individual 
mills there were also similar instruments recording the output 
of one of the high-tension lines feeding this system. Fig. 5 is 
a typical record of one of these transmission lines at the power 
plant. This record was taken during a typical morning start. 
The shape and character of this record does not indicate any 
possibility of distress on account of current draft during starting 
period. 

A further consideration of these graphic records indicates almost 
to a certainty that it was not the motor starting currents that 
caused the failure to pick up load, but the high rate at which incre- 
ments of real kilowatt-load are assumed by the power during the 
starting period. The source of power in this case was water 
power, and it is well known that waterpower plants are by 
nature much more sluggish in their ability to assume incre- 
ments of real load than are steam plants. It seems very 
probable, therefore, that the cause of the inability to pick up 
load was due to the high rate of real kilowatt assumption, 
coupled, probably, with an unusually sluggish adjustment of 
governors. 

This probability seems all the more certain when we consider 
the method of starting up cotton mills. The method used in 
such mills is first to start all motors some five or 10 minutes 
before the blowing of the morning or noon whistle. However, 
the starting of the motors does not put into operation the looms 
and other mill machinery that these motors drive. Each motor 
drives a more or less extensive system of countershafting to 
which the individual looms and other machinery are connected 
by tight and loose pulleys. Therefore, until the starting whistle 
blows, each motor operates only a relatively short section of 
countershafting. As soon as the starting whistle blows, each 
operator starts his own group of machines as rapidly as possible 
and it is during this period that the real kilowatt load rises so 

-rapidly. An inspection of the accompanying graphic records 
clearly indicates the period at which the real load is thrown on. 


1800 LINCOLN: MOTOR-STARTING CURRENTS [June 28 


From the data that have been given herein, the writer believes 
that the following conclusion is entirely logical— 

That the only logical restriction in size of motor is one that 
will prevent it becoming more than 25 per cent of the capacity 
of the largest mill on the system. Such a restriction as this 
usually leads to so large a motor that no restriction whatever is 
necessary. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1801 


Discussion on “ THE SQUIRREL-CAGE INDUCTION GENERATOR” 
(Hopart AND KNowLton), 
“SINGLE-PHasE InpucTIoN Motors” (BRANSON) AND 
“Motor STartTING CurrENTS AS AFFECTING LARGE TRANS- 
= Systems” (Lincotn). Boston, Mass., JuNE 28, 


Lee Hagood: My remarks will be confined to the question 
of exciting current in connection with Mr. Hobart’s and Mr. 
Knowlton’s paper. As you will see from reading their paper, 
the matter of exciting currents bears very much on the question 
of air gaps. To some extent, the amount of exciting current 
required may appear to bea very great objection to these ma- 
chines. I wish to make the point that neither the design of 
the machine nor its application should be very much restricted 
on account of exciting current. 

On most commercial systems, the exciting current is already 
large, due to the transformers and induction motors. The 
former require from 4 per cent to 8 per cent of the actual current, 
and the latter from 40 per cent to 80 per cent. Exciting current 
is wattless and 90 deg. out of phase with the energy current. 
Its magnitude depends upon matters of design. It may be 
supplied to a system by either synchronous motors or synchron- 
ous generators, and the amount supplied by any given machine 
to a system depends upon the direct current applied to the field 
of the unit in question. In the circuits involved in its transmis- 
sion, it. produces two important effects, one being a voltage 
difference, and the other energy losses. The losses are mostly 
copper losses. 

The effect of exciting current on J?R losses can be seen from 
the following equation: 


per cent losses at unity power factor 
(power factor)? 


per cent losses = 


For example, if the losses in a transmission line were 8 per 
cent at unity power factor, they would be 16 per cent at 0.7 
power factor. 

The following equation represents approximately the voltage 
drop in a transmission, or feeder line: 

V =1.R+ IwX when Ip = I’'y—I,/2 

V is the voltage difference between a generating and receiving 
station: if the difference is a voltage drop, V must be taken as 
positive and if the difference is a rise V must be taken as negative; 
X and R represent the three-phase resistance and reactance be- 
tween the points under consideration; J. is the energy component 
of the current supplied the load; I’ is the wattless component 
of the transmission line current at the receiving end; and J;is 
the amount of wattless current required to charge the trans- 
mission line. 

This formula is based on the assumption that the voltage drop, 


1802 TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS [June 28 


due to the charging current, is equal to (I,/2) X, and that we can 
disregard a very small quantity which should appear in the 
equation, namely E, (1 — cos@), where Eg is the generating 
voltage and a is the phase relation between the generating and 
receiving voltage. 

Fig. 1 represents a synchronous generator and an induction 
generator in the same station supplying, in parallel, a non-in- - 
ductive load. The induction generator will require about 30 
per cent exciting current, or 800 wattless kv-a. This is sub- 
stantially independent of load, and must be supplied by a syn- 
chronous machine. In the case illustrated in Fig. 1, neither 
the losses nor the voltage are of consequence, due to the smallness 
of the exciting current and distance of its transmission. 


~ INDUCTION SYNCHRONOUS 
INDUCTICN SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR GENERATOR. 


GENERATOR GENERATOR ‘ ia 
2500 KV, A. 3840 KV. A. ~ 
2400 KW. J 8216 KW, 
2500 KV. A. 8100 KV. Aw .95 PF. ( .98 PF. 
2400 KW. 8000 KW. 
295P.F. +97 PLF. 
A — 5616 KW, 
5400 KW, 
| (5200 KV. A. 
5200 KW. 


LS 00 Bs 


5000 KV, A. 7126 KV, A. 

one Lye as 200 kwh mi 6000 KW. 
hy -04P.F. +70 P.F, 

1.00 P.Fa ( RF 


ce INDUCTIVE. 
NON-INDUCTIVE LOAD pa se nl LOAD 


Fic. 1 Fic. 2 


Fig. 2 is similar to Fig. 1, except that the load is inductive 
and asynchronous condenser is applied, of sufficient capacity to 
carry the maximum wattless component of the load. The value 
of 70 per cent power factor used is one that often obtains in prac- 
tise. The field of the synchronous condenser can be under auto- 
matic control by means of an automatic voltage regulator in 
such a manner that the power factor in the transmission line is 
corrected, and the voltage maintained constant across its bus- 
bars with a regulation of 2 per cent. Thus we can accomplish 
not only an excellent voltage regulation at a distribution center, 
but a saving in /?R losses and the full use of the kilovolt-amperes 
of the apparatus involved. In the case given in Fig. 2, it is 
assumed that the transmission losses at unity power factor are 


© a. 
\ 
’ : 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1803 


8 per cent. Without the synchronous condenser, the demand on 
the receiving and generating stations respectively would be 
7125 and 7625 kv-a., whereas with the synchronous condenser 
the demand is only 5200 and 5600 kv-a. To maintain this con- 
dition, a 60-cycle, 5000-kv-a. synchronous condenser would be 
suitable and would cost, with its switchboard and accessories, 
about $20,000.. This additional investment is quite small, 
when we appreciate that the total investment in an installation 
for delivery of power to any point over a transmission line is 
based principally on kilovolt-amperes, and is in the magnitude, 
in a great many cases, of $150 per kv-a. Inthe above, we have 
reduced the kilovolt-ampere demand by about 2000 kv-a.; the 
line losses have been reduced 8 per cent, and an excellent voltage 
regulation is accomplished. The losses in the synchronous con- 
denser are about 4 per cent, but the better power factor in the 
generators has reduced their losses about 2.5 per cent: hence a 
net economy in losses of 6.5 per cent, or 375 kw., is obtained. 

The smaller the constant voltage difference maintained be- 
tween the generating and receiving station, the nearer constant 
will be the power factor. If we make this difference zero, the 
equivalent line power factor will be constant from no load to 
full load: for most transmission lines the equivalent power factor 
will be around unity, the exact value depending upon the rela- 
tion I-/Iy = X/R. The action of the synchronous condenser, 
controlled by its voltage regulator, is to hold constant voltage at 
the receiving station and in so doing it automatically carries 
all or part of the load’s wattless kv-a., at all loads maintaining 
I'» at such values as to meet the given voltage setting of the 
regulator. 

I notice Mr. Lincoln referred to asystem having a voltage regu- 
lation around 10 percent. Ihave in mind two or three systems in 
which the regulation is 20 to 30 per cent. Induction regulators 
usually compensate fora voltage variation of about 20 per cent, 
and they cost, in general, for similar service, about half the price 
of a synchronous condenser for 60-cycle service; however, a syn- 
chronous condenser can not only take care of voltage regulation, 
but it corrects the power factor, as well, causing the consequent 
economies. Hence, there exists a wide application for its 
general use. ; 

I believe that we will come to a very extensive application 
of synchronous condensers used for power factor correction 
and automatic voltage control. In view of this, I feel that but 
little restriction should be placed on exciting currents required 
by induction generators, induction motors and transformers. 
The designs of all these should lend themselves only to matters 
of cost, durability, etc. 

Comfort A. Adams: In connection with the question of ex- 
citation in an alternating-current system, I wish to present the 
following point of view, which may be helpful to some. In 
any alternating-current system there are various magzictic 


1804 TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS {June 28 


fields for all of which excitation must be provided; whether it be 
the field of an alternator, synchronous motor, induction motor, 
or the magnetic field surrounding the line wires. In most sys- 
tems the only* or at least the principal fundamental source >f 
excitation is the direct current supplied to the fields of the syn- 
chronous machines of the system. Any other magnetic fields, 
such as in induction motors, transformers or around the line 
wires, must be excited through the medium of reactive lagging 
currents which act as conveyers of the excitation from the source 
in the synchronous machines to the place of consumption. The 
greater the excitation demanded by these various secondary 
magnetic fields, the greater must be the excitation supplied by 
the direct-current field currents of the synchronous machines, 
in order to maintain the desired voltage, and the greater must 
be the lagging reactive currents required for conveying the ex- 
citation. Thus one advantage of supplying the excitation at 
or near the point of consumption is the obvious saving in the 
cost of transmitting it. But there is another sometimes greater 
advantage, namely the improvement in regulation and the ability 
to control the voltage at the receiving point by the adjustment of 
the excitation at that point. This point of view leads naturally 
to the consideration of a system in which the voltage is main- 
tained at the same value at all points by means of properly 
distributed excitation. 

Referring now to the paper of Messrs. Hobart and Knowlton, 
consider the question of core losses. We are sometimes tempted 
to pride ourselves upon the accuracy and definiteness of electrical 
engineering calculations, but in ordinary computations of the 
core losses of induction motors and induction generators, we 
must multiply the rational part of the formula by from two to 
four in order to make the results check with observations; 
that is, we acknowledge that the part of the core loss which we 
do not take account of rationally in our formulas is in some cases 
two or three times as large as the part rationally accounted for. 
The inevitable result is a very large probable error in any 
machine differing appreciably in design or construction. from 
those previously tested. 

One of the sources of this large discrepancy is clearly demon- 
strated by the oscillograms, Figs. 17 and 18; namely the pulsa- 
tions of flux in the teeth at what may be called tooth frequency, 
and due to local variations of equivalent air gap permeance, 
caused by the slots and slot openings combined with a short 
air gap. But this local variation of gap permeance may also 
cause considerable tooth-frequency pulsations in the core back 
of the teeth. For example consider a rotor and stator with 20 
and 21 slots per pole respectively. Starting with a rotor tooth 
that is exactly opposite to a stator tooth at a particular instant, 


*Electrostatic capacity either artificially inserted or natural to the 
system, such as the capacity of a transmission line, obviously contributes 
more or less exciting current. 


—— 


a 
\ 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1808 


there will be in this vicinity at the same instant a group of seven 
or eight rotor teeth each of which is nearly opposite to a sta- 
tor tooth, and ten slots from our starting point there will 
be a similar group of seven or eight rotor teeth each of which 
is nearly opposite to a stator slot. The first group mentioned 
constitutes a region of high gap permeance and the second group 
a region of low gap permeance. But as the variation of gap 
permeance from point to point is gradual from maximum to 
minimum and back again, we shall have at any instant a com- 
plete wave or cycle of gap permeance variation for each pole. 
Had the number of slots per pole on rotor and stator differed 
by two instead of one, there would have been two complete 
waves for each pole; and so on. 

A little consideration will show that these waves of gap per- 
meance variation move along the gap periphery with a velocity 
corresponding exactly to tooth frequency; that is, the wave of 
variation moves one complete wave length while the rotor is 
moving one tooth pitch, or since the wave of gap permeance vari- 
ation means a wave of gap flux density variation, the pulsation 
of flux density in the teeth will be at tooth frequency. But in 
the first case cited each half-wave includes 10 teeth, and the 
resulting maximum of the flux wave must penetrate back into 
the core behind the teeth to a depth depending upon the length 
of the half-wave along the periphery, which is one-half of the 
pole pitch in the assumed case. The greater the difference 
between the number of rotor and of stator slots per pole the 
greater will be the number of gap permeance waves per pole 
and the less the depth to which the resulting flux pulsations 
penetrate back of the teeth. 

It is obvious that in any case the resulting eddy currents will 
tend to damp-out these pulsations, and to reduce the depths 
to which they penetrate, but that does not affect the validity 
of the above explanation. 

It is also obvious that the more nearly the slots are closed and 
the longer is the air gap, the less will be the amplitude of the 
wave of reluctance variation. 

There are thus in some cases tooth-frequency flux pulsations 
in a portion of the core back of the teeth as well as in the teeth 
themselves. 

There is also the wave loss* due to the eddy currents induced 
in the tips of the stator teeth as the edges of the rotor teeth pass 
across them. 

And finally there is the extra loss due to the breakdown of 
the insulation between the laminations. This last can be 
largely eliminated by more careful lamination, or by using less 
pressure when assembling the plates, or by both, although con- 
siderable pressure is desirable for mechanical reasons. 

If these phenomena could be readily subjected to reasonably 
accurate analysis, there would be five separate core loss compu- 


*See Pole Face Losses, A.1.E. E. TRANS. 1909, XXVIII, Part II, p. 1133. 


1806 TRANSMISSION: SYSTEMS [June 28 


tations to make, excluding breakdown of insulation, in place 
of the one or two now employed. But unfortunately these - 
phenomena are not as yet amenable to even roughly approx- 
imate quantitative analysis, as a little consideration will show. 
It isreasonable to expect, however, that some at least semi-rational 
method will be discovered for computing these losses separately. 
‘Phe speaker has been carrying on a series of experiments to this 
end and hopes later to present some useful results, although 
those thus far obtained are chiefly confirmatory of our previous 
conclusion, that the problem is a very difficult and complicated 
one. 

Referring now to the question of neutralizing the pulsation of 
single-phase armature reaction by means of a squirrel-cage dam- 
per, it is stated on page 1745 that “‘ if the aggregate cross-section 
provided by the face conductors of the squirrel cage equals the 
aggregate cross-section of the stator conductors, then the loss 
incurred in neutralizing the pulsations of the stator current 
is about equal to the stator J?R loss.” 

This damper loss has also been estimated at one-half and one- 
quarter of the above, respectively, by well-known engineers. 

All of these estimates are presumably based upon the as- 
sumption of perfect damping, that is that the leakage reactance 
between stator and damper windings is negligible, which is 
not the case. 

The speaker has made careful computations of this. loss, 
with the following results. The method of computation will be 
set forth at another time. Suffice it to say for the present that 
there are many factors entering into the computation, and that 
many approximations are necessary. : 

Assuming perfect damping as above and assuming the same 
current density in the damper as in the armature copper, the 
damper loss will about equal 70 per cent of the armature copper 
loss; with the same copper section in damper and armature, 
the damper loss will be somewhat less than 50 per cent of the 
stator copper loss. Practically the losses will be slightly less 
than indicated by these figures, owing chiefly to the leakage re- 
actance between armature and damper conductors, as the re- 
sistance is relatively a small factor. 

E. F. W. Alexanderson: In connection with the remarks of 
Professor Adams I should like to mention the results of an investi- 
gation which I made in order to determine a practical equation 
for finding the high-frequency tooth losses in induction motors. 
It is a well-known fact to designers that the additional core loss, 
due to magnetic disturbances, is higher in induction motors 
than in synchronous machines. A number of induction motors 
were examined, using data available for machines of greatly 
varying losses and speeds, in order to find a law for the variation 
of the losses due to high-frequency magnetic disturbance in the 
teeth. It was anticipated that a formula could be based on the 
frequency of the magnetic disturbance or on the width of the 
teeth. However, on going over the material available, it was 


1912} DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1807 


found that in machines of the same peripheral speed the high- 
frequency loss was practically independent of the frequency, 
because a higher loss that might be expected from the higher 
frequencies is offset by the smaller penetration of the disturbance 
that necessarily accompanies a greater number of slots. As a 
result, it was concluded that the variations due to any other 
cause than the peripheral speed itself and the average flux density 
are smaller than the variation that occurs between machines 
of the same design, due to difference in the grade of iron or the 
mechanical treatment of the same. A formula was, therefore, 
evolved to determine the core loss due to high frequency in the 
teeth, which is based on peripheral speed and magnetic density 
of the gap only. The loss is proportional to the square of the 
speed, and the square of the density and the empirical constant 
is apparently the same from the largest and highest-speed 
machines to the small or low-speed machines. 

For induction motors of ordinary design with open slots and 
standard iron, the empirical formula for cére loss due to tooth 
frequency is 


lossin kw. =0.13 


diameter ( rev. per min. X flux X poles y 
length 10,000 


The core loss in the original induction generator referred to in 
the Hobart paper may seem excessive, but it is in accord with the 
general law, as expressed by the above formula, and in order to 
reduce the tooth losses to such values as might be expected in 
synchronous machines, it was necessary to employ special 
measures. This condition will apply, in general, to induction 
generators, and is a circumstance that may make it difficult 
for such machines to compete with synchronous generators. ~ 
However, this is a question that will answer itself, because the 
preference for one type of machine or the other can be expressed 
in dollars cost per kilowatt. 

There is another consideration which I think is of importance, 
i.e., the one referred to by Capt. Hagood, whether the power 
companies will favor a generator which needs lagging current 
for excitation. If it is agreed that the lagging component can 
be taken care of to advantage by synchronous condensers, a 
field is opened for other types of generators which have been 
practically forgotten, such as the Stanley double synchronous 
generator which makes it possible to operate a 25-cycle turbine 
set at 3000 rev. per min. 

Lester McKenney (by letter): It seems to me that in making 
a rule as to the largest size motor to be allowed on a system, the 
rule should be based on the capacity of the system, or that part 
of the system supplying the section in which the motor 1s to 
be installed, rather than upon the capacity of the largest mill 
in that section, for the reason that a rule based on such a method 
would be more general in its application. Asa rosult of the rule 
based upon the capacity of the largest mill, we see that if the 


1808 TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS [June 28 


load on the system were made up of a great number of 
small mills, the largest motor would be of comparatively small 
size, and all out of proportion to the capacity of the system and 
its ability to furnish motor starting currents. 

The number of motors of the maximum size allowable also 
deserves special consideration. The idea here is not so much 
to protect the consumer having a motor of the maximum size 
against voltage disturbances, when his motors are started, as 
to protect the rest of the consumers against such starting. 

It is to be regretted that no charts were taken showing the 
voltage disturbances at the mills and at the centers of distribu- 
tion, during the investigation, as such records would have given 
much valuable information on one of the principal points men- 
tioned in the paper. 

It hardly seems possible that poor voltage regulation would 
be tolerated, even on a large transmission system dealing in 
wholesale power, if it were not for the large expenditure required 
for its elimination. A considerable part of the cost of our equip- 
ment is due to the demand for good voltage regulation. It 
therefore seems desirable that we take advantage of everything 
to secure this result, even to limiting the sizes of motors permitted 
on our transmission systems, providing the result is not obtained 
by too great a sacrifice of other things. 

Referring to the charts Figs. 1 and 2, it will be noted that in 
plant No. 3 the motors are overloaded, while in plant No. 8 
they are underloaded; and that the ratio of the starting current 
to the running current is based on the actual load which obtained 
at the time. On this basis, the ratio was nearly the same in 
both plants. The starting currents are independent of the load 
on the motors, and it seems desirable, for the purpose of future 
comparisons, that the ratio of the starting currents to the running 
currents, be based on the rated full-load current of the 
motors. 

On this basis, the maximum starting current in plant No. 3, 
having squirrel-cage motors, would be 80 per cent of rated full- 
load running current; while in plant No. 8, having wound- 
rotor motors, the starting current is only 50 per cent of the rated 
full-load running current. This seems a most reasonable basis 
of comparison, as it shows the relation of the starting currents 
to the capacity of the motors. 

It seems to me that the starting of squirrel-cage motors, 
with compensators, can be hurried to as great an extent as the 
starting of wound-rotor motors, and just as great drafts of current 
caused thereby. 

There is one other point in this comparison, which the paper 
does not bring out, and that is, the higher power factor of the 
starting currents of wound-rotor motors, which, for equal values, 
cause less voltage disturbance than the starting currents of 
squirrel-cage motors. The wound-rotor motor is, therefore, 


most to be desired where close voltage regulation is an impor- 
tant feature. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1809 


H. M. Hobart: Capt. Hagood first spoke of the synchronous 
condenser, and it would seem that if it should become customary 
to use a synchronous condenser to control the power factor of 
distribution systems the field for the induction generator would 
at the same time be slightly widened. I do not feel that the 
field for the induction generator in any case is going to be very 
extensive, but it certainly has several very important charac- 
teristics to which Mr. Knowlton and I have called attention 
in our paper. We have endeavored also to call attention to its 
faults and limitations so that both sides of the question could 
be understood. . 

_ There are certainly many cases where it would be of commer- 
cial advantage to have a considerable proportion of the plant 
consist of induction generators. Consequently, from the stand- 
point. of being in a position: to realize these commercial advan- 
tages, it is to be hoped that Captain Hagood’s views as to the 
rapid introduction of the synchronous condenser will be realized. 
It seems to me his argument is very sound, that they should be 
widely used. Professor Adams spoke of many interesting attri- 
butes of windings and the effect of employing either full pitch or 
fractional pitch. These were very interesting and it certainly is up 
to designers to keep this matter carefully in mind in such work. 
As to the loss in squirrel-cage windings it looks as if Professor’ 
Adams is correct, and that we have overestimated the J?R loss 
needed in the squirrel-cage winding to effect a certain degree 
of compensation. On the other hand I believe we have under- 
estimated the parasitic iron loss which will still remain on our 
hands due to incomplete compensation of the pulsations of 
magnetomotive force. I should personally be of the opinion that 
the net result would be substantially the same except that we 
ascribe it to J?R loss where it is partly J?R loss and partly hys- 
teresis and eddy losses in the iron. Mr. Alexanderson spoke 
of the greater losses which he considered to be inherent 
in the induction type of machine. I personally feel that 
any excess losses are nearly if not entirely attributable to 
the American plan of employing form-wound coils, and the con- 
sequent necessity of wide-open slots. Of course it is a great 
commercial advantage to have form-wound coils, but if you were 
to test European motors with nearly closed slots on both stator and 
rotor, the losses would be found to be down to the values obtained 
on other types of electric machines. It is of more importance 
in induction machines to have closed slots because of the neces- 
sity of employing a very small air gap. It is also interesting to 
keep in mind the point that Mr. Alexanderson made that the re- 
cent revival of interest in induction generators carries our at- 
tention back to various less simple types of induction generators 
that have been brought out from time to time. And I am aware 
that Mr. Alexanderson has given a great deal of attention to some 
of these types and finds that they possess qualities which will 
probably be of commercial value in the future. 


1810 TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS [June 28 


E. Knowlton (by letter): On page 1742 mention is made of 
the method of ventilation for a high-speed induction generator. 
The statement regarding the less amount of cooling surface 
required with axial ventilation should not be construed as mean- 
ing that this feature can be entirely neglected. The amount of 
surface can be considerably reduced because of the lowet tem- 
perature drop through the iron when the heat is transmitted along 
the plane of the laminations instead of transversely thereto, but 
one should not lose sight of the fact that the temperature drop 
at the surface should be taken into account, as it is, even with 
axial ventilation, an appreciable part of the total drop. When 
the air passes through any machine in parallel paths the resis- 
tance of the paths should bear some relation to the heat to be 
absorbed by the air in the path. Because of other considerations 
it is usually difficult to predetermine the paths accurately, but 
a careful test of a machine will generally suggest means of 1m- 
provement. With some designs the inherent characteristics are 
-such that the greater amount of air will be supplied to the hotter 
parts where it is needed, but in others special construction must 
be used to accomplish this result. 

W. L. Waters (by letter): The paper of Messrs. Hobart and 
Knowlton is a very useful presentation of the status of the in- 
duction generator to date. As has been frequently pointed out 
in the past, the main field for this type of generator at the pres- 
ent time is in large city power systems operating synchronous 
machinery or in water-power systems consisting of a number 
of comparatively small isolated stations. 

The authors describe the first really important installation 
of the induction generator on a large scale, and the tests made are 
both interesting and instructive. The suggestion that this type 
of generator is suitable for single-phase work is, I think, a some- 
what radical one. It is essentially a generator for high power 
factor or leading power factor loads, while a single-phase load 
is usually a railway one of low power factor. The low efficiency 
of the single-phase generator is due almost entirely to the low 
output for given dimensions and weight, compared to the three- 
phase rating. The total losses are approximately the same for 
both single- and three-phase, so that the slight reduction in the 
eddy current loss in the damping circuit of the rotor claimed for 
the induction generator would have little effect upon the effi- 
ciency. 

I fully expect that the induction generator will have an im- 
portant future in power station work as soon as operating engi- 
neers realize fully its advantages, and the demand increases so 
that manufacturers can standardize them like synchronous units. 
I think Messrs. Hobart and Knowlton’s paper will help greatly 
in again bringing this type of generator before the public and 
in familiarizing it with its characteristics. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


DEVELOPMENT OF A SUCCESSFUL DIRECT-CURRENT 
2000-KW. UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 


BY B. G. LAMME 

This paper is not intended to be a theoretical discussion of 
the principles of unipolar machines; neither is it a purely descrip- 
tive article. It is rather a record of engineering experiences 
obtained, and difficulties overcome, in the practical development 
of a large machine of the unipolar type. For those who are in- 
terested in the design and development of electrical machinery 
there may be many points of very considerable interest in this 
record. Some of the conditions of operation, with their attend- 
ant difficulties, proved to be so unusual that it is believed that 
a straightforward story of these troubles, and the methods for 
_ correcting them, will be of some value as a published record. 

Two theoretical questions of unipolar design have come up 
frequently: (1) whether the magnetic flux rotates or travels 
with respect to the rotor or the stator; and (2) whether it is 
possible to generate e.m.fs. in two or more conductors in series 
in such a way that they can be combined in one direction, with- 
out the aid of a corresponding number of pairs of collector rings, 
to give higher e.m.fs. than a single conductor. 

To the first question the answer may be made that in the 
mach’ne in question, it makes no difference whether the flux 
rotates or is stationary; the result is the same on either assump- 
tion. To the second it may. be said that when the theory of inter- 
linkages of the electric and magnetic circuits is properly con- 
sidered, it is obvious that the resultant e.m.f. is equivalent to that 
of one effective conductor, and therefore it is not practicable 
to obtain higher e.m.fs. than represented by on2 conductor, 
without the use of collector rings or some equivalent device. It 

1811 


1812 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


has been proposed in the past, by means of certain arrangements 
of liquid conductors in insulating tubes, to add the e.m.fs. of 
several conductors in series, but such a scheme does not appear 
to be a practical device. Therefore, the theoretical considera- 
tions being largely eliminated, the author confines himself to 
the practical side only. 

In 1896 the writer designed a small unipolar generator of 
approximately three volts and 6000 amperes capacity at a 
speed of 1500 rev. per min. This machine was built for meter test- 
ing and the occasion for its design lay in the continued trouble 
encountered with former machines of the commutator type 
designed for very heavy currents at low voltages. 

The general construction of this early machine is shown in 
Fig. 1. The rotating part of this machine consisted of a brass 
casting of cylindrical shape, with a central web, very similar 
to a cast metal pulley. The two 
outer edges of this pulley or ring 
served as collector rings for col- 
lecting the current as indicated 
in the figure, while the body of the 
same ring served as the single 
conductor. The- object of this 
construction of rotor was to obtain 
a form which could be very quickly 
renewed in case of rapid wear, as Fic. 1 
this arrangement would allow a 
small casting to be made and simply turned up to form a new 
rotor. However, this renewal feature has not been of very 
great importance, for the rotor of the first machine was replaced 
only after 12 years’ service. This period of course did not 
represent continuous service, for this particular machine was 
used for meter testing purposes or where large currents were 
required only occasionally. 

A number of peculiar conditions were found in this machine. 
In the initial design the leads for carrying the current away 
from the brushes were purposely carried part way around the 
shaft in order to obtain the effect of a series winding by means 
of the leads themselves. In practise, they were found to act in 
this manner and, in fact, they over-compounded the machine 
possibly 30 to 40 per cent. In consequence, it was necessary 
to shunt them by means of copper shunts around the shaft in 
the opposite direction. 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1813 


Shortly after this machine was put in operation there was con- 
siderable cutting of the brushes and rings, especially at very 
heavy currents. It was found that block graphite, used as a 
lubricant, gave satisfactory results. This machine was operated 
up to 10,000 to 12,000 amperes for short periods. 

The description of the above machine has been gone into rather 
fully, as it was a forerunner of the 2000-kw. machine which will 
be described in the following pages. The general principle of 
construction and the general arrangement of the two parts, or 
paths, of the magnetic circuit are practically the same in the two 
machines, as will be shown. 

In 1904, due to the rapidly increasing use of steam turbines, 
the question of building a turbo-generator of the unipolar type 
was brought up, and an investigation was made by the writer 
to determine the possibilities. This study indicated that a 
commercial machine for direct connection to a steam turbine 
could be constructed, provided a very high peripheral speed was 
allowable at the collector rings or current-collecting surfaces. It 
appeared that the velocity at such collector surfaces would have 
to be at least 200 to 250 feet per second, in order to keep the 
machine down to permissible proportions of the magnetic 
circuit, and to allow a reasonably high turbine speed. Con- 
trary to the usual idea, the very high speeds obtainable with 
steam turbines are not advantageous for unipolar machines. 
For example, while maintaining a given peripheral speed at the 
current collecting surface, if the revolutions per minute of the 
rotor are doubled, then the diameter of the rotor collecting 
rings is halved, and the diameter of the magnetic core surrounded 
by the collector rings is more than halved, and the effective 
section of core is reduced to less than one-fourth. The e.m. 
generated per ring or conductor, therefore, on the basis of flux 
alone, would be reduced to less than one-fourth, but allowing 
for the doubled revolutions per minute, it becomes practically 
one-half. 

On the other hand, if the revolutions are reduced, while the 
speed of the collector ring is kept constant, then the e.m.f. 
per ring can be increased, as the cross-section of the magnetic 
circuit increases rapidly with reduction in the number of revo- 
lutions. But at a materially reduced speed, the total material 
in the magnetic circuit becomes unduly heavy. In consequence, 
if the speed is reduced too much, then the machine becomes too 
large and expensive, while with too great an increase in speed, 


1814 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


the e.m.f. per ring becomes low or the per-pheral speed of the 
rings must be very high. It is desirable to keep the number 
of collector rings as small as possible, for each pair of rings handles 
the full current of the machine, and therefore any increase 
in the number of rings means that the full current must be col- 
lected a correspondingly large number of times. Therefore, 
it works out that the range of speeds, within which the unipolar 
machine becomes commercially practicable, is rather narrow. 
In 1906, an order was taken for a 2000-kw., 1200-rev. per min., 
260-volt, 7700-ampere unipolar generator to be installed in a 
portland cement works near Easton, Pa. The fact that it is 
a cement works should be emphasized, as having a considerable 
bearing on the history of the operation of this machine, as will 
be shown later. : 


tome ‘ 
ee et a a a a ee 


I Te ‘s ime = + 
tee “ot 


rasa LIL 1 ct rT | 
oo PICA ise 


Fic. 2 


This 2000-kw. machine does not represent any theoretically 
radical features, being similar in type to the smaller machine 
already described, but modified somewhat in arrangement to 
allow the use of a large number of current paths and collector 
rings. The general construction of this machine is indicated 
in Fig. 2. 

The stator yoke and the rotor body are made of solid steel, 
the stator being cast, while the rotor is a forging. There are 
eight collector rings at each end of the rotor, the corresponding 
rings of the two ends being connected together by solid round 
conductors, there being six conductors per ring, or 48 con- 
ductors total. In each conductor is generated a normal 
e.m.f. of 32.5 volts, and with all the rings connected in series, 
the total voltage is 260. 

The stator core, at what might be called the pole face, is built 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1815 


up of laminated iron, forming a ring around the rotor. This 
was laminated in order to furnish an easy method for obtaining 
the stator slots in which le the conductors which connect to- 
gether the brushes or brush holders for throwing the pairs of 
rings in series. The slots in the stator laminations were made 
open, as indicated in Fig. 3, in order readily to insert the stator 
conductors. There are 16 slots in this ring, and in each slot 
there is placed one large solid conductor. 

As first assembled, non-metallic wedges were used to close 
these slots, but later these were changed to cast iron, for reasons 
which will be explained later. 

The rotor core consists of one large forging, as indicated in 
Fig. 2. Lengthwise of this rotor are 12 holes for ventilating 


purposes, originally 2$ in‘ in diameter. Each of these holes is con- 
nected to the external surface by means of nine 13-in. radial 
holes at each end of the rotor, these holes corresponding to mid- 
positions between the collector rings. It was intended to take 
air in at each end of the rotor and feed it out between the collec- 
tor rings for cooling. In addition, as originally constructed, 
there was a large enclosed fan at each end, as indicated in Fig. 4. 
These fans took air in along the shaft and directed it over 
the collector rings parallel to the shaft. The object of this was 
to furnish an extra amount of air for cooling the surfaces of the 
rings, and the brushes and brush holders, as it was estimated 
that the brushes and brush holders themselves could conduct 
away a considerable amount -of heat from the rings by direct 


1816 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


contact, and that the cooling air from the fans, circulating among 
the brush holders, would carry away this heat. These fans 
were removed during the preliminary tests, for reasons which will 
be given later. 

The rotor collector rings consisted of eight large rings at each 
end, insulated from the core by sheet mica, and from each other 
by air spaces between them. Each ring has 48 holes parallel 
to the shaft. These holes are of slightly larger diameter than 


Fic. 5 


the rotor conductors outside their insulation. Six holes in 
each ring were threaded to contain the ends of six of the conduc- 
tors which were joined to each ring. The six conductors con- 
nected to each ring were spaced symmetrically around the core. 
Fig. 5 shows this construction. 

The rotor conductors, 48 in number, consist of one-in. copper 
rods, outside of which is placed an insulating tube of hard ma- 
terial. Each conductor, in fact, consists of two lengths arranged 
for joining in the middle. The outer end of each conductor 
is upset to give a diameter 
larger than the insulating tubes, 
and a thread is cut on this ex- 
panded part. After the rings 
were installed on the core, the 
rods were inserted through the 
holes to the threaded part of a 
ring and were then screwed Fic. 6 
home. 

At the middle part of the rotor core, a groove is cut as shown 
in Fig. 6. Into this groove the two halves of each conductor 
project. These two ends are then connected together by strap 
conductors in such a way as to give flexibility in case of expan- 
sion of the conductors lengthwise. This arrangement is also 
shown in Fig. 6. 

With this arrangement there is no possibility whatever of 
the conductors turning after once being connected. There is 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1817 


a series of holes from the axial holes through the shaft to this 
central groove, for the purpose of allowing some ventilating air 
to flow over the central connections. 

As originally constructed, the conductors passed through com- 
pletely enclosed holes near the surface of the rotor core, as in- 
dicated in Fig. 7. This construction was afterwards modified 
to a certain extent. The face of the rotor at this point was also 
solid, as originally constructed. This was afterwards changed, 
as will be described later. 

The collector rings, as originally constructed, consisted of a 
base ring with a wearing ring on the outside, as shown in Fig. 8. 
Both rings were made of a special bronze, with high elastic 
limit and ultimate strength. On the preliminary tests these 
rings showed certain difficulties and required very considerable 
modifications, and several different designs were developed 
during the preliminary operation. 


WIMMMMMIM pa LTT, 
UMM 


Fic. 8 


The eight sets of brush holders at each end are carried by 
eight copper supporting rings. These supporting rings are 
insulated from the frame of the machine but are connected in 
series by means of the conductors through the stator slots. 
There are 16 brush holder studs per ring and two brush holders 
per stud, each capable of taking a copper leaf brush ¢ in. thick 
by 12 in. wide. These brush holders are spaced practically 
uniformly around the supporting rings. The supporting copper 
rings are continuous or complete circles, so that the currents 
collected from the brushes are carried in both directions 
around the ring. There are two conductors carried from each 
ring through the stator slots to a ring on the opposite side of the 
machine, in order to connect the various brush holders in series. 
The arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 9. 

The above description represents the machine as originally 


1818 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


constructed and put on shop test. From this point on, the 
real story begins. Various unexpected troubles developed, each 
of which required some minor modification in the construction of 
the machine, and moreover, these troubles occurred in series, 
that is, each trouble required a certain length of time to de- 
velop, and each one was serious enough to require an immediate 
modification in the machine. In consequence, the machine 
would be operated until a certain difficulty would develop; that 
is, that trouble would appear which took the least time to de- 
velop. After it was remedied, a continuation of the test would 
show a second trouble which required a remedy, and so on. 
Some of these troubles were of a more or less startling nature. 

This machine, after being assembled according to its original 
design, was operated over a period of several weeks in the testing 
room of the manufacturing company. It was operated both 
at no-load and at full-load current, and a careful study was 
made of all the phenomena which were in evidence during 
these tests. 

The machine was first run at no-load without field charge 
to note the ventilation, balance, and general running conditions 
of the machine. The ventilation seemed to be extremely good, 
especially that due to the fans on the ends of the shaft. The 
noise, however, was excessive—so much so that anyone working 
around the machine had to keep his ears padded. At first it 
was difficult to locate the exact source of this noise, but it was 
determined that the end fans were responsible for a considerable 
part of it. 

On taking the saturation curve of the machine, it was found 
to be extremely sluggish in following any changes in the field 
current. The reason for this sluggishness is obvious from the 
construction of the.machine, each magnetic circuit of the rotor 
core being surrounded by eight continuous collector rings of 
very heavy section, and also by eight brush-holder-supporting 
rings of copper of very low resistance. These rings, of course, 
formed heavy secondaries or dampers which opposed any change 
in the main flux. The total effective section of these rings was 
equivalent in resistance to a pure copper ring having a section 
of 49 sq.in. One can readily imagine that such a ring would be 
very effective in damping any sudden flux changes. This slug- 
gishness of the machine to changes in flux, however, was not 
an entirely unexpected result. 

The saturation curve showed that the machine could be carried 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1819 


considerably higher in voltage than originally contemplated, for 
apparently the magnetic properties of the heavy steel parts 
were very good, and it was possible to force the inductions in 
these parts to much higher density than was considered prac- 
ticable in working out the design. This gave considerable lee- 
way for changes which later were found to be necessary. 

In taking the saturation curve, the power for driving the 
machine was measured and it was found that there were prac- 
tically no iron losses in the machine; that is, at full voltage 
at no-load the total measured losses were practically the same 
as without field charge. This apparently eliminated one pos- 
sible source of loss which was anticipated, namely, that due to 
the large open slots in the stator pole face, these slots being very 
wide compared with the clearance between the stator and rotor. 

After completion of this test the machine was then run on 
short circuit. Apparently, as there was no iron loss shown in 
the no-load full voltage condition, the short-circuit test with full- 
load current should cover all the losses in the rotor which would 
be found with full-load current at full voltage. Experience 
afterward proved this assumption to be correct, for in its final 
form the machine would operate under practically the same 
condition as regards temperature, etc., at full voltage as it would 
show at short circuit, carrying the same current, the principal 
difference being the temperature of the field coil. 

It was in this short-circuit temperature run that the real 
troubles with the machine began. The measured losses, when 
running on short circuit, were somewhat higher than indicated 
by the resistance between terminals times the square of the 
current. These extra losses were a function of the load and 
increased more rapidly with heavy currents. The measured 
power indicated that these excess losses were principally due to 
eddy currents. However, the total losses indicated in these 
preliminary tests, although somewhat higher than calculated, 
were still within allowable limits, as considerable margin had been 
allowed in the original proportions to take care of a certain 
amount of loss. It was therefore considered satisfactory to go 
ahead with the short-circuit tests, and in making these it was 
the intention to operate long enough to determine the neces- 
sary running conditions as regards lubrication, heating, etc. 

As mentioned before, the original collector rings of the machine 
each consisted of a base ring upon which was mounted a second- 
ary or wearing ring, it being the intention to have this latter 


1820 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


ring’replaceable after it was down to the lowest permissible 
thickness, as it would be rather expensive and difficult to replace 
the base ring which carried the rotor conductors. As the inner 
ring was shrunk on the core and the outer ring was shrunk on 
over the base ring, with a very small shrinkage allowance, it 
was considered that the outer ring was in no danger of loosening 
on the inner ring, especially as both rings, being of bronze, and 
in good contact, should heat each other at about the same rate. 
This assumption, however, was wrong. The machine was put 
on short-circuit load of about 8000 amperes early one evening 
and an experienced engineer was left in charge of it until about 
midnight. Up to that time the machine was working perfectly, 
with no undue heating in the rings and no brush trouble, although 
vaseline lubrication was used. About midnight the engineer 
left the machine in charge of a night operator, and at about three 
o’clock in the morning this operator saw the brushes beginning 
to spark and this very rapidly grew worse, so that in a very few 
minutes he found it necessary to shut 
the machine down. An examination 
then showed that several of the outer 
rings had shifted sideways on the base 
ring, as indicated in Fig. 10. One of 
these rings had even moved into contact 
with a neighboring ring so as to make 
a dead short circuit on the machine. It 
was also noted that all the rings which loosened were on one side 
of the machine, and that the surfaces of the rings exposed to 
the brushes were very badly blistered. The brushes also were 
in bad shape, indicating that there had been excessive burning 
for a short time. An investigation of the loose rings showed 
that they had loosened on their seats on the inner or base rings. 
Investigation then showed that a temperature rise of 70 to 80 
deg. cent., combined with the high centrifugal stresses, would 
allow the rings to loosen very materially. It was then assumed 
that as the ring had heated up, bad contact had resulted be- 
tween the inner and outer rings and this, in turn, had caused 
additional heating, so that the temperature rose rather suddenly 
after bad contact once formed. It developed later that this 
was probably not the true cause of the trouble, but at the time 
it was considered that the remedy for the trouble was in the 
use of rings which could be shrunk on with a greater tension. 

It was then decided to try steel outer rings instead of bronze 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1821 


on the end where the bronze rings had loosened. However, upon 
loading the machine, after applying the steel rings, a new diffi- 
culty was encountered. It was found that the loss was very 
greatly increased over that with the bronze rings. This loss 
was so excessive as to be prohibitive, as far as efficiency was 
concerned, and also the tests showed excessive heating of the 
rings and of the machine as a whole. Also, there were continual 
small sparks from the tips of the brushes, these sparks being 
from the iron itself, as indicated by their color and appearance. 
However, during the time these rings were operated there did 
not seem to be any undue wear of either the brushes or the rings, 
but obviously there was continued burning, as indicated by the 
sparks. With these steel rings it was found to be impossible 
to operate continuously at a current of 8000 amperes, due to 
the heating of the steel rings in particular and everything in 
general. Ata load of 6000 amperes the loss was materially re- 
duced and it was possible to operate continuously, but with very 
high temperatures. The tests showed that 
with the steel rings, at full rated current, the 
loss was approximately 200 kw. greater than 
with the bronze rings, or about 10 per cent 
of the output. With both ends equipped 
with steel rings, this would have been prac- 
tically doubled. 

While this was recognized as an entirely 
unsatisfactory operating condition, yet it allowed the machine to 
be run for a long enough period to determine a number of other 
defects which did not develop in the former test. One of these 
defects was an undue heating of the rotor pole face. This was 
obviously not due directly to bunching of the flux in the air gap 
on account of the open stator slots, for this heating did not appear 
when running with normal voltage without load. Further investi- 
gation showed that this was apparently due to some flux dis- 
torting effect of the stationary conductors in the stator slots, 
which carried about 4000 amperes each at rated load. On 
account of ample margin in the magnetizing coils the air gap 
was then materially increased, with some benefit. A further 
improvement resulted in the use of magnetic wedges, made of 
cast iron, in place of the non-magnetic wedges used before. 
These wedges are illustrated in Fig. 11. This produced a further 
beneficial effect, but there was still some extra heating in the 
pole face. Cylindrical grooves alternating 4 in. and 1 in. deep 


1822 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


and about } in. wide, with a }-in. web of steel between, were 
then turned in the pole face. The resultant pole face was there- 
fore crudely laminated, as shown in Fig. 12. Also, on account 
of an apparent local heating of the metal bridge over the rotor 
slots, a narrow groove was cut in the closed bridge above each 
rotor slot, thus changing it to a partially open slot, as shown in the 
figure. This effectively eliminated the excess loss in the rotor 
pole face. This, however, led to another unexpected difficulty, 
which will be described later. 

After this trouble was cured, the short-circuit test was con- 
tinued with a current of about 6000 amperes. After a con- 
siderable period of operation, a very serious difficulty in the 
operation of the machine began to show up, namely, trouble 
with lubrication. At first the lubrication was vaseline fed on 
to the rings by lubricating pads. This was apparently very 
effective for awhile, but eventually it was noted that slight 
sparking began, which, in some cases, would increase very 
rapidly, and in a comparatively 
short time became so bad that 
the rings or brushes would be- 
come badly scored or blistered. 


bet : | ULL! 
Examination of the sparking : HAITI F 
brushes showed a coating of black CAAA nan 
““ smudge ”’ over the surface which ” Bye. 12 


seemed to have more or less in- 

sulating qualities. A series of tests then showed that when- 
ever sparking began, the contact drop between a brush and the 
collector ring was fairly high and this drop increased as the spark- 
ing increased. For instance, it was found that on good, clean 
surfaces, the voltage drop between the brushes and the ring 
might be 0.3 to 0.5 volt. As each brush carried about 250 
amperes at -full load, this represented -75 to 125 watts per 
brush. When this contact resistance rose to about one volt, 
noticeable sparking would begin, the watts being, of course, 
proportionally higher, and when the contact drop became as high 
as two volts, representing about 500 watts per brush, very bad 
burning of the brushes and rings was liable to occur. A series . 
of tests then showed that vaseline, or any other lubricating oil, 
would tend to form a coating over the brush contact and this 
coating would gradually burn, or be acted upon otherwise by 
the current, so that its resistance increased and the black 
smudge was formed which had more or less insulating qualities. 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1823 


A great number of tests was then carried out with various 
kinds of lubricants and it was. found that anything of an oil 
or grease nature was troublesome sooner or later, as the smudge 
was formed on the brush contact. Then graphite, formed into 
cakes or brushes by means of high pressure, was tried on the rings 
and the results were very favorable compared with anything 
used before. In fact, the tests indicated that soft graphite 
blocks or brushes could furnish proper lubrication for the rings. 
The graphite is a conducting material, and a coating of it on 
the brush contact does not materially increase the resistance 
of the contact. This was supposed to have practically settled 
the question of, lubrication and brush contact trouble, but ex- 
perience later gave an entirely new turn to this matter. 

While these tests were being carried on, a study of the ventila- 
tion of the machine was being made. The tests indicated that 
the end rings, that is, those next to the exciting coils, were con- 
siderably cooler than those near the center of the machine. 
However, as there were excessive losses and heating in the steel 
rings themselves, it was not possible to make any material im- 
provement until the rings were changed. 

The steel rings at one end of the rotor, and the bronze rings 
at the other end, were then removed and a second set of bronze 
rings was tried. These rings were specially treated in the manu- 
facture so that the elastic limit was very high, and they were 
put on much tighter than in the former case. The load tests 
were then continued and the excess losses were again measured 
at various loads. It was found that the losses were very small 
compared with those of the steel rings, thus verifying the former 
results. The temperatures of the rings were much lower than — 
with the steel, but it was found that the heating of the rings was 
unequal. It was finally determined that this unequal heating was 
due to the large external blowers which were driving the air over 
the rings in such a way as to heat those next to the center of the 
rotor to a much higher temperature than those at the outer 
ends. It was assumed at first that the air entering the axial 
holes through the core and blowing out between the rings as 
shown in Fig. 1, was more effective on the outer rings, and that 
this possibly caused the difference in temperatures. However, 
the radial holes at the outer ends were closed, and this made 
but little difference. The axial holes were then closed, and 
while the temperatures of the rings, as a whole, were increased, 
about the same difference as before was found between the end 
rings and the center ones. ‘ 


1824 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


It was then decided to remove the two large blowers to de- 
termine whether some other method of ventilation would be 
more effective. When this change was made, the windage of 
the machine was greatly reduced and there was greater uni- 
formity in the temperatures, and the average temperature of 
the rings was only about 10 deg. higher than with the fans. More- 
over, the windage loss was only about one-seventh as great as 
before, although the average temperature rise was not much 
higher, which indicated that the ventilation through the rotor 
holes was much more effective than that due to the blowers. 
In consequence, it was decided to increase the size of the axial 
holes through the rotor core from 232 in. to 33 in. diameter, and 
to ‘‘ bell-mouth ” them at théir openings at the ends, in order 
to give a freer admission of air to the holes. When this was done 
it was found that the temperatures of the rings were lower than 
in any of the preceding tests, and moreover, they were fairly 
uniform. Also, after the removal of the blowers, the objection- 
able noise, already referred to, was largely eliminated, so that it 
was not disagreeable to work around the machine. The graphite 
lubrication was continued with the bronze rings, on this test, 
and no difficulty was encountered, although the machine was 
operated for very considerable periods at approximately 8000 
amperes. 

On the basis of these tests, the machine was shipped to its 
destination and putin service. Then the real difficulties began— 
difficulties which were not encountered in the shop tests, princi- 
pally because the conditions under which the machine operated 
in service were radically different from those at the shop, and 
also, because the shop test had not been continued long enough. 
This machine was operated in service, although not regularly, 
for a period of about two months, being shut down at times due 
to difficulties outside of the generating unit itself. However, 
this period of operation of the generator was suddenly ended 
by the stretching of one of the outer collector rings, which 
loosened it to such an extent that it ceased to rotate with the 
inner ring. This required the return of the rotor to the manu- 
facturer. 

This two months’ operation gave data of great practical 
value, and in consequence, a number of minor difficulties were 
eliminated in the repaired rotor. 

Upon the return of the rotor to the shop, an examination of the 
collector rings showed that the separate shrunk-on type of ring 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATUR 1825 


was not practicable with any design of ring then at hand. ‘There- 
fore, it was decided to make the collector rings in one solid piece 
with a very considerable wearing depth. This necessitated 
the removal of all the base rings and, in fact, it required a com- 
plete dismantling of the entire rotor winding. As the outer ring 
had loosened, there was a possibility of the base rings loosening 
in the same way, and therefore it was considered necessary to 
apply some scheme for preventing this loosening in case of sudden 
heating and expansion of any of the collector rings. It was then 
decided to apply some form of spring support underneath these 
rings, which could follow up any expansion in such a way as to 
keep the rings tight under any temperature conditions liable to 
be met with in practise. The spring support used consisted of 
a number of flat steel plates arranged around the rotor core, as 
indicated in Fig. 13. These plates were of stich length and stiff- 
ness that a very high pressure was required to bend them down to 
conform with the rotor surface. 
These plates were. arranged 
around the rotor core and drawn 
down with clamp rings until 
they fitted tightly against the 
mica. The collector ring was 
highly heated and slipped over 
the springs, the clamps being 
removed as the ring was slipped 
on. Tests were made to find 
at what temperature such a ring would loosen. While the best 
arrangement without springs would loosen at about 100 to 125 
deg. cent., it was found that a ring supported in the above 
manner was still fairly tight at 180 deg. cent., which was far 
above any temperature which the machine would attain under 
any condition. It may be said here that, after several years’ 
operation, this construction still appears to be first-class, and 
no loosening of any sort has occurred. 

In removing the winding from the rotor, it was discovered 
that the insulating tubes over the rotor conductors had traveled 
back and forth along the rods a certain amount. This travel, 
if continued for a long enough period, would apparently have 
injured the insulation, although no trouble had yet developed. 
Apparently, during heating and cooling, the expansion and con- 
‘traction of the rods would carry the tubes with them lengthwise _ 
a very small amount. The tubes would then seat themselves in 


Fic. 13 


1826 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


the supporting rings or core and would not return to their original 
positions. It was found that in the slotted pole face already 
described, the webs or laminations of metal overhanging the 
rotor slots would hold the tube when the rod was traveling in 
one direction, but would sometimes allow the tube to move 
slightly when the rod traveled in the other direction, so that 
there was a sort of extremely slow ratchet action taking place. 
It was evidently necessary to have the tubes fit rather tightly 
in the retaining or supporting holes in the rings and the core, and 
to have the rods fit rather loosely in the tubes. Also, it ap- 
peared that shellac or other ‘‘ gummy ” material on the inner 
surface of the insulating tubes was harmful, for wherever shellac 
was present the insulating tube always stuck to the rod and 
would tear at either side of such place. In consequence, the 
new set of tubes was made with a dry, hard finish on both the 
outside and the inside, and the inside surface was also paraf- 


Fic. 14 


fined. This, when carried out properly, served to remedy this 
trouble. 

The reconstructed rotor, with the solid collector rings, was 
shipped to the customer and the service was continued. After 
operation for a considerable time, certain extremely serious dif- 
ficulties appeared. One of these was brush trouble, and another 
was undue wear of the rings. 

The brush trouble was a most discouraging one. The machine 
was located in an engine room adjacent to a rock-crushing build- 
ing. Fine dust was always floating around the machine and 
this dust, continuously passing through the machine, tended to 
form a deposit immediately behind the brushes, as shown in Fig. 
14. This dust packed in rather solidly behind the brush, due to 
the high speed of the rings, and eventually it tended to lift the 
brushes away from the rings. It also showed a tendency to get 
under the brush contact, with consequent increased resistance 
of contact. Frequent removal and cleaning of the brushes was 


_— 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1827 


impracticable, as they were not sufficiently accessible to do 
this readily. This rock dust, packed behind the brushes, 
also had a scouring or grinding action on the rings themselves. 
Accompanying this was an undue rate of wear of the ri gs. This, 
however, was not entirely mechanical wear, as it appeared also 
to be dependent upon the current carried and was, to some ex- 
tent, due to a burning action under the brush which tended to 
eat away the surface of the rings. However, while the undue 
wear was not altogether due to dust back of the brushes, 
this accumulation of dust appeared to have a very harmful 
action on the machine. Various methods were considered for 
overcoming this collection of dust, one of which consisted of 
enclosed a'r inlets to the machine, fitted with screens for sifting 
out the dust. This lessened the trouble to some extent, but 
it was evident that it would not cure it entirely, as the entire 
machine was so located that dust could come in around the brush 
holders without going through the ventilating channels. 

The method finally adopted for overcoming the difficulty of 
accumulation of dirt was rather startling. It was casually sug- 
gested that the copper leaf brushes be turned around so that 
the rings would run against the brushes, so that the dirt or dust 
over the rings would be “ skimmed off” by the forward edge cf 
the brushes. This obviously would prevent the collection of 
dirt, but the question of running thin leaf copper brushes on 
a collector ring operated at a speed of about 220 feet per second 
(or 13,200 feet per minute) looked like an absurdity to any one 
with experience in electrical machinery, so that we all hesitated 
at first to consider the possibility of it. However, as something 
had to be done, the writer suggested to the engineer in charge 


- that he change the brushes on one of the rings so that they would 


be inclined. against the direction of rotation. This gave no 
trouble and the other brushes were then changed to the same 
direction and the operation ever since has been carried on with 
this arrangement. To the writer this has always seemed an 
almost unbelievable condition of operation, but as there has 
not been a single case of trouble from this arrangement during 
several years of operation, one is forced to believe that it is all 
right. This change entirely overcame the trouble from accumu- 
lation of dirt. However, it did not entirely cure the burning of 
the brushes and rings above described, but rendered the matter 
of lubrication somewhat easier than at first. 

As to the other serious trouble, it was mentioned that there 


4 


1828 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


was a burning action under the brushes which tended to ‘‘ eat” 
or “wear” away the surface of the rings. This also tended to 
burn away the brush surfaces, the amount of burning in either 
case depending, to a considerable extent, upon the direction 
of the current. At one side of the machine the brushes 
would wear more rapidly, while at the other side the rings 
would wear faster. The polarity of the current was influential 
in this action. Particles of the metal appeared to travel in 
the direction of the current; that is, where the current was from 
the ring to the brushes, the ring would wear more rapidly, 
and the brush would show but little wear, while at the other 
end of the machine, the opposite effect would be found. How- 
ever, the particles of metal taken from the ring did not deposit, 
or “ build up,” on the brushes. 

During all this operation, graphite had been used for lubri- 
cation. In the earlier stages, powdered graphite, compressed 
into blocks, had been used. Later it was found that very soft 
graphite brushes in insulated holders would give ample lubri- 
cation for the rings. However, even with this lubrication and 
the removal of the dirt trouble, there was still an appreciable 
burning of the brushes and rings as indicated by the more rapid 
wear of the rings at one end of the rotor, and of the brushes at 
the other end. Extended tests showed that this burning was 
a function of the contact drop between the brushes and the rings. 
Neither the rings nor the brushes would burn appreciably if 
the contact drop between the brushes and the ring could be kept 
very low. When this drop became relatively high (about one 
volt), the rings or brushes would show an undue rate of wear. It 
was found also that, after a considerable period of operation, 
it was very difficult to obtain a low brush contact drop, as the 
brush wearing surface became coated with a sort of ‘‘ smudge,” 
which seemed to have resisting qualities. An analysis of this 
coating showed a very considerable amount of zinc in it, and 
it was determined that the zinc in the collector rings was burning 
out and forming an insulating coating on the brush contacts. 
The remedy for this condition was the application of some clean- 
ing agent which would chemically act on the smudge and dis- 
solve it or destroy its insulating qualities. The right material for 
this purpose was found to be a weak solution of muriatic acid— 
about 4 per centin water. When this was applied to the rings by 
means of a “‘ wiper,” at intervals, the brush contact drop could be 
reduced to a very low figure— frequently to 0.1 or 0.2 of a volt— 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1829 


and the rings would take ona very bright polish. Also, while 
this low contact drop was maintained it was found that the rings 
showed an almost inappreciable rate of wear. However, one 
set of rings continued to wear somewhat faster than the other. 
This difficulty of unequal wear of the two sets of rings was over- 
come by arranging a switch so that the polarity of the two ends 
of the machine could be changed occasionally. 

The temperature of the machine was reduced by the above 
treatment of the rings. Obviously, part of the heat was due to 
the loss at the brush contacts, which, of course, was reduced 
directly as the contact drop was reduced. 

The machine was now running quite decently with compara- 
tively heavy loads, from 7000 to 10,000 amperes, and the only 
trouble was in several minor difficulties which were then taken 
up, one at a time, in order to ascertain a suitable remedy. 
These difficulties, however, were not interfering with the regular 
operation of the machine. 

One of the difficulties which finally developed was due to 
stray magnetic fluxes through the bearings. These fluxes, pass- 
ing out through the shaft to the shell of the bearing, consti- 
tuted, in themselves, the elements of a small unipolar machine, 
of which the bearing metal served as collecting brushes. The 
e.m.f. generated in the shaft was a maximum across the two ends 
of the bearing. Consequently the current collected from the 
shaft by the bearing metal should have been greatest near the 
ends of the bearing, and least at the center. This was the case 
as indicated by the appearance of the bearing itself, which 
showed evidence of pitting near the ends but none at the center. 

To remedy this trouble, a small demagnetizing coil was placed 
outside the stator frame, at each end of the rotor, between the 
rotor core and the bearings. These coils were excited by direct 
current which was adjusted in value until practically zero e.m.f. 
was indicated on the shaft at the two ends of each bearing. This 
indicated that the unipolar action was practically eliminated. 
This arrangement has been in use ever since it was installed, and 
no more trouble of any sort has been encountered from local 
currents in the bearings or elsewhere. 

Some of the brushes did not show as good wearing qualities 
as desired and various experiments were made with different 
combinations of materials and various thicknesses and arrange- 
ment of the brush lamine. Brass leaf brushes were tried; also, 
mixtures of copper, brass, aluminum and various other leaf metals 


1830 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


in combination. None of these gave any better results than the 
thin copper leaf brush. The tests finally showed tha’ such a brush, 
very soft and flexible, with a suitable spring tension, would 
give very satisfactory results. Also, instead of two brushes 
side by side, a single brush, covering the full width of a ring, was 
found to be more satisfactory. Some tests were also made with 
carbon brushes, consisting of a combination of carbon or graphite 
combined with some metal, such as copper, in a finely divided 
state. These brushes were claimed to have a very high carrying 
capacity and also to have a certain amount of self-lubrication. 
A set of these brushes was tried on one of the rings, but lasted 
only for a very short time. The apparent wear was rapid, but 
it is not known whether this was due to the very high speed of the 
collector rings, or rapid burning away of the brush or the inability 
of this type of brush to follow quickly any inequalities of the 
collector rings. This test was abandoned in a comparatively 
short time. 

After getting rid of the old troubles, a new and unexpected one 
had to appear. For some unknown reason, the insulating tubes 
on the rotor conductors began to break down; also grounds oc- 
curred between the collector rings and the core. 

On account of the delay required in making any changes in 
the rings or rotor winding, the customer arranged with the 
manufacturer to have a new rotor built as a reserve, as it was 
obvious that sooner or later there would have to be considerable 
reconstruction of the insulation on the first rotor due to unex- 
plained short circuits and grounds. A new rotor was at once 
constructed, embodying all the good features of the first rotor, 
with some supposedly minor improvements. The old rotor was 
then removed for investigation and repairs. The cause of the 
breakdowns of the insulation on the tubes was then discovered. 
The air entering through the axial rotor holes and passing out 
through the radial holes between the rings, carried fine particles 
of cement or crushed stone dust and this had ‘‘ sand-blasted ”’ 
the under side of the tubes. When the rotor had been operated 
during the preliminary two months’ period, previously described, 
before the replacement of the rings, no evidence of this sand- 
blasting had been visible. Investigation showed that the in- 
sulating tubes in the former winding had been made with a fuller- 
board base, which is rather soft and fibrous in its construction. 
The tubes on the second winding had been made with “ fish 


paper ”’ instead of fullerboard, in order to give a hard finish on the 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1831 


inside and outside. It was due to this hard material that the 
troubles from sand blasting occurred. However, fish. paper 
tubes were superior to the fullerboard in strength and other 
qualities, and as they were inferior only in this one character- 
istic, they were used again in rewinding the rotor, but where- 
ever the tubes were exposed in passing from one ring to the next, 
they were taped over with several layers of soft tape wh’ch was 
also sewed. This gave a soft finish which would resist sand- 
blasting, and no trouble from this source has occurred for several 
years. 

From the breakdowns to ground, it was evident that an entire 
replacement of the rings was necessary in order to repair the 
mica bush or sleeve lying beneath the rings. This required 
the removal of the entire rotor winding and rings. It was found 
that cement dust coming up through the radial holes had sifted 
in through various crevices or openings 
around the holes and that, finally, con- 
ducting surfaces and paths were formed 
which allowed the current to leak to 
ground sufficient to burn the insulation 
eventually. Therefore, when replacing 
the mica sleeve over the rotor, extra care 
was taken to fit insulating bushings at 
the tops of the radial holes in such a 
way as to seal or close all joints, thus 
; allowing no leakage paths between 
collector rings and the body of the core. This isshownin Fig. 15. 
No further trouble has occurred at this point. 

In removing the collector rings for these repairs, it was found 
that the flat spring supports shown in Fig. 13 had been entirely 
effective and there was no evidence whatever of any disturbance 
of the rings on the core, and there was no injury to the mica, 
such as would be shown by any slight movement. The rings 
were also very tight so that it took a very considerable temper- 
ature to loosen them sufficiently for removal. 

In view of the delay and expense of repairing one of these 
rotors when the collector rings had to be removed, with the pos- 
sibility of damaging the insulating tubes over the conductors, 
and the insulating bush over the core, it was then decided that 
a movable wearing ring was practically necessary in order to 
make this machine a permanent success. Therefore, the 
problem of a separate outside wearing ring, as originally con- 


Fic. 15 


1832 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


templated, was again taken up. The difficulty, already de- 
scribed, of the zinc burning from the rings and forming a coating 
on the brushes, indicated that some other material, without 
such a large percentage of zinc, should give better results. The 
difficulty was to obtain such a material, with suitable charac- 
teristics otherwise. All data at hand showed that rings with 
desirable characteristics electrically, did not have the proper 
elastic limits, or proper expansion properties when heated. In 
other words, when such rings were shrunk on the base or sup- 
porting ring they would stretch to such an extent, when cooled, 
that they would become loose again with very moderate in- 
crease intemperature. The solution of this problem of a separate 
ring construction was found in the use of some spring arrange- 
ment underneath the outer ring which would still keep it tight 
on the inner ring even when hot. The spring arrangement 


used under the inner rings, as shown in Fig. 13, was then applied 
with certain modifications. In order to get good contact be- 
tween the inner and outer rings for carrying the current, each 
of these steel springs or plates was covered by a thin sheet of 
copper as shown in Fig. 16. While each copper sheet was of 
comparatively small section, the large number of springs used 
gave sufficient total copper to carry the current from the outer 
to the inner or base ring without any danger of current passing 
through the spring plates themselves. This arrangement was 
used in reconstructing this rotor and has proved entirely 
successful. 

In order to determine the effects of various materials without 
zinc, or with but a small quantity of it, several rings were 
fitted up on a test rig and were operated for long periods with 
currents up to 12,000 amperes in some cases. In these tests, 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1833 


four different kinds of material were used, all of them representing 
different mixtures of copper with a small percentage of other 
materials, but with little zinc in any of them. It was feared 
that copper brushes on the copper rings would not work satisfac- 
torily, but while there was apparently some difference between 
the action of the different rings, it was found that copper brushes 
running on copper were, in general, satisfactory. The brushes 
were inclined against the rings, as in the actual machine, 
during this series of tests. 

These tests were carried through with various numbers of 
brushes, etc. It was found that the number of brushes could 
be reduced to about one-third the full number, and still collect 
the total rated current, but that any great reduction from the full 
number of brushes made the operation of the rings and brushes 
more sensitive, and more attention was required to keep them 
in perfect condition. It was also found that any hardness or 
undue ‘‘springiness”’ in the brushes, or brush material, would 
tend to give increased wear. Brushes of very thin leaf copper 
eventually gave best results. It was also shown by these tests 
that if a very good polish could be maintained on the rings, 
the rate of wear from day to day was practically unmeasurable 
on account of its smallness. 

As a result of these ring tests, the rotor undergoing repair 
was equipped with outside copper wearing rings, spring-sup- 
ported. The material in the rings was about 92 per cent pure 
copper, 2 per cent zinc and 6 per cent tin. 

The rotor was then installed in service and has been operating 
steadily for several years, with entire success. The other rotor, 
which had been operating while this rotor was being repaired, 
was then’ thoroughly examined after removal, to determine any 
- possible defects. It was noted that the insulating tubes over 
the rotor conductors were badly cracked or buckled in a number 
of places. Upon removal of the rods or conductors it was found 
that the insulating tubes were stuck so tightly to the copper 
rods that they would be torn in pieces in trying to remove them. 
As it had been intended that these tubes should move freely 
on the rods or conductors, as previously described, it was evident 
that there was something radically wrong. The true cause 
of the trouble was then discovered. In first fitting this set of 
tubes over the rods, they had been too tight, and, in 
order to make them fit easily, the men who assembled 
the machine had reamed them on the inside to enlarge 


1834 LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


them, and, in doing so, had cut away the inner hard sheet of 
fish paper which had formed the lining, thus exposing a shellaced 
surface. As soon as heated, this shellac stuck the tube to the 
rod so that there could be no possible movement between the 
two. In consequence, when the rods expanded or contracted, 
the tubes moved backward and forward in the supporting holes, 
and wherever they stuck fast in the outer holes, something had 
to give, so that eventually the tubes buckled or cracked or pulled 
open. This was readily remedied by putting on new tubes prop- 
erly constructed. As the rings on this rotor were in very good 
condition with but little worn away, the removable type of 
ring was not added, as this would require turning off a large 
amount of effective material on the existing rings and replacing 
it with new outerrings. It was decided that as there was several 
years’ wear in the old rings, it would be of no material advantage 
to throw this away when it could be worn away im service, 
just as well-as it could be turned off ina lathe. After the rings 
in this machine are worn down the permissible depth, they will 
be refilled by the addition of the removable type. 

This unipolar generator has now been in service for quite 
a long period, with no difficulty whatever, and with an average 
ring wear of less than 0.001 in. per day, or less than % in. per 
year. This may seem like an undue rate of wear; but in reality 
it is an extremely low rate, if the high peripheral speed, and the 
number of brushes, are considered. This machine operates 
day and night, seven days in the week, and practically contin- 
uously during the entire year. Taking the peripheral speed 
into account, the above rate of wear represents a total travel 
of each ring of about 3.6 million miles for each inch depth of wear, 
or about 150 times around the earth along a great circle. Con- 
sidering that there are brushes bearing on each ring at intervals 
of about eight in., a wear of one in., for every 3.6 million miles 
traveled, does not seem unduly large. If, at the same time, it 
is considered that the brushes are collecting from 7500 to 10,000 
amperes from each ring on a total ring surface of about 33 in. 
wide by 42 in. diameter, it is not surprising that there should 
be more or less ‘‘ wear’ due to the collection of this current. 
In fact, the current collected averages from 16 to 20 amperes 
per square inch of the total ring wearing surface. This may be 
compared with standard practise with large d-c. commutators, 
in which 13 to 2 amperes per square inch of commutator face 
is usual and 3 amperes is extreme. 


1912] LAMME: UNIPOLAR GENERATOR 1835 


On account of the final success of this machine, the story of 
its development is a more pleasant one to tell than is the case 
in some instances where entirely new types of apparatus are 
undertaken. It might be said, after reviewing the foregoing 
description, that many of the troubles encountered with this 
machine could have been foreseen; but such a statement would 
be open to question, for the engineers of the manufacturing 
company were in frequent session on all the various phases and 
difficulties which developed. The writer knows that in many 
cases, after any individual trouble was known, suggestions for 
remedies were not readily forthcoming. The writer does not 
know of any individual machine where more engineering and 
manufacturing skill was expended in endeavoring to bring about 
success, than was the case with this machine. As an example 


_ of engineering pertinacity, this machine is possibly without a 


rival. A mere telling of the story cannot give more than a 
slight idea of the actual fight to overcome the various difficulties 
encountered in the development of this machine. 

The results obtained were valuable in many ways. Many 
data were obtained which have since been of great use, both from 
a theoretical as well as a practical standpoint, in other classes 
of apparatus. Certain fundamental conditions encountered in 
this machine have led to the study of other allied principles 
which point toward possibilities in other lines of endeavor. 
Therefore this machine, which was very costly in its develop- 
ment, may eventually pay for itself through improvements and 
developments in other lines of design. 

The writer wishes to say a good word for the purchaser of this 
new apparatus. He was long-suffering, and was undoubtedly 
put to more or less trouble and inconvenience, but nevertheless 
he gave opportunity to correct difficulties. He recognized that 
the engineers were confronted with a new problem in this ma- 
chine and he gave them an opportunity to carry it through to 
success. Apparatus of this type could only be developed to 
full success in commerical operation, as all the difficulties en- 
countered would never have been found on shop test. There- 
fore, the attitude of the customer was of prime importance in 
the development of such a machine. 


1836 UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


Discussion ON ‘‘ DEVELOPMENT OF A SuccESSFUL DIRECT- 
CurRENT 2000-kw. Unrporar GENERATOR” (LAMME), 
Boston, Mass., JUNE 28, 1912. 


J. E. Noeggerath: It is a great pleasure indeed to congratu- 
late Mr. Lamme upon his frank and exceedingly important 
paper on acyclic machines, and to comment on It, as, naturally, 
having been in a position to overcome similar difficulties in the 
development of the unipolar machines I am connected with, I 
appreciate the extraordinary problems that have to be met. 

A few of the troubles mentioned by the author did not mate- 
rialize, as those connected with the slots for the conductors, since 
the machines were built differently from the start; also the rings 
never came loose, but, as fair exchange, experiences were bought 
dearly in other ways. Of the problems in common some were 
‘solved in the same manner, some entirely differently, by which 
statement I do not lay claim to a better solution. 

Mr. Lamme’s design of the collector rings is ingenious. He 
states that one of the reasons for building them up out of two 


Fie. 1 Fic. 2 


concentric rings was to facilitate their exchange. A different 
way of solving this difficulty is not to mount the collector rings 
on the armature directly, but rather on a separate shell which, 
magnetically, forms part of the armature. (Fig. 1.) This elimi- 
nates the necessity of handling the heavy bulk of the armature, 
reducing the weights that have to be taken care of in shipping 
and dismounting, to considerably less than 10 per cent. 

The collectors are so designed that one-half of the rings can be 
taken off from one end and the other half from the otherend. In 
case of a large number of rings two or more collector shells are 
used for each set. 

Due to the length of the conductors, it is necessary to provide in 
some way against the stresses produced by heat expansion. For 
the purpose of eliminating them, Mr. Lamme inserted a flexible 
element. 

The corresponding solution which avoids the necessity of tak- 
ing away space from the magnetic section, consists in dividing 
the conductor lengthwise, the end of one-half protrud ng into the 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1837 


end of the other half (Fig. 2), or in providing a sliding connec- 
tion, the conductor fitting loosely into a hole in the ring. Since 
the peripheral speeds are very high, this connection forms a per- 
fect contact which has proved successful in years of operation. 

Bearing troubles were solved in identically the same way by 
Mr. Lamme and myself, both of us using coils in the bearings to 
counteract the stray fields. 

Part of the collector ring troubles, too, was taken care of in the 
same way, as in both cases soft insulated graphite brushes of a 
specific kind are used; if Iam not mistaken, even the same make 
is used. 

Mr. Lamme’s investigation relating to the other brush troubles 
and supplementing my investigations of the theory of the electric 
contact are ingenious and I gladly acknowledge that where I have 


M, 


PEG ads Fic. 4. 


taken the first step, Mr. Lamme at the present stage has obtained 
superior results as to the voltage drop in the contacts. He suc- 
ceeds in permanently keeping it down to an average of 0.4 volt; 
he even mentions 0.1 volt; these are excellent results. 

I am glad to have Mr. Lamme a commiserator as to the mileage 
that has to be traveled over by the brushes. If such require- 
ments had been fulfilled by single-phase commutator motors, 
the maintenance expense would have become reasonable long 
ago. 

AE to running the generator, i.e., the rings against the brushes, 
it has been my experience for a long time that this is feasible; an ~ 
additional advantage not mentioned but probably known to Mr. 
Lamme, is that in running against the brushes, a compounding 
action takes place. 

If any criticism can be made outside of those mentioned by 
the author of the paper himself, it would refer to the great bulk 


1838 UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


of the machine; this can probably be explained to a considerable 
extent by the comparatively low speeds employed. 

As Mr. Lamme has brought up again the question of the mag- 
netic fields of unipolar machines, I put now before the Institute 
the results of an investigation, which originally I intended to 
elaborate into a paper. 

T have found that, in contradistinction to the accepted ideas— 
this ought to be of fundamental importance with regard to the 
theory of the magnetic field—magnetic fields set at right angles 
to each other do not affect each other in the least (Fig. 3 and 4). 

In other words, if a field is set up in a magnetic material 
which is permeated by a second field at right angles to it, the rela- 
tion of the first field to its electromagnetic force is not in the 
slightest degree affected by the second field, although the second 
field may be so strong as to have completely saturated the iron at 
right angles to the first field. 

Tf for instance in Fig. 3, M-1 and F-1 represent respectively a 
strong magnetomotive force and a strong magnetic field, it is 
natural that it will be little or not at all affected by a small 
second magnetomotive force and magnetic field, etc., M-2 and 
F-2, set at right angles to 1. 

However, it should be expected, according to the usual con- 
ception, that if F-2 and M-2 reach saturation (Fig. 4), then with 
the same M-1, F-1 should be considerably reduced, because one 
should assume that if the iron is saturated in one direction of the 
field F-2 there will be no possibility for any magnetic flux to pass 
through it, even though directed at right angles. 

However, F-1 is not at all affected by F-2. This is not in con- 
tradiction to the phenomena observed with fields which are said 
to be and are in some respects at right angles to each other in alter- 
nating-current machinery, in commutating direct-current ma- 
chinery and even in many types of unipolar machines. (How- 
ever, unipolar machines can be so designed that the fields are in 
such relation to each other so as to be actually at right angles. 
This is of course not usually the case when conductors are placed 
in slots or holes as in Mr. Lamme’s machine). Thisis,asI stated, 
not a contradiction, as a close scrutiny will show that the fluxes 
in the cases usually considered are affected in their mutual rela- 
tionship not because they are at right angles but for any of a 
number of other reasons. - 

ae conditions seem to find a parallel in the modern theory 
of hght. 

In concluding, I take pleasure in stating that I have observed 
the successful operation of Mr. Lamme’s 2000-kw. machine. It 
ran very well indeed; there was no sparking; it ran cool, noise- 
lessly and without vibration. 

It is almost needless to say that I hope the paper will give a 
new impetus to this development, which though apparently 
stagnant in the United States, I had the pleasure of reviving in 
Europe. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1839 


Elihu Thomson: [ listened to Mr. Lamme’s account of his 
experiences with the unipolar machine with much interest. It 
is an example of how bold an engineer must be at times even to 
undertake the problems of which so little is known. He enters 
the field and tries to do the work and then finds so many difficul- 
ties that it is a wonder he ever gets through or does not lose his 
enthusiasm before he has gone as far as Mr. Lamme has gone. I 
congratulate him on the final result in having a machine that will 
do the work. Now, in regard to unipolar construction, it will be 
recalled that in 1884 in the old electrical exhibition in Philadel- 
phia George Forbes showed two or three examples of unipolar 
dynamos. They had great blocks of carbon for brushes, but it is 
about the worst material to be used in the case of a unipolar 
machine where the contact resistance is high. The loss involved 
would be very great. About 1885 or ’86 we were studying the 
problem of the possibility of large power stations for continuous 
work, from the point of unipolar design, thinking possibly we 
might construct a number of machines in series for a very large 
output such as 25,000, or 30,000 kilowatts, large in those days. _ I 
was led to look into the unipolar design. I built two machines of 
moderate size to test out the conditions; the armature conductor 
was single without. series connection. This single conductor 
was used much asin Fig. 2 of Mr. Lamme’s paper, only the com- 
pounding which I obtained in that machine was by making the 
current-collecting ring connect with the inner conductor by a 
spiral band going around two or three times, as if a huge ribbon 
had been wound around, which carried the current to the outside 
ring. That is simply doing the same thing as carrying the leads 
from the brushes around in order to get compounding. The 
machine, however, developed difficulties and it was evident that 
we did not have enough knowledge in those days for proper con- 
struction. The iron losses were evidently, however, quite low. 
I would say that the rotor itself was composed of a plain cylin- 
drical bar which was evenly plated with copper on the outside 
so as to confine the conduction to the outside, and in the air gap. 
I was led to suspect in those days that possibly there was a 
lessened loss to be expected in iron, where we did not have a re- 
versal of flux, and in building some inductor dynamos later we 
found the iron losses so low that they were hardly measurable 
because the flux merely changed direction from one point to an- 
other, so that the amount of iron subject to magnetic changes was 
very small. That, I think, would apply in the case of unipolar 
machines and account for the low iron losses. 

I was interested to note the remarks that Mr. Lamme makes as 
to the brushes. This problem in a way reminds me very strongly 
of the early days of railway motors. We had a hard fight to get 
railway motors to work in the street, where they were exposed to 
the dust and dirt of the street, and the commutators likewise. 
We attempted to run them open, without any boxes or casing, 
and encountered many difficulties. I was on the point of telling 


1840 UNIPOLAR GENERATOR [June 28 


our company to hold up on railway motor business because the 
commutator repair bills would swamp them. We then intro- 
duced the carbon brush. The box type of motor kept the dust 
off, and our hard work was over. For a time it was a very seri- 
ous outlook. I recall that in 1889 Mr. C. E. L. Brown, known 
to us all as one of the most competent engineers, whose work has 
stood as the very highest, was engaged at that time in unipolar 
design, and the Oerlikon works had a contract to build a machine 
for 10 volts for electrolytic work. It was of large output, some- 
thing like 12,000 or 15,000 amperes. I saw the parts of the ma- 
chine in the shop. The rotor was a large copper pulley with rims 
turned up at each side for the traverse of the brushes. I said to 
Mr. Brown, “ That is all right; but how about collection of 
current from that ring? The wear will be terrific on those sur- 
faces and your ring will soon have the flanges worn off.” He 
said ‘Do you really think so?” I said “I know so. I don’t be- 
lieve it is possible for you to run at those high speeds without 
wearing them off.’’ In about a year’s time a letter came from 
Mr. Brown saying he had found exactly what I told him about 
the brush wear was true, and he said ‘‘ Now I am going to try 
carbon.” I wrote back that I thought he would be in worse 
trouble with carbon than with leaf brushes, because the leaf 
brush will accommodate itself to the surface, while the block of 
carbon will dance and jump, and cannot possibly follow the vibra- 
tion of the machine unless the pressure be so high as to cause a 
mechanical friction that will be absolutely prohibitive. Later 
on I heard from Brown that these things were true. I have 
been interested very much to see the chemical methods of keep- 
ing contacts clean as applied in the way that Mr. Lamme says 
has been done. When I was analytical chemist, to keep our 
metal surfaces clean we washed them with a little hydrochloric 
acid. If applied to cases of the kind in such a way that the acid 
would not do any damage around, it would often solve difficulties. 

W.L. Waters (by letter): Mr. Lamme, at the end of his paper, 
states—‘‘ As an example of engineering pertinacity, this machine 
is possibly without a rival.”’ I would change the word “ pos- 
sibly ” to ‘‘ probably.”’ The writer had the pleasure of assisting 
Mr. Lamme in some of the work described, and I think that en- 
gineers that have been through similar difficulties will realize 
that his bare narrative covers a long period of strenuous work— 
work that would never have been brought to a successful con- 
clusion, but for the extraordinary resourcefulness and persever- 
ance of the man who was directing it. As stated in the paper— 
“TE SNiCht DA S830 ve so ae io cee he that many of the 
troubles encountered with this machine could. have been fore- 
seen,’’ but when it is considered that this is merely one of a 
thousand machines that were being handled in the routine work 
by the engineers responsible for this unipolar machine, it is easily 
seen that the only way to decide the numerous points which arose 
was by the direct experiments described in the paper. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


EXCITATION OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT 
GENERATORS 


BY D. B. RUSHMORE 


Tue PrositEeM OF EXCITATION 

In order to induce an electromotive force in electrical machin- 
ery some sort of excitation must always be provided. In direct- 
current machines an e.m.f. is induced in the armature conductors 
by their motion across a stationary magnetic field. This is 
sometimes also the case with alternators, although it is more 
usual that the field is revolving, so that the magnetic flux travels 
past the armature conductors, which are stationary. 

In the inductor alternator both the field and armature wind- 
ings are stationary and only the pole pieces revolve. Due to the 
varying reluctance of the magnetic circuit, caused by the revolv- 
ing poles, the flux linked with the armature coils will vary period- 
ically, and induce an alternating e.m.f. in the armature winding. 
Inthe polyphase induction motor the stator and rotor currents 
produce a resultant magnetomotive force resulting in a rotating 
field which induces e.m.fs. in both the primary and secondary 
windings. In a transformer, the applied primary current mag- 
netizes the core and produces an alternating magnetic flux which 
links with both the primary and secondary windings, causing 
e.m.fs. to be induced therein. 4 

The above cases can in general be divided in two groups: 
first, those of the transformer action, where the field and the 


. 


windings, in which the e.m.f. is to be induced, are both stationary 
relative to one another and where the voltage is induced by the 
alternating magnetic flux; second, those of the generator action, 
where the field and the windings, in which the e.m.f. is to be 
induced, move relatively to one another, so that the armature 
conductors cut the lines of force of the magnetic field. 

1841 


1842 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


In this paper it is only the intent to cover that part of the 
second group which refers to the excitation of alternating-current 
synchronous generators. 


ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS 
Induced E. M. F. An alternating-current synchronous gen- 
erator is absolutely dependent on a direct-current excitation 
for its operation, the e.m.f. induced in the armature circuit being 


determined by the formula 
E =4.44 kskyfnd 10% 


in which 
k; = slot factor. 
kw = winding pitch factor. 
f = frequency in cycles per second. 
nm = armature turns in series per phase. 
@ = magnetic lines of force. 
VALUES OF SLOT FACTOR ks 
Slots per pole | Single-* Two- Three- 
per phase phase phase phase 
1 1.000 | 1.000 | 1.000 
2 0.707 | 0.924 | 0.966 
3 0.667 | 0.911 | 0.960 
4 0.653 | 0.907 | 0.958 
5 0.647 | 0.904 | 0.957 
6 0.643 | 0.903 | 0.956 


The values of the winding pitch factor, kw, are given in Fig. 1. 

Characteristics. The field ampere-turns required to produce 
the magnetic flux which is necessary in order to induce a desired 
e.m.f. depends on the character of the magnetic circuit, 4.e., 
on its dimensions and on the material of which it is made up. 
The values are readily obtained by referring to standard satura- 
tion curves, similar to the ones shown in Fig. 2, these curves, of 
course, depending upon the qualities of the iron or steel which is 
used. The curves are plotted asampere-turns per inch against 
kilo-lines per sq. inch, although occasionally ampere-turns per 
centimeter are plotted against kilo-lines per square centimeter. 
The total magnetomotive force per magnetic circuit is equal to 
the sum of the m.m. fs. necessary for establishing the required 


*If part of the ‘slots are left open, the breadth of the winding is re- 
duced and the value of ks is increased to approximately that given for 
a two-phase winding. 


a As 


a eh 


3300 
1.00: 3000 
3 2700 
0.90 2400 
w 2100 
38 =) 
0.80 < 1800 
a 
= = 1500 
s BE 
2 0.70 8 1200 
Sa: > | 
900} —> 
600} ii 
300 ree 
| 
EQ A005 70. BO ee 90) a8) 00 () ean? cae Sk ee OAC NEC 
PER CENT WINDING PITCH AMPERES FIELD 
Fic. 1—VaLuEs oF WINDING-PITCH Fic. 3—ALTERNATOR CHARACTER- 
Factor, ks. ISTICS. 
130 A 
= ‘ae SHEET| STEEL 
110 
: AST|STEEL 
$ 100 _| c i al 
5 90 = = ii 
~ 80 ; 
é 70 { isl t } 4 
a | 
5 cagt_Inon 
1 6 + 
oa Lak 
x Es 
lee ie ae oat | 
a if FORAIR 
20 | AMP. TURNS = .3123 B 
a CI | 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1843 


flux in the separate parts of the circuit which are in series, viz., 
the pole pieces, the field spider, the air gaps, the teeth and the 
armature core. 

The relation of the e.m.f. produced by an alternator at no-load, 
i.e., at open circuit, to the field current when the alternator is 
driven at constant speed is represented by the no-load saturation 


ay uL_* 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120 130 140 150 160 170 189 190 200 210 2. ° 
AMPERE TURNS PER INCH 


Fic. 2-—-SATURATION CURVES. 


curve. Such a characteristic curve is shown in curve A, Fig. 3, 
and it is seen that this curve is almost a straight line for small 
exciting currents. At low excitation, the reluctance of the air 
gap is very high and that of the iron very low, and therefore the 
former may be considered as constituting the entire reluctance | 
of the magnetic circuit. Since the reluctance of air is constant, 


1844 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


regardless of the flux density, at small excitations the flux will 
be proportional to the magnetomotive force, and therefore the 
open-circuit voltage is proportional to the field current, hence the 
curve is straight. As the field becomes stronger, however, the 
proportion of the air-gap reluctance to the entire reluctance 
decreases because the permeability of iron decreases with in- 
creased flux density, and therefore the e.m.f. increases less 
rapidly with increased excitation. 

When a current is flowing in the armature circuit, 7. e., under 
load, the field ampere-turns required to maintain normal terminal 
voltage exceed the no-load ampere-turns required for normal 
voltage. This is due to the following: 

1. The resistance drop in voltage caused by the armature current. 

2. The demagnetizing effect of the armature current. 


3. The increased leakage flux caused by a greater full-load field excita- 
tion. 


A number of methods have been proposed for calculating 
the above components, and thus determining the total field 
excitation. A detailed explanation of these methods is, however, 
beyond the scope of this paper. Knowing the resistance and the 
leakage reactance of the armature, the voltage drop in the arma- 
ture is added geometrically to the terminal voltage, and this 
gives the induced voltage in the machine. Knowing from the 
no-load saturation curve the required net excitation at this volt- 
age, and correcting it for the effect of the armature reaction, the 
necessary field ampere-turns are obtained. The result of such 
calculations for different values of the armature current and for 
various power factors are represented by the load-characteristic 
curves. The full-load saturation curve of an alternator is shown 
by curve B in Fig. 3. 

Effect of Power Factor. When the armature current leads the 
induced e.m.f. in the armature conductors, the armature m.m.f. 
assists the field m.m.f. and so strengthens the field. When the 
armature current lags behind the induced e.m.f., the armature 
m.m.f. opposes the field m.m.f. and so weakens the field. 

When the current and the induced e.m.f. are in phase, the 
two m.m.fs. neither assist or oppose each other, and the influence 
of the armature reaction is only to distort the main field without 
changing its value. The current in the armature, however, 
always lags behind the induced e.m.f. by reason of the inductance, 
and even with unity power factor in the external circuit the 
armature reaction is demagnetizing to a certain extent. 


oY 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1845 


The induced armature e.m.f. is proportional to the flux per pole, 
and thus, with leading current in the armature the induced e.mf. 
is greater than the open-circuit voltage, and with lagging current 
less than the open-circuit voltage. In the latter case, when load 
is put on the machine the field excitation must, therefore, be 
increased in order to overcome the armature reaction by an 
amount sufficient to neutralize the armature-demagnetizing 
magnetomotive force. 

Range of Excitation. In order to get the best combination for 
automatic voltage regulation an alternator should preferably 
have a range in excitation from no-load to maximum load, with 
approximately 80 per cent power factor, of the ratio of not more 
than one to two. With 125 volts excitation, the voltage should 
therefore not be allowed to exceed 125 volts at maximum load, 80 
per cent power factor, and the corresponding no-load excitation 
should be about 70 volts. Should the excitation voltage be 250, 
the same ratio should hold true. 

Excitation required varies considerably for different machines, 
depending upon the size, the number of poles, the speed and the 
regulation. For alternators of different capacities, but other- 
wise similar, the relative excitation naturally decreases as the 
size of the alternator increases. High-speed machines generally 
require a less excitation than low-speed, due to the less number 
of poles. With a large number of poles, however, the air gap 
is usually smaller, and this will somewhat offset the higher 
excitation for low-speed machines. 

In general, it may be said that small machines of many poles 
require a large excitation, and large machines with few poles a 
comparatively small excitation. The percentage of the excitation 
of alternators as compared to their output may approximately 
be taken as from 2 per cent or more for the former class to 0.5 
per cent for the latter. In Fig. 4 are given some curves showing 
approximately the average values of excitation required for 
different types of alternators. 


EXCITERS 
Exciter Characteristics. When exciters are to be operated in 
connection with automatic regulators it is most important that 
they be designed with this point in view. The densities, 


| especially in the fields, should be fa rly low, as with a high density 


the time element required to vary the voltage from one point to 
another would be so long as materially to affect the regulation. 


RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


1846 
The exciter should preferably have a time element so that it 
will be responsive to changes in the field excitation to the extent 


that, by inserting an external resistance equal to about three 


times the resistance of the field, the voltage will fall from 125 
to 25 volts in from four to six seconds. An ideal exciter designed 


along these lines should also give at full field 165 volts, and the 
increase in the field current from 125 volts to 150 volts should not 


be over 50 per cent. 

For alternators operating at maximum inductive overload, 
125 volts is generally required for the excitation, and in order 
to get satisfactory regulation when a T A regulator is used, 


| 
it iis 
a |S | & 
eh le z 
2300 Ser 1 
z i 
SA z 
700 iy eS 2 
= Zz}. & 4, 
= aye is | 
& 6000 ra] 4 ey 
; i pavaaae 
* 5000 J eaeny = 
3 Ey ae) & i‘ 
> el Ay = AK 
7 006 Pa a 5 
"4000 —|—} a8 —15 pale eal 
of el _ 
: al | S 
3000 tof > - 
UenLS) A 
2000 / 
7 0; 2ek G8. 10° Ise. 16 sa 
190 [ AMPERES GIELD | 
Fic. 5—SATURATION CURVES OF 
DIRECT-CURRENT EXCITERS. 


0 10, 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 
KW. EXCITATION 
Fic. 4—APpPROXIMATE AVERAGE 


EXCITATION OF ALTERNATORS. 
the exciter must be designed so as to be able to give 165 volts 


momentarily. It is also necessary that the increase in the exciter 
field current should be small, so that the exciter will respond 
quickly to the short-circuiting of the rheostat, and thus insure 
the desired alternator excitation. Should the excitation voltage 
be any other value than 125, e.g., 250 volts, the above values 
would be proportionally changed. 
The curves in Fig. 5 show the saturation curves of two exciters, 
one representing the characteristics of a machine with a low 


density, as required, and the other representing the characteristics 
of a machine with high density and consequently requiring a 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1847 


large increase in the field current. It can readily be seen that 
the latter exciter is not as desirable for good voltage regulation 
as the former exciter when an automatic regulator is used. 

The series field excitation should not exceed 30 per cent of the 
total excitation so that a good regulation may be obtained by 
control of the shunt-field rheostat. In order to obtain the desired 
variation in the voltage it becomes necessary to provide a rheostat 
of sufficient size, its resistance being about three times that of 
the resistance of the exciter shunt field when hot. 

Shunt vs. Compound-Wound Exciters. While an exciter can be 
either of the shunt or compound-wound type, the latter is pre- 
ferable. The main reason for this is that a better parallel opera- 
tion is obtained with compound windings, this being especially 
true where two or more machines of different size are to be oper- 
ated in parallel. It makes no difference whether an automatic 
regulator is used or not, although the series winding loses its 
value in connection with automatic regulators if the exciters are 
not operated in parallel. 

When operating without automatic regulators, compound- 
wound exciters have the advantage that they will give the same 
excitation from no load to full load, or they can be slightly over- 
compounded to take care of the increased load, and will thereby 
compensate in a measure for the drop or rise in the voltage as the 
load varies. 

Exciters with Commutating Poles. In operating exciters with 
commutating poles in parallel, there is sometimes a tendency for 
the incoming machine to take all the load. The reason for this 
is generally due to the fact that a commutating-pole machine, 
when flat-compounded at 125 volts, has a rising characteristic 
when operated at voltages less than normal, as shown in Fig. 6. 
To overcome this it is therefore desirable to flat-compound all 
exciters with commutating poles at 80 volts, so as to give a droop- 
ing characteristic at higher voltages, as shown in Fig. 7. 

Rating. It is the general practise so to determine the capacity 
of the exciters that their combined normal rating will correspond 
to the maximum excitation required for the total generating 
equipment when operating at the specified power factor. 

An overload capacity of 25 per cent is therefore generally 
considered ample to take care of possible excessive load variations 
and for furnishing current to auxiliary station apparatus and- 
lighting. ' 

The temperature rise at normal load should not exceed 45 deg. 


1848 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


cent. on the commutator and 40 deg. cent. on all other parts; for 
25 per cent overload 60 deg. and 55 deg. cent respectively. These 
temperatures are to be based on thermometer readings, and a 
room temperature of 25 deg. cent. 

Voltage. The pressure most commonly used for excitation is 
125 volts. For alternating-current machines of a very large 
capacity requiring a large excitation it will, however, usually be 
found to be more economical to use a 250-volt excitation. This 
higher voltage will necessarily allow a smaller conductor for the 
exciter and field leads, and in addition the size of the commutator 
can be considerably reduced, which is important, especially for 
waterwheel-driven exciters where the design must be such as 
to withstand safely the increased stresses due to a possible double 
speed. 


0 4 % FULL 0 % % 4% Fuu 
LOAD LOAD 


Fics. 6 AND 7—COMPOUNDING OF COMMUTATING-POLE EXCITERS. 


Speed. The speed of an exciter depends on the method of its 
drive and on its capacity. Extremely slow or high speeds mean 
excessive cost, with the addition of mechanical difficulties for 
high speed. This is especially important in hydraulic installa- 
tions, where the exciters are driven from waterwheels, in 
which case they must be designed to withstand the increased 
stresses due to a double speed. This fact should, therefore, 
always be considered before the speed of waterwheel-driven 
exciters is fixed. 

Mechanical Design. The mechanical design of exciters does not 
differ from other direct-current generators. They are almost 
always of the horizontal type, although in certain instances 
vertical units are desired, due to certain advantages in the 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1849 


hydraulic equipment. Vertical units are, as a rule, considerably 
more expensive than horizontal, on account of increased de- 
velopment charges. 

The pole pieces are generally built up of laminated steel riveted 
together and bolted to the frame. The extensions of the pole 
face serve to hold the field coils firmly in place, and the coils 
can readily be exchanged when necessary by simply removing 
the pole pieces. 

Belted exciters are generally provided with end-shield bearings, 
as when this type of exciter is selected the required capac'ty is 
not very large and two-bearing machines can safely be used. 
When intended for direct connection to a waterwheel they are 
almost invariably of the pedestal-bearing type, the shaft being 
provided with the necessary coupling. When, on the other hand, 
they are intended for direct connection to an engine or to the 
main generators, shaft and bearings are generally not furnished. 
In the former case the exciter armature is commonly mounted 
directly on the engine shaft and the frame is supported on an 
extension of the engine base, while in the latter case the arma- 
ture is generally mounted on an extension of the generator shaft 
and the frame is supported on a bracket outside one of the 
generator-bearing pedestals. 

Vertical exciters are ordinarily provided with one or two guide 
bearings and a short shaft with coupling. For supporting the 
revolving element a roller-suspension bearing is sometimes 
furnished, forming part of the upper bearing bracket. It should 
be of sufficient size to take care not only of the weight of the 
exciter armature but also of the revolving element of the prime 
mover. In certain instances waterwheel builders will furnish 
a step bearing and if so, only guide bearings need be furnished 
with the exciter. 

Two-bearing belted exciters are usually provided with a slid- 
ing base and the belt is tightened by the use of a ratchet screw 
which moves the machine along the base. When the exciters 
are rigidly coupled and driven by motors, both the exciter and 
the motor should be mounted on a common cast-iron base to 
insure perfect alignment. 

Pulleys for belt-driven exciters should preferably be of paper, 
these being preferable to cast-iron pulleys. They are cheaper, 
lighter and adhere well to the belt. The belt speed should not 
exceed 5000 ft. per minute and the pulley ratio should not exceed 
5 to 1 unless an idler is provided. 


1850 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


DIrrERENt MetuHops OF EXCITATION 


The excitation of alternators can in general be classified under 
the following three divisions: self-excited, compositely excited 
and separately excited. Of these, however, the last named is 
almost entirely used. 

Self-Exciting Alternators. The simplest form of self-excited 
alternator is the one where the field current is supplied through 
a rectifying commutator from the armature under consideration. 

Self-excited alternators may be divided into series-wound and 
shunt-wound, depending upon whether the whole current is 
rectified and led through a comparatively small number of turns 
around the field magnets, or whether only a portion of the 
current is rectified and led through a shunt circuit several 
times around the field poles. Of these, the shunt-wound type 
has been mostly used, and either the full pressure of the 
armature, or that of one or more coils, may be impressed directly 
upon the rectifying commutator, by means of a transformer 
attached to the armature. 

The Alexanderson self-excited alternator is possibly best 
_ known in this country. A novel feature of this machine is the 
automatic voltage regulation accomplished by a special applica- 
tion of the field rheostat. While in ordinary generators the 
field current is controlled by hand regulation, this machine 
employs a three-phase field rheostat in which the voltage drop 
is automatically cut down to the desired extent by a three-phase 
current forced through the rheostat in opposite directions to the 
field currents. The current used for redycing the drop in the 
rheostat is taken from a transformer connected in series with 
the armature circuit. In this way the field current is regulated 
with respect to the power factor as well as to the amount of 
current taken from the generator. 

A diagram showing the general connections of this machine 
is givenin Fig.8. The stationary part is provided with two wind- 
ings, the main winding, A, and the auxiliary winding, 8 
which is placed in the same slots as the main winding and con- 
sists of a few turns of small wire. 

The exciting current is generated in the auxiliary three-phase 
winding, its terminals being connected to three sets of brushes 
bearing on a special rectifying commutator. R represents three 
non-inductive resistances connecting the windings to the neutral 
point. Three series transformers are connected in the main 
lines of the alternator, the secondaries of which are connected 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1851 


to the resistance in the Y-connection of the auxiliary winding. 
F is the field winding of the alternator, which can be of the 
ordinary construction. The commutator has one active segment 
per pole, each alternate segment being connected to one side of 
the field winding and the remaining segments to the other. 
By this arrangement it is possible to make the commutation inde- 
pendent of the reactance which is inherent in the ordinary type 
of field winding, and the whole process of commutation is 
carried out in the stationary circuits before the current enters the 
field. 

The operation of the machine is as follows: full-load inductive 
excitation of the machine is obtained from the voltage generated 


Fic. 8—-DIAGRAM OF ALEXANDERSON SELF-EXCITED ALTERNATOR. 


in the auxiliary winding, and the resistance in series with the 
winding is so adjusted that the current from the winding to 
the brushes is right at no load. With full-load wattless current 
of the alternator, the current in the secondary of the series trans- 
former and its potential is such that the drop in the resistance 
which occurs at no load is completely compensated for, so that 
there is no potential difference although the resistance is in 
series with the commutator. With full non-inductive load, 
since the arrangement of the circuits is such that the opposing 
e.m.f. by the series transformer is displaced 90 deg. from that 
generated in the auxiliary winding, the resultant drop in the 
resistance is of some magnitude and therefore the exciter 
voltage is less than at full-load wattless current, but more than 


1852 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


at no load. The true relation between excitation at no load, 
full non-inductive load and full inductive load is illustrated in 
Fig..9, in which A B is the excitation at full non-inductive load, 
AC the excitation at full inductive load, and A O, equal to 
AC—OC, is the no-load excitation. The circle is the locus for 
the field excitation for different power factors. It is evident that 
the voltage so obtained at the rectifying commutator is correct 
for proper compounding, since the relation between the no-load 
ampere-turns and the full non-inductive load ampere-turns 
is quite closely found by combining the no-load ampere-turns 
and synchronous impedance ampere-turns at right angles. This 
full inductive excitation is very closely obtained, if the no-load 
ampere-turns and the synchronous impedance ampere-turns are 
directly added. This corresponds in the diagram to the condi- 
tions when A O is added to OC. 
Composite-Wound Alternators. In order to obtain the result 
for which compound windings are used with direct-current gen- 


A 


Fic. 9—ExcITATION DIAGRAM—SELF-EXCITED ALTERNATOR. 


erators, compensating windings are used with alternators. The 
field is excited for its normal open-circuit voltage by an exciter 
either direct-connected or geared to the generator, while the 
voltage drop caused by the load current is compensated for by 
series ampere-turns from self-excitation. 

The compensating winding can be connected in many different 
ways; for example, the armature current may all be rectified for 
use in excitation, or it may pass through a special transformer 
attached to the armature, and the secondary of this transformer 
may supply the current for rectification and self-excitation. 
Again, the rectified current may be passed through a few turns 
of wire on each pole, or all the necessary series turns may be 
placed on one or two poles. 

The connections of one type of compensated generator are 
shown in Fig. 10. There are two collector rings for supplying 
current to the revolving field, and three collector rings for sup- | 
plying alternating current from a series transformer to the arma- 


ay 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1853 


‘ture of the compensating exciter. This set of three rings is 


mounted outside of the bearing in the case of the smaller belt- 
driven generators, and inside the bearing, just outside the field 
collector rings, on the larger belt-driven machines. On the 
engine-driven generators these rings are mounted on the exciter- 
shaft. 

The compounding of these machines is accomplished by pass- 
ing three-phase current into the exciter armature in such a 
way that it reacts magnetically on the exciter field in propor- 
tion to the strength and phase relation of the alternating current. 
Consequently, the magnetic field and hence the voltage of the 


LINE 


+ 3 
2 
4 
z 
t Y 
EQUALIZER ‘a 
ch 6 
MARKING SHOWING POSITION eI rc yt 
OF MAGNET FRAME FIELD RHEOSTAT € ,\ |p 
5 c= ee | 
vy js =| {2 
PEE EG all is =| (a 
Se -  —— x o = 7 
-. 
MARKING SHOWING POSITION 
OF BRUSH HOLDER YOKE 
ed Rs CONNECTION BOARD 
as a a EXCITER TERMINALS 
Se 


SECONDARY LEADS A, B AND CO CONNECTED 
TO TAPS P GIVE MINIMUM COMPOUNDINGe 
SECONDARY LEADS A, B AND C CONNECTED 
TO TAPS Q, R OR S GIVE INTERMEDIATE 
COMPOUNDING, 

SECONDARY LEADS A, B AND C CONNECTED 
TO TAPS T GIVE MAXIMUM COMPOUNDING 


ARMATURE 


t 
COLLECTOR RINGS 
COMMUTATOR REVOLVING FIELD 

EXCITER ARMATURE 


CONNECTION BOARD 
MAIN TERMINALS 


Fic. 10—CoNNECTIONS OF THREE-PHASE COMPENSATED GENERATORS. 


exciter are due to the combined effects of the shunt field current 
and the magnetic reaction of the alternating current. The alter- 
nating current passes through the exciter armature in such a 
manner as to give the necessary rise of exciter voltage as the 
non-inductive load increases, and without other adjustment, to 
give greater rise of exciter voltage with additions of inductive 
load. 

An illustration of a compensating generator of the above type 
is shown in Fig. 11. ; 

Separate Excitation. A separately excited generator has no 


inherent tendency toward regulation, this being effected either 


1854 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


by a rheostat in the field circuit or by means of different systems 
of automatic regulator operation, as treated more fully in another 
part of this paper. 

With separate excitation the direct current is obtained by 
means of exciters, or from some other existing source of direct- 
current supply or from a storage battery. The first method, 
however, is the most advantageous and is the one almost invari- 
ably used. 


DIFFERENT METHODS OF VOLTAGE REGULATION 
Hand Regulation. The simplest system of operation is by 
means of hand-operated rheostats connected in the field circuits 
of each generator. The pressure of the exciter bus is then 
generally kept constant at the rated exciter voltage and all 


CURRENT 


MAIN CONTACTS COMPENSATING 
3) TRANSFORMER. 


WINDING 


i |] COUNTER WEIGHT 


POTENTIAL 
TRANSFORMER 


EXTERNAL 
RESISTANCE EXCITER FIELD 


RHEOSTAT 


= 
A.C, FIELD \a.0, GENERATOR 


RHEOSTAT 


Fic. 12—ELEMENTARY D1AGRAM OF TyPE TA Form A REGULATOR 


the regulation is done by manipulating the generator rheostats. 
In order to regulate the exciter voltage it is, of course, also neces- 
sary to provide rheostats in the exciter fields. 

T A Regulators. Of the various schemes proposed for auto- 
matic voltage regulation, the TA regulator is now most widely 
used. With this system the desired voltage is maintained by 
rapidly opening and closing a shunt circuit across the exciter 
field rheostat. The rheostat is first turned in until the exciter 
voltage is greatly reduced and the regulator circuit is then 
closed. This short-circuits the rheostat through contacts in the 
regulator and the voltage of the exciter and generator im- 
mediately rise. Ata predetermined point the regulator contacts 
are automatically opened and the field current of the exciter 


PLATE XCill 
A. 1. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[RUSHMORE| 


Frc 1J1—THREE-PHASE COMPENSATED GENERATOR. 


[RUSHMORE] 
Fic. 20—VoLtTaGE REGULATOR. 


1912) RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1855 


must again pass through the rheostat. The resulting reduction 
in voltage is arrested at once by the closing of the regulator 
contacts, which continue to vibrate in this manner and keep the 
generator voltage within the desired limits. 

Method of Operation. An elementary. diagram of the type 
T A, form A regulator’s connections with an alternating-current 
generator and exciter is shown in Fig. 12. The regulator has a 
direct-current control magnet, an alternating-current control 
magnet, and a relay. The direct-current control magnet is 
connected to the exciter busbars. This magnet has a fixed 
stop-core in the bottom and a movable core in the top which is 
attached to a pivoted lever having at the opposite end a flexible 
contact pulled downward by four spiral springs. For clearness, 
however, only one spring is shown in the diagram. Opposite the 
direct-current control magnet is the alternating-current control 
magnet¢which has a potential winding connected by means of a 
potential transformer to the alternating-current generator or 
busbars. There is an adjustable compensating winding on the 
alternating-current magnet connected through a current trans- 
former to the principal lighting feeder. The object of this 
winding is to raise the voltage of the alternating-current busbars 
as the load increases. The alternating-current control magnet 
has a movable core and a lever and contacts similar to those of 
the direct-current control magnet, and the two combined pro- 
duce what is known as the “ floating main contacts.” 

The relay consists of a U-shaped magnet core having a dif- 
ferential winding and a pivoted armature controlling the con- 
tacts which open and close the shunt circuit across the exciter 
field rheostat. One of the differential windings of the relay is 
permanently connected across the exciter busbars and tends to 
keep the contacts open; the other winding is connected to the 
exciter busbars through the floating main contacts and when the 
latter are closed neutralizes the effect of the first winding and 

allows the relay contacts to short-circuit the exciter field rheostat. 
Condensers are connected across the relay contacts to prevent 
severe arcing and possible injury. 

Cycle of Operation. The circuit shunting the exciter field 
rheostat through the relay contacts is opened by means of 
a single-pole switch at the bottom of the regulator panel and the 
rheostat turned in until the alternating-current voltage is re- 
duced 65 per cent below normal. This weakens both of the 
control magnets and the floating main contacts are closed. This 


1856 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


closes the relay circuit and demagnetizes the relay magnet, 
releasing the relay armature, and the spring closes the relay 
contacts. The single-pole switch is then closed and as the exciter 
field rheostat is short-circuited the exciter voltage will at once 
rise and bring up the voltage of the alternator. This will 
strengthen the alternating-current and direct-current control 
magnets and at the voltage for which the counterweight has 
been previously adjusted the main contacts will open. The relay 
magnet will then attract its armature and by opening the shunt 
circuit at the relay contacts will throw the full resistance into 
the exciter field circuit, tending to lower the exciter and alternator 


. 


FEEDERS 
OR MAINS 


MAIN 
ra, CONTACTS 


a> \_ RELAY 
H}H—~contacts 
tI 


POTENTIAL 


RELAY |_ 
CONTACTS TRANSFORMER LAW 


140 
CONTACTS 


EXCITER FIELD 
RHEOSTAT 


A.C.FIELD 
RHEOSTAT 


FIELD 
O- EXCITER 


AsC, GENERATOR 


EXCITER BUSES 


Fic. 18—-ELeEMENTARY DIAGRAM OF TyPpE T A Form F REGULATOR 
CONNECTIONS. 


voltage. The main contacts will then be again closed, the exciter 
field rheostat short-circuited through the relay contacts and the 
cycle repeated. This operation is continued at a high rate of 
vibration, due to the sensitiveness of the control magnets, and 
maintains not a constant, but a steady exciter voltage. 

For larger installations the type T A, form F regulator is 
generally used, an elementary connection diagram of this type 
being shown in Fig. 138. This regulator has several relays, 
varying from two to twelve in number according to the size, 
capacity and character of the exciters used. While the funda- 
mental principle of operation of these regulators is the same as 
for the form A, as described above, certain modifications are 


1912) RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1857 


necessary in controlling two or more generators. As will be 
seen by reference to the elementary diagram of the form F 
regulator, relay No. 1 is connected across the field rheostat of 
one exciter, while relays No. 2 and No. 3 are placed across sec- 
tions of the field rheostat of the second exciter. This is necessi- 
tated because the second exciter is of larger capacity than the 
first. Similar modifications are necessary in special cases, but 
the method of control by the rapidly moving main floating 
magnets and sensitive control magnets remains identical and 
maintains the same steady rise and fall in voltage required by the 
alternating-currrent system. 

Compensation for Line Drop. Compensation for line drop 
may also be obtained with these regulators. For ordinary instal- 


COMPENSATING 


wane LINE DROP 


MAIN CONTACTS 
J 


SS = PONPENGATOR 
D.C. PIVOT 3 HcouNTER oe 
CONTROL []weieut c = ad 
MAGNET 
CONDENSER 
SPRING—}-}—> 
RELAY 
MAGNET 
EXTERNAL EXCITER 
RESISTANCE FIELD POTENTIAL 
RHEOSTAT (id Vine aaa 
}___t oy 
z EXCITER aaa 


A.C, FIELD A.C, GENERATOR CURRENT 
RHEOSTAT TRANSFORMERS 


Fic. 14—CoNnNECTIONS OF AUTOMATIC REGULATOR FOR ALTERNATING- 
CURRENT GENERATOR, USING LINE-DROP COMPENSATOR. 


lations the compensating winding on the alternating-current 
control magnet is connected to a current transformer in the main 
feeder. A dial switch is provided by which the strength of the 
alternating-current control magnet may be varied and the 
regulator made to compensate for any desired line drop up to 
15 per cent, according to the line requirements. 

This arrangement is very satisfactory for general use, but where 
the power-factor of the load has a wide range of variation, as 
in long-distance transmission lines, better results can be obtained 
with a special line-drop compensator adapted to the regulator. 
This compensator, see diagram Fig. 14, has two dial switches 
with many taps to the resistance and the reactance in the box 
so that it can be adjusted to compensate accurately for line 
losses with loads of varying power factor. 


1858 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION {June 28 


Systems. In larger stations with a number of alternators, the 
general practise has been to provide two or more exciters opera- 
‘ing in parallel and controlled by one common voltage regulator 
by a suitable arrangement of equalizing rheostats. The con- 
nections of such a system are shown in Fig. 15. 

A system using T A regulators for preventing cross-currents 
between generators operating in parallel is shown in the diagram, 
Fig. 16. This particular arrangement covers two generators 
operating on separate buses provided with a tie-line. With the 
tie-switch closed, however, the condition will be the same as 
if both generators operated in parallel on one bus. One exciter 


CURRENT LIGHTING 
TRANSFORME 1 FEEDER 


Sima 59 St mbes 560 [pos ! news 
———— | 
ers POTENTIAL 


~TRANSFORME 
O1 U2 U3 O4 Os Oe Liz cy 


A.C. BUS BARS 


A.C. 
GENERATOR 


GENERATOR 
EXCITER 


RHEOSTAT. 
BUS BARS 


Pat 
: 50 35 5 
CONSENEGEE FIELD EXCITERSO as O 
. EXCITER Nacegese 
il RHEOSTAT / 2 
& e110] 11] 12 | 18) 14 | 15 ]16 | 17 
slola o 1a 
a2] Osa Ist 56] a6] 87] 3n_a9| aol 4 


Fic. 15—ONE ARRANGEMENT OF EXTERNAL CONNECTIONS OF TYPE 
TA Form F REGULATOR. 


with its own regulator is provided for each generator, and the 
current and potential transformers are connected 90 deg. out 
of phase with each other, so that if cross-currents tend to flow 
between the generators, the regulator will reduce these cross- 
currents by strengthening or weakening the field of the generator 
to which the regulator is connected. 

Cut-out Relay. This relay has been devised to be used in 
connection with T A regulators for guarding against short- 
circuits and voltage rises in transmission systems. If a voltage 
regulator is used and a short-circuit should occur somewhere on 
the system, for example in the transmission lines, the action of 
the regulator would naturally be to deliver the maximum excita- 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1859 


tion to the fields of the exciters and generators, so as to keep up 
the voltage of the system. This in turn necessitates that the 
governors of the prime movers be wide open, and if the short- 
circuit should be suddenly relieved, the voltage often rises to 


4.0. BUS BARS 


EPOTENTIAL 

el TRANSFORMER! 
{ lL SWITOH 
my CURRENT. 


eo Oss Hee : EXTERNAL 
7 
60 O59 sels [ise RESIS, TRANSFORMER 


A.C. BUS BARS 


3 4 je a (4 Os Oe 
SEE 0.S. 7962 SEE 0.S. 7962 
FOR INTERNAL CONNECTIONS FOR INTERNAL CONNECTIONS 
FRONT VIEW FRONT VIEW 
CONDENSERS CONDENSERS 
EXCITER | y 
8] 9/10) 11]12/13]14) 15) 16] 17/18}19/20)2 1122/29] | 8 | 91 10)11/12/13114)1 16] 17}18)19/20)2 1/22/23 FIELD 
FI a RHEOSTAT 
fa) fa] 

32]33/34)/ 35/36,37/38)39 40/41|42/43 44/45/46) 4 32/33] 34)35/96|/37|39|39 40/41/42/43/44/45/46)4 


UU 


Fic. 16—CoNNECTIONS OF Two VOLTAGE REGULATORS OPERATING IN 
PARALLEL WITH ONE ARRANGEMENT OF TWO EXCITERS NOT IN PARALLEL 


50 WATT 
POTENTIAL 
TRANSFORMER 


FEEDERS 


POTENTIAL 
TRANSFORMER 
CURRENT TRANSFORMER ii 


CONTACTS 


| 4.0, BUS BARS 
OxA.0, GENERATOR 
A.C. FIELD 
RHEOSTAT 


SEE D.S.7956 OR 5 \ ‘ i 
INTERNAL CONNECTIONS) hy if) | POTENTIAL 


FRONT VIEW 
CONDENSERS 


10 | 1) 


Fic. 17—CoNnNEcTIONS OF HIGH-VOLTAGE HiGH-CURRENT CUT-OUT 
RELAY WITH VOLTAGE REGULATOR AND ONE EXCITER. 


very high values, owing to the time element involved in closing 
the governors and in demagnetizing the fields. The connections 
for a high-voltage, high-current relay operating in connection 
with one exciter and one T A regulator are shown in Fig. 17. 
The relay is provided with a current coil and a potential coil, 


1860 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


and will automatically reduce the excitation on the exciters in 
case of excessive loads, high voltages, or. any other cause tending 
to increase the voltage. 

Operating Results. The result of installing T A regulators is 
shown in the attached charts, Figs. 18 and 19, taken before and 


Fic. 18—CHART SHOWING VOLTAGE REGULATION AND LOAD BEFORE 
REGULATOR WAS INSTALLED. 


\ 
\ 
aT 
\ 
2 


FE Chart fo) No. 494 = 


Fic. 19—CHART SHOWING VOLTAGE REGULATION AND LOAD AFTER 
REGULATOR WAS INSTALLED. 


after the installation of the regulator. With much greater load 
fluctuations, itis seen that the variations in the voltage are. 
practically eliminated by the introduction of the regulator. 
A type T A, form F regulator is shown in Fig. 20, Plate XCIII. 

The K. R. System of Regulation. This system of regulation 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1861 


is for use where the excitation for the generators varies con- 
siderably, and where at the same time it is desirable to maintain 
a constant pressure on the exciter busbars, so that current 
can be taken therefrom for lighting, operation of relays, oil- 
switch mechanisms, etc. 

An elementary diagram of this system is given in Fig. 21. 
By referring to the diagram it is seen that three buses are provided, 
the upper, which can be called the field bus, while the others 
may be called the exciter buses. A motor-driven booster is 
connected across the two upper buses as shown, its object being 
to boost or buck the exciter voltage and thus vary the voltage 
applied across the generator fields in proportion to the required 


BUS BARS 


POTENTIAL 
TRANSFORMER 


A.C«GENERATOR 


AVN 
a A.C.FIELD 
RHEOSTAT 


EXCITER 
BUS BARS 


D. Ce CONTROL. 
MAGNET 


‘A. Ce CONTROL 
MAGNET 


RELAY 
MAGNET 


&) [go] ©) [go] FIELD 
RHEOSTAT 

REGULATING 

GENERATOR 


CONDENSER 


NON-INDUCTIVE 
RESISTANCE 


s 
Fic. 21—ConNECTIONS OF VOLTAGE REGULATOR WITH ONE AR- 
RANGEMENT OF Two EXCITERS IN PARALLEL IN CONJUNCTION WITH 
STORAGE BATTERY AND BOOSTER. 


excitation, without, however, varying the exciter busbar 
pressure. 

The boosting or bucking action of the booster is effected by merely 
reversing its field, this in turn being accomplished by reversing 
the field of a small regulating generator or exciter which is direct- 
connected to the booster. One terminal of the field of the regu- 
lating generator is connected to the middle point of a storage 
battery which is connected across the exciter busbars, while the 
other terminal of the field is connected to a series of resistances 
as shown in the diagram, this series of resistances also being 
connected across the exciter busbars. The connection is made 
between R, and R, and aT A regulator is connected across the 


1862 . RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


terminals of resistance R;. The object of the storage battery is 
simply to provide for a neutral point, and a resistance could 
equally well be provided, although it would not be so efficient. 
The values of the resistance units are such that Ri > Rz and 
R.,+ R3 > R1. 

The operation is as follows: In case the alternating-current 
busbar voltage tends to drop, the main contact circuit of the regu- 
lator will close, this in turn closing the relay contacts and short- 
circuiting resistance R;. As resistance Ri is greater than Rs, 
the excitation current for the regulating generator field will 
flow from the lower bus, through resistance Re, then through 
the field and hence through the upper half of the storage bat- 
tery to the middle bus. This will cause the booster to raise the 
voltage of excitation, thus increasing the pressure of the alter- 
nating bus, until it reaches the value for which the regulator is 
adjusted. At this instant the regulator main contact circuit 
opens, thereby opening the relay contacts, thus releasing the 
short circuit across the resistance R;. The resistances R3 + Re, 
being greater than Ri, will cause the field current of the regula- 
ting generator to flow from the lower bus through the lower half 
of the battery, then through the field and hence through resist- 
ance R, to the middle bus, thus in opposite direction to which it 
was flowing before. This will also reverse the booster field, caus- 
ing it to lower the voltage applied to the generator fields and the 
alternating-current busbar voltage will drop. 

This action of opening and closing the regulator main contact 
circuit takes place at the rate of from 300 to 600 times per 
minute, thereby insuring a perfectly constant voltage across the 
alternating-current busbars. If line compensation is desired, 
it can also be arranged for in the same manner as previously 
mentioned under T A regulators. 

Thury Regulators. The Thury regulator which is generally 
used in Europe is primarily intended to keep the generator 
voltage constant by regulating the field resistance. In order to 
combine rapidity and reliability of action with sensitiveness, the 
field rheostat is not actuated directly by the fluctuations in 
voltage, but is operated by a small electric motor of about 1/20 
h.p., the regulating mechanism being merely brought into play 
or stopped by the fluctuations of voltage. Fig. 22 is a diagram- 
matic sketch of the voltage regulator for alternating-current 
systems, being practically identical with that used in continuous- 
current installations. H is a toothed wheel keyed to the shaft 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1863 


L which carries the switch arm of the rheostat. D is a casting 
which is rocked to and fro about the shaft L by the miniature 
motor referred to. The pawls J and I’ are attached to D in 
the manner shown, but are held off the toothed wheel by the 
spring-actuated levers K and K’. Each of these two levers 
carries a projection at its upper end; the projection on K passes 
normally above the blade C, while that on K’ rocks to and fro 
underneath this blade. Consequently, when the blade C is 
lowered or raised in the manner presently to be described, it 
will strike against K’ or K respectively, thus permitting pawl J’ 
or I to drop into the teeth of the wheel H. The latter is now 
rotated in the one or the other direction—thus cutting in or 


= 


Fic. 22—DIAGRAMMATIC SKETCH OF THURY REGULATOR. 


cutting out field resistance—until the blade C regains its hori- 
zontal position, when it no longer strikes against K or K’. Pawls 
Tand J’ are then drawn by spring-action out of contact with the 
teeth of the wheel H. 

The electromagnetic mechanism for controlling the position 
of the blade C is as follows: P is one of the limbs of the lamina- 
tions which constitute part of the magnetic circuit through which 
a flux is maintained by the coil F. A very light coil B, connected 
across the busbars whose voltage is to be controlled, is free 
to move up or down above F, the movement being limited by 
adjustable stops 6 and 6’. When the voltage of the supply is 
normal, the current through B is such that the lever £ carrying 
the blade C is in a horizontal position, and nothing happens. 


1864 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 


But when the supply voltage is higher or lower than the normal, 
then a correspondingly larger or smaller current flows through 
the shunt coil B, which rises or falls in consequence and causes 
the blade C to move into the way of the oscillating levers K and 
K’, thus actuating the rheostat as previously explained. 

The coil B moves against the tension and compression of the 
two springs A and R, the latter being, in its turn, attached to the 
free end of a flat spring, O, fixed at S. The free end of O is also 
in connection, through the intervention of a dash-pot JN, with 
the pivoted lever M, which takes up a position in accordance 
with the position of the switch arm by means of the gearing 
shown. Thisfarrangement tends to steady the removal of coil 


WZ TRANSFORMER 
Wh SERA 
Mire r\ 


COMPOUND, 
WITCH. 
Ahi d 


SERIES 
TRANSFORMER 
LAMP FOR ony Si 
7 : 


ON- INDUCTIVE 
RESISTANCE 


FIELD 


Fic. 23—-DraGRAM OF CONNECTIONS OF CHAPMAN REGULATOR. 


B and to bring it back speedily to its horizontal position after 
having been deflected. In order to prevent vibrations of the 
blade C in regulators for alternating-current or where the 
regulation is required to be unusually sensitive, a dash-pot, Q, 
is also provided. 

Chapman. Regulator. This regulator, a connection diagram 
of which is shown in Fig. 23, is composed of three distinct parts, 
viz., a voltmeter, or relay, for detecting small changes of voltage; 
a rheostat to connect into the field magnet circuit of the generator 
to be regulated; and a pair of working solenoids to operate the 
rheostat. 

The voltmeter, or relay, consists of a coil of wire wound on a 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1865 


brass spool. Inside of the coil is a thin iron disk pivoted at 
opposite ends of its diameter. The tendency of the coil is to 
move this disk to an angle of 90 deg. with itself, and this force is 
opposed by a spring, the tension of which is adjustable by a 
thumbscrew below the coil. The turning of this thumbscrew 
thus enables one to adjust the voltage of regulation. The disk of 
the relay has a platinum-tipped spring attached to it which is 
arranged to make contact with one or another of two platinum- 
tipped screws and these admit current to one or another of two 
working solenoids. The platinum points are protected from dust 
by a metal case with glass top fitting on the top of the brass 
spool. A resistance lamp is placed in circuit with the relay coil, 
the resistance of the lamp being many times that of the coil. 

The rheostat part of the regulator consists of a set 
of resistance units in the smaller sizes of regulator and of 
cast-iron grids in the larger sizes. The resistance units are 
connected to a set of contact segments arranged in the arc of a 
circle on the face of the regulator, and a lever arm carrying the 
contact shoes moves as a radius to the circle. The contact shoes 
are pivoted to the lever arm and held in contact with the seg- 
ments by coil springs. 

The lever arm carrying the contact shoes is part of a beam 
lever that has the cores of the working solenoids pivotally con- 
nected to its two ends. These working solenoids are consuming 
no current except when the regulator is called upon to act, 
and they are, therefore, in circuit only a small portion of the 
time. ‘These solenoids have two windings, a primary andea 
secondary, both wound in the same direction. The primary 
winding alone is fed with live current, while the secondary has 
a current induced in it just at the instant of rupture of the 
contact points, and the induced current, being in the same direc- 
tion as the live current, prevents the formation of an induction 
spark at the points of contact, and these points, being sparkless, 
will last indefinitely. 

An adjustable dash-pot is attached to one side of the apparatus 
at the bottom. This adjusts the quickness of movement of the 
regulator to correspond with the characteristics of the generator 
to be regulated. This dash-pot consists of a brass tube having a 
spline extending its whole length on the inside. A groove in 
the piston fits this spline, and whenever the tube is turned it 
turns the piston also, and opens or closes ports in the piston, 
which allow a more or less free passage for oil from one side to 


1866 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


the other of the piston. All that is necessary in order to adjust 
the dash-pot is to turn the containing tube by hand. 

The relay of this regulator can be compound-wound and may 
thus be made to compensate for line loss. There is also another 
way of compensating for line loss which in some instances is more 
feasible than compounding the regulator, and that is to connect 
the relay of the regulator directly to a pair of potential wires 
coming back from the center of distribution. 

Booster System. A system used in Europe is shown in Fig. 24. 
The main feature of this arrangement is a constant exciter bus- 
bar pressure, while the voltage for the generator field excitation 
can be varied by means of varying the excitation of a booster 
connected in series with the generator field circuit. 


GENERATOR 
Fe REGULATING BOOSTER 


bi ~ EXCITER BUSES 
+ <— CHARGING BUS 


Sil 


STORAGE BATTERY Ibiiiiihiiiiite--———— Mh 


Fic. 24—REGULATING BoosTER CONTROL. 


The system consists of two or more exciters driven by separate 
prime movers and adjusted to keep a constant exciter busbar 
pressure. Their design, however, is such that by manipulating 
their rheostats a considerably higher voltage than normal can 
be obtained. This is in order to permit of charging a storage 
battery, which is done from one of the exciters, this being con- 
nected to a charging bus so as not to interfere with the busbar 
pressure. 

In order to vary the voltage across the generator fields one 
booster regulating generator is provided for and direct-connected 
to each main generator. It is connected in series with the gen- 
erator field, and the booster field is also excited from the exciter 
busbars as shown in the illustration. By reversing and varying the 
booster field, which is generally done by a manually operated 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1867 


controller, it is possible to vary the field excitation considerably— 
in one particular instance from 0 to 440 volts, while the exciter 
busbar voltage is kept constant at 220 volts. 


DIFFERENT EXcITER ARRANGEMENTS 


Number of Units. The standard practise for larger stations 
has in the past been to provide two or more exciters operating 
in parallel, and of sufficient capacity to excite all the generators 
in the station. In many installations one or more spare units 
have also generally been provided as reserve, the number depend- 
ing on the capacity of the generating equipment. 

Insome of the recent developments, however, individual ex- 
citers are provided for each main generator, each exciter having 
a capacity sufficient for exciting its own generator only. The 
exciters are not arranged for parallel operation, but the main 
generators are generally operating in parallel, being arranged for 
connection to a common bus, which, however, can be section- 
alized if desired.. 

Method of Drive. Exciters driven by independent prime 
movers, either waterwheels or steam engines, are generally 
found in almost all large installations. While in some modern 
developments they are used entirely for furnishing the excitation, 
in others they are generally kept as reserve, and the excitation is 
normally obtained from motor-driven units. It is obvious that 
a material saving can be accomplished by reducing the number 
of exciters driven by separate prime movers toa minimum. This 
is especially true in hydroelectric developments where the cost 
of the hydraulic part of such an equipment is very high. Separate 
pipe lines are preferable for the exciter turbines as the tapping 
of the penstocks for the main units may seriously interfere 
with the constant speed of the exciters, due to the fluctuating 
water supply for the main units, as the load varies. 

A view of a station containing two 400-kw. 250-volt vertical 
waterwheel-driven exciters for exciting a number of large 
generators is shown in Fig. 25. 

Another method of drive is to have the exciters either direct- 
connected or belted to the main generators. One of the objec- 
tions to this method is the speed variation of the main units, ~ 
which naturally also affects the exciters. Another objection is 
that a trouble in the exciter unit involves the shutting down of 
the large generating unit. Couplings, etc., can, however, be 
provided, for readily disconnecting the exciter from the main 


1868 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


units, and the generator can be excited from the other exciter 
units, which can be provided with some reserve capacity over 
what would be required for normal operation. A generator 
of the horizontal design with a direct-connected exciter is 
shown in Fig. 26, and one of the vertical design in Fig. 27. 

The system which seems to be most generally used is the one 
where the exciters are driven both by prime movers and motors. 
While both drives are occasionally used at the same time by 
coupling the turbine or engine to one end of the exciter and a 
motor to the other, separate drives are, however, mostly used. 
In case of the combination method either the prime mover or 
the motor will have to run idle, unless methods are provided 
for mechanically disconnecting them from the exciter. 

With separate drives, enough motor-driven exciters are gen- 
erally provided for exciting the total generating capacity and 
the exciters driven by prime movers are used as reserve and in 
starting up the system. This arrangement will therefore give 
two independent sources of excitation, and in larger stations 
it might even be advisable to provide two or more exciters 
driven by prime movers. 

In certain of the recent installations one small induction-motor- 
driven exciter is provided for each generator, the current for the 
motors being supplied by separate alternating-current low-voltage 
generators, driven by independent prime movers so as to insure 
a perfect operation free from fluctuations in speed. Sometimes 
provision is also made, whereby these auxiliary generators can 
be driven by motors connected to the main buses, or also 
whereby the motors of the exciters can be connected through 
transformers and also fed from the main busbars. A small 
induction-motor-driven exciter set is shown in Fig. 28. 

Different Systems of Connection. The system of connections 
for an exciter equipment varies widely in different installations 
depending upon the layout of the station, the number of units, 
the method of drive and other special requirements which must 
be provided for, such as lighting, storage battery charging, etc. 
‘It is therefore difficult to give specific rules for any particular 
system to be selected, but in the following will be given a des- 
cription of a number of systems which are in general use. 

The diagram shown in Fig. 29 represents a system where 
three prime-mover-driven exciters, operating in parallel, are 
feeding into one common exciter bus extending along all the 
alternating-current generators. Each generator field is then 

/ 


PLATE XCIV 
A. |. E. E. 
EVOL. XXXII, 1912 


[RUSHMORE] 

Fic. 25—PowER STATION CONTAINING Two 400-Kw., 250-vVOLT 

WATERWHEEL-DRIVEN VERTICAL EXCITERS FOR EXCITATION OF SEVERAL 
LARGE ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. 


[RUSHMORE] 


Fic. 26—HorizonTaL GENERATOR WITH DIRECT-CONNECTED EXCITER 


PLATE XCV 
A. 1. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[RUSHMORE] 


Fic. 27—VERTICAL GENERATOR WITH DIRECT-CONNECTED EXCITER. 


[RUSHMORE] 


Fic. 28—INbucTION Motor-DrRIVEN EXCITER. 


1869 


EXCITATION 


RUSHMORE 


1912] 


‘SNOILOUNNOD AO WALSAS—G§Z ‘OI 


NOILVIIVISNI SUNLNA LNa9SudSy 
G3L10d NMOHS SANIT -:3LON 
s367a'D'a 


sna eee 
HOLIMS 2 2 


00r os 


HOLIMS: 
O31yu3d0, a1ona10s 


SYALIOXSIIM e S: 
£0 
Le 


AOA O90 ao0 occ cece eee == sep: ES epee ap Seem ye 
HOLIMS GIaid SK - t Bests ¢ 
aiaig Wweaalyuadonw Yen Vand aes 
7-~QlONB10S- — no Kan 1 
$ rai : ‘ 5 
worvuanan GMM pity gh) fe 
i 
AvTau — cal “1 The Se 
AIWID SWIL 3LIN1430 : ‘ 
waWHOasNvul INauuNO EF 33 = Ss $3 
. HOLIMS 110 7 Ui oe Fi 
HOLIMS ONILOANNOOSIG oi i = pa = 
HOLIMS 0 | i 
OtLyWwolLny NO t 
! 


HOLIMS DNILOSNNOOS]: 4 | & 

$N@ 110A ooott ~--—b-+----+4----1-+--- 
\ 

HOLIMS ONILOBNNOOSIa | 


HOLIMS 110 1 
OILvWOLAY NON 


HOLIMS 110 
OILVWOLNY NON 


Py 


“ 


os 
S\--f----4% 
b 


HOLIMS 
ONILOINNO: 


SY 


& ” ¥ 
ir 

fos l 
! 


-Ssid 
HOLIMS 


ees 
Bag 

= 

x 


' 
whem vam Mr emo! 
477-0000 *7y¥F-0000t =“ 4Y¥So000 


ee al es 
i yee 


‘ i 


= 
x 


YIWYOISNVYL NIVW 


AW134 S3IuaS 
ALIANT BWIL SSuaANt 


HOLIMS 110 
HOLIMS 110 
HOLIMS ONILOANNOOSIG 


SNA LIOA OO000L 
HOLIMS ONILOSNNOOSIG -~ — 

HOLIMS 110 

DILVWOLNY NON 
HOLIMS ONILOANNOOSIG  _ 


HOLIMS ONILOANNOOSIG x 
T 


oe 
os 
cS 
So 
cs) 


ce 
1E 


aoe 


1 
t 
| 


Se le ee 


oz 


BA 


j-—-—---+-—-—-~—-! 


Os! 


HOLIMS 110 

AV1V3¥8 LINIT 3WIL SSYSANI 
HAWEOSSNVYL IN3Z4HND #4 
HaLSSYYY ONININOIT ' 
WOODS 3HOHO iy 
HILIMS ONILOANNOOSIG r 
¥ 


430344 1V007 "My 

HOLIMS 0006 
SNILOANNOOSIG 
HOLIMS 110 
HOLIMS F110 
AVT38 LIWIT 
SWIL ASHAANE 
YSWYOSSNVEL 
AN3Y8uGO 


HALSBYYV ONINLNDIT 
W090 3SHOHD 

HOLIMS 
ONILOANNOOSIG 


HOLIMS ONILOSNNOOSIA 
HOLIMS 110 DILYWOLNY NON L 
HOLIMS SUE OANNC REIS 
HOLIMS ONILOINNO 
HOLIMS 110 DILYNOLNY 


ANI ONIOOLND 


O3NNOO x 
=SiG'—— 


ONIL 
bs 


| 
1 
t- 
x 
= 
& 
i 
=} 
We 
1 
| 
ES 
1 
1 
! 
i 
vj 
oA 


Gh i tt tla Gh et ae 


° 


ie regen | ha on Aaa on: 


HOLIMS ONILOSNNO 


E 


%.. 
Yo 
, 


“aye 
fw 
sf) ip( 

DILUNO LAVINGN 
| 
a 
i 
Saree 
avant 


OOS 


HOLIMS 
ONILOSNN 
“Sid 


$ 


Tx 


YOLIMS ONILOANNOODSIC 


~ 
ieeeaca 


= 
% 


GO0E 


aly 
HOLIMS ONILOINNOOSIG 
HOLIMS SN se 


HOLIMS 110 GiLVWOLNY NON 
HOLIMS 110 OlLVWOLNY NON 

HOLIMS ONILOJNNOODSIG 
HOLIMS 10 OILVWOLNY NON 


= LA \ n N _* Cx 


1870 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


connected directly to this bus, the pressure of which is generally 
regulated by means of automatic regulators, although it can also 
be done by manual manipulation of the exciter rheostats. In 
each generator field circuit is also provided a rheostat so that a 


OUTGOING LINES 


' 

' 
LIGHTNING ARRESTERS May 
DISCONNECTING SWITCKES ty 
CHOKE COILS Pe 

r 
CURRENT TRANSFORMER Wonca 
RELAY INVERSE TIME LIMITE 2» 5 

Se es 

J 

i 

| 

' 
PNEUMATICALLY QFERATED 
Ol SWITCHES er 
PNEUMATICALLY OPERATED Ar 
DISCONNECTING SWITCHES ¢ 


114000 V. BUS on Pas es eee 
PNEUMATICALLY OPERATED 
DISCONNECTING SWITCHES 


by 
g 
PNEUMATICALLY OPERATED c- 
OIL SWITCHES Let 
k 


RELAY SERIES INVERSE TIME LIMIT # 
* 
! 
1 
VVINOW Ve ew Soe . “ 
TRANSFORMER Z 
4000 Vv. Para ak as aN i 
[a 
CURRENT TRANSFORMER z $ < 
RELAY INVERSE TIME LIMIT + > i he 
ON SWITCH e-> $--5 
a: 0 
1 a 1 ae 
DISCONNECTING SWITCHES et! Li? 
4000 Vv. BUS ee — 7 
& 4 


DISCONNECTING SWITCHES 
He3 OIL GWITCHES 


DISCONNECTING SWITCHES 
CURRENT TRANSFORMER 
RELAY DEFINITE TIME LIMIT 


F=9. 
a= CO FO 
: L 
eas ad sa 
ea 
BE 
' 
L--«ajo4 tae 
settles 
he 
Ly 
ee, 
Ae rt 4S 


’ 
/ a 
Van 
he 5h a 
hs 4 
‘ v i = 
a 
a 
an THVT 


6 6 
DISCONNECTING SWITCHES my of 
H-8 OIL SWITCHES Le ; 
Ls ‘ 
CURRENT TRANSFORMERS te---- te Agen 
RELAY DEFINITE TIME LIM ne ; Cie fe : 
€ Limit a - Ad 


A.C, GENERATORS 6700 KWy \ ! 

GENERATOR FIELO 
SWITCH —— SOLENOID OPERATED eeu 
FIELD SWITCH ¢ ¢¥ 


EXCITER BUBES 
SWITCH - CIRCUIT BREAKER 


INDUCTION MOTOR EXCITER SETS 


K-39 OIL SWITCH 


4000 V. A,C+ BUS 
STARTING BUS 


Fic. 30—SystEM OF CONNECTIONS. 


. 


separate adjustment of the field excitation for the different 
generators can be accomplished. 

In Fig. 80 are shown the connections of another system 
in which the exciters are also operating in parallel on a com- 


1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION : 1871 


mon excitation, but where they are driven by induction 
motors fed from the low-tension main bus. Two buses are 
shown for the motors, one being the running bus and the 
other the starting bus, the reduced voltage of which is ob- 
tained from taps of an auto-transformer. In a system of this 
kind some means must be provided for obtaining direct current 
when starting up the system. For this reason a small exciter 
s usually installed, being sometimes driven by a gasolene engine 


LIGHTNING ARRESTER 


DISCONNECTING SWITCH 


CURRENT TRANSFORMER 
eS & RELAYS 
OIL SWITCH 


DISCONNECTING SWITCH 
88000 V BUS 
DISCONNECTING SWITCH 
OIL SWITCH 
SERIES TRIP 


DISCONNECTING SWITCH - 
OIL swiTcH al 
TRANSFORMER “e00 y “why 


-———— 
| 

| 

be 
grit 
Ural 


>'¢ 


—3}---, 


SWITCH, 


TRANSFER BUS 6000 V ———— +}— — — -» —-— —_ oe 
; H ; 
! L 


DISCONNECTING SWITCH 
CIL SWITCH ea 
COMPENSATOR 


OIL SWITCH 
A.C. GENERATOR 
SOLENOID OPERATING SWITCH i 


LEVER SWITCH 
EXCITING BUSES 


TO STORAGE 
BATTERY 


Fic. 31—SystEM OF CONNECTIONS. 


or also belted to one of the main units. A storage battery would 
of course also serve this purpose well. 

A system using both a separate waterwheel-driven and a motor- 
driven exciter is shown in Fig. 31. The waterwheel-driven ex- 
citer is then generally used when starting up and for reserve, 
while the motor-driven unit is used for normal operation. Both 
units can, of course, be operated in parallel if desired. 

A system of more flexibility is shown in Fig. 32. Two positive 
and one negative exciter buses are provided and by means of 


! 
{ 
| 
| 1 
Bay 
t 
! 


1872 _ RUSHMORE: EXCITA TION [June 28 


double-throw switches it is possible to connect the exciters to 
either bus and also to excite the generator fields from either bus. 
If it is desired, two different exciter voltages can be maintained 
by operating one exciter on either bus. One exciter can also 
furnish the current for the excitation and the other the current 


4+ 


3 


SH JLIMS 
ON LOSNNOODSIO 


S3HOLIMS 
DNILOINNOOSIC 


SHOLIMS 
ON'7HIYNOILOSS SNE 


SSHOLIMS. 
SNILOSNNOOSIG 
fa 


S3HOLIMS 
QNILOSNNODTIG 


SyYsTEM OF CONNECTIONS. 


Aad 


Fic. 32 


= 
° 
e 
= 
oa 
| 
S 5 
< 
- s 3 in 
ee eas 3 6s 
° 
$ S ® Qr 
ry ® s o 2 » ® w 
Soe SES ser 8 ee 8 ae = 20 
5. Sct S's 2 eae Peeoeoes oo 2 ges Sind: 2 
a 
PeeEcee ee es ete & E Solis | epee tet ean 
= z a 4 = = 6 o> ez 8 = w . e 
35233882525 55 3 6 8 £8 oo" 88 © SS 
ots seo02 46 OS 5s a2 g BQ o@ geste 35°98 © E 
= wu 2 o o 
San. G = sees sr eieno gt) 2urene = Sop Ree So MEG ee Boas 
-< FEO =e i bus i 2 2 co & §$ wa 
SEE obs s of £F% Ss 5 2 Sewn cyanea Pe tei 
ie, ceee ee Py eS fe S.C esd ee ee renee 
w ze Rzzu& 2 2 ES See ee ec f& N 
3 zzz szzr eee ee 3 <r <40 oe a eS 
= orw oo Zuepw2o & ons X @©€® Go - - Pe 
a Ste segzrosr e o we wsot ee Ee ie oe 
o sss5assbssh 588 2S 85% G8ao 82S 2 2 3s 
F A288 2os5 2 2 0 6B, 2,8 Seidek 8 oe oot w he ee 
* a+ 


for lighting, etc. The fluctuation in the exciter voltage caused 
by an automatic regulator connected to the first-named machine 
would therefore not be felt on the auxiliary or lighting bus, 
the pressure of which could be kept constant. A similar arrange- 
ment is shown in Fig. 33, with the exception that both sets of 
buses are double-pole. 


1873 


EXCITATION 


wr 


RUSH MORE 


1912] 


low 


“SNOILDUNNOD AO WALSAS—EE 


yuaisoos 


aids 


pe ee EE OT ET ET 


=o 


I —————— 


0 0 
; GG GG 


O 


iviLSO3HY 


= wav $u30334 NOILV1LS 


Old 


Wo i) 


F 
F 


Ton 


THe 


OAS O90 eg 9 


E 


asna 
HOLIMS 


s38n8 YaMOd 


- 4 
HOLVYINOSY Wissel 
A® G31708LNOO 
$3SnNa NOIMVLIOXS 
yarvaue LINDHID 
YSLIOXS 


ANQHS 
HOLIMS Q1313 "H3dO GION3IOS 


YOLVYSN3S "O° 


“SNVHL “HND 
*"SNVYL*LOd 


HOLIMS 110 

SNS Ya4SNVHL 
*SNVUL "ND 
BSWYOSSNVYL YBMOd 


HOLIMS T10 | 
A134 Sa1uaS 


HOLIMS ONILOANNOOSIG 
sna NIVW 

SNS YSISNVEL 

HOLIMS DNILOANNOOSLG 


HOLIMS 110 


AV138 S3IYSS 


HOLIMS ONILOANNOOSIG © 


09 3HOHO 


\ 
uBiS3uuv ONINLHDID 
dv NYOH 


[June 28 


RUSHMORE: EXCITATICN 


1874 


“SNO[LOANNO.) JO WALSAS—FE “OIA 


SUBLIOX3S OSLOBNNOD 
LO3¥IG HLIM SHOLVYANSO o-+ 
N3AINO 133HM Y3Slvm 


SSHOLIMS 110 


SASSNE LIOA Oy 
S139 
HOLYUSN3D HOLOW H3BLIOXS 


SHYOLVHNSN]ID 
S3HOLIMS 110 


BAWYOSSNVNL HBMOd 


3 C © 
AUVITIXNY 4 
S3HOLIMS ONILOSNNOOSIO 
S3HOLIMS 110 


SSHOLIMS ONILOANNOOSIO 


Aah i 
ee bbe} i se 


SBHOLIMS SNIWoSNNGOSIE * Lit ty fs Tl ! l J } 
SUSWHOJSNYYL Y3MOd = a a ra rh 4 
SBHOLIMS ONILOANNOOSIC a 
S3HOLIMS 110 y 
le 
SSHOLIMS ONILOSNNOOSIO died Z 


gassna LIOA Goo'dIt 


ee FA, 


S3HOLIMS ONILOaNNOOSIG 


S3HOLIMS 110 


hn GER RE 


s3ssng 110A 0oo‘olL geome a ea ots 


S3HOLIMS ONILOZSNNOOSIG S3HOLIMS NOILO3S SNe a S3HOLIMS NOILO3S SNe S3HOLIMS NOILO3S SNS \ 
S3HOLIMS 110 3 
S3HOLIMS ONILOSNNOOSIG 
= - = 3 ce vy = 


SBHOLIMS ONILOANNOOSIO 
SUSLSSHYY ONINLHOIT 1739 W.WN7 

$1109 3XOHO 

sdv9 NYOH 


ci 

3 
rH 

ais 


. 1912] RUSHMORE: EXCITATION 1875 


In the arrangement shown in Fig. 34 one motor-driven exciter 
is provided for each generator. The exciters are not intended 
to operate in parallel and one automatic regulator is provided 
for each exciter. In general, the reason for operating a number 
of units with the exciters not in parallel is on account of the pos- 
sibility of an accident. In systems where one or more large 
exciter units are provided, the operation of a large part of the 
system may be mateérially affected if one exciter unit is shut 
down, while, in the event one of the smaller units becomes dis- 
abled, the operation of the system will not be affected to such 
a ereau extent. ; 

The possibility of compensating for cross-currents between 
the machines, as previously explained, is also one of the reasons 
for selecting this system. 


A.C. BUS BARS 


POTENTIAL_Y 


—— © ——— Ol 
fi 5 TRANSFORMER 
nf [eoUNTER | 
aad WEIGHT < A.C+ GENERATOR 
EL \spring y: 
8; 
a. HH —— wv 5 D 
A.C«MAGNET 15) 3G, Flee 
CONDENSER 
(5 =] SEE TOS 
ELF} RELAY Se ari 
AONTACTS il BUS BARS 


= BOOSTER EXCITER EXCITER 


» WF EXTERNAL STORAGE C) S ©) EXCITER 
RELAY | RESIS. | aR 58) FIELD 
LI} H —> RHEOSTAT 


BOOSTER FIELD 


[a 
\ BOOSTER FIELD 
RHEOSTATS 


Fic. 35 


The motors driving the exciters are fed either from the main 
bus or from the two auxiliary waterwheel-driven generators, 
thus giving two independent systems. In another installation, 
the auxiliary generators are provided with combination drive, 
i.e., they can be driven either by waterwheels or by induction 
motors fed from the main buses. In this particular case, how- 
ever, the individual exciter sets are not intended for being driven 
directly from the main buses as in the systems shown in Fig, 
34. 

Storage Batteries. The use of storage batteries in connection 
with exciters has of late been increasing considerably. The 
advantages of such a combination are obvious, as, with the failure 
of the exciters for some reason or other, the storage battery would 
automatically keep up the excitation. The storage battery is 


1876 RUSHMORE: EXCITATION [June 28 


generally floating on the exciter buses, the pressure of which is 
kept constant. A separate exciting bus is provided and between 
this bus and one of the exciter busbars a booster is installed 
which can be operated to either raise or lower the voltage, its 
field being controlled by an automatic voltage regulator. The 
voltage fluctuation is therefore entirely on the exciting buses, 
being caused by varying the booster voltage by means of the 
regulator, while the voltage of the exciter busbars is kept con- 
stant. 

In case of failure of the exciters the excitation would be fur- 
nished by the storage battery, and the booster in connection 
with the regulator would take care of the voltage regulation. 
Should the booster be disabled, provisions are made whereby it 
can be short-circuited and the system operated without the 
regulator. 

In the diagram, Fig. 35, are shown the connections of such 
a system. 

The author desires to acknowledge the assistance of Mr. E. A. 
Lof in the preparation of this paper. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1877 


Discuss1on ON ‘‘EXcITATION OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT 
GENERATORS ” (RusHMORE), Boston, Mass., JuNE 28, 
1912. 


B. G. Lamme: I have only a few points to bring up in 
connection with this paper. On page 1842 is a table which I 
did not understand. For example, the constants given for 
single-phase and three-phase windings do not agree, and yet: 
very frequently three-phase windings are used to give single- 
phase. However, I may not understand how these constants 
are used. In the method of calculation which I have been using, 
I do not have any fixed constants. I first work out the magnetic 
field distribution. From this I then derive the constants for 
each individual case. The use of a constant is all right in the 
hands of a skilful designer, if he knows how it is derived, but in 
special designs it is likely to be misleading. The table given 
probably refers to a standard type of machine in which the 
constant has been determined, and has been proved to be 
constant in all cases. 

A second point is the value of Kw, the winding-pitch factor, 
that is shown on page 1843. The curve shown is part of what 
is practically asine curve. It is so close toa sine that it is almost 
impossible to find the difference. 

On page 1845 the “‘ Range of Excitation ”’ is referred to, where 
it is stated that ‘‘ with 125 volts excitation, the voltage should 
therefore not be allowed to exceed 125 volts at maximum load, 
80 per cent power factor, and the corresponding no-load exci- 
tation should be about 70 volts.” That statement can apply 
only to fairly well regulating machines; but for high-speed 
machines such as turbo-alternators where the regulation is made 
purposely rather bad, the ratio of 70 to 125 is much too small, 
and we find in practise that 50 volts at no-load is about right, 
with 110 at full load, which leaves a little margin for rheostat. 

On page 1847, ‘‘ Exciters with Commutating Poles,” it is 
stated, ‘‘ The reason for this is generally due to the fact that a 
commutating-pole machine, when flat-compounded at 125 volts, 
has a rising characteristic when operated at voltages less than 
normal.’ I think that, while that is frequently true in practise, 
it is not necessarily true; because it is due partly to the fact that 
a machine at 125 volts is usually worked farther over the bend 
of the saturation curve than at lower voltages. Part of the over- 
compounding may be due to the presence or absence of local cur- 
rents in the coils short-circuited by the brushes. When a machine 
with commutating poles is operated as a motor, and the commuta- 
ting poles are over-excited, the main field of the machine is weak- 
ened as the load goes on, due to the local currents under the 
brushes. If it is operated as a generator, the local currents will 
tend to strengthen the field and compoundit. At 80 volts, for in- 
stance, the magnetic circuit is less saturated than at 125 volts. 
If part of the saturation lies in the yoke of the machine, which is 


1878 EXCITATION {June 28 


usually the case, then this saturation will affect the magnetic 
circuit of the commutating pole, and more commutating pole 
ampere-turns are required at 125 volts than at 80 volts. There- 
fore the commutating pole will be over-excited at the lower sat- 
urations, and the local currents will tend to compound the 
machine. But I have seen many machines in which there was 
no evidence of this compounding action. 

On page 1867 reference is made to the use of one exciter 
for each generator. That has been the practise in many large 
European stations, but judging from my experience, it is not 
an advisable arrangement in general. I think a better scheme 
is to put in one or two large independent exciters, to excite all 
the machines. However, if individual exciters are used, they 
can be adjusted to operate without rheostats in the main fields. 
With turbo-alternators, however, the total loss in the exciting 
circuit is generally so low that the rheostatic loss does not 
make much difference. There is some demand for large turbo- 
alternators with an exciter with each machine, but it is a practise 
that I do not think is right, and I have objected to it, so far 
as I could. 

H. M. Hobart: This morning there seemed to be a pretty 
general agreement that it was better to have the ventilating 
apparatus distinct from the generator, that the generator could 
then be designed so as to be better for its purpose, and 
the ventilating apparatus for ifs purpose. I think the 
same argument applies in the case of the exciter. The plan of 
employing direct-connected exciters is very disadvantageous, 
from various standpoints. It is hard to conceive of a worse 
practise, for obvious reasons which I will not take time to 
review. It is desirable to ascertain whether there is any clearly 
defined common agreement among engineers who have studied 
the subject thoroughly, as to having independent exciters. 
Mr. Lamme has voiced his opinion that that is the only reason- 
able thing to do, and if others would give their support to this 
plan I think it would help to discourage men from concluding 
that their individual requirements would justify them in using 
direct-connected exciters. . 

J. Lester Woodbridge: On page 1847 the statement is made 
that compound exciters are preferable, the main reason for this 
Aeing that better parallel operation is obtained with compound 
windings, this being especially true where two or more machines ~ 
of different size are to be operated in parallel. I suppose that 
refers to the question of stability, or the equal division of load 
between two machines, but I do not see how compound winding, 
that is, the series windings, can improve the stability over 
what would be obtained with shunt-wound machines, connected 
in parallel. The cause of instability in compound-wound 
machines operating without equalizing connections is the fact 
that if any disturbance occurs in one machine, such as a change 
in speed, which causes local currents to circulate between the 


‘ 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1879 


machines, the result is aggravated by the series windings. By 
using the equalizing connection, the same stability results as is 
obtained with two shunt-wound machines without the series 
winding, provided the equalizing connection has practically 
zero resistance. Any departure from this last assumption intro- 
duces some instability, due to the fact that some of the local 
current will flow through the series windings. Therefore I 
do not see how any better stability can be obtained with the 
compound winding than is inherent in two shunt-wound machines 
operated in parallel. 

E. A. Lof: With regard to Mr. Lamme’s remarks as to the 
advisability of using a few large units rather than a number of 
small ones, there may also be objections to such an arrangement. 
In one large central station the exciter equipment consists of 
both waterwheel-driven and motor-driven exciters, the latter 
being intended for the normal operation. Considerable trouble 
has been experienced from the motor-driven unit falling out of 
step, thus shutting down the whole system. This, however, 
might not have been the case if the exciter unit had been driven 
by an induction motor instead of a synchronous motor. With 
a number of small motor-driven exciter units, preferably operated 
from a separate alternating-current source, such a complete 
shut-down would, of course, be very remote, and this is evidently 
the reason why such a system of excitation has been provided 
in a number of recent installations of the largest capacity. 
In one particular plant which contained two or three large 
exciters the original equipment has been discarded and one 
small motor-driven unit has been installed for each main genera- 
tor. 

With reference to the single-phase slot factors, these values 
are under the assumption that the winding is distributed over 
the whole armature. If part of the slots are not occupied, the 
breadth of the winding is reduced and the values should be 
increased to approximately those given for a two-phase winding. 

B. G. Lamme: In my remarks I did not refer to a number 
of small exciters as compared with a large one, but to two large 
exciters direct-connected with the generators. 

Lester McKenney: I wish to emphasize the necessity, where 
automatic voltage regulators are to be installed, of using exciters 
designed especially for the purpose. It is of the greatest im- 
portance that the exciters have a voltage range considerably 
in excess of the maximum excitation requirements, that the 
range of excitation required by the alternator be narrow and 
that the time element of the alternator and exciter combined 
be as short as possible; as upon these things, largely, depends 
the success of automatic voltage regulation. 

A considerable margin of exciter voltage is desirable, as 
when the maximum voltage of the exciter is called for, the relay 
contacts remain closed and voltage regulation is no longer ob- 
tained. When operating near the maximum voltage the density 


1880 EXCITATION _ [June 28 


in the fields becomes high and large variations in field current are 
required for small variations in voltage, the time element is 
increased, and the operation becomes in general unsatisfactory. 

A time element of less than from four to six seconds is desir- 
able, providing it is not obtained by the use of excessive resist- 
ance in the exciter field rheostat, which greatly increases the 
duty of the relay contacts and impairs the operation of the 
regulator. The series field excitation should be limited to about 
30 per cent of the total, as with higher percentages shunt field 
rheostats of excessive resistance are required for reducing the 
exciter voltage to the required minimum in a reasonable length 
of time. — 

In a great many cases, where automatic voltage regulators 
have been installed, the results have been disappointing, due 
to the lack of a proper appreciation of the instantaneous effect 
of the armature resistance and reactance upon the alternator 
voltage and of the effect of the time element introduced by the 
inductance of the alternator and exciter field windings. When 
these points are given consideration it will be evident that 
momentary fluctuations of voltage are to be expected during 
unusual disturbances. 

It would seem, other things being the same, that compound- 
wound exciters would be somewhat more sluggish in their action 
than shunt-wound exciters, due to the damping effect of the 
local circuit formed by the series field winding and the external 
shunt. This, of course, applies only in automatic voltage 
regulation where the exciter field strength is varied as rapidly 
as possible from one value to another. 

It is advisable, where belted exciters are used in connection 
with automatic regulators, to make the pulleys of more liberal 
proportions than are usual in ordinary applications, as the 
exciters are subject to higher excitation and greater overloads 
in time of trouble. 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I E. E. 


LOCALIZERS, SUPPRESSORS, AND EXPERIMENTS 


APPLICATION OF LOCALIZERS OF FAULTY FEEDERS AND AN 
ARCING GROUND SUPPRESSOR TO THE SYSTEM OF THE 
PuBLIc SERVICE ELECTRIC Co., AND DESCRIPTIONS 
OF SEVERAL EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES 


BY E. E. F. CREIGHTON AND J. T. WHITTLESEY 


The object of this paper is expressed briefly in tHe titles “The 
localizer is a special type of relay which is connected to the 
current transformers of each feeder. When an accidental con- 
tact or are occurs between one phase and ground on any feeder, 
the localizer of that feeder lights a signal lamp and sounds an 
alarm in the switchboard room. 

The localizer is part of the general scheme of protection of 
cable systems. It is used especially in connection with the 
arcing ground suppressor.* The arcing ground suppressor 
extinguishes an accidental arc from one phase to ground in a 
small fraction of a second after it forms. The localizer indicates 
the feeder that is faulty. The switchboard attendant may 
leisurely substitute a spare feeder for the faulty one and clear 
the circuit of the fault without an interruption of service. 

The Public Service Company of New Jersey covers the entire 
state. There are three systems, namely, the northern, middle 
and southern. The tests were made on the northern system. 
On this system are both overhead and underground transmis- 
sions. There are 47 miles of cable operating at 60 cycles, as 
much more at 25 cycles, and 32 miles of spare cable. There are 
72 miles of open wiring on poles used exclusively on the 60-cycle 
system. The generated potential is 13,200 volts and the gener- 
ators are directly connected to the lines. There are several 

*See TRANSACTIONS, A. I. E. E., 1911, Vol. XXX, 1, page 257. 

1881 


1882 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


power plants and two systems at different frequencies which are 
operated together at times through a frequency changer. All 
the tests herein described, however, were made at the Marion 
Station, using only one generator of 9000 kw. capacity. 

Some idea of the extent of the 60-cycle system may be gleaned 
from the value of the electrostatic grounding current. When a 
contact is made between one phase and ground the unbalanced 
condenser current rises to 60 amperes (measured). The momen- 
tary rush of current to ground is, naturally, many times greater. 

The Remarkable Changes in Potentials by Grounding. When 
there is no ground on the system the potential from each phase 
to ground is the Y potential (7600 volts). This is shown in 
Fig. 1 by the lines 01, O02 and 08. When phase 2 is brought 
in direct contact with the ground its potential to ground is 
zero and the potentials of phase 1 and phase 3 to the ground is 
the delta potential, 13,200 volts. 
Without special consideration one is 
inclined to assume that when there 
is a medium value of resistance in- 
terposed between phase 2 and ground, 
the potentials to ground will be 
represented by some such inter- 
mediate values as phase 1, phase 
2 and phase 3, Fig. 1. This, how- 

Fic ever, is far from true. This was 

first noticed from the behavior of the 

selective relay of the arcing ground suppressor. When one 

phase of a circuit was grounded through a relatively high 

resistance there was no movement of the corresponding arm of 

the selective relay, but the arm corresponding to one of the 

other phases moved toward its contact. Much to our dismay 

we found that this effect promised to put a limit on the maxi- 

mum sensibility at which the selective relay could be set to 
operate. 

The actual potentials from each phase to ground are shown in 
Fig. 2 for all values of grounding current. These measurements 
were obtained by varying the resistance from phase 2 to ground 
by means of a water rheostat. A remarkable condition is shown. 
When the resistance is gradually decreased from an infinite 
value the potential of the grounded phase shows scarcely any 
change. But the potential of phase 3,which is not being grounded, 
shows a gradually diminishing value until the current reaches 


1 13200 VOLTS 


ow 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1883 


16 to 20 amperes, then it gradually increases. Over the total 
range of grounding current, the potential of phase 1 to ground very 
consistently increased, but not along a straight line. Before a 
dead ground is reached the potential of phase 1 rises to a value 
actually greater than the delta potential of the circuit. When 
the resistance to ground reaches zero, phases 1 and 3 both assume 
the delta potential. In considering the potential of phase 3, 
attention is directed to the impossibility of setting the selective 
relay for a drop in potential of less than 19 per cent, as sucha 
setting would cause the relay to close the wrong switch of the 
arcing ground suppressor. This condition of the relay applied 
to cable systems has no significance, nor importance. Faults 


— 


© POINTS AS CURRENT INGREASES 
o ‘ “b 


sk 


s DECREASES fal 
4 -- 4 a—+ 


for) 


KILOVOLTS 


0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
AMPERES PHASE TWO TO GROUND 
Fic. 2—VARIATION IN VOLTAGE OF EACH PHASE TO GROUND AS CUR- 
RENT, PHASE 2 TO GROUND, VARIES. 
Curves from test data, readings 27 to 49, Aug. 22, 1911. 


in a cable develop immediately into a condition of low resistance. 
This matter of resistance of accidental grounds will be treated 
‘in more detail farther on in the paper. 

The volt-ampere relation of the different phases relative to 
earth are shrouded in a mist of mystery when plotted in rectan- 
gular coordinates. This mist is immediately dissipated if the 
plot of the data of potentials is made on a triangle of the 
three phases. Asa basis to justify this method we know from 
measurements that the generator continues to generate the same 
potential between phases independent of the presence or absence 
of an accidental ground. Since we are not treating of transient 
effects at present, it must be understood that the foregoing state- 
ment is not intended to apply to the first instant that a ground 


1884 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


appears. Under normal conditions of load, then, the delta 
potentials are not materially disturbed by a ground on one 
phase. This means that the points 1, 2 and 3 of the triangle in 
Fig. 3 are fixed and the potential of each phase to ground may 
be plotted from its corner. Since the earth potential itself is 
the same for all three phases, the length of the lines from the 
three corners must meet in a point. Plotting the simultaneous 
potentials of the three phases gives a semi-circle on the Y 
potential as a diameter. For a particular condition of resistance 
to ground the point pis given. The potential from phase 1 
to ground is represented by the length of the line 1 p. The 
direction of this line indicates its phase relation. Likewise the 
potential from phase 3 to ground is represented by the line 3 p. 
In the potential from phase 2 to ground, represented by the line 
2 p,it is known that the current is in phase with the electromotive 
force. This potential is in the drop across the resistance situated 
between phase 2 and ground. By actual measurement it was 
found that during these tests the generator continued to generate 
the normal value of Y potential which is represented by the line 
O02. From fundamental considerations it is known that the Y 
potential O2 must be the vector sum of the resistance drop p 2 
and the reactance drop O p. 

Since there is no inductance in this circuit the angular dis- 
placement of the current, which is in phase with the line P 2, 
must be due to capacity in the circuit. 

The question arises, which electrostatic capacity comes into 
play to cause this angular advance of the current? The capacity 
in question is evidently not the capacity of phase 2 to ground. 
Conditions are represented in a simplified form in Fig. 4. In 
this figure the capacities between the three conductors are not 
shown because the charging currents between conductors, except 
for transitory effects, remain practically constant whether a 
phase is grounded or not, since the potentials between the phases 
remain constant. In other words, an artificial separation of the 
different capacities is made for the sake of convenience. Return- 
ing to the consideration of phase 2, the resistance between this 
phase and ground is in parallel with its capacity to ground. After 
the first moment, the current which flows in the resistance 
comes directly from the generator and not from the condenser 
2. The current which flows through the resistance to the sheath 
returns to the generator through the condensers 1 and 3. The 
potential O p in the diagram Fig. 3 is the vector potential drop 
across the condensers in series with the resistance. 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1885 


The current, then, that flows through the resistance from phase 
2to ground, returns not only by phases 1 and 3 of the grounded 
cable but also by the same phases of all the other cables through 
their electrostatic capacity to ground. In this way it is seen, from 
one viewpoint, that current goes out from. the generator on the 
phase of the grounded cable, to a value in this case of 60 amperes, 
and returns in a subdivided form by being distributed among all 
the cables. From another viewpoint, a current flows out in one 
of the current transformers of the grounded cable which does not 
return through two adjacent transformers on the other phase 
of the same cable. This makes the sum of the currents in the 
three transformers not equal to zero. This unbalanced condition 
produces the current in themlcalizer relay which causes it to 
operate. It should be noted 
that the same condition 
holds only toa lesser extent 
in all the other cables 
which are not grounded. 


CONDENSER1 CONDENSER 3 


13200 VOLTS 3 


Fic. 3 Fic. 4 


The relations of the potentials to the current expressed in the 
rectangular coordinances of Fig. 2 are worked out mathematic- 
ally from the diagram of Fig. 3 and are given in the summary of 
this paper. It may be evident to some engineers that this whole 
matter could have been worked out symbolically. The experi- 
mental method used with the interpretation of the data is much 
more trustworthy than -the symbolical method, however, on 
account of the difficulties in obtaining by ‘abstract analysis all 
the factors involved. 

In Fig. 5 the conditions are shown for two values of resistance. 
When the resistance is very high then the potential from phase 2 
to ground represented by m 2 is nearly equal to the Y potential, 
and the current. is nearly in phase with the Y potential. The 
potential Om across the condenser at this time is very small. 


1886 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


If further proof were required that the condenser involved is 
not the capacity of phase 2 to ground, it is given by this diagram 
of Fig. 5 when the resistance to ground is high, as in the case 
assumed. Then the potential from phase 2 to ground, which is 
the potential on condenser 2, is practically the normal Y poten- 
tial and not O m. 

When the resistance to ground is low then the potential across 
the condenser is O m and the potential across the resistance is 
n2. Since the condenser effect now predominates, the current to 
ground is practically 90 deg. in advance of the Y potential O 2. 
At this time the capacity current has reached practically its full 
value, as the resistance is too small to affect it sensibly. 


COMMENTS ON THE TESTS 


These tests were made to investigate the applicability of the 
arcing ground suppressor to cable systems. It is of interest 
to note here that although the system was 
grounded more than 100 times by the arcing 
ground suppressor, no high potentials were 
caused. The condition of full ground was ap- 
proached very gradually. During this time 
needle gaps were placed between phases and 
from each phase to ground. Note was taken 
also of discharges on the lightning arresters. On 
one day at a particular time the lightning ar- 
resters in two stations discharged during the x 
grounded condition. Every effort was made to 2— 
reproduce these effects, but without success. ye. 5 
The tests show that a contact ground on one 
phase of this system produces no: abnormal potentials. The 
two non-grounded phases simply rise to delta potential 
above ground. The factor of safety in the insulation of the 
cables makes the application of delta potential harmless. Dur- 
ing the periods of grounding, which sometimes were purposely 
carried to several minutes’ duration, there were no disturbances of 
the power on the system, although there were synchronous 
machines in operation. During part of the time a two-phase 
system was connected to this three-phasesystem. This webelieved 
would increase the possibility of surges, but no surge was noted. 

In making and breaking the grounds on the circuit, it is well 
known from volumes of theory on the subject of transients, 
especially the classical work by Dr. Steinmetz, that oscillations 


7640 VOLTS 


{912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1887 


will take place. If no resistance had been used one might look 
for high potentials from these oscillations. It is well to note that 
in every case the grounds were made initially with some resist- 
ance in series. In a former paper before the Institute, on the 
arcing ground suppressor, the construction of the grounding 
switch is shown with a resistance in the oil pot. As the con- 
tact blade descends it first picks up this series resistance, which 
is designed to damp out oscillations. An instant later after 
this ground takes place the resistance is cut out by a further 
movement of the blade which makes a direct contact between a 
phase and ground. In opening the switch the first movement 
,of the blade throws the resistance in series again with the ground 
and when the contact to ground is finally broken it is done 
through the damping resistance in the oil pots. To this condi- 
tion in the protective apparatus we can attribute the immunity 


WH 
UMUET 


Fic. 7 Fic. 9 


from troubles such as occur from the usual accidental arcs to 
ground. The value of the use of the critical resistance in the oil 
pots was evident when the arcing ground suppressor switch was 
harmlessly made to pump open and shut rapidly for some time. 


OSCILLOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF CURRENTS AND POTENTIALS WHEN 
THE SYSTEM IS GROUNDED SUCCESSIVELY THROUGH A 
RESISTANCE TO GROUND AND THE SWITCH OF 
THE ARCING GROUND SUPPRESSOR 


In making these oscillographic tests, two instruments were 
used simultaneously. One instrument had its vibrators num- 
bered 1, 2 and 3; the other, 4 and5: 

For the first oscillogram, P.S. 7, Fig. 6, the connections of the 
circuit for the vibrators 1, 2 and 3 are shown in Fig. 7. 

The object of this test was to show the operation of the arcing 
ground suppressor. For vibrators 4 and 5 the connections are 
shown in Fig. 9, and the oscillogram in Fig. 8. One vibrator 


1888 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


measured delta potential and the other vibrator measured cur- 
rent to ground through an aluminum cell connected directly be- 
tween the neutral of the generator and earth. 

Fig. 6. Oscillogram P.S. 7, Vibrators 1,2 and 3a. Phase 2 
of generator No. 8 was grounded. Generator No. 8 was not 
connected to the power system when this test was made. 

Upper Record: Vibrator 1.—Voltage of non-grounded phase to 

ground. 

Middle Record: Vibrator 2.—Current to ground through a resistance 
of about 300 ohms. This current is the electrostatic 
capacity current of the generator. 

Lower Record: Vibrator 3.—A circuit parallel to the one of the middle 
record from phase 2 to ground. This circuit was a 
single pole switch of the arcing ground suppressor. 

In this preliminary test a resistance of about 300 ohms was also 
placed in series with the switch of the arcing ground suppressor. 

Notes: The exposure on the film starts at a point at the 
right of the film marked zero time. At this instant both switches 
between phase 2 and ground are open, and therefore, the vibra- 
tors 2 and 8 show zero current and vibrator 1 on phase 3 shows 
normal Y voltage to ground (7740 volts effective.) 

The small lumps in this generator wave represent the 17th 
harmonic. The 17th harmonic corresponds to 18 teeth per pair 
of poles. After about 2.75 cycles from the time marked zero 
time, the first grounding switch closes, connecting phase 2 to 
ground through about 300 ohms resistance. This is shown in 
the oscillogram by the disappearance of the zero line. Due to 
vibration of the contacts of the oil switch the record of vibrator 
2 is initially so broken as not to be clear. It becomes clearer, 
however, in its continuation at the left end of the oscillogram. 

When the first switch closes to ground the voltage of phase 
3 as indicated on vibrator 1 immediately jumps to approximately 
delta potential. This takes place in spite of the 300 ohms in 
series to ground. The electrostatic capacity of the generator 
is so small that the resistance of 300 ohms has very little effect 
in limiting the grounding current from reaching its full value. 
Note has already been made of the high value of the 17th har- 
monic. This harmonic is greatly magnified by the capacity of 
the windings of the generator. In a later oscillogram it will be 
shown that when the generator is loaded by being connected to 
the system the effect of the teeth of the generator in producing 
the 17th harmonic disappears. 


Coming now toa consideration of the arcing ground suppressor 


1912} LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1889 


switch as shown in vibrator 3—sixteen cycles (about 4 second) 
after the first ground is put on the generator, the switch of the 
suppressor closes. The two circuits parallel to ground then 
divide the current between them. 

Fig. 8. Oscillogram P.S. 7, Vibrators 4.and 5. The general 

conditions of the circuit have already been described. 

Upper Record: Vibrator 4.—Delta potential. 

Lower Record: Vibrator 5 is the current from the neutral of the 
generator through aluminum cells to ground. There 
is no visible current to ground shown until the first 
switch closes. The higher current initially on this 
record is due mostly to the charging current of alum- 
inumcells. Ina later oscillogram surges at the neutral 
will be shown in this circuit. 


Fig. 10. Oscillogram P.S. 10, Vibrators 1, 2 and 3. The 
electrostatic capacity current to ground with a strong 17th 
harmonic is shown more clearly by choosing only a small part of 
the oscillogram. This test is a repetition of the previous one 
described. The film velocity is somewhat greater in order to 
bring out the form of the harmonics. 


Upper Record: Vibrator 1 is the potential of phase 3 to ground. 
Middle Record: Vibrator 2 is the electrostatic capacity current of the 
generator from phase 2 to ground. 

Lower Record: Vibrator 3.—Zero line only is shown. 


Fig. 11. Oscillogram P.S. 11, Vibrator 4 and 5. Grounding 
of generator No. 8, not loaded. 

Upper Record: Vibrator 4.—The delta potential of the generator. 

Lower Record: Vibrator 5.—The current from the neutral of the 

generator through the aluminum cells to ground. 

Nore: This oscillogram is reproduced especially on account 
of the initial surge that took place at the neutral the instant 
the generator was grounded. 

Fig. 12. Oscillogram P.S. 19, Vibrators 1, 2 and 3. This 
record shows the opening of the grounding switch when the 
generator is connected to the whole system. There were about 
500 ohms in series in the grounding circuit. 


Upper Record: Vibrator 1 is the voltage of phase 3 to ground. 
Middle Record: Vibrator 2 is the current from phase 2 to ground. 
Lower Record: ‘Vibrator 3 shows only a zero line. 

Notes: Only the last half cycle of the current to ground is 
shown on this oscillogram, vibrator 2. When the current ceases 
in vibrator 2, vibrator 1 shows a distortion of its zero line which 
is probably due to a magnetic effect in the potential trans- 


1890 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


former. It should be noted in the small part of the cur- 
rent wave that is visible that since all the cables were con- 
nected to the generator and the normal load was_ being 
taken, the 17th harmonic disappears, leaving the current wave 
smooth. 

Fig. 18. Oscillogram P.S. 20, Vibrators 4 and 5. ‘This test 
illustrates conditions while phase 2 is being grounded, first, - 
through 25 ohms resistance, then, 16 cycles later, through the 
arcing ground suppressor switch, which in its final closed con- 
dition had no series resistance. 

Upper Record: Vibrator 4 was again the delta potential. 


Lower Record: Vibrator 5.—The current from the neutral of the 
generator through aluminum cells to ground. 


Notes: The only subject worthy of note in the wave of delta 
potential is the absence of harmonics. In the current from the 
neutral to ground (the lower record), the initial current rush is 
shown of comparatively small magnitude. After about 16 cycles 
the switch of the arcing ground suppressor closes and cuts out 
all the resistance in phase 2 to ground. Under this condition 
there is an unusual and remarkable, although harmless, surge of 
potential at the neutral which makes itself evident by consider- 
able current from the neutral to ground. This surge first in- 
creases, then decreases slightly, and then increases again, and 
decreases to zero. The cause of this surge was not found, and it 
could not be reproduced. Although many tests were made it 
appeared but one other time. It may have been due to an un- 
balanced condition which occurred only when the ground con- 
nection was made at a certain unknown point in the cycle of the 
generator wave. , 

Fig. 14. Oscillogram P.S. 34, Vibrators 1, 2 and 3. This 
record demonstrates the operation of the arcing ground sup- 
pressor under normal running conditions of the loaded system. 


Upper Record: Vibrator 1 is the potential of phase 1 to ground. 

Middle Record: Vibrator 2 is the current from phase 2 to ground, 
through a contact intentionally placed on the circuit 
to start the operation of the arcing ground suppressor. 

Lower Record: Vibrator 3.—Current through the switch of the 
suppressor from phase 2 to ground. 


Notes: The potential of phase 1 to ground is shown initially 
at the middle of the film, where the record starts, at its normal 
value of 7600 volts. After about five cycles, the intentional 
ground was placed on the circuit. This shifts the neutral and 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1891 


causes the potential of vibrator 1 to rise somewhat (9150 volts). 
Sixteen cycles later the arcing ground suppressor switch closes 
on its first contact and raises the potential from 9150 volts to 
11,750 volts. Four cycles later when the suppressor switch is 
entirely closed the potential of phase 1 rises to the delta value, 
namely, 13,150 volts effective. 

Following through the conditions of vibrator 2, the intentional 
ground to start the operation of the suppressor occurred about 
five cycles after the shutter of the oscillograph opened. There 
was a small resistance in series in this circuit from phase 2 to 
ground, which limited the grounding current to 42.5 amperes. 
After a duration of about 16 cycles the arcing ground suppressor 
switch partially closes and reduces the grounding current in 
vibrator 2 to 20.4 amperes, and when the suppressor switch 
closes entirely, four cycles later, it shunts out the current from 
this intentional ground which takes the place of the accidental 
ground in the operation of the device. 

Tracing now the zero recorded in vibrator 3, the suppressor 
switch contact touches the resistance one-fourth of a second after 
the first ground was put on the system—34.2 amperes flows 
through this resistance. The wave is perfectly smooth. The 
switch blade requires four cycles to pass through the resistance 
contact to its home contact. When this resistance is shunted out 
there is a slight momentary oscillation of grounding current of a 
frequency of about 480 cycles per second, which quickly dies out. 
During this test there was a discharge of the lightning arresters at 
Garfield substation and also at City Dock station. Note is made 
of this because of the impossibility of getting sufficient potential 
at any other time to cause a discharge of the lightning arresters. 


Srupy OF PHASE RELATION OF ‘THREE-PHASE POTENTIALS 
WHEN ONE PHASE IS GROUNDED THROUGH MorRE 
or Less RESISTANCE 
Fig. 15. Oscillogram P.S. 42, Vibrators 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. 
Oscillograms were taken with different values of resistance from 
phase 2 to ground. From these oscillograms are chosen the 
following: 


Oscillogram Resistance to ground Current to ground 
P.S. 42 Infinite Zero 
Le easy 0) 835 ohms 9 amperes 
“ok 51 td 180 “ 34 “ 


«& «& 46 21.6 . Loni % 


1892 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: | [June 28 


The system was operating under normal conditions of day 
load. 

Upper Record: Vibrator 1 is the potential of phase 3 to ground. 

Middle Record: Vibrator 2 is the potential of phase 2 to ground. 

Lower Record: Is the potential of phase 1 to ground. 

Note: It just happened in this oscillogram that the separa- 
tion of the zero lines from each other corresponded to the 
difference in calibration of the vibrators and this brought the 
tops of the peaks of the three phases about onaline. This is only 
incidental but it may cause some confusion in reading the oscil- 
logram. This oscillogram shows the natural condition of the 
waves when there is no ground on the system. 

Vibrator 4 shows the delta potential of 13,200 volts. Vibrator 
5 shows the potential of the neutral to ground. This neutral 
potential shows the presence of a 3rd harmonic which has an 
effective value of 660 volts. 

Fig. 16. Oscillogram P.S. 50. In this case the resistance from 
phase 2 to ground is 835 ohms, which limits the current to ground 
to 9 amperes. The voltage of phase 2 to ground is 7500 volts 
while the potential of phase 3 to ground is only 6730 volts. This 
illustrates the condition already described, of the reduction of the 
potential of phase 3 to ground when phase 2 is grounded through 
a comparatively high resistance. There is not yet sufficient 
shifting of the phase relation of the potentials of each phase to 
ground to be noted in this oscillogram. 

Vibrator 5 shows an interesting development of the superposi- 
tion of the third harmonic on the fundamental generator wave 
which appears as the neutral is displaced by the condition of 
ground. 

Fig. 17. Oscillogram P.S. 51. The resistance to ground has 
now been reduced to 180 ohms and the current from phase 2 
to ground has risen, correspondingly, to 34 amperes. It will be 
noted also in vibrators 1,2and3 that the potential of phase 2 
ground has decreased to 6120 volts, and the potential of phase 3 
to ground has increased to 7220 volts, while the potential of 
phase 1 has already increased to the relatively high value of 
12,200 volts. 

Fig. 18. Oscillogram P.S. 46. Resistance to ground is 21.6 
ohms. The current from phase 2 to ground has reached practi- 
cally its full value of 60 amperes. The potential of phase 2 to 
ground has decreased to 1295 volts. The potential of phase 3 
has increased to 12,600 volts, and the potential of phase 1 to 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1893 


ground has increased to 14,000 volts, which is greater than the 
delta value. The potential from neutral to ground shown on 
vibrator 5 has increased to 7630 volts and the effect of the third 
harmonic shows relatively little in this large wave. 

Fig. 19. Oscillogram P.S. 60, Vibrators 4 and 5. The entire 
60-cycle system through the suppressor switch on phase 2 is 
grounded. 

Upper Record: Current from the generator neutral to ground through 

aluminum cells and a small gap. 

Lower Record: Zero line only. 

Notes: On the upper record, the shutter of the oscillograph 
opens at the extreme left. There is a period of zero current until 
the suppressor switch strikes the resistance contact in the 
switch pot. At this instant the current from the neutral to 
ground through the aluminum arrester is so great that it carries 
the deflection off the width of the film. By continuing the traces 
of the oscillogram until the lines meet an approximate value of 
20 amperes is given. After the fourth cycle the resistance to 
ground in the switch pot is cut out by a movement of the blade 
of the suppressor switch. The surge of current at the neutral 
again goes off the film. The maximum value of current gradually 
decreases as the electric system becomes adjusted to the new 
condition of ground. It may be noticed that all the way through 
this record there are three to five small current surges before 
the large one takes place in each half cycle. This surge is due 
to the small gap that was placed in series with the aluminum cells 
in this test. This gap was placed there simply to determine its 
effect on the current to ground. The large deflections, however, 
are not due to this small series gap. The subsequent oscillo- 
grams were taken under the same conditions, but this condition 
could not be reproduced. It may be noted that this surge is 
similar to the one previously noted in Fig. 18. It is included in 
this paper with the idea of showing everything unusual and 
abnormal. 

Fig. 20. Oscillogram P.S. 62, Vibrators 1, 2 and 3. 

Upper Record: Vibrator 2 shows a zero line, as it was not used. 

Middle Record: Vibrator 1 is the voltage from phase 1 to ground. 

Lower Record: Vibrator 3 is the current in the lightning arrester. 

Nores: This oscillogram was taken especially to record a 
discharge of an aluminum lightning arrester in a station. Since 
there was insufficient potential from the surges to cause a dis- 
charge over the horn gaps at their minimum setting, the gaps 


1894 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


were shortened sufficiently to spark at delta potential. The 
effective current in the arrester was 3.3 amperes by ammeter 
measurement. The peak of the instantaneous value given by the 
oscillograph showed about 5 amperes maximum. 

Fig. 21. Oscillogram P.S. 65, Vibrators 4 and 5. During this 
exposure of the film, phase 2 of the entire system was grounded 
through the suppressor switch. During this time the lightning 
arrester had its gap so that it discharged but this discharge has 
no effect on either of the records of the vibrators shown. 

Upper Record: Vibrator 4 is the current from the generator neutral 
through aluminum cells to ground. The cells were 
directly connected without the intervention of a gap, 
such as existed in the previous figure. 

Lower Record: Vibrator 5 is the voltage from generator neutral to 
ground. 

Notes: At the left end of the record the third harmonic is 
prominent in both the current and potential wave, but naturally 
more prominent in the latter. When the suppressor switch 
closes, the third harmonic becomes of relatively little importance. 
While the resistance in the switch pot is in series to ground the 
voltage of the neutral rises only to 6200 volts, but after about 
four cycles this resistance is cut out and the voltage rises to 
7630 volts. At the instant complete ground takes place the 
aluminum cells at the neutral show a surge current of 1.75 
amperes maximum. 

Fig. 22. Oscillogram P.S. 68, Vibrators 1, 2 and 3. This 
oscillogram gives a record of the main load currents in the three 
phases during the period of grounding. 

Notes: The ground takes place at about the tenth cycle of 
the generator after the opening of the shutter of the oscillograph. 
There is no visible disturbance of the load currents resulting 
from grounding. This result was checked in a subsequent test. 
The absence of disturbances is explained by the fact that the 60 
amperes of grounding current is nearly at right angles to the 
greater value of power current. The power current at this time 
was about 310 amperes per phase, at 87 per cent power, factor. 
The total load was 6200 kw. 

Fig. 23. Oscillogram P.S. 70, Vibrators 1,2 and 3. Charging 
current in the three phases of an unloaded cable which is not 
grounded. Energy was taken from generator No. 8 the same asin 
the previous test. The length of cable was 6.5 miles. The size 
of the copper conductor in the cable was No. 1 and the insulation 
was paper, 7/32 in. thick. 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1895 


Notes: It is interesting to compare the wave form in this 
oscillogram with that shown in several others. For example, 
if it is compared to the one shown in Fig. 10, it will be seen 
that a different harmonic is magnified. In the present figure the 
most prominent harmonic is the eleventh, whereas in Fig. 10, 
oscillogram 10, the most prominent harmonic is the seventeenth. 
In regard to the oscillogram 10, it is necessary to explain that a 
cable only 3.5 miles long was connected to the generator at 
that time, but it had the effect of magnifying the seventeenth 
harmonic. In this case, Fig. 23, an idle cable 6.5 miles 
long was connected. It is somewhat confusing to find the elev- 
enth harmonic magnified. This is explained by the fact that | 
when the seventeenth harmonic was prominent the generator 
was without load, whereas when the eleventh harmonic was 
magnified the generator was carrying the normal day load of 
the system. Other comparisons will be made in the notes of 
subsequent oscillograms. 

Fig. 24. Oscillogram P.S. 71, Vibrators 1,2 and 3. Charging 
current in three phases of an unloaded cable, the same as in the 
previous test except that phase 2 is grounded at the busbar. 
The generator is still carrying its normal load. 

Nores: The effect of grounding phase 2 is to steal away some 
of the capacity current in the wire and divert it to the cable 
sheath. Phases 1 and 3 show an increase in capacity current 
-of perhaps 40 per cent. The capacity current in phase 2 drops 
off about half. Special attention is directed to these varia- 
tions and capacity currents during ground. The variations 
- indicate a change in capacity. In another paper on a localizer 
it is endeavored to prove that this capacity current in the 
grounded phase does not affect the localizers in the non-grounded 
cables. 

Fig. 25. P.S. 73, Vibrator 1. Charging current to ground in 
the same unloaded cable, 6.5 miles long (cable H). The poten- 
tial is taken, however, from generator No.4, which is not carry- 
ing any power. 

Notes: In this record the thirteenth harmonic is more promi- 
nent even than the fundamental wave at 60 cycles. One might 
even consider the frequency from this generator in the cable as 
780 cycles per second instead of 60. T his record should be com- 
pared with previous records where the seventeenth and eleventh 
harmonics were prominent. Since there was no load in the 
generator the 12 teeth per pair of poles in the generator gave 


1896 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


their distorting effect undiminished by any armature reaction 
from load current. The effective current to ground was 19.1 
amperes. The thirteenth harmonic is free of any visible higher 
harmonics. In comparing this oscillogram with that of the gen- 
erator No. 8 shown in Figs. 6 and 10, the difference in design of 
the generator armatures explains the difference in wave form. 
In the case where the eleventh harmonic was prominent the 
explanation is probably found in attributing the eleventh 
harmonic to a generator in the City Dock power station. 

It is evident these harmonics exist in more or less magnified 
forms under different conditions of operation. The possi- 
bility of resonance with these harmonics is very remote. The 
possible chance of occurrence is about the same as that of 
winning a prize in a Chinese lottery. Still, the possibility must 
always be kept in mind, and whenever occasional troubles 
occur of unusually damaging effects, no doubt the magnification 
of the harmonics by resonance may at times come in for part 
of the blame. It has often been noticed, for example, on a system, 
that arcing grounds will take place many times without causing 
any trouble, but finally one single arcing ground will cause wide- 
spread damage. These oscillograms are reproduced especially 
to point out the possible source of high potentials from 
resonance. 

Measure of Capacity Currents Made on Three-Phase Trans- 
mission Cables when One Phase is Grounded, and Generator 
Not Loaded. A number of tests were made of the distribution 
of capacity currents between the cables and sheath under 
conditions of construction. It was found that these currents 
deviated in value from the empirical laws that are given to 
cover such conditions. Not having time to look up the literature 
on this matter and fearing that the subject has been thoroughly 
covered, space is economized by not including them in this 
report. The fact that the currents do not check with the standard 
equations is easily explained by the changes in the harmonics 
that have been illustrated in the preceding oscillograms. 

In introducing this subject the object is simply to call atten- 
tion to the fact that the usual equations given for capacity 
between wires and sheath have little practical value in determin- 
ing the charging current from any generator to a cable. 

Data of a Grounding Test. Readings, Nos. 27 to 50. Returning 
to the subject of accidental grounds, the following table of a 
complete test is given for reference: 


PLATE XCVI 


fod snl =p 


1912 


VOL. XXXI 


‘OT “Sl 


[AGSHTLLIHM GNV NOLHSIANO] 


[ATSHTILLIHM GNV NOLHDIAUD 


] 


“9° 


on 


. S9¢9079 Ppunosip Y yang 
1 


BRE 


PLATE XCVII 


Aoi Ee Es 
VOL. XXxXIl, 


1912 


[AUSHILLINM GNV NOLHDITAD] 


TT “91d 


[AASHILLIHM GNV NOLHSIGx) 


GIINNOYD, 2 ISvHd V 
wy BZ 2 


PPPUnOdg 2 IS2Ya 


‘GI (Sld 


[AASAILLIHM GNV NOLHSIFaAD] 
TIAOWIY INICHD | 


6 aR eee ee are sae) CEAALEROZUES 


Saat i RE AS AAS BO tea 4 RR dato ee 


ED 


A 


PLATE XCVIII 


A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[AUSAILLIHA GNV NOLHSIA] 


‘PT “91d 


Cl) Me ae 
nee babe 


_ AOSTES 


PLATE XCIX 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


PSs42 


7750" phase ¢ te ground. 
jee eri 3 to ground, 


i 7690" phase 2 te ground, 


13200." line fo line. 


¢ 


ee Nevtral to ground, 


due to 3rd harmonic. 


Current phase 2 to grounc_ = 0. amp. 
Resistance. “ 1 o> Ofims 


BG. 15: [CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY] 


PLATE C 
Awl. E. iE. 
VOL, XXXI, 1912 


6730" phase 3 fo ground. 
7500" phase 2 to ground. | 
9070.” POSES. 1 fo i oe 


13200" line fo line, 
1820" neutral to ereind 


Current phase 2 ‘brebnas F.ame. 
Current ph % fe : : 2835. ohms. 


Pic. 16. [CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY 


PLATE Cl 
A. t..E. 6. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


7220, phase 3 to ground, PSS. 
\ 6/20" phase Z2to ground. — ; 
Y 200" phase 1 to ground. 


13200" line to line. 
9800" meutral ko round, 


Current phase ad ie ts Ricbagietna 3 SF arn p. 
Fresistance __.. 


Lr Gen Lae [CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY] 


PLATE Cll 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


(2600. Vahase 3 to ground. 
1% . ‘hd a phaseeéte groun 
/ 14008 phase / to ere D 


p43 LOO” jie to ting 
7630" neutral to ground. 


Pre. 18. CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY] 


PLATE Clll 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[ASSHILLIHM GNV NOLHSIAAS) 61 ‘Old 


“anuyjxpe due ('L/s 
| 5 
winunxecu dup oz popoulfsz7 
} | 
wiruixoi duo gg Ny | | 
Cele ale Id 
| th “| 


ranaeg 


7 tata ae 2 a a meme \s 


| 


FLATE CIV 
Aol Ese. 
VOL. XXX*, 1912 


Ini PAN, [CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY] 


PLATE CV 
A.» E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


P.S. '70 


—- 
Phase / 82! amp tnaximum. 


Fic. 23 [CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY] 


PLATE CVI 
A. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Y— BS. 7! 
Peak value of currant, phase 4 = 8.70 amp. 


&= 3.10 


b y 7 ESEY 
Fic. 25. [CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY] 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1897 


Potential to ground 
Ie R 
Reading | Hour Vi V3 Ve to to is Oscillo- | 
No. ground | ground localizer gram | 
27 3:24 TAO eo 7,800 0 00 0 
| 28 3:254 9,250 7,500 6,700 1 682 (QF @ 47 
29 3:2643 9,400 | 7,450 6,620 12 621 0.35? 
30 3:27 9,370 7,440 6,600 13 572 0.35? 
31 9,720 7,380 6,500 14 527 0.35 
| 32 3:2743 9,930 7,360 6,480 16 461 0.35 
33 11,250 6,780 6,600 26 261 0.48 
34 11,730 6,490 6,900 29 224 0.52 
So 12,250 | 6,180 7,260 34 182 0.60 
36 3:29 12,550 5,880 7,680 aly 159 0.64 
37 12,930 5,520 8,050 40 138 0.70 
38 13,180 5,260 8,520 42 125 0.74 
39 3:30 13,310 5,040 8,760 44 114.5 0.76 48 
40 13,530 4,780 9,180 46 104 0.80 
41 3:31 13,770 4,320 9,660 48 93.7 0.86 
| 42 13,910 3,900 | 10,150 51 76.5 0.88 
| 43 14,000 3,700 | 10,500 52 71.2 0.90 
44 3:334 | 14,090 1,140 | 12,720 60 19 1.2 
45 3:34% | 13,930 1,105 | 12,650 60 18.4 te 49 
ies 46 14,300 2,990 | 10,690 56 53.4 1 
47 12,600 5,760 7,680 41 140.5 0.70 
48 12,840 5,580 7,980 39 143 0.70 
49 3:36 11,950 6,360 6,960 34 187 0.56 


RELATION OF KILOVOLTS TO GROUNDING RESISTANCE IN 
A GROUNDED PHASE 


In the previous illustration the relation between current and 
voltage for the three phases was given. In some cases it is 
valuable to know the relation between the voltages and resistance 
from a phase to ground. This is given in Fig. 26. 

_ Relation of Power Lost in the Ground Circutt and the Current 
to Ground. For several reasons the energy lost in the grounded 
circuit is of value, also the conditions at which maximum energy 
loss occurs. It is evident that when the resistance is infinite 
there is no loss of energy, and again when the resistance is zero 
there is no loss of energy. The maximum loss occurs when the 
‘current is about 34 its full value to ground. The relation at 
every instant is shown in Fig. 27. 

Relation of the Power Lost in the Grounded Circuit, and the 
Difference of Potential between the Grounded Phase and Earth. 
This relation is shown in Fig. 28. 

Rate of Development of an Accidental Ground. When this work 
was first begun it was hoped that some device might be con- 
structed which would indicate the early stages of the develop- 


1898 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


ment of an accidental ground so that the arcing-ground suppres- 
sor could be used to prevent an actual arc to ground by closing 
on the fault during this early stage. A brief consideration of 
the power curves already given will show the difficulties involved. 
For example, in Fig. 28 when the potential of the grounded phase 
is diminished by only 10 per cent the energy lost is 170 kw. From 
‘the standpoint of potential, it is not easy to make a device sen- 
sitive to a change of only 10 per cent and still maintain a high 
degree of reliability. From the standpoint of rapidity of develop- 
ment of the fault, it is quite evident that 170 kw. applied to a 
small hole in the insulation about one-half inch long will carry 
the resistance immediately down to a negligible value. Taking 


T ; => T — 
ePOINTS AS RESISTANCE DECREASES | 4 
e aj it fs 7 INCREASES | | | 


| 


a 


KILOVOLTS 


lor) 


c= 


100 200 300 400 500 600 700 
OHMS PHASE TWO TO GROUND 
Fic. 26—VARIATION IN VOLTAGE OF EacH PHASE TO GROUND AS 
RESISTANCE, PHASE 2 TO GROUND, VARIES. 
Curves from test data, readings Nos. 27 to 49, Aug. 22, 1911. 


another example in which the drop in potential is less, the con- 
ditions still seem to be hopeless. When the drop of potential to 
ground is only 1 per cent there is a loss of 70 kw. at the fault. 
Seventy kilowatts concentrated in a small fault is sufficient to 
develop it with enormous rapidity. In order to get the loss at 
the fault down to a value that will develop at such a rate as to 
permit the operation of a safety device, let us assume that the 
energy loss in an incandescent lamp is the upper value that can 
be allowed in the fault. When one considers that an incandescent 
lamp has a filament longer than the fault in the insulation, and 
that that filament becomes incandescent with 50 watts in <b. 
we have surely not chosen, as a basis, a value of energy loss that 


1912| LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1899 


is too small. Still, when we consider this energy loss, the prob- 
lem is far more difficult. A loss of 50 watts in the fault corres- 
ponds to a resistance of 1,000,000 ohms. When it comes to loca- 
ting a fault of 1,000,000 ohms in a system where the insulation 
resistance runs from 2000 ohms up to 500 megohms, the diffi- 


— - —_—_—— 


+ 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 
AMPERES IN RESISTANCE TO GROUND 


Fre. 27 


culties seem insurmountable and unsolvable by any of the devices 
that have been described in scientific literature. From a stand- 
point of utilization of the current of the fault to ground, it is 
interesting to note that the value is only 77 milliamperes. When 
one considers that the load current on the system is several 


ina ie os 


w 40 | 


* a 7680 7200 6600 6000 5400 4800 4200 3600 3000 2400 1800 1200 600 
VOLTS FROM PHASE #2 TO GROUND 


Fic. 28 


hundred amperes, and the electrostatic charging current five 
amperes or more per cable, the difficulties in this approach to 
the problem are obvious. It is evident that for large systems 
the solution in sight is either to allow the fault to develop when 
it will and take care of it with the arcing ground suppressor, or 
to utilize the following proposed method: 


€ 


1900 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


Predetermining the Faults in Cable Systems. Experience 
shows that practically all the faults in a cable system develop 
initially between a single phase and ground. If the arc is not 
extinguished the arcing ground will very quickly burn the 
insulation between phases so badly as to cause a short circuit. 
In fact, this is what has always taken place when a fault has 
occurred on a cable system. There are certain weaknesses and 
accidents that cannot be foreseen, and the arcing ground sup- 
pressor with the localizer seems to be the only practicable solu- 
tion in sight at present. There are, however, many faults which 
can be prematurely developed at a time most convenient to the 
operating engineer. Operators have often need to paraphrase 
an old saying in the form: ‘Grounds never come singly.” 
One arcing ground will set up surges which will weaken other 
parts of the cable system, and these weakened points will sub- 
sequently develop into grounds. From experience in the labora- 
tory, and from our knowledge of the phenomena, it is evident 
that most of these faults develop very gradually in the early 
stages. Laboratory experience shows very convincingly that 
insulation will stand a fairly definite limiting potential without 
any deterioration. Also, that slightly above this limit the 
deterioration is exceedingly slow, but becomes more and more 
rapid, along a descending logarithmic curve, as the potential 
across the insulation is increased more and more. If a test 
potential for a cable is chosen at a value that is less than the 
deteriorating value, then there can be no objection to applying 
it as frequently as desired. If, while this test potential is applied, 
there are inherent faults in the insulation which are still in their 
early stages of development, then the higher potential will 
hasten the development of these faults. Any inherent fault, then, 
may be developed at a time of the day and week when it is most 
convenient to make repairs, and when a spare cable may be 
substituted for the faulty one with the least inconvenience and 
disturbance in handling the load. To meet this situation, then, 
it is proposed to introduce at an artificial neutral, direct-current 
potential which will raise the total potential of the entire system 
by a specified amount above ground. Faults which stand this 
strain for several minutes are not likely to develop at normal 
potential within several days. The application of such a method 
would, we believe, tend greatly to keep the system free of incipi- 
ent or embryonic faults. It is a refinement which, in the future, 
perhaps, may find considerable application. The assumption 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1901 


is made that some faults will always develop in cables due to 
inherent weaknesses and age, or due to troubles which may come 
from electrolysis of the sheath. It is, then, reasonable to develop 
these unavoidable faults at the most convenient time without 
switching or disturbance of the load. Plans are being made 
to apply this method. 


INSULATION RESISTANCE OF THE SYSTEM OF THE PUBLIC 
SERVICE ELECTRIC COMPANY 


This system consists of both overhead and underground con- 
struction. A statement has already been made that the insula- 
tion resistance under normally safe conditions of operation 
varies from 2000 ohms to 500,000,000 ohms. While Mr. A. H. 
Davis was making a study of the factors involved in the design 
of a localizer, he carried on, incidentally, continuous tests of the 
insulation of the system. The results show several features of 
interest. 

The tests were made along the lines proposed above, that is, 
‘a direct current was applied at an artificial neutral formed by 
three potential transformers. In series with this direct-current 
generator was a recording ammeter. The current was kept within 
the range of the ammeter by different values of direct-current 
applied. Some typical results are shown in the following plotted 
curves of the resistance of insulation of the system as ordinate, 
and time as abscissa. Since the range of insulation resistance 
was so very large, a special method of plotting the curves was 
used. Three scales are used in the ordinates. These scales are 
placed one above the other, but there will be no difficulty in 
reading the resistance in the usual way by jumping from one 
scale to the next where the changes in resistance require it. 
The diurnal variations which actually took place are shown in 
these curves—also the variations in resistance from minute to 
minute when the insulation resistance was low. The needle 
of the recording ammeter under these conditions moved over a 
very wide range. Low resistance invariably came from the 
overhead lines and was due entirely to weather conditions. The 
resistance varied according to the variations in the precipitation. 
Resistance might be of a medium high value, and a fog, or slight 
precipitation, might cause changes from minute to minute over 
a small range. When there was a steady downpour of rain over 
all the insulators, then the resistance became very low and un- 
steady. This may have been largely due to spattering of water 


1902 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


up under the petticoats of the insulators. The measurements 
brought out one interesting condition that has been noted else- 
where, but so far as the writer knows, never measured. Just 
before sunrise there is nearly always a sudden drop in the insu- 
lation resistance. A little later the insulation returns to a fairly 
high value. This is explained by the fact that when the sun 


rises, the temperature of the atmosphere around the insulator . 


is above the temperature of the insulator. In other words, the 
insulator absorbs heat more slowly than the air does. This 


| vp) 
“| J ts 
— | ie |_| 1 3 Ps 
al 4 - + 2 0 
i Ba ag 
0 
ai = 1.0 
9 
{—t at Ca Sa t 5 | [ 8 
+ _— 
eeonee | cz 
ie 
+ eat | Be T ‘3 
+ { ‘i + tw 
+3 BS it 
1] + + vores I 2 
= 1 
- 0 
= + 10000 
| i LT 
PEPE eee eee eet 
J +H 5000 
PEER eee ere 
1 CI 1 | es eS a ae poy 
lho { Se 
wa a a a 
NOVEMBER 3) 1911 ied 
[7 
PEELLESEELELLSE LE Oe 


A.M.<——TIME——>P. M. 
Fic. 29 


leaves a cold insulator in contact with a more or less moist atmos- 
phere and the result is a precipitation of dew on the surface of 
the insulator. This dew lowers the insulation resistance. Later, 
the insulator takes the same temperature as the ambient 
atmosphere and again dries off, which restores the insulation 
to its previous value. The tendency of insulators to break down 
- at sunrise was noted years ago on some Mexican lines. Typical 


curves of the insulator resistance of the system are given in 
Figs. 29 to 34. 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1903 


The insulation resistance on one day (Fig. 29) ran above 
100,000 ohms. Between the hours of 10:00 and 12:30 the 
insulation ran above five megohms. The day was clear and the 
atmosphere fairly dry. 

The curve of insulation resistance two days later as shown in 
Fig. 30 has a medium value all day. In the early morning 
between 1:30 and 3:00 o’clock there was either a shower or heavy 
fog. This we have indicated on this curve by a zigzag line in imi- 
tation of the movement of the ammeter needle over the same 


a 
e 


(yaa C 


MEGOHMS 


Sew HS Rao 


m= 1:30 


A.M<——TIM 
Fra. 30 


period of time. The insulation varies from 300,000 ohms to 
600,000 ohms during the day. As in the previous figure, the 
insulation increases during the middle of the day, although, 
due to the moisture in the atmosphere, the actual value of resist- 
ance is not nearly so high as shown in the previous figure. The 
day was cloudy. 

The resistance during the next day (Fig. 31) is typical of bad 
‘weather. Along about 5:00 o’clock in the morning there was 
evidently a light shower. At 9:00 o’clock the resistance became 
so low that the deflection of the ammeter went off the scale. 


1904 . CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


This condition of the meter was not corrected by lowering the 
voltage until 1:30. During this time the resistance dropped 
from 100,000 ohms down to 7000 ohms. There was a shower 
about 2:00 o’clock, another one at 4:30, and another at 9:00 p.m. 
During this entire time the resistance was varying up and down 
over a wide range, as indicated in this figure by the zigzag lines. 
The lowest resistance of insulation recorded during the day was 
3000 ohms. 

The record in Fig. 32 was taken on the following day. It rained 
heavily in the early hours of the morning but cleared up in the 
afternoon and dried off sufficiently to carry the insulation 


MEGOHMS 


5 
4 
3 
2 
e 
0 
qi 


0 


co 


1a oO 


MEGOHMS 


ot 
han! 


—TIME—— P.M. 
Fic. 31 
resistance from 5000 ohms at 4:00 a.m. to 5,000,000 ohms at 
5:00 p.m. Part of the record was lost during the middle of the 
day due to the lack of adjustment of the voltage on the recording 
ammeter. The variation of resistance was so great as to require 
a variation in the direct-current potential in order to keep the 
needle of the ammeter on the scale. 

The record in Fig. 33 was taken two days later. It is typical 
of the usual cloudy weather conditions and illustrates a condition 
of precipitation of dew already referred to. At 3:00 a.m. 
moisture in the atmosphere begins to make itself felt and the 


2 
= M2 RR 
eceas 

I 


A. 


Z 
— pm sa 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1905 


resistance drops from 650,000 ohms to 100,000 ohms at 7:00 
o’clock. The dissipating effect of the sun’s rays then begins to 
make itself felt and the resistance of the system rises rapidly 
and reaches a value of about one megohm at 9:00 a.m. While 
the sun is directly overhead the resistance remains high, but at 
3:00 p.m. the insulation resistance again drops and reaches a 
value of 200,000 ohms at 6:00 p.m. Due probably to a favor- 
able dry wind the insulation rises again until 9:00 p.m., but 
drops rapidly thereafter and reaches a value of less than 100,000 
ohms by midnight. 


a ae 5 
[ — ; : 
=f Bs 
| 2 § 
7 5, 1 = 
0 
1.0 
.9 
8 
TO 
62 
68 
AW 
32 
33 
ai 
0 
10000 
9000 
} 3000 
7000 
6000 
5000 
4000 
3000 
2000 
1000 
NOVEMBER 7, 1941 ala oe 
ee e8 S82 282389223 = 
Get oncio ee ee wee mira SS ro) 
A.M,<——TIME—> P.M. 


The record of a later day (Fig. 34) illustrates a condition that 
is difficult to explain. During the early morning hour the resist- - 
ance ran low but steady. At noon time it began to rain. At 
5:00 o’clock the rain ceased and the resistance rose rapidly to 
over two megohms, but dropped in a few minutes back to its 
former value. This same condition was repeated five times up 
to midnight. There is a ‘possibility that this variation might 
have been due to a fault in the measuring apparatus such as 
might result from some accidental condition of contact between 


the brushes of the direct-current generator and the commutator. 


1906 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


Considerable variations have been noted, although not as great 
as shown here, due to the passing of a cloud and a burst of sun- 
shine, but this could not be the explanation here. In this case 
such a variation might also be caused by the accidental contact 
of a live wire with the limb of a tree, which was removed during 
short intervals. In such case the limb would finally be burned 
away and leave the insulation high. One of the above condi- 


tions, we suppose, accounts for the form of these resistance 
curves. 


xd 
ig 
‘ae 
2 & 
1 wW 
o= 
1.0 
9 
8 
n 
Ts 
62 
ie) 
565 
fw - 
3= 
2 
el 
0 
Mie | 10000 
wo 
= 
= 
° 
5000 
7A) 
= 
& 
° 
0 
S223838828R8 328833233 
QP LD. A iB) ct 0 dln iampacsnney — tee] 
A.M, TIME P.M 


SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ARC IN THE ARCING GROUND 
ON A CABLE 


Those who have made observations on the length of time 


ee id 
et eat cecilia cette ieee ie TTL OED 


required for an arcing ground to develop into a short circuit, and 
also on the difference in the destructive effect. of arcing grounds 
occurring at different times and different places, cannot help 
but be impressed by remarkable differences. If we compare the 
accidental arcs of one system with those on another, naturally 
we will expect to find different harmonics. Furthermore, due to 
differences in electrostatic capacity, different values of grounding 
current will also occur. These fundamental differences will 
naturally give different effects. The cause of the difference is 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1907 


not so evident, however, when we consider arcing grounds on the 
same system at different times, when, apparently, all the con- 
ditions of generation and capacity are identical. 

In discussing this subject it might be well to bring up at this 
time the possibilities of variations coming from the reactions 
of the receiver apparatus on the circuit, such, for example, as 
synchronous motors, induction motors, etc. The presence of these 
machines has to do with the harmonics, but apparently has 
no effect on the duration of the accidental arcing ground before 
it burns into a short circuit. This latter seems to depend very 


(= ad 
| | 5 ws 
Ss 
L Saat 
ti ge 
1 w 
| e z 
= =F 1.0 
7 | | 9 
4 Bo 
ee = i i 
|| 66 
a4 {90 
ie res 
= i 3 
2 
be , al 
ks 0 
L ; 10000 
; + i + ; 9000 
: + Ie T ae 8000 
| 4 7000 
= + 6000 
bai 7 ae [ | 5000 
——> art 4000 
4 | 3000 
| [ 8 Sse | 2000 
feb e 1000 
0 7p) 
NOVEMBER) 12TH, 1911 = 
= x 
S82S8258 232233 38228233 fo) 
x an owt oT a = = aot or ae =} ie 
A.M TIME P.M 


Fic. 34 


greatly on the peripheral location of the accidental arc on the 
sheath of the cable. If, on the one hand, the arc should take 
place on the under side of a horizontally placed cable, the melted 
lead from the crater of the arc would drop down and there would 
be a tendency to melt the lead away from the fault, and thereby 
constantly increase the arc length. We know that a varying arc 
length will cause a magnification of different high frequencies. 
On the other hand, suppose the accidental arc takes place on the 
upper side of a horizontally placed cable, then the melted lead 
from the sheath will tend to run into the punctured hole in the 
insulation and make a direct contact from the faulty phase 


1908 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


to ground. If the charging current is not large, then the 
lead in a solidified form may have sufficient conductivity to 
radiate the J?R given to it by the grounding current. The 
extinguishment of the arcing ground in this case will cut off the 
surges and a system would be able to run for hours without 
interference to the power service. If, however, the lead from 
the sheath which melts and runs into the hole is not quite suffi- 
cient to carry the grounding current, it will be continually 
breaking up, forming a short arc which melts more lead, which 
in turn again shortens the arc. In other words, there will be an 
intermittent arc to ground. The duration of the fault before 
it burns into a short circuit may still be many minutes. 


By taking into account the possible variable locations of the: 


three phases relative to a vertical line, and the variable per- 
ipheral location of the arc on the sheath, it seems possible to 
explain many of the different effects that have been obtained 
on the same system with different accidental arcs to ground. 

Another factor is the peripheral location of the fault on the 
insulation of a single phase. If the fault should occur where the 
insulations of the two adjacent phases come in contact it will, 
naturally, burn into a short circuit much more rapidly than if 
the fault should occur at a point nearer the lead sheath. 

Another condition that will cause differences in transient 
potentials has been mentioned in previous papers. This dif- 
ference comes from the location of an accidental arcing ground 
relative to the length of the feeder. Like the light touch of a 
finger on a violin string which makes it vibrate on high notes by 
oscillations in sections, the same condition may occur electrically 


ona feeder. There are certain locations on a violin string where 


a light touch will simply dampen the vibrations. Apparently 
there exists the same condition in the electrical circuit. There 
are, however, many places on the violin string which give 
different clear high tones, and by analogy, there are the same 
conditions on the electrical circuit. If any one of these high 
frequencies happens to resonate with some localized inductance 
and capacity in the circuit, damage results. This is mere chance 
and is a condition which, happily, does not occur often during 
accidental grounds. 

When a short circuit takes place which is not the result of 
the development of an areing ground it usually occurs at a 
defective joint. In order to give the arcing ground suppressor 
a maximum efficiency in preventing interruptions of service, 
special care should be taken to prevent weakness in the joints. 


1912] LOCALIZERS AND SUPPRESSORS 1909 


A difference has been noted in the strength of joints on different 
sections of a system which results from a difference in the policies 
of the repair foremen. On one section the foreman makes a 
repair just as soon as it can be done at any time of day or night. 
On the other section the foreman waits for daylight and other 
favorable conditions of the atmosphere and weather. The 
foreman who waits for propitious conditions has fewer break- 
downs in joints than the one who pays less attention to the 
conditions. If it is assumed that each is equally conscientious 
in his work, and that no other factors enter, the extra care seems 
very much worth while. 


FIG a3) 


From the relations shown in Fi g. 35 the equation for the po- 
tential of one of the non-grounded phases (V1) in terms of the 
delta potential (V) has been worked out: 


Ke 
nev» 1.734 VA User eae 
in which K = cat 
Since the diagrammatic solution is so much simpler, this par- 


ticular analytical form has little to recommend it. The expres- 
sion in polar codrdinates is simpler. 


1910 CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY: [June 28 


SUMMARY 


Generators on a loaded three-phase system maintain practi- 
cally constant delta potential between phases. The generators 
themselves generate nearly constant and stable Y potentials. 
Any shifting of the neutral of the generator on a loaded system 
is transitory. The values of potential of the three phases to 
ground are determined by lines drawn from the corners of the 
delta triangle to a point on a semicircle drawn on the Y potential 
as diameter. This semicircle is drawn on the side of the Y 
potential next to the succeeding phase (see Fig. 35). For example, 
if phase 2 is grounded the semicircle is on the side of phase 3. 

In the oscillograms of the operation of the arcing ground 
suppressors, no dangerous potentials were observed. The sup- 
pressor operates in one-quarter of a second in accordance with the 
usual design of switch. 

Different harmonics were found on the system, namely: 11, 13 
and 17, which were magnified more or less according to the con- 
ditions of capacity. In themselves, these harmonics have no 
baneful significance. 

The effects of an arcing ground on a cable are modified by 
movements of the melted metal of the lead sheath. On the 
under side the lead drops away and thus increases the arc length. 
On the upper side the molten metal runs down into the fault and 
shortens the arc. 

For a certain value of resistance to ground, the value that drops 
the potential to ground by about one-third, the loss of energy 
in the fault is a maximum of 220 kw. 

A method of predetermining faults in the insulation while the 
system is in normal operation, is proposed, in which high-potential 
direct current is applied at the neutral, protection being given 
by arresters, suppressors and localizers. 

All the protective effects of a grounded neutral may be obtained 
by connecting aluminum cells between the generator neutral 
and ground and, at the same time, all the objectionable effects 
of short circuits and cross currents that attend a grounded 
neutral are avoided. 

The insulation resistance of a mixed overhead and under- 
ground system is determined almost entirely by the relatively 
high leakage over the insulators. Weather conditions changed 
the insulation from 5000 ohms to over 500 megohms. 


1 pte 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 


BY L..L. ELDEN 


Reviewing American practise in the use of relay protective 
devices for electrical generating, transmission and distributing 
systems, there appears to have been no material change in the 
construction or commercial application of this class of apparatus 
in a considerable period of years. 

Such improvements as have been madé relate principally to 
mechanical details for increasing the reliability of operation and 
maintenance of adjustment of relay apparatus. Recently, in 
response to demands for modifications of the electrical charac- 
teristics of time limit overload relays, certain changes have been 
made in existing types of relays, and in addition a new type of 
relay has been introduced. These developments have tended 
to increase greatly the facilities for obtaining selective action 
between different relays in stations where such operation of 
relays is desired. 

Experience has shown that no single part of an electrical 
system is free from the possibility of injury, either accidental or 
unavoidable as may be the case, and that it is incumbent upon 
operating and designing engineers to protect their systems as 
far as possible from such occurrences, through the use of 
protective devices suitably designed to afford such protection. 

We may summarize American practise in the application of 
relay protection to the various parts of alternating-current 
electrical supply systems of moderate and large capacities as 
follows: - 

Generators. In general, generators are not arranged for auto- 
matic disconnection from the system which they supply, upon 
the occasion of a fault developing within their windings or their 

1911 


1912 ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 


connections to the main buses. | Reverse current relays are used 
in many cases to operate signals to indicate reversal of current 
in generator circuits, but under all conditions the judgment 
and movements of the operator are usually depended upon for 
the proper operation of generator switches. 

Transmission Lines. Relay protection for transmission lines 
varies with type and method of operating different systems, 
but in general either instantaneous, inverse time limit or definite 
time limit types of relays have been used, according to engineering 
judgment. 

In systems operating radial feeders, with each feeder connect- 
ing to only one substation and not operated in parallel at sub- 
station ends, reasonably satisfactory service has been rendered 
by the types of relays referred to. 

In systems operating ring systems of feeders, or radial feeders 
with several substations in tandem on a single feeder, where 
selective adjustments are required between different relays in 
order to prevent interruption of service from all stations between 
a fault and the source of power, satisfactory results have rarely 
been continuously attained with. any of the types of relays 
mentioned. In attempting such operation recourse has been 
had to reverse current relays in combination with time limit 
overload relays, with equally unsatisfactory results. 

In addition to these regular or standard methods of employ- 
ing relays for line protection, many attempts have been made 
to devise arrangements for cutting a defective feeder out of ser- 
vice from among a group of feeders operating in parallel at both 
ends, without affecting the remaining feeders. Combinations 
of reverse current and time limit relays have been used for this 
purpose, arranged with interlocking attachments to prevent other 
than faulty feeders being affected. 

It may fairly be said. that indifferent success has uniformly 
been the result of the use of such arrangements, due in some part 
to the failure of the apparatus itself to operate consistently and 
continually as designed, and in other ways the apparatus has 
failed to meet the conditions developed by faults. There are 
of course some instances where radial systems of transmission 
lines have operated with reasonable satisfaction, using some form 
of standard relay for protection, still, it is well known __ that 
failures have been experienced through faults inherent in the 
relays themselves, thereby producing a feeling of uncertainty 
as to their operating condition at all times while in service, 


1912] ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 1913 


Recourse has been had to frequent inspection and tests to pre- 
vent failure in service, all of which creates undesirable expendi- 
ture for maintenance without adequate return in security from 
failure. 

Putting the situation plainly, the standard relay devices in 
use in our alternating-current systems are inadequate properly to 
protect the apparatus they are intended to protect, simply be- 
cause they do not discriminate between faults and excess current 
conditions. 

It is probable that very few engineers on this side of the water 
appreciate the great difference between American and European 
practise in the use of relay protective devices. Articles have 
appeared in the technical press from time to time in which brief 
comment has been made in reference to certain developments and 
applications of protective systems in England and on the Con- 
tinent, without, however, attracting the attention they deserved. 

A personal inspection of some of the larger European under- 
takings reveals substantial advances in the art of relay protec- 
tion which, as applied to generators—sections of busbars— 
transmission lines and substation apparatus, have operated with 
marked success. Several systems have been developed which 
possess merit, but among them all the system invented by Messrs. 
Merz and Price of London, England, is apparently the most 
flexible and best adapted for application to any of the problems 
of such a character as are met with in the protection of the 
various apparatus and connecting links comprising electrical 
supply systems. 

This form of protection has proved so reliable in practise 
that it has become not only safe, but possible, to operate high- 
tension interconnected transmission systems without risk of the 
failure of a single section interfering with the remainder of the 
system. Individual ring feeders may not only be cross-connected 
at will, but may with perfect safety be interconnected with other 
ring or radial feeders as desired, either for reasons of capacity 
or insurance of service to consumers, The economic advantages 
resulting from such use of investment, particularly in systems 
covering wide areas, are too obvious to require comment. The 
extent to which the interconnection of feeders and generating 
stations is carried out in regular service is indicated in some 
measure by reference to Fig. 1, in which is shown a typical ar- 
rangement of interconnected high-tension feeders. 

This system of protection has the further advantage of being 


1914 ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 


discriminative in action, operating only under fault conditions, 
and possessing the further valuable characteristics of cutting 
out defective apparatus instantly, or while troubles are in the 
incipient stage, thus preventing the destructive aftermath which 
sometimes follows minor troubles if allowed to develop to serious 
proportions. Its introduction and subsequent use has modified 
foreign practise to such an extent that there is a strong tendency 


GENERATING STATION 


GENERATING STATION 


[=] SUB STATION 
OMERZ-PRICE E. M. F BALANCE PROTECTION 
x TIME LIMIT OVERLOAD RELAYS 


Fic. 1—TyrrcAL ARRANGEMENT OF RELAY PROTECTION WITH MERz- 
PRICE SYSTEM. 


to apply the system to generator protection in many new instal- 
lations, while some important companies are adopting this 
system for the protection of existing generating and transforming 
apparatus. 


The Merz-Price system of relay protection is based on the . 


principle that if a conductor in service is in a sound.. condition 
the current entering and leaving it must be of the same value, 


ee 


1912] ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 1915 


due allowance being made for losses. It will thus be apparent 
that such a system is capable of being arranged for the protection 
of any generator, section of busbar or transmission line, by in- 
troducing suitable relay equipment at the proper points. 

The apparatus employed in this system consists of suitably 
designed series transformers and relays, and, in addition, pilot 
wires forming a connecting link between the relay apparatus 
located at the terminals of the protected section of line. 

The limitations of the system lie mainly in the first cost and 
construction incident to the installation of the pilot wires, the 
remainder of the apparatus or its application being no more 
costly and at the same time far simpler than the devices which 
we regularly use for similar purposes. In the commercial use 
of this system two standard arrangements of the apparatus are 
generally employed, although many other combinations may 
be arranged for special purposes. These two standard arrange- 
ments are designated as ‘‘ current balancing” and “ potential 
or e.m.f. balancing.” ‘‘ Current balancing ”’ is usually employed 
for the protection of generators, transformers, frequency changers, 
etc., while ‘“‘e.m.f. balancing " is used in connection with feeder 
protection where the energy losses in the pilot wires make the 
current balancing scheme undesirable. In addition another 
development is called the ‘‘ magnetic balance system ’’, which has 
its application in similar locations to those in which current 
balancing is used. 

Fig. 2 illustrates the principles of these three arrangements of | 
protective devices, in which 

A represents the “ current balance system ” applied to the 
protection of a transformer, 

B represents the ‘‘e.m.f. balance system ’’ applied to feeder 
protection, and 

C represents the ‘‘ magnetic balance system’ applied to 
transformer protection. 

In A it will be noted that series transformers are installed. on 
both primary and secondary sides of the main transformer. 

The series transformers are of such ratios that their secondary 
currents are equal at all loads on the main transformer, and are 
connected with their secondaries in series, with the current flow- 
ing in the same direction through the secondary circuit. Suitable 
pilot wires are employed to complete a relay tripping circuit, 
with the relays connected to the central points of the secondary 
circuit as shown. As the connection of the relay circuit to the 


1916 ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 


secondary circuit is made at the point of zero potential, no cur- 
rent flows in the relay circuit so long as the current in the main 
conductors, and therefore in the secondaries of the series trans- 
formers, remains balanced or in the same ratio. Any variation 
in this current balance results in a flow of current through the 
relay circuit, thus causing the relays to operate to open the main 
switches on both sides of the main transformer, upon the un- 
balance reaching predetermined values for which the relays 


MAIN SWITCH MAIN SWITCH 
D5 IN N: 
MAIN TRANS, 
A 
—. — 
SERIES TRANS. SERIES TRANS, 


TRIP COIL TRIP COIL 


MAIN SWITCH PROTECTED FEEDER MAIN SWITCH 
B mF 
SERIES TRANS. SERIES TRANS. 
TRIP 
RELAY COIL 
BATTERY = BATTERY 
« MAIN SWITCH MAIN SWITCH 
MAIN TRANS. : 
— —_ 


SERIES TRANS. SERIES TRANS, 


— 


EALANCING TRANS, 


TRIP COIL TRIP COIL 


Fic. 2—TypicaL ARRANGEMENTS OF MERz-PRICE PROTECTIVE SYSTEM. 


may be adjusted. Series transformers of any standard design 
are suitable for use with this scheme of protection, provided, 
however, they are of sufficient capacity to furnish the necessary 
current to overcome the resistance of the pilot wires and trip 
coils as well as their own impedance. What is more important, 
they must maintain their own ratio with great accuracy under 
extreme overloads, otherwise the relays may be operated at 
times unnecessarily, through the difference in secondary currents 
delivered by the protective transformers under the same load. 


1912] ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 1917 


B illustrates the ‘‘e.m.f. balance system” as applied to a 
single feeder. Series transformers are used as in the preceding 
case except that in this system they are connected with their 
secondaries opposed or bucking, under which conditions no 
current flows in the secondary circuit as long as the current in 
the main conductor is normal throughout the protected section. 
Upon this balance becoming affected, the difference in potential 
thus created between the series transformers will force current 
through the secondary circuit and actuate the relays included 
in that circuit, to close the trip circuit and open the main switches. 
Series transformers for the “‘ e.m.f. balance system ”’ must usually 
be of special design, as most types of standard transformers 
cannot be operated on open circuit without burning out. These 
transformers must be designed to operate with a low temperature 
rise, and be of ample capacity to supply the energy necessary 
to overcome the resistance of the pilot wire and relay circuit. 
What is most important, they must be able to maintain exact 
ratios of transformation under all conditions of load, including 
extreme overloads. Substantial insulation must be provided 
between secondary turns in these transformers to withstand 
successfully the high potentials developed by heavy rushes of 
current in the main conductors when occasioned by faults else- 
where in the system, or by the heavy starting currents of motors 
of large capacity. 

C illustrates the ‘‘ magnetic balance system ’’ as applied to the 
protection of a single transformer. The series transformers 
are arranged with their secondary circuits connected to a balan- 
cing transformer provided with a one to one winding. As the series 
transformers. are designed for equal secondary currents with re- 
lation to the ratio of the main transformer, the resultant flux in the 
core of the balancing transformer is zero and no current will flow 
in the winding connected to the trip circuit, so long as the main 
transformer is in sound condition. Upon the occurrence of a 
fault within the main transformer, the currents in the secondary 
circuits of the series transformers will become unbalanced, re- 
sulting in an induced potential in the trip circuit windings, 
‘sufficient to operate the relays to open the main switches. Stand- 
ard series transformers may be used with this system, providing 
they are of suitable capacity and of correct ratio. The addition 
of the balancing transformer may or may not offer advantages 
over the regular ‘‘ current balance system ’’ according to condi- 
tions, although it is to be noted that the latter system appears 
to be preferred in all recent installations. 


1918 ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 : 


Relays used with the Merz-Price system are of the simplest. 
forms of the instantaneous type of circuit-closing relay, capable 
of adjustment for different currents and arranged with time limit 
attachments when used for the protection of certain classes of 
apparatus such as generators or transformers. These time limit 
attachments are provided to prevent the opening of main switches 
by heavy rushes of current which may be developed when syn- 
chronizing generators, or switching large transformers into 
service. . - 

Experience indicates that for reliability it is best to use a 
battery for operating the trip coils on switches, in preference 
to using alternating-current trip coils directly in the secondary 
circuits of the system. The battery system requires series 
transformers of less capacity and makes certain that low voltage 
in the main system will not lower the secondary potentials to 
values insufficient to operate the trip coils. 

Important as are the other features of this system, no less 
important is the part played by the main switches used in con- 
nection with these relay devices. A quick-acting switch is a 
necessity if the full benefit of the action of the relay on minor 
faults is to be obtained. 

That such switches have been developed is shown by the ab- 
sence of serious damage to cables or their surroundings upon the 
occasion of cable failures, there being every evidence that such 
faults are cut out very early in their development. It should 
also be noted in this connection that the duties imposed on oil 
switches when used on systems provided with balance protec- 
tion, are not nearly as severe as in situations where ordinary 
overload protection is provided, due to the early disconnection 
of defective equipment under conditions which require the 
actual rupture of relatively small amounts of current. 

The remaining link to be considered to complete the con- 
nections between the several parts of this system is the pilot 
cable. Where employed with either overhead or underground 
construction a No. 12 B. & S. gage 3-conductor, lead-covered, 
paper-insulated cable of low capacity is generally employed, 
although in some modifications of the standard methods of 
connection, only two pilot wires are used. In underground 
installations this cable is laid beside the main cable in the same 
trench in the solid system of construction, or is drawn into a 
separate duct where the drawing-in system of construc- 
tion is used. Where used in connection with overhead 


4 
' 
. 
| 
1 
' 
: 


1912} ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 1919 


lines, a catenary suspension is provided for the pilot cable which 
is ordinarily attached to the poles or carrying structures at a 
considerable distance below the mainconductors. In certain 
undertakings open wires have been used for pilot wires on 
overhead lines, but not with as satisfactory results as cable in- 
stallations have shown, owing to the induced currents developed 
in the pilot circuit, due to proximity to the high-tension wires. 
These currents have caused relays to trip upon the occasion of 
disturbances in the system, when there was no trouble with the 
main conductor being protected. As previously stated, the 
first cost, installation and maintenance of the pilot wires is the 
serious drawback to this system, amounting to approximately 
$1000 per mile as far as the cost of underground construction 
is concerned, although varying conditions may make it possible 
materially to reduce this cost, when a number of cables are to 
be protected. It is obvious that the maintenance of the pilot 
cable is of no less importance than that of the main cable, as 
a break in the pilot wires immediately causes the relays to operate 
the main switches exactly as though a fault had occurred in the 
main cable. Troubies of this character are more liable to occur 
with overhead construction, owing to the exposed positions in 
which they are placed with respect to opportunities for malicious 
damage, or that resulting from the action of the elements. 

The really excellent feature of the Merz-Price system, aside 
from its extreme simplicity, is its ability to protect against faults 
in any part of a system, thereby permitting the operation of 
momentary and continuous overloads at the discretion of the 
operator, without fear of interruption from the operation of 
the relay devices. 

This is a sharp contrast to American practise, where heavy 
momentary overloads are likely to cause interruptions of service 
unless special provisions have been made to the contrary, and 
in the case of continuous overloads special relay adjustments 
may be required. 

The Merz-Price system may properly be termed a system 
of protection which makes possible for the first time the supply 
of continuous service in alternating-current systems, in that it 
makes possible the operation of ring systems of feeders, or sys- 
tems of feeders operating in parallel at both ends, and at the 
same time insures the instantaneous disconnection of any faulty 
feeder or section of a ring feeder, without affecting the service 
of the rest of the system. In making this assertion it is 


1920 ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 


assumed that in the design of ring systems of feeders, the con- 
ductors forming each ring are of suitable capacity to carry the 
entire load in either direction, or that interconnection with 
other feeders will afford the same capacity. 

Consideration of the value of a protective system such as is 
here under consideration naturally involves discussion relative to 
the desirability of using any one of several arrangements of trans- 
mission lines, that is, whether ring systems or radial systems of 
duplicate independent feeders, or combinations of both, are most 
desirable. This is a question to be decided on its merits in each 
case, and has no particular bearing on the relay question as 
that is adapted to all, but it is fair to assume that in supplying 
service to any substation, more than one source of supply is de- 
sirable. In widely scattered districts it is apparent that a ring 
main will more economically serve such business, and at the same 
time afford full protection against failure of service. Conditions 
of supply in large cities usually require the delivery of large 
quantities of energy to individual substations, making it necessary 
to employ several feeders for each station, under which plan the 
radial system is adopted with each feeder carrying full load, with 
perhaps a duplicate feeder or equivalent capacity in reserve. In 
this case there can be no advantage in a ring system from any 
point of view. Certain companies employing duplicate radial 
feeders with a number of substations in tandem, would obviously 
greatly improve the capacity and reduce the losses in their sys- 
tems, if such lines were operated with their ends in parallel at the 
most distant substation, or possibly at other substations as well. 

The fact remains that this system provides opportunities for 
operating economies in substations which at first glance may not 
be appreciated. It is not unusual to find many English sub- 
stations in service without attendance of any character, where 
the Merz-Price system of protection is employed for the protec- 
tion of feeders and apparatus. This is possible in transformer 
substations located on consumer’s property, where energy is sold 
in bulk to a consumer through step-down transformers, without 
regulation or further attention. Under such circumstances if the 
main switches on a ring main and the transformers supplying the 
service are protected by this system of relays, it is obvious that a 
certain number of such stations in a system require no operators, 
and no unfavorable conditions will result to the consumer from 
their absence, provided the transmission system is properly de- 
signed and the consumer’s own equipment is protected by suit- 
able overload devices. 


1912] ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 1921 


It is evident that a switch failure or short circuit on the station 
busbars is a form of trouble to which the balance system of pro- 
tection is applicable with satisfactory results. It is noted in 
actual practise, however, that owing to the success attending 
the operation of oil switches in the protection of feeders and 
station apparatus, the need for special protection for busbars is 
rarely recognized in commercial operations. 

While mention has been made of the simplicity of the relays, 
it is not to be inferred that a certain amount of care and testing 
is not required for their maintenance. On the contrary, it is 
desirable to test the operation of the relays and continuity of the 
pilot circuit at regular intervals, by manually operating the relays 
to open the switches at the ends of a protected line. The amount 
of fault current upon which the relays are to operate having been 
previously determined and adjustments made for such values, no 
further tests are required except those to determine the mechan- 
ical condition of the relays and switches, and the continuity of 
the pilot wires. , 

To those who may contemplate the use of the balance system 
of relay protection, too much cannot be said in emphasizing the 
necessity of using series transformers of ample capacity and 
exactly similar ratios. 

Determination of actual transformer ratios should be ascer- 
tained by actual tests on each group of transformers to be bal- 
anced against each other in service. By this method errors in 
ratio under abnormal overloads may be determined in advance 
and corrections made to insure the proper operation of the pro- 
tective apparatus under all conditions. 

In English practise a series transformer with a single primary 
turn and an open magnetic circuit has proved most satisfactory 
in all respects. Transformers of this design may be more con- 
veniently tested and adjusted for balance than any other type, 
although series transformers of both open and closed magnetic 
circuit types are in general use, and after adjustment render 
equally efficient service. 

Transformers used for feeder protection must be constructed 
with ample insulation between secondary turns, for when op- 
erated with secondaries open-circuited or bucking, potentials are 
created in the secondary circuits which are usually in excess of 
those for which standard series transformers ordinarily used in 
our practise are designed. These potentials often reach 600 to 
700 volts in transformers used with the Merz-Price system for 
the protection of long high-tension feeders. 


1922 ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 


In order to illustrate the application of this system of pro- 
tection to various situations, there follows a series of diagrams, 
Figs. 3 to 8, showing typical arrangements and connections of 
transformers, relays and pilot wires, as used in protecting cer- 
tain apparatus. 

Fig. 3 illustrates the application of ‘‘ current balance protec- 
tion ’’ to generators—series transformers of proper capacity and 
ratio are ‘nserted in the generator circuit with their secondaries 
connected through pilot wires to relays arranged to control the 
opening of the main generator switch. 

Any failure within the generator windings or connections to 
the buses, which affects the balance of current in the main and 


: TRIP 
“4 BATTERY 
» € D i — hin; 
FSR. e,! 
St) 
rH RELAYS 
a4 y 


Fic. 3—GENERATOR PROTECTION Fic. 4—TRANSFORMER PROTECTION 
—CURRENT BALANCE. —CuURRENT: BALANCE. 


secondary circuits, causes the relays to open the main switch 
and disconnect the generator from the system. 

Fuses are inserted at F to shunt the relays when a time element 
feature is desired to prevent the main switch opening upon the 
development of heavy currents which sometimes occur during 
synchronizing. 

In Fig. 4 is shown the arrangement of series transformers and 
relays for the protection of transformers. The small sketch 
shows the secondary circuits only. Fuses for the time limit 
protection, marked F, are included to provide for momentary 
rushes of: magnetizing current, when the main transformér is 
connected to the system. It is customary to remove these fuses 


1912] ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 1923 


after the transformer is in service if no time limit protection is 
then desired. 

Fig. 5 shows a method of protecting against faults in feeders 
by the ‘‘ e.m.f. balance method.”’ This has been found more 
desirable than current balancing, as the energy required to over- 
come the resistance of the pilot wires on long feeders would be 
prohibitive. The two small sketches show methods of connec- 
tion employed with grounded and non-grounded neutral sys- 
tems. 

Fig. 6 illustrates the application of “‘ e.m.f. balance protection * 
to main feeders with tee connection on systems with insulated 
neutral. Tee connection on such feeders should be avoided 
wherever possible. 


= BATTERY 
= 


is 


BATTERY 


y Ly 
9) ) y) 
: 1 ; TRIP 


Fic. 5—FEEDER PROTECTION— Fic. 6—FEEDER PROTECTION— 
E. M. F. BALANCE. E. M. F. BALANCE. 


Fig. 7 illustrates a method of protection occasionally used, 
styled ‘‘ neutral wire balancing.’’ The transformers are con- 
nected as for current balancing, with the neutral wire connecting 
between the two points of equal potential at the ends of the pro- 
tected section. In this case no current passes through the pilot 
system in which the relays are connected, under normal conditions. 

The method shown in Fig. 8 has its application to single radial 
feeders and depends for its operation upon the leakage of current 
to earth, from one of the conductors in a three-conductor feeder. 
Such unbalancing in the current in the three conductors of a 
feeder destroys the balance in the relay or trip circuit, and re- 
sults in opening the main switch to disconnect the feeder. 


1924 ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 


As previously noted, the most reliable operation is secured 
where a storage battery is used to supply tripping current, 
although these batteries are not shown in some of the diagrams. 

Referring for a moment to Fig. 1, there is shown the applica- 
tion of balanced protection to a high-tension feeder system in 
which both ring and radial systems are combined. Two genera- 
ting stations are shown feeding into the same network, indica- 
ting the flexibility possible in the application of this form of pro- 
tection to all situations. It will be noted that a combination of 
two methods is employed at the ends of the feeders at generating 
stations, and at points where cross-connections between feeders 
are made at substations. 


a 


Va" 


RELAY 


Sal} 


Fic. 7—FEEDER PROTECTION— Fic. 8S—MErRz- PrRicE CORE 
E.M.F. BALANCE—NEUTRAL WIRE BALANCE OR LEAKAGE PRO- 
METHOD. tEcTION METHOD. 


As the Merz-Price protection is for faults and not for over- 
loads, it is advisable to adda time limit relay for overload pro- 
tection at certain points as indicated, to provide for possible con- 
tingencies such as a busbar fault or switch failure in a substation, 
which, being simply a short circuit between the conductors of a 
feeder, would still result in auniform current throughout the length 
of the feeder, and therefore not affect the balanced protection. 
This possibility is actually very remote, as ordinarily such a fault 
would naturally develop short circuits to earth, producing 
conditions favorable for the operation of the balanced protective 
devices. 


Time limit relays on cross-connections between feeders serve 


~~ 


1912] ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 1925 


to separate the feeders into groups upon a short circuit occurring 
on any single feeder, thereby limiting the spread of trouble be- 
yond the original feeder or group of feeders in which it occurred. 

It is advisable to adjust time limit relays for practically in- 
stantaneous tripping when used on cross-connections between 
feeders, and when employed at generating station ends of such 
feeders in conjunction with balance protection, relatively long 
time limit settings should be employed. 

After personally observing the results attained by users of 
the Merz-Price system in England in protecting station appa- 
ratus, such as transformers, the writer deemed it desirable to 
apply this form of protection to the transforming apparatus in 
the substations of the company with which he is connected. 

Current balancing proved the most desirable system of protec- 
tion to employ, affording as it did an opportunity to use existing 
series transformers for operating the relays. These transformers 
were tested carefully to determine their actual capacity and ratio 
under heavy overload conditions. The results show that certain 
types of standard transformers are entirely satisfactory for use 
with this system of balance protection. Experimental circuit- 
closing relays were constructed and substituted for the time 
limit overload relays formerly used in the protection of three 
5000-kw., three-phase, 7000/14000-volt, 60-cycle transformers in 
the main generating station of the Boston Edison Company. 
Several months’ use of the apparatus has given most satisfactory 
results in handling the heavy rushes of magnetizing current de- 
veloped by switching operations when the transformers are cut 
into service, as well as those caused by faults in overhead and 
underground feeders. The relay which was finally adopted is 
of the simplest form, comprising suitable circuit-closing contacts 
and a single solenoid provided with two similar windings of the 
same number of ampere-turns. One relay was provided for 
each phase of the main transformer to be protected, with its two 
windings so connected to the secondaries of series transformers 
that they opposed each other when the current in the main trans- 
former windings was normal. 

The relays, Fig. 9, were adjusted to close with an unbalanced 
current equivalent to 150 per cent of the normal full-load current 
of the transformer, this allowance covering the magnetizing cur- 
rents developed when a transformer was switched into service, 
without making it necessary to resort to time limit attachments 
on the relay to meet these conditions. 


1926 ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 


Following this experimental installation, it is now proposed 
to equip similarly all transformer installations in substations 
throughout the system, using standard transformers now in service 
and substituting the special relay for the present equipment of 
inverse time limit relays. 

The introduction of this system of protection will afford 
immunity from the interruptions of service sometimes caused by 
heavy short circuits on distributing circuits unnecessarily opening 
the main switches on substation transformers, through the action 
of instantaneous or time limit overload relays as now employed. 

The use of this system of protection will be extended to all 
new transmission lines as installed, particularly those lines serv- 
ing suburban districts. This course will 
finally introduce many protected sec- 
tions of line into the system and ma- 
terially aid in improving the present 


MAIN SWITCH . MAIN TRANS, MAIN SWITCR 
eS 


‘ 
—_— 


— 
SERIES TRANS, SERIES TRANS, 


GENERATING STATION 


J sus sTATION 

© BALANCE PROTECTION 

INVERSE TIME LIMIT 
OVERLOAD RELAYS 


— 


TRIP COILB =~ BATTERY S TRIP COIL 
= 


Fic. 10—RING SYSTEM 


OF FEEDERS. 
Fic. 9—TRANSFORMER PROTECTION— Sections 1, 3, 5, protected by 


EXPERIMENTAL APPLICATION OF CURRENT I. T. L. overload relays. 


Sections 2, 4, protected by 
BALANCE METHOD. Merz-Price system. 


methods of relay protection. Where such protected lines are 
conveniently located the operation of closed ring systems will 
become feasible, for through the introduction of one or more 
such protected sections, improved selected action may be 
obtained from the relays now in use on existing lines which 
may go to make up a ring feeder. 

The possibilities of improving conditions by applying the 
‘balance system ’’ of protection to a limited number of lines in 
an existing system, where the expense involved to equip all lines 
is prohibitive, is illustrated in Fig. 10, in which is shown a typical 
ring feeder supplying several substations. 

Three sections of this feeder are equipped with standard in- 


; 
, 
{ 
: 
! 
} 
; 


ee Sa 


aS ae 


1912] ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 1927 


verse time limit overload relays and two sections with the 
“balance protection.” 

Assume that sections 2 to 4 are adjusted to trip on fault 
currents equivalent to 20 per cent of normal full line current. 
Adjust time limit overload relays on 1 to 5 for twice normal full 
line current in three seconds, and adjust similar relays on section 
3 for half these values. It will then be possible for a fault to 
appear on 3, causing its relays to open, without interrupting the 
service on the other sections of the ring. 

Similarly, either section 2 or 4 may prove defective and be 
cut out of service automatically by the “ balance protection ” 
without affecting the other sections, assuming in each case that 
the lines comprising the ring are of sufficient capacity to carry 
the whole load in either direction. 

Should section 1 be damaged it is probable that the relays on 
section 1 to 3 would open on account of their relative adjustments, 
thus interrupting service from two substations for a time at least. 
The same conditions would apply to a fault on 5, and although 
somewhat unsatisfactory in the last two cases, the results are a 
great improvement over those obtained from the use of inverse 
time limit overload relays ordinarily used for such stations. 
Variations in the location of the section of lines equipped with 
balance protection will introduce new combinations of relay 
adjustments, but the conditions suggested in Fig. 10 will illus- 
trate the possibilities and results obtainable by a partial applica- 
tion of the balance protection to an existing system of feeders. 

Another arrangement of the Merz-Price system is shown in Fig. 
11,representing the application of the ‘‘magneticbalance system 4 
to the protection of certain important tie line feeders connecting 
two large generating stations of the Commonwealth Edison Com- 
pany, of Chicago. ; 

In this case the magnetic balance system was chosen, as it 
afforded an opportunity to employ existing series transform- 
ers, by simply adding relays and a special balancing transformer 
with windings arranged as shown in the illustration. The 
adaptation of this apparatus to an existing switchboard panel 
is shown in Fig. 12, where the change from inverse time limit 
overload protection was made with scarcely any disturbance to 
existing switchboard arrangements. Experience with this instal- 
lation is somewhat limited, but in so far as operated the results 
are satisfactory, and the engineers of the company ate studying 
the further application of the system of protection to other parts 
of the system. 


1928 ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 


Another system of relay protection has been devised by Mr. 
Hochstadter of Cologne, Germany, which, while somewhat dif- 
ferent in principle, effects the same results in feeder protection 
as the Merz-Price system. In this system, when applied to a 
three-phase feeder, a copper ribbon is wound spirally around 
each main conductor of a three-conductor cable during the pro- 
cess of manufacture. These ribbons are insulated from the main 


SYNCHRONIZING> 
. RECEPTACLE 
oP. 
" 
{Cle 


=op, 
TRIP SW. 


TO Oli SW. 


SYNCHRONIZING 
RECEPTACLE 


Fic. 11—SprecitaAL PROTECTIVE RELAY SYSTEM USED BY COMMONWEALTH 
EpIsSON COMPANY. 


conductors and sheath, and from each other, and in service are 
connected to an auxiliary storage battery and suitable relays, all 
arranged to operate the main feeder switches upon the occasion 
of a fault in the main cable. 

Whenever the insulation breaks down at any point in the cable, 
a connection is established between the main conductor and its 
copper ribbon, or between conductor, copper ribbon and sheath, 


PLATE CVII 
A. |, Es E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


SPECIAL TRANS 
TIE LINE A 


PLACE FOR ff. 
SPECIAL RELA 

TIE. LINE|A & 
ting to dA 


Fic. 12—SprectaL RELAY APPARATUS ON SWITCHBOARDS. [ELDEN] 
COMMONWEALTH EDISON COMPANY. 


1912] ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 1929 


thereby allowing current to flow in the relay circuit to actuate 
the feeder switches at both ends of the defective feeder, as clearly 
shown in a typical diagram of this system reproduced in Fig. 13. 

Choke coils are included in the relay circuit to limit the alter- 
nating current which would otherwise flow in the circuit formed 
by the copper ribbons around the conductors. 

This system admittedly possesses some admirable features, 
particularly in the absence of a separate pilot wire cable, and 
while somewhat complicating the construction of the main feeder 
cable by the introduction of the copper ribbons, this detail 
appears to have been satisfactorily accomplished. 

A number of installations using the Héchstadter system of 
protection have been made in Germany, notably in Cologne, 
where an extensive three-phase ring transmission system has 


SYMBOLS aa 
G. = GROUND G 


§. = MAIN SWITCH 
5 | \v.c.=MAIN CONDUCTORS 
c.R= COPPER RIBBON 
8 Ic.c=CHOKE COIL 

R.= RELAY 
C.C, ©T, =TRANSFORMER 


CC. C.C. 


Fic. 13—DIAGRAM OF CONNECTIONS OF HOCHSTADTER SYSTEM OF PRO- 
TECTION APPLIED TO A THREE-PHASE FEEDER. 


been in operation at 25,000 volts for a considerable period with 
great success. 

While other modifications of the Merz-Price system have been 
developed and applied to commercial practise, there is always 
evident a desire in the minds of all engineers interested in the 
subject to do away with the pilot wires and accomplish the same 
results in other ways. 

Messrs. Faye-Hansen and Harlow, of England, have brought 
out a system of balanced protection, in which the balancing of 
secondary currents from series transformers is accomplished by 
the insertion of variable artificial resistances in the secondary 
circuits, in a manner said to be more convenient than in the Merz- 
Price method. However, as the system is based on the principle of 
balanced protection and still requires}pilot wires, although in 


1930 ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 


some cases less in number,*there appears to be no decided ad- 
vantage in using it in preference to the earlier method, unless it 
be that one prefers a scheme in which relays may be omitted and 
straight alternating-current trip coils employed to operate the 
main switches. I 

A method of protection for parallel feeders without pilot wires 
has been used by an English company, which consists of a com- 
bination of overload balanced relays at one end and simple trip 
coils at the other end of such feeders. 


GENERATING STATION 


MAIN SWITCHES 
(— COILS TRIP COILS, 


( 


SERIES TRANS. 


J 
3B 
m 
n 
| 
2 
s 
SERIES TRANS 


OVERLOAD OVERLOAD 


BALANCED BALANCED 
RELAY RELAY 
THREE PHASE | Late PHASE | 


FEEDERS— FEEDERS 


<—~ SERIES TRANS.——> 


SERIES TRANS. | 
SERIES TRANS. 


7 
RIP COILS TRIP COILS 
“~<— MAIN SWITCHES ——x 


SUB-STATION 


Fic. 14—SELECTIVE RELAY SYSTEM WITHOUT PILOT WIRES. 


Fig. 14 illustrates the method of applying this protection, from 
which it will be noted that if used with a single pair of feeders, 
both will be cut out should either feeder prove defective. 

If, however, two pairs of feeders are in service the protection 
may be made selective, in so far as trouble on one feeder in a pair 
will only cause that pair to be cut out of service, leaving the 
station running from the remaining feeders without interruption. 
While this method has been used to some extent with success, it 


a. il 


Sh | 


1912] ELDEN: RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 1931 


is apparent that in principle it is not discriminative except under 
certain conditions, and, therefore, is not fully adapted to all con- 
ditions met with in practise. 

There will be undoubtedly other methods of protection brought 
forward in the future to improve the operation and reliability 
of our electrical systems. In the meantime those engineers who 
have difficult problems of this character in hand may with profit 
investigate the improved methods employed in foreign countries 
in the protection of electrical equipment, with the assurance 
that a solution of practically all problems of that character may 
be found. 

In closing the writer wishes to acknowledge the assistance 
rendered by Mr. Charles H. Merz and his assistant Mr. P. V. 
Hunter in furnishing information and diagrams concerning the 
construction and operation of their system. 

I am also indebted to the engineers of the Commonwealth 
Edison Company for the information regarding their experiments 
with balance protective devices, all of which assistance has made 
possible the presentation of this paper. 


1932 PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 © 


Discussion on ‘ LOCALIZERS, SUPPRESSORS AND EXPERIMENTS” 
(CREIGHTON AND WHITTLESEY), AND ‘* RELAY PROTECTIVE 
Systems ” (ELDEN), Boston, Mass., JUNE 28, 1912. 


D. W. Roper: Referring to Fig. 1 of Mr. Elden’s paper, where 
an outline of the Merz-Price system is shown, there is indicated 
a time limit overload relay in a generating station, in addition to 
the Merz-Price balance relay at both ends of the line. I do not 
quite understand the application of the overload relay at that 
place. As I understand the Merz-Price balance protection 
scheme, the object of it is to open up the switches on the two 
ends of a faulty section of cable so that this faulty section will be 
disconnected and allow the remaining sections to continue in 
operation. Later in the paper, it apparently indicates that the 
object of the overload relay is to take care of the trouble from a 
switch failure or short circuit on the station busbars, which are, 
as the diagram shows, obviously not protected by the Merz- 
Price balance protection system. If I am correct in my interpre- 
tation of these relay diagrams, I would like to learn how to set an 
overload relay so that it will not open in case of a cable breaking 
down, and have it open when the short-circuit occurs on the station 
busbars. Ifthat scheme of discrimination can be carried out it 
certainly is very effective. The paper states that the operation 
of the Merz-Price system is a protection against faults in any part 
of a system, thereby permitting the operation of momentary and 
continuous overloads at the discretion of the operator. Appar- 
ently that wording, if I understand it correctly, refers to a system 
in which there isno synchronous apparatus, because synchronous 


apparatus would be thrown out of service by the heavy short - 


circuits which that is apparently intended to cover. If that is 
the case I think it should be made more apparent, because itis a 
very essential item in designing relay protection systems. 
Harold Osborn: This system has so much to recommend 
it theoretically, in that it suggests just the current which it is 
wished to have operate the relays and is independent of the low 
currents, that I judge its adoption in any given case is merely a 
matter or should be merely a matter of proper commercial value, 
the cost of the protection of the present systems, and the value of 
their protection. I suppose one of the principal objections to 
applying it to existing installations would be the necessity of 
changing current transformers, and the present practise, which I 
believe is general, of having single current trahsformers supply 
both protective relays and measuring instruments. I want to 
ask if it would not be perfectly practicable to use the present 
American transformers with this system and use those trans- 
formers still to supply the measuring instruments, provided 
the voltages put in opposition were not the total voltage of the 
transformers but the voltage across certain impedances? 
Could not the balance system be applied to those impedances 
without changing the transformers? I have not read the paper 


ce me yan 


a’ SS 


1912] DISCUSSION-AT BOSTON 1933 


carefully enough to notice whether this system has been applied 
ne busbars, but it would seem to be particularly applicable to 
them. 

L. C. Nicholson: In connection with Mr. Elden’s paper it 
might be well to review the situation with reference to transmis- 
sion lines. Whether or not a system of reverse current and over- 
load relays operates successfully to isolate and cut off defective 
circuits does not appear to be the determining feature as affect- 
ing the continuous operation of synchronous receiving machin- 
ery. The limiting factor appears to be the speed of the oil 
switch opening the short circuit. The inherent electrical and 
mechanical lag of the best oil switches amounts to something 
more than one-half second. Consequently this is the least time 
in which a short circuit can be switched off, and unfortunately is 
too long a time for synchronous receiving machinery to operate 
successfully under the low-voltage conditions usually accompany- 
ing a short circuit. For this reason we do not believe that a 
system of relays, no matter how perfect, can secure continuous 
delivery of power to synchronous machinery fed from transmis- 
sion circuits connected in multiple. 

Professor-Creighton’s paper is very interesting. There is one 
point which I think should be made a little more clear. As I 
understand it, when applied to cable systems the action of the 
arc suppressor is to suppress the arc and keep it suppressed. In 
other words, it does not make a metallic ground and then remove 
it, but keeps the cable grounded until cut out of circuit. Other- 
wise I cannot see how the insulation which has once failed would 
again hold voltage. 

E. E. F. Creighton: There is one question which Mr. Nichol- 
son brought up. The arcing ground suppressor as described last 
year had an attachment for immediately opening the circuit. 
The switch short-circuits the arc to ground, and then opens. 
That device is applicable only to insulator trouble. When the 
arcing ground suppressor is applied to the cable system the 
grounding switch remains closed until the cable is disconnected, 
just as Mr. Nicholson suggested. 

L. L. Elden: Referring to Mr. Roper’s question, the reason 
for the use of the time limit relay on a system in which the Merz- 
Price control is used, is to enable the instantaneous disconnection 
of lines upon which faults may occur between conductors, or 
short circuits which may occur between station busbars, in order 
to prevent interrupting the service of the rest of the system. By 
viewing the diagram, Fig. 1, it will be apparent that a short circuit 
on either of the substation buses will result in cutting out the 
station, without interfering with the rest of the system. The 
time limit relays on such lines are usually set at relatively long 
intervals, averaging 15 to 20 seconds, and at relatively high cur- 
rents. Overloads on transmission lines within reasonable limits 
need not be feared with this system of protection, because when 
the load on a line has reached an amount which is dangerous, the 


1934 PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS [June 28 


relay will operate to cut the line out of service, purely for reasons 
of overload. The same condition applies to time-limit relays 
between different ring systems, as in such cases the setting is in- 
stantaneous, thus permitting an immediate disconnection of 
two ring mains in case of a fault occurring on either, which action 
does not mean an interruption of service, but merely an inter- 
ruption in a cross connection. The one point frequently lost 
sight of in considering this system of protection is that it operates 
only on fault currents. 

In reply to Mr. Osborn, I would say that, in general, American 
series transformers are not suitable for use with the balanced 
potential method of protection, although under certain conditions 
they may be used with the current balance method by substi- 
tuting suitable relays for those now in use. 

The use of this system in connection with high-tension aerial 
transmission lines, as referred to by Mr. Nicholson, appears to 
require a wide separation between the transmission line wires 
and the wires of the control system if open wiring is used, in order 
to prevent induced currents operating the relays when there is no 
oceasion for their being so operated. The better plan appears 
to be to employ a three-conductor lead-covered cable, suspended 
in a proper manner on the structure, which construction appears 
to be most satisfactory in operation. 

It is a matter of record in one severe storm experienced, that 
as many as one hundred short circuits occurred on the overhead 
transmission lines of a large system without, however, discon- 
necting or interrupting the service from any single station. This 
simply means that the switches were restored immediately after 
opening, and were able to be maintained in operating position 
because the trouble was only momentary. 

L. N. Crichton: (communicated after adjournment): The au- 
thors of this paper call attention, in Figs.11,18 and 19, to the surges 
of current through the aluminum cells which are in circuit between 
the generator neutral and ground. The inference is that the 
surges are caused by an excessive potential at the neutral of the 
generator, but it is more probable that they are due to the char- 
acteristic of the aluminum cell and that there is little, if any, rise 
in potential. Fig. 19 is almost identical with a number of oscil- 
lograms which show the rush of current when a bank of 10,000- 
volt arresters is given its daily charge. The curve is not always 
so uniform. For example, the accompanying oscillogram, No. 
296, shows the charging of an arrester 19 hours after the preced- 
ing charge. It is characteristic of these records that the current 
does not decrease as rapidly on one side of the zero line as on the 
other, probably because of the difference in the exposed area of 
the upper and lower surfaces of the aluminum cones. _ In oscillo- 
gram No. 299 is shown the charging of an arrester 13 minutes 
after a previous charge and it will be observed that even in such 
a short interval the hydroxide film on the cones has appreciably 
deteriorated. Inthe second case there isno spark gap in series 


= ote ee 


te yD eee 


EE —<_——— e h | e hm 


—— 


PLATE CVIII 


AG ey aie 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


ue4 Ia4selie YSNo1y4 pes] Joyueo Woz yUeLIND—E 

ai! ut ie (ESL J ) 

punoi3 pue pee] 1oye1eue3 IoyUs0 UseMyaq [e1yUE}0G—Z 
aIIM PUNOIZ 10}eI9USZ UL yUSIIND—T 


[NoTHOINd] ADUVHD SNOIATA UALAV SALANIW ET AALSAYAY NV ONIOAVHD 


MOUUIXOLS uy z }* 


| 
Fa on a na aaa aan a eee eeeneeeneneel 


AANNAN MN \ | i /' Nh WM \ \ AWM 


Te hal le ae ht ade ahd he ale he a vonyiynninn wih ah hy 


\ spins plover 


[NOIHOIAD] ADUVHD SNOIAGU AALAV SUNOP Sf AALSAAAY NV ONIOUVHD 


: —, | anensenenam 


hide. hoa 
b i p_aAIE SOTSU Ose EOnms Sa 


ml 


eee. 
yy toy 


\spanjs p4oray 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 1935 


with the arrester,so that some current is flowing, which finally 
becomes a leading current, but which contains a pronounced peak 
in phase with the peak of the voltage wave when the charge is 
started and before the film on the aluminum plates has had time 
to build up perfectly. 

These tests were made by connecting the terminals of one ar- 
rester tank between the ground and one terminal of an 11,000-volt 
3600-kw. alternator which was carrying a load at the time. 
The current in the generator ground wire differs from the current 
in the arresters by the addition of a third harmonic charging 
current, of.the system. The voltage wave across the arrester 
is shown and proves that there is no rise in potential on that 
phase at least. It is to be expected that a current wave having 
such a steep wave front would cause considerable rise in voltage 
across any inductance which might be in the circuit, and experi- 
ence indicates that such is the case. To give two instances: a 
couple of banks of current transformers which are connected to 
a 45,000-volt circuit, spark across their high-tension terminals 
whenever the arresters are charged, either in their station or in 
a station three miles away. In the latter case, each transformer 
carried less than half the current which flows into the arresters. 
The potential necessary to cause this sparking is probably over 
7000 volts, but no harm has ever been caused by it. In the 
other instance, a magnetic vane type of ammeter which was used 
to measure directly the current passing through the arrester was 
damaged by puncturing between turns. It hardly seems pos- 
sible that the current wave was sharp enough to induce such a 
voltage in a single turn of such a small coil, but no other expla- 
nation has been offered. 


oat Se 


al i! ie i! ee 


baht 


A paper presented at the 29h Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


THE RUNAWAY SPEED OF WATERWHEELS AND 
ITS EFFECT ON CONNECTED 
ROTARY MACHINERY 


BY DANIEL W. MEAD 


In the selection of hydroelectric units, the operating speed 
of the turbines should be so chosen as to give the most efficient 
results under the varying conditions of operation. When the 
head of water is constant, the choice, unless modified somewhat 
by the necessary synchronous speed of the generator, should 
ordinarily be the speed at which the turbine will operate with 
the highest efficiency with the normal condition of load. 

Under operating conditions the normal speed of the turbine 
is usually maintained, as the load varies, by the action of the 
turbine governor which opens or closes the gate or gates by 
which the water is supplied to the turbines, as the load on the 
connected generator, and consequently, on the waterwheel, 
increases or decreases. If the changes in load take place without 
a corresponding change in the quantity of water admitted to the 
wheels, the speed will necessarily vary, increasing as the load 
decreases, and decreasing with an increase in load. Under the 
condition of maximum load, with the turbine gate at or near 
maximum opening, a sudden dropping off of the load without a 
corresponding change in gate opening will give rise to a consider- 
able increase in speed, which has in some cases resulted in 
disaster to the connected generators, when such generators had 
not been designed for the overspeed to which they were subjected. 
Such accidents have usually been due to the breaking or sticking 
of the governor or its connections, whereby the control normally 
exerted by the governor on the gate opening has been accident- 
ally discontinued, allowing the turbine, as the load dropped, to 

1937 


1938 MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS [June 28 


speed up and run away. Such conditions, while not common, may 
happen in any hydraulic turbine installation, and to assure 
safety under such runaway conditions the generator or other 
rotary machinery connected with the turbine must be so designed 
that it will operate with safety at such runaway speed as is 
likely to occur. 

At present it is current practise to design the generators for 
a possible 100 per cent overspeed in order to assure safety under 
such conditions. Such a basis for design often involves a large 
extra expense in generator construction, on account of the neces- 
sary extra strength of the rotor, and an inquiry as to the safe 
allowance for overspeed which should be made under varying 
conditions of operation and installation should, therefore, be of 
interest and importance in securing the necessary safety of the 
installation, combined with maximum economy in construction 
consistent with such safety. 


NOMENCLATURE 


The following symbols will be used in the discussion that 
follows 


DD, = diameter of homologous wheels or wheels of same 
type. 

E = energy. 

e = subscript e attached to any coefficient shows that 


the value of the coefficient as expressed is for the 
conditions of maximum efficiency of the wheel. 
F = force. 


g = acceleration of gravity 32.16. 

hha = head under which wheels are to operate. 

hy = head of one foot. 

l = length of brake arm or leverage of resistance. 

NMNq = rev. per min. of wheels of diameter D and D, under 


same head; also rev. per min. of wheel of same 
diameter under heads of h and hz. 

nN = rev. per min. under one-foot head. 

PP, = power of wheels of diameter D and Da under same 
head; also the power of the wheel of same diameter 
under head h and ha. 

Py = power of wheel under one-foot head. 

space passed through. 

velocity of water due to head. 

Va = average velocity. 


ge) 
ll 


TANG 


1912] MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS 1939 


nig” = velocity of circumference or periphery of impeller 
which may be measured on any fixed diameter. 
Vy = resultant velocity. 
WwW = weight or resistance applied. 
w = unit weight of water (per cubic foot). 
= 3.14159 = ratio of circumference to diameter of the 
circle. 
0) = v’/y = ratio of periphery velocity of turbine to 
spouting velocity of water. 
De = ratio of wheel velocity under conditions of maximum 
efficiency. 
@max = ratio of wheel velocity at runaway speed. 
1S = coefficient of speed = speed of one-inch wheel under 
one-foot head. 
e = coefficient of power = power of one-inch wheel under 
one-foot head. 
ve = the speed of a wheel at one-foot head of size sufficient 
to develop one horse power. 
Os = power-speed coefficient = the square of the unity 
speed. 


SomME ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES OF TURBINE GOVERNING 

The writer has already pointed out in another place* that the 
power delivered by any waterwheel may be expressed in terms 
of resistance overcome by the wheel in a known distance and in 
a known time by the formula 


271W 
eee O00 ros 
In this formula, P = power, 
Cl Ee resistance overcome per revolution, and 
33000 Sati 


n = the number of revolutions per minute. 


The actual variations of resistance and speed under certain 
conditions are shown in the upper curve of Fig. 1, and the result- 
ing variations in power under various speeds are shown by the 
lower curve of the same figure. The conditions illustrated in 
Fig. 1 are not applicable to normal operating conditions of a 
pete et ee 


*See ‘‘ Water Power Engineering,” p. 440.. 


1940 MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS [June 28 


hydroelectric installation, which require constant speed, but the 
conditions illustrated do apply to the accidental conditions 
above outlined and to the actual working conditions of a pump 
driven by an hydraulic turbine, where the pressure in the 
delivery pipes from the pump is allowed to vary somewhat. 
The upper curve line A X B illustrates the actual and varying 
relations of resistance to speed in a turbine operating at a fixed 
gate opening. The point A shows the condition under which the 
resistance is so great that the turbine is held stationary with the 


RESISTANCE 
= 


PER MINUTE 


POWER 


SPOUTING VELOCITY=1/ 2 GH 


MAXIMUM OR RUNAWAY SPEED 


fe) Pe. Pax. 10 
RATIO OF PERIPHERAL VELOCITY TO1/2GH=@ 


Fic. 1 


result of no power output (see lower curve). The point X shows 
the condition where the relation of resistance to speed is such as 
to result in a maximum power output of the turbine under the 
gate conditions considered. The point B shows the conditions 
under which the exterior resistance is completely removed and 
the entire energy of the water, as far as utilized at all, is expended 
in overcoming the wheel friction, resulting in maximum speed 
and zero power output. 

A turbine-driven pumping plant with variable pressure in 
the discharge pipe system will give self-regulation as indicated in 


ee es 


1912] MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS 1941 


Fig. 1. In such case the point A represents a pressure in the 
system so great as to result in the stopping of the pump, and 
hence no speed and no pump discharges. Point X represents 
moderate pressure and normal discharge for which the system 
is designed, while point B represents the entire removal of pres- 
sure and the pump discharging its maximum under the gate con- 
dition. In practise, the actual variation extends to a limited 
extent, only, on each side of point X and a radical change in dis- 
charge of pressure under satisfactory working conditions must 
be accompanied by a change in the gate opening. 


A lL | 
240 | 
Li | 
a %; ‘i + 
ae aS Vo | HEAD= 95/ 
ee £3 <F i 
3 6 SONS, [ 
3 Oe 
> 160 ‘ fe SN 
= ba | 
Q S < 64 es Si 
& 120 --— = : 
ea bg | aX 
80 be x 4 
= r Xe 
40 
05 150 300 450 600 700 «6900 )=— 1050s: 1200 B 
REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE 
2.5) 
8 
we a9 i 
2.0) ee D| ex 
faa oy os 
= WA lem 
Sek) ) 66 
(@) 1.5 ra p 
a 1 
uw lie + 527 
1.0 ss 
5 ‘ 36: 
r= ?, 
0.5 4 | 


0:9 : j 7 OP Max, 
I immNRLOY met2Orenmda0 91 G0) enbOT) ARGON) 2 )70mses.o 
RATIO OF PERIPHERAL VELOCITY TOV2gh=@ 


Fie..2 


Fig. 2,constructed from experimental data*, illustrates the 
results which must obtain for the satisfactory regulation of a 
constant-speed hydraulic unit, and consequently, of a hydro- 
electric unit: Here again the upper curves show the actual rela- 
tions of resistance to speed at various gate openings, while the 
lower curves show the relations of power to speed at the same 


* See Figs. 15 and 16, Bulletin 337, University of Wisconsin. “The 
Relation of Experimental Results to the Theory of the Tangential 


Wheel.” 


1942 MEAD: SPEED OF WATER WHEELS {June 28 


gate openings shown by the upper curves. In the lower curves the 
speed factor is expressed as a ratio between the peripheral 
velocity of the wheel and the spouting velocity of water. Under 
stich conditions satisfactory operation will be represented by 
the line XX: ppid~. The point X and the corresponding 
point p (on the line of 100 per cent nozzle opening of both upper 
and lower curves) represent the conditions of maximum gate 
opening, and consequently of maximum power. If the wheel is 
improperly selected for the load to be carried, and the power 
demands exceed this limit, a slowing down in speed will result 
as illustrated in the discussion of Fig. 1, and under such condi- 
tions the service will be satisfactory. If, however, the power 
varies only between the maximum and zero, satisfactory regula- 
tion must be accomplished by a proper change in the nozzle 
opening as the load varies, the point of operation dropping from 
position p to pi, p2, Ps, etc., as the power demands decrease, or 
rising from ps to the higher position as the power demands in- 
crease. This result is accomplished in practise by a turbine 
governor, the details of the operation of which are immaterial 
for this discussion. Now, if at any point of the load the gov- 
ernor becomes disconnected and the load suddenly varies, the gates 
may either remain fixed or swing to a fixed position, and a varia- 
tion in speed will result similar to that illustrated in Fig. 1, or 
by any one of the upper curves of Fig. 2 which corresponds to the 
fixed gate opening. If the load is entirely removed a runaway 
speed will result, which may vary according to the fixed gate 
condition under which this accident occurs. 


Fig. 2 illustrates the experimental results from a 12-in. tan- 


gential wheel under a 95-foot head, operating under a load applied 
by a prony brake. It will be noted that the operating condition 
is taken at 675 revolutions per minute, or with @, = 45 (that 
is, with the periphery of the wheel moving with a velocity 45 
per cent of the spouting velocity of the water under a 95-foot 
head). 

In this case, at the maximum or runaway speed @ did not 
exceed @max. = 80 for 36 per cent gate opening, or max. = 84 
for 100 per cent gate opening, and if a generator had been con- 
nected to this wheel these speeds would have been slightly 
reduced by the amount of power necessary to operate the un- 
loaded generator. In this case it is evident that the runaway 
speed of the wheel would be 186.5 per cent of the normal speed 
at full gate and 177.5 per cent of the normal speed at 36 per 


* ern 


ae 


1912] MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS 1943 


cent gate, without considering other than the actual wheel fric- 
tion. 


THE HYDRAULICS OF RUNAWAY SPEED 


In order to present this subject clearly, it is necessary to 
consider, briefly at least, the hydraulics of the turbine as it 
affects this problem. A jet of water spouting from the nozzle 
of a wheel will acquire a velocity v due to the head h/ represented 
in the formula 


v= V2gh (1) 


and will possess energy in foot-pounds per second £ due to veloc- 
ity v and weight of water discharged per second, W = qw, as 


follows js 
W.. gw? 


TELS Wars siggy (2) 


The energy of the jet leaving the orifice isthe product of a force 
F, which, acting on the weight of water gw for one second, gives 
it the velocity v. 

The space passed through by the force in one second in raising 
the velocity from 0 to vis 


Uv 
es | (3) 


and therefore the work is | 


Ee Feed is (4) 
which is also an expression for the energy of the jet. Therefore, 


we may write 


SoAInNG OU > 
Oi Kas | Dg (5) 
and therefore 
ee. 
Lata (6) 


The force F will be exerted against any obstruction in its path 
and its magnitude will depend on the momentum of the-moving 
stream of water and is directly proportional to its velocity. It 
is also a function of the angle through which the jet is deflected. 


1944 MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS [June 28 


If friction be ignored, the stream will be diverted without change 
in velocity and the force exerted in the original direction of the 
jet will be equal to the momentum of the original stream less the 
component, in the original direction, of the momentum of the 
diverted jet. (See Fig. 3.) 


qwv _ qwv qwu 


F= =~ cos 2 = =— (1 — cos a 
g g gs (7) 
If the jet is deflected 180 deg. by means of a semi-cylindrical 
bucket, cos 180 deg. = — 1, and therefore (see Fig. 4) 
_ 9 qwv 
F=2 Sits Fe (8) 


Tangential wheels utilize the 
impulsive force of a jet impin- 
ging against buckets attached 
to their circumference and 
practically semicircular in 
section. _ 

The bucket must move 
under the impulse in order to 
transform the energy of the 
impact, and the ratio of v’, 
the velocity of the center of 
the buckets, to the velocity, ¥, Pic. 3—Forcr or DIvERGING JET. 
of the jet, is indicated by ¢. 


v! 
DRT (9) 


The force F exerted on the moving bucket is dependent on 
the relative velocity, vr, of the bucket and jet. 


vr =v—gv=(1-—9)v (10) 


The relative weight of water that strikes a single bucket 
per second will also be less on account of the movement of the 
buckets. But as new buckets constantly intercept the path of 
the jet, the total amount of water effective is equal to the total 
discharge of the jet, hence, from equation (7), 


F = (1 — cos a) ew hd 


(1 - 4) (11) 


1912] MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS 1945 


The energy E expended on the buckets per second is equal to 
the force, F, times the distance, gv, through which it acts, 7.e., 


WU 


E = Fou = (1— cosa) (1 ~ 9) = oY (42) 


This is a maximum when (1 — ¢) ¢ is a maximum or when 
@ = 0.5. Substituting dé = 0.5 and cos a = 180 deg. above, we 
then obtain 
qwv? 


22g (13) 


In an impulse wheel, it is not practicable to change the direc- 
tion of the water through 180 deg., as it would then interfere 


ice 


Fic. 4—Jet DiverGine 180 DEGREES. 


with the succeeding bucket. The angle cos a must therefore be 
less than 180 deg., but the loss from this source is small, probably 
not more than 0.5 per cent. 

Fig. 5 illustrates graphically the flow of water into and through 
the bucket of a tangential wheel at the most economical relative 
velocity. The bucket is double, each half being essentially semi- 
circular in section. v is the absolute velocity of the jet; v’ is 
the absolute velocity of the bucket; v, is the relative velocity 
of the jet in relation to the bucket; or, v, = (1 — ob) v. The 
bucket is moving in the direction B B’ and occupies successively 
the positions indicated by the vertical lines a, a1, ds, etc., in equal 
intervals of time. The water moves along the surface of the 
bucket with a uniform velocity, v7, passing successively through 


1946 MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS [June 28 


equal distances, indicated on the surface of the bucket by the 
lines b, bi, be, etc., in equal intervals of time. 

At each of these successive points the jet has changed its 
direction and its absolute velocity. Its path through space is 
represented by the line B CD. The change in velocity is repre- 
‘sented by the absolute velocity curve, E F, in which ordinates are 
the resultants obtained by applying the principle of triangle 


if 


LON y, 


== = 


as 


————— 
a, &, 


WAVE a 
Ce 


Vi 


‘ 


Fic. 5—GRAPHICAL ILLUSTRATION OF FLOW IN. TANGENTIAL BUCKETS. 


of velocities to corresponding velocities of the bucket and of the . 
water relative to the bucket. 

At the time of entering the bucket the stream has the abso- 
lute velocity, v, represented by the length of the line GE and 
GE’, in the lower diagram, while its velocity relative to the 
bucket is constant and equal to v,, equal to the length of lines 
GHandGH’. For the most effective speed, vr = 0/2. 


Se 


1912] MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS 1947 


At the end of the first interval of time, the jet has moved from 
the original point of contact with the bucket, b, to the position 
b,. Its direction and velocity in the upper half of the bucket are 
represented by the radius G J in the lower velocity diagram. v’ = 
gv, is constant both in magnitude and direction, and this is 
laid off in the lower diagram on the line JJ. The resultant of 
these two velocities is represented by the line GJ, whichis the 
absolute velocity of the water in space, and to indicate the ve- 
locity of the water at this instant is laid off for the purpose of the 
velocity diagram on the ordinate a; from the axis G F in the lower 
diagram. In the same manner each of the remaining points on 
the velocity curve E F is constructed. The jet leaves the bucket, 
as shown, with a velocity, relative to the bucket, of (1 — ¢) v. 
If this velocity is combined graphically with the velocity of the 
bucket ¢ v, the true absolute residual velocity v, of the water will 
be obtained. The efficiency is evidently maximum when 
has a value with v,a minimum. This condition can be shown to 
obtain when the triangle is isosceles or when ¢, = (1 — ob) v 
which gives @ = 0.5. 

The hydraulics of the tangential wheel has been discussed 
somewhat at length on account of its simplicity. If the friction 
of water and air on the bucket could be obviated, and if the 
friction of moving power could be eliminated, the runaway speed 
of the wheel would be equal to the spouting velocity of water, 
which in turn is slightly less than V2¢h on account of nozzle 
and atmospheric friction. In practise, therefore, the runaway 
speed of the tangential wheel is less than V2 oh, i.€., Pax. 
<1.00. In consequence of these friction losses, it was also 
found in the case of the small experimental tangential wheel that 
the values of @ max. vary considerably with different heads under 
which the experiment was conducted. (See Table I.) 

The value of $max. apparently increases with the head some- 
what to about 73 feet, on account of the relatively large friction 
loss at the lower heads, and then decreases somewhat to the 
maximum head, probably on account of the less efficient action — 
of the larger quantities of water discharged from the jet 
onto the buckets at the higher head. These results should 
probably vary with the quantity of water for which the 
bucket is designed. In the tangential wheel the wheel diameter 
should be measured between the center lines of the bucket, 
on which lies the center of the application of the resultant of 
the combined stream lines of the jet. The peripheral velocity 


1948 MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWEEELS [June 28 


of the wheel measured on this line of application can never be 
faster, theoretically, than the spouting velocity of the water, and 
practically is reduced by friction and windage from 10 to 20 
per cent or more below this velocity. 

Table II shows the results of various tests which have been 
made on tangential wheels. In this table are given as determined 
by experiments, the runaway speed ratio, @max., the most effi- 
cient speed ratio, @., and the values of @ both higher and lower 
than ¢, at which the efficiency of the wheel was 5 per cent below 
the maximum efficiency of the speed @,.._ Below each value of 
@ the percentage that value bears to @max. is given. It should 
be noted that any cause that reduces efficiency reduces max. 
as for example, the use of flat buckets in experiment No. 7. 


TABLE I 
RUNAWAY SPEED OF 12-IN. DOBLE TANGENTIAL WHEEL AT VARIOUS 
HEADS 
Head (feet) | Rev. per sec. T= Veh v’ émaz 
13.3 7.4 29.25 23.28 0.796 
25 10.14 40.1 31.62 0.79 
36.6 12.63 48.52 39.8 0.82 
49.4 14.77 56.37 46.5 0.825 
61 16.45 62.55 51.7 0.826 
72.6 17.92 67.25 56.5 0.842 
83.9 19.45 73.4 | 61.4 0.838 
95.3 20.81 78.3 65.5 0.837 
108.3 22.05 83.5 69.4 0.832 
118.7 | 23.05 87.5 | 72.5 0.829 
130.1 24.25 91.5 | 76.4 0.835 
141.9 25.4 95.5 80 0.8385 
¥53.5 | 25.61 99.5 80.6 0.811 
165.1 26.59 106 | 83.5 0.787 


It is evident that the diameter of the wheel may be measured 
on some other circumference than that on which the center of 
the jet is applied. If, for example, a rim or extension were added 
to the wheel beyond the bucket, or if the buckets themselves 
extended considerably beyond the center of pressure, and if the 
diameter and peripheral velocity of the wheel is measured at any 
such exterior circumference beyond the line of application of the 
jet, the peripheral velocity so measured will be found to be mate- 
rially greater than if measured at the bucket centers. The per- 
ipheral velocity so increased may be so great that the resulting 
value of @max. will equal or exceed the spouting velocity of 
water or 1. In reaction wheels such conditions actually obtain, 


ee 


1949 


SPEED OF WATERWHEELS 


. 
. 


MEAD 


1912] 


“Lee “ON “TING “SIM JO Ayisrearug worg4 


‘SON ‘6T TOA .1UYOeL URBIYOIW Wolds 


6¢8'0 veo ee gio wig "43. 89°89 ‘Ur T “Ur ST uoqed yo-aity d 
¥68'0 ache 20 Be “WEL SIT “ult “UI ST wowed yovany d 
186s Tovece oh hed ces Neel eee al esas wee “ur § “Ut ST uosed 30 att d 
06°O: eee oe) eee te) eebes Be emarert VR oye? ‘urgt | uoyea | 30 "ait a 
2880 Bare yea aee Pee Oke "43.9 IST “ar § “Ul ZT uozyed jo vay d 
38 2138 Sizz0n 1690 ane pone ee ‘HW P66 “ul “Ur GT VeLT bene 10}OW *YOTPY JO “ATU_ 
ged" [aaa hk Meeps et <oca' col NMonic cna “nz | aigoa | 30-ata a-v 
LyL 0 ari. eee eee: moqe” ‘ul ¢ “Ul 9° FT e1qoq yo catty JOJOUL “YO! JO “ATIE) 
ano. | 49,8%t | %or0t | %r 202 “at wave | amg | 38 “ait H 
LO alsue a1zzon | gF8‘0 SEA | Fane ple ceo Menez 60 ‘ur f "Ur ZT exer | jo-aug on 
soe} a Go aeN PRL ‘0 eee aa ess "13 30° 16 1or g ‘UlFL FT | Ang oq jouaiuy JoyOUr “Yor Jo°aTupy 
TE9°0 eet eee goa os ‘WF 88° SIT “ur § “UT ST snxpeg joan W-d 
a ‘DULG oe, e = ai 9]zzou yeoqm P24se4 
SHIVUIOY oryer AQuaoyje VAT} eIAI prey jo jo yeyong aioy MM peqse} [200M 
ABMEUNY lo} $ jo onje, ‘weg “weId 
sjaeyM [eyuesuey 
SNOILIGNOO AVMYNOAU ANV ONILVYAdO UAGNA SOILLVA GaadS AO NOILVIEU 


II @TaVL 


1950 MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS [June 28 


The curves of the reaction bucket are so complicated that the 
center of application of the resultant pressures cannot be accur- 
ately determined. The diameters of reaction wheels are there- 
fore measured on the outer diameter of the buckets and conse- 
quently outside of the center of application of forces, as above 
discussed. The result is that the value of @mox in the reaction 
wheels is greater than unity. 

The relative values of @max. in the various types of reaction 
wheels are further complicated by the fact that the outer diameter 
of the runner may vary at different points, and that even when 
the runners of various makers are of similar design, the same size 
of wheel may be measured at different points, and consequently, 
be listed as of different diameter. In general, the section of 
reaction of wheel may be represented by 
the two outlines in Fig. 6, and in prac- 
tise are measured on the various lines 
marked D, D’, D’’, D'"’. 

American practise, in the measure- = 
ment of turbine waterwheel diameters, 
as far as I have been able to determine, 


is given in Table III. a) ; (« 
saltes bY Sai 

HYDRAULICS OF THE REACTION TURBINE | 
The hydraulics of the reaction wheel, 2 

on account of a more complicated cur- l 

vature of the buckets, is apparently c= 

more involved. The reaction wheel is, 

however, subject to essentially the same B 

principles, although their application is Vic.t 


somewhat more obscure. 

The velocity of the water through the buckets of the reaction 
turbine is less than in the tangential wheel, and the energy of the 
water is delivered through pressure instead of through impact. 
The energy in both cases is delivered through the reactive pres- 
sure, due to a change in the direction of the water jet through 
contact with the surface of the bucket of the turbine, and in the 
reaction wheel the conditions are also essentially as shown in 
Fig. 5. 

If the reaction wheel could be measured on the diameter of 
the circumference at which the resultant of the active jets of 
water is applied, the resulting velocities would closely approxi- 
mate those of the tangential wheel. 


Tom 


1912] MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS 1951 


On account of the diversity in practise in the measurement of 
the diameters of reaction turbines, and also on actount of the 
diversity of this design, a general statement of the value of 
P max cannot be made, for this value varies considerably in the 
different makes of turbine waterwheels. . Reaction wheels vary 
greatly in design and may be roughly classified as low-speed, 


TABLE III 


PRACTISE OF VARIOUS AMERICAN MANUFACTURERS IN MEASURING AND 
CATALOGING THE DIAMETER OF TURBINE WATER WHEELS 


Manufacturer Type of runner Style Point of measurement 
A-C B ipa 
D-G A A D 

N-A A D 
S-A B iB" 
I-A ud B Dp" 
R-H Mc? B D 
H A D 
jJ-L S-L A D 
Sp-L A D 
S B D 
I-S B D ‘ 
Ay Mc B De 
P-I Type A B D’ 
Types B and C A D 
M-S Mc? B D’ 
S B DY 
T s-T4 B Di" 
H-T Bo D 
w-s B Dd” 
| 


1. Fillet at angle. Diameter measured just above. 

2. Diameter of runners as measured at the crown which projects beyond the tips of the 
buckets and is essentially the same in diameter as at D’. 

3. Diameter of the runners as measured at the crown which projects beyond the tips of 
the buckets and is essentially the same in diameter as at D’. 

4, Diameter at D is 20 per cent greater than at D’’’. 

5. Bucket of high-spged runner has parallel edges but is cut back as shown in B. 


moderate-speed, and high-speed wheels. In the low-speed wheels, 
the values of $, which will result in the greatest efficiency will 
vary perhaps from 0.60 to 0.70; for moderate-speed from 0.70 
to 0.80, and for high-speed, from 0.80 to 0.90. This, however, 
is a general statement and others might not agree to the exact 
limits of values given. In each case the actual speed of the wheel 
under the conditions of operation should be determined and the 


1952 MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS [June 28 


maximum speed which may possibly obtain. When the runaway 
speed of the waterwheel is definitely known and the value of ¢- 
at which the waterwheel will operate under fixed head is also 
established, the relation of the operating to the runaway speed 
can be definitely determined and the deduction drawn as to the 
necessary strength of the rotary machinery to be operated there- 
by. In many cases, however, the head under which the turbine 
is to operate is not fixed, but varies between conditions of extreme 
high water and conditions of extreme low water. In low-head 
plants the head is normally much greater under low water condi- 
tions and much less during flood conditions. This variation may 
in some cases be relatively great. In ordinary practise it is not 
unusual for the minimum head to be 50 per cent of the maximum 
head. Insuch cases, the relative speed of the wheel will vary in its 
relation to the spouting velocity of water inversely as the square 
of the head; and in the casesmentioned, will vary essentially 
as 10 is to 7; that is to say, where the minimum head is one-half 
of the maximum and the wheel is operating at a uniform speed, 
the value of ¢ will vary under different conditions, for example, 
from 0.49 to 0.70, 0.56 to 0.80, 0.63 to 0.90, or 0.70 to 1. 
In many modern turbines, such ranges of relative speed are 
possible with fairly good resulting efficiency. In such cases, the 
most satisfactory relative speed and practically the highest 
efficiency will be reached at a point intermediate between the 
extremes given. Under such conditions, the relative operating 
speed of wheels under conditions of high head is much lower than 
under the best conditions, and under low head is much higher 
than for the best conditions, and if the turbine should overspeed 
during periods of high heads, the relative increase in speed due to 
the runaway condition will greatly exceed that which would 
obtain under normal conditions or under low head conditions. 
In order to form a basis for an intelligent estimate of the relation 
of the runaway speed of wheels to the operating speed under the 
conditions outlined, I have prepared Table IV ,showing the results 
under test of various types of reaction waterwheels on which 
experiments have been made. In this table is given the value 
max corresponding to the runaway speed as determined by 
experiment, also the value ¢, at which the maximum efficiency 
was secured. There is also given the variations in @ at which 
the wheels operated with 5 per cent less efficiency both above 
and below the most economical speed. These variations in } 
correspond approximately to those required for the 50 per cent 


Re a a 


a a ee 


—— 


TABLE IV. 


RELATION OF SPEED RATIOS UNDER OPERATING AND 
RUNAWAY CONDITIONS 


Reaction Wheels 
Hol- 
yoke Diam. Values of ¢ Runaway 
Manu- test of for relative efficiency ratio — Remarks 
facturer num- | runner neat 
ber x —5% de =5% ‘ 
Ww-s 1795 | 32 in 0.563 0.738 0.826 1.225 
218% 153% 148.4% cise Feb., 1909 
W-S 1796 28 in 0.675 0.800 0.965 915 
180%. | 151.9% | 126% 5 AS) ned 905 
w-s 1797 30 in 0.681 0.782 0.961 
181.6% | 158.1% 128.7% a Feb., 1909 
Ww-sS 1799 31 in 0.640 0.755 0.874 
190.4% | 161.2% | 139.4% cis March 1909 
W-s 1800 31 in 0.669 0.781 0.943 5 
192.2% | 164.5% | 136.2% | 1:785 | March, 1909 
eC 1778 30 i 0.668 0.815 1.012 
in. | 903.2% | 166.6% | 134% sage 
I< A® 1883 30 i 0.613 0.75 0.896 
in. | o17"50% | 177.8% | 148.6% | 21°39? 
AE 1815 45 i 0.691 0.815 0.987 
5 5 in 183.8% | 155.8% | 128.6% 1.270+¢ | t0.9 gate 
M-S 1983 30 in. 0.629 0.767 0.848 
in. | 188.9% | 155% | 140% PACE 1 Red Olt 
M-S 1820 48 in. 0.631 On: 0.930 : 
in. | ye, | 162% | 131.5% | 1:224 | June 1909 
J-L 1690 45 in. 1.412 
(383 in.)* S (1.21)+ | Sept., 1907 
ery 1903 | 50 in. 0.868 1.365 
(434 in.)* 157.2% (1.19) t 
j-L 1896 | 35 in. 0.899 1.40 : 
(304 in.)* 156% (1.22)+ April, 1910 
D=G 150 44 in, 0.652 0.781 0.932 r 
509 in. | y99e7" | 160% | 134.1% | 1°2° | March, 1904 
ss 1 in, | 0.639 | 0.759 | 0.937 
aC 835 | 60in. | ygger” | 166.4% | 134.9% | 1°70? | Aug., 1909 
J. B. Francis 113 in. 0.44 0.75 0.101 1.566 See Water 
Fourneyron 356% 209 % 155% Power Engi- 
turbine} neering p. 703 
48 in. 0.54 0.68 0.79 
R Bin. | 1500, | 150.5% | 120.5% 1 17929. [poe “pate 
neering, p.704 
H-M 988 |- 42 in. ae ae 1.120 See Water 
68% Supply and 
Irrigation 
paperU.S.G.S 
No. 180 p.60. 
H-M 1030 | 45 in. 66.5 1.124 See Water 
169% Supply and 
Irrigation 
paper U. S. 
G.S., No. 180 
page 60 
H-M 1077 | 51 in. 67.7 1.151 | See Water 
170% Supply and 
rrigation 
aper U. S. 
.5., No.180 
page 64 


Note. Percentages show relations of runawa 
*These diameters show the correspo 
the gates and values of maz. marked f s 
No longer manufactured. 


“f 


y to operating speeds. 


i ize of the wheel measured at the center of 


nding si } 
how the values calculated on these diameters. 


1954 MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS [June 28 


range in heads discussed above. In each case the percentage 
of max to the operating value of is given just below the value 
in question, This percentage, in both Tables II and IV, shows 
the relative speed for which attached machinery must be 
designed to meet runaway conditions if operated at @. or under 
the two extremes given. 


VALUES OF 9 
r 500 1000 1500 2000 
100 | “ | 
+ i 5.1 pa ead =a ag “A 
{— Hi “ wie i Si Pe Ss S| 
a eae SS | : = 
“i | +733|GATE | 
r i i [bed Gate | eo 
. 607. GATE f ; ' c 
pi Pa OLLGATS t - + 
20 | 
oO 2 : 
ai -500 sare : 
2 5 333-GATE le 
70 
7 eerie 
tt i 
EFRICIGNCIESS|; | 0 
c 12 -23 -<}+0 
i e “Oo S 
= He fp =tt | Lie 
acts selet ate 
spehs 2 Abe 
ro tsi} ele ste 
oy 3 Se BS 2 ° = 
Srzns Zope —-gHe, 5000 
ELSHS a ee} —= C4 
s{cilz tlie t Sis 
a =! ae — 5. a ’ 
0020 ° 5 h sf es 
: + thar 
a= p 2 
~ —_ 
uw- 0015 UNITY, POWER VALUES =|Ps! 1 x 
ro) =e ; 
ro) z 4 i me 
: Z x a 
= : < g 
2.0010 z | : 
> A} : Z 
Sy i 
600 Tey [: + 
ie : 1000 
SY 
ise H } 
0 : ; 
0 10.20 80 40 50 00 0 .80 .90 1,00 110 1.20 1.0 
VALUESOF® be — =VEgh Puan 
Fic. 7 


For the J—-L wheels the values of @ are calculated both for 
the table diameter and also for the actual diameter measured at 
the center of the gates. From a comparison of these values it 
will be noted that while the speed of these wheels seems unduly 
high when based on the maker’s measurements they actually 
correspond closely with other standard wheels when based on the 
diameter measured at the gate centers. 


1912] MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS 1955 


From Tables II and IV some general conclusions can be drawn, 
but as in most problems of this class, general statements are 
apt to be misleading, and the speed problem should be carefully 
analyzed for each particular case. 

As a brief example of such wheel analysis, the writer has con- 
sidered a single type of wheel under various conditions of use. 
Fig. 7 shows a complete graphical record of the W—M test (No. 
1800) of a 31-in. reaction turbine, so analyzed that all of the 
fundamental data for power, speed and efficiency are given for 
any wheel of homologous design, or identical in type, regardless 
of size, as well as for the particular wheel on which the experi- 
ments were made. 

In this diagram are given the values of: 

The efficiency of such wheels at various relative speeds. 


@ = the ratio of peripheral to spouting velocity. 

A = thespeed at one-foot head of a one-inch wheel of homol- 
ogous design. 

@ = the power under one-foot head, of a one-inch wheel of 


homologous design. 
®, = the speed-power coefficient. 
The value of @, is expressed by the equation 


n? P 
gs sa 527 (14) 


This coefficient is the square of the coefficient of “ unity speed”’ 
of the type of wheels considered, and is used in the above form 
to facilitate calculation for water power purposes. 

It should here be noted that in general, when the coefficients 
of a series of wheels of homologous design are given, they are 
given for the condition of maximum efficiency, and maximum 
efficiency can only be obtained by operation under the fixed 
value of @. or Ae. 

Any wheel, however, may be so installed or operated that @ 
or A may vary from 0 to maximums which are approximately 


mas = 1.28 
A max = 2400 


In consequence @& will vary from 0 with @ = 0 to an approxi- 
mate maximum with ¢, and then to 0 again with @ max. 
Efficiency will vary in essentially the same manner. 


1956 MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS- [June 28 


> 

As ®, varies with the square of the speed and directly with 
the power at full gate, it also varies from 0 with @ = 0 through 
a maximum to a value of 0 at @max. The maximum value 
of ®, does not occur with ¢-., as will be noted from Fig. 7. 

In many series of wheels of homologous design the following 
principles hold within the limits of error due to imperfect design, 
construction and installation. 

Where ¢ is held at a constant value: 

Efficiency will remain constant for any given gate opening 

Dn Da Na 


Vi Vin (16) 


i.e., the rev. per min. vary directly with Vh and inversely with 
the diameter of the wheel. 


fey, as 
D?h3/2 D2 h,3/2 (16) 


i.e., the power of wheels varies directly with D? and with h3/?. 
With wheels of the same diameter and with @ held at a con- 
stant value 
n Na 


Vi Vie oy 
The rev. per min. of a wheel vary directly with V h. 


ee = Tg (18) 


The power of a wheel varies directly with h3/? 
The following relations also obtain: 


epee vy’ oe Ae oy Dn 
v 1842 1842 7/7, (19) 
P = @ D3 (20) 
e, 5/2 
ORL a (21) 


Referring to Fig. 7, it is evident that the maximum efficiency 
may be obtained from this series of wheels when @, = 0.81 and 
@, = 3200. 


1912] MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS 1957 


If we desire to secure 1000 h.p. with a wheel of this type at 
25-foot head and 100 rev. per min., 


100 

m1 = speed at one-foot head = —“— = — = 20. 
eas Va V5 
Pee ri (000 

P, = power at one-foot head = aa oR 8. 


0, =n? P; = 3200. 


This shows that a wheel of this series will operate under these 
conditions to the best advantage. 
The size of the wheel can then be determined as follows: 


Dee eee = 74.5 inches = diameter of wheel. 
1 c 
oes (eres 


is SDT Saaee 157 per cent = relative runaway speed. 


Runaway speed = 157 revolutions per minute. 


If we desire to operate a wheel of this type and of 75-in. 
diameter under conditions where the head will vary from 16 to 
32 ft. under various conditions of river flow, a somewhat different 
problem must be considered. With . = 0.81 and h = 32, a 
75-in. wheel would run at 113 rev. per min. and would give 1470 
h.p. at full gate. 

With @ = 0.81 and h = 16, a 75-in. wheel should run at 80 
rev. per min. and give 520 h.p. In order to run at both heads 
with reasonable satisfaction a constant and intermediate speed 
must be selected, which from trial appears to be m = 90. 

Under this condition 


; ; S75 90F = Oe a cae 
with h = 16, 6 = 4375524 = 0.916; 0. = 4100; P = 520. 

: ee ee Me eg: 
with h = 32,¢ = e956 7 0.647; ©, = 1900; P = 1270. 


Under these conditions the power and efficiency is consider- 
ably reduced at 32-ft. head, which may, however, be warranted 
by the condition. 

Under the above conditions the runaway speed at the 32 ft.- 
head will be 


eee ech 2715 
@ 0.647 


= 197 per cent = 177 rev. per min. 


1958 MEAD: SPEED OF WATERWHEELS [June 28 


In this manner the actual runaway speed can be ascertained 
with any given wheel and under any condition of head. It should 
be noted, however, that the results may be modified somewhat 
by various physical conditions. 

1. The value of @max under high heads may increase somewhat 
over that determined by tests given above, on account of the 
fact that the friction does not increase as rapidly as the power 
under increased heads. 

2. The value of @max will decrease slightly when the tur- 
bines are directly connected to generators on account of the 
power necessary to move the same when running light. 

The writer can offer no data on which to estimate these changes 
in @max., but such changes are not large. 


CONCLUSIONS 


From an inspection of Table II it will be seen that in the case 
of impulse or tangential wheels which are used under high heads, 
which heads are generally relatively constant, the over-speed 
to be cared for should be estimated at 100 per cent of the nor- 
mal speed. 

In general, from an inspection of Table IV, it may be stated that 
when a reaction turbine is working at the most efficient speed 
ratio (¢.) and the head is constant, the runaway speed ( max) 
may be as low as 150 per cent or as high as 180 per cent of such 
speed, according to the type of wheel used, or, otherwise, that 
the over-speed may be from 50 to 80 per cent above the normal 
speed of a reaction wheel. If, however, under the low head con- 
dition there is wide variation in the head available under different 
conditions of stream flow, and if the wheel is designed to work 
under these various conditions, and the speed chosen is inter- 
mediate to that which would be chosen under either extreme, 
then, under the maximum head a runaway speed of 200 per cent 
or more of the normal speed may be realized. 

These conclusions are only general, and in all cases a detailed 
analysis should be made, based on test data for the particular 
type of wheel which is to be used, and considered for the extreme 
range of heads and the exact conditions which must be antici- 
pated. 


_- < cemelaal 


A paper presented ut the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


APPLICATION OF ELECTRIC DRIVE TO PAPER 
CALENDERS 


BY E. C. MORSE 


Motors have been used in paper mills for the last twenty years 
and have been applied with success to every machine used in 
the process of making paper. 

By means of motors it has been possible to study the power 
requirements of various machines and much useful information 
has been obtained for the manufacturer of the paper, of the 
machine, and of the motor. 

As far as the writer knows, very little of this information has 
been published and it is the intention of this paper to set forth 
facts that have been observed and state the possible laws that 
may be deduced from these facts. 

This paper is confined to the finishing department of the paper 
mill and more particularly to the motor drives for three types 
of paper calenders. 

Paper as it leaves the machine does not, for many purposes, 
have a sufficiently high glaze and it is therefore necessary for it 
to undergo some further process known as calendering. This 
may be done in one of three ways: first, the pre roll may be 
calendered by passing the paper through a “super or web 
calender;’”’ second, the paper may be cut in sheets and these 
sheets calendered in a ‘‘ sheet calender;’’ third, the paper may 
be cut in sheets and calendered in a ‘‘ plater.’”’ The method 
used depends on the kind of paper and the kind of finish desired. 
All ‘loft ” or air-dried papers are finished either in a sheet cal- 
ender or a plater, as the paper must be cut into sheets before 
Ervine These papers are usually of the higher grades. 

1959 


1960 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE [June 28 


SUPER CALENDERS 


A super calender (Fig. 1) consists of a stack of rolls carried 
in upright housings, each roll having its own bearings, which are 
so constructed that they are free to move vertically. Power 
is usually applied to the bottom‘roll (occasionally to the third) 
and the other rolls are driven by friction from this one. Oil 
for lubrication is supplied to the top journals and is carried down 
through the other bearings by gravity. The top and bottom 
roll and the small or intermediate rolls are nearly always steel; 
the other rolls may be either steel, chilled iron, paper or cotton, 
depending on the kind of paper and finish desired. A system 
of levers with weights is used to apply pressure to the top roll 
in order that there will be proper pressure on the paper. The 
number of rolls is nearly always odd and may be three, five, 
seven, or nine, usually seven ornine. The diameter of the bottom 
roll varies from 18 in. to 24 in., the intermediate from 10 in. 
to 16 in., the cotton or paper rolls from 14 in. to 20in. Calenders 
are built varying in width from 36 in. to 125 in. 


Requirements for Drive of a Super Calender. One end of the 
paper is taken over the top of the calender and then passed 
back and forth between the rolls, shown in Fig. 1, to the 
bottom of the stack and then to the winding roll. In order 
to pass this paper through between the rolls, which process is 
known as ‘‘ threading in,’’ it is necessary to operate the rolls at 
a slow speed and it is very important that this speed be constant. 
This speed varies in different mills from 20 ft. per minute to a 
maximum of 100 ft. per minute. As soon as the paper is 
“threaded in’’ and started on the winding roll, the calender 
must be speeded up and will then operate at a speed be- 
tween 400 ft. to 800 ft. per minute, depending on the method 
of drive, the operator, and the kind of paper calendered. It 
is therefore necessary to provide at least two speeds on each 
stack, one a low speed and the other a high speed, regardless of 
the method of supplying power. It is very important that the 
aceeleration be smooth from the low speed to the high speed 
in order not to break the paper and cause the consequent loss 
of production. It is also very advisable to have a method of 
slowing down, when a weak or torn place in the paper appears, 
and of smoothly accelerating to highest speed again. It is 
convenient to be able to stop the calender from other places 
than at the operator’s usual stand, in case of emergency. 


antes 


ee 


PLATE CIXx 
OIE Es 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Unt intshed 
Axo ll 


Fic. 1—WeEB CALENDER. [MorsE] 
a—top roll, steel. 
4 — bottom roll, steel. 


b, c, e, f, h— fabric rolls 
d, g—intermediate rolls, steel. 


Fic. 3—Wes CALENDER—Two-MorTor Drive. [Morse] 


“atest geen mah | 
: Pe cgrtees aes 2 
| ¥ 2}, a 

i Ce 


mS) vs) 


—V ee 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1961 


METHOD OF DRIVE 


Group or Shaft Drive: Calenders were originally driven from 
a line shaft and still are in many mills. This shaft may or may 
not be driven by a motor. Fig. 2 shows the method of drive 
and how the ‘“‘ threading in’ speed is obtained. The cycle of 
operation is as follows: 

Throw in horn clutch a which starts rolls at their low speed. 
After paper is threaded in throw in friction clutch b which con- 
nects high-speed driving pulley and increases roll speed to max- 
imum. As the speed increases clutch a is automatically thrown 
out. To stop the calender throw out friction clutch 6. Both 
pulleys ang running all the time. Clutch a is now nearly always 
made a friction clutch and a horn clutch put on pulley c, both 
being operated from the same lever. With this arrangement 


Fic. 2—WEB CALENDER—MECHANISM FOR Group oR BELT DRIVE. 


(U- PIN CLUTCH 
b= FRICTION ‘£ 
C - PULLEY SLOW SPEED 
d- «§ HIGH“ 


the horn clutch is thrown in first and then the friction clutch 
whichis now ata. This reduces the shock and allows the calender” 
to be stopped if need be while ‘ threading in.” 

The high speed must be a compromise between the maximum 
that any of the paper will stand, and a lower speed, which is 
best for the weakest paper. 

Engine Drive. Abroad, and in one or two cases in this 
country, individual variable-speed engines are used to drive 
calenders. As no steam is required ordinarily around a calender 
this engine drive means long live and exhaust steam lines. This 
drive requires space in the basement and an engineer in atten- 
dance. A belt drive through floor is used, with the attendant 
grease and dirt which is always present around a reciprocating 


engine. A two-cylinder engine must be used and even then .a 


1962 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE [June 28 


uniform torque is not obtained. This type of drive does not 
meet with favor among American manufacturers. 

Two-Motor Drive. The most natural step, when motors were 
applied to calenders, was to belt motors to the old mechanism 
which was used when the calender was belted to the line shaft. 
It was at once seen that a simpler, more compact arrangement 
could be made, as well as the belts eliminated, if the motors were 
mounted on same base with the clutches and gears, and geared 
to the driving mechanism. (See Fig. 3). This arrangement 
is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 4 and the cycle of operation 
is as follows: 

Close the circuit breaker, then start small motor, now throw 


(t- PIN CLUTCH 

b -GEAR ON WHICH 
FRICTION CLUTCH 

iS MOUNTED 


Fic. 4—WEB CALENDER—MECHANISM FOR Two-MotTor DRIVE 


in horn clutch at a, which will start the calender at the low 
speed. After paper is threaded in, advance controller on large 
motor, which increases speed of calender and automatically 
throws out horn clutch at a. The small motor may be shut 
down or left running, as desired. To stop calender the power 
is thrown off. 

It is usual practise now to mount a friction clutch also at b 
which is controlled from same lever as a and operated as de- 
scribed under ‘“‘ Group Drive.”’ 

It is now a simple matter to make the large motor an adjustable 
speed motor and obtain smooth acceleration from low to high 
speed. This type of motor makes it possible to gear the calender 
so that the maximum speed will be the maximum at which it 


i il 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1963 


is possible to finish any of the paper and the calender can easily 
be slowed down to accommodate weaker paper or for a different 
finish. 

Two Motors Replaced by One. It is possible to do away with 
the small motor used in a two-motor drive and by means of 
gearing and clutches to operate the calender at the “‘ threading 
in’ speed from the large motor. This is shown in Fig. 5. The 
cycle of operation is as follows: 

Close the circuit breaker and start up motor. The large 
gear d and pinion e are mounted on a bushing loose on the shaft. 
In starting, horn clutch a is first thrown in, the friction clutch 
c being open. As gear d is loose on shaft the calender is driven 
at the low speed through back gears. After the paper is 


Q-PIN CLUTCH 
C- FRICTION ¢¢ 
cl ~ LARGE GEAR 
¢— PINION 
(l d& @- MOUNTED ON SLEEVE 


Fic. 5—WeEB CALENDER—MECHANISM FOR ONE-Motor DRIVE. 


“threaded in” friction clutch c is thrown in, connecting gear 
d to shaft and calender speeds up to maximum, while horn clutch 
a is thrown out automatically. 

From the operator’s standpoint this drive is practically as 
good as the ‘‘ Two-Motor Drive * previously described. The 
electrical features will be discussed later. 

One Motor Direct-Geared. In this method of drive there is 
only one large motor direct-geared or belted to the driving roll * 
as shown in the diagram, Fig. 6. It is therefore necessary to 
obtain the ‘‘ threading in’’ speed or a speed 4 to 1/13 of the 
maximum by reducing the speed of the motor by inserting re- 
sistance. The cycle of operation is as follows: 

Close the circuit breaker and adjust the controller until the 


1964 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE [June 28 


motor operates at the desired speed. All speed changes are 
made by the movement of the controller handle. 

This drive eliminates all clutches, nearly all the gears and 
makes mechanically a very compact and simple drive. The 
‘threading in ’’ speed, necessarily, is very unstable, as will be 
seen when the electrical features are taken up. 


POWER REQUIREMENTS 


General Characteristics. The power consumed by a calender 
is entirely used in overcoming friction, therefore a calender re- 
quires (within limits) a constant torque. It has further been 
found, from tests, that with most grades of paper, only 15 to 
20 per cent of the power consumed is required by the paper itself, 
and 80 to 85 per cent of the power is consumed in overcoming the 
friction of the machine. Therefore, to drive a given calender at 


Fic. 6—WEB CALENDER—ONE-MotTor DRIVE, DiIRECT-GEARED. 


various speeds, a motor or engine is required that will give con- 
stant torque rather than constant horse power over the range of 
speed desired. 

Low-Speed Power Requirements. As previously stated, means 
must be provided to obtain a slow or “ threading in ”’ speed, ap- 
proximately $ to 1/13 the maximum speed of the calender, in order 
that the feeding in of the paper may be done as easily and quickly 
as possible. This speed should remain practically constant with 
the change in torque from the calender alone without weights, 
to the calender with paper completely ‘‘threaded in’’ with weights. 
This increase in torque varies from 10 to 75 per cent, depending 
on the kind of paper or cardboard being calendered. Many low- 
speed drives have been tested and the maximum power required 
by the motor at 50 to 60 ft. per min. on the paper has never 
exceeded five to six horse power, regardless of the size of the calen- 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1965 


der, kind of paper, and the type of drive. Fig. 7 shows the results - 
of various tests on different paper calenders at “ threading 
in’’ speeds. The points all fall close to a straight line, showing 
the condition of constant torque. These values represent the 
power consumed by calender and drive with paper completely 
“ threaded in’. A motor smaller than 73 h.p. is not to be 
recommended if a separate motor is used, and the gearing can be 
made easily to accommodate a motor speed of 850 revolutions. 
High-Speed Power Requirements. When we come to determine 
the power required by a calender when calendering paper, 
there are many points to be considered. These are listed in order 
of their relative importance, and then each taken up in detail: 


HORSE POWER 


| 


1 L I 
PEUMESO ESS dO fo -c0) 859) 9602 165,” 0 
FEET PER MINUTE 


Fic. 7—PowER REQUIRED FOR THREADING IN. 


steel 

chilled iron. 
paper. 

{ cotton. 


a. Material, size, number and condition of rolls 


b. Number of ‘‘ nips’ or passes of paper. 
plain journals. 


ec. Type bearings ora bearings. 


; paper. 
d. Kind of stock cardboard: 


e. Pressure on rolls. 
(1) Power varies with kind of rolls. 


f. Width of stack or rolls. 
(1) Active width is width of paper calendered. 


g. Surface speed of rolls in feet per minute. 

(1) Difference in speed between rolls and paper. 

a. The varying of the power with the kind of rolls is closely 
interlinked with the varying of power due to different pressures 
applied. This subject as far as the writer knows has never been 
investigated carefully. It is known that the power varies accord- 


[ox 


——_ 


19:90 


160 K.W. 


LOAD CURVE OF 


15 


a 
ry 
Ww 
oa 
oO 
zz 
£0 E13 
rose pyNupor Hagan 
[oa o 
o 
2. ous | 
o- FNO 
= 200 
we 
Kor es 
aw Wi 
ee 
OS a 
2 8x3 
ar <9 
Orn 
wO?s 
Oo. Ens 
$= Og 
a z 
: 
rt 
° 
°o 
= 


stop 

NOYHL SS¥d OL wadve, 
31103430] MOTD kK 

o3ads 4 sondaN A ON. 


<nny Aa aasnvo SNONLWHY Ao 4 
: HTT 


SIZE 62" 


COATED CALENDER ROOM 
50 H.P. 480 R.P.M.TYPE C MOTOR SLOW SPEED 


we 
20 
wu. 
rare 
ati 
zu? 
fon 
<F 
>. 
ow 
@. 
S 


LOAD CURVE 
50 H.P. 480 R.P.M. TYPE F MOTOR HIGH SPEED 


DIRECT CONNECTED TO 


NO. 6 STACK 
7 ROLL-COTTON AND STEEL STACK 


VENI a San 


| 


MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE [June 28 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1967 


ing to hardness of the roll, therefore steel or chilled iron requires 
the minimum power, then comes paper and then cotton. This 
variation is probably only a few per cent in most cases. A 
temporary increase of 20 to 25 per cent in the power may be re- 
quired by a calender when starting up with rolls and bearings 
cold; this will not usually last more than 15 to 30 minutes and 
can be taken care of by overload capacity of the drive. It has 
also been found that a calender takes a little less power as the 
diameter of rolls is increased, due to the fact that the wedging 
effect is less. 

b. Even though a seven or nine-roll stack is installed, it may be 
found possible to obtain the finish desired without passing the 
paper between each pair of rolls. Each pass is known to the 
paper maker as a ‘‘nip.” The more “ nips” taken, the larger 
the power, and this increase varies from nearly zero with hard 
paper to 10 per cent with heavy cardboard for each nips’ 

c. Practically all calenders are equipped with plain bearings, 
although roller bearings have been used in a few cases. Tests 
claimed that roller bearings reduce the bearing friction about 30 
per cent, but the first cost and maintenance is probably higher 
than for plain bearings. It is also essential to keep the bearings 
well lubricated, for, referring to the top curve of Fig. 8, it is 
noticed that the power dropped 8 to 10 kw. or nearly 12 per 
cent when the upper journal was oiled. 

d. The amount of power required by a calender will vary 
according to the thickness of the stock being calendered. This 
stock varies from the thin book paper to heavy cardboard. The 
power required for the heavier grades of board may be from 25 to 
30 per cent more than for the ordinary weights of book paper. It 
is not customary to use as much pressure on the heavy cardboards 
as-on the thinner papers. The power requirements for different 
grades of papers of approximately the same thickness do not 
vary to any extent. There is also very little difference in power 
consumed between plain and coated papers. 

e. As the power consumed by the rolls alone of a calender is 
used in overcoming rolling friction, it is correct to assume that 
it will increase about in proportion to the pressure. The total 
load consists not only of the friction of the rolls but also of the 
roll bearings and driving mechanism; which friction will not 
increase directly with the pressure on the rolls. For all practical 
purposes, however, as regards the motor sizes, it is safe to assume 
that the torque will vary directly with the pressure applied to the 


1968 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE [June 28 


rolls. Tests made in Germany show that increasing the pressure 
3.43 times increases the power 2.74 to 2.78 times. Another 
variable that now enters is whether the rolls are steel, chilled 
iron, paper or cotton. The friction of the last mentioned in- 
creases somewhat faster than the others as pressure is applied. 

f. Approximately 80 to 85 per cent of the power used in a cal- 
ender is consumed in overcoming the roll and roll bearing fric- 
tion, except in the case of cardboard. Of this, the amount con- 
sumed by the bearings is a very small percentage. The friction 
of the rolls varies directly as the length of contact, therefore with 
any given design of calender on the same grade and same speed 
of paper, the power required will vary almost directly with the 
width of stack, or the active length of roll face, when calender- 
ing. 

The following table shows that the constant per inch active 
width remains fairly uniform, the speed being the same. 


Active width roll Constant per inch width 
Inches Minimum Maximum 

28 0.78 0.97 
62 0.905 1.03 
72 0.80 0.94 
75 0.81 0.987 
86 0.93 1.02 

Average 0.85 0.93 


Total average = 0.89 


The active width{of roll is determined by width of paper and 
this not being known in some of the above cases, probably ac- 
counts for the lower values. A constant near the maximum 
should be used in determining maximum power required by a 
given calender. 

g. The power required by any given stack with same width and 
grade of paper will vary directly with the speed at which the 
paper is calendered, assuming same pressure at all speeds. This 
must be true if a calender is considered asa friction ¢ or constant 
torque machine. 

Two Germans found from tests which were recently published 
that the power required at full speed was 1.95 times power re- 
quired at 50 per cent speed, while the amount of paper turned out 
was 1.75 times without weights and 1.81 times with weights. 
The increase of pressure reduces slippage between rolls and paper, 
as might be expected. 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1969 


SUMMARY OF POWER REQUIREMENTS 

In determining the amount of power required by a calender 
the maximum should be considered that would be required with 
paper of full width, making all the passes, running at maximum 
speed for which gearing is designed, and with all weights on pres- 
sure levers. Calenders are usually designed so that the maxi- 
mum pressure per inch width is constant. If the above points 
are considered, then the overload capacity of the drive should be 
capable of handling any increase in load due to poor lubrication 
and different roll material. (This applies to paper only, as power 
required for cardboard is materially different).. Tests have 
shown that the average load on a motor driving a calender is 
from 50 to 66 per cent of maximum while the true heating effect 


pis! | * * 


= 
— 


- x——| 

MEAN MAXIMUM 
x | x 
x x 


ad 


— 
= 
an 


HORSE POWER 
—) 
o 


= 
2 
J 


* 4005 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
INC'4 WIDTH CALENDER 


Fic. 9—HorsE POWER PER Inco WiptH, CALENDER—500 FEET PER 
MINUTE. 


is from 20 to 30 per cent larger than the average, or from 60 to 80 
per cent of maximum. 

Fig. 9 shows the maximum horse power per inch width re- 
quired on ten calenders varying from 36 to 86 inches, reduced to 
a 500-foot per minute basis. The low points recorded are prob- 
ably due to narrow paper in the calender. Unfortunately, 
complete data as to what weights were used are not available 
on all the tests. This might also account for some of the low 
points. It is probable, however, that a value of 0.95 to one h.p. 
per inch width is the correct constant to use at 500 feet per 
minute calender speed, and if used, the drive will be of sufficient 
- capacity to drive the ordinary calender finishing paper with prac- 
tically all the weights on pressure levers. Fig. 10 is convenient 
for quickly ascertaining the size of motor for any width calender 


1970 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE [June 28 


at any common speed and is based on numerous observations 
and tests. 

The question will probably be asked, ‘‘ Why not choose the 
capacity of the motor such that full load on the motor will be the 
same as the true heating effect of the load, that is, from 60 to 80 
per cent of that shown in Fig. 9?’ Maximum production is de- 
sired by the manufacturer and an alternating-current motor 
having 4 per cent slip at full load will have 6 to 7 per cent, at 
least, at 40 per cent overload, and this means a loss of 2 to 3 per 
cent production if the motor is operated at overload while cal- 
endering paper, as well as increased stresses in the motor. 


MOTOR SIZE 


O6- 10 20. go WwW oOo. 60. mw 80 OO MUO JLo x90 
WIDTH CALENDER IN INCHES 


Fic, 10—Power REQUIRED BY WEB CALENDERS. 


Power Required by Cardboard. The power used when card- 
board is calendered depends largely on the personal element of 
the mill and on the condition of the stock as it comes to the 
calender. For a low speed of about 60 ft. per minute a 10-h.p. 
motor is required, while the power requirements for high speed 
should be studied for each particular situation, inasmuch as the 
power required may easily be 25 to 30 per cent more than for 
the same calender if calendering paper. In many cases, however, 
very light pressure is used on the rolls. The power required by 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1971 


the calender without the cardboard threaded in is therefore 
smaller (about 40 per cent of the total), while the power con- 
sumed by the cardboard is more (about 60 per cent of the total), 
and the total load on the motor may be about the same as if the 
calender was working on paper with heavy pressure on the 
rolls. : 


DISCUSSION OF MoToRS AND CONTROL FOR DRIVING 
CALENDERS 


As we have previously stated, motor drive for calenders must, 
to be successful, meet certain conditions, as follows: 


’ 


a. Give uniform ‘‘ threading in ’’ speed. 

b. Give smooth acceleration to maximum speed. 

c. Must be possible easily and quickly to slow down and again ac- 
celerate. 

d. Must be able to operate at various speeds to accommodate various 
grades of paper. 

e. Should be able to shut down motor from various points around 
calender. 

f. Control should be simple and extremely substantial. 

g. Should be capable of stopping calender quickly. 


Two-Motor Equipment—Alternating Current. Fig. 4 shows 
in outline the mechanical drive using two motors. For the 
small motor a 73-h.p. 850-rev. per min. squirrel-cage type of 
motor is used, which may be provided with an induction type 
starter, or preferably a small oil switch mounted close to the con- 
troller for large motor. For the large motor a wound-secondary 
type is nearly always used and a full load speed of 495 or 580 rev. 
per min. is required in order to keep the pitch line speed and 
size of the gears within reasonable limits. This motor is con- 
trolled from a drum controller, with external resistance, usually, of 
such a capacity that the motor may be operated continuously at 
any speed as low as 50 per cent of the maximum. Occasionally, 
the resistance is designed for only three- or five-minute service 
on the low speeds. In addition, an automatic oil circuit breaker 
should be installed to protect the large motor and also control 
circuit to small motor. This breaker should be equipped with 
an inverse time element relay so that the momentary peak demand 
for power on accelerating will not trip the breaker. 

One of the most satisfactory controls which has yet been de- 
signed for a calender drive consists of a panel on which is 
mounted a set of solenoid-operated switches for main circuit, a 
circuit breaker with inverse time element relay and an ammeter 


1972 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE (June 28 


for check on power consumed. With this panel is used a 
modified drum controller and the operation is as follows: 

Close the circuit breaker, throw in the small oil switch start- 
ing small motor. When ready, move controller handle to first 
notch, which closes solenoid switches, and continue to advance 
handle until the large motor takes the load from the smaller 
motor. In series with the solenoid winding of switches and 
first notch of controller, may be inserted as many emer- 
gency stations as are desired. If one of these Stations is 
opened the solenoid switches immediately drop out and shut 
down the large motor and the switches cannot again be closed 
until controller is returned to the first notch. The small motor 
remains running but disconnected from the driving mechanism 
by the pin clutch. It is always preferable to stop calender by 
one of these stations, which should be mounted at the controller. 
This control puts the work of making and breaking the current 
on the solenoid switches, which can be made very rugged and pro- 
vided with arcing tips. In many mills the number of times the 
current is broken is 8 to 12 or even more times an hour, and if the 
calender runs 24 hours a day, six days a week, the switches are 
called on to break approximately full-load current 1100 to 1700 
times a week. 

The above equipment meets conditions (a) to (f), leaving 
now only the quick stop. From calculations based on a 
65-in. seven-roll stack, operating at 600 feet per minute, 
it was found that the flywheel effect of the rolls and mech- 
anism, exclusive of the motor and large gear driven by the 
motor, was 35 h.p-seconds, the motor 38 h.p-seconds, and > 
the large gear 34 h.p-seconds. The flywheel effect of a motor- 
driven stack is therefore about three times that of a stack driven 
from line shaft and the time required to stop after disconnection 
from power is about three times as long. This is not so import- 
ant on light-weight paper as on heavy weights. An electric 
brake may be attached to the large motor which will overcome 
its flywheel effect. It appears, however, more satisfactory, and 
introduces fewer complications to use a mechanical brake on the 
lower roll outside of the calender housing, this brake being 
applied by a foot lever extending close to the controller. This 
brake is usually made so that its operation is very effective and 
the calender can be stopped even quicker than in the group drive. 

Direct Current. The motor end of a direct-current drive is the 
same as with alternating current, with the exception that in some 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1973 


cases part of the speed control is obtained by varying field 
strength of the motor. The control is worked out in the same 
manner as before; in some instances the drum controller is re- 
placed by one of a face-plate type. Sometimes a master con- 
troller only is used, which controls magnetic switches for hand- 
ling the current. One advantage with direct current is the fact 
that dynamic braking can be obtained automatically and the 
calender stopped very quickly. 

One-Motor Drive (Small Motor Omitted). Fig. 5 shows that 
this drive resembles the two-motor drive, except that by means of 
gearing and a clutch the large motor is made to do the work pre- 
viously done by the small motor. The same type of motor and 
control is used as before and the same facts regarding flywheel 
effect and braking are true. The calender is stopped by cutting 
the power off the motor. If the clutch is thrown out then there 
is only the flywheel of the calender alone, as in the belt drive. 
This type of drive so far as is known has never been used with 
direct current, but could be if desired. 

One Motor Direct-Geared—Alternating Current. In this drive as 
shown in Fig. 6, the one large motor of the wound-rotor type is 
geared or belted direct to the driving roll. It is, therefore, neces- 
sary to decrease the speed of this motor, by inserting resistance in 
secondary, to } or 1/12 the maximum speed in order to obtain the 
proper “‘ threading in”’ speed. It is impossible to obtain a stable 
“ threading in” speed in this manner, owing to the well-known 
characteristics of an a-c. wound-rotor variable speed motor. If 
the calender is running without paper at the proper speed and 
paper is fed in, the friction increases and if this increase amounts 
to approximately 8% per cent the motor will stop. With some 
cardboard this increase in friction has been found to be as high as 
60 per cent. It is impossible, in nearly every case, to complete 
the ‘‘ threading in”’ without changing the controller setting, which 
may mean a third man on the calender. After the paper is 
“threaded in” the motor operates like any other variable speed 
motor. The control which should be used with this drive is 
the one using solenoid switches described under ‘“ Two-Motor 
Drive.” The controller must be supplied with a large amount 
of resistance in order to obtain the very slow speed. The flywheel 
effect and braking conditions are as in the two-motor drive. 

One Motor Direct-Geared—Direct Current. If a d-c. motor 
is used direct-geared, the conditions are not quite so bad. A 
d-c. motor giving a 3:1 or a 4:1 reduction in speed from the 


1974 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE [June 28 


maximum by field control should be used. The power input 
of this motor is proportional to the load within its speed 
range and is not constant as in the case of the a-c. motor. It 
is now necessary to reduce the speed from the full field speed, 
or + the maximum to only 3 or § in order to obtain a “ threading 
in” of 4 to 1/12 the maximum speed. Using a commutating- 
pole motor of good inherent regulating qualities, a fairly stable 
speed is obtained and it will take 33 per cent increase in friction 
to stop motor instead of 84 per cent as in the a-c. motor. There- 
fore, with a 30 per cent increase in friction in “ threading in” 
one would not expect to stop the motor. With paper this in- 
crease is much smaller and this speed change would not be 
troublesome. Another feature is that dynamic braking can 
be used and quick stopping assured. Fig. 11 shows a control 
panel for this drive. 


MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL ADVANTAGES AND DIsaAp- 
VANTAGES OF EacH DRIVE 


In the following comparisons it should be remembered that 
the paper maker is primarily interested in cost of production. 
He is, therefore, interested in mechanical and electrical simplic- 
ity, ease of control and operation, small maintenance, minimum 
labor, minimum power cost per unit output. 

It has been found from many tests and observations that 
calenders are run on slow speed from 25 to 33 per cent of the 
time; 10 to 22 per cent of the time is consumed in “ threading - 
in,” varying with weight of paper or length of roll. 

The following comparisons are bare statements of facts and 
it is not the intention to recommend one drive over another. A 
large advantage for one drive, in some mills, may be insignifi- 
cant in another. 


Group Drive By Motor—SAME FOR A-C. AND D-C, 


Advantages. With this drive the manufacturer has a constant 
slow speed, only one motor and starter for entire group, minimum 
chance of trouble with electrical apparatus. Lower first cost, 
therefore lower fixed charge per calender. 

A 70-in. calender arranged for drive from line shaft costs $4600 

Shaft per..calender: approx s«i:-.«u wattle aetiieies 100 

Share of capacity in large motor for 70-in. -calender... 400 


PLATE CX 
Awl. Ba Ey 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 11—D1rEcT-CURRENT CONTROL PANEL. [MORSE] 


Fic. 12—SHEET CALENDERS. 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1975 


Disadvantages. Belts to maintain, two clutches to keep in 
repair; main shaft takes space on floor below calenders; friction 
clutch to throw in high speed, and as usually operated there is 
a sudden strain on paper with consequent possibility of breaking 
and lost production. Only one high speed and no way to vary 
it. Large motor operating on a widely fluctuating load, from 
15 per cent to 150 per cent load, which means poor efficiency, 
poor power factor, and a variation in the speed of shaft of 5 per 
cent or more. It has also been found that the shafting and 
belting loss alone, per calender, is approximately four kw. This 
means for a 24-hour day, 96 kw-hr. at $0.01 per kw-hr., $0.96 
per day, $288 per year. This capitalized at 5 per cent means 
$5770. 


Two-Motor Drive. SAME FOR D-C. AND A-C. 


Advantages. Constant ‘“‘ threading in” speed, smooth accel- 
eration from low to high speed, reducing strains on paper and 
lost production. Ability to slow down to any desired point 
easily and quickly. Calender can be geared to run at maximum 
speed that any of paper will stand, as lower speeds are available 
for weaker paper. This speed can easily be 10 to 15 per cent 
higher than in the group drive. Only one clutch necessary and 
that a pin clutch. Sometimes a friction clutch is also used on 
large gear on low speed so the pin clutch may be thrown in 
without starting the rolls and the rolls started by friction clutch. 
Both these clutches are operated from one lever. Large motor 
operated at good efficiency and power factor. Losses minimum 
on low speed. The low-speed motor running light has an 
average input of 0.6kw. This corresponds to the friction of the 
shafting in the group drive, as the large motor does not consume 
energy except when driving the calender at its operating speeds. 
Moreover, the efficiency of the motor in the group drive will 
be nearly the same as this large motor. It may be assumed that 
this 0.6 kw. is a 24-hour loss, as the small motor is usually left 
running continuously and is used for “ threading in’’ only 10 
to 15 per cent of the time. Thus 0.6 kw. for 24 hr. per day at 
$0.01 per kw-hr. = $0.144, or $43.20 per year of 300 days—a 
gain of $234.00 per stack over group drive, or 5 per cent on 
$4700. 

Good power factor is maintained on the line since the idle 
current of the small motor is small. 


1976 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE [June 28 


Disadvantages. High first cost: A 70-in. calender, 


Rortwo-motordrivessit na. neh Pages ae $4750.00 
Porsmallsmotorza: 2 fire: . bee 2 ee 170.00 
For largeimotory Jou psecoe Aye: 8Ger BOE 900 .00 
Forseontrol lak. brews ster Se ARO 300.00 

Total nc. ee SALE 


Maximum chance of trouble exists with electrical equipment. 
Large floor space is required. It requires three times as long 
to stop after power is shut off as group-driven calender. Large 
motor requires the same kilowatt input regardless of speed, 
assuming constant torque. This disadvantage is more than 
overcome by increased production possible, due to variable 
speed feature. 


Two Morors REPLACED BY ONE. SAME FOR D-C. AND A-C. 


Advantages. One less motor to care for than in two-motor 
drive. Less floor space required, constant ‘‘ threading in”’ 
speed obtained, smooth acceleration from low to high speed, 
ability. to slow down easily if desired. Calender can be run at 
maximum speed any paper will stand, as slower speeds are 
available for weaker papers. As motor and gear may be dis- 
connected from stack on stopping, flywheel effect is the same as in 
group drive. If stack is stopped by cutting power off the motor 
the flywheel effect is the same as in two-motor drive. 


_ Calender, 70-in., and mechanism............ $4925 .00 
DART OG. TIOCOT Fes S setts Breen) sees 8 Oe ae 900 .00 
CCAPRT NG 5 ol ee cae ek eecdiey oie mee aL a 275.00 

$6100 .00 


Disadvantages. ‘Two clutches, one being friction; large gear 
on quill which may wear and cause excessive gear wear. Re- 
quires same kilowatt input regardless of speed, assuming same 
torque. This is turned to an advantage by increased production 
possible. Light load losses larger. Based on a 70-in. stack, a three- 
phase 550-volt 75-h.p. motor running light will operate with a 
current approximately 25 amperes, power factor 15 to 20 per cent, 
kilowatt input 4.0 to 6.0. Assuming 5 kw. to be average 
and the motor running light 20 per cent of time or 4.8 hours per 
day, we have 5 X 0.01 X 4.8 = $0.24 per day or $72.00 per year, 
or $28.80 per year more than two-motor drive. This is 5 per 
cent on $575.00 and small motor costs $170.00. The worst 
effect is in the power factor of the system if many of these motors 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1977 


are installed. As far as power consumed goes, there is ordinarily 
not much choice. 


SINGLE Motor, DrrECT-GEARED 


Advantages—a-c. Only one motor is used, no clutches, minimum 
possible amount of gearing and smallest floor space of any drive. 
The calender can be geared for maximum speed that any of the 
paper will stand and can be easily retarded at will, and operated 
at lower speeds for weaker paper. Smooth acceleration from 
“threading in’’ to running speed is obtained. The first cost 


is lower: 
CSA ISSECS (S aie © Co MA SE oc ne artless $4185 .00 
VEO COT eee tee nate ECD, REPENS RTV GI Ty Asch iu 900 .00 
ANE C0) a ER re ag Be ee cs ur ev gu face 450.00 


LS Nii ee A het ea $5535 .00 


Additional Advantages on d-c. Dynamic braking can be used 
to stop calender quickly. More stable ‘‘ threading in”’ speed 
due to the fact that full field speed is about 4 maximum and the 
speed has to be further reduced by armature resistance to } or 
+ instead of 4 or 1/12 as with a-c. Losses are less on reduced 
speeds than with a-c. 

Disadvantages. Very unstable ‘ threading in” speed is ob- 
tained; controller setting usually has to be changed during 
“threading in.” Extra large controller and resistance is re- 
quired to obtain the low speed. The large flywheel effect 
causes the calender to run three times as long as if group-driven. 
It has been found on this type of drive that the “ threading in ” 
requires from 9 to 14 per cent of total time and on a 72-in. cal- 
ender the power consumed varied from 16 to 29.8 kw. during 
this period, as against about 2.2 to 4 kw. with two-motor drive. 
As this time required to “ thread in” is also somewhat longer‘ 
the cost of power used for the ‘“‘ threading in” process is from 
6 to 10 times that of the other two types of drive. This motor 
is practically never running except when paper is in the calender, 
and therefore has no “ running light ”’ loss to correspond to the 
other drives. The power factor is low while motor is running 
light and during “ threading in.” The control for this drive 
is subjected to the hardest service of any, as 60 per cent to 100 
per cent full load current is broken every time the current is 
shut off. Motor tests show that the current is broken 13 to 
15 times per hour as an average. This means for a 24- hour day, 
six-day week, 1870 to 2160 breaks per week. The ordinary 


” 


1978 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE [June 28 


circuit breaker contact is said to be good for about 3000 breaks, 
so a very substantial switch must be used in order to get any 
reasonable length of service. This drive may require more labor, 
or in other words a third man may be needed at controller during 
“threading in.’”’ This same man, can, however, take care of 
several stacks. 


Wuy SHoutp Moror-DRIVEN SUPERCALENDERS BE USED? 


From the preceding pages certain advantages of motor-driven 
supercalenders have been pointed out which tend to lower cost 
per unit product and to increase the production per machine. 
These may be summarized as follows: 


a. Long mechanical transmissions eliminated with maintenance of their 
shafts, belts, hangers, etc. 

b. Reduced chance of all calenders being shut down at once. With 
mechanical drive this often happens due to belt breaking or shaft trouble 
and the loss of production is large. 

c. Smooth acceleration from low to high speed, reducing strains on 
paper, therefore reducing breakage and loss of production. 

d. Ability to operate calender at maximum speed which the particular 
paper will stand. With group drive only one speed is available. 

e. Ability to slow down easily for a weak place in paper saves much 
time and increases production. Referring to Fig. 8 (lower half) it will be 
seen at one point the paper ran 25 minutes without a break but the con- 
troller was used 26 times to reduce the speed, and it is further seen thatitre- 
quires on the average three to five minutes to paste together the paper and 
feed it in again. If the paper had broken 13 times only it would mean 

13 X 4 X 500 
—__—_—_—_—_——. = 8700 yards of production lost. 
3 

f. The speed of calender is much more likely to be uniform, as in group 
drive the number of calenders operating varies the belt slip and speed of 
line shaft. 

g. The kilowatt-hours per unit output required are less than in group 
drive. 

h. The power factor of system is better than when a large motor drives 
group, if a two-motor drive is used. 

i. That the above facts are true is proved by figures of one of the 
largest and best managed mills in the United States which give the average 
efficiency of all motor-driven calenders as 35 per cent better than group- 
driven and of two of the most recent drives, 50 per cent better. 


SHEET CALENDERS 


Use. A sheet supercalender is used to give “ loft ” -dried 
papers their final finish where that finish can be given by passing 
the paper between rolls, as contrasted wit finish given by platers. 
It is also used in certain machine-dried papers to give the final 
finish after they have been cut into sheets. 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1979 


Construction. Fig. 12 shows motor-driven sheet calenders, 
taken from the feeding-in side. The strips of webbing run ver- 
tically in front of the calender. These endless bands run around 
a system of rollers. There is a set of these bands on both the 
front and back of the calender and they serve to take the sheets 
from the operator feeding in, guide them through the rolls and 
deliver the paper after it has been calendered to the “ catch box ” 
and to the operator taking care of the finished paper. 

The general mechanical construction of a sheet calender is 
similar to a web calender, except that it is lighter. The widths 
commonly used are from 26 to 48 in. and the stacks are from 
three to five rolls high, the five-roll stack being the most common. 
On these, as in web calenders, the top and bottom rolls are of 
steel and larger than the others. The intermediate rolls may be 
either steel, chilled iron or fabric. 

Sheet calenders do not require a low speed for “ threading 
in ’’, so they may be driven direct from the power supply to a 
pulley or gear mounted on the lower or driving roll. 

The paper is finished under pressure, which is applied by screws 
at the top of the stack. This pressure is varied according to 
finish desired and kind of paper being calendered. 

Power Required. The power required by a sheet calender 
varies according to the same laws as were discussed under web 
calenders. The power required by a five-roll, 36-in. calender 
will be discussed, as this is the most common size in use. 
This calender requires from 23 to 3 h.p. to drive the rolls, without 
pressure on them or paper going through, at a surface speed of 
400 feet per minute. By means of the pressure screws this 
power is increased to 9 or 12 h.p. for ordinary work and can 
be increased to as high as 18 or 20 h.p. The following table 
shows the power required by this size calender for various papers: 


{ 
Friction h.p. | | 
Paper — | | 
| Paper h.p. | Total h.p. 
No Usual | 
pressure pressure | 
| | | 
ZO IPsec Mats ela SMe 2NADM Hop tear Pel chia oe —_ 54 1 64 | 
Seipe tlatsyeli. MoeOitcmumecis es sect — 6 3 \ 9 
Nore DONG, 2k KiG lite. oe oe ee ee 3 10 4 | 14 
Heavy envelope | 
F yb MSE CIE 0 Bee en oe ee 24-3 9-10 23-3 114-13 
170 lb. paper’ 303 X 20fin............ 24-3 10 73-10 173-20 
300 lb. paper 31 X 26 in.........-.. 23-3 10 10-14 20-24 


1980 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE (June 28 


Fig. 13 shows a typical power curve taken from a 42-in, five- 
roll calender with a speed of 400 feet per minute. Comparing 
this with the above table it will be noted that the same paper 
takes practically the same power whether the calender is 36-in. 


or 42-in. width. A sheet calender should be run at the highest ~ 


speed at which the operator can feed in the paper and not have 
any space between the sheets. These spaces are shown in Fig. 
13 where the power drops to the friction load. The size of sheets 
and the weight of paper determine the speed with which any 
given operator can work, but this speed is not necessarily the 
same with the various operators. It is obviously a waste of 
power to run the calender too fast for the operator and a waste of 
the operator’s time and of production to run the calender too 
slow. This shows that the motors driving sheet calenders should 
be adjustable-speed and the range of speed is determined by the 


42'SHEET ite NDEI 


PAPER SPEED, 400 FT.PER MIN. | 


4 


AMPERES AT 230 VOLTS 


ARRANGEMENT 


Resa tia PAPER FEED 8”PER HOUR 


Fic. 13 


range of grades of paper to be finished. The maximum possible 
speed seems to be about 500 feet per minute and the minimum 
speed ever necessary is 200 to 250 feet per minute. Usually 
a range of about 30 per cent is sufficient. The following motor 
sizes appear to be about correct for five-roll calenders at 400 
to 450 feet per minute maximum speed: 


2Riidh sucess Vie ak te eee ee 15 h.p 
OG itis. EE es, PRY Se eR et 15 h.p 
Vat 58 oO May Pe Rea Mie RNa Lt 0 2 20 h.p 


Methods of Drive. With group drive it is not possible to 
vary the speed of the rolls to suit the operator or paper and the 
production per calender is less than it should be. Direct-current 
motors have been used in many mills very successfully. A 
commutating-pole motor of approximately 700 to 800 rev. per 


1912] MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1981 


min. should be used, direct-geared to the bottom roll. This 
motor should have a speed reduction of at least 30 per cent by 
field control, keeping in mind that it is driving a constant torque 
load. 

It was not thought feasible to use a-c. adjustable-speed motors 
until recently, when a test was run using a 15-h.p., 850-rev. 
per. min., wound-rotor type with a speed reduction of 50 per 
cent by insertion of resistance in secondary. This test proved 
that excellent results could be obtained using such a motor, and 
there is no reason for hesitating to install a-c. adjustable-speed 
motors on sheet calenders anywhere. The most satisfactory 
way to equip a group of sheet calenders with a-c. motors would 


[ 100—25- | : 
ee } 


| 
“POWER TO 
DRIVE PLATER | 


Hl WITH PAPER IN 


_ 
oa 


at 
= 


AT 230 vo Lis 


' 
- 
i= 


APPROXIMATE H.P. 


e 
=) @ 


AMPE 


a SES) ) 
¥ saa talahonne 
0 <2 7- MIN> 2) MIN 


Fic. 14—PoweER CURVE OF 36-IN. PLATER. 


be to drive part by constant-speed motors and part by adjustable- 
speed motors, as in every case the work could be so laid out that 
the constant-speed calenders could be working at their best 
efficiency and the special papers finished on the adjustable- 
speed calenders. 
PLATERS 

Use. In nearly every mill making a high-grade finished 
paper there will be found a machine known as a “ plater.”’ 
This machine is used to put certain kinds of finish on the paper 
after it has been cut into sheets. Probably the most common 
finish is the so-called “‘ linen finish ”’ which is found so often 
on writing papers. This is obtained by making a stack of paper 
with sheets of linen between the sheets of paper (at the 


1982 MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE [June 28 


top and bottom of this stack are pieces of zinc) and passing this 
paper through between the rolls, under pressure, several times. 
In the packs the linen may be replaced by sheets of any other 
material which will impart the desired finish to the paper. This 
may be either some kind of fabric or even metal sheets. 
Construction. The general construction of the plater is as 
follows. The machine consists primarily of two steel rolls, 
operating under pressure, a table on which the pack is laid, and 
the driving mechanism. ‘The driving pulley consists of two tight 
and one loose, as it is necessary to reverse the rolls with each 
pass of the paper. Originally, platers were constructed with a 
minimum space of one inch between the rolls and an adjustment 
of three-quarters of an inch. With the increased use a demand 
was made for a wider opening and more adjustment. By a 
careful design and arrangement of the gearing it is now possible 
to obtain an adjustment from zero to two inches, or, from any 
desired minimum opening, an adjustment of two inches. 
The size of plater in common use has two rolls approximately 
17 in. in diameter and a working length of 40 in. By means of 
weights and a system of levers, a pressure as high as 40 tons is 
applied to the rolls. Platers are built as narrow as 36 in. and 
up to a maximum width of about 48 in. : 
Power Requirements. Fig. 14 ‘shows a typical power input 
curve for a 36-in. plater. This is an ordinary belted plater 
and the motor is belted to the countershaft. There is also a 
large pulley on this shaft which has considerable flywheel effect 
and helps out on the peaks a certain amount. This plater has 
a pressure of about 40 tons, and a surface speed on the rolls 
of- about 61 feet per minute. It will be noted that about 10 
amperes or approximately 2$ h.p. was required to drive this 
machine light, but that it jumped to 80 amperes or approximately 
20 h.p. at (a) when the pack was inserted. It can be seen from 
the fluctuations about how many times the rolls were reversed. 
The pack is not allowed to pass entirely out from between the 
rolls before reversal. At (b) the pack is turned around to make 
sure that the finish will be the same on each edge. At (c) the 
pack is finished, removed, and a new one started at (douse 
takes about two minutes to finish a pack and about as long to 
change packs. The average load while plating is about 15 h.p. 
but the load factor on the motor is very poor. 
In a group drive having four or more platers it is safe to choose 
a motor allowing about 10 to 12 h.p. per machine. — If the platers 


1912} MORSE: ELECTRIC DRIVE 1983 


are to be driven by individual motors, from 15 to 20 h.p. should 
be used. 

Method of Drive. Nearly all platers up to the present time 
have been driven by a belt from a line shaft. It is a simple 
matter to use a motor belted to this line shaft. 

Many paper makers would like to obtain an individual drive 
on their platers. Considerable time has been spent in trying 
to obtain a motor and a reversing switch which would stand this 
service. This means about five reversals of the motor a minute 
and in order to obtain this number it would require a motor of 
small flywheel effect but large torque. In order to obtain quick 
reversal it would be necessary to “‘ plug ”’ the motor; that is, 
apply the power for reverse direction before the motor stopped. 
No one has as yet had the courage to attempt this on a standard 
40-in. plater. Thereare three platers of a small size taking paper 
pack 9 by 14 by 13 in. with rolls set at one-inch opening, driven 
by a d-c. 5-h.p. 400-rev. per min. commutating-pole motor, 
direct-geared and reversing with each reversal of the pack. 
These have been operating several years with the best of results. 
It is reasonable to suppose that the same thing could be done 
with larger motors. The big advantage to be obtained with 
individual drive on platers is doing away with shafting and belts 
with their attendant dirt and grease, and the maintenance and 
replacement of the plater belts, which wear out very rapidly. 
It would also give a greater flexibility in the finishing room. A 
group drive will give a much lower first cost, smaller motor, 
better load factor, better power factor if alternating current is 
used, and better efficiency of the motor. 


CONCLUSION 
From the preceding pages it is quite evident that increased 
quality and quantity of production is obtained by the use of 
electric drive in the finishing department. This is due to the 
fact that each machine is operated, and each kind of paper 
finished, at the correct speed. 


ry 


ie 
Peta | 
— Lie 
vs 
Yi 
-— Fy 
sere 
tag 
wi 
‘=. 
tat 25 
. . ° 
5 “ 
oy ne, 
“ici 
aS Ive 
Te 
i 


tnlaeniohnd, aS abi © grip at a? vi yods qrithyooeny 
meds (A eearlhto’ precise wii werey Bee fete 
At — su 4 ie vi apres " cee yaxyota sidan aids 


iG 


ft 
Te (Ay 3G 


or rt 


} 


ra aqirk 
Leaketetat Sect ey pare) Prt: ity peters 
aed is, stay ive 2 retstiz ody le leds 
efter sit ada Gt VIHNTeoR ghee) f- vrigandas 
; as toe Je Sewn nase suty {fier Die 
f wit eaitog eaaiad wag his 


Hanser: Ae TG CaO 
; ee rote oe aT 


fini Y shade iyin Letrtbating mir al sontiaacn dd 
a Vat \ aBoquye oe 

re oh! oe eae 
mig. aoe: nD Jad a Bie ae : 
 coienringeiay dnish a el a 


: ee setae HOE ‘te 


hal 


A paper presented at the 29th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Boston, Mass., June 28, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 


BY PUTNAM A. BATES 


Never in the history of this country has there been sucha great 
arousing of public opinion, such an arousing of interest of the 
people generally, in the agriculture of the country. Weare com- 
mencing to appreciate that while in the early years of the past 
century two-thirds of our people were engaged in the producing 
business, producing food and clothing for the people, now but 
one-third are so engaged. And it also seems to be pretty clearly 
demonstrated that the average earning of the average farmer 
has netted too small a return for his labor. In many parts of the 
country, what he did earn was earned at too great a personal 
sacrifice—labor for long hoursand norecreation. Plainly speak- 
ing, we have wakened up to the situation that though the yearly | 
crop figures seem to indicate an abundance, we are actually 
approaching the condition where demand will soon exceed supply, 
and in most instances the farming business is badly out of gear 
and needs reorganizing. It has fallen to the lot of the electrical 
engineer to take a hand in many matters of reorganization, 
and I believe agriculture now requires his attention. 

Betterment of the farmers’ conditions and improved efficiency 
in all the operations involved in his work is the cry of the day. 
Bankers and business men’s associations, federal departments, 
agricultural colleges and important engineering organizations 
are giving this feature of the country’s welfare careful study, - 
and yet there is perhaps no one improvement that may be — 
counted upon to benefit the farmer so radically as the introduction 
of electricity on the farm. 

The electric farm, however, is not a new idea, for several farms 
well worthy of this name have been in successful operation for 

1985 


. 


1986 BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM {June 28 


some ten or twelve years, and perhaps longer than this. But 
there has been very little organized effort in disseminating existing 
knowledge of the practical use of electricity in agriculture, with 
the result that farms so equipped are generally regarded with 
suspicion and possibly in the light of a hobby. 

I shall endeavor to show that such a point of view may at 
once be dismissed and we may look for a general use of electricity 
on the better class of farms in this country before many more 
years have elapsed. As a matter of fact, electricity is now being 
utilized for lighting and power purposes on a much larger number 
of American farms than perhaps many of us have heretofore 
realized. 

Let us consider for a moment the farms of our great Southwest. 
In some sections of that wonderfully fertile country, well pro- 
tected by the high mountain ranges, practically every farm is 
an electric farm. That is to say, the buildings are lighted by 
electricity and many of the laborious operations are accomplished 
by the use of electric power. These really were our first electric 
farms, the period of their establishment corresponding with the 
development of the water powers of the nearby mountains. 

On the majority of these farms irrigation is practised and 
quite naturally electricity was first made use of for pumping 
purposes. Then under the influence of progressive local central 
station operators, it was almost universally adopted for light. 

I can recall seeing electric lights and the electric flat iron in 
use in the farm homes on the Pacific coast, eleven years ago. 
The people were content to enjoy the advantages which these 
improvements made possible to them, but did not seem to regard 
their conditions as unusual. Their farms were in fact electric 
farms and their industries dependent upon the produce of the 
land were, as they are now, practically all operated by electricity. 
I refer to the canneries, fruit packing houses, etc. 

The conditions surrounding the farming districts in Southern 
California, for example, at that time, were such that any other 
form of energy would have been unusual to adopt, a combi- 
nation of circumstances being largely responsible for this happy 
situation. The high-tension transmission service systems were 
then new and the companies desired business; besides this, we 
did not have the gas engines we have today. The efficient and 
reliable gasolene and fuel oil motors were not developed until 
several years later. There was pumping to do, for irrigation was 
rapidly coming into favor, and, naturally, the electric companies 
secured this business. 


1912] BATHS: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 1987 


It is hard to say whether the power plants, supplying service 
at rates within the reach of all, made the irrigated farms, or the 
electrical load, which these farms offered, insured the success 
of the power developments. Both interests seem to have worked 
together and,in some instances practically the entire supply of 
the central station current was at once engaged for lighting, 
heating and power uses on the farms. This was the case ten 
years ago in the instances I speak of, and according to reports I 
have just received, the situation has not materially changed, 


LEGEND 
@, GENERATING STATIONS 
© SUB-STATIONS 
weme TRANSMISSION LINES 
—— CISTRIBUTION LINES 


G 
j Ni Le od Feempneovoc 
5 * ie 
Steam’ povay ald x adgier’ 
Generating step Exeter ¢ 


sen Pa Vee 
as Springville — 
ae 


Fic. 1—TERRITORY COVERED BY Mt, WHITNEY POWER & ELECTRIC 
Co’s SERVICE, VISALIA, CAL.—TyPICAL OF A MODERN INTENSIVE FARM- 


ING DISTRICT. Z 


except that both supply of and demand for the current have 
increased. 

Such electric service plants may be regarded as ‘‘farmers’’ 
central stations and I shall commence my illustrations with a 
description of the Mount Whitney Power and Electric Company’s 
service in the vicinity of Visalia, Cal. This will serve as an 
illustration of a plant of this class. 

Description of the power station itself or the transmission 
_ system is not necessary as the plant is well known, and possibly 
many readers are familiar with its equipment. Fig. 1 shows the 


1988 BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


territory covered by the service of this company and is typical 
of a modern intensive farming district where irrigation plays an 
important role. 

Some of the farms in this district are large farms of several 
hundred acres, but the majority are small truck and fruit farms, 
ranging from 10 to 40 acres, an average of about 20 acres to 
each person, the total number of acres irrigated by electric 
power from the Mt. Whitney plant approximating 25,000, and 
representing about 6000 horse power in electric motors. 

Fig. 2 shows a characteristic pumping installation employed 
on the irrigation farms in this district. It is interesting to note 
that on this 800-acre farm the electric service lines have been 
carried to several widely separated points, serving pumping 
motors in some’ cases of no greater capacity than five horse 
power. In fact, the loads these western central stations cater 
to, oftentimes, are of surprisingly small amount and quite dis- 
tributed. : 

In the Exeter district, where this 800-acre farm is located, 
there are 32 plunger pumps aggregating 96 h.p., and 16 centri- 
fugal pumps aggregating 1254 h.p. And in the Lindsay district, 
comprising about 25 square miles, there are in operation 217 
pumping plants with a total connected horse power of 1794, of 
which 113 were plunger pumps (1100 h.p.) and 104 centrifugal 
pumps (694 h.p.) The total pumping load connected to the 
company’s system is 374 plunger pumps (2385 h.p.), and 256 
centrifugal pumps (2471 h.p.), or a total of 630 pumping plants 
with 4856 h.p., being on the average 7.7 h.p. for each pumping 
plant. ; 

The irrigation pumping season in California is from five to six 
months at 24 hours per day. Contracts are on a basis of $50.00 
per annum per horse power; the customer installing and main- 
taining at his own cost the motors, transformers, pumps, housings 
and all other appliances. He agrees to pay each year the sum of 
$50.00 for each horse power furnished him at time of his max- 
imum consumption during the year. He further agrees that the 
amount of power to be paid for at that rate shall not be less than 
75 per cent of the rated horse power of the motor. Motors of 
less than five h.p. are paid for at $50.00 per year for the rated 
horse power of the motor, instead of 75 per cent thereof. 

In very few cases only, power is sold between the hours of 
sunrise and sunset at $30.00 per h.p. per annum, the company 
not having much power to sell at this rate as, during the irrigation 


' 
a mt oo areal 


1912] BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 1989 


season, the irrigators want to operate day and night. However, 
small power applications are taken care of in this way, consisting 
chiefly of cream separators, churns, grindstones, wood saws, 
heating flat irons, washing machines, fans and other domestic 
items. 

There is also a partial meter rate contract which is used 
principally by growers of acidulous fruits and alfalfa, the es- 
sential points of which are as follows: 

Current is furnished during the six months, February Ist to 
August Ist, at $25.00 for each horse power based on maximum 
demand, while for current furnished during the remaining months 
of the year, the rate is three cents per kilowatt-hour, it being 
agreed that the maximum amount of power to be used during 
the meter period will be equivalent to at least $6.00 per month 
horse power per of motor rating. 

The straight motor rate is used for development work, grading 
from five cents for the first 26 kilowatt-hours per month (ad- 
ditions depending on size of the motor and the months), usually 
ranging around one and three-fourths cents to two cents per kilo- 
watt-hour per month. Most of the irrigating power, however, 
is sold on the $50.00 flat rate. 

The farms served by the Mt. Whitney system may be termed 
electrically irrigated farms, as in all cases the farmer operates 
his irrigation pumps by electricity. The details of this class 
of business, it will be seen, are well established. Electric com- 
panies in other sections have also built up businesses of this kind 
and in doing so have followed the same lines or a modification 
of them. 

Another hydroelectric development and distribution system 
where irrigation pumping forms an important portion of the 
total load is that of the Pacific Power and Light Company. 

The lines of this company traverse a fertile farming district 
lying in the southeastern corner of the State of Washington, 
just east of the Cascade Mountains. Several power develop- 
ments are connected together making a complete distribution 
system, serving a total population of 101,900, including 39 
towns, having an average population of 2500. In addition to 
the towns, the population of the rural communities is 5000. 

There are 300 miles of primary lines at 66,000 volts, with 
500 miles of 6600-volt secondary. é' 

All of the plants making up this company’s system are illus- 
trations of a generating station designed to meet the lighting 


1990 BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


and power demands of a growing farming community. Fig. 3 
shows the territory served. 

It will be seen from this map that the power plant at Naches 
is close to the mountain range and Figs. 4 to 8 show the evolution 
from the snow-capped mountains to the power station where the 
energy of the falling waters is utilized first for generating elec- 
tricity and then allowed to pass on, to be used again for irrigation. 

These illustrations require very little description, for the de- 
velopment shown is complete. It is a beautiful illustration of 
the combination of the works of God and man. The magnifi- 
cent orchards and gardens which have thus been made possible 


SR. 
—<OS BEN 
' 


at Oe BR 
\Yakima City 


la ’) ! 
me ato Zi SN ig ae Be : Fis, ke 
sBchtse O% BE za y. Hie Thee 
3 mae oe 
Sat ee FP Waitse we ‘4 
ial for NF yy oe = 
= Walla Wajid fs z 
FB yeew ter F \Liitost™ ‘ 


S leiga4 


Westol 
mh FA he Stel. 


* Athouad®™ 


> nn aw 
REN: F SLEGEND 
Ms <FRANSMISSION LINES 
Under CONSTRUCTION wee 5 es ee 6 
. * PROJECTED LINES om mmm ee 
WATER POWER PLANTS STEAM PLANTS @) 
PELECTRICITY SERVED v0 GAS PLANT A 
STREET hAILWAYS [} WATER WORKS 


Fic. 3—TERRITORY SERVED BY SEVERAL POWER STATIONS OF THE | 


Paciric POWER & LIGHT CO. IN AN IRRIGATED FARMING SECTION, WASH 


on the waste places of the earth are wonderful accomplishments 
of which we may well be proud. There can be no greater work 
for us all in this day of agricultural investigation, than to advance 
in all parts of our land the utilization of our resources as exem- 
plified by these illustrations. 

Figs. 9 and 10 show further developments in electric power 
transmission, and Fig. 11 shows the acres of garden truck and 
the bountiful crops of hay or grain that result from the scien- 
tific application of water to the fertile soil. ; 

During the early part of the history of American farming 
there was too much extensive husbandry and not enough in- 


STEAM RAILROADS mrepieepetite GAS SERVED fn | 


1912} BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 1991 


tensive farming. Land was abundant and cheap, and much of 
it drained itself. The pioneer, believing the supply of land in- 
exhaustible, selected a patch, killed off the trees, cultivated it 
until the fertility of the soil was exhausted, and then moved to 
another location. In this way, the increase in population being 
enormous, great and rapid inroads were made on the country’s 
natural resources of soil. In time, all the naturally drained and 
naturally watered lands became absorbed, and a great deal of 
it exhausted, temporarily at least. 

The reclamation of our western desert and prairie land along 
most approved scientific lines is an object lesson to us all. Those 
lands are now rapidly being taken up and have become very 
valuable, and fertile, low-cost farms by the tens of thousands 
are needed. 

We have learned from these western developments that for 
proper crop culture all lands must be drained and all crops need 
water. And it is not sufficient to have a deluge of water from 
time to time, but water must be applied in such manner as to 
provide the food necessary to plant life, in order that development 
may be greatest at certain stages of its growth. This is especially 
interesting, in that it is a claim for the merits of irrigation, not 
only in the arid country, but also in sections where there may be 
an abundant rainfall. 

Mr. C. J. Blanchard, statistician of the U. 5S. Reclamation 
Service, in a lecture on ‘‘ Making the Wilderness Blossom,’’* 
states that the desert of our old geographies has no place on the 
map. The magic of irrigation has transformed valleys long 
vacant into prosperous agricultural communities. 

A brief summation of the work accomplished shows that con- 
struction is under way or has been completed on 29 projects 
involving an expenditure of $65,470,000.. In the eight years 
of actual work there have been dug 7000 miles of canals and more 
than 19 miles of tunnels, mostly excavated through mountains. 
The total excavation of rock and earth amounts to 77,200,000 
cubic yards. There have been built 570 miles of roads, 1700 
_ miles of telephones, and there are now in operation 275 miles 
of transmission lines over which surplus power and light are 
furnished to several cities and towns. The small farms and vil- 
lages grouped about these developments give the effect of sub- 
urban rather than rural conditions. The cheap power developed 
from the great dams or from numerous drops in the main canals 


*Proceedings, 19th National Irrigation Congress, 


1992 BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM {June 28 


is now utilized for the operation of trolley lines which reach out 

into the rural districts, bringing the farmer in close touch with 
the city. It runs numerous industrial plants, for storing, hand- 
ling and manufacturing the raw products of the farm. The 
same power is used for lighting and heating in the towns and 
for cooking in the homes. On several of the projects the farmers 
are applying for electric power and in many farm houses electric 
power is utilized for many domestic duties. 

More than a million dollars has been invested in the develop- 
ment of power on the Salt River project, of which the farmers 
have voluntarily raised $800,000. The sale of power up to the 
beginning of the present year amounted to $144,000 with the 
plant only partially constructed. This revenue will contribute 
materially towards lessening the cost of operating the irri- 
gation system. 

Thus it may be seen that scientific agriculture, irrigation and 
electricity have formed a powerful combination. The natural 
waters are played with at will, sometimes passing directly te 
the land, but more often the turbulent mountain streams are 
carried for miles in flumes or canals, only to give up energy at 
several points on the way, and ultimately to irrigate the land 
by gravity, or pumping, as the conditions may require. 

Another method is to drain the marsh land and pump the 
water thus available on to the higher places adjoining. Suitable 
crops are then grown on land of any level with the result that 
the area for production is materially increased. 

In many of our states, both East and West, there is a well 
established underflow of water which can be made available 
through pumping. In the sections where irrigation methods 
obtain, water ditches conveying this well water to various por- 
tions of the farmer’s land are often carried to the next man’s 
land, the compensation thus derived diminishing the pumping 
cost. 

All through our Western and Southwestern country are to be 
found examples of well installations where electric power has 
replaced steam or gasolene engines, for it becomes economy 
to do this under the favorable rate charged by the electric gener- 
ating stations there. 


The San Joaquin Light and Power Corporation of Fresno, _ 


California, supplies electric service to seven counties in one of the 
most fertile farming sections of the country, the actual area 
being more than 200 miles long and 75 or 80 miles wide. This, 


| 
| 
| 


PLATE CXI 
A. 1. E. EB. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 2—800-AcrE FARM AT EXETER, CAL. [parse] 


Pump house containing 5-h.p. electric motor, belted to 53-in. by 5-in. triple plunger 
pump with 33 i 


-in. suction, using 5.56 h.p. 


|BATES] 


Fic. 4—Mr. RAINIER, THE FOUNTAIN HEAD FROM WHICH DESCENDS 
A NEVER-FAILING SUPPLY OF WATER. 


PLATE CXII 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 5—NATCHES RIVER ABOVE INTAKE OF CANAL. [BATES] 


Fic. 7—PirpE LINES FROM CANAL TO NATCHES PowER House. [BATES] 


3 PLATE CXiIll 
A. 1. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 8—Natcues Power House. ° “'" ~~ | [Bates] 


Sli S ONLINE 
MAY 31310 


Fic. 9—PoOWER TRANSMISSION LINE. 


Fic. 10—AN IRRIGATION COMPANY’S PUMPING PLANT ON [patEs] 


THE COLUMBIA RIVER. 


Two 50-h.p. motors driving centrifugal pumps supply gravity ditch furnishing water 
to many farms. These we e recently supplemented with a 625-h.p. vertical type centri- 


fugal pump to supply a new high-level canal. 


PLATE CXIV 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[BATES] 
Fic. 11—AcrES OF GARDEN TRUCK FORCED TO EARLY MATURITY BY 
IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE. 


: = 
LLL 1 


Wena 


Fic. 13—In A DarrRyY OR CREAMERY PLANT ELECTRIC [BATES] 
FIxTURES Must BE WATERTIGHT. 


se ’ 


In the bottling room the hose is used twice dail Y i 
; Aas : i y to ‘* wash down i < 
as in all the other buildings of this dairy farm at Morristown, New ae entire interior, 


PLATE CXV 


Ag Ene. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


‘aH £ OL $—dCaLOANNOD-LOANIG AOLOW& 
DINLOATY HLIM NYNHD TaxAVG—O[ “Og 
[saLva] 


We a ata n'y hs sh nd ai i mic cme ilk Ne 0 AA kt la ioe he maa ee a al 


‘AOLOW ‘d°H-G/T ‘AOLVAVdaS 


Ad NHAIYG wAOLVAVdHS WVAAD—GT ‘Oly WVada- NAATAC -AOLOP[—FI ‘Oly 
([sarva] 


[Saiva] 


ibe 


PLATE CXV 
Avte Ge Es 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[BATES 


Fic. 17—Drrect-Connectep Motor-DrRIVEN BuTTER WORKER. 


[BATEs] 


Fic. 18—MECHANICAL MILKING MACHINE, ELECTRIC MOTOR AND 
MiLk RECEPTACLE FORMING A PART OF EACH INDIVIDUAL EQUIPMENT. 


PLATE CXVII 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[BATES] 
Fic. 19—23-H.p. Moror BELTED TO AMMONIA COMPRESSOR USED FOR 
CooLING STORAGE REFRIGERATOR, MILK COOLER AND ICE-MAKING SET. 


College Farm Dairy, New Brunswick, New Jersey. 


[BATES] 
Fic. 20—MiLk CooLER AND AERATOR CONNECTED WITH INSULATED 
BRINE LINES RUNNING FROM BRINE TANK OF THE ELECTRICALLY- DRIVEN 


REFRIGERATING PLANT SHOWN IN Fic. 19. 


PLATE CXVIII 
Awl; Es Es 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 21—HarveEstinG ICE WITH TRAVELING CHAIN AND _ [BATES] 


ELECTRIC POWER. 


The “ flights "are 33 ft. apart on the chain and there are ten of them, five on the 
‘* going side "’ covering a distance of 165 ft. The return trough for the chain is fastened 
up tight against the under side of the slide. 


[BATES} 
Fic. 22—A 24-H.p. Motor, CONNECTED BY 200 FT. OF FLEXIBLE 
CABLE WITH THE ELECTRICAL SUPPLY OF THE NEAREST BUILDING, DRIVES 


THIS ICE HARVESTER. 


PLATE CXIX 
Ne (ES 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 23—CaTTLe AND Horses MAY BE CLIPPED AND GROOMED By [BATES] 
ELECTRIC POWER. 


[BATES] 


Fic. 24—SpINNING ON TINFOIL CAps ON BOTTLES OF HIGH QUALITY 
MiLkx. THESE CAPS CANNOT BE REMOVED AND THEN REPLACED. 


Fic. 25—CuttinGc ENSILAGE AND DELIVERING IT INTO THE SILO BY [BATES] 


ELECTRIC POWER. 


PLATE CXX 
| Ne Bat 7) Se 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[BATES] [BATES] 


TELE- Fic. 28—PoRTABLE TELEPHONE 
STATION, INCLUDING TRANSMITTER, 
RECEIVER, MAGNETO AND CONNEC- 
TION TO LINE BY MEANS OF A 
‘“POLEs)AGKa 


Fic. 26— WATERTIGHT 
PHONE STATION SUITABLE FOR USE 


ON THE FARM. 


[BATES 
Fic. 27—On THE RAMSDELL ‘‘ ELECTRIC Farm” aT Minot, MAINE, 
THE FARMER’S DAUGHTER ACTS AS TELEPHONE CENTRAL. 


PLATE CXXI 
Aa Ee. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 29—Tuts WINDMILL Drives A DyNamMo WHICH FuRNIsSHES [®ATES| 
CURRENT FOR TWENTY-FOUR TUNGSTEN LAMPS. 


Fic. 30—Tue Dynamo Has A Capacity or 0.21 Kw. [BATES] 


It is set on the second floor of the mill, and is driven by a gua teciesed belt from a 
pulley on the vertical shaft of the windpower. 


[BATES] 


Fic. 31—STorAGE BATTERY IN ADJOINING BARN, ACCUMULATES 
ENERGY GIVEN BY DYNAMO WHEN RUNNING, AND STORES IT FOR USE WHEN 
LIGHTS ARE TURNED ON. 


PLATE CXXII 
Boile gba Ese 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


| “ee an 


Pas tn . 
rs or. a 


[BATES] 


Fic. 33—An IpEAL PumpING PLANT FOR FriRE Protection. [BATES] 


1912] BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 1993 


therefore, is a very important district, and information regarding 
its growth and present conditions cannot help but be of value. 

Mr. A. G. Wishon, general manager of the company, reports 
as follows: 


We are now serving 140 pumping plants in our territory, which are 
used for the development of water for irrigation purposes. We wish to 
mention particularly a number of plants that we are operating for a water 
company located at Alpaugh, Tulare County, California. This proposition 
is somewhat unique. About twelve miles from a colony of 8000 acres, 
planted to alfalfa and various other farm products, are located seven 
artesian wells that are about 1000 ft. deep. These wells were flowing 
artesian wells, the capacity of which was about 60 in. per minute, per well. 
This water company made a contract with us to extend our transmission 
line to this nest of wells, which are located on a tract of about 10 or 15 
acres, for the purpose of serving electricity to operate electric motors. 
There were seven 20-h.p. motors installed at seven different wells, belt- 
connected to 8-in. pumps. These pumps are located at the surface of 
the ground, with a 30-ft. suction pipe: each pumping plant is delivering 
about 1500 gallons of water per minute, with about 20 h.p. 

They are paying us $50 per h.p. per year for continuous service, the 
motors being operated almost continually throughout the entire year. 
The water discharged flows into a main canal which extends to the colony 
twelve (12) miles away, and at a point near the edge of the colony, this 
entire body of water is raised about 6 ft. with a 50-h.p. motor and dis- 
tributed over a tract of 8000 acres. They are also paying us the same 
price per h.p. per year for the 50-h.p. motor. The cost, therefore, for 
irrigation is about $1.25 per acre, which is a very reasonable charge for 
water service throughout the entire year. These people are raising 10 
or 12 tons of alfalfa per year, per acre, and in some instances the onion 
growers will clear $500 per acre. 


Irrigation is the key which unlocks the fertility of the soil, 
and to comprehend its importance in agriculture, one must 
appreciate the fundamental principles governing plant growth 
and soil culture. 

Rain may or may not come when it is needed most, and again, 
it may pour forth even in destructive quantities, but water under 
a well-managed irrigation system is turned on when and where 
required. This makes farming in so-called arid land a more 
definité and scientific proposition than it is in parts of the country 
apparently more favored by nature. When we have so arranged 
our soil conditions that water may be drained off the land as 
positively as it is applied, the application of irrigation methods 
is beneficial, no matter what may be the natural conditions 
of rainfall. 

Pump irrigation results in intensive farming: And this is 
the direction in which our agriculture is moving. It may 


1994 BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


also be added that the power required for pumping has proved 
to be the opening wedge in introducing the use of electricity 
in the majority of those farming districts where dependence 
upon this form of energy has become established. The most 
scientific farming can be done only by pump irrigation where 
the work can be arranged and the farm run just as systematically 
as some of the big manufacturing and commercial undertakings. 

Regarding irrigation in humid districts, Mr. Milo B. Williams,* 
Irrigation Engineer of the U. S. Department of Agriculture, 
states that it is the distribution of rainfall with respect to need of 
different crops which determines the necessity for irrigation in a 
locality. Drought records for several years past have led the 
National Department of Agriculture to encourage supplemental 
irrigation in the humid regions as a vital factor in crop insurance. 

The most humid portion of the agricultural East is subject to 
the greatest irregularity of rainfall. This refers to the southern 
states bordering on the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean. 
Here the normal annual precipitation ranges from 45 to 55 
inches and vet these states are subject to droughts lasting from 
20 to 60 days or more during the growing season. Irrigation 
‘in various parts of Alabama, Georgia and Florida, has resulted 
in producing very profitable crops on land which has heretofore 
failed to yield sufficient returns to pay for cultivation. Irri- 
gation will do for the South what it has done for the West. It 
will insure results to the small farmer. The coming of the small 
farmer to the South will cause the passing away of ruined plan- 
tations, as his going to the West has caused the passing away of 
great deserts and wasteful wheat ranches. 

The South today represents one of the largest areas of dormant 
latent agricultural possibilities in this nation and when drainage 
of the low lands is coupled with the general practise of irrigation 
throughout our South and our East, much in the same way that 
water distribution has been conquered in our West, we will 
have added many millions of acres to the productive area of 
this great country. > 

These are great problems and promise an immense work for 
years to come, but the beneficial results will outweigh many 
times the cost and labor that will be necessary to bring them about. 
At present, an abnormal condition exists just as it did in the 
arid sections before irrigation was practised, and it is the writer’s 
opinion that the reclamation of the worn-out farms and the barren 


*Proceedings, 19th National Irrigation Congress, 


1912] BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 1995 


lands of the Atlantic Slope presents agricultural opportunities 
unsurpassed at this time by any section. 

In the drainage of water-soaked lands, as in irrigation, electric 
power may be used for short lift pumping. And as an indication 
of the magnitude of the work ahead of us in this field alone, it 
is sufficient to quote from the statistical records of the United 
States of 1910 issued by the Department of Commerce and Labor, 
which place the total swamp area and overflowed lands at a 
total of approximately 75,000,000 acres. 

In their present condition, the swamps of the country are a 
source of weakness in our national economy. They are unpro- 
ductive, but they can be made sources of great national wealth. 

The policy of maintaining our agricultural lands in vast areas 
and thus, through what has been termed ‘‘ extensive husbandry,” 
failing to utilize to the utmost every acre of fertile soil, is rapidly 
falling into disfavor. And we are, on the other hand, moving 
toward an increased number of farm homes with more intensive 
methods of development. This change is going on all over our 
land. In the West, the old cattle ranges are passing away, 
merely to be replaced by irrigated farms, where diversified 
methods are practised. 

The stock feeder of today makes his money on the weight o, 
the stock when purchased, the practise being to buy in the fallf 
feed through the winter and sell in the spring. Such increased 
weight as live stock make in that period, however, is not suffi- 
cient to pay for its portion of the feed given. Profit, therefore, 
comes through improved condition of the meat, and the differ- 
ence between fall and spring values. The successful feeder 
aims for an increase of about 100 per cent. 

To accomplish this, care must be exercised in feeding. The 
coarse and unbalanced rations which cattle had to depend upon 
on the ranges, proved anything but beneficial to them, particu- 
larly, out of the growing seasons. The method today is to use 
grains with the roughage, and to grind the grains and cut the 
- roughage. For this the farmer must have power—in fact to 
meet competition the farmer must economize on his feeding, 
that is, he must work for the best results with the least expendi- 
ture for feed—power for cutting and grinding is now a necessity 
on every stock farm of any appreciable size, for with feed so 
prepared, there is better assimilation and less waste. 

Of late years, an enormous impetus has been given to alfalfa 
grinding and corn cutting for ensilage. Feeders have found that 


* 


1996 BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


by following this method the cost of the apparatus and the power 
for driving it is more than saved in a single season over the 
old method which involved waste through stock trampling their 
fodder under their feet. Further, by grinding and mixing the 
feed, any ration desired may be prepared. 

One of our largest farming industries is that of stock ‘‘ feeding,”’ 
and in so far as the need for power is concerned, stock ‘‘ raising ”’ 
farms may be regarded as in the same class, balanced rations for 
young stock being perhaps even more important than for 
‘« feeders.”’ 


APPROXIMATE DISTANCES 


Milk House to Dwelling 600 feet 
«« Nearest Barn 250 ++ 
“ «¢ +s Quarantine «+ 800 ++ 
Nearest Barnto ‘ «+ 1000 feet 


FARM BARNS 
a 


MANAGERS: 
RES. 


QUARANTINE 


\ 
’ 
\ 
< 1 =a 
=, CQHOUSE an = == 57 
h pe ha ES ie 
BOARDING 
HO. | as 


1 


\ = 
SS os 
NY 1 < 
: = EXERCISING 
\ Me a 
“ a * < 
\ABARN w 
1 7 


TRAMWAY 


Wagons receive 
Manure bere daily 


Fic. 12—DIMENSION PLAN SHOWING PoWER HOUSE AND ARRANGEMENT 
or BuILpINGs ON Dairy FARM AT PLAINSBORO, N. J. 


On all such farms there is considerable demand for power, 
ranging in most cases from 25 to 50 h.p. and sometimes consider- 
ably more. Besides the power necessary on the individual 
farms, there are in all farming districts industries that convert 
the farm produce into finished products. 

Electricity is gaining a foothold for both lighting and power 
in our better class of dairy farms. Its great cleanliness and safety 
for lighting leave little room for argument when new dairy build- 
ings are being planned. And on account of its convenience 
as a form of power, it is frequently used with cream separators, 
churns, refrigerating machines, milk testers, also in the barn 


1912] BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 1997 


or field work incidental to the preparation of feed and handling 
of crops. 

Fig. 12 shows a large milk farm at Plainsboro, New Jersey, 
where electricity is used for lighting, clipping cows, operating 
a bottling machine, spinning on tinfoil caps or seals on bottles, 
cutting ensilage, running a saw mill, pumping water from a deep 
well, grinding feed and elevating it to storage bins. 

The fact that this is a commercial plant turning out daily 
from 3500 to 4000 quarts of milk, where a high standard of 
quality is rigidly maintained, is evidence that there must be 
advantages in using electricity in such an installation. 

The total acreage of the farm is nearly 1200, and at present 
about 70 per cent is under cultivation. Electricity is generated 
by steam power and distributed at 220 volts. The generating 
equipment, at present, consists of one 25-kw. direct-connected 
unit, steam boiler, etc. 

This is not a large generating plant, tobe sure, but it insures 
cleanliness of lighting equipment and safety from fire risk in 
the barns, bunk houses and outbuildings. It also makes pos- 
sible a convenient source of power in any part of the farms or 
outbuildings, which, of necessity, are widely distributed, and 
cost of generating the current, including interest and depreciation 
charges, is probably not over 4 cents per kilowatt-hour. 

Scientific milk production is more and more coming into 
prominence and the necessity for perfect cleanliness, immediate 
cooling and keeping the milk at a low temperature, compels 
such dairy farmers to adopt devices that will be most helpful 
in obtaining these results. 

Fig. 13 shows the bottling room at a milk dairy in Morristown, 
New Jersey, where the walls, ceilings and floors of all rooms in 
which the milk is handled are washed down daily, both morning 
and evening—the electric lighting fixtures being entirely water- 
tight. 

“ Dairying ” and “ stock raising ” are usually followed where 
land needs upbuilding in fertility, and in either the silo is a 
necessity, cutting up succulent forage crops and storing them in 
the silo for later use being the accepted method of preparing 
the feed. To do this the farmer must have power, but a 10-h.p. 
electric motor with its capacity for momentary overload will do 
work that would stall a gasolene engine rated at 12 or 15 h.p. 
‘Hence, for silage cutting and elevating, a 10-h.p. electric motor 
is sufficient where a 20-h.p. gasolene engine would be recom- 


mended. 


1998 BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


The farmer can easily recognize the advantage of the electric 
motor for this operation, and when once adopted, he soon wants 
to use the current for grinding feed, baling hay and other pur- 
poses. 

On the dairy farm, however, electricity offers other oppor- 
tunities, as it is the most convenient form of energy for operating 
an artificial refrigeration plant, the cream separator, churn and 
butter worker. The reason for this rests in the ease of control, 
making for economy. The current is used only while the ap- 
paratus driven is in operation and may be shut off when the work 
is done. No skill whatever is required to operate such equip- 
ments, it being necessary only to turn a switch. 

Cream separators, while often turned by hand on small 
dairy farms, are more frequently driven mechanically where 
considerable cream is handled. Fig. 14 shows the use of the 
electric motor for separator driving where perfect cleanliness 
is a factor. Cream separators, except in the very large sizes, 
require not more than a 1/5-h.p. motor and they are in operation 
only for a comparatively short time. The operating cost, there- 
fore, is practically negligible. 

Figs. 15, 16 and 17 show a complete creamery outfit of excel- 
lent type, each piece of apparatus being driven by an individual 
motor. The power required for the various branches of cream- 
ery work is small, convenience and freedom from dust being the 
all-important factors. 

In large dairies where hand milkers are difficult to obtain, 
the milking machine has a place and the records seem to show 
that these devices are favorably received in some of our western 
dairy sections, at least. Those that the writer is familiar with, 
which have been commercially used in this country, consist prin- 
cipally of a vacuum pump, milk chamber’ with specially con- 
structed admission valves, rubber connecting tubes and special 
type of cups which fit directly on the cow’s teats, a con- 
venient method of driving the vacuum pump being by the electric 
motor. These equipments are often called “ electric milkers.” 

The only “electric milker’’ really deserving the name that 
has come to the writer’s attention is shown in Fig. 18. 

This device is so designed that an electric motor of about 1/12- 
h.p. forms an integral part of the apparatus that does the milking, 
the whole machine being suspended under the belly of the 
cow. Through a worm and gear the motor moves an aluminum. 
rod forward and backward, which carries the pressure plates, 


1912] BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 1999 


and the teats, being held in a fixed position by a corresponding 
set of stationary plates, are thus squeezed as in hand milking. 

It is an ingenious device, free from springs, tubes or other 
parts which might get out of order, and being of aluminum it is 
very light in weight. All of the details of design have been 
carefully developed, and as a machine milker, it is deserving of 
careful consideration. 

As all dairymen know, refrigeration is an essential that they 
cannot do without. In many plants natural ice is still used, but 
the cost of harvesting, storing and handling ice is far greater 
than the operation of a power-driven refrigerating machine. 

Artificial refrigeration is more sanitary and far more con- 
venient. Figs. 19 and 20 show a refrigerating equipment 
which was recently installed in the dairy department at the 
College Farm of the New Jersey State College of Agriculture, 
New Brunswick, N. J. 

In this refrigerator is the usual brine tank through which the 
ammonia coils pass. The cooling of the brine and of the refriger- 
ator entirely takes the place of ice. In other words, it is not 
a combination refrigerator, but is cooled by the ammonia 
pumped by an electric motor. The same pump and motor con- 
ducts ammonia through the inner compartment of the milk 
cooler and aerator shown in Fig. 20. 

The motor is set running just before the milk is started to flow- 
ing over the cooler and aerator. The milk by passing over it nds 
cooled and aerated, and run into the bottler just below. As 
soon as the milk has all passed over, the motor is turned off; 
thus the power used is a minimum. 

Some dairies without this equipment, resort to pumping of ice- 
water through the cooler. This, of course, can be done with the 
electric motor or any other power and even by gravity. T his 
last method is most common, but in warm weather it does not 
cool the milk sufficiently. The cooling which the electric 
ammonia system provides makes it possible to almost freeze the 
milk, and thus keep down the bacteria content by reducing the 
natural multiplication of these organisms. 

Small refrigerators are beneficial on all farms for storage of 
eggs, dressed poultry and for preserving the freshness of flowers, 
fruit or garden truck that cannot be immediately sent to market. 
They are also useful for keeping meats and other perishable sup- 
plies for home consumption. 

Figs. 21 and 22 show an ice-carrying machine operated by 


2000 BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


electricity on the farm of Dr. Schuyler S. Wheeler, who states: 
“The outfit was eminently practical and satisfactory in every 
way and enabled me to fill my house with about 200 tons of ice, 
using five men and no teams, in four days. Previously it has 
been the custom to employ four to six teams, four to five days in 
addition to these men.’’ When the bridge was fully elevated, 
2.5 h.p. was required, current for which was supplied from the 
private generating plant, ordinarily used for lighting and small 
power devices. 

Individual uses for electric power on the farm seem to be 
almost without end. Fig. 23 shows the method of electric clip- 
ping employed in the dairy barns of a milk farm, and cow groom- 
ing is accomplished in similar manner. When milk of the high- 
est quality is to be produced, the farmer must put his stock 
through a careful preparation for cleanliness, and it has been de- 
termined at several experiment stations, as well as in practical 
commercial dairies, that it pays to groom cows daily, owing to 
the greater production of milk thus obtained. In some cases 
this practise has resulted in an average increased output per 
cow of 15 per cent, which of course, even at a low value of 
milk, would pay for the electric current, man’s time, etc. Figs. 
25 and 26 illustrate other applications of electric power which are 
in successful use at this samefarm. It can be said of this plant 
that everything that makes for quality and efficiency has been 
employed, but nothing that would suggest an over-capitaliza- 
tion of equipment. 

In all farming one realizes that the time incidental to covering 
distance is one of the greatest handicaps to rapid production 
and the accomplishment of quick results. The force of this 
statement is hard to realize until one has actually observed the 
distance a farmer and his men will travel in a day by team or on 
foot in going to and from their work, the house or barn buildings. 
Perhaps the farmer will desire merely to speak to his assistants 
about their work, but, nevertheless, he must travel the interven- 
ing distance, as, generally, no other means of communication is 
available to him. ; 

In the western farm life, this is not so frequently the case, as 
the telephone has been used there for several years, but in the 
East, strange as it may seem, the telephone is only rarely found 
in the farming home and in the fields. 

Some time ago, one of the electrical manufacturing companies 
designed a water-tight telephone, Fig. 27, for mine, police and 


1912] BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 2001 


railway service or other exposed use. The case is cast of heavy 
malleable iron, so shaped as to permit of attachment to a pole, 
post or side of building. The door closes against a rubber gasket, 
and when closed, the case is water-tight. 

This form of local telephone station has been installed at some 
thirty different points on the farm of Mr. E. E. Ramsdell, Minot, 
Maine. 

Mr. Ramsdell has introduced several electrical devices for 
saving labor on his form. The installation that has impressed 
me as being most worthy of especial mention, however, is his 
telephone equipment. 

Fig. 28 shows the farm “ central’’, and from any outlying point 
on the farm the owner or his men may talk to the farm head- 
quarters, the nearby town, or to any place whatever, by “ long 
distance ’’ if necessary. 

Another form of telephone equipment which should be very 
useful for field work on the larger farms is shown in Fig. 29, 
consisting of a portable magneto telephone, which may be 
carried as part of the field worker’s outfit, and by means of a 
pole jack, which is also shown in the illustration, it is possible to 
signal to, or converse with any other part of the farm. Telephone 
installations of the kind just described may also include a separate 
water-tight loud ringing extension bell that may be heard at a 
considerable distance from the fixed signal point. Such appara- 
tus, and.in fact any electrical devices for farm use, should be 
substantial in construction and built to withstand weather con- 
ditions. 

That electricity on the farm makes for great economy, not 
only through convenience, cleanliness and safety, but also 
in actual cost of operation, can be proved over and over again 
in the case of those installations where the service is properly 
installed and where apparatus of suitable type and size has been 
selected. For example, in one instance where the monthly 
output was considerable, the cost for electric power averaged 
from one-half to one and one-half mills per pound of butter made, 
the rate of charge for current being 2} cents per kilowatt-hour. 

Considering the cleanliness, minimum upkeep and labor 
required, this cost becomes negligible. And the difference in 
cost of using electric illumination, compared with the full costs 
incidental to burning kerosene, while somewhat dependent upon 
‘the relative rates of charge, is actually in favor of electricity, 
when chimneys, wicks and time of trimming are considered. 


2002 BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


It may, therefore, be accepted as a fact that on the farm, as 
elsewhere, electricity for lighting and power results in lower 
cost, but to make this statement so that it cannot be disputed, 
I would add that where electric service cannot be obtained from 
a public supply on a basis that will insure reasonable rates, it 
is entirely within the privilege of the farmer or rural dweller 
to equip his property with a private electric generating plant 
that will give him light and power at moderate cost, and the 
operation of such a plant should not be difficult for anyone to 
understand. 

The plant illustrated by Figs. 30, 31 and 32 perhaps embodies 
a maximum of simplicity and minimum of operating expense, for 
which reasons I refer to it as an equipment within the reach of 
anyone desiring the benefit of electricity with very moderate 
outlay. In this instance, a small dynamo (6 amperes, 35 volts at 
450 rev. per min) is belted to the vertical shaft of a windmill. 

As the mill speed is not constant, an automatic cut-in is 
introduced in the electrical circuit between the dynamo and the 
storage battery, from which the lighting current is taken, the 
charging of this battery being the sole duty of the dynamo. 

This plant, which is on the farm of J. F. Forrest, Poynette, 
Wisconsin, develops current for 24 15-watt, 25-volt tungsten 
lamps. Its whole cost was $250, exclusive of transportation, but 
including windmill, dynamo, storage battery, automatic cut-in, 
wire, porcelain insulators, sockets, switches and tungsten lamps. 
The owner did the complete wiring and arranging of the lights 
and switches. The two years of successful operation and the 
cleverness of the lighting scheme, which embodies several two- 
way and three-way switches for distant control of both exterior 
and interior lights, is certainly an indication that Mr. Forrest, 
who runs a farm of some hundred or more acres, has done for 
himself what many other farmers may also do by a little planning 
and some interesting labor. 

To make this subject of electricity on the farm reasonably 
complete, there is shown Fig. 33, which illustrates a well-equipped 
generating plant where the dynamo is directly connected to a 
vertical type gasolene engine, the whole unit mounted together 
on one foundation. The storage battery is in the room adjoining, 
while the switchboard is built into a wall of the engine room. 

In conclusion, I would state that the practicability and 
feasibility of utilizing electricity for both lighting and power on 
the farm has been demonstrated by many successful installa- 
tions. 


1912] BATES: ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 2003 


In some agricultural sections, central station operators are 
stimulating a general use of electricity in rural districts by follow- 
ing a far-sighted policy as to extension of service lines and rates 
for current. 

Should one or more isolated farmers find it impracticable to 
obtain central station service, there is open the opportunity of 
establishing a cooperative generating station, utilizing water- 
power, producer gas, steam, gasolene or fuel oil equipments, 
depending upon the conditions obtaining. 

In conjunction with such cooperative electric generating 
stations, there could be operated community laundries, creamer- 
ies, canneries, grist mills or other industries suggested by local 
needs. 

Where neither public service nor cooperative plants are feas- 
ible, a farmer may, at a cost of approximately $250, install a 
private electric lighting plant, large enough for two dozen lights, 
and from this as a probable minimum, he may install an isolated 
plant at additional outlay that will provide current for as many 
lamps and as much power as he may desire. 

The use of electricity on the farm makes for greater safety 
from fire risk, and for this reason especially, its use should be 
encouraged for lighting, heating and power. 

And, finally, as our future land improvement in the East, as 
well as the South, will involve drainage and irrigation, we may 
expect to see here, as in the West, electricity taking a leading 
place in agricultural development. It should be remembered, 
too, that electric energy is greatly cheaper than man or horse 
power, and that nowhere else are man and horse labor wasted 
through periods of inactivity to an extent to be compared with 
the labor waste on the farm. Now, when it seems impossible 
to secure men on the farm, the turn of a switch brings electric 
energy, begetting production and wealth. 


2004 ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


DIscusston on “ ELECTRICITY ON THE Farm ” (BaTEs), Boston, 
Mass., JUNE 28, 1912. 


J. D. Merrifield: Where I come from they sell electricity to 
the farmer at $50 a horse power, and he can use it for anything 
he pleases. 

I want to speak of refrigeration. Mr. Bates states that every 
farmer can afford refrigeration. I will tell you of a refrigerating 
“plant ” in use in my town. The humidity of the air there is 
very low. If you draw air through water and then pump air 
into the room by means of a fan, you will lower the temperature 
of the room six or eight or even ten degrees. Where | live the 
temperature goes up to 119 deg. fahr. in the shade, and: I have 
known it higher. This may last a day or two. I know of a boy 
out there who rigged up a very successful device. It consisted 
of a rod from his wagon and the picket rope from the cow, and he 
made a little fan drive, put the fan on the kitchen window, 
hung wet cloths, and he cooled off both the kitchen and dining- 
room, and made it a very. comfortable place to occupy. It isa 
very simple and yet a very effective method of accomplishing 
the result. 

L. L. Elden: I hope before Mr. Bates leaves our country here 
in the East he won’t fail to find out that at least one electric 
company is entering the field. The Edison Electric Illuminating 
Company of Boston has what is called an “ Edison farm,” about 
twenty miles from Boston, where all types of electrical machines 
and applications of electricity to these machines are on exhibition. 
The company is offering to extend its lines practically anywhere 
to get the business, and it is practically off-peak business. It is 
therefore very attractive to the company from both the capacity 
and income points of view. I do not know whether this exploita- 
tion has been attempted elsewhere, and we do not know exactly 
what the result of this effort is going to be, but so far there has 
been a marked interest displayed by the neighbors in the vicinity 
of the exhibit, and sales of several large motors have been made 
for farming purposes. 

Putnam A. Bates: I have known something of the idea 
that this company was planning, and I am very glad to hear that 
the project has been put into actual operation this year. There 
is no question that it will take a little time before the additional 
expense of such an exhibit is brought back, but when it 
comes back it will come back strong and the companies 
that make their beginning now will be the ones that will 
profit the most. The sale of electric machinery among the 
farmers, as I have pointed out, is going to be tremendous. The 
sale of electrical energy is going to be even more tremendous, 
because in five or ten years at the outside, it will be a most 
unusual thing to see a farm without electric current in use for 
both lighting and power. 

I can recollect when dentists used a hammer, to drive the filling 
into one’s teeth, but they don’t do that now. A little electric 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON »x 2005 


motor has been substituted for the hand method. I have worked 
my own garden with a hand wheel hoe, but why should I not 
attach an electric motor to this device and let the motor do 
the digging while I merely furnish the energy to move the tool 
along? That is what was done with the big grain harvesting 
machines. They required forty or fifty horses or mules to pull 
them, the greater part of this energy being necessary to do the 
cutting, threshing and binding. Some ingenious fellow said, 
“Why not leave a good many of those animals in the barn, or 
sell them to the neighbors? Put a little gasoline motor on the 
back of that threshing machine. It is heavy already. It won’t 
add much to put on a few hundred pounds more. Let the 
gasoline motor do the threshing and binding, and let the animals 
pull the thing about.”’ That was a great improvement in har- 
vesting machinery. 

J. A. Moyer: I would like to ask Mr. Bates one question, 
whether he has any figures regarding the proportion of the in- 
dividual or isolated plants used in comparison to central station 
power, where the latter is available. 

Putnam A. Bates: If I understand the question correctly 
my answer must be that the isolated plant and the central station 
service for the farmer very seldom conflict. We might think they 
would, because in the city we find such competition always. But 
out in the rural sections the conditions are different. The 
central stations seem to be either progressive or hopeless. The 
former follow a liberal policy and cultivate the farmers’ business. 
They are solving the problem from his point of view. With the 
latter class, we find the plants generally are carrying tremendous 
overhead burdens and have to charge from ten to fifteen or more 
cents per kilowatt-hour, and they insist on the farmer paying 
for the pole line if he wants the current. It is a ridiculous prop- 
osition. The farmer simply buys an isolated plant instead. You 
can compete with a ten-cent service rate by having an inde- 
pendent plant. 

You find that on the farm, labor conditions work out differently 
from in the factory. In the factory you can differentiate between 
your candidates for employment. You can pick out the skilled 
man. You can let the others who apply go. But on the farm it 
is the other way around. You are mighty lucky if you get an 
unskilled man, to say nothing of the skilled man. These farm 
hands are pretty good as farmers. They usually mean well, but 
they will go along with the load of corn stalks to put into the silo 
and if you have a gasoline motor of 12 h.p. that is supposed to 
be ample to drive an ensilage cutter and silo filler they will put 
two bundles of wet cornstalks on the platform, and they will jam 
them in so as to stall a 12- or 15-h.p. gasoline motor every time. 
So really you ought to have 20 h.p. in a gasoline engine if you 
want to do silage work and do it right. Now with electricity 
you can use a 10-h.p. motor. It will cost less than a 10- or 12- 
h.p. gasoline motor, and rough treatment such as I have described 


2006 ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


makes no difference to the motor. It has 100 per cent overload 
capacity for a short time, and it will go through the heavy mo- 
mentary overload with no delay or injury. That is one of the 
great advantages of electricity on the farm, it is so easily and 
well adapted to the needs of the situation. 

Mr. Sanford: I would like to ask whether in the course of 
the daily work there is what you ordinarily call a peak load on 
the generator, that is, on a farm running with a small isolated 
plant, and, supposing there is any peak load which would tend to 
bother the generator, would it not be economical to carry a stor- 
age battery which will be charging during the light load and 
when the peak load comes on will be running parallel with the 
generator? 

Putnam A. Bates: That isa good point. The storage battery 
is of no little significance in connection with the equipment of the 
isolated plant on the farm. I never design an isolated plant 
for farm use without putting in a storage battery anda good big 

-one because that is just the factor that you need in a small rural 
isolated plant—a good big balance wheel to carry you over the 
times when you don’t want to run your engine. 

Adolph Shane (by letter): This paper has proved of consider- 
able interest to me for several reasons. In the first place I have 
had occasion to look into this subject under the conditions sur- 
rounding my section of the country (Iowa)* and I desired to as- 
certain the view-point of another who had also made a study 
of this important development. In the next place, Mr. Bates 
has given me a clearer idea of the extent to which electrical 
apparatus for farm purposes has been developed. Again, he has 
shown the possibilities inherent in farm electrification. 

Under certain conditions these possibilities may prove to be 
desirabilities. And this is the phase of the subject I wish to con- 
sider. To what extent is it desirable to electrify a farm? Mr. 
Bates shows us how extensive irrigation schemes are successfully 
carried out in the semi-arid West by means of electricity. He has 
shown us the application of electric power in the dairy and in the 
harvesting of ice. But does a comprehensive scheme of electri- 
fication under our present conditions represent advantages to 
the majority of farmers over this broad land? I think not. Until 
central station men see that it will pay them to sell cheap power 
to the farmer and until the farmer sees that his returns in 
dollars and cents are greater by the use of electricity than with- 
out, electrically operated farms will not become general. 

The greatest farming sections of the United States are in the 
Middle West. Because of the preponderance of farm produc- 
tion and wealth in this part of the country, the conditions as they 
obtain here should also fairly well represent the conditions over 
the country as a whole; and where other conditions exist else- 
where they might perhaps be taken as special and not typical. 


*See Bulletin No. 25, Engineering Experiment Station, Iowa State 
College, Ames, Iowa. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 2007 


Let us then consider the farms of the Middle West and study the 
problem of electrification. 

In looking over the field we find that the farms, generally 
speaking, are many and moderate in size rather than relatively 
few and great in extent. On the large farm the problem of elec- 
trificatfon may be taken seriously, but on the small farm the 
owner will have to be convinced of definite profits before he com- 
mits himself to the expense, especially since the middle western 
farmer does not depend on irrigation for his crops. But suppose 
he is considering electrification, what is to be his source of 
power? It must either be a central station or he must manufac- 
ture the power himself. As a rule the central station does 
not find it profitable to supply farmers with power in this region. 
The uses to which the farmer may desire to apply electric power 
are light, a number of domestic utensils, several motors of small 
power, and a large motor of perhaps 25 h.p. with which to thresh 
* and cut ensilage. This latter motor is used but a few days in each 
year, yet it is necessary to supply transformers to take this max- 
imum load. The result is that the load factor for the year is so 
poor that the all-day efficiency on the average is low. The 
further result is that there is a considerable waste of power and the 
central station must charge more per kilowatt-hour for this rea- 
son, and because of the relatively heavy overhead charges in 
proportion to the amount of power used. The latter reason may 
not exist if the transmission line is primarily built to serve a 
neighboring town and the farmer is taken on incidentally. 

If the farmer is to manufacture the power himself he must, 
under similar conditions again, install a plant capable of supply- 
ing the largest motor with power, namely the 25-h.p. motor. 
Thus he would again, excepting for a few days in the year, oper- 
ate his plant at a ridiculously small load factor. This would 
be aggravated by the fact that there would be little excuse to 
drive the churn and cream separator by an electric motor, since 
the gasoline or oil engine could drive a line shaft, which connects 
the power room with the repair shop and dairy room, at the same 
time that it operates the generator. This would be no less con- 
venient and cleanly than the motor drive, for under any circum- 
stances all apparatus should be operated at as nearly the same 
time as possible for the sake of economy in power generation; 
and the line shaft and belting is not more prominent 1n one case 
than in the other. I refer now to the dairy room of the average 
farm. Accordingly the cost of plant is excessive for the amount 
of power produced and the cost of power is excessive because of 
the very small load factor. 

We thus see that the average farmer is at present enabled to use 
electric power only in a limited fashion; but if he is properly 
advised he may reap considerable benefit from the use of such 
power in a conservative way. The farmer realizes the con- 
venience and safety of the electric light, particularly in the barn. 
Hence, aside from its cost, he may desire electric light. So I 


2008 ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


believe the use of electric power on the farm centers at present 
in the farmer’s desire for electric light. In most cases he will 
produce the power himself, using a small gasoline or oil engine, 
generator, and storage battery for lighting. This is the entering 
wedge. If planned beforehand, the generator may have sufficient 
capacity to supply power for the flat-iron, washing machine, fan, 
sewing machine, etc., as well as to charge the battery, without 
causing the plant to cost materially more. The farmer may be 
ambitious and desirous of doing his grinding and pumping by 
means of electric power. He may still do this with a small capac- 
ity plant. But this is perhaps the extent to which, it appears to 
me, electrification should be carried by the average farmer at 
present. 

If a number of farms operated a plant in cooperation the 
above discussion would be subject to considerable revision. But 
because of the human equation entering, general cooperation 
has hardly proved a success among farmers. ‘ 

In the future the following causes may extend the degree of 
profitable electrification: : 

a. The increase in value of farm products to such a point that 
it may pay to multiply machinery for the more efficient and rapid 
handling of them. 

b. The general development of large central station systems 
for the economic production and distribution of power. 

c. The increase in size of farms under single or corporate owner- 
ship. 

Any of these causes or combination of causes may produce the 
desired end. The point I desire to make in this discussion is 
that the members of the electrical profession interested in exploit- 
ing electricity for the farm will gain greater and farther reaching 
results in the end if such exploitation is followed along careful 
and conservative lines. The confidence of the farmer will then 
be secured. 

Putnam A. Bates (by letter): Mr. Adolph Shane in his dis- 
cussion of my paper “‘ Electricity on the Farm ”’ states: ‘‘ under 
certain conditions these possibilities may prove to be desira- 
bilities.” And he adds the question: ‘‘ To what extent is it 
desirable to electrify a farm?” 

In answering this question, I must first emphasize the fact 
that in my paper I have not described possibilities, but have 
recited actual conditions of electrification on farms, many of 
which have been thus successfully operating for several years, 
a sufficient length of time to demonstrate fully their desirability. 

The purpose of Mr. Shane’s argument, I take it, is to awaken 
the central station man to the importance of aggressive co-opera- 
tion in this application of electricity landward, and while in a 
measure I can sympathize with Mr. Shane, as my own farm in 
New Jersey lies in a section of electrical supply where the opera- 
tors of the local plants are many years behind the times, generally 
speaking, the central station men are now quite alive to this 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 2009 


problem, and it is a notable fact that during the past two years 
the progressive central stations in the United States and Canada 
have been making rapid strides in extending service to the farm. 
In fact, almost coincidently with the presentation of my paper 
at the Boston convention of this Institute in June last, the 
National Electric Light Association during its convention in 
Seattle discussed this subject and many important data were 
presented. 

A few years ago, Mr. Shane’s statement that the greatest 
farming sections of the United States are in the Middle West 
would have gone unchallenged, but today reliable reports do 
not show this to be so. 

Unquestionably, the Middle West is deserving of great credit 
as a section of immense agricultural wealth, but in basing an 
argument as to the best equipments to recommend for the 
proper development of ourfarms in all sections of thisvast country 
on the practises that now obtain there, more credit is being 
given than is due the Middle West, or any other one locality, 
for that matter. 

The very fact that the Middle West has for so many years 
been regarded as a leader, agriculturally, is, I think, a sufficient 
reason for us to regard with suspicion any suggestion of im- 
practicability regarding the recommendations of those who wish 
to see the advancement of new ideas in this field. It isin the new 
sections that we are most apt to find the early adoption of im- 
proved methods and not, necessarily, in those districts where an 
industry has long been successfully established. 

The older agricultural sections must not remain too wedded 
to the methods of the days during which their reputations were 
making, for it is only through a continual application of new 
ideas, improving upon the old methods, that supremacy can be 
maintained. 

The increase in rural population during the past ten years has 
been decidedly in favor of sections other than our Middle West, 
and this is a straw that shows the way the wind isblowing. In 
Iowa, for example, the rural population has actually decreased 
and the same is true of Missouri, Indiana and Ohio, whereas in 
the other States of the middle western group the increase has been 
less than ten per cent. Against this, we find the increase in 
Washington, Oregon, Idaho, California, N evada, Arizona, Colo- 
rado and other States to be 30 to 50 per cent, and in some cases 
even more than this. These figures are from the U. S. Govern- 
ment Census reports, 1900 to 1910. 

A similar condition is indicated to us by a study of the acre 
crop yields of the middle western States compared with the old 
eastern States that are coming back into their own through the 
scientific treatment which these ‘‘ worn-out ’’ soils are.now te- 
ceiving and the passing of the farms from weaker to stronger 
hands. This fact is shown by the following figures taken from 
the reports of the Department of Agriculture of the United States 


2010 ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM {June 28 


for the year 1910 regarding the production of wheat, corn and 
oats since 1866. Reliable reports prior to 1866 are not available. 
The production of wheat per acre in the following States was: 


1866 to 1875 1876 to 1885 1910 
Mainesn cts te etc eats 13.2 bushels 13.7 bushels 29.7 bushels 
NewaN Of kauri shania 14.1 . 15.5 y 23.7 - 
Pennsylvania..........+ 13.3 2 13.4 . 17.8 = 
ORIG. fee eies.s) cro ac 12 - 14.6 We 16.2 & 
Blin OIS Ae eeis tobe stele once 11.9 - aSine « 15. 5 
LOwasnen tit aide 6 aon 12.6 £ 10.2 s 21: se! 
Kansas.c.ccbcte cola snes 15.7 be 13.9 « 140 y 


The production of oats in the following States was: 


1866 to 1875 1876 to 1885 1910 
Maines aces clelae os sieteiels 21.6 bushels 26.8 bushels 42.4 bushels 
New 1Y Of ive cle clelei='=)e5= 21.2 4 30.5 . 34.5 * 
Pennsylvania.........+-: 30.6 he 30.2 ! 35.2 md 
ODIO srecsrsters aious siousieisie are se 29.6 < 30.6 nm 37.2 ho 
TWinOigesccce cs cee e cee es 30.5 : 33.2 s 38. . 
BOWacn <icacieicia clovelerciste sere 35.8 - 33. $ 37.8 =f 
KoanBaS sc)s.«icjalsic @ersre sels els 32.8 t! 30.6 s 33.3 s 


The production of corn in the following States was: 


1866 to 1875 1876 to 1885 1910 
Maine: sc case ola o.cs es 29.3 bushels 33.8 bushels 46.0 bushels 
New Yorks nie. .d 5. sense 31.6 “ 30.4 : 38.3 Ss 
Pennsylvania.........-- 35.1 s 32.6 ‘ 41.0 a 
Obi en canton eke faytals' = 35.2 s 32.6 = 36.5 2 
Tlin OiB decice wie’ ee aps) 0ie ialel 29.9 “ 27.2 4 39.1 . 
TOWMGt catecne velci's sine = 34.3 - 31.8 * 36.3 u 


One very important feature of the now much discussed sub- 
ject of ‘electricity on the farm’’ is that where this improve- 
ment is found, it is universally accompanied with better con- 
ditions generally. The farmers are of a different frame of mind 
from those where the less efficient forms of energy are used for 
power and lighting. This condition I have noticed many times 
in different localities, and it is in my opinion the most important 
condition of all, because this interest means better farming in 
all branches, and even if the electrical method were the most 
expensive, which it is not under a proper order of things, a com- 
prehensive scheme of electrification would be justified on all 
farms worthy of the name and farmers will do well to adjust 
their present conditions so as to be not long delayed in the en- 
joyment of the advantages of electricity, no matter what agri- 
cultural section the farm is located in. 

We would not think of recommending electric power for the 
textile mills of New Jersey and then advising against its use in 
the mills of Illinois. We would not say that the machine shop 
in New York State, where we will assume the power rate for 
electrical energy is from 5 to 10 cents per kw-hr., should be op- 
erated by hand-power whereas the shop in Colorado, where 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 2011 


perhaps a 2- or 3-cent rate prevails, might indulge in electrifica- 
tion and the many resulting advantages therefrom. 

Electric drive and electric lighting are too well understood for 
us to confuse in any way the importance of their advantages with 
the obstacles that are naturally encountered in the introduction 
of a new method into a new field. 

Today, however, the farmer is independent of the central 
station, and yet where service is supplied at a fair rate with rea- 
sonable reliability, there may be advantages in some cases in 
not installing a private plant. In any event, the problem can 
be solved and the improvement well justifies the expense. This 
has been demonstrated in many places, under many conditions. 

On all farms the problem of electrification should be taken 
seriously. On the small farm it may not pay to carry the idea 
as far as on the large farm, but again the reverse is sometimes 
true. Inthe small farm home, oftentimes it is nearly impossible 
to secure satisfactory labor, and it is under such conditions that 
electrical energy is most useful. On small farms a large amount 
of power is seldom, if ever, required. The feed is ground when 
bought and threshing and other heavy work can be contracted 
for. 

On the larger farms a greater percentage of the operations 
involved in converting raw material into finished products is 
undertaken, the average daily power requirement is greater, 
and the business enterprise is of sufficient magnitude to justify 
a gradual improvement in equipment and an ultimate adoption 
of the most efficient methods. This is an economic problem and 
one which is more important to consider on our farms than in 
our factories or mills. And from the facts already presented 
we know that the increased rate of handling work, the decrease 
in labor required and the actual economy of electrical power 
commend this form of energy for favorable consideration on the 
farm as elsewhere. 

I must also differ with Mr. Shane in what he says in reference 
to the character of plant that would be necessitated under certain 
conditions which he has named. 

While a 25-h.p. motor would be running less than half loaded 
when operating an ensilage machine in reasonably good repair, 
and slightly more than this when driving a threshing unit of 
average size, let us take Mr. Shane’s figure for the sake of argu- 
ment. Manifestly it would not be good planning to load the 
entire year’s service bills, where the ordinary day’s electrical 
requirements are small, with the inefficiencies and overhead 
charges incidental to a service equipment that is out of all pro- 
portion to the average current demand. The idea of electrifica- 
tion of the farm should not be carried to this point. 

The same principle is true in the designing of a private plant, 
but there the difficulty cited is more easily overcome through the 
introduction of a storage battery of sufficient capacity to carry 
large peak loads. In fact it is advantageous to have the battery 


2012 ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM [June 28 


of such size that it does not have to be charged every twenty- 
four hours, as here again we encounter the labor problem which 
is so difficult to arrange satisfactorily on the farm. 

If the plant be so designed that the generating set is of sufficient 
size to carry the evening lighting load direct and to charge the 
storage battery during the daytime, and the battery is large 
enough for the heavy peak loads when unusual work is being 
undertaken, it is better, even if it takes several days to charge 
the battery fully, than it would be to have a generating set of 
sufficient capacity for the maximum demand and only a small 
battery or none at all. 

Now one word about electricity in the dairy. Mr. Shane 
speaks of possibilities and desirabilities of electricity on the 
farm. Let mesay that when clean milk is selling wholesale at 
from 74 to 15 cents per quart net to the farmer, as it is today in 
New York State and New Jersey, Massachusetts, Connecticut, 
Pennsylvania, Maryland and doubtless elsewhere, there is little 
question of the desirability of using electricity for both lighting 
and power, no matter what may be the source of electrical supply. 
For the introduction of electric light and power devices in our 
high-class dairies has done more toward bringing down the bac- 
terial count in milk than any one other feature of equipment, 
except sterilization facilities and proper means of cooling. 

In the creamery, it is not a question of economic use of power 
that prompts the use of the direct-connected or closely belted 
motor-driven separator and similar sanitary devices, but the elim- 
ination of dust-stirring parts and vibrations and uneven speeds 
which reduce both the quantity and quality of creamery pro- 
ducts. 

To define the possibilities of electricity on the farm would be 
to design an ideal installation with an infinite number of uses 
for this form of energy. This I have not attempted to do in 
my paper, but instead have confined myself wholly to descrip- 
tions of actual installations and the submission of data from 
which all may benefit in dealing with this problem in individual 
cases. 

In closing, I would, therefore, point out that the electrician 
must get his point of view in this matter from the needs of the 
farm in question and select his equipment on the basis of a proper 
economic treatment of the problem of the management of the 
farm as a whole. He must not reason from the standpoint of 
the farmer who is today poorly equipped with apparatus or 
knowledge as to scientific agriculture. The farm is a factory 
and in the profits of its output will be reflected the skill with 
which its operations are managed. 

Electric light and power are used everywhere else in our 
industries and it is only through lack of confidence in the possi- 
bilities of success in farming as a business that anyone would 
be justified in denying this great improvement to the farmer. 

The points which Mr. Shane raises come really under the heads 


1912] DISCUSSION AT BOSTON 2013 


, 


of “ farm management ”’ and “ plant design.’’ And the answer 
as to whether any particular farm should be electrified or not 
must rest with the farmer himself. I need only add, as a guide 
to anyone in such a position, that the value of the farm as a pro- 
ducing proposition should be determined and its operating con- 
ditions noted. If then the business enterprise is of sufficient 
magnitude or of such character as to justify an important im- 
provement for safety against fire risk, or for improved and in- 
creased production with greater economy of operation, then find 
a way to electrify and carry this as far as the state of the art 
may permit, or as far as one experienced in these matters would 
advise. 


A paper presented at the 276th Meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, October 11, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


THE USE OF REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS 


BY W. S. MOODY 

Until recently, reactance in transformers was considered only 
as an objectionable characteristic. To this there was one minor 
exception, which will be referred to later on, in connection with 
transformers to furnish constant current for arc lighting; but 
in general, because of its detrimental effect on regulation, react- 
ance in transformers has been considered something to be 
avoided, and the more it was avoided the better was the trans- 
former supposed to be fitted to its use. 

Recently, however, in connection with the use of larger units 
in generating stations, and higher voltages in transmission lines, 
reactance in other parts of electrical installations has become 
less and less, until a short circuit in such a system may result 
in such a tremendous flow of current, that some means of limiting 
the possible current rush through the system has become impera- 
tive. The most natural remedy is to replace in the system, by 
the transformer, some of the reactance that has been taken out. 

Reactance has commonly been used as a means of obtaining a 
variable ratio of transformation between the source of supply and 
the collector rings of synchronous converters, but when more 
than 3 or 4 per cent reactance is desired for this purpose, it has 
been customary to use separate reactance coils between the trans- 
formers and the converter. A very satisfactory method of 
obtaining as high as 15 to 20 per cent reactance for this purpose 
in the transformer itself, has been recently developed. 

It is the object of this paper to discuss in a general way how 
reactance can be introduced into transformers for the purposes 
mentioned above, to point out some of the difficulties and limita- 
tions which are met in obtaining the desired results, and to show 

2015 


2016 MOODY: REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS  [Oct. 11 


how effectively some of the problems connected therewith have 
been solved. 

As all know, a transformer would have no reactance when 
under load if all the lines of force created by its primary threaded 
through the secondary and if all the lines linking the secondary 
also linked the primary. Such a complete interlocking of the 
primary and secondary fluxes is, of course, impossible, a portion 
of the fluxes always passing through the spaces between the pri- 
mary and secondary coils. 

The percentage of the total flux that links with the primary 
but does not link with the secondary coil, plus that which links 
with the secondary but does not link with the primary, is the 
per cent of reactance of the transformer. That is, when 99 per 
cent of the primary flux cuts both primary and secondary, the 
transformer is said to have 1 per cent reactance, and when 90 
per cent, only, cuts both primary and secondary, it has 10 per 
cent reactance. 

Calculations for reactance are made by an equation of the 
form: 

Reactance volts = 


(Turns)? X Current X Area of leakage path 
Length of leakage path X (No. of groups)? 


x aconstant (1) 


From this formula, it is evident that reactance for a given 
size of transformer may be decreased, 

a. By decreasing the total number of turns in primary and 
secondary. 

b. By decreasing the length of turn, with a corresponding 
increase in the flux density in the core, or by decreasing the dis- 
tance between primary and secondary windings. 

c. By increasing the dimensions of the windings in the direc- 
tion in which the leakage flux passes through the wire space. 

d. By increasing the number of groups of intermixed pri- 
maries and secondaries, the number of turns in each group being 
correspondingly reduced. 

So much effort has been put forth in designing transformers 
of the lowest possible reactance consistent with reasonable ex- 
pense in the matter of insulation and efficient proportioning 
of the various parts, that one would naturally think that if low 
reactance was not desired, it would be a much easier problem 
to make a transformer. 

Several difficulties are met, however, in the design of trans- 


1912] MOODY: REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS 2017 


formers with high reactance, principal among which are an extra 
loss in the conductors due to eddy currents, an increase in me- 
chanical strains under overloads, and difficulties in multipling 
different sections of the windings. Some of the leakage flux 
between the primary and secondary windings must pass through 
the conductors of the windings themselves, resulting in an 
inequality of the e.m.fs. generated in different parts of the same 
conductor. This gives a distorted distribution of current, pro- 
ducing a copper loss, in addition to the calculated /?R loss, which 
is roughly proportional to the square of the density of the leakage 
flux, and to the square of the width of the conductor in a direction 
at right angles to the leakage field. Unless the width of the 
conductors is small, therefore, high densities of leakage flux are 
not permissible, on account of the resulting abnormal copper loss, 
and the corresponding increase in heating, and decrease in 
efficiency. 

Perhaps the first use of high reactance in transformers was 
that referred to above, to obtain in the secondary, constant 
current rather than constant potential for purposes of arc light- 
ing. Here, however, not a constant reactance but a variable 
one was needed. High reactance was here obtained without high 
densities in the leakage flux, by providing a large cross-sectional 
area of the leakage field rather than many turns; and since the 
conductors were not large, no especial difficulty was experienced 
with eddy currents. The increased reactance for partial load 
conditions in these transformers is obtained by moving the 
primary farther and farther away from the secondary, so that 
the leakage flux is increased by increasing the area of cross-section 
of its field, the density remaining constant. 

This method of obtaining high reactance is very expensive 
because of the great length of core that is necessary to surround 
this idle space, in addition to surrounding the copper and insula- 
tion, and is prohibitive in large units. The reactance that can 
be obtained economically, without a density of leakage flux which 
is not too high from the standpoint of eddy current loss, varies 
with the voltage of the transformer, for the higher the voltage the 
greater the distance that must necessarily exist between primary 
and secondary windings for insulation purposes, and therefore the 
greater the amount of flux that can be carried through this space 
without serious eddies in the copper. Thus it may be as easy 
to make a transformer with 10 per cent reactance when wound 
for 100,000 volts as for 5 per cent reactance when wound for 


2018 MOODY: REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS [Oct. 11 


25,000 volts, due to the broader path that exists for the reactive 
flux in the high-voltage design. 

As a general proposition, it may be said that it is usually 
impractical to get more than 8 per cent reactance in 60-cycle 
transformers without undue eddy current losses, and that the 
allowable maximum would be considerably less than this in low- 
voltage designs. For lower frequency, higher reactance may 
be practical, since eddy current losses are, of course, less at a 
given density. 

It has recently become customary to specify that the trans- 
former must not have less than, say 5 per cent reactance, for 
the protection of transformers, switches, generators, and in 
fact all parts of the system, against the high mechanical stresses 
due to excessive currents. It is not always appreciated, how- 
ever, that limiting the current in this way, while protecting other 
apparatus, does not necessarily make the transformer any 
safer to withstand overload conditions. 

Calculations for the mechanical stresses in the transformer 
may be made by the equation: 

Mechanical stress = 


(Turns)? X (Current)? 
(Length of leakage path)? X (Number of groups)’ 


xX aconstant (2) 


where the groups are all alike; or where the groups are not alike, 
Mechanical stress = 


(Turns)? X (Currents)? 
(Length of leakage path)? 


x a constant, (3) 


where the turns considered are not the total of the transformer, 
but the turns in that group which has the maximum number. 

From the above equations, it may be seen that when high 
reactance is obtained by massing the turns in a small number of 
groups, the “turns” factor of the expression for mechanical 
stress is increased, though the ‘‘ current ” factor at short circuit 
is reduced. If the groups are not kept equal to each other, 
the maximum stress, which occurs in the maximum group, and 
which produces the forces that are felt by the core and coil 
supports, is likely to be actually greater under short-circuit 
conditions for a high-reactance transformer than for a low-re- 
actance one. 

With equal numbers of turns in all the groups, the forces will 
be greater for the low-reactance transformer than for the high- 


1912} MOODY: REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS 2019 


reactance one at absolute short circuit with full voltage main- 
tained on the primary terminals, although not enough greater to 
make a very serious difference in any case where the supports are 
designed to supply a proper factor of safety for the high-reactance 
transformer. Moreover, with a definite fixed current flowing, 
the force will be much smaller for the low-reactance transformer 
than for the high-reactance one, and with a comparatively small 
external impedance, in addition to the impedance of the trans- 
— + former, the force due to short 
| circuit becomes lessforthelow- 
reactance transformer than 
for the high-reactance one. 
: From the above it will be 
Se Nee seen that very little is to be 
=| gained from the standpoint of 
safety to the transformer by 
Pa i “| the introduction of high re- 
iis ih actance within the trans- 
T | former itself. It is true that 
+ this would protect other parts 
eo | | of the system, but the addi- 
| tional reactance would be 
| | equally as effective for this 
purpose outside of the trans- 
former as inside of it. 
yeaah | | This is illustrated by Fig. 1, 
which shows the mechanical 
| stresses under short-circuit 
+ === conditions, in a transformer 
3 4 6 8 cee) designed for 2 per cent re- 
PER CENT EXTERNAL REACTANCE ieee ndmearetheacame 
Fic. 1—Errect oF EXTERNAL RE- transformer when redesigned 
ACTANCE ON MECHANICAL FORCES f,. 5 per cent reactance. 
ME SSE ae a It is assumed that constant 
voltage is maintained at the primary terminals. With normal 
current only flowing, the mechanical stresses in the high-re- 
actance design are higher than in the low-reactance design, 
but when short circuit occurs at the secondary terminals, the 
stress is higher in the low-reactance design. This is shown 
on the curve for zero external reactance. With the addi- 
tion of about 1 per cent external reactance, the curves cross, 
and with further increase in external reactance, the high-re- 


MECHANICAL STRESS 


0 


2020 MOODY: REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS (Oct. 11 


actance transformer is subjected to the greatest strains. With 
3 per cent external reactance added to the low-reactance_ de- 
sign and none to the high-reactance design, thus making the 
total in both cases 5 per cent, the stress in the former is only about 
one-fourth as great as that in the latter. 

When short circuit occurs at some distance from the trans- 
former, the reactance of the lines adds to the transformer re- 
actance and serves to reduce the stresses on the transformer. 
In fact, in this case the line resistance also assists, and a smaller 
value of external reactance will cause the two curves to cross 
and the stresses in the low-reactance design to become less than 
those in the high-reactance design. 

The effort to obtain sufficient reactance for current limiting 
purposes in an auto-transformer is a more difficult problem. 
These are frequently used for a one-to-two ratio of transforma- 
tion, as, for instance, in stepping up the voltage of a 10,000-volt 
generator to 20,000 volts. Here the auto-transformer has only 
half the rating of the generator, and the effect of its reactance 
on the system is only one-half that of its own inherent reactance. 
In some cases where it is necessary to get the equipment in the 
smallest possible space or keep to the lowest possible costs, 
it is necessary to be satisfied with what current-limiting reactance 
can be placed in the system by such an auto-transformer, but 
an exceedingly rigid design of coil supports then becomes neces- 
sary. 

When greater amounts of reactance are desired for flexibility 
in ratio of transformation, as for use with synchronous conver- 
ters, the result can be obtained by placing a laminated iron 
structure between primary and secondary in such a way as to 
form a path for the leakage flux. If this iron path is of such a 
section as to carry the flux corresponding to the desired reactance 
without approaching saturation, the copper will be entirely 
shielded from eddy currents, and the transformer’s reactance 
may be increased almost without limit. It is evident, however, 
that the use of such a device does not extend the possibility 
of current-limiting reactance, as the amount of iron that would 
be necessary to carry the entire flux on short circuit would 
result in a prohibitive amount of reactance, from a regulation 
standpoint, at normal loads. 

It is interesting to note that this use of an iron path for the 
reactive flux, as well as the high-reactance design in which the 
flux is entirely within the air space between primary and second- 


1912] MOODY: REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS 2021 


ary, was first developed in connection with arc lighting apparatus, 
where transformers with a fixed high reactance were used to 
obtain regulation characteristics approaching constant current. 
The proportioning of these flux shunts for transformers with 


\ 


\\ ly t/] 


S 


MAGNETIC 
SHUNT 


GROUNDING 
STRIP 


INSULATING 
CYLINDER 


HIGH 
TENSION 


Fic. 2—D1IAGRAM OF CoRE TYPE HIGH-RESISTANCE TRANSFORMER 


regulating reactance is an interesting and not altogether easy 
problem, and it may be of sufficient interest, in view of the fact 
that it has been so recently reduced to practise, to be worthy of 


comment here. 


2022 - MOODY: REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS  [Oct. 11 


Evidently there must be as many shunts as there are spaces 
between primary and secondary groups. Evidently, also, the 
section of these shunts must bear the same relation to the section 
of the core of the transformer as the reactance voltage bears 
to the full voltage of the transformer—this on the assumption 
that the density in the shunt at full load is to be the same as the 
normal density in the core at normal voltage. However, it is 
usually the case that if a straight line characteristic is to be ob- 
tained in the reactance, say, up to 50 per cent overload, the sec- 
tion of each of these shunts must be somewhat larger than this; 


3H CI 


f Z SHUNT y 
seo a 


—blconoslel— 


Fic. 3—D1AGRAM OF SHELL TyPE HIGH-RESISTANCE TRANSFORMER 


that is, for 15 per cent reactance the section of the shunt will 
have to be perhaps 20 per cent of the section of the transformer 
core. 

Again, it is necessary to have air gaps in this circuit: First, 
because a straight line characteristic can not be obtained with 
any magnetic circuit that is a closed iron circuit; and second, 
because in any group of ampere turns that would be practical, 
a sufficient magnetomotive force would be obtained to over- 
saturate the shunt circuit at full load if there were only the reluc- 
tance of the iron circuit to limit the flux. It should be noted 


PLATE CXxIll 


VOL. XXXI, 1912 


SNIGNIM GNV SLYOddNS 


‘AOD AO INANAONVAAY ONIMOHS AONVLOVAY ONILIWI]-LINAXAND—E “OI 
{Aadoon] 


AONVLOVAY ONILINIT 
-INAUUND AIOD ALAAONOD AAW ]--fF “Og 


[Aadoow] 


vi 
,& 


\ 
\ 


Se PCCTUUARRLULLEY YY 


_ 
_ 
— 
— 
—_ 
— 
~ 
er 
_ 
~ 


ECE ELE EEE ETLEE 


1912] MOODY: REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS 2023 


that the loss in these shunts is not a constant one like core loss, 
but varies with the load; consequently, it affects efficiency as 
if it were a copper loss. However, the loss in the shunts is small 
as their weight is very small compared with the weight of the 
core. 

Figs. 2 and 3 illustrate the manner in which these flux shunts 
are placed in core type and shell type designs, respectively. 

Figs. 4 and 5 show the general appearance of the concrete 
core external reactances which have been developed and suc- 
cessfully used in large power systems to limit the flow of current 
at short circuit. 


? Katt aat 


A paper presented at the 276th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, October 11, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


THE EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE UPON THE 
HYSTERESIS LOSS IN SHEET STEEL 


BY MALCOLM MAC LAREN 


In the paper which the writer presented before the Institute 
last year upon this subject* it was shown that there was no 
apparent change in the law governing the variation of the hys- 
teresis loss with the induction for all temperatures from atmos- 
pheric up to near the point where the steel became non-mag- 
netic. The writer suggested at that time that the rate of heating 
the sample might affect the change in hysteresis loss with chang- 
ing temperature and the measurements described below were 
carried out to investigate this point. It was thought also that 
some additional light might be thrown on this subject if hys- 
teresis loops were obtained from the sample near the non- 
magnetic temperature. This had not been done in the previous 
tests as the samples had been prepared for the two-frequency 
method of measurement in order to obtain results quickly at any 
temperature over as wide a range of induction as possible. An 
attempt was made at that time to obtain a few characteristic 
loops at high temperatures, but the use of iron wire for the sec- 
ondary winding on the sample introduced errors on account of 
variable thermal currents in the galvanometer circuit which 
could not be readily eliminated. It was also found that the 
insulation resistance between primary and secondary at high 
temperatures was not sufficiently good to permit measurements 
by the galvanometer method, although no error could be de- 
tected from this source with the two-frequency wattmeter 
method. ' 


*Transactions A. I. E. E., 1911, Vol. XXX, I, page 761. 
2025 


2026 MACLAREN: HYSTERESIS LOSS [Oct. 11 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 


In the present investigations the measurements were made by 
the method of slow reversals as described in the previous paper. 
The arrangement of connections for the test is shown in Fig. 1. 
The hysteresis loop is obtained by first applying a magnetizing 
force H to the sample by passing a current through the primary 
winding. It is advisable to reverse this current several times 
before taking the observations in order to make sure that the in- 
duction in the sample is in a stable condition. The galvano- 
meter switch should be open during these reversals. The gal- 
vanometer is then connected across the secondary winding and by 
inserting resistance in the primary circuit the magnetizing force 
is reduced at such a rate as to keep a constant deflection on the 
galvanometer. At the end of 10 seconds, or any convenient 
time interval, the ammeter reading and galvanometer deflection 
are recorded. At this point the galvanometer deflection may be 
altered and then held at aconstant value for 10 seconds, when the 
ammeter and galvanometer readings are again noted. This 
process is continued until the current is reduced to zero, reversed 
and gradually increased until it reaches the same value as at the 
beginning of the test. The galvanometer readings then give a 
complete record of the change of induction for a complete re- 
versal of the magnetizing force and the ammeter readings give 
the corresponding values for the magnetizing force. In c. g. s. 
units the change in induction B during any interval is obtained 
from the following expression: 


k6t10° 


Bremner feet 


where k = galvanometer constant 


6 = galvanometer deflection 

t = time interval (10 seconds) 

S = number of secondary turns 
2T% 

also H = ———— 
ie Se 
where A = area of cross-section of sample in square centi- 
meters 
T = number of primary turns 
4 = amperes in prinary winding 


r = mean radius. of sample. 


he) MACLAREN: HYSTERESIS LOSS 2027 


The maximum value of B for any reversal may be found from 
the following expression: 


k Atl108 


Mitnick 2S AC 


where Ais the sum of the deflections for a complete reversal. 

It should be noted that one reversal of the current gives one- 
half of the hysteresis loop. If the observations are accurate 
this is sufficient, as the other half is symmetrical with it. In 
all of these measurements, however, except at the maximum 
temperatures, the observations were carried through the entire 
cycle or double reversal, in order to check the accuracy of the 
results. 

It was found in practise that it was not always possible to 
keep the galvanometer deflection constant between readings 
and in such cases the average deflection was noted. The 


1960 OHMS 


= 1500 750 96 36 18 
OHMS OHMS OHMS OHMS OHMS 


Fie. 1 


time required for going through the cycle was minimized 
without loss in accuracy by using larger deflections in the 
middle of a reversal than were permissible at the beginning and 
end. 

Test Samples. Two samples were tested, each consisting 
of a number of sheet steel rings. The inside diameter was 25.4 
em. and mean diameter 26.66 cm. Sample 1 consisted of a 
commercial steel used for pole punchings. The average thick- 
ness of the sheets was 0.693 mm. Sample 2 consisted of high- 
silicon transformer steel, the average thickness of plate being 
0.348 mm. Sample 1 had a primary winding of 160 turns 
of No. 18 iron wire and a secondary of 50 turns of No. 20 copper 
wire. The cross-section was 6.165 square cm. and the weight 
3.989 kg. Sample 2 had a primary winding of 168 turns and 
a secondary of 50 turns, both of the same wire as before. The 


- 


2028 MACLAREN: HYSTERESIS LOSS [Oct. 11 


cross-section was 6.585 square cm. and the weight was 3.989 kg. 
In each case the rings were separated at the center by U-shaped 
spacing strips to allow the introduction of ‘thermocouples. The 
secondary was first wound on the sample and was insulated from 
it by sheet asbestos and mica. It was then covered with a thin 
layer of Portland cement, and a second layer of asbestos and 
mica. The primary was then wound over this and distributed 
as uniformly as possible around the ring. As the secondary 
covered only about } of the ring, the inside surface of the re- 
mainder was padded with asbestos to the same thickness as the 
secondary in order to assist in obtaining an even spacing of the 
primary turns. The whole sample was then covered with a 
second layer of Portland cement. The use of copper wire for 
the secondary absolutely eliminated the thermal e.m.f. which had 


Fic. 2 


been present in the earlier samples. As anticipated, however, 
it did not prove to be durable for such high temperature work. 
After one heating oxidation increased the resistance about 25 
per cent and the wire became so brittle that on one sample the 
terminal broke off upon removing it from the furnace. The 
change in resistance introduced no error in the observations as 
the resistance at start was only 0.3 ohm, and total resistance of 
the galvanometer circuit was 2450 ohms, 

The insulation resistance between primary and secondary 
was about 200 megohms when cold and fell to less than one 
megohm at the maximum temperature. At these extreme 
temperatures it was possible to detect a mere trace of leakage 
from primary to secondary, but this only occurred with high 


1912] MACLAREN: HYSTERESIS LOSS 2029 


values of exciting current and was so small as to introduce no 
appreciable error in the results. 

Electric Furnace. The same furnace was used as in the earlier 
experiments. This consisted of concentric heating coils arran ged 
to give as uniform a temperature as possible in the heating 
chamber. The temperature was measured by platinum-iridium 
thermocouples, introduced into the sample through small holes 
cut in the walls of the furnace. 


RESULTS 


Sample No. 1. In this series of measurements the tempera- 
ture was increased quickly and then held practically constant 
while a set of observations sufficient for one complete cycle was 


op) 
4 
(op) 
S14 = 
oO 
rs) 
1.2 —| a 
E10 aa 
6 8 —- =e el 
x 15/2 HOURS L085 
x 6 
WW 
oO 
on A + 
| 
SD 
<< 
re = 
100. 200. +300 400 + 500 
DEGREES C. 
‘Fic. 3 


being made. During the earlier part of the run the temperature 
was held constant for an hour or more and then a second set of ob- 
servations was made. When it was noted, however, that the 
losses did not change appreciably during such intervals, the later 
measurements were made without holding the temperature con- 
stant longer than was necessary for one set of observations. The 
effect of aging when a constant high temperature is maintained 
for a longer period was well illustrated during this run by keeping 
the sample at about 186 deg. cent. during one night. 
Representative hysteresis loops taken during this run are 
shown in Fig. 2 and the results of the complete series are given 
in Table I. The losses are also plotted with reference to tem- 
perature in Fig. 3. These are reduced to a constant induction of 


2030 MACLAREN: HYSTERESIS LOSS [Oct. 11 


10,000, on the assumption that the loss will vary as the 1.6 power 
of the induction. 


TABLE I 
| Watts cor- 
Magnet- Watts per kg.| rected for 
Time Temperature | Induction izing force at 25 cycles 10,000 B 
i 
| 
— 
/ | 
2.45p.m.| 25deg.cent. | 10357B | 3.6 H 1.4 1.33 
Bio) Mee 116 . 10686 “* | 3.0; an 1.355 1.23 
S:40G-* 186 . Li5OG1e? 4 S605 1.225 0.98 
§:00...* 186 £ abaya 3 167 n 1.235 0.99 
9.15 a.m. 186 a 11428. “ Sa SR ae 1.43 1.16 
LOetoe: = 260 ¢ | 11457 neal a. Gat 1.255 1.01 
1120 5% 300 : thor oa 346e.* 1.037 0.841 
12.35 p.m. 392 $ 10936 “ Res 0.85 0.738 
22250 ¥* 389 - 10913 “ 32054 0.851 0.738 
CAT ie 502 ® i 106767" 3.857 27 O.coe 0.598 
AP Gieee 562 ks LA TISO Rey 4.08 “ 0.613 0.517 
A500" 640 ! |. 10986 * | 4.08 “ 0.489 0.421 
On 708 % | 10340 “. | 4.08 “ 0.268 0.252 
piAO Ls* 748 . | 10149 “ 4,08 “-| 0.1665 0.164 
DADO. a 777 “ | 5952 * 4.08) 0.0474 0.109 


Sample No.2. The observations were made upon this sample 
without holding the temperature constant for any extended 
period, except at noon, and the measurements immediately be- 
fore and after this period were practically the same. Some of 
the hysteresis loops taken during this test are shown in Fig. 4 
and the variation of the loss with the temperature is shown in 
Fig. 5. The results are given in detail in Table IT. 


— 


TABLE II 
| > > en ln ‘a 
| } Watts cor- 
| | | Magnetiz- | Watts per kg.| rected for 
Time Temperature | Induction ing force at 25 cycles 9000 B 
8.00 a.m. | 25 deg. cent. 9787 B 2.52 H 0.652 © 0.572 
9.50 “ 134 “ | ‘9270 # 2.52 * "|' 0,584 0.556 
10.40 “ 225 ° samo" 25652731) | #40, 626 0.544 
114.38) 304 “ | 8719 “ 2177 a) mi OU488 0.511 
12.20 p.m | 408 ‘ | gag2 « Sti) We 0.507 0.437 
2.35 “ | 395 «“ | 8472“ 2.77 « 0.397 0.438 
$140 “ 542 ¢ sagt 4 ec02008 0.342 0.391 
4,20) 5% 610 : 8651 « 3730. * 0.228 0.243 
5.454 725 “ 6818 “ Bist yo 0.0525 0.082 
5.55“ 735 « 43805. 5 raRot et 0.0185 0.058 
6.05 “ 745 . | 1193. 3: Amos 0.00 0.00 


1912] MACLAREN: HYSTERESIS LOSS 2031 


Comparing the results in the two cases it is seen that there are 
certain variations in the shape of the loss curves although the 
general trend is the same. These variations are quite as likely 
to be a function of the previous heat treatment of the samples as 


> 

S 

re) 
| 


Fic. 4 


of their chemical composition. It will be seen that the nigh- 
silicon steel becomes non-magnetic at a lower temperature than 
the ordinary steel and also that its permeability falls with 
increasing temperature throughout the test, while with sample 


ca a7 ea ae ea a 
zit 10 
& 

asl ij if i {— L_<w 9 
iB a) | 8 
S [eee rect lhe ' 
= 
o) ap) 
ro LOSS +} + 6a 
N A =) 
eis sa Brag 
ot — eI 4 
ned 
a3 }— 3 
: | aS ; 
nee ai | i N [ ‘i 2 
nes 
A + 7 1 
E zi 
= 100 200 300 600 700 500 


400 500 
DEGREES C. 
Ei1e.25 


No. 1 the permeability first rises and then falls away with 
increasing temperature. No special significance should be at- 
tached to this last point, however, as an inspection of the hystere- 
sis loops would indicate that if lower inductions had been used 
the permeability would have first increased with the temperature 


2032 : MACLAREN: HYSTERESIS LOSS [Oct. 11 


in both cases. Both sets of experiments show that the tempera- 
ture may be held constant for an hour or more at a time during 
the run without appreciably changing the hysteresis loss. 

Cooling Curves. <A series of observations made upon sample 
No. 1 as it was coming into the magnetic state is shown in Fig. 
6. The temperature was falling slowly while these observations 
were being made and as the permeability varies rapidly with 
the temperature during this critical period it was apparent 
that magnetic changes were occurring in the sample while the 
test was being made, so that the value of B for the maximum H 
was not the same at the end as at the beginning of the reversal, 
and a true hysteresis loop could not be plotted. An at- 


| | | 
: OBSERVED WALUE S| 
CORRECTED VALUES 


Fic, 6 


tempt was made, however, to correct approximately for 
this in the second set of observations by considering the general 
shape of the curve, from which it appeared that the induction 
at start was about 2500 lines. This would. mean that about 
1430 lines were added to the circuit during the observations 
through change in temperature. Assuming that this change 
occurred fairly uniformly with the time, each observation 
may be corrected to show the approximate induction which 
would have existed with constant temperature by multiplying 
1430 by the ratio of the time from the start to the time of the 
entire reversal and subtracting this from the observed value of B. 
In this way a complete loop, as shown in broken lines in Fig. 6, 
was obtained. - 


1912] MACLAREN: HYSTERESIS LOSS 2033 


Little importance could be attached to a single set of obser- 
vations corrected in this way except as they are confirmed by tests 
upon sample No. 2. In this case the temperature fell very slowly 
and the time required for taking the observations for 
one reversal was about one minute, so that the slight 
changes occurring in the magnetic state during the reversal could 
not materially alter the shape of the hysteresis loop. Three 
such loops are shown in Fig. 7 and it is seen that they have much 
the same character as the loop shown in Rigas 6. «lhe 


Fic. 7 


difference in the character of the reversal during heating and 
cooling is well illustrated by comparison with the dotted line 
which reproduces in the proper scale the last reversal with rising 
temperature as shown in Fig. 5. When the temperature fell to 
735 deg. cent. the loops became normal. The writer regrets that 
he has been unable to make further investigations to verify 
these observations, for if these figures represent true magnetic 
cycles they show a peculiar molecular condition for the material 
near the critical temperature. 


2034 MACLAREN: HYSTERESIS LOSS [Oct. 11 


Critical Temperature. In the earlier experiments with alter- 
nating current the temperature at which the material became 
non-magnetic was quite clearly defined, but in these tests with 
a sensitive galvanometer it was possible to detect a trace of 
magnetism in both samples eight or ten degrees above the tem- 
perature at which the induction ceased to be measurable. With 
alternating current it appeared that the material returned to 
magnetic state at the same temperature as it became non-mag- 
netic, while in these later tests, at the lowest measurable induc- 
tion the temperature was about 10 deg. lower upon cooling than 
for the same induction and magnetizing force with rising tem- 
perature. Such differences may be due to lack of uniform 
temperature throughout the sample in every case, or possibly 
the continued application of an alternating magnetizing force may 
assist the material in regaining its magnetic properties. This point 
was investigated further with sample No. 2 by maintaining a con- 
stant magnetizing current in the primary while the material was 
passing through the critical temperature during both heating and 
cooling. As the induction fell, through the loss inpermeability,an 
e.m.f. was generated in the secondary which could be observed with 
the galvanometer. In order to get a measurable deflection under 
such conditions it was necessary to remove the external resistance 
from the galvanometer circuit and the leakage between the pri- 
mary and secondary circuits then caused a deflection of several 
millimeters in the galvanometer, and it was not possible to sharply 
define the point at which the galvanometer deflection became 
zero due to the reduction of the permeability of the sample to 
unity, but with rising temperature, this occurred at approxi- 
mately 750 deg. cent. and with falling temperature a reversal in 
the galvanometer deflection, indicating a rising permeability, 
could first be detected at 740 deg. cent. The maximum deflec- 
tion corresponding to the point at which the permeability changed 
most quickly with the temperature occurred at 745 deg. cent. 
with rising temperature and 715 deg. cent. with falling tempera- 
ture. This experiment is of further interest in showing a new, 
though scarcely a commercial, method, of producing an e.m.f. by 
magnetic induction in which there is no movement of conduct- 
ors in the magnetic field nor change in magnetizing current. For 
if a continuous current is maintained in the primary circuit and 
the temperatures are successively raised and lowered through the 
critical point an alternating e.m.f. will be produced in the 
secondary. 


1912] MACLAREN: HYSTERESIS LOSS 2035 


At temperatures below the critical point the magnetic charac- 
teristics during heating and cooling soon coincide. In Fig. 7 it 
is seen that sample No. 2 has practically the same permeability 
for rising temperature at 745 deg. cent. as for falling at 739 deg. 
cent. At 725 deg. cent. no difference in either permeability or 
character of loop could be detected. 


2036 REACTANCE AND HYSTERESIS [Oct. 11 


Discusston on “ THE Usk oF REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS ”” 
(Moopy) AND ‘ THe Errect OF TEMPERATURE UPON THE 
Hysteresis Loss IN SHEET STEEL” (MACLAREN). NEw 
York, OctroBer 11, 1912. 


Philip Torchio: Mr. Moody states that outside reactances 
are equally effective and in practise superior to reactance within 
the transformer. Different attempts have been made to obtain 
a design of such reactances that would give the best results as to 
economy and safety, and also meet with the operation and in- 
stallation requirements in stations. Mr. Moody gives in Figs. 
4 and 5 views of a drum-wound reactance of large capacity. I 
desire to describe a design of reactance which has certain im- 
portant features that might be of interest to the Institute mem- 
bers. 

These characteristic features are: 

1. The adoption of the pancake winding instead of the drum 
winding. 

2. The adoption of an enclosed case and supports of fireproof 
and insulating materials throughout. 

By means of these two features several marked advantages 
are obtained. 

The pancake-wound coil can be designed more efficiently, and 
for the same floor space, of considerably less height than an 
equivalent drum-wound reactance. This is due to the fact that 
windings and layers can be placed closer together for the same 
potential gradient between layers. It is also a well known fact 
that for the same outside diameter, the shorter the coil the greater 
the reactance for a given number of turns. These two facts 
combined make the drum-wound coil, for approximately the 
same per cent reactance and the same floor space, about twice as 
high as an equivalent pancake-wound coil. This causes a greater 
leakage of flux, which creates a greater tendency to eddy current 
losses and requires a greater length of conductor and consequently 
more heating and losses. 

The adoption of a coil with porcelain supports and self-en- 
closed in a case made up of fireproof and insulating materials 
gives a greater factor of safety and other obvious practical ad- 
vantages to the user. 

These self-enclosed, self-cooled reactances are built of hori- 
zontally wound spirals supported and insulated by porcelain 
arms with suitable recesses for the windings; the arms are as- 
sembled radially as vertical walls between a center core of alberene 
stone and outer enclosing wall built up of special porcelain seg- 
ments. These cellular compartments as formed allow natural 
ventilation for the coil. The whole is supported at the two ends 
by heavy concrete headers, securely fastened to the wall by a 
series of brass bolts passing through the heads and the special 
porcelain segments from top to bottom. Ventilating holes cro- 
respond with each vertical cellular compartment of the coils. - 


PLATE CXXIV 
AG No EA ES 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


ices i [ToRCHIO] 


RR NALS 


Hid. 2 {[rorcuH10} 


PLATE CXXV 
A, 1. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


{(ToRCHIO] 


4 


Fic. 


[rorcHro] 


Fic. 3 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2037 


The heating is very small and considerably less than the heat- 
ing of the generator itself, which was accomplished by a special 
treatment and design of the stranded conductors. These con- 
ductors are also insulated throughout to prevent short circuits 
from foreign objects falling or being drawn into the coil. Each 
coil is tested to ground at five times the working potential. 

Figs. 1 and 2 show the separate pieces and an assembly section 
of the different insulating materials for encasing the coil. Fig. 3 
shows a top view of a coil under construction, showing the way 
the winding is laid in the porcelain arms. The brass rods are 
insulated by mica tubes throughout their length. Fig. 4 is a 
photograph of a set of three coils in service. The coils are rest- 
ing upon eight small concrete pillars and insulators to allow air 
space for natural ventilation. The over-all dimensions are 59 in. 
(1.5 m.) in diameter and 55 in. (1.4 m.) in height. The winding 
inside the case is 45 in. (1.14 m.) diameter and the height over 
copper is 80 in. (0.76 m.) 

The same design is used for different sizes of generators and 
different frequencies, the only changes required being in the 
number, size and shape of slots in the radial arms, and the num- 
ber of layers assembled in one coil. 

The following table gives the constants of a set of reactances 
operating on three 20,000-kw., 6600-volt, 25-cycle generators in- 
stalled by the New York Edison Company. The table also 
gives the results for the same coil at 624 cycles; the latter to be 
used for a sectionalizing bus reactance in a large station. 


: 623 Cycles 25 Cycles 
INiimiberiofettanns: cos... fetvsalaaeostns 34. 34. 
Reactance in OHMS) ,......< 6 + sin wae 9% 0.227 0.0914 
Reactance in per'cent............-. 10.4 per cent 4.2 per cent 
Equivalent resistance............. 0.00254 0.00204 
ONMUC KESISEANCE 50.56/56 o sista ees as 0.00197 0.00195 
Calculated a-c, resistance.......... 0.00215 0.00198 
CG wrrentcaetsa nis cievoccus oreisusrs acsysioer aloe 1750. amps. 1750. amps. 
HETRMOSSOS Fetes eine Fee eT coe ah 6.57 kw. per coil 6.05 kw. per coil 
Poweawlt POsses) sc pick cle c ose viele weed 1.17 kw. per coil 0.186 kw. per coil 
SRO BAL OSSES Sater voi ovs eres proto eres a imlere 7.81 kw. per coil 6.236 kw. per coil 
Temperature rise full load 3 hours 43.7 deg. cent. 33. deg, cent. 


L. W. Chubb (by letter): Professor MacLaren’s paper is cer- 
tainly a valuable addition to the general knowledge of the in- 
fluence of heat upon the magnetic properties of sheet steel. Such 
papers on magnetic phenomena not only add the data given but 
are unusually fruitful because of the suggestions for future work. 

The paper by the same author last year was of great value 
because it showed that the law of variation between loss and 
magnetic induction was practically the same at all temperatures. 
The suggestion made that rate of heating probably affected the 
change in loss has been covered briefly by the paper under dis- 
cussion, but the relation between loss and temperature, as a 
function of rate of temperature change, is too involved, and 
depends upon too many variables, to be disclosed by a few tests 


2038 REACTANCE AND HYSTERESIS (Oct. 11 


on a few samples of steel. The general trend of the curve is 
shown by the tests and some very interesting points have been 
brought out because the author not only gives results of the 
hysteresis or loop area, but has given the actual loops and thereby 
shown the relation between permeability and temperature. The 
changes in shape of the hysteresis loops and the odd shapes at the 
magnetic-point are very interesting. 

In the work with which I have been connected, a limited 
number of experiments were made to find the effect of rate of 
change of temperature upon the loss at different temperatures, 
and to determine if any great change in the cycle of temperature 
would have its effect upon the losses. The results were too vari- 
able to be of value and it.was necessary to study only the effect 
of the heat cycle upon the losses at atmospheric temperatures 
before and after heating. This of course is the familiar problem 
of annealing. Within certain limits of temperatures the rate of 
change in temperature has the opposite effect upon the instan- 
taneous value of the loss. A pause in temperature at some values 
will have no effect on the loss, at others it will raise such loss, and 
at others it will lower the loss. Tests show that although such 
holding of temperature may not change the loss at the given 
temperature it will change the loss at other temperatures. Also 
at certain points a pause in temperature that will appreciably 
age the steel at the given point while held constant will cause a 
lowering of the intrinsic loss at other temperatures, other parts 
of the temperature cycle being the same. 

The study of temperature cycles on the final losses at tem- 
peratures at which laminated cores operate is ofthe greatest 
importance and it is this study which will probably result in the 
greatest improvements in sheet steel in the near future. 

The arrangement of samples which was used under test may be 
of interest. The first tests were made upon small shell-type 
punchings built into coils of asbestos-covered wire. The results 
were not accurate but were relative. The later tests were made 
by placing a ring sample around the leg of a large transformer 
core and heating it as a short-circuited secondary. The sample 
was taped with several layers of asbestos tape and wound with a 
primary and secondary of asbestos-covered wire. The tem- 
perature of the ring sample was very uniform and could easily 
be controlled by variation of flux in the transformer core. The 
sample was so well heat-insulated that the windings were rel- 
atively cool and gave no oxidation trouble. The wattmeter 
method was used in both cases. 

Professor MacLaren’s loops are certainly a recommendation 
for the method of “ slow reversals ”’ and the points plotted seem 
to show great accuracy. I believe that the results are worthy of 
careful analysis and that it is to be regretted that all of the loops 
were not reproduced in the paper so that the progressive changes 
in magnetizing components could be followed. 

C. A. Adams: Mr. Moody’s very interesting and instructive 
paper illustrates a not uncommon experience in the development 


1912} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2039 


of electrical plant and apparatus; namely, that when a certain 
size is reached, qualities which for smaller sizes were considered 
as objectionable and the reduction of which was considered of 
sufficient moment to warrant the partial sacrifice of other de- 
sirable qualities, pass through a critical stage and we suddenly 
find ourselves straining other points in design in order to in- 
crease this erstwhile objectionable feature. 

The reason for this is usually the appearance of a new limita- 
tion, such as that of mechanical strength in the present instance. 
But why should this limitation appear in large rather than in 
small sizes, since the short-circuit current of a transformer in 
terms of its full load current, does not increase considerably with 
size beyond a comparatively low limit? Here is an inter- 
esting illustration of the operation of one of those laws con- 
necting the quality of a physical organism or piece of apparatus 
with its linear dimensions. A large piece of stone will fall through 
the air without feeling appreciably the atmospheric resistance, 
but a sufficiently small piece of the same stone will float in the 
same air as a dust particle, because the weight decreases as the 
cube and:the friction surface as the square of a linear dimension. 
A flea can jump hundreds of times his own length, but an elephant 
can’t jump at all, because weight increases as the cube and 
muscle cross-section only as the square of a linear dimension. 
Numerous other illustrations of the most fundamental nature 
could be provided to explain other limitations and critical 
values. 

The connection between the relative mechanical strength of 
a transformer coil under short-circuit and the size of the trans- 
former, is not quite so obvious; but as it may be of interest to 
many here, I will attempt to explain it briefly. 

Imagine every linear dimension of a transformer to be increased 
in a certain ratio, the current density in the copper and flux 
density in the core remaining the same; the cross-section of the 
magnetic leakage path will increase as the square, its length as 
the first power, and therefore its permanence as the first power 
of the linear increase. The current linked with this path will 
increase as the square and therefore the flux as the cube. The 
useful flux will increase as the square, therefore the per cent 
leakage flux and the per cent reactance will increase as the first 
power. To avoid this increase a larger number of interlacings 
between the primary and secondary coils is ordinarily employed 
in the larger sizes. 

Assume first that the number of interlacings 1s not changed. 
The leakage flux density will increase as the first power, the cur- 
rent as the square, the length of current path as the first power, 
and the mechanical reaction of the two on each other as the fourth 
power of the linear dimension. Moreover the length of the coil 
extension and thus the lever arm of this force will increase as the 
first power, and the moment of the force about the coil support as 


the fifth power. 


2040 REACIANCE AND HYSTERESIS {Oct. 11 


If the coil section were solid in each case, the moment of inertia 
of its cross-section and its stiffness would increase as the fourth 
power, and therefore its relative stiffness inversely as the first 
power. But if the coil is built up of wire, the linear dimension 
of whose cross-section does not increase as much as the linear 
dimension of the transformer, the stiffness will increase by less 
than the fourth power, and the relative strength be still less 
than inversely as the first power. 

Assume now that for purposes of ventilation, the coils are 
kept at the same thickness, and that in order to keep down the 
reactance, the interlacings between the primary and secondary 
coils increases as the linear dimension. This approaches ap- 
proximately to common practise. Then the leakage flux density 
will be the same, the current in a single coil will increase as the 
first power of the linear increase, the length of the current path 
as the first power, and the lever arm as the first power. Thus 
the bending moment will increase as the cube. But as the stiff- 
ness will increase as the first power only, the relative strength 
will be inversely as the square of the linear increase. 

If, in order to increase the reactance, » of these same primary 
coils be grouped together in place of being interlaced with sec- 
ondary coils, but are separated from each other for ventilation 
purposes, the density of the leakage flux adjacent to the outside 


coil will be 7 times as great and thus the relative strength - 


times as great as for the completely interlaced arrangement of 
the same coils and the same short-circuit current; but the latter 
will be much less owing to the n? times as much reactance. 

With the common method of construction there is thus a limit 
of size beyond which extraordinary methods of coil support, 
or some form of current limiting reactance, must be employed. 

David B. Rushmore: The very interesting subject brought 
up by Mr. Moody, is, I think, indicative of one of the critical 
changes that are taking place in electrical development. In 
much of our historical work we alter and improve by very slow 
methods up to a certain point, and then we are apt to make very 
radical changes. As we all know, in the small apparatus which 
we have been using there was sufficient inherent reactance to 
furnish the desirable characteristics; but the very large power 
stations of the present day have brought into play such large 
concentrations of energy that the destructive effects are no 
longer controlled by the natural characteristics of the apparatus, 
and we have had to introduce artificially into such machines and 
into such systems qualities which previously we bent all our efforts 
towards keeping out. 

When we think of what reactance is and why we introduce it, 
in general terms, or why we do not want it and why we have got 
to have it, the thought comes to us that reactance is comparable 
to inertia. In other words, it introduces inertia into electrical 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2041 


movement. It introduces into inertia a capacity for the storage 
of energy and also a capacity for the reflection of wave motion. 
Reactance is used in some places for one reason, and in other 
places for still another reason. The tremendous mechanical 
force brought into play by the short-circuit current, and especial- 
ly the instantaneous short-circuit currents of apparatus and in- 
stallation, is so great that it has to be lowered in some artificial 
way. 

In introducing the reactance into machines, speaking now 
especially of the subject of alternators, we are confronted with 
the fact that in all designing a compromise has to be made. 
The desirable qualities of reaction when put into a machine 
introduce certain undesirable features of bad regulation, and also 
the fact that practically all voltage fluctuations that we get are 
across reactance. I shall always feel indebted to Prof. Rosa for 
an article which he wrote years ago, which expounded to my 
youthful mind how we could neutralize capacity in reactance 
and what actually happened. 

Introducing reactance into transformers also introduces the 
possibility of a very serious rise of potential, especially with 
high-frequency currents. These are naturally guarded against 
in other ways, but still this is the reason why in generators, for 
example, it is one of a number of points which make it desirable 
to put the reactance outside of the machine rather than to intro- 
duce it all into the armature, and in that way sacrificing other 
qualities of manufacture, repair, and conditions of operation. 
Introducing it into the transformer, as Mr. Moody has explained, 
does not protect the transformer itself; and the reactance is now 
finding a considerably wider application in busbars, together 
with its introduction into machines. 

Reactance is also used—and very likely in the future will be 
used to a much larger extent still—for another purpose which has 
been mentioned, namely, that of protection against high-fre- 
quency and high-voltage disturbances. A person naturally 
wonders why iron is not used with current-limiting reactances. 
Naturally one would think that it would be very much more 
efficient and thus reduce the size of the coils. The densities, 
however, that are employed, are so great that iron is of no bene- 
fit. It is quite startling when you think of magnetizing the sur- 
rounding air. 

While it is rather difficult to add much that is new to the 
discussion without entering the field of speculation, I think it 
can well be said that the use of reactance both for current- 
limiting devices and self-protecting devices is undoubtedly to 
increase much in the future. It is one of the refinements of the 
art which is going to be studied; it is anew refinement of analysis, 
and I think the work of the engineer in the future is going to be 
very largely concerned with the proper use and application of 
such reactances. 

W. M. McConahey (by letter): Mr. Moody’s paper is very 
timely as it deals with a phase of transformer design that is of 


2042 REACTANCE AND HYSTERESIS {Oct. 11 


great importance in large power transformers and, generally 
speaking, is but imperfectly understood. 

Low teactance has been considered desirable because of the 
good regulation it gives on inductive load. With large power 
transformers this is unimportant. What is of great importance, 
however, is that the reactance be of such a value that the mechan- 
‘cal stresses on short circuit will not be such as to make it difficult 
to prevent damage to the windings. There is a widespread im- 
pression that merely changing the design so as to increase the 
reactance will reduce the short-circuit stresses. This is true only 
within limits and in some cases an increase in the reactance will 
actually increase the stresses. 

Formula (1) of Mr. Moody’s paper shows the elements that 
enter in to determine the reactance of a transformer and formula 
(III) shows those that enter in to determine the short-circuit 
stress<s, the current in the latter case being that which flows on 
short circuit and which is determined by, the impedance of the 
transformer. An inspection of these formulas shows that prac- 
tically the same elements enter into both, thus indicating the 
close relation between reactance and short-circuit stresses. 

In large transformers of 50 or 60 cycles, particularly if they are 
for high voltage, it is not difficult so to proportion the design that 
they will stand up successfully under the most severejshort-circuit 
conditions. For 25 cycles the problem is much more difficult 
and if the voltage is comparatively low, the difficulties are still 
further increased. However, by careful designing and the use of 
substantial mechanical construction, satisfactory low-frequency 
transformers can be built in moderate sizes without resorting to 
any special form of construction or the use of outside protective 
reactances, but in very large sizes, one of these special methods 
of protecting the windings against excessive mechanical stress 
may have to be employed. 

As stated by Mr. Moody, in a 2:1 auto-transformer the effect 
of the reactance is reduced by one-half. In a recent case in- 
volving the design of some 2:1 auto-transformers for railway 
service, the short-circuit stresses were found to be so heavy that 
it was deemed advisable to reduce them by a mechanical separa- 
tion of the primary and secondary parts of the winding. This 
of course increased the cost of the transformer, but it is cheaper 
than supplying outside reactances, which in this case would not 
have been acceptable. 

Exceedingly low reactance, giving very close regulation on 
inductive load, not only makes it difficult to brace the coils 
securely but it also increases the cost. ; 

The scheme of placing strips of laminated iron between the 
primary and secondary coils in order to increase the leakage flux 
and thus secure high reactance in transformers, particularly 
for operating synchronous converters, is one that the writer tried 
out as far back as 1899 and has used many times since with entire 
success. I cannot quite agree with Mr. Moody that by this 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2043 


scheme ‘‘ the copper will be entirely shielded from eddy currents”’ 
because there will be leakage flux inside the coils themselves as 
well as in the space occupied by the laminated iron, and there 
will also be a fringing flux cutting into the coils around the air 
gaps in the iron. These fluxes will have an appreciable effect in 
producing eddy currents in the copper. With this scheme, how- 
ever, high reactance can be secured with much less eddy current 
loss than with the ordinary type of design, because a compara- 
tively small number of turns can be used in the windings, thus 
securing a low magnetomotive fogce and consequently a weak 
leakage field through the windings. 3 

_ Charles F. Scott: Mr. Moody’s paper presents the subject 
in a simple, clear and analytical way, and the author has made 
himself understood without very many differential equations. 

In placing the iron shunts between the coils, he says that they 
can be used to modify the regulation of the transformer up to 
say 50 per cent overload, but that this is not a remedy for ex- 
cessive current on short circuit. 

In this connection I have been looking at Fig. 3, showing the 
cross-section of the transformer, and have been trying to imagine 
what the probable effect would be with a current on short cir- 
cuit. As I understand the situation it is that as current is in- 
creased above normal the reactance continues to be very high 
until the saturation of the shunt prevents its becoming propor- 
tionately greater, so that the transformer on short circuit would 
probably give, say. three-quarters of the current that it would 
without the shunts. In order to make the shunts fully effective 
under conditions of short circuit it would be necessary to make 
them pretty large. If that were done in Fig. 3, the shunts would 
present a total area equal to a large fraction of the area of the 
main core of the transformer, which would introduce a number 
of difficulties and complications. 

Prof. MacLaren’s Fig. 1, in which he shows a ring with a pri- 
mary and a secondary coil around it, leads me to remember 
that some seventeen or eighteen years ago he and I were associ- 
ated together in some work of this kind. The diagram here 
represents very nearly the conditions which we had then. Our 
ring was some four in. (10 em.) thick, something like five it. 
(1.5 m.) high, and about 12 ft. (3.6 m.) in diameter. It was one 
of the large nickel steel rings used on the first of the Niagara 
generators. The interesting feature was that we got away from a 
delicate fiber suspension galvanometer, and could maintain a 
constant reading on a voltmeter, of a volt or two, for some time 
while the current through the primary was increased. Indeed, 
it was increased at such a rate as to keep the reading on the 
secondary constant. As I recall it now, a period of something 
like ten minutes could be occupied in keeping a constant voltage 
on the secondary by slowly increasing the current flowing around 
the big ring. 

HI. M. Hobart: Years ago we used to make alternators and 
transformers less satisfactory and more expensive than they 


“2044 REACTANCE AND HYSTERESIS [Oct. 11 


otherwise need have been in order to keep the reactance very 
low. The present tendency is perhaps to make them still less 
satisfactory and more expensive than they otherwise need be in 
order to make the reactance somewhat higher than would con- 
form to their natural characteristics. 

My own opinion is that when we try to give a transformer or 
an alternator a high internal reactance, the result is a bad trans- 
former or a bad alternator and a bad reactance; and I think that 
generally the best economic solution of the problem is to make the 
transformer as good asit can possibly be from all standpoints and 
then if we need further reactance, put in a reactance as a separate 
external item. That seems to me to be substantially the con- 
clusion at which Mr. Moody arrives, and I should be interested 
in hearing his comment on this summing up of the situation. 
Of course, as Mr. Moody has pointed out, the natural reactance 
will be higher, the higher the voltage of the transformer, and in 
the case of very high voltage transformers a considerable pro- 
portion of the desired reactance can be obtained in the trans- 
former itself, without sacrifice of other characteristics. But the 
point to be emphasized, as it seems to me, is that we should de- 
sign a transformer from the standpoint of heating and efficiency 
and mechanical strength, and let the reactance come whatever 
it will, and then put whatever further reactance we desire, 
outside of the transformer. The introduction of iron to increase 
reactance is a more undesirable means than it would appear at 
first thought. We usually estimate the efficiency of transform- 
ers or of alternators by summing up the segregated losses, and 
we do not take into account the so-called ‘‘ parasitic ”’ losses 
which we have at full load. These “ parasitic ’’ losses are liable 
to be considerably increased if we employ magnetic material in 
the leakage paths. Moreover the increased reactance obtained 
by the employment of magnetic material in this way, while 
present at moderate loads when we do not require it, (when, in 
fact, it is very undesirable), is not preseat to any appreciable 
extent under the conditions of short-circuit. This is because, for 
the enormous magnetomotive forces present in the leakage mag- 
netic circuit at short-circuit, the permeability of iron is scarcely 
in excess of unity, the permeability of air. 

M.V. Ayres: I would like to say a few words in regard to Mr. 
Moody’s paper, more from the point of view of the designer of | 
the substation than of the designer of the transformer. I would 
take issue with the last speaker in regard to the desirability of 
designing a transformer and then putting the reactance outside. 
It seems to me that in the case of the railway substation, where 
reactance is required for voltage regulation, the method of put- 
ting the reactance inside of the transformer fills a long-felt want. 
A separate reactance for the purpose is a great deal of a nuisance 
from the point of view of building and equipping a substation. It 
practically ‘takes up a great deal more room then its mere floor 
area would seem to indicate, and requires arrangement and ad- 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2045 


justment of other apparatus just on account of finding the space 
to put the reactance; and the wiring of the secondary is always 
rather awkward on account of the very heavy conductor used. 
Of course, it is true that the transformer with the reactance 
feature would not have as good efficiency at full load, but it 
would seem probable that it would have as good efficiency at full 
load as a transformer plus a separate reactance coil. Ifso, that is 
a sufficient answer to that objection. . 

As to the use of reactance in transformers for very high voltage 
circuits and in installations of very large kilowatt capacity, I do 
not feel able to speak definitely. I only wanted to make the 
point that for railway substations where reactance is required 
for voltage regulation, it seems to me that this would be a very 
great step in advance. 

W. S. Moody: I am afraid that I was not very logical, in 
view of the title of my paper, in referring at all to these external 
reactances, and without cuts or illustrations it will be difficult 
for me to describe in detail any of the types that have been con- 
structed. 

Just what form it is best to use in a given case depends upon 
very many factors—the current that you have to handle, the 
voltage, whether they must be transported, and so forth. As 
yet there has not been much opportunity to test the relative 
advantages, for fortunately, short circuits do not occur every 
day, and so as yet we cannot say whether one form or another 
form will stand up best under such strains. It is well that more 
than one form is being tried out, and I hope that some time in 
the near future we will have enough data to show what particular 
form is the best for average conditions. 

In the communication read from Mr. McConahey he pointed 
out something in my paper that was not stated as clearly as 
it should have been. He states that the magnetic shunts in 
transformers will not necessarily protect the windings from any 
eddy currents that would result from the flux passing through. 
I had reference in my remarks entirely to the extra flux that is 
created by the presence of iron. It is easy to see that the trans- 
former must be designed so that if the iron was not there the flux 
would be sufficiently low so as to cause no appreciable eddy in the 
conductors. If that is so, then the addition of the shunts will 
create a much greater flux, and that additional flux will not cut 
through the copper, as the flux densitv in the air and the copper 
will remain constant, because the magnetomotive force causing 
them remains constant. 

The reason why iron cannot be used advantageously in devices 
designed to limit current on short circuit is simply because you 
have in a large transformer, even when the primary and second- 
ary are well subdivided, ampere turns enough so that you would 
over-saturate the iron, unless so large a cross-section be provided 
as to give too much reactance at time of normal load. Similarly 

- in these current-limiting reactances that are external to the trans- 


2046 REACTANCE AND HYSTERESIS (Oct. 11 


formers, for, under the conditions of short circuit, the flux in the 
air is well above the saturation point of iron. So there would 
be practically no greater flux there if iron were present. ; 

Ralph D. Mershon: Are the concrete forms, that you wind 
the resistance on, reinforced? 

W.S. Moody: No. We have never felt that it was safe 
to reinforce them, as iron or any other metal that might be used 
to reinforce thém might heat sufficiently from eddy currents to 
crack the cement. 

Ralph D. Mershon: How do you insulate the coils on the 
concrete form? 

W. S. Moody: The conductors are bare and insulated by 
treated wood, with asbestos as a heat insulation between the con- 
ductor and wood. 

Malcolm MacLaren: ‘The only comment that I have to make 
is to emphasize what Mr. Chubb said about the extreme sensibil- 
ity of steel toits heat treatment. Different samples taken from 
the same consignment may show widely different loss character- 
istics, if subjected to slightly different treatment, and the laws 
which govern the various factors entering into the problem are so 
complicated that it will probably be necessary to gather a great 
many additional data before any systematic attempt can be made 
to generalize on the subject. 

W. L. Waters (communicated after adjournment): Mr. 
Moody’s paper gives a complete resume of the present state of 
transformer design as affected by the presence of internal react- 
ance. It is also interesting as indicating how early engineers 
understood the effect of reactances on the operation of transform- 
ers. The explanation given by Mr. S. Z. de Ferranti of the 
effect of internal self-induction in limiting the secondary current 
and influencing the regulation of a transformer is practically as 
complete as that given by Mr. Moody. Mr. Ferranti’s explana- 
tion was given 20 years ago when he installed his first constant- 
current arc lighting transformer operated by the magnetic re- 
pulsion of the primary and secondary windings, this transformer 
being almost an exact duplicate of the series arc lighting trans- 
former as used today. The development of distribution sys- 
tems involving the parallel connection of transformers on a light- 
ing network resulted in engineers reducing the self-induction of 
transformers to a minimum, in order to improve the regulation; 
and as Mr. Moody points out, it was only when synchronous 
converters came into extensive use—about 15 years ago—that 
it was recognized that the presence of self-induction in the circuit 
had other uses thar that of producing a constant secondary cur- 
rent for arc lighting work. On account of the existence of patents 
covering the use of a special external reactance coil to obtain auto- 
matic compounding with a synchronous converter, the writer, 
together with other engineers of the smaller manufacturing com- 
panies, considered the possibility of building transformers with a 
high internal self-induction. It was soon found that with the 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2047 


comparatively small transformers then being used with con- 
verters, practically the only disadvantage of placing the required 
self-induction in the transformer itself, rather than in the sepa- 
rate external coil, was that it became impossible toad just the 
value of the reactance after installation. The transformers 
with high internal reactance were somewhat cheaper, and the 
over-all efficiency was about the same, as the increased eddy 
currents mentioned by Mr. Moody were offset by the reduc- 
tion in the weight of iron in the transformer due to the modi- 
fied arrangement of the coils, and by the absence of any losses in 
an external reactance coil. A large number of such high-reactance 
transformers was built and operated satisfactorily with syn- 
chronous converters, and it is only recently, when heavy com- 
pounding has been required in connection with large transform- 
ers, that the external reactance coil has again become a necessity. 

The use of internal or external reactance for limiting the sec- 
ondary current in a transformer on short circuit ismerely a natural 
development of the Ferranti principle, which is now found to be 
advantageous on account of the increased size of power systems; 
and I think one of the most interesting features in Mr. Moody’s 
paper is that it indicates how early the theory and principles of 
transformer design and operation were thoroughly understood. 
The great advance in transformer design and manufacture during 
the past 20 years has been in the details of construction and in 
the improved methods of manufacture which have made trans- 
formers for high voltage and large capacity a commercial possi- 
bility. 

M. G. Lloyd (communicated after. adjournment): The 
especial value of Professor MacLaren’s parer lies in the fact that 
the observations have been carried up to the critical temperature, 
since the measurements of magnetic hysteresis with varying tem- 
peratures have been comparatively few and most of these have 
not been extended tosohighatemperature. A large number of 
measurements have been made upon permeability, however, show- 
ing that iron and steel lose their ferromagnetic quality at this tem- 
perature, and that the hysteresis must therefore disappear at 
this point. 

The results obtained by Professor MacLaren are quite similar 
to those obtained by Kunz!, who in 1894 made experiments up 
to 800 deg. cent. with specimens in the form of long thin wires, 
the measurements being made by the magnetometric method. 
He made use of several varieties of soft iron and of steel, and one 
specimen of nickel. The results with soft iron showed a decrease 
of hysteresis with increasing temperature, the curve plotted be- 
tween these quantities being a straight line. Very nearly the 
same result was obtained with steel when the temperature cycle 
was repeated often enough to obtain constant values. With nickel 
the hysteresis fell off rapidly at first with increasing temperature, 
and afterward decreased more slowly. As the author has made 
eit a ee ee 


1 Wwekunz TZ. XV, 194-(1804.) 


2048 REACTANCE AND HYSTERESIS (Oct. 11 


no reference to any of the previous work on this subject it may be 
of interest to note some of the other experiments which have been 
made. 

Wills? found similar effects with iron and tungsten steel, and 
Thiessen’ observed the same general trend for several materials 
between minus 70 deg. and plus 100 deg. Some of their results 
are shown in the following table. 


EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON HYSTERESIS 


Ergs per cu. cm. per cycle 
——————- Author- 
Material Bmax 15° 100° | 300° 500° 700° ity 
Iron 4000 1080 975 685 460 250 |Wills 
Iron 6000 2200 2200 1450 725 Wills 
Tungsten steel (4.5%) 2000 9200 8900 5800 2200 — |Wills 
Tungsten steel (4.5%) 6000 12000 11700 8000 3750 —— |Wills 
—-70° 20° 100° 
Soft wrought iron 2000 423 397 | 333 ———— | ——_ | Thiessen 
Soft wrought iron 5000 1720 1620 1520 ——— | ———_ | Thiessen 
Soft wrought iron 10000 5070 4600 4030 ———— | ———_ | Thiessen 
—52° vi 99° 
Crescent tool steel 14700 33850 31880 | 29600 ———- | ——_ |Thiessen 
—65° 24° |. 100° 
Nickel steel (5%) 14900 43070 41860 39700 ——— ] ——_ Thiessen 


The work of HondaandShimizu,! reaching down to the tempera- 
ture of liquid air, is perhaps the most illuminating which has been 
done on this subject. They found that upon cooling Swedish 
iron the hysteresis decreases for low flux densities, but increases 
for high flux densities, and tungsten steel behaved in the same 
way. In nickel and cobalt, the hysteresis was always increased 
by cooling. A research by Waggoner’ shows that low-carbon steel 
behaves as stated above for iron, while high-carbon steel behaves 
like nickel and cobalt. The change was least for a steel contain- 
ing 1.1 percent carbon. He also found that the ratio of hysteresis 
to coercive force was constant for varying temperature and vary- 
ing carbon content. 

The above results apply to hysteresis with alternating magneti- 
zation. Experiments in a rotating magnetic field were made by 
Fuller and Grace® and by Perrier.7. Both sets of experiments 
show that the maximum hysteresis in the rotary field decreases 
with increasing temperature, and that this maximum is reached 

2. R.L. Wills, Phil. Mag., V., 117 (1903.) 

3. A.H. Thiessen, Phys. Rev., VIII, 65 (1899.) 

4. K. Honda and S. Shimizu, Proc. Tokyo Phys.-Math. Soc. 2, III, 
186 (1904.) 

5. C. W. Waggoner, Phys. Rev., XXVIII, 393 (1909.) 

6. W. P. Fuller & H. Grace, -Phil. Mag., XVIII, 866 (1909.) 

1& 


A. Perrier, Thesis, Geneva, (1909.) 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2049 


with a lower flux density. Thus for iron at 580 deg. this maximum 
occurs at 10,500 gausses, while at temperatures below 340 deg. 
it occurs at about 16,000 gausses. Since the saturation value is 
also reduced by increasing the temperature, it was to be expected 
that the hysteresis would decrease to zero for a lower magnetiza- 
tion, and this was found to be the case. 

Perrier worked with nickel, magnetite and three kinds of iron 
and concluded that the ratio of the maximum values of the two 
kinds of hysteresis was characteristic of the material and independ- 
ent of the temperature. 

One of the most recent papers dealing with this subject was 
presented before the recent convention of the International Asso- 
ciation for Testing Materials and presented results which had been 
obtained in the chemical laboratory of the Schneider works at 
Creusot. In this case an automatic registration was secured of 
the magnetic flux due to a constant magnetizing field with varia- 
able temperature. These experiments showed not only the critical 
point, mentioned above, at which magnetism disappears, but also 
another critical point between 200 and 300 degrees, at which point 
there is an irregular change in the curve in the case of many of 
the steels used. The changes at this critical point are not re- 
yersible. The authors connect this critical point with the dis- 
appearance’ of magnetism from the iron carbide or cementite. 
A highly oxidized steel probably containing occluded gases shows 
in the cold state abnormal hysteresis and coercive force. This 
anomaly disappears at about 250 degrees and appears at a slightly 
lower temperature on cooling. 

I regret to note the misleading statement in the opening para- 
graph of this paper, where the author states in reference to the 
paper presented in April, 1911, that “Tt was shown that there 
was no apparent change in the law governing the variations of 
the hysteresis loss with the induction for all temperatures from 
atmospheric up to near the point where the steel became non- 
magnetic.’ In the discussion of that paper it was pointed out 
by both Mr. W. J. Wooldridge and the writer that this statement 
was not justified by the experimental results. 

Malcolm MacLaren: If Dr. Lloyd will refer to the discussion 
of the author’s paper of April, 1911, he will find that no results 
were presented to show that the law governing the change in 
hysteresis with the induction was affected by the temperature. 
The only: point which was raised at that time was whether in the 
case of high silicon steel there should not be a greater variation 
from the 1.6th power law than was shown by the author’s results, 
and it was pointed out at that time that the inconsistencies were 
largely due to the erroneous method which Dr. Lloyd used in 
deriving his exponents. Since the date of that paper the author 
had made further measurements upon the exponential values 
for high silicon steel which show a departure from 1.6 above 
10,000 lines, but there was no indication that a change in tem- 
perature would affect these exponential values. 


A paper presented at the 277th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, New 
York, November 8, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A. I. E. E. 


POWER REQUIREMENTS OF ROLLING MILLS 


BY WILFRED SYKES 


The increasing use of electric motors for driving the main 
rolls in modern steel works, makes the question of the power 
requirements of rolling mills of considerable importance to the 
industrial engineer engaged in designing such installations. An 
error in judgment due either to inexperience or to lack of accurate 
information, may involve the loss of a large sum of money in the 
installation itself, but what is of still greater importance, is the 
loss that is incurred indirectly, due to the time lost before the 
error can be remedied. 

The subject is one of great complexity due to the various factors 
controlling the power requirements and also to the variation in 
operating conditions in different works. The subject of rolling 
mills is one on which it is hardly possible to obtain reliable infor- 
mation from published data and the whole rolling mill practise 
is based upon empirical knowledge gained by experience. Dur- 
ing the last few years an attempt has been made in Europe to re- 
duce the subject of rolling mill practise to some scientific basis 
but without very great success up to the present time. 

It is not the object of this paper to attempt to give any set of 
rules for determining the correct size and characteristics of 
the motor required for driving any particular mill but rather to in- 
dicate the lines along which such problems must be studied and 
to give an idea of the factors controlling the size and equipment re- 
quired. To cover the conditions met in modern steel mills would 
require a great deal more space than can be allowed in a paper 
before this Institute, and even with full knowledge of such con- 
ditions, considerable judgment is always required in working out 


such problems. 
2051 


2052 SYKES: ROLLING MILLS [Nov. 8 


One of the most difficult features of this problem is to de- 
termine the set of conditions on which to design the equipment, 
for any particular mill, that will coincide with the actual practise. 
It is almost impossible to obtain accurate data, from the men re- 
sponsible for the operation of such installations, as to operating 
conditions, on account of the changes that occur in practise after 
the mill has been installed, and for this reason any assumptions 
made when determining the size of machine required for driving 
it, may be altogether wrong in two or three years. A great many 
superintendents are of the opinion that it is impossible to obtain, 
within limits, an equipment too large. This is a mistaken idea, 
but has been based upon past experience which has shown 
that by improvements, mainly in organization, it has been 
possible to increase the output often as much as 100 to 200 
per cent over the original estimate. With our present knowledge 
of rolling conditions and in view of what has been done in the past 
it should be possible to make a reasonable estimate as to how 
much the production of a mill may be increased in the future, 
by improvements in the auxiliary apparatus and organization, 
and this is a factor which must always be considered when 
designing an installation; and it is here that the electrical manu- 
facturer must often take the responsibility for assumptions as to 
rolling conditions altogether different from those given by the steel 
mill engineers. Some of our most successful manufacturers of 
rolling mill engines have based their machines upon the size re- 
quired to break some part of the mill, so that they arecertain that 
the engine would carry any load that could be caused by the mill, 
independently of the method of operation. Solong as efficiency 
is not considered and it is not necessary to meet competition as to 
price of the installation, such an arrangement is an ideal one from 
the standpoint of the manufacturer, as there is never any doubt as 
to the operation of his part of the plant, but under the conditions 
now existing in our steel mills, attention must be paid to the ques- 
tion of efficiency, and business conditions also necessitate atten- 
tion being paid to the price of equipment. 

In the first place it must be pointed out that the size of the 
mill as determined by the size of pinions, or the width and di- 
ameter of rolls, has comparatively little to do with the size of 
motor required for driving it, as the work performed by the same 
size mill may vary several hundred per cent. The fundamental 
basis on which the size of motor must be determined, is the pro- 
duct of the mill and the tonnage rolled. There are a great many 


1912] SYKES: ROLLING MILLS 2053 


factors entering into the proposition which must be considered, 
and dealing first with the product, the following are the principal 
in their usual order of importance: 
1. Volume of metal displaced. 
Method of displacement. 
. Temperature of metal. 
. Class of material. 
Rate of displacement. 
6. Size of roll. 
This order is not fixed, and the importance of any of the fac- 
tors will vary with the practise at the particular mill in question. 


ore W bw 


VOLUME OF METAL DISPLACED 


It is of the greatest importance to have some method of com- 
paring the actual work done on the metal in various mills and it 
must be admitted that such a comparison is extremely difficult. 
In comparing various tests, I have used as a unit of work, the 
h.p.-seconds required to dis- 
place one cubic inch of metal. 
The displaced volume is ob-~ 
tained as shown in Fig. 1. 
The area enclosed by the full 
lines, represents the original 
length of material with the 
. original area A and length L. 
After rolling, the area has been reduced to a@ and the length in- 
creased to J. The shaded portion of the original section, it has 
been assumed, has been displaced so as to correspond with the 
shaded part of the metal after the pass. The displacement in 
practise is of course not as shown, but the illustration will show 
what is meant by displaced volume. From this sketch it is 
obvious that the volume displaced is equal to (A —a) L. If 
the inch is taken as a unit, this formula gives the cubic inches 


Fic. 1—D1AGRAM OF DISPLACED 
VOLUME 


displaced. 

This unit of work takes into consideration only the volume 
displaced in the direction of rolling, and for simple work such as 
rolling plates, blooms, flats, etc., practically all of the metal is 
displaced in this way, as the displacement at right angles to the di- 
rection of rolling is negligible. In cases where the section of the 
pass is completely enclosed by the rolls, there is very often a side 
displacement which this unit does not take into consideration, 
nor is it my opinion that any simple unit of work can provide for 


2054 SYKES: ROLLING MILLS INov. 8 


this condition, as it is impossible to determine exactly how the 
metal flows. Fig. 2 shows a typical pass when rolling rounds 
from square billets. The full line shows the section after the 
pass, and the dotted line the section before the pass. These sec- 
tions were obtained by cutting pieces from the bar before and 
after the pass. It will be seen that the width of the material 
has been appreciably increased, much more than would be 
natural if the pressure of the rolls were only perpendicular to the 
bars of the metal. 

Attempts have been made to introduce.a factor into the com- 
parisons that would take this condition into consideration, it 
being considered that the metal covered by the area not shaded 


has not been displaced, but-investigations have not yet reached _ 


the stage that would warrant any statement being made as to 
this method of comparing different passes. The instance given 
in Fig. 2 is a comparatively simple one, but in practise when 
rolling various sections such as angles, channels, rails, etc., this 
side displacement is often made under conditions that make it 
impossible to use anything else but empirical figures. Referring 
to Fig. 5, showing the sections after the various passes when 
rolling rails from billets, it will be seen in the case of pass one 
of the first series, that the metal has been displaced considerably 
to form the basis of the flange. In this case there has been a 
considerable distortion of the metal in addition to the increase 
in the length due to displacement in the direction of rolling, and it 
is obvious that no formula can take into consideration such dis- 
tortion, even if an accurate knowledge were available as to the 
way that the metal flows. We have some information available 
as to how metal flows when rolling simple sections such as plates 
or blooms, but, even with this knowledge, theoretical calculations 
do not check up very well with practical test results. Various 
other units of work in addition to the power required to displace 
a cubic inch of metal, have been adopted by different investi- 
gators, but they all take into consideration only the displacement 
in the direction of rolling, and from what has been said, it is 
obvious that this is the only basis on which any comparison can 
be made, although it is admittedly open to objection and must be 
used in conjunction with empirical constants to provide for the 
distortion of the metal in other directions. I have adopted the 
unit of h.p.-seconds per cubic inch displaced as it appears to be 
the most simple and direct basis of comparison. For convenience 
it will be referred to as “‘ specific power consumption,” or S.P.C. 


1912] SYKES: ROLLING MILLS 2055 


MeEtHOoD oF DISPLACEMENT 


Reference has been made to the side flow of the metal, but it is 
also of the greatest importance to consider how the pressure is 
applied to the material rolled. When the pressure is vertical, 
or nearly so, to the surface being rolled, it may be referred to as 
‘direct pressure ’’ and it is obvious that under such conditions 
the power required will be a minimum. When finishing mate- 
rial such as flanged rail or channel, where the pressure is almost 
parallel to the surface being rolled, it is obvious that the actual 
displacement for a given pressure, may be very small. Such 
a condition is illustrated in Fig. 3, which shows the condition ex- 
isting when finishing a rail flange and a channel section. Under 
such conditions, it is obvious that the component at right angles 


PITCH| \ 


FINISHING RAIL FLANGE 
AA" AXIS OF ROLLING 


Fic. 2—Pass SECTIONS ROLLING Fic. 3—EXAMPLES OF INDIRECT 
ROUNDS FROM BILLETS PRESSURE 


to the surface of the metal is very small, and consequently the 
pressure may be very large for a very small amount of work done. 
This condition may be referred to as ‘‘ indirect pressure.” 

In Fig. 4 is shown a number of sections illustrating what is 
meant by ‘direct’ and “indirect pressure,’’ which will make 
this point clear. 

Referring to Fig. 5, a comparison is made of the various passes 
when rolling rails, and this figure illustrates the difference in 
practise met with in steel mill work. The second series of sections 
shows that the rolls are designed to have as direct pressure as 

possible, whereas in the first set of sections, a great deal of the 
work is done by indirect pressure. The first series of sections, 
- however, has been laid out so that the axis of the rail, during 


2056 SYKES: ROLLING MILLS [Nov. 8 


the finishing passes, is not parallel to that of the rolls and in 
this way the surface of the metal is worked at a more favorable 
angle than in case of the finishing passes of the second set of sec- 
tions. It would be reasonable to expect for such conditions that 
the second set of sections would require less power during the ini- 
tial passes, but that the finishing passes would require somewhat 
greater power. This shows to some extent the local problem 
encountered in steel mills. In Fig. 6 are shown two methods of 
rolling channels, and it will be seen that in rolling the second 
set the direct pressure is used as much as possible and it is 
only in the last pass that the actual channel section forms. In ' 
this pass the volume displaced is negligible, so that the mill has 


EXAMPLES OF DIRECT PRESSURE 


WY 
Ys YW, 
SLABS, BARS, SHEETS, A 
PLATES, ETC. BLOOMS, BILLETS 


EXAMPLES INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN DIRECT AND INDIRECT PRESSURE 


SS 


’ D) n 
i y y 
f ) ) 

( 


Fic. 4 


only to straighten the sides of the channel which has already 
been formed by direct pressure or pressure at favorable angles. 
These two examples show the difference in practise in various 
mills and illustrate to some extent the necessity of studying the 
particular conditions in each mill before attempting to design 
an equipment for driving the rolls. The question of roll turning 
has been based in the past, more or less, upon empirical knowl- 
edge obtained by the roll turners from actual experience, but 
in Europe, some attempt has been made during the last few years 
to systematize the methods of reducing the metal for different 
sections, and when this is done the problem of comparing the 
results to be expected from various mills will be,considerably - 3 
simplified, 


1912] SYKES: ROLLING MILLS 2057 


The pressure on the rolls due to the metal introduces addi- 
tional friction, but as this cannot be separated from the power 
actually required to displace the metal, it must be included 
in the specific power consumption. There is often considerable 
friction between the rolls and the metal due to the peripheral 
speeds of various parts of the section being different. On refer- 
ring to Fig. 5 it is obvious that the speed of the portion of the 
roll in contact with the web is appreciably greater than that at 
the edge of the flange and therefore as the flange and the web 
are delivered at the same rate, there must be slippage somewhere 


AREA=NO-4 No.5 


AREA= 
BASEN, 25.1 SQN, 
- 73" 
AREA= NO.6 
2.62 SQuIN- es 


4.05 SQ.IN. 


BILLET 274" NO.3 


IN.SQ. 
AREA= 
“18,22 SQ.iN 


AREA= 


AREA= 
6.88 SQ.IN. 6.84 SQ.IN. 


AREA == AREA== AREA == 


NO. 


SECOND SERIES—PAss SECTIONS ROLLING RAILS 
Fic. 5 
@ 
between the metal and the roll. In cases where a rail flange, 
for instance, is being finished, there is a tendency to move the 
rolls laterally in relation to one another, which may be taken up 
by indirect pressure in the opposite direction or in roll collars, 
in which case the friction is of course increased. As we have no 
way of determining what the friction due to rolling may be, it 
must be included as part of the net rolling work, which is the 
actual input to the mill less the no-load friction. In the author’s 
opinion, it is perfectly legitimate to consider the additional 
friction in the rolls, pinions and spindles as part of the net rolling 


2058 SYKES: ROLLING MILLS [Nov. 8 


work, and I do not think we would be any better off if we had 
tests showing exactly how much power each item represented, 
as the problem is so complicated that I doubt if we would be 
able to make more accurate estimates than are now possible, 
although perhaps it might be possible to get along with a smaller 
number of tests. 


TEMPERATURE OF METAL 


The temperature of the metal plays a very important part in 
the power required for any mill. Tests made indicate that the 
power requirements, all other things being equal, vary practically 
as the tensile strength of the material. There is nota great deal 


Emcuesracanec~ 
ONnA ta a— 


Pass SECTION ROLLING CHANNELS—FIRsT SERIES 


NO.3 NO.4 


NO.1 NO.2 
— SSS SS =, 


No.5 NO.6 NO,7 No.8 NO,.9 
Pass SECTION ROLLING CHANNELS—SECOND SERIES 
Fic. 6 


of information available as to the tensile strength of steel at 
various temperatures and naturally such tegts are rather difficult 
tomake. In Fig. 7 is shown a curve of tensile strength of mild 
steel at various temperatures, this curve being made up from 
information that has been published of tests in the Watertown 
Arsenal and from various European publications, as well as 
from tests made by the writer. The curve varies somewhat 
from others that have been published as to the strength at high 
temperatures, as the tests made by the writer indicate that pre- 
vious estimates as to the tensile strength have been too low and 
that, instead of the curve gradually tapering to zero atthe melting 


1912[ SYKES: ROLLING MILLS 2059 


point, there is a point somewhere between 1300 and 1400 
deg. fahr. where the tensile strength rapidly decreases. Tests 
made at various temperatures when rolling plates, using only 
direct pressure, so that there are no other disturbing factors, 
indicate that this curve is approximately correct as indicating 
the relation between the power required to displace the metal 
and the temperature. It will be seen from this curve that the 
strength increases quite rapidly after the temperature drops 
below about 1400 deg. fahr., so that when rolling thin sheets, 


0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600 
DEGREES-FAHR. 


Fic. 7 


when the metal becomes almost black the power requirements 
increase at a very rapid rate. This curve shows that tensile 
strength about 100 deg. fahr. is about 18 times greater than 
at 2000 deg. fahr. Tests made when rolling sheets at 2000 deg. 
fahr. and rolling cold, showed a variation in the power consump- 
tion per cubic inch displaced varying from 17:1 to 20:1. 

The rate at which metal cools is obviously of the greatest 
importance and within the usual limits of rolling temperatures 
it may be said that the rate of cooling will be practically pro- 
portional to the area exposed in relation to the volume. In 


2060 SYKES: ROLLING MILLS [Nov. 8 


Fig. 8 is shown the increase in exposed area of a particular slab 
as the cross-sectional area was reduced; and when the rate of 
cooling is taken into consideration, in conjunction with the curve 
shown in Fig. 7, it is obvious that the power required to displace 
the metal will increase very rapidly as the cross-section is de- 
creased. This will be referred to later when discussing this 
point. 
CLass OF MATERIAL 

Tests made by the writer and by others indicate that, pro- 
viding the temperature is the same, the power required to dis- 
place a given volume of metal is practically independent of the 
chemical composition of the steel. This of course applies only 
when rolling metal hot and within the usual rolling temperatures. 


lye 
a 
cll 
“10 
a9 z II 
oO 
o7% at 
aie a 
wi © 
2 | x 
Zz EF 
O3 AIS rl L a 4 <2 
o 9 Ls Ww 
Ow c 1 
wo 
= 4 
= 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 ® 10 O 100 90 80 70 
% ORIGINAL OF AREA % ORIGINAL OF AREA 
Fic. 8—SHowINnNG INCREASE IN ExposEpD FiG. 9—SHOWING INCREASE IN 
AREA OF PLATE WITH REDUCTION IN RELATIVE SPECIFIC POWER 
Cross-SECTION CoNSUMPTION—COLD-ROL- 


LING STEEL PLATES © 


As the temperature approaches 1500 deg. fahr. the influence of 
the different chemical compositions can be noticed, but as metal 
is usually worked, except in the case of thin sheets or small sec- 
tions, between 1800 and 2400 deg. fahr., it may be said that in 
practise, the composition of the material does not directly in- 
fluence the power consumption. Indirectly, however, it has con- 
siderable influence, as it is necessary to roll high-carbon steels and 
some alloy steels at comparatively low temperatures, so that 
the power consumption for a given volume of displacement 
may be considerably higher than would be the case when rolling 
mild steel. : 

The density of the steel also has considerable influence upon 
the power requirements, and when rolling ingots, the first one 


1912) SYKES: ROLLING MILLS 2061 


or two passes made require comparatively little power per cubic 
inch displaced, as the steel is more or less porous. After the 
metal has had one or two passes through the rolls, the density 
when hot apparently does not enter further into the question. 
When rolling steel cold, there is a continual increase of the power 
required due to the increased density, and in Fig. 9 is shown a 
typical curve indicating the increase in power requirements as 
the cross-section area is decreased. 


RATE OF DISPLACEMENT 


Although little information is available, there are indications 
that the rate of displacement somewhat affects the power re- 
quirements. Tests made by the writer appear to show that a 
~ low rate of displacement requires less power than if metal is rolled 
quickly. In practise, however, metal is rolled as quickly as it 
can be handled, so that this feature is of comparatively little 
importance. 

SIZE OF ROLLS 

Theoretical investigations show that when rolling plates or 
blooms or such sections where direct pressure only is used, the 
size of roll has some effect upon power requirements. Small rolls 
should require somewhat less power than large rolls, but the 
writer has not been able to demonstrate the accuracy of these 
theoretical calculations owing to the great many other factors 
which influence the test results. 


PRACTICAL DETERMINATION OF MOTOR SIZE 


The great majority of rolling mills are of the type running 
continuously in one direction, and to equalize the input to the 
motor, flywheels are used. It is of the greatest importance 
to determine the size of flywheel required in conjunction with 
the characteristics of the motor and control apparatus, as it is 
only by considering them as a unit that a satisfactory installation 
can be made. It is seldom that a mill is run at such a rate that 
it is discharging metal from the finishing pass for anything ap- 
proaching 100 per cent of the running time. Depending upon the 
class of mill and the work performed, it is usual to find the mill 
actually rolling from 20 to 80 per cent of the total time. Inthe 
heavier mills, the percentage is naturally less than in the case 
of the mills rolling small sections, and it is therefore obvious that 
if the motor size is determined upon the basis of rolling so 
much material per hour, it may be altogether too small to perform 


2062 SYKES: ROLLING MILLS [Nov. 8 


the work while the metal is actually in the rolls, although it 
might be large enough to take care of the average conditions. 
With the ideal flywheel, a motor sufficiently large to carry the 
average load would be the right size to use, as all the peaks would 
be taken by the flywheel, and during the intervals between 
passes, energy would be storedinit. In practise it is not possible 
to use such flywheels, as they would be excessively large, and 
consequently a compromise must be made between motor and 
flywheel. It is usual to consider that the mill will run for short 
periods at its maximum capacity, that is, with the minimum in- 
terval necessary to handle the material, and on this basis the load 
diagram must be determined. The load diagram can be de- 
termined from curves showing the power requirements per 
cubic inch displaced, in conjunction with the volumes displaced 
and the rate of rolling. From this diagram, the average load, 
when the mill is rolling at the maximum rate, can be determined, 
and also the size of the flywheel. The average production of 
the mill must be taken into consideration in determining the 
size of motor so as to have an equipment which has suitable 
characteristics for the normal operating conditions. The curve 
showing the power required per cubic inch displacement shows 
a rapid increase as the cross-section area of the material rolled 
decreases. It is necessary to determine this curve from test 
data for practically every installation, as local conditions vary 
so greatly that it is not possible to take any set of curves as 
representing universal conditions. To illustrate the methods 
used in determining the size of motor, a load diagram when rolling 
plates is worked up in detail in Table I, which it is believed will 
show how this problem is handled when the proper data are avail- 
able. It is of course obvious that this diagram is subject to 
-appreciable variations in practise due to the variation in the 
condition of the material, temperature, etc., but as the curve 
for power consumption is based upon an average of a number of 
tests, the diagram is sufficiently accurate to enable the size 
of the motor and flywheel to be determined. The motor slip 
under actual operating conditions may be somewhat different 
from that calculated, but the flywheel will take care of these 
operating -variations. From the load diagram, after allowing 
for friction, the average load on the motor during the period 
when the mill is rolling at its maximum rate, can be determined. 
For perfect operating conditions the flywheel should take all 
loads in excess of this average load. In practise this is not 


2063 


ROLLING MILLS 


. 


SVK ES 


1912] 


£666 Cert SoSL + 8828 961 000¢ 008 0886 6 
LS80T 0998 EL8 LOTS OL0E OSéT Ors - 09ST “3 
$866 L8LL E16 LOIS OPS OSZT Serr OOLE L 
TLL6 PLSL T9SE LO1G 8gLg OSZT OSSZ 0069 9 
O1e9 €lOP 0GLZ LOTS LI6¥ OSGI OFZ9 09L¢ S 
O67E E661 9TIT LOTS e1&é OSZT 866P OF6E ¥ 
PLES LLY LLY LOTS PLES OSZT STE W214 € 
LOTS OSGT ST8G 0896 4 
6601 OSZT O€9T SePrT is 
(‘998s-"d"y) (‘oes-"d'y) (‘oas-'d"y) (‘oas-"d'y) ‘oes-"d'°Y yeAsoqut UOTzOIIT (‘oes *d*y) ‘ON sseg 
ssed Jeqje JPeUMAP urosy ssed sossed aseloae sulinp SuIpnyout ssed 
ye2eqyMABG jo AZiIau2 JO Bulinp Asi1eue u9seM4eq aaoqge yeod spuooes ‘ssed 3ulinp BulInp FIOM 
yndyno UOTVEUIUING ppeyM Ag peeyM AG sseoxe [soyM -Iamod asioy | *oas-"d'y yeyoL BUulTJOI JON 
WINUIIXe JY JO SSO] JON 0} peuInyory -Ay Jo ndyno 
00°F £06 OGL 89'°€ 0° 06S 0087 0°81 G°61 9T/ZT 6 
g9O'€ v&% OSZT VE 0' 087 0 91P G61 GGG 9T/€1 8 
9€'°€ 9°96 OOTT 6S 0° 91P 0°898 $°G3S g°SG 9T/ST L 
€8°G 6'°SE OVS 9G 0° 896 G11] SSS ove 9T/T T 9 
88'S Vv SP Wa“ 66'T GIL] 106 SVE g 9Y. 9T/L 1 g 
GO'% 6°09 OG6T €P 1 $106 0° O9T G.9Or. cess 9T/ST v 
08 'T igmey 4 S6ST eben 0° O9T 0° S&T $°8g¢ GOL 9I/L &@ £ 
4g°T 68 eV9L 60 0° €&T L' 601 GOL g°S8 9T/ST & G 
SF I oot é00T 82L°0 1° 601 G16 g°Ss8 96 91/6 §€ T 
(OT *3ta) ssed a10Joq (seqout *nd) (998) (seyout) (sayout) (seyout *bs) | (seyout ‘bs) (seyout) ‘ON Sstq 
‘ul “nd vole [eUulstio T (v-V) ssed 1 Ls ¥ Vv ssed Joqye 
ted ‘oas-"d'y a8equ90I0g poor|dstp "JOA jo oWITy, ssed tojyjyy | ssed o10jag | ssed taqzy | ssed si0jog | ssouxory 
-uoljdurnsuoo 
iJomod oytoeds y3ue'T ely 


UWOTpOI yy 


‘ulur Iod ‘Aol 06 poeds a3vi0oAy 


spuodas 0g ‘Sqe]S Us9MJoq [eAIOZUT ‘spuOddes g ‘sessed useM4Oq JeAIOJUT “dy QGZ ‘TIT Jo proT 


*19j9WeIP “Ul OF SOU 


*qeis ‘ul-G" 76 Aq #Z AQ F WOT; ayeId ‘Ul-FZ Aq “UI-¥ BuT[OI 10} parmnbes JaMmod jo uoremMoed 


I @TavL 


2064 SYKES: ROLLING MILLS [Nov. 8 


always feasible, but it must be remembered that the type of 
control also has considerable influence upon the input to the 
motor. If the speed of the motor is to be regulated in such a 
way that the motor takes only the average load, it is necessary 
to vary automatically the resistance of the rotor circuit. The 
usual method of control in rolling mills is to use a fixed rotor 
resistance, so that the speed falls as the load is increased. This 
gives a more or less satisfactory control of the flywheel, but in 
the majority of cases it leaves a great deal to be desired. Efficient 
control devices have been designed which will automatically 
regulate the rotor resistance quickly enough to meet rolling mill 


- 


[7] 


SPECIFIC POWER CONSUMPTION 
H,P.-SECS. PER CUB INCH 


i 


10 20 380 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
% ORIGINAL OF AREA 


Fie. 10 


conditions, and a description of one successful type has been 
already given by the author.* In the table calculated, it has been 
assumed that automatic slip regulation is provided for, so that 
the flywheel will take all loads in excess of the average, and from 
the load diagram, the capacity of the flywheel can be readily 
determined. In Fig. 10 is shown the curve from which the 
S. P. C. has been obtained. This curve represents the average of 
a number of tests. In Fig. 11 is shown the load diagram corres- 
ponding to the table, which shows the work to be performed by 
the motor and flywheel. In practise it has been found that, al- 
*TRANSACTIONS A,I.E. E., 1911, Vol. XXX, Part II, page 1587. 


1912] SYKES: ROLLING MILLS 2065 


though the power required for the individual passes may vary 
quite appreciably from that calculated, the flywheel will have 
sufficient capacity to compensate for these individual variations, 
and that the general operating conditions of the motor can be 
fairly accurately determined. It has been pointed out that the 
daily or hourly capacity of a mill may be very much less than 
the maximum possible capacity, and it is necessary to compro- 
mise between the size of machine required to handle the max- 
imum possible output and the actual hourly and daily output. 
For instance, in the example that has been worked out, the 
average load on the motor is 675 h.p. when the mill is run at 
its maximum rate of production. The actual hourly rate of 
production of this mill is only 80 per cent of this maximum, so 


3000 


2000 


0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 


SECONDS 


Fic. 11—Loap DIAGRAM CORRESPONDING TO TABLE I 


that if the normal rating of the motor is such that it would carry 
the hourly average, it would be overloaded 25 per cent when 
working at the maximum rate of production. 

In practise it is advisable not to allow for an overload of more 
than 25 per cent when rolling at the maximum possible rate, 
so that there is always a certain reserve available in the motor 
for extraordinary conditions that may arise. Rolling mill 
motors are usually designed so that they can carry 25 per cent 
overload continuously with a 50 deg. cent. rise and 50 per cent 
for one hour with a 60 deg. cent. rise. With motors designed 
on this basis, it is quite permissible to allow for their being over- 
loaded 25 per cent when the mill ig run at its maximum capacity. 
If the hourly capacity of the mill is considerably less than the 


2066 SYKES: ROLLING MILLS [Nov. 8 


maximum that can be rolled, it is then necessary to investigate 
very closely the conditions existing so as to determine on what 
basis the compromise must be made. 

In the foregoing, attention has been drawn to some of the 
features controlling the power requirements of rolling mills 
and it is hoped that at some future date it will be possible 
to discuss this problem more in detail when a fuller knowledge 
is available of the various constants that must be considered 
when dealing with this proposition. The examples given rep- 
resent simple conditions and it will be readily appreciated that 
the great variety of shapes rolled makes the actual determination 
of power requirements very difficult. Curves showing the spe- 
cific power consumption are not as a rule so regular as for plates, 
which represent the simplest condition met with and the one 
not interfered with by such items as indirect pressure, collar 
friction, etc. 


A paper presented at the 277th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, New 
York, November 8, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I. EH. E. 


THE ECONOMICAL SPEED CONTROL OF ALTER- 
NATING-CURRENT MOTORS DRIVING 
ROLLING MILLS 


BY F. W. MEYER AND WILFRED SYKES 


For reasons which need not be discussed in this paper the 
induction motor has been adopted almost exclusively for driv- 
ing rolling mills where electrical equipments have been installed. 
One of the most difficult problems to be solved with this type of 
motor when electrifying rolling mills is the speed regulation re- 
quired for the merchant and hand mills, owing to the fact that 
this type of motor is normally a constant, speed machine. It 
is also one of the requirements on which it is almost impossible 
to obtain reliable information and one which invariably leads 
to a great deal of discussion, not only between the electrical 
engineers and the mill operator, but also amongst the operators 
themselves. Although the principal types of mills requiring 
~ adjustable speed are the merchant and hand mills, it is occasion-" 
ally necessary to run the mills rolling heavy sections at various 
speeds. In the latter case, however, the problem is usually fairly 
simple because as a rule only two speeds are asked for. 

The smaller mills generally call for a great number of speeds 
and it is in connection with motors of about 300 to 1000 h.p. 
that the principal difficulty occurs. 

In referring to adjustable speed drives it is understood that this 
means mills that have to run at a number of definite speeds and 
that these speeds are maintained substantially constant, inde- 
pendent of the load variation. 

To any one investigating the requirements of rolling mills, 
one of the most striking features is the diversity of opinion among 
mill operators, as to what speed regulation is necessary when 

2067 


2068 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. & 


rolling various sizes of material and different classes of work. 
To explain clearly the problem, it is necessary to divide the mills 
into three classes as follows: 

1. Speed adjustment is required on account of the large range 
of material required. 

2. The speed regulation is required to enable a mill to run in 
tandem with another mill which has a fixed speed and which 
rolls a variety of product. 

3. Speed regulation is required to make it possible to obtain 
certain qualities, finish, and accuracy of section for different 
products. 

As a rule it is not clearly understood, but it is a fact never- 
theless, that in the first case, the speed regulation required 
depends greatly upon the class of labor operating the mill, and to 
thedegreetowhich it have been organized for working this particu- 
lar plant. A gang of men that has been working together for a con- 
siderable period at a particular mill can naturally handle the 
metal quicker than one that is not so well organized and familiar 
with its characteristics, and it is also possible when the men are 
thoroughly familiar with the work to handle a larger variety of 
sections at high speeds, than can be done by less skilful workmen. 
Where the range of material rolled is very great it is, of course, 
not possible to handle heavy sections properly at the same speed 
as the lighter sections, no matter how well the workmen may be 
trained. The rate at which it is possible for the workman to 
catch the metal with his tongs as it leaves the mill and return it 
to the roll, depends, within limits, entirely upon the skill he may 
have acquired through practise, and when rolling the smaller 
sections, it is the workman’s capacity to handle the metal that 
limits the speed of the rolls. The more skill he has, the greater 
will be the range of material that he will be able to handle at the 
maximum speed of the mill, provided, of course, that the weight 
is not excessive, and this accounts to a very great extent for the 
difference in the practise of different mills when rolling the same 
material. It may be stated, therefore, that if the range of mate- 
rial rolled is not very great, the speed regulation required de- 
pends principally upon the skill of the workman. It is not un- 
usual to find that after a mill has been installed with arrange- 
ments for speed regulation, and has been operating for a few 
months, that speeds lower than the maximum are not used at all. 

As the greatest speed regulation is generally required by the 
smaller mills, due to the larger range of material that must be 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2069 


rolled with a given equipment, it is in such plants that the best 
results can usually be obtained by studying the operating con- 
ditions and the organization of the workmen. 

In changing an existing installation from steam to electric 
drive, it is very often possible to materially increase the output, 
due to the fact that the speed limitations of the induction motor 
necessarily introduce changes in the method of operation. If, 
for instance, a mill is installed with say only two speeds where 
previously a greater‘number was possible, it is commonly found 
that after a short time, a much greater variety of sections is 
rolled at the higher speed than was formerly the case. As the 
operators have only one alternative, it is, therefore, necessary 
to study very closely the working conditions, and by comparing 
them with those of other plants, to arrive at conclusions independ- 
ently of the statements of the operators. Such methods must 


800}2 ele ;-+ 
= 
a a 
F00he |— 
coo et tT lal 
re 
Sean - 
on 
thea —s 
pe 
400 sft a 
a 
300 S| | MAXIMUY SIMENE ‘ON IN| ANY DIREOTION-INGHES 


25 3601 1% 8 26 8 86 4 be SS 


Fic. 1 


not be pushed too far, of course, as the quality of the organiza- 
tion must also be taken into consideration. From investiga- 
tions made as to the operating conditions in a great many mills 
driven by steam engines, it has been found that the operators 
usually have only a very vague notion of the speeds at which 
different materials are rolled. In Fig. 1 are shown some average 
figures for the delivery speed of hand-operated mills and it will 
be noted that the speed depends upon the maximum dimen- 
sions of the material rather than upon the area of the section. 

It is occasionally necessary to roll certain kinds of steel at lower 
speeds than the maximum on account of the quality of the ma- 
terial or the temperature at which it is worked, and this must, 
of course, be taken into consideration. 

It is obvious that if a mill is to rolla great variety of sections 
‘some speed regulation may be necessary, but as it is not uncom- 
mon to find material rolled at speeds varying as much as 100 ft. 


2070 MEYER AND SYKES: . [Nov. 8 


(30.4 m.) per minute from the average figures given, it is 
obvious that a great’ number of speeds is not absolutely neces- 
sary, although very often asked for. The greatest speed adjust- 
ment is required in the case of jobbing mills where it is not 
unusual to find material varying from } in. to 3 or 4 in. (0.63-cm. 
to 7.6 or 10.1-cm.) rounds rolled in the same mill, and a speed — 
range of 2to 1 may be required. With such a range of work it is 
necessary to finish the smaller sections at a higher speed than 
the larger ones, as otherwise the metal would cool too rapidly and 
could only be formed by the expenditure of a great deal of power, 
thereby increasing the liability of breakage of the mill, and the 
accuracy of sections and quality of product may also be affected. 
To obtain a reasonable production from the mill, the smaller 
sections must naturally be rolled at as high a speed as possible. 
The second conditon to be met is where the finishing stands of 


FLYWHEEL 


MOTOR 
GEAR HOUSING 
TWO STANDS 


FLYWHEEL 
9 IN. MILL. USING 


MOTOR 


FIVE STANDS THREE HIGH 


12-IN. MILL 
Fic. 2 


a mill are driven by a separate motor, and the metal is in the two 
mills simultaneously. In this case the metal is usually delivered 
from the first mill at approximately constant speed and the speed 
of the finishing stands is dependent upon the reduction in area 
in the last passes. There is usually a loop between the two mills, 
but if the relative speeds are not approximately correct, the length 
of the loop may become excessive or the metal may be torn apart. 
In Fig. 2 is shown the layout of a mill of this type in which the 
smaller sections are finished in the separately driven rolls while 
the larger sizes of material are finished by the first mill. The 
delivery speed of the mill is approximately the same as the 
peripheral speed of the rolls, and consequently the intake speed 
will vary in proportion to the reduction in area in the pass. For 
instance, if there is a 30 per cent reduction in area, the ratio 
between the intake and delivery speeds will be the same as 70 
to 100, or in other words the delivery speed will be 43 per cent 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2071 


faster than the intake. This relative speed, of course, varies 
with each section rolled. Another feature controlling the delivery 
and intake speeds is the size of the rolls. In practise, rolls will 
vary in size 10 per cent; they are usually about 10 per cent. over 
size when new, and they will be turned until they are about this 
amount under size, before they are discarded. If it should 
happen that the first mill has new rolls, and the finishing mill 
old rolls, there may be a difference between the delivery and intake 
speeds of 20 per cent, independent of any other conditions that 
may exist. 

The amount of variation from the correct speed of the finishing 
rolls depends upon the normal length of the loop, which should 
be as short as possible, the floor space available and the length 
of the material. It is, therefore, usually necessary with this 
arrangement to arrange for a fairly large speed regulation with a 
considerable number of steps. 

The third condition is usually met with in mills rolling heavy 
and complicated sections. In such cases in order to roll some 
particular section accuratély to size, a lower speed may be neces- 
sary than is required for normal operation, but in such cases only 
two speeds are usually wanted to meet operating conditions. 

To meet these three conditions a number of arrangements have 
been used and suggested, and it is proposed to review some of 
these different schemes from a practical operating and commercial 
standpoint. 


RHEOSTATIC CONTROL 


The simplest method of reducing the speed of an induction 
motor is, of course, to insert resistance in the rotor circuit, by 
which means any speed required may be obtained for a certain 
definite load and with a corresponding loss of efficiency depend- 
ing on the load and reduction in speed. With simple rheostatic 
control, we are limited by the speed variation which occurs with 
varying loads, as at light loads the motor speed will rise to ap- 
proximately the maximum value, no matter what the full load 
speed may be. Within certain limits, where the regulation re- 
quired does not exceed about 10 to 15 per cent from the syn- 
chronous speed, the rheostatic method of control is not only the 
simplest and most satisfactory, but under mill operating condi- 
tions probably the most economical. In the class of mill requir- 
ing speed regulation, the load is usually comparatively constant, 
- due to the fact that there is often more than one piece going 
through the mill at a time, and the interval between passes is 


2072 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. 8 


generally very short, so that the actual speed variations are not 
so great as it may be thought would be the case from the motor 
characteristics, especially if the flywheel effect of the rotating 
parts is at all appreciable. The effect of a flywheel is not only 
to lower the peak loads that come on the motor, but also to 
lengthen the time required for the motor to increase in speed 
after the load is reduced. 

Without automatic regulation of the resistance, about 15 
per cent regulation is about all that can be obtained under usual 
operating conditions, but sometimes a still greater range is prac- 
ticable. With automatic resistance adjustment so as to vary it 
inversely with the load, it is usually possible to obtain a speed 
regulation up to about 30 per cent, provided the friction load of 
the mill is not less than about 20 per cent of full load capacity 
of the motor, and there is sufficient flywheel effect in the mill to 
compensate for the time element of the regulator. Beyond these 
limits it is hardly practical to use rheostatic speed regulation, 
but up to about 30 per cent it is possible to obtain fairly satis- 
factory operation by rheostatic control under the above condi- 
tions. The accuracy of the regulation will depend somewhat 
upon the flywheel effect of the system and if it is very great even 
a greater range than given above may be obtained satisfactorily. 
Although at first sight rheostatic control may not appear to 
be economical, where the speed range is as large as mentioned 
above, there are many cases where it is more economical than 
some auxiliary arrangement for obtaining speed regulation, due 
to the fact that at light load the rheostatic losses are not great 
and that the proportion of the time that the motor is operating 
at full load may be comparatively small. 

If we consider, for instance, a jobbing mill which runs continu- 
ously, but which has a very small production, the no-load losses 
of any auxiliary arrangement may mean an appreciable reduction 
of the all-day efficiency. Take for example a mill requiring 500 
h.p. average when rolling and 100 h.p. running light, the motor 
losses being 10 per cent of the average output at full load, and 
5 per cent at the friction load. If the mill carries full load 
20 per cent of the running time, and the regulation from syn- 
chronous speed required is 25 per cent, the additional loss due to 
the resistance will be about 22 per cent at full load, and at light 
load the rheostatic loss will be about 24.4 per cent. The total 
input to the motor under these conditions will be for one hour: 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2073 


Useful output, 500 h.p., 12 minutes.............. 100 h.p-hr. 
NiGtorloss oo bap. llc amin UItes mieten < acteicte tte 10S“ 
Rheostatic loss, 140 h.p., 12 minutes............. Deyo ae te 
Friction output, 100 h.p., 48 minutes............. 80 “ “ 
Motor loss#20n0- ps, 45 MUNULCS wane coisas wees ue 9) OS a 
eine Osta ticnlosstccmL scrim airmen ar le cveriene isc apne 0 
270 h.p-hr. 


The 25 per cent speed regulation has been obtained at the expense 
of an additional input of 60 h.p-hours. If, instead of rheostatic 
control, the alternating current were converted to direct current 
by means of a synchronous converter, the efficiency of the con- 
verting equipment, including transformers, would be about 90 
per cent at full load and about 83 per cent at light load. In 
this case an adjustable speed motor would be used for the mill, 
so the efficiency would be about the same as the induction motor. 
With this arrangement the input would be as follows: 


Useful output, 500 h.p.. 12 minutes.............. 100 h.p-hr. 
Motor loss, 50 h.p., 12 minutes........-..---+565 TOF Se 
Conversion loss 60 h.p., 12 minutes............. De Seay 
Friction output, 400 h.p., 48 minutes...........-. SO nea. 
Motor loss, 25 h.p., 48 minutes..........-.-+++-- Dea 
Conversion loss, 25 h.p., 48 minutes.........+.-+- Oman 
242 h.p-hr. 


The over-all efficiency with the rheostatic control would be 


(100 + 80) X 100 _, 


270 6.6 per cent. 


and with the direct-current system, 


(100 + 80) x 100 
3 2 


om =74.3 per cent. 


An improvement of 7.7 per cent in the over-all efficiency has 
been gained with a capital expenditure about 100 per cent 
greater than that of the simple induction motor. The fixed 
charges will be appreciably increased due to the greater outlay 
and the greater maintenance of the additional apparatus. 
Actually, the gain will be considerably less, as the mill will 
operate only a part of the time at the reduced speed. If, for 
instance, it runs half the time at the reduced speed, the over-all 


2074 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. 8 


efficiency of the induction motor drive would be 75 per cent, 
and the direct-current drive 74.3 per cent, so there would be 
no saving in a year’s operation. 

This is not representative of the class of work usually met 
with, but such cases are not uncommon and it will be seen that 
although rheostatic control is inherently inefficient, yet in 
certain instances it might be better than some of the arrange- 
ments that are at present operating. In the example taken, the 
obvious solution of the problem would be to use a two-speed 
motor and to obtain intermediate speeds by rheostatic control, 
in which case the economy would be very much better than 
shown, and superior to the direct-current arrangement. With 
some of the newer methods of speed regulation which will be 
referred to later, much more economical regulation can be 
obtained than with any arrangement requiring the conversion 
of the energy to direct current, so that the field for rheostatic 
control will be reduced in the future, but the difference between 
full-load and the yearly efficiency with rheostatic control, should 
be clearly understood. 


Mutt1-Speep Motors 


Theoretically it is possible to obtain practically any number 
of speeds required from a single motor by using one or more 
windings and suitably grouping the coils. In practise, however, 
we are limited to one or two combinations, not only on account, 
of the complexity of the motor design and the uneconomical 
use of the material, but also because of the complication of the 
control equipment. Four speeds is about the maximum that 
can be obtained with multi-speed motors in practise and even 
this range requires an extremely complicated control, especially 
if the motor has a wound rotor. Two of the speeds need not 
have any definite relation to each other, but the other speeds in 
each case must be half of the corresponding higher speeds. This 
arrangement requires two windings on the stator, and in the case 
of a wound-rotor motor, two windings on the rotor, each winding 
being grouped to give double the number of poles for the lower 
speed. To obtain the various combinations, such a motor must 
have at least nine slip rings, and 12 leads must be brought out 
from the stator. 

The usual type of motor used in steel mills has not more than 
three speeds, one speed being half of the maximum and the 
third speed intermediate between these two. This motor also 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2075 


has two windings, one of which must be re-connected to give a 
2 to 1 ratio. Such arrangements are seldom met with and a 
great majority of cases, up to the present, have been taken 
care of by two-speed motors, intermediate regulation being 
obtained by rheostatic control. The simplest type has a speed 
ratio of 2 to 1 and has only one winding which is re-connected, 
requiring six stator and six rotor leads. The second type has 
two windings that are absolutely independent of each other, but 
has the same number of leads as the motor with the 2 to 1 ratio. 
The complication of the control is one of the disadvantages of 
the multi-speed motor and it is one of the limiting features of 
the number of speeds that it is feasible to obtain. In the motor 
with two separate windings the control is very simple, as it is 
only necessary to change from one winding to the other by 
means of double-throw switches. 

With an arrangement giving two synchronous speeds, one 
approximately 70 per cent of the other, it is possible to obtain 
a speed regulation by rheostatic control of about 2 to 1, giving 
any number of intermediate steps that may be required. This 
arrangement in a great many cases where comparatively close 
regulation may be necessary, such as when mills are worked in 
tandem, may work out to be the best and cheapest installation. 

A number of papers have been read before this Institute on 
the possible combinations for obtaining a number of synchronous 
speeds, but in all the discussion little attention has been given 
to the switching arrangements required to make up such com- 
binations. From the standpoint of the operator, the control 
equipment is usually a greater worry than the motor, and an 
arrangement that may be technically very interesting and 
ingenious will probably be so complicated from a control stand- 
point that satisfactory operation is impossible. The motor is 
usually the simplest and most reliable part of the equipment and, 
therefore, it must not be considered alone. The order in which 
the switching must be done, when changing from one speed to 
another, to prevent short circuits, is such that itis almost impera- 
tive to uge automatic control with the class of labor usually 
operating such machines, and, to obtain the proper combinations 
the wiring becomes extremely complicated if more than two 
speeds are required. 

The efficiency and power factor of the multi-speed motor is not 
very much lower than a single-speed machine of the same char- 

“acteristics and from a practical operating standpoint, the differ- 
ence is not appreciable. 


2076 MEYER AND SYKES: ‘[Nov. 8 


Morors IN CASCADE 


With motors in cascade it is possible to obtain practically 
any number of speeds that may be required. Actually, the 
number of speeds that it is possible to obtain is limited by the 
cost of the equipment and the complication of control apparatus 
more than by any limitations of the system. This arrangement 
has been used to a slight extent here, and to a greater extent 
abroad for rolling mill work, but on account of its high cost 
and rather unsatisfactory operating conditions it has not found 
many advocates. 

The possible combinations have been brought out to some 
extent in the discussion of Reist and Maxwell’s paper before 
this Institute,* and practically the only limitation is the number 
of steps that can be obtained with an even number of poles. 
Such combinations, however, could not be used in practise on 
account of the complexity of the switching devices, which would 
be such that they would be necessarily very unreliable. The 
combinations that are really practicable do not give any greater 
range than can be obtained by multi-speed motors, and the 
efficiency and power factor are not as good. The low power factor 
of the cascade arrangement is one of the most undesirable 
features of this arrangement, and in steel mills where induction 
motors are so largely used the addition of such apparatus is 
very undesirable. The work that has been done in the study 
of the speed requirements of the mills by electrical engineers 
has shown that it is not necessary to have such a wide range 
of speeds as can be obtained with the cascade arrangement even 
leaving the practical side of the question out altogether, and, 
therefore, the multi-speed motor has been used almost exclusively 
in this country, wherever different speeds have been necessary. 


INDUCTION Motors IN CONJUNCTION WITH 'THREE-PHASE 
COMMUTATOR REGULATING MACHINES 


In the types of machines that have been referred to, the 
characteristics are generally well known. In the case of rheostatic 
control, the resistance losses are such that this system is not 
efficient if the amount of regulation required is large, as the 
energy from the rotor circuit is dissipated in the resistance. If, 
instead, the energy from the rotor circuit is absorbed by an 
auxiliary machine or machines, which in turn delivers power to 
the system, it will be possible to obtain speed regulation below 

*TRANSACTIONS A.I.E.E., 1909, XXVIII, I, page 610. 


sf 


1912) MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2077 


synchronism economically. If energy is delivered to the rotor 
circuit by an auxiliary machine or machines, regulation above 
synchronism can be obtained. With such arrangements it is 
possible to combine many of the advantages of the induction 
motors with those of the adjustable-speed direct-current motors. 
The desirability of such regulating systems cannot be questioned, 
but under the conditions existing in this country there are at 
present certain difficulties standing in the way of the general 
adoption of the various methods which will be described. The 
problem of adapting these various systems to American condi- 
tions presents considerable difficulty and consequently they 
cannot be generally used at the present time. 

The various systems that have been developed enable speed 
regulation over a considerable range to be obtained, and in 
addition to their use in connection with rolling mill motors 
they have been largely adopted in Europe for the speed control 
of compressors, blowers, etc., as well as for the driving of machine 
tools requiring adjustable speed, thereby supplanting the adjust- 
able-speed direct-current motor, and making possible the use 
of alternating current for all purposes. 

The desirability of obtaining a greater speed range, economic- 
ally, than is possible with the multi-speed motor and cascade 
systems that have been previously described, caused some of the 
European manufacturers to experiment at an early date with the 
various arrangements involving three-phase commutator ma- 
chines. Inspite of the favorable results obtained under test con- 
ditions the development of these arrangements progressed rather 
slowly, due to the fact that this type of machine introduced new 
problems from an operating standpoint, and consequently, 
practical experience had first to be obtained before confidence 
was established. Originally, there was considerable doubt as to 
the possibility of obtaining satisfactory commutation, but the 
development of the single-phase commutator motor for railway 
work, operating under most severe conditions, paved the way 
for the introduction of a three-phase commutator motor. One 
of the difficulties that had to be overcome in the introduction of 
this type of motor was the education of the operators. In 
Europe, the experience that had been gained with the single- 
phase motor showed that the three-phase machine did not 
present any greater difficulties, as far as commutation is con- 
cerned, and in certain features had advantages over the single- 

phase, and in some respects even over direct-current machanes, 
in spite of other drawbacks. 


2078 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. 8 


How far it is possible to use the systems that have been devel- 
oped in Europe, in this country, is a question that can only be 
demonstrated by experience, but in view of the inferior class of 
labor that we have in a great many of our plants for attending 
to the machines, it will be necessary to exercise considerable 
care in the early installations. As will be seen from the follow- 
ing descriptions of the various systems, some of them are quite 
simple, and when the preliminary difficulties have been over- 
come, we may expect that such arrangements will find consider- 
able application. In a paper before this Institute, Mr. G. A. 
Maier* described some of the systems that have been developed 
in Europe, and in the discussion another system was mentioned. 
It is proposed in this paper to describe some of the newer develop- 
ments with this type of machine and for the sake of comparison, 
the principal features of the systems already described will be 
mentioned. Most of the main characteristics of the new systems 
_ that will be described have been already tested, but at the 
present time it is not possible to discuss operating experience. 

One characteristic of the three-phase commutator regulating 
machine is that it is possible, with suitable arrangements, to 
compensate for the power factor of the main motor and over- 
come the objections that are raised as to the use of induction 
motors, on account of their low average power factor. This 
characteristic has not been taken full advantage of in all systems 
that have been developed, but it is one of the important advan- 
tages of this method of regulation, if properly worked out. 

One of the first systems developed had the commutator 
machine direct-connected to an induction motor shaft. This 
system has worked satisfactorily, but the question is sometimes 
asked why the three-phase motor is not used directly instead of 
in combination with the induction motor. The reason is that 
it is desired as much as possible to employ the simple induction 
motor for performing the work and that the commutator machine 
is only used as an auxiliary to obtain the speed regulation, and 
consequently it may be smaller in most cases than would be the 
case if it were used directly. 

In Fig. 3, the system referred to above is shown diagrammatic- 
ally. The induction motor A is designed for the full load to be 
carried. When the main motor is operating at its full speed the 
auxiliary motor B is not loaded and may be disconnected alto- 
gether. In order to obtain a reduction in speed, the transformer 


*TRANSACTIONS A.I.E.E., 1911, XXX, III, page 2455. 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2079 


C is so regulated that the auxiliary motor B develops a back 
e.m.f. which can only be overcome by an increase in the rotor 
voltage and a consequent drop in speed, and consequently, the 
energy from the rotor circuit, instead of being lost in resistance 
as with rheostatic control, is absorbed by the auxiliary motor, 
which assists the main motor in carrying the load. So long as 
the speed range of the main motor is not large, the auxiliary 
motor is comparatively small, but its capacity is determined by 
the percentage of speed regulation required, or, for instance, if 
the speed must be reduced 30 per cent, it must have 30 per 
cent of the capacity of the induction motor. This is important, 
as previously it was not possible to build three-phase commutator 
motors for large capacities. The limit of size was fixed by the 
fact that satisfactory means were not available to obtain good 


Fic. 3 


commutation, and the arrangements for obtaining power factor 
regulation, by means of moving the brushes, made it extremely 
difficult to use auxiliary commutating fields in the motor. The 
movement of the brushes was necessary to avoid the use of an 
expensive combined phase and voltage regulator in place of the 
simple regulating transformer. Due to later developments, the 
limit placed upon the size of machine by the commutation has 
been removed by the use of commutating fields, which makes it 
necessary with the ordinary phase winding to use a constant 
brush lead to obtain good power factor compensation for the 
average operating conditions; or it is possible to obtain the same 
results by. a special phase combination in the motor itself. 
The latter arrangement has certain advantages, especially where 
the field form is not favorable to good commutation, which is 

not possessed by the system of varying the brush position. 


2080 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. 8 


This system of speed regulation has the advantage that as the 
speed of the set is reduced, the available torque for the same 
line current is increased as the work done by the commutator 
machine increases, directly in proportion with the decrease of 
speed. The disadvantage of this system is that the direct con- 
nection of the commutator motor necessitates its being designed 
for the same speed as the induction motor, which as arule, in the 
case of machines of large capacities in rolling mills, is comparative- 
ly low, and this introduces difficulties in the construction. Inthe 
case of high-speed induction motors, driving turbo-compressors, 
blowers, etc., it is generally quite impossible to build the com- 
mutator motor for the same speed as the main motor. It is, of 


Fic. 4 


course, possible to connect the commutator motor to the main 
motor through some form of gearing, but such arrangements 
should be avoided if possible. 

The well-known system shown in Fig. 4 presents advantages 
in this respect. In this figure the commutator motor B is not 
connected to the main motor A mechanically, but is coupled to 
an induction machine D which is connected to the line. This 
makes it possible to build the auxiliary machines for the most 
desirable speed, from a designing standpoint. The energy 
from the rotor circuit is not transmitted to the shaft of the main 
motor, but is transmitted through the auxiliary machines and 
is returned to the line in the form of electrical energy, and con- 
sequently this arrangement is better adapted for cases where 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2081 


constant torque is required. The commutator motors of such 
regulating sets are nearly always provided with a compensating 
winding on the stator which counteracts the rotor field and makes 
it possible to regulate the speed by varying the magnetizing 
current. Consequently, the regulating transformer C and the 
necessary controller can be smaller. It would be possible 
to avoid the use of a regulating transformer altogether if the 
commutator machine were provided with an auto-transformer 
winding, which has been done in a number of cases withthesystem 
first described. 

The power factor compensation with this system is obtained 
by aspecial phase combination some what different from that used 
with the arrangement previously described, but such an arrange- 
ment provides correct compensation for only one definite speed 


and load, which are chosen so as to approximate, as closely as 
possible, the average working conditions. 

In the system just described the commutator machine has been 
in some cases furnished with a series pole for obtaining the charac- 
teristics of a compound motor, which is an advantage, for in- 
stance, if this arrangement is used in conjunction with the motor 
driving a rolling mill requiring a drooping speed characteristic 
to enable the flywheel to take the proper proportion of the load. 

The principal disadvantage of this system is that it requires 
two auxiliary machines to obtain regulation and it will be shown 
later that it is possible with suitable arrangements to avoid 
this feature. 

In Fig. 5 is shown diagrammatically a system that has been used 
to some extent in Europe and which has been mentioned in the 
discussion of G. A. Maier’s paper before this Institute. In this 


2082 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. 8 


arrangement the second auxiliary machine D is a small motor 
which drives the frequency changer B and only has to overcome 
the mechanical losses. The commutator machine B consists 
of a wound rotor which has on one side a commutator and on 
the other, slip rings. On the stator there is only an auxiliary 
winding for improving the commutation of the machine. This 
machine cannot develop any torque and it is, therefore, necessary 
to use the small driving machine D to rotate it relatively in 
synchronism with the main motor. The regulating transformer 
C must in this case be designed for the whole of the rotor energy, 
which flows through the frequency changer and the transformer 
to the line. In the frequency changer the copper losses are 
comparable with those of a synchronous converter and are con- 
sequently very small. 

With this system, as it has been pointed out, it is necessary for 
the frequency changer to run relatively in synchronism with 
the main motor, and consequently if the number of poles of the 
auxiliary machine D and the main motor were the same, which, 
however, is generally not the case, both would have to run at 
exactly the same speed.. The rotor connections between the 
motor A and the auxiliary driving motor D insure that the 
machines remain relatively in synchronism and any slight differ- 
ence will cause the exchange of synchronizing energy in the same 
way as with synchronous machines. The power factor of this 
system is fairly good on account of the favorable distribution 
of the magnetizing current, but it is not possible to obtain reg- 
ulation. The advantage of this system over the arrangement 
previously described is that it is possible to supply energy to 
the rotor circuit so as to regulate above synchronous speed. 
With the previously described arrangements it is extremely 
difficult to cause the main motor to pass through synchronism. 
As it is possible to divide the regulating range above and below 
synchronous speeds of the main motor, the auxiliary machine 
need only be designed for half the capacity that would be neces- 
sary if the whole of the regulation was done below synchronism. 
This arrangement presents certain advantages when a higher 
speed than normal is occasionally required; for instance, in the 
case of blowers, where a higher pressure than normal may be 
required for a short period, the motor being run above synchron- 
ism when this necessary. To make it possible to obtain a 
definite speed variation between no-load and full load a com- 
pounding transformer has been used which gives such a charac- 
teristic. 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2083 


Suggestions have been made for the simplification of this sys- 
tem by modifying the frequency changer, but they introduce 
undesirable characteristics such as poor power factor. The 
power factor might be sometimes improved by such arrange- 
ments as brush moving or phase combinations, but in such modi- 
fied arrangements, the range of regulation required is greater 
than is necessary with the types of machines previously described, 
and consequently, it is more difficult to obtain a phase combina- 
tion or to set the brushes in such a position as to obtain an aver- 
age power factor that will be satisfactory under operating con- 
ditions. It is possible to simplify the arrangement somewhat 
by coupling the frequency changer to the main motor, which 
obviates the use of the auxiliary driving machine, or the frequency 
changer may be geared to the main motor so as to obtain favor- 
able construction speed, and as the power to be transmitted is 
trifling, the gearing can be of small dimensions. If the gearing 
is so arranged as to make it possible to change the relative rotor 
position of the motor and the frequency changer, power factor 
regulation can be obtained, and it is also possible to use a phase 
and voltage regulator for the same purpose. Such arrangements 
for connecting the two machines together are not very desirable 
and although possible, should be avoided. 

From what has already been described it will be seen that there 
are many desirable features not covered by the systems hitherto 
in use, and it is, therefore, not astonishing that even recently 
arrangements have been used by which the rotor energy is con- 
verted into direct current and then to alternating current and 
returned to the line. For American conditions where 25 cycles 
is standard for heavy power work, such a system presents many 
disadvantages, not only on account of constructive difficulties, 

‘but also on account of the high cost compared with other arrange- 
ments, although it has the advantage of using machines that are 
familiar to the attendants. 

Although it is not possible in this paper to discuss all of the 
improvements that have been made, some of the latest develop- 
ments may be described. Itis not proposed to discuss the theoret- 
ical features of the various machines and systems, as these will be 
given in another publication. The arrangement shown in Fig. 6 
is one that is particularly suitable for rolling mill and mining 
applications and it will be seen that it is very simple. There is 
only a single auxiliary machine, the frequency changer B, which 

“has a simple three-phase winding on the stator which need only 


2084 MEYER AND SYKES: _ [Nov. 8 


be designed for a comparatively small current and which is 
connected to a small regulating resistance. In addition, an 
auxiliary winding is provided to improve the commutation. 
As in addition to this regulating resistance there is also provided 
the regulating transformer C, it is possible to regulate the whole 
system in two ways, which are necessary to control independently 
the power factor and the speed. The operation of this system 
can be understood from the following: Let us suppose the 
motor A is started as an ordinary induction motor, with 
rotor resistance, and the connection to the frequency 
changer being open. The frequency changer may be also 
started as follows: Rotor R of the frequency changer B is 


Fic. 6 


supplied through the regulating transformer C with voltage to 
correspond to the desired voltage on the rotor of the main 
motor, and the stator winding of the frequency changer B S, 
which in this case is the secondary, is regulated by the resistance 
D until it runs relatively in synchronism with the main motor A. 
If, for instance, both the main motor and the auxiliary machine 
have the same number of poles, which, however, is generally 
not the case, then both machines must run at exactly the same 
speed. As for example, if the voltage of the rotor of the main 
motor at standstill is 200 volts, and the speed is to be regulated 
to half the normal, the rotor voltage will be 100 volts, which 
must also be the case of the voltage on the commutator and ~ 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2085 


slip rings of the frequency changer. If the ratio of the secondary 
and primary windings of the frequency changer is 1 to 1 then the 
voltage across the stator winding of the frequency changer must 
be regulated for 50 volts. The frequency of the induction motor 
rotor circuit is the same as that on the commutator and the 
stator of the frequency changer. By means of synchronizing 
lamps between the commutator of the frequency changer and the 
slip rings of the main motor, the two machines can be synchron- 
ized. If the starting resistance of the main motor is disconnected, 
the rotor energy will flow through the frequency changer and 
the regulating transformer to the line. The current in the 
stator of the frequency changer can be comparatively small, as 
the field generated by the current flowing through the commu- 
tator is counteracted by the current flowing to the transformer 
through the slip rings, with the exception of that necessary for 
the magnetizing of the working field, which is only sufficient to 
give enough torque to enable the machine to run at the proper 
speed. The method mentioned for synchronizing the frequency 
changer and the main motor is in practise unnecessary and is 
only used to illustrate the process. 

An interesting question is what’ happens when the stator 
winding only is regulated by means of the resistance D, or only 
the transformer is regulated. It has been held that under such 
conditions stability of operation is questionable. The whole 
question of relative synchronous operation in general is interest- 
ing and difficult to solve, which occasionally has led to a misun- 
derstanding of the whole problem, as for instance in the newly 
published book of Arnold* on single-phase and three-phase 
commutator motors. Practical results, however, have settled 
all doubts on this question and have confirmed the theoretical 
foundations for this system. The theory shows that by such 
regulation, power factor compensation of the whole power circuit 
is possible as far as may be desirable. If, for example, the resist- 
ance D is decreased without changing the regulation of the 
transformer C, the frequency changer has a tendency to run 
faster, but this is impossible on account of its connection to the 
main motor, and the only result is that an equalizing current will 
flow between the two rotors, therefore, causing a synchronizing 
force. It is consequently the case that by suitable regulation of 
this current, the power factor to the whole system can be set at 
any desired value. This result can be somewhat explained by 


*Volume 5-A, ‘‘Wechelstromtechnik.” 


2086 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. 8 


means of the vector diagram in Fig. 7. The uncompensated 
induction motor with resistance regulation will take the current 
I’ which will be behind the voltage E. In operation with the 
auxiliary machine, there flows the current J, in the stator of the 
motor which leads the voltage E and at the transformer we have 
the current J, which lags very much behind the voltage compo- 
nent. The resultant of both these currents gives the current J, 
which is more or less in the direction of the vector E and con- 
sequently the power factor can be brought to the desired value. 
As a diagram of the internal action of the commutator machine 
would show, the regulating transformer supplies a strong wattless 
component of the current J, which produces the field of the 
auxiliary machine and also that of the induction motor. How- 
ever, by the regulation of the stator winding of the frequency 


Fic. 7 Fic. & 


changer a greater wattless component is produced than is 
necessary for the production of these fields and this has the 
effect that the main motor current can be made leading so that 
the resulting current comes into the right phase relation. It 
should be kept in mind that, although at the transformer there 
is an increase in the magnetizing current, there is not a cor- 
responding decrease in the induction motor. If we assume a 
ratio of 1 to 1 between rotor and stator in the induction motor, 
there will be the same leading component in the primary as 
there is a surplus lagging component in the secondary, which is 
independent of the voltages of the rotor and stator, and also of the 
speed. It is questionable whether it is advisable to compensate 
for the power factor of other machines on the line by such 
methods, but if this is done, it will have practically no effect on 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2087 


the stability of the machines, as good machines are capable of 
standing two or three times the normal torque, and oscillation 
between the machines seldom occurs, even if no particular efforts 
are made to avoid it. The main motor and the regulating 
machine operate only relatively in synchronism and not in 
synchronism with the line. 

The speed of the sets varies somewhat when the power factor 
is regulated, being caused by the fact that the voltage drop in 
the machines varies somewhat when the wattless current is 
changed. In a simple case, with constant torque on the motor 
and other conditions remaining unchanged, we obtain from a 
detailed investigation of the characteristics, the curve shown in 
Fig. 8, which shows the variation of the commutator voltage 
E, in comparison with the assumed constant slip ring voltage Es. 
This variation is the reason why the speed changes somewhat 
when the power factor is regulated. When there is an improve- 
ment in the power factor, the speed increases. If the load is 
varied, we also have variation in the speed of the set which 
decreases as the load increases, and this characteristic can be 
taken advantage of in case of motors driving rolling mills to 
enable the flywheel to take its proper proportion of the load. 
The drop in speed is naturally dependent upon the resistance 
and self-induction of the frequency changer, leaving out of the 
question the characteristics of the main motor, and if the set is 
regulated for a certain speed, the speed characteristic is similar 
to that of a shunt motor. It should be noted that on account of 
the interaction of the machines, even if the frequency changer 
were non-inductive, it would be possible to obtain satisfactory 
operation, which is an important difference from the character- 
istics of synchronous machines. Even with such a condition, 
it would still be possible to compensate for power factor, but in 
view of the fact.that it is desired to obtain a good power factor, 
as constant as possible without regulation over a wide range of 
load, it is desirable to have some induction in the rotor circuit. 
By varying the self-induction in the rotor circuit, it is possible 
to change the speed characteristics from no-load to full load 
and this may be done without interfering with the capacity of 
the machine to regulate the power factor. If variations in the 
power factor are permissible, it is possible to obtain a very fine 
speed regulation by regulating it, and consequently the regulating 
transformer need not have so many steps. The inner part of 

the voltage curye, Fig. 8, corresponds to the operation of the set 


2088 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. 8 


above synchronism, and as is clear from theoretical consideration 
of the effect of regulating the machine, the speed must eventually 
rise above synchronism, although with the constant voltage Es 
there would be heavy current flowing at the synchronous speed. 
It is a very interesting question as to how it is possible to obtain 
such a curve practically; as also is the whole subject of operation 
above synchronous speed. It might be mentioned in this con- 
nection that by means of phase transposition, the frequency 
changer can run as much below synchronism as the main rotor 
is to run above synchronism. The necessity for the transposi- 
tion of the phases can be avoided by modifying the system some- 
what, and the whole cperation ofthe set at and above synchronous 
speed can be improved by such modification, but this point can- 


not be discussed at the present time. The system that has just 
been described is very simple on account of the fact that we have 
only a single regulating machine instead of a number of machines, 
and it is easily regulated as it is only necessary to regulate the 
transformer in any way that may be convenient, or an induction 
regulator might be used which would avoid handling the regula- 
ting current altogether. On account of the fact that the cur- 
rent in the stator is very small and need not be regulated in fine 
steps there is no difficulty whatever in controlling this circuit. 
It is possible to avoid the use of the regulating transformer in 
the case of low-voltage circuits as shown in Fig. 9. Inthis case, 
we have also the main motor A and the frequency changer B 
with the rotor R and the stator S. The stator is provided with 


& FS 
1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2089 


an auto-transformer winding and the function of the regulating 
transformer is combined in the machine. It will be seen, how- 
ever, that the stator winding can be regulated in two ways, 
and this makes it possible to regulate both speed and power factor 
as in the system previously described. If we suppose the fre- 
quency changer is running relatively in synchronism with the 
main motor and also has the right voltage, the two machines can 
be connected together. If the stator is now regulated in such a 
way that the transformer ratio remains the same, but at the same 
time, the absolute number of active turns is varied and conse- 
quently the field, the wattless current will change and the power 
factor can be regulated. The whole of the regulation can be 
taken care of by a single controller which can be very simple, 
as it is unnecessary to regulate the power factor in fine steps. 
All of the characteristics required of the motors driving the mills 
or machines can be readily met by interlocking the various 
elements of the controller. This arrangement does not require 
any changes in the windings of the machines, nor is it necessary 
to move the brushes, or to have any variable gearing between the 
main motor and the auxiliary machine to obtain power factor 
regulation. The auxiliary machine combines in itself all of the 
regulating requirements and is, therefore, 

Voltage regulator, 

Frequency changer, 

Power factor regulator, 

Motor for driving itself. 

By various arrangements it is possible to obtain entirely satis- 
factory operation above synchronism, and in fact, it is just as 
easy to operate above synchronism as below and the passing 
through synchronous speed of the main motor does not present 
any particular difficulties. 

When it is necessary to work near or at synchronism it is far 
better, however, to use such an arrangement as is shown in Fig. 10, 
although it is possible in the system just described to ob- 
tain a working field and the possibility of regulating at 
the synchronous speed. The system shown by Fig. 10 
provides for an almost constant working field under all 
conditions. The system shown in Fig. 9 is more suitable for 
regulating the speed in fairly large steps, and when the motor is 
running at such a speed as not to require the use of the auxiliary 
machine it can be disconnected and used for regulating the power 
factor of the line. The arrangement shown in Fig. 10, on the 
other hand, is more suitable for regulation in fine steps near the 


& 
2090 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. 8 


synchronous speed, but the auxiliary machine is somewhat more 
expensive. This system is desirable where speed regulation is 
required, where the size of machine does not determine the type, 
but other technical reasons make it desirable to use such a regula- 
ting system. This is, for instance, the case with turbo-compres- 
sors or blowers, which generally run at very high speeds, and even 
with comparatively small equipments it would be impossible to use 
any type of commutator machine directly. Consequently it is 
necessary to use an induction ‘motor, and to obtain necessary 
speed regulation by some such system as has been described. 
The characteristics of blowers and compressors are such that 
only comparatively small speed changes are required to cause 
a considerable difference in the output, as the power varies 


Fic. 10 


practically as the cube of the speed. The regulation of the sys- 
tem shown in Fig. 10 is obtained in a way similar to that des- 
cribed in the previous system, and to obtain operation above 
synchronous speed it is possible to use a continuation of the 
phase winding through the star of the stator. A further 
development of the three-phase commutator machine for the 
purpose of obtaining motors for main drives as well as for regu- 
lating induction motors, however, makes it possible to avoid 
the use of such an unsymmetrical phase arrangement. 

It is sometimes the case that the requirements of such systems 
are severe and that high momentary overloads or severe over- 
loads for a comparatively short time must be carried; such as, 
for instance, in the case of rolling mills, blowers, compressors, 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2091 


etc. These characteristics can be obtained with such a combina- 
tion, either at starting or at high speeds, under or above syn- 
chronism. In some cases it would be advantageous if the 
frequency changer could be used as a motor, at the same 
time retaining the function of the frequency changer, which 
would give a good combination for running above or below 
synchronism. Such an arrangement would present a number of 
advantages in some cases, but is only possible if the auxiliary 
machine is mechanically connected in some way with the main 
motor. It may be also desirable to use a mechanical connection 
on account of the quickness of the speed variation required. 
To obtain such characteristics and to keep the advantages al-- 
ready mentioned, new arrangements are necessary, and it might 
be mentioned that such a system has been already worked out, 
but it cannot be described at present. 


THREE-PHASE ComMMUTATOR Motors 


Operating difficulties exist when a very large speed range is 
required when the speed is reduced practically to zero, and in such 
a case a regulating auxiliary machine presents no advantages, 
“as it would have to be designed for practically the same capacity 
as the main motor. In such a case the commutator motor can 
be used for direct drive except when it is necessary to regulate the 
speed very much above synchronism, when it may be desirable 
on account of the commutator speed to use an induction motor and 
to operate the regulating commutator machine correspondingly 
below synchronism. In the case of drives of small power, the com- 
mutator motor used directly is quite satisfactory, but even in the 
case of motors of large capacity, there is no particular construc- 
tive difficulty in the way so long as care is taken to provide good 
commutating fields and such devices as brush moving are avoided. 
Some method of providing a good commutating field is, however, 
necessary, as, for instance, with an eight-pole motor designed 
without commutating poles or other means of helping commuta- 
tion, for 50 cycles, the limit of construction is about 150 to 200 
h.p. In the United States the conditions in the steel plants are 
favorable for such machines on account of the almost universal 
adoption of 25 cycles. Until recently only one type of such 
machine with shunt characteristics was in use in Europe. This 
type has at present such characteristics that the voltage for the 
rotor is supplied by an auto-transformer winding from the 
stator with a special phase combination or an arrangement 


t 


2092 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. 8 


with auxiliary phases. This design makes it possible to obtain 
power factor compensation for one particular load and speed 
which is chosen so as to approximate the average operating con- 
ditions. To give power factor correction over a wide range of 
load and speed when this is desirable, such a system becomes so 
complicated as to be impracticable. In the following there is 
described a system which avoids all of these phase combinations 
and auxiliary phases as well as fixed phase relations at all, and 
also the necessity of brush moving. This machine is constructed 
not only with a rotor similar to that of a direct-current machine, 


Fic. 11 


but also with a field of the same type, which enables the speed, 
power factor and starting torque to be regulated. It should be 
noted that the machine with such a winding usually prevents the 
formation of excessive disturbing fields for the commutation. 
The newer developments of the winding have made it possible 
to regulate, even over a very large range, without introducing 
disturbing fields. Such machines have, however, in every 
case, a simple continuous winding without auxiliary phases. 
The diagram shown in Fig. 11 illustrates the principles involved 
for all cases, as far as regulation is concerned. This diagram 


1912} MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2093 


shows most of the possible variations, but it is necessary 
when designing such machines to determine how far the different 
possibilities can be taken advantage of. The same results as 
shown in the vector diagram, Fig. 7, are here obtained by the use 
of a single machine giving the phase regulation. From Fig. 11 
it will be seen that it is possible to obtain the phase regulation 
by shifting the connections, and at the same time to vary the 
field and the voltage, or in other words, this arrangement allows 
of a direct regulation of the vectors. For this purpose the stator 
winding has a number of divisions as shown by the spaces D E 
and FG. How many divisions are necessary in the stator 
winding is a question which depends upon the amount of copper 
in the winding. In any case, however, there must be at least 
three in these phase segments, which it will be understood can 
be displaced if required. From this diagram it can be seen that 
it is possible to shift the field and at the same time to vary its 
strength. The line voltage is applied between B and A. On 
the segment A B the voltage vector for the rotor can be set 
between A C. It will be, of course, understood that the rotor 
circuit can also be supplied from a special winding which is 
independent of the main winding. This circuit need only be 
designed to carry the regulating power, which arrangement is 
particularly advantageous when the machine is designed forhigher 
voltages. In this way, we obtain another possibility of varying 
the vector displacements which can be partly substituted for 
the other vector regulation. The whole question of such winding 
combinations, which is connected with the question of the mainte- 
nance of the field form, and the reduction of the current to be 
handled by the controlling devices, as well as the type of winding, 
is too complicated to be discussed in this paper. The speed of 
the motor can be varied, for instance, either by varying the 
position of the point B, thereby changing the field, or by varying 
the position of the point C which changes the rotor voltage, and 
in either case the phase connection A can be so regulated as to 
give good power factor. This system has the advantage that the 
necessary commutating field can be supplied directly in the 
correct phase relation on the stator winding by proper connec- 
tions. Fig. 12 shows how this same arrangement can be used for 
a motor with series characteristics. This diagram shows the 
phase connections A and B and the division points C D, E F, etc., 
and it is believed that no further explanation is necessary. In 
this paper, which describes some of the latest developments in 


“ 


2094 MEYER AND SYKES: [Nov. 8 


this class of work and only mentions the well-known other 
systems for the sake of comparison, we have avoided, altogether, 
any reference to the names of the various arrangements and also 
to the historical development, but it is generally known that 
the series three-phase motor is very old. As originally built 
it had the disadvantage that the speed could only be regulated 
by shifting the brushes, which caused the machine to operate 
with very poor power factor. The newly developed machines 
with brush-shifting arrangements also have the samedisadvantage 
even when the operating characteristics are favorable. Such an 
arrangement also has the disadvantage of high cost on account 


Fic. 12 


of the lack of a good commutating field. Ifin addition to shifting 
the brushes the number of turns on the stator is also regulated, — 
the whole machine becomes very complicated. The arrangement 
shown in Fig. 12 offers a better solution of the problem, as it 
avoids these disadvantages and presents a number of other 
desirable features. The combination of the series and shunt 
systems gives the characteristics of a compound-wound motor, 
which is of special importance where it is necessary to use a fly- 
wheel. 

The combination of such an arrangement with the regu- 
lating sets previously described gives a series of possibilities that 
can be obtained with standard construction of commutator 


1912] MOTOR SPEED CONTROL 2095 


machine which may at times be useful. Further discussion of 
such special applications, as for instance, arrangements to avoid 
the use of the expensive and rather inefficient flywheel motor- 
generator sets, must be left for another occasion. 

The various arrangements involving the use of three-phase 
commutator machines make possible the efficient regulation of 
induction motors, but they introduce a new problem in the use 
of the commutator machine itself. The results obtained in 
Europe, where the class of attendants is usually very much better 
than here, have been very favorable, but under American condi- 
tions any attempt to simply follow European practise would prob- 
ably give disastrous results. As it has been pointed out, consider- 
able care must be exercised in the first installations, and we may 
expect difficulties which can only be overcome by a sympathetic 
cooperation between the user and the manufacturer. The use of 
a regulating machine in conjunction with an induction motor 
offers many advantages over the direct use of the commutator 
motor when the speed range is not large, not the least being the 
comparatively low frequency of the rotor circuit. The extensive 
use of this type of machine may be looked for in the future, but in 
any case, to insure success careful application is absolutely neces- 
sary. 


2096 ROLLING MILLS—SPEED CONTROL [Nov. 8 


Discussion on “ Power REQUIREMENTS OF RoLiinc MILis ” 
(SyxEs), AND “THE EcoNomicaAL SPEED CONTROL OF 
ALTERNATING-CURRENT Morors Drivinc Rotiinc MILs” 
(MEYER AND SYKES), New York, NovemBEr 8, 1912. 


John M. Hipple: The general tendency in industrial engineer- 
ing is towards refinement in methods and apparatus. Only 
an exact knowledge of those requirements enables us to meet 
them successfully. The steel industry is a notable example of 
this condition. The making of steel requires high-power sub- 
stantial machinery, the first demand on the machinery being 
’ continuity of service. 

When the application of electricity to steel mills was first 
taken up, the first motor that was available which the steel 
mill engineer thought by any chance would do the work, was 
put in service. If it broke down, a larger one was put in service, 
and this was continued, until a motor was secured which would 
stand up to the service. The same was true of control apparatus. 
The tendency was for many years, after reaching that point, to 
duplicate that application, unless the new application required 
more power, in which case a larger motor was used. More 
experience and more exacting requirements have indicated the 
necessity for investigations such as the one which has been 
undertaken and reported upon in Mr. Sykes’s paper. 

Such investigations are sure to advance the cause of industrial 
electrical engineering, and, further, to increase the economy of 
production, and these are the things that the members of the 
Institute who are interested in industrial engineering are par- 
ticularly anxious to see forwarded. 

J. H. Wilson: In looking over this paper by Mr. Sykes, I 
feel that considerable credit is due the author for the clear and 
comprehensive manner in which he has subdivided and explained 
the various elements entering into the determination of the 
amount of power required to roll steel in its various forms and 
shapes. Concerning this part of the paper there is not much to 
be added of a general nature. The only thing that might be 
added would be more complete data concerning some actual 
installations. 

Referring to the paragraph under the heading “ Practical 
Determination of Motor Size,” in this paragraph Mr. Sykes 
fails to bring out clearly the fact that the utilization of flywheel 
energy is more or less of a necessary evil. The use of a flywheel 
is made necessary in most cases, by considerations external to 
the motor equipment, such as the supply of electrical energy or 
the arrangement of the mill drive. For example, a sheet mill with 
rope drive between the motor and mill must necessarily have 
flywheel effect on the mill side of the ropes, as the power re- 
quired for rolling varies so greatly that with the flywheel on the 
motor side the ropes would jump, run unevenly and be sub- 
jected to such variations in pull as to increase materially the 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2097 


maintenance cost. The necessary flywheel effect is usually 
obtained from the large rope sheave wheel. 

The following facts should be noted: 

First—In order to obtain energy from a flywheel we must 
permit the slowing down of the equipment. This means the 
adding of external resistance to the rotor of the induction motor, 
which in turn results in decreasing the efficiency of the motor 
at heavy loads where efficiency is most important from a power 
consumption point of view. 

Second.—The slowing down of the flywheel in turn slows down 
the rolls and decreases the amount of material which can pass 
through them.in a given time. 

Third.~Additional power is required, due to the friction load 
caused by the flywheel. This power becomes of considerable 
importance, as it must be expended all the time, when the mill 
is running idle as well as when rolling steel. , 

Fourth—The use of a flywheel adds expense, due to the 
necessity of maintaining large heavy bearings, keeping them 
properly lubricated and in good mechanical condition. 

The ioad diagram, Fig. 11 of this paper, is fairly ideal for the 
use of flywheel equipment. The passes are of short duration 
and the interval between passes is sufficiently long to allow the 
motor to re-accelerate the flywheel from a very low speed to 
nearly synchronism. 

In an installation such as this the additional first cost of a 
larger motor would probably offset the savings which would 
result from the elimination of the items shown above as being 
objectionable in the case of flywheels. In case, however, we 
consider a load curve in which the average load is, say, twice the 
average load shown in this curve and the peaks remain the same 
as shown on this curve, the flywheel would probably not be 
warranted, this heavier average load being assumed to have 
resulted from a decrease in the interval between passes. 

The above argument is based entirely on a consideration of 
the power conditions at the mill. If, however, other conditions, 
such as power station capacity and arrangement of the mill drive, 
are allowed to enter into this matter the question assumes an 
altogether different aspect. Assuming that the power supply 
for a rolling mill is of sufficient size so that the maximum fluc- 
tuation obtainable from one driving motor or the accumulated 
fluctuation from a number of driving motors is small as compared 
to the total station load, then these questions of economies in 
operation are of first importance. In other words, these econo- 

_mies might well be sufficient to cover the increase of a motor size - 
as much as 50 per cent, which increase would not affect the 
efficiency at light load but would greatly benefit from the elimina- 
tion of flywheel expenses. On the other hand, if the power. station 
is comparatively small and an individual motor is large in com- 
parison to the total average load, then flywheels and automatic 
regulators are necessary, as the economies referred to could not 


2098 ROLLING MILLS—SPEED CONTROL [Nov. 8 


possibly offset the additional cost due to the operation of the 
power station under the extreme variations of load which would 
be met with. These economies could not, of course, offset 
additional cost which would result from the operation of power 
station machinery below its normal capacity, as the efficiency of 
the generators and driving units would be of considerable 
importance. 

The equipment of individual mills determines the power station 
load curve and the flywheel is more often made necessary on 
account of the fluctuation here than on account of the power 
requirements of the individual mill. 

The electrolytic regulator referred to by Mr. Sykes makes the 
use of flywheels more economical than does any other type of 
induction motor regulator with which I am familiar. This 
regulator permits the operation of the motor and flywheel at 
the highest possible average speed and will cause the motor to 
re-accelerate the flywheel much more quickly than will any 
resistance stepping device on the market. 

This question of motor and flywheel sizes is one which presents 
different phases in each installation and necessarily must be 
figured to meet local conditions. 

Selby Haar: All engineers who are called upon to become 
familiar with the power requirements of rolling mills will owe 
their thanks to Mr. Sykes, because he has collected facts which 
heretofore have been scattered in a great many places. As long 
as the known laws of the subject are largely empirical, the 
collection of data for generalization will be restricted to the few 
who are able to conduct the very expensive and extraordinarily 
difficult tests. As an instance of the meagerness of our knowl- 
edge, it may be pointed out that practically all the available 
data relate to iron and steel. 

Mechanical engineers interested in roll driving contented 
themselves generally with measuring the fuel and water con- 
sumption of the engines, so that the electrical engineer entefing 
the field was compelled to exercise imagination as well as judg- 
ment in recommending motors. Even in the present state of 
our knowledge, it is still advisable to make a minute study of 
local conditions before recommending a motor equipment, 
because the steady operation of the motor frequently increases 
the output of a mill beyond all expectation; and an electric 
motor does not, like a steam engine, deliver its maximum capac- 
ity continuously without injurious heating. As soon as electric 
motors began to displace steam engines, however, precise testing 
began; a German manufacturing firm collected a complete 
set of measuring instruments for this purpose alone, with which 
a committee of the Society of German Foundrymen (Verein 
deutscher Eisenhuettenleute) conducted the extensive series of 
tests which is the nucleus of the published data. 

It was fortunate for the testing engineer that reversing mills 
were among the first to be electrified, because direct-current 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2099 


motors were used, which simplified the design of graphic meters. 
Even with the present refined testing apparatus, however, it is 
not clear why there should be such a difference in the nature of 
the results obtained by different experienced engineers, such as, 
for example, results published in Stahl und Eisen, June 9, 1909, 
and Iron Age, January 4, 1912. Both sets of tests show a fluc- 
tuating torque for a constant reduction of the thickness of a 
piece during a pass, which is contrary to the usual assumption. 

In the construction of load diagrams for mill cycles, I have 
found it easier to deal with the elongation of the piece rather 
than the actual volume of metal displaced as has been done by 
Mr. Sykes in Table I of his paper, because this method lends itself 
readily to wide changes in ingot or billet sizes, and also fits in 
well with the working range of the slide rule. 

In regard to the automatic regulation of resistance mentioned 
on page 2064, it should not be overlooked that a regulator which 
can perform its function during passes, the duration of which is a 
few tenths of a second, must be exceedingly rapid. 

In conclusion, however, I wish to express my thanks to Mr. 
Sykes for the preparation of this paper, which must have en- 
tailed a large amount of work; and it is to be hoped that it 
will stimulate the publishing of more data on this important 
subject. . 

Edward J. Cheney: With the application of electric motors 
to main roll trains there has arisen the necessity of determining 
with as much accuracy as possible the power requirements for 
rolling steel. With engine drives the size of the engine was rarely, 
if ever, calculated, but was determined almost solely from judg- 
ment and experience. If it was known that a certain mill was 
running satisfactorily with a certain size of engine, and a similar 
mill was to be installed, the same size engine would probably be 
used, or, perhaps, a trifle larger for safety. The result of these 
methods is that most rolling mill engines are too large and very 
few are of the proper size. It is not an uncommon sight to see 
engines running which take steam for only one or two strokes 
at occasional intervals. 

Mistakes in engine size are not attended with serious results 
except as regards efficiency and possible handicaps on produc- 
tion. If the engine is too small the mill stalls. The rollers then 
judge that the capacity of the mill has been reached and ease up 
on the work. Most engines have heavy flywheels which will 
carry them over the peak loads and, with steam-driven mills, 
speed variations are tolerated which would not be considered 
with motor drive. 

In determining the size of motors, such haphazard methods are 
not, or should not be, used. If the motor is: too large a low 
power factor results, to say nothing of lower efficiency and 
increased first cost. It should be noted that the latter items 
apply equally well to engines, but are not so much considered 
in their case because the error in capacity is not so easily noticed. 


2100 ROLLING MILLS—SPEED CONTROL [Nov. 8 


If the motor is too small the mill will not stop and so compel 
mercy from the rollers, but the over-willing motor will continue 
to turn the rolls until it overheats, and perhaps burns out and is 
cursed for being inadequate. 

This quality of the electric motor, which causes it to take 
enormous overloads without any appreciable change in speed, 
has resulted in a large increase in production in nearly every 
instance where mills have been changed over from steam to 
electric drive, merely because the rollers are then enabled to 
crowd the material through, absolutely regardless of the driving 
motor. For this reason engine tests must always be used with 
caution as a basis for determining motor sizes. 

The electrical engineer must have at hand all of the informa- 
tion possible and needs much more than is now available. 
Mr. Sykes has well pointed out the difficulties which are en- 
countered in this work, probably the greatest one of which is 
the ignorance of what any mill will ultimately be called upon to 
do. Considerable progress has been made in determining the 
power actually required for rolling under various conditions, 
and, particularly in the case of mills used simply for reductions 
in section without much distortion of shape, fairly reliable data 
are available. This includes blooming, billet, slabbing, and plate 
mills, and mills for rolling simple shapes, such as rods and bars. 
It is on merchant mills that the greatest uncertainty exists. 
Here a great part of the work is used not in elongating the piece, 
but for distorting its shape, or is consumed in friction, as shown 
by the author. For such mills there is no reliable information 
except from actual tests under the exact conditions. This is a 
laborious task but apparently a necessary one. Much has 
already been done, enough to afford approximately correct 
information for most conditions, but much more remains to 
be done before complete data are obtained for all cases. 

While not strictly pertaining to this subject, it may be re- 
marked in this connection that the ease with which power is 
measured in the case of electrically driven mills is really one 
of the greatest advantages which they possess. This fact 
not only makes possible the accurate determination of power 
for future installations, but is a constant check and guide to 
rolling methods in the mills already equipped. With engine 
drive little attention is paid to the setting of valves or the 
condition of the rolls, because there is no direct way of determin- 
ing the power consumption. But with electric drive the indica- 
ting wattmeter faithfully points out and the watt-hour meter 
relentlessly records the power input to the motor, and the 
influence of various factors is readily seen. The mill superinten- 
dent soon learns to watch the meter. He knows what has been 
the record for any section and any increase in power over that 
record causes an immediate investigation to determine the cause. 
This stimulates activity in searching for further possibilities 
of reduction. Instances have been known where over 25 per 


\ 


1912) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2101 


cent saving in power has been accomplished by slight modifi- 
cations in roll shapes without in any way affecting the quality 
of the product. 

Bayse N. Westcott: Iwas very much interested in Mr. Sykes’s 
‘paper, because I have encountered the same troubles in testing 
that he has. Mr. Sykes mentioned the difficulties in getting 
accurate speed measurements on mills. With an induction 
motor of the slip ring type, you can get very accurate speed 
measurements, because the slip of the motor with a given 
resistance in the secondary is, within reasonable limits, in- 
versely proportional to the input, so that if you know the 
characteristics of the motor, or if you can make an experimental 
determination, all that is necessary is to record the input with 
a sufficiently sensitive curve-drawing wattmeter and you can 
determine the speed of the motor at any instant from the record 
of kilowatts input. 

Mr. Sykes did not say anything about steam-engine-driven 


‘xT 
ean 


1 / ’ 
BCOeCIRCAn 1—Liquid tachometer and _ contact 
Nas y maker. 
2 and 3—Continuous steam-engine indi- 
cators. 


St 


4—Reducing motion 
5—Stroke counter. 
6—Recording instrument 
7—Mill observers. 
8—Electric gong. 


ws 
< 
oS 
z 
wi 
= 
a 
= 
ao 


Fic. 1 


mills. They are the most difficult mills to test and also very 
important, because it is the present steam-driven mills which 
are largely being electrified and which mean business to the 
electrical manufacturer. 

In steam-driven mills, one of the first essentials is to secure 
a good record of the horse power developed by the driving 
engine while the steel is being rolled, and the best way to do 
this is to use a continuous drum steam engine indicator. This 
differs from the ordinary steam engine indicator in that the 
paper on which the indicator card is made is a long strip, which 
is reeled inside the drum and feeds around the drum a quarter 
of an inch (6.35 mm.) at each stroke of the engine. Fig. 1 
shows the general layout used in testing steam-driven mills. 

Fig. 2 shows details of recording instruments for speed, time 
and general information regarding work in the mill. These have 
pens actuated by magnets, which mark on a strip of paper which 
is moved at a uniform rate beneath the pens by a spring motor. 
In most cases three pens are used, marked A, B and Cin the 
figure. A is actuated by a contact maker, which is driven 
from the engine shaft or other convenient place so as to com- 


2102 ROLLING MILLS—SPEED CONTROL [Nov. 8 


plete the circuit of magnet A several times for each revolution 
of the engine. The number of contacts per revolution depends 
on whether the engine is of high or low speed. Pen B is con- 
trolled by a contact-making clock, which is regulated to close 
the circuit of B once in every five seconds, or at shorter inter- 
vals if preferred. In addition to actuating B, the contact-making 
clock also closes the circuit of an electric bell, or in some cases, 
that of an electrically operated whistle. The third pen Cras 
controlled by a manually operated key located at the rolls. 

In addition to the foregoing, a liquid tachometer, consisting 
of a small centrifugal pump which raises a column of colored 
alcohol to a height depending on the speed at which the pump 
is driven, is used to indicate speed variations of the engine. 
A stroke counter is connected to the engine to record strokes and 
furnish a check on the graphic instrument. 

The equipment described will secure an accurate record of 
the power that is furnished the mill. 

Speaking of graphic meters, Mr. Sykes said that in using the 


TACHOMETER 
“SS 


STEAM| ENGINE 1 = a=, =D 
= - bia ' 
[oOo a 0 
STROKE 
CONTINUOUS COUNTER 
INDICATORS REVOLUTION MOTOR 


MARKING 


COMMUTATOR ae 


Fic. 2 


graphic meter the pen should not touch the paper. We used 
successfully a high-speed graphic meter, with a pen which used 
ink, and which did rest on the paper. We used a paper speed of 
about 30 in. (76 cm.) per min., which is only half the speed used 
by Mr. Sykes, which was one in. per sec., or 60 in. (152 cm.) per 
min. I suppose the paper in the tests referred to by Mr. Sykes 
was driven by an electric motor. On our graphic meters we had 
spring motors, which, of course, are not as good as an electric 
motor drive for the paper. 

The chief thing about instruments for use in steel mill testing, 
especially in commercial testing, is that they must be reliable. 
They must be hardy, as they have to be shipped around the 
country by express to various mills and they are liable to rough 
treatment. 

David M. Petty: I would ask Mr. Sykes if he has any figures 
which show the relative kilowatt-hours necessary, for a given 
reduction, with a fast or slow rate of displacement. I refer to 
the paragraph in his paper headed ‘“‘ Rate of Displacement.’ 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2103 


Fred Bickford Crosby: Messrs. Meyer and Sykes have pre- 
sented for our consideration a problem of especial interest to 
every engineer concerned with the application of mechanical 
power. In the manufacture of steel the introduction of the 
direct-current motor brought.about revolutionary changes in 
established methods. With the advent of the polyphase induc- 
tion motor the superior advantages of alternating current were 
quickly seized upon, particularly where power in large quantities 
must be distributed over a considerable area. Today, even for 
the largest drives where only a single constant speed is required, 
the high efficiency and substantial simplicity of the induction motor 
leaves it practically without a competitor in new installations. 
With all its good qualities, however, the induction motor for 
certain classes of service possesses two undesirable characteristics 
—power factor and inability to secure adjustable speedregulation. 

Multispeed induction motors with changeable pole connection 
to give a2 :1 speed ratio or with separate independent windings 
to give some third speed, have in many instances proved a 
satisfactory compromise for adjustable speed control. The 
efficiency of such a machine may be fairly high for each of the 
several synchronous speeds, but the power factor is invariably 
poor at the lower speeds. With rheostatic control the power 
factor is reasonably high at all speeds, but, since with constant 
h.p. output the slip energy dissipated is directly proportional to 
the reduction in speed, the low efficiency encountered renders 
continuous operation at reduced speeds prohibitive. Further- 
more, the induction motor with rheostatic control has an un- 
fortunate tendency to accelerate automatically as the load falls 
off. Direct or differential concatenation of two single motors or 
of a multiple-wound induction motor has been employed to 
secure aS many as six independent synchronous speeds for a 
single set, but only at a heavy sacrifice in simplicity and other 
desirable features. 

Until recently it has been practically necessary to resort to 
direct-current motors to obtain strictly adjustable speeds, that 
is, several independent speeds, each constant under variable 
loads. 

Recently there has been a steadily increasing demand for 
an adjustable-speed alternating-current motor. In recognition 
of this demand the company with which the writer is connected 
has for nearly two years been carrying on a series of very thorough 
investigations, both theoretical and experimental, to determine 
which of the numerous schemes suggested for obtaining shunt 
speed characteristics is commercially feasible. T he company 1s 
now prepared to furnish speed-regulating sets for use with 
standard phase wound induction motors. The form which these 
sets will take depends very largely upon the requirements of 
the installation in question. Of all the schemes suggested two 
have successfully withstood the test of actual installation. 
Either of these methods will give a uniformly high efficiency and, 
if desired, unity power factor throughout the speed range for 


2104 ROLLING MILLS—SPEED CONTROL ~ {[Nov. 8 


which the set is designed. In general, power factor correction 
above 95 per cent is not recommended, since the higher per- 
centage correction is obtained at an expense wholly dispropor- 
tionate to the benefits resulting. 

The first of the two methods advocated employs a compen- 
sated commutator motor which transforms the slip energy of the 
main motor into mechanical energy and drives a high-speed 
induction motor con 1ected to the supply main, slightly above syn- 
chronism, thus caus ‘ng it to operate as an induction generator 
and return electrical energy to the system. This scheme has 
proved especially satisfactory for 25-cycle systems and speed 
regulation not exceeding 30 to 40 per cent. These sets are also 
practicable for 60-cycle service, provided the regulation required 
is not too great. 

For regulation in excess of 50 per cent where the slip fre- 
quency is high and the output large, the second method is 
usually preferable. In this case a special synchronous con- 
verter is used which transforms the slip energy to direct current. 
This in turn is used to drive either a high-speed d-c.-a-c. motor- 
generator set for returning energy to the system electrically, or 
to drive an adjustable-speed d-c. motor mounted on a shaft 
extension of the main motor. 

It should be distinctly understood, however, that these 
sets are not a universal panacea for chronic speed difficulties. 
Each is subject to limitations, but of all the various schemes 
proposed the two which I have mentioned appear to be by far 
the most satisfactory from the viewpoints of practical design and 
economic operation. Some of the other schemes appear more 
simple in diagram, but I believe will be found to involve serious 
difficulties both in electrical and mechanical design, particularly 
in those cases where it is proposed to pass the entire slip energy 
through the regulating transformer. 

In spite of the very real advantages which these regulating 
sets possess for the various classes of service mentioned, there 
are still occasions when sound engineering will warrant only 
the use of direct-current motors to meet the requirements of 
adjustable speeds. 

I recently had occasion to investigate the comparative char- 
acteristics of a 350-h.p. mine fan motor with rheostatic control 
and with commutator motor regulating set arranged to give 20 
per cent speed reduction, with the following interesting results: 


Regulating set Rheostatic control 


Per cent regulation ; 
Efficiency Power factor Efficiency Power factor 


0.5 88 100 84 ol 
10 87 100 82 91 
15 86 100 77 91 
20 84.5 100 72.5 91 


25 84.5 100 68 91 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2105 


On the basis of 0.6 cent per kw-hr. the saving per annum 
effected by the higher efficiency of the regulating set would be 
approximately $2700. 

Another interesting case involving a 6500-h.p. motor with 
the synchronous converter and motor-generator designed for 
40 per cent speed regulation gave the following results: 


Rev. per min. Over-all efficiency 
Main motor Regulating set | Rheostatic control 
85.6 87.0 73.5 
75.0 83.7 64.0 
64.3 80.0 55.0 
53.5 75.0 46.0 


The arguments of complex control often used against the 
speed-regulating set lose much of their weight in view of the 
present excellence of automatic magnetic control and the increas- 
ing tendency among steel mill engineers to place the motor with 
all accessory control in a room separate from the mill. 

L. T. Robinson: I wish to make one general remark, and to 
refer specifically to one point in Mr. Sykes’s paper. . The general 
remark is that I think we have been much benefited by the 
discussion of methods of measurement, together with the general 
subjects to which they are related. There is very seldom an 
engineering problem that does not involve some problem of 
measurement, and to get the most good out of the whole thing 
it is well to take them up together, as they have been in this 
discussion. ; 


ma ADJUSTING SPRING 
= 
HINGE ESE ______}, CAPILLARY TUBE 
fj VERY SMALL INK 
— GLOBULE 
= 53) INK WELL Peeen 


Fie. 3 


The specific point I wish to raise is in connection with the 
spark method of recording. I was much interested in the refer- 
ence to that method—it brings out the fact that one thing, 
although it may be good, is not always useful to cover every 
condition that comes up. The advantages of this spark method 
of recording are quite obvious, but, in my experience, it has 
some disadvantages. : 

The paper which is used for the record is somewhat irregular 
in thickness, and in getting a difference of potential between 
plate and pointer that will strike through in a satisfactory 


2106 ROLLING MILLS—SPEED CONTROL [Nov. 8 


manner, you encounter two troubles—first, if you use a high 
potential that will strike through rather definitely, you are 
likely to run into trouble with electrostatic effect between the 
pointer and the frame of the instrument; second, sometimes 
there is a tendency to puncture at a point not directly under- 
neath the needle, especially if a comparatively low difference 
of potential is used. This means that you must develop a 
considerable difference of potential, and guard successfully 
against the electrostatic effects by using a considerable torque, 
to get the same degree of precision that you can get in other ways. 

I will show what means have been employed in the instruments 
that have been referred to by some of the previous speakers, to 
overcome the effect of friction on the paper, etc. (See Fig. 3.) 
Friction is minimized by an arrangement to feed the ink by 
capillary action, leakage on to the paper being prevented by 
surface tension at the recording point. The arrangement will not 
leak, and the ink will flow freely, and it can be adjusted to the 
paper so that it is in very light contact, and after the pen starts, 
it is simply the contact of the ink and paper and not of the pen 
point. 

H. L. Barnholdt (by letter): When determining the motor 
size during the early stages of introducing electric rolling mill 
drives, the tendency was to follow the steam engine practise 
in many cases, i.e., to use a motor large enough so that the first 
thing to break would be some part of the mill rather than the 
motor. This, no doubt, was good practise with the meager 
data then on hand in regard to the power requirements, as it 
would have been poor policy to run much risk of the motor 
breaking down when endeavoring to introduce the electric 
drive. Although at the present time the economy of electric 
rolling mill drives in general, as compared with steam drives, has 
been fully established, competition has made the question of 
further increasing the economy of these drives one of great 
importance. Not only can the initial investment be made low 
by selecting a motor of proper capacity to handle the require- 
ments, but the performance of such a motor will be superior 
to that of a larger motor running underloaded. The ease and. 
accuracy with which the electric. power consumption of these 
fluctuating loads can be determined, as compared with steam, 
has done much to bring the subject of rolling mill practise to 
amore scientific basis. It also enables the motor manufacturer 
to work closer on the design and still be within limits of safety. 

G. E. Stoltz (by letter): Mr. Sykes has mentioned the diffi- 
culty in obtaining the tonnage output of a mill from the opera- 
tors. It seems to me that by knowing the peripheral speed at 
which the metal is rolled and the method of handling the material, 
an engineer who is acquainted with this phase of steel mill work 
should be able to estimate very closely the output which the mill 
is capable of rolling. 
- It has been stated that it is the practise of some engine builders 


1912} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2107 


to supply an engine large enough to break some part of the mill. 
This seems to be rather an expensive method of playing safe. 
Of course, in the absence of the necessary data to make an 
intelligent calculation of the power required, it is easy to see 
why the engine builder is willing to install an unusually large 
engine, provided the customer can be persuaded to pay for 
apparatus of such abnormal capacity. By the use of such a 
method for determining the size of engine, it would be only 
natural to simply guess at the size of flywheel. Supposing the 
flywheel should be too small, the engine must take more than 
its share of the peaks. With this condition the engine builder 
may be misled into believing that his engine is none too large. 
Very comprehensive data are necessary to determine definitely the 
size of motor and flywheel required, considering the two as 
a unit, their relation to each other depending to a large extent 
upon the type of control used. Almost any engineer can specify - 
the drive of a mill if he is allowed a large factor of safety, but 
good engineering and commercialism demand accurate knowledge 
of the subject. 

It is stated that a low rate of displacement probably requires 
less power than if the metal were rolled quickly. Could this be 
attributed to greater slippage between the metal and rolls at 
high speeds, which would introduce greater friction? 

One of the advantages of automatic speed control is that the 
losses in the external resistance of a motor are reduced to a 
minimum. It is well known that very often rolling mills run 
idle a fairly large percentage of the time. During light load the 
secondary resistance is automatically short-circuited, which, 
with no losses occurring in external resistance, gives the best 
possible efficiency. With fixed resistance in secondary, energy 1s 
dissipated in this resistance, which makes it impossible to obtain 
a high efficiency even at light load. 

I note that in Table I of Mr. Sykes’s paper the last four columns 
of passes one and two have been left blank. This has probably 
been done not to complicate the calculations too much. Ltcis 
evident that the motor can return 2197 h.p-sec. during the five 
seconds interval, but during the intervals after the first and 
second passes, only 1092 and 2167 h.p-sec. are required, respec- 
tively, to bring the flywheel up to speed. This is true only of the 
first slab put through the mill after the motor has been running 
idle long enough to come up to light-load speed, but if the 
schedule is followed as shown in Fig. 11 when the second slab 
enters, 1135 h.p-sec. are still required to bring the flywheel up 
to light load speed. This shortage is made up during the inter- 
vals after the first and second passes by the motor teas 
2197 h.p-sec. to the flywheel in each case, instead of 1092 an 
2167, respectively. 

Wilfred Sykes: In Mr. Wilson’s discussion of the first paper 
he refers to the use of flywheels being a necessary evil. That 
is quite true. But the flywheel makes it commercially feasible to 


2108 ROLLING MILLS—SPEED CONTROL [Nov. 8 


drive rolling mills electrically, which, in the majority of cases, 
would otherwise not be possible. The diagram referred to in- 
the discussion, that is, the one given in the paper, is actually 
made up from tests on a plate mill, in fact, it is the result of the 
test, modified somewhat to give it in round figures, but for all 
practical purposes they are the test figures obtained. 

Mr. Wilson refers to the possibility of carrying the peak loads 
to the power station. The universal complaint that one hears 
from the operators in steel mills is that their power stations 
are all fully loaded, and they never have enough generator 
capacity to carry the load, and anything that produces a peak 
is about the most undesirable thing they can think of, next to 
something that will give them a bad power factor. 

Mr. Haar in his discussion referred to the differences that 
exist in tests that have been published. I have studied some of 
these tests rather closely, and I believe a good deal of the differ- 
ence is due to the method of testing. Some years ago, I had 
some work to do, involving such testing, and as we did not know 
before starting what the difficulties were, we got all sorts of 
results, and exactly the same thing occurred in tests referred to 
in this discussion. That is why it was necessary to make a 
preliminary test extending over about two months. It took that 
time to train the people so that they would operate the instru- 
ments properly and get the information accurately. One of the 
most difficult things was to get all the information, in the first 
place, and after we had the observers trained properly so that 
they would get all the information, the next difficulty was to 
get the information correctly. The preliminary results which 
were obtained varied several hundred per cent and were wholly 
unreliable. It was after the people had been trained for a couple 
of months to work together that they reached such a state of 
perfection in their operations that they could go into a mill and 
make tests which would be reliable from the beginning. 

A great deal of this trouble was due to the fact that we did not 
appreciate the necessity of calibrating our apparatus often 
enough. We thought if we calibrated it once a day it was all 
right. Actually, we found we had to calibrate the apparatus 
after every test, and that is not an easy proposition, and involved 
the employment of a great many instruments. 

Mr. Cheney has brought out very well the subject of power 
factor. It is often asked, ‘“‘ Why don’t you put in a motor that 
is big enough to carry the load, so that there will be no doubt 
about it?” In some cases they have such machines, and they 
do not know how to run the generating stations on account of 
the low power factor. 

Mr. Westcott referred to the tests on steam-driven mills. 
In that connection I think it might be well to refer to a type 
of steam indicator that has been developed in Europe by Rosen- 
kranz. This indicator has been used in Europe, and to some 
extent in this country. When you make a test with an ordinary 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2109 


closed diagram the lines get so mixed up that in many cases you 
cannot make out where one diagram begins and the other 
ends, and under such circumstances it is difficult to get accurate 
results. Instead of using a closed diagram Rosenkranz brought 
out an arrangement of diagrams which has the appearance of 
an ordinary graphic recording meter chart. This indicator 
makes it possible to make fairly reliable tests and secure reliable 
results from steam mills, where it was not possible to obtain 
very consistent results with the ordinary closed indicator diagram. 

Regarding the method used for obtaining the section when 
rolling heavy materials, such as angles, channels, etc., we have 
managed to persuade the mill people in a great many cases to 
run out a piece after a pass so that we got a section of it. We did 
not always succeed in doing this. If they were not very busy 
we managed to get them to do it, but it was not always easy. 

The paper was driven from a countershaft, all instruments 
being driven by the same countershaft, and the whole thing 
driven by a little motor, from a storage battery, or sometimes 
directly from the lighting circuit. The speed stated in the paper, 
of one inch (25.4 mm.) per second, was not always used. We 
arranged the speed according to the class of mill with which 
we were dealing. If we had a rapidly fluctuating load the high 
paper speed was employed. If the load did not fluctuate, then a 
lower speed was used. In all of these tests we never succeeded 
in getting the people to slow down their mills to accommodate us. 
All the tests were made while the mills were running at their 
normal rate of production, and that complicated the matter a 
good deal. 

Mr. Petty asked if any information was available as to the 
effect of the rate of displacement. The effect of the rate of dis- » 
placement is not very great, so far as I can determine, and the 
whole thing is so covered up with other factors, that I am 
doubtful, without making a series of investigations especially 
with that object in view, if it is possible to say definitely what 
effect it has upon the power requirements. 

Referring to Mr. Crosby’s discussion, there is no doubt that 
the separation of the electrical equipment from the mill is an 
important factor in insuring satisfactory operation and this is 
practically the universal custom, but this does not obviate a 
number of difficulties that occur with complicated control 
apparatus. ; 

Regarding the use of three-phase commutator regulating 
machines, it has been pointed out that such schemes have the 
general drawback that they require good attention, more so 
than is usually given apparatus in steel mills in this country. 
However, the general use of 25 cycles in our mills makes it easier 
to design good machines than is the case in Europe, where 50 
cycles is nearly always used. This is especially true of the re- 
volving field type. The regulating schemes involving the use 
of a synchronous converter in the rotor circuit are, on the other 
hand, placed at a considerable disadvantage on account of the 


2110 : ROLLING MILLS—SPEED CONTROL (Nov. 8 


lower frequency, compared with European plants, and it is hard- 
ly to be anticipated that they will be used to any appreciable 
extent, on account of the high cost. In discussing such a subject 
it is desirable to give particular attention to the difficulties that 
may be met with, so that the problem may be fully understood 
before installations are made. Mr. Crosby’s anticipation that 
some of the schemes described will present difficulties is rather 
hard to answer, as he has not stated just what he fears. Ma- 
chines built along the lines of the newer types described have given 
very good results under severe conditions and it is difficult to 
understand just what troubles he has in mind. We fail to see 
where any difficulty exists in passing the slip energy through a 
transformer, as surely this is preferable to using a rotating 
machine, such as shown in Fig. 4, and also more efficient. The 
system shown in Fig. 5, which is in commercial use in Europe, 
has this feature. The arrangements shown in Figs. 9 and 10 
avoid the use of a transformer, but, of course, they can only be 
used on comparatively low-voltage circuits. 

It is important, however, to avoid energy transformations as 
much as possible, or, in other words, to return the rotor energy 
as directly as possible to the line. The systems referred to by 
Mr. Crosby are generally well known, the one using a three- 
phase commutator motor being shown by Fig. 4 of our paper. 
The speed regulation requires the transformation of energy from 
the primary to rotor circuit, then into mechanical energy by 
the commutator motor, and again into electrical energy by the 
inductive machine. 

That such an arrangement is not the limit of development, 
is clear, and other systems were described in our paper which 
avoid at least one of these transformations. Even the arrange- 
ment shown in Fig. 5, using a transformer, has the advantage 
over the older systems that both power factor and speed can be 
regulated without shifting the brushes, or the use of complicated 
auxiliary phase combinations. The newer arrangement des- 
cribed can be readily designed to operate from below to above 
synchronism, which, however, is not the case with the systems 
mentioned by Mr. Crosby, due to the difficulty of obtaining 
current in the commutator machine when passing through syn- 
chronism. The possibility of regulating above and below syn- 
chronism reduces the maximum energy to be handled by the 
commutator motor to one-half of what is necessary for a certain 
speed range compared with arrangements regulating only below 
synchronism. It also reduces the frequency of the current to 
be handled, which is particularly desirable for commutator 
machines. With the system shown in Fig. 3, even if arrange- 
ments could be made to run above synchronism, the commutator 
machines would have to be driven by the main motor as a gen- 
erator, and the available torque is correspondingly reduced, 
wheteas generally the reverse is required. 

We believe it can be safely said that the limit of developmen 
of such schemes has not been reached, and we have indicated 


1912) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2111 


in our paper some of the lines along which improvements can 
be made. Other systems, promising further improvements are 
receiving attention, but cannot be discussed at present. 

This brings up the point, in connection with mining work, 
especially in this country, that you must look out very carefully 
for anything that introduces complication. The more machinery 
or control apparatus you have, the more trouble you will have 
with the system. 

The point brought out by Mr. Robinson covers one of the 
difficulties we ran into. It is quite true that the spark has a 
tendency to jump around, and we found it was necessary to make 
pretty careful arrangements to insure that the paper went 
evenly over the board in which the plate was recessed. Then, 
in addition to that, we had to use a special paper, to avoid 
spreading of the spark. We also found out that the material 
used for the spark point had a great deal to do with the matter. 
If we used platinum and shaped it properly we got good results. 
We used rather a light spark, which did not burn the paper, but 
the puncture could be distinctly seen by holding the paper to 
the light. After the test was made, the sheet of paper was 
placed on a plate of glass and the curve drawn in by hand...in 
that way it was possible to avoid the difficulty of the spreading 
of the spark, and I do not think in any case the mark of the 
spark was more than 0.01 in. (0.25 mm.) wide in the tests we 
made after the preliminary experiments were made. 

A. Dyckerhoff (communicated after adjournment): In 
going over the paper on The Economical Speed Control of Al- 
ternating-Current Motors Driving Rolling Mills, it occurs to me 
that some statements made in this paper are misleading, and 
also that many points are not brought out which should be men- 
tioned. While I do not wish to invade the territory of the rolling 
mill engineer, whose task it is to find out the best rolling methods, 
and to whose needs the electrical manufacturer has to adapt 
his machinery in ways consistent with the best engineering prac- 
tise, I wish to make a few remarks as an electrical engineer con- 
nected with steel and rolling mills. I feel myself the more quali- 
fied to speak since I had a very good opportunity during the past 
summer to study in Germany the question of economical speed 
regulation of a-c. motors, and its reliability in practical appli- 
cation under severe conditions. 

The objection may be made that the rolling mill practise in 
this country is more severe than in Europe, and requires also, 
on account of the more or less unskilled labor, machinery of the 
most heavy construction and with practically fool-proof control. 
It will be seen, however, from the following statements, that all 
such objections to the adaptation of similar devices can be easily 
overcome. ‘These devices are selected for their value in giving 
more definite speed control as a refinement in the art of rolling 
steel, and for cheapening the cost of producing rolled steel through 
more efficient operation. 


2112 ROLLING MILLS--SPEED CONTROL [Nov. 8 


The statement is made that speed regulation on merchant 
mills depends greatly on the class of labor operating the mill. 
Naturally a certain gang will have to be trained for a particular 
mill or class of work, but the lack of skilledilabor should not 
impose the necessity of providing arrangements for speed regu- 
lation which would otherwise be unnecessary. In the case of 
merchant mills of the continuous type for high production the 
rolling process is almost automatic, and when steel is being rolled 
at very high speed, e.g., in three-high rod mills, unskilled manual 
labor can be almost entirely dispensed with by using “ guides ”’ 
leading the metal from one pass to another. 

It is the nature of the rolling process that merchant mills with 
a wide range of work require speed adjustment, particularly 
mills rolling refined material such as tool steel, spring steel, etc., 
where accuracy of section is necessary. This applies especially 
to mills running at low speed and rolling higher grade sheet and 
tin plate, stampings for electric machinery, etc. In most of 
these cases speed adjustment is essential for reasons of quality 
of metal and finish of product. Metal of this kind is often 
worked at low temperatures, thus requiring more power. Since 
many firms rolling such material do not own electric power 
plants, but have to buy electric power, they are particularly con- 
cerned with putting in the most economical speed adjustment 
devices they can get. 

There are certain other applications where speed regulating 
devices are desirable in order to secure better operating con- 
ditions. Continous mills, a type much in evidence in this country, 
may offer possibilities for great improvement in conditions, due 
to their large output. Where the range of product of an existing 
‘mill is increased by adding several roll stands, a small regulating 
set attached to the roll motor may increase its output sufficiently 
to carry the entire load under the new conditions, whereas a 
larger motor would be otherwise required. 

Rheostatic Control. It is pointed out above that in many 
cases a steady speed regulation is required, for rolling reasons. 
It follows that a resistance control cannot, for inherent reasons, 
give as good results as can be obtained by the new speed regula- 
tion devices, even if an automatic regulation of the resistance 
is applied so as to vary it inversely with the load. In ordinary 
merchant mills a speed regulation of from 10 to 15 per cent of 
synchronous speed, obtained by rheostatic control, may be just 
as economical under certain conditions as that obtained by 
regulating sets, and being more practicable is therefore more 
desirable. That a rheostatic speed regulation of 25 to 30 per 
cent can be just as economical as that obtained with any other 
auxiliary arrangement, not considering the question of satis- 
factory operation, is an assertion that will not hold true in ordi- 
nary practise. In the example cited of a jobbing mill carrying 
full load only 20 per cent of the running time, a condition is 
illustrated that is rarely met with, as it means bad mill practise 


1912} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2113 


and excessive costs due to light running. Furthermore, several 
points are omitted which should be taken into account. First 
of all, the power factor on the motor decreases with the rheostatic 
regulation considerably; further, the efficiency of the converting 
equipment, including transformer, is rather low (about two per 
cent higher could be obtained at full load and three per cent 
higher at light load with a proper arrangement). I assume 
that the transformer mentioned was connected between the rotor 
ring and the converter, but the transformer, however, can -be 
entirely dispensed with, since it does not assist in the cheapening 
and improving of the arrangement in any way. ‘There is also 
an improvement of the power factor on the motor to approxi- 
mately 100 per cent over almost the entire range of regulation, 
which means that a motor of a smaller rating could eventually 
be chosen. Any of these points should be fully taken into ac- 
count; however, none has been mentioned. It is nothing but 


i 5 
0.90 5 
3 
> 0.80 
e f r a 
w 0,70 
= (es aes 
le 
ti 0.60) +++ Sei a 
0.50. 


8 4 2 16 BR 8 4 0 
PER CENT SPEED-REGULATION 


Fic. 4——EFFICIENCIES OF VARIOUS REGULATING SYSTEMS IN RELATION 
TO SPEED REGULATION 


(1) Synchronous converter—d-c. motor system (Kramer). = 
Main motor—1150 h.p., 270 rev. per min, 

(2) Frequency changer system (Heyland). Motor—950 h. p., 
300 rev. per min. : 2 

(3) Scherbius system. Main motor—1000 h. p., 363 rev. per min. 

(4) Rheostatic control. Motor—1200 h, p., 248 rev. per min. 


fair to consider the efficiencies of the different regulating sets and 
rheostatic regulation under equal conditions as found in ordinary 
practise, and to leave out entirely exceptions due to certain 
local conditions. This assumption of general conditions 1s 
illustrated by the curves in Fig. 4 of this discussion, which are 
based on actual tests representing present-day practise. It will 
be noted that the best result has been obtained by the converter 
d-c. motor system, and therefore the statement remains to be 
proved that some of the newer methods, referred to on page 207 4 
of the paper by Messrs. Meyer and Sykes, give more economical 
regulation than an arrangement requiring the conversion of the 
energy to direct current. 
Multi-Speed Motors and Motors im Cascade. It is a matter 
of fact that the control of those motors 1s rather complicated. 
When dealing with a motor arranged for pole changing, this 
arrangemént provides for a few speed steps only, the interme- 


2114 ROLLING MILLS--SPEED CONTROL [Nov. 8 


diate steps being obtained by inserting resistance. The power 
factor of such a motor is poor, consequently the generators and 
lines are loaded unnecessarily with current. In the case of 
two motors in cascade this feature of a low power factor is still 
more doubtful, the cascade motor forming a high inductive re- 
sistance for the main motor, thus resulting in high wattless 
current in the system. If there is a choice between a multi- 
speed motor and motors in cascade, the former is preferable. 
The latter arrangement is used in very few installations in this 
country as well as in Europe, where they have been using d-c. 
roll motors, which are so ideal as to speed regulation, to a greater 
extent than in this country. 

Regulating Sets. There are four different kinds of regulating 
systems in successful operation: 

1. Induction motor with synchronous converter, feeding 
d-c. motor, connected mechanically to shaft of induction motor, 
known as the Kramer set. 

2. Induction motor with three-phase commutator motor 
coupled to same. 

3. Induction motor connected electrically to three-phase 
commutator motor which drives induction machine feeding back 
to the line, known as the Scherbius set. 

4. Induction motor with frequency changer feeding its 
secondary energy back to the line, known as the Heyland system. 

Application. Thenature of rolling processes generally requires 
high torqueand low speed for heavy stock, and low torque and high 
speed for light sections, and also, when rolling a certain section, 
high torque at low speed is necessary for the first passes and light 
torque and high speed for the last passes. The rolling mill 
is therefore entirely a constant output proposition, 7.e., the torque 
increases with decreasing speed, whereas in the case of fans, 
blowers, and pumps, low torque is wanted at low speed. From 
this it follows that the d-c. motor system (set No. 1) and the 
three-phase commutator motor cascade (set No. 2) are in their 
nature more adaptable for roll trains than any other system, 
of which two the latter is preferable on account of requiring 
only one additional machine and converting the secondary energy 
of the induction motor directly into mechanical power. I know 
of installations where such sets, arranged for a regulation of 
more than 30 per cent on merchant mills, are operating very 
satisfactorily. This country is more fortunate than Europe 
in using 25-cycle circuits for steel mills, which makes the design 
of three-phase commutator motors easier, although the output 
is limited. The maximum speed regulation in operation with 
the Kramer system is somewhat more than 60 per cent in con- 
nection with an induction motor of 1000 h.p. There is under 
construction a set calling for the regulation of a 2000-h.p. motor 
over a range of 55 per cent. The two systems, Kramer and 
d-c. commutator motor cascade, thus respond, to a great ex- 
tent, to the needs of rolling practise, but this does not do away 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2115 


with the great usefulness and adaptability of the other systems. 
Some of the merits of the remaining systems are as follows: 
(1) they are very suitable for a high range of regulation; (2) 
they can be designed for their most suitable speed; (3) they can 
be placed independently of the mill itself; (4) they possess certain 
other advantages mentioned in the course of the discussion. 
Thus far a Scherbius set is operating in connection with a roll 
motor of 1800 h.p. with a speed regulation of 50 per cent, and a 
Heyland frequency changer in connection with a 900-h.p. 
motor for approximately 45 per cent regulation. If a choice 
is to be made between the three-phase commutator motor cas- 
cade and the Kramer set, the former is preferable for a roll motor 
running at high speed for a limited range of speed regulation, and 
for motors at medium speed and speed regulation usually met 
with, say, up to 65 per cent, the Kramer set is preferable; and 
for low-speed motors with wide range separate regulating 
sets should be chosen. Thus far the Kramer set seems very 
adaptable for this country, as the design of the synchronous 
converter has reached a higher stage of development in the United 
States than in Europe; its reliability is proved by its extended 
use in power stations and railroad service, and its operation is 
familiar to attendants. Also, the three-phase commutator motor 
cascade promises, from its successful operation as single-phase 
motor in railroad service, to be a reliable asset in steel mill 
drives. 

Number in Operation. It is interesting to note that approxi- 
mately 57 motors with a total rating of approximately 64,000 
h.p. (continuous rating at high speed of main motor only) are 
equipped with economical speed regulating devices, of systems 
1, 2,3,or4. Of this 64,000 h.p., motors totalling approximately 
17,000 h.p. are under construction or are intended for speed 
regulation. The total amount of 64,000 h.p. is distributed 
among the different systems approximately as follows: 


Synchronous converter-d-c. motor system. .... 57 per cent. 
Roferbius systems com... met 19 per cent. 
Three-phase commutator motor cascade...... 18 per cent. 
Frequency changer system..............-.. 6 per cent. 


Of this 64,000 b.p. approximately 12,000 h.p. is driving fans, 


blowers and pumps, and 45,000 h.p. is driving roll trains, the 


distribution of which on the various systems amounts approxi- 


mately to: 
Synchronous converter-d-c. motor system. .... 75 per cent. 
Scherbius system.....--- 0+ +2 esses 13 per cent. 
Three-phase commutator motor cascadé...<t:. 9 per cent. 
Frequency changer system. .... oe -o-pet cen: 


From these statistics it will be seen to what a great extent 
(about 70 per cent) the roll train motors share in the total 
amount, and to what a great percentage (75 per cent) the syn- 
chronous converter-d-c. motor system is represented. The latter 
system is also supplied for a great amount of the 17,000 h.p. 


2116 ROLLING MILLS--SPEED CONTROL ¥ (Nov. 8 . 


under construction. The frequency changer system was brought 
out only about two years ago, which accounts for its small share. 

Efficiency. Besides having a reliable operation it is of the 
greatest interest to learn what efficiencies have been obtained 
in actual service. Fig. 4 (see Electrische Kraftbetriebe und 
Bahnen, 1912, No. 21) shows the over-all efficiencies of three 
systems with their respective motors compared with rheostatic 
control. These motors are driving fans, are approximately of 
the same output, and therefore permit the direct comparison 
as shown. From this it will be seen that the synchronous con- 
verter-d-c. system gives the best efficiencies, followed by the 


THREE-PHASE 
COMMUTATOR MOTOR 
CASCADE 


EFFICIENCY 
= 
o 
RHEOSTATIC CONTROL 


o 
= 
o 


_PER CENT OF FULL LOAD TORQUB 


Fic. 5—EFFICIENCY CURVES FOR SPEED REGULATION BY MEANS OF 
THREE-PHASE COMMUTATOR Motor ON Rotyt Motor SHAFT COM- 
PARED WITH RHEOSTATIC CONTROL. Main Motor 

1000 u.P., 8360 REV. PER MIN. 


frequency changer system and the Scherbius system, which 
operate practically at the same efficiency. I understand that 
the efficiencies of the latter two have been increased lately. 
Further, the curves show that the efficiencies of the Kramer . 
set and rheostatic control are approximately the same at 4.5 
per cent speed regulation, and those of the frequency changer and 
Scherbius system and rheostatic control the same at approxi- 
mately 7 per cent. This means that a speed regulation above 
4.5 per cent and 7 per cent, respectively, in these particular 
cases, is therefore more economical with regulating sets than with 
rheostatic control. The synchronous converter requires ap- 
proximately at least two cycles for operation free from hunting, 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2117 


which means that with a frequency of 25 cycles, as used in steel 
mills, operation for less than about 8 per cent speed regulation 
will not be very satisfactory. 

Fig. 4 does not give the efficiency of a three-phase commutator 
motor cascade set; this, however, can be taken from Fig. 5 
(see Electrische Kraftbetriebe und Bahnen, 1910, Nos. 6 and 7), 
. Showing efficiencies of such a cascade set compared with rheo- 
static control. It will be noted that such a set has an efficiency 
approximately two to three per cent less than the synchronous 
converter-d-c. motor system. 

For comparison of a three-phase commutator motor cascade 
set with a Scherbius set Fig. 6 (see Electrische Kraftbetriebe und 
Bahnen, 1910) has been prepared, and it will readily be seen 
that the three-phase commutator motor cascade is superior 
in efficiency to a Scherbius set by several per cent, depending 


EFFICIENCY 


20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
PER CENT OF FULL LOAD TORQUE 


Fic. 6—EFFICIENCY CURVES FOR SPEED REGULATION BY MEANS OF 
SCHERBIUS SET, WITH AND WITHOUT 5 PER CENT SPEED DROP FROM 
No Loap To Futt Losp For 10, 15, 20 AND 25 PER CENT OF 
NorMAL SPEED. Main Motor—1000 8. P., 360 REV. PER MIN. 


on the amount of regulation and on the torque. The efficiency 
of the Scherbius set is better than if there is a roll motor and a 
three-phase commutator motor operating at a very low speed. 
How far the efficiency is affected by a speed drop of 5 per cent 
from no load to full load, so as to obtain energy from the fly- 
wheel, is shown by the dotted lines. This disadvantage of a lower 
efficiency of the Scherbius set, however, is rather compensated 
by other advantages. In connection therewith, I would men- 
‘tion that by means of such a set 18 to 20 per cent of the 
energy taken by a roll motor of 1800 h.p. at 375 rev. per 
min. driving a rod mill was actually returned to the line, this 
being the average over several months and measured by actual 
readings of integrating wattmeters. 

Power Factor. With any of the regulating sets mentioned, 
the power factor of the circuit has been brought to unity and 
the sets operate usually under this condition. A high power 


2118 ROLLING MILLS--SPEED CONTROL [Nov. 8 


factor is the more important since the output of an existing motor 
can be increased, or in a new plant a main motor of smaller output 
can be chosen, under proper conditions, by adding are gulating 
set or a three-phase commutator machine as a phase compen- 
sator. Fig. 7 shows that unity power factor has been obtained 
with the synchronous converter-d-c. motor, the Scherbius and 
the Heyland frequency changer systems. The same result can 
also be obtained with a three-phase commutator motor cascade, 
but not, however, with such a simple device as with a Kramer 
set, where merely the excitation of the synchronous converter 
is regulated till unity power factor is obtained on the motor. 
The same effect can very easily be secured with a frequency 
changer; first, either by shifting the stator of the motor driving 
the frequency changer or, second, by means of double induction 
regulators if the frequency changer is connected to the main 
motor by means of a gear. Both of these methods are in success- 


POWER FACTOR 


Ss 
8 
8 


14 «10 6 
PER CENT SPEED-REGULATION 
Fic. 7—Power Factor or Various REGULATING SYSTEMS IN RELA- 
TION TO SPEED REGULATION 


ful operation. The disadvantage of the rheostatic control as 
compared with regulating sets is borne out by curve 4 of Fig. 7 
of this discussion. 

Control. A word may be said as to control, which is of such 
importance for successful operation. In most cases it is required 
to arrange the control so that it is fool-proof. Comparing the 
control for any regulating system with, for instance, that ofa 
multi-speed roll motor, it will readily be seen that one is prac- 
tically no more complex than the other. The sequence of switch- 
ing operations in connection with regulating sets is very simple, 
and in all instances mechanical or electrical interlocks can be 
provided. Under certain conditions, e.g., with a frequency 
changer, synchronizing is necessary, and this can be done by 
automatic synchronizers: 

In a great many installations phase-potential regulators have 
been used successfully, although this arrangement involves 
higher cost. The potential regulator has also been used in con- 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK . 2119 


junction with the synchronous converter-d-c. motor system, 
connected between the rotor of the main motor and the converter, 
but not to the advantage of the regulating system, because of 
such drawbacks as additional high cost, large converter, lower 

efficiency, etc. 

There is another important field of application of the three- 
phase commutator motor in connection with an induction motor 
and flywheel. This application is the more important in this 
country as the three-phase induction motor is being much used 
in connection with roll trains, whereas in Europe, due to other 
conditions, a great number of reversing mills are in operation 
which require a flywheel motor-generator set interposed between 
the line and the roll motor. This arrangement involves a triple 
conversion of energy from the switchboard in the motor room 
to the roll necks, and accordingly heavy losses. The tendency 
in this country is mostly to use the electric energy directly in the 
roll motors, thus requiring from the switchboard to the roll 
necks only one conversion of energy and saving the losses imposed 
by two more conversions. 

It may be desirable to smooth out the peaks on the line where 
a motor drives the roll train directly, and in such cases a flywheel 
set with induction motor and three-phase commutator motor 
can give very good service. It is mainly the task of the three- 
phase commutator motor to enable the three-phase induction 
motor to act as a generator below synchronous speed, taking its 
energy from the flywheel and supplying current to the line. 
At the same time, the three-phase commutator motor takes care 
of the economical speed regulation of the induction motor. 
The whole arrangement can be made automatic. 

A similar application of a three-phase commutator motor 
may also be useful in connection with an Ilgner set for the pur- 
pose of improving its efficiency. 

The above points rectify some erroneous statements made in 
the paper and outline what really has been obtained under actual 
operating conditions in Europe, which same conditions hold 
true to a great extent in this country. : 

In regard to the systems described on page 2084 and following, 
I would say that the above statements of a general nature which I 
have made hold true also for the new regulating arrangements, 
especially as to the adaptation of frequency changers to roll 
trains. These systems apparently represent some simple features, 
but so far are not yet proven by practical application, as far as 
I know, and the results will be awaited with interest. If there 
are any such installations I should like to know where they are 
located, also the output of the motor and the amount of regula- 
tion. I would further like to know for what theoretical reasons 
synchronizing of the frequency changers is not necessary, al- 
though I can anticipate the means for synchronizing which might 
be applied. 

The main part of the switching arrangement of the frequency 
changer, as shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 of the paper, and also 


2120 ROLLING MILLS--SPEEL CONTROL [Nov. 8 


of the three-phase commutator motor, Fig. 11 and Fig. 12, will 
consist of the control of the stator winding. These windings 
will have to have many taps in order to obtain a sufficient number 
of steps and thereby fine speed regulation. Furthermore, re- 
sistance steps or similar arrangements will have to be provided 
in order to avoid short-circuiting of part of the winding when 
switching from one tap to another. In connection therewith, 
I wish to say that the operation of three-phase commutator mo- 
tors arranged for control by means of brush shifting has proved 
very satisfactory, and I learn that in consequence of this many 
are under construction. 

Ford W. Harris (communicated after adjournment): It — 
seems to me that the authors have made a little too much of a 
bugbear of the complexity of control and of control wiring. 
The latter may be eliminated at once as a matter of first cost. only. 
That is, the control wiring can be so installed that it is absolutely 
no trouble to maintain. This is reasonable enough, as itis 
simply stationary material that may be protected against ex- 
ternal injury. The multiplicity of switches 1s another matter, 
but even here a good word may be said for the simpler motors 
that may be used if a little switch complexity is allowed. 

Further, it will be found that, by a little care in laying out the 
sequence of switching operations, all the maintenance will 
fall on one or two switches and the remainder will be more or 
less free from arcing and wear. As to making them operate 
automatically, the writer has become convinced that there is 
really no question that, by suitable arrangements of interlocks 
and contacts, automatic control can be made practically in- 
fallible. The only requirement is good switches in the first place 
and a moderate amount of attention. It is my opinion that either 
a cascade or rheostatic control would probably work out more 
cheaply and be more satisfactory to maintain than either of 
the several commutator type systems shown. The item of 
economy is, of course, getting to be of importance, as the steel - 
mill engineers are fast getting to a point where they can get 
absolutely satisfactory service and they are more and more 
bending their energies to the refinements that tend toward lower 
fixed charges and lower operating expense. - 


A paper presented at the 278ih Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, New 
York, December 13, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I. E.E. 


HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS OF LINE INSULATORS 


BY L. E. IMLAY AND PERCY H. THOMAS 


The object of this paper is to present for consideration certain 
very interesting and suggestive high-frequency insulator tests 
recently made by the authors. These tests were undertaken to 
determine the availability of a certain insulator for use on a 
projected 38,000-volt line and resulted in a radical modification. 
of the design. Having a strictly utilitarian purpose in view, 


- these tests were not expanded to the point that would be desirable 


from a scientific point of view, although the nature of the results 
shows the great desirability of further research in this same field. 
With this explanation the plan of the tests will be understood. 

A certain transmission system* has used three parallel circuits 
operating at 22,000 volts to transmit a rather large amount of. 
power some 16 miles for a number of years. The demand 
for more power has rendered a new line necessary, which is being 
installed for 38,000-volt operation. The insulators on the old 
lines are made of electrose, having an umbrella petticoat about 
12 in. (30.4 cm.) in diameter, and a second smaller petticoat about 
6 in. (15.2 cm.) in diameter. They were originally intended to be 
used on 38,000 volts when the rise of the load should require. 
Experience showed that these insulators occasionally punctured 
through the head from lightning, such failures being very difficult 
to find. The insulators are mounted on grounded steel pins. 
This sort of failure was very surprising in view of the fact that 
these insulators had never been punctured in testing, though they 
would arc over when wet at about 90,000 volts, as indicated on 
the primary side of a 25-cycle testing transformer. 

It was this discrepancy between the repeated punctures 
through the head from the conductor to the pin due to lightning, 
and the steady refusal of the insulators to puncture on a 25-cycle 


*Canadian Niagara Power Co. 
2121 


2122 IMLAY AND THOMAS: [Dec. 13 


testing set, that led to the high-frequency, high-voltage tests 
described below. 

These tests were made to determine directly whether any differ- 
ence in the behavior of the insulators could be determined be- 
tween the use of high frequency and 60 cycles, both produced 
in the laboratory. ; 

The circuits for the high-frequency tests are shown in Fig. 11. 

In this figure is indicated a 500-kw., 750,000-volt transformer. 
One side of this transformer is grounded and the other side 
connected to the discharge apparatus. The “ plate’’ shown 
was a sheet iron plate approximately eight by nine ft. (2.4 by 
2.7 m.), estimated capacity 0.0001 microfarad, suspended by a 
cord approximately 3.5 ft. (1.06 m.) from a large transformer 
tank, which served as a ground plate. The coils marked A, B 
and C were three air-core choke coils intended to protect the 
transformer. The coil A was a helix having a diameter of 18 in. 
(45.6 cm.), and had approximately 22 turns of wire, the turns 
being spaced approximately three in. (7.6 cm.) apart. The coil 
B was circular and approximately 24 in. (60.9 cm.) in diameter — 
and had 10 turns. The coil C was a pancake coil and had ap- 
proximately 200 turns with a mean length of turn of 37.7 in. (95.8 
cm.) This coil C was shunted by a graphite resistance of about 
125,000 ohms. 

The insulator to be tested was mounted on a wooden box some 
four ft. (1.22 m.) from the floor and had a half-inch (12.7-mm.) 
brass rod tied in the groove by a band of small size copper wires. 
The pin carrying this insulator was grounded through a wire 
approximately six ft. (1.8 m.) long. The length of the lead from 
the transformer terminal to the condenser plate was approxi- 
mately 50 ft. (15.2 m.) 

A series discharge gap was made by approaching a second brass 
rod mounted on a wooden stand to one end of the 4-in. (1.27-cm.) 
rod tied to the insulator, the second rod being connected to the 
sheet iron condenser plate by a wire two or three ft. (60 or 90 cm.) 
long. 

Where a measuring gap was used, as recorded in the reports 
below, this consisted of a needle point gap mounted on hard 
rubber pedestals located some six ft. (1.8 m.) from the insulator 
under test. One side of this gap was connected, either with or 
without resistance, to the conductor on the insulator under test, 
and the other side was connected to the insulator pin or to the 
ground. 

The general method of test was to raise the voltage of the 


1912} HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS 2123 


generator feeding the primary until a discharge occurred across 
the series gap onto the insulator. With the adjustment of 
generator voltage and transformer ratio used, the result of the 
breakdown of the gap was in most cases to so reduce the applied 
voltage that the arc proper would drop out, at least partially, 
leaving the series gap nearly intact, and thus the return of voltage 
on the next alternation would be obliged to nearly reproduce the 
original breakdown voltage on the gap. The effect of this ar- 
rangement was to give a continuous succession of static sparks 
lasting as long as voltage remained on, that is, one or two seconds, 
as distinguished from the holding of a continuous arc over the 
gap. Inthe tests of June 24th, however, the opposite effect was 
secured, that is, a single static spark each time the voltage was 
raised, followed by a mild arc. 


1 

! 

i 

i 

| 

1 

i 

| 

| 

| 

Po 1 
115/55 ah 


oa 


Fic. 1—ORIGINAL INSULATOR Fic. 2—PROPOSED 38,000-VOLT 
INSULATOR 


The terms “application of voitage” and “ trial” used herein- 
after mean the raising of voltage to the breakdown point and 
the cutting off of voltage one or two seconds later. 

The results of the various tests have been tabulated as follows, 
and the tests will be considered briefly in groups. 

First Group. (Tests 1-2) Normal Flash-Over Test, Dry, in Atr, 
60 Cycles. 

This group of tests was preliminary and was made in the usual 
manner, the voltage being measured by a spark gap checked 
approximately by a voltmeter reading on the low-tension wind- 


ing of the raising transformer. 


- Inno case did an insulator puncture. An insulator of the type 
shown in Fig. 1, that now in use in the three existing lines, 
flashed over at 122,000 on the second trial; the insulator of the 


type shown in Fig. 2 flashed over at 150,000 volts. The insulator 


of Fig. 2isa new design that was intended to replace the insulator 


- of Fig. 1 and to resist lightning stresses better. Thetwo insulators 


are the same except that the later design has a head nearly two 


IMLAY AND THOMAS 


2124 


jel} YIGT pvey Ysnosyy peingoung 


*Ainful yuor 
-djoul ou pemoys ynq einjound wv a1ojeq 


eu} 0} SWI} Woy poulMexg “ynoqe 
” 38S n ” ” 
» FW » ” ” 


jel} WF] Peoy YBno1yy peinjoung 
“jerry 
puooses a4} pesy ysno1yy peinjound 


“2 489} UT Se sTeLTy 


OL seaye pray Yysnoryz pormmyoundg 


{werp'ur 
$9/1-U1ZE/T xoidde ajoy & Sulyeut speTy 
CT-OT Joye peey YySsnoiyy poeinpound 

‘jelly UIFT ‘peey Ysno1yy peinjzound 


*yeoonjed JeMo] JO s[pprur ur smmyound 
Joy ydooxo ‘sovjins JeAO peysely 


‘a0RJINS JOAO Poyse]y 
*pesy ysnoiyy pommyound 


‘syieds Areut 


2 
-ulljaid auros * i a 4 


” ” ” 


‘018 OU ‘a0ej}INS IOAO Psysepy 


000'See 


000'8ZE 


000'8ee 


000'ZFE 


000‘00& 
000'ZFE 


000'0¢z 
000'0F% 
000°¢0% 


000‘¢6 
000‘0ST 
000°ZZT 


480} 24} JO 4NsSey 


So ee ere Fe ee 


SIsa], TWALOY JO ATAVL 


de3 y1eds uo 
adey[OA JOWIIOJsUeLL, 


WS 


sotteg 


des 


Aguenbelj 4st 
Aouanbesj ysty 


” ” ” 
” ” ” 
ies ” 

you y ” 
” ” ” 


Aip ‘sapaA0 09 


4s0} Jo adAL 


< -gmyound 1937 YOno} 243 0} 304 4OU sem JOzBINsUY SIGLt 


NN ie cn a tla rhb a nnn ace 


(‘s3]04 000'06 38 Asp Se}949 09 
uo a0ejins JoAO peysep AjsnotAeldg) 
‘aseq 4e 
yo yno sem 4209 
-1yyed doz ydaoxe'Z » » » 


‘a9Bpe urTolj} 
‘ul ,£% yeoorjed 
zoddn ut pap 


sajoy # Joy ydaoxe ‘Z “Bly SB ees 


(‘s3104 000‘0ST 38 AIP sato49 Q9 
uo d0R}ins JeAO poysep A]SnorAsig) 
*punoie |e yeooryjod saddn ay} Yo yo 
st ,¥L 324} ydeoxe ‘Z ‘BIg se eules 


*yeoorjed Jamo, jo sseq YsnoIy} 
ajoy ,% Joy ydeoxe ‘*g “Bly se eutes 


% ” ” ” 


I ” ” ” 
% ” ” ” 
‘ 
‘% ” ” ” 
I ” ” ” 
% ” ” n 


‘g ‘BI se oulesg 


‘I ‘Big se emes 


ee 


Joje[Nsut jo uoTydLOseq 


SUOLVINSNI ANIT JO SLSAL AONANOAUA-HOIn 


86 


&@ 


0Z 


FI 


z 
Tt 


“ON 
Ioyensuy 


Fn 


” » 


7% oun{ 


ZI6L 
a1eq 


“~ Oo © 


2125 


HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS 


1912] 


‘JeU} UIZT ‘peey y3no1yq} pemyoung 


‘je pug ‘peey ysnosy} peinzoung 


“IN[Iej 3Y} 0F JOLId punoj o10M 
Ain{ut 10 Suijevey JO sUBIS OU 4Nq suIT} 04 
QUIT} UOT] poulUTeXe SEM IOZV[NSUT SITY L 
‘JeI41 WIGE WO peasy YSnoiyy peinyoung 


‘yoy AJoA yOu. sinyjound ‘s[el14 e10ml 
Maj & Ul VIM 91} Jopun prey Ysno1yy 
peinjound useyy ‘[eIly pg Io pug ‘szeoo 
-144ed IgMO] OM} YSnNoIY, peinyoung 


*s[el1y 
0g ‘einjound 4e 4oy ‘elIM 913 Japun pesey 
ysnoiyy woeyy ‘yeo0oI}30d a[pptu Ysno1yy 
uey3 ‘yeoomyj0d IeMOyT poinjoung 


*s[W1I} GQ UL sernyound sJeyyINnj ou 


{jelly pug yeoorjed urozj0q einyoung 


Jel} YIPT ‘ peoy ysnor1g3 pomyoung 


*s[B11} OST Ut eimyound on 


4824 94} Jo ynsay 


000'0E¢ 


o00‘'ses 


000°¢Sz 


000'°0€€ 


de3 y1eds uo 
a3e}[0A Ioullojsuely 


uGG 


UGG 


des 
S9TIIg 


Aouenbealj ysty 
4s0q Jo adAL 


(*S}]104 QOO' PST 92 Arp SaTDA9 09 

UO VdejINs I8AO paysep A[sNoIAelg) 
*peosy UO pasn sem deo [eJOUL 

ue yey} ydooxe ‘T “BIg se ouesg 


(*S}]O4 QOO‘OST 38 AIp seToA9 OQ 

UO s0BjINS I9AO Poysey A[snolAeig) 
*peoy Ut pesn sem deo [ejeu 

we yey} ydeoxe Z% ‘BIg se sues 


(‘S9TOA NOO'SET 1240 3e AIp sapoAO OQ 
Wo sovjIns I9AO peysey A[snotAelg) 

*g ‘Big Ul se 1o}e[NsUT Jo 4sTemM 

ay} punoie posovid seM ]IO} pve] jo 
419q © yeu, ydooxe ‘zg “BIg se ouleg 


(*s}Joa 
000'6ZT-000'EZT 32 ‘Arp sepoAo 0g 
uo s0BjINS I9AO peysepy A[SNOIAeIg) 

"g ‘BIg oes ‘I0ye[NsUT 
urefeoiod 30A-Q00'SF ‘ZOOE “ON 


('sq]JoA 
000‘0FT-000'0ST 38 Ap sajoAD 09 
UO 90BjINS JaAO peysey A[snolAeig) 
"2 ‘BIg gas ‘10je[Nsut 
urejeoiod §4f0A-Q00'¢E ZIOS “ON 


('s}]104 000'L8 38 AIP seToA9 Q9 

UO do0¥jINS J9AO poysey A[snoraclig) 
*g ‘Bly oes ‘10yelMsut 

ureyaotod § 4f0A-000'GZ + L00E ‘ON 


(-Axp ‘000‘0ZT 48 se[o49 09 

uo 90¥jIns IaAO0 poysepy A[snotAeig) 
*yeootyjod doy yo 4yno 

SeM FT Jeq} Ydeoxe ‘T “BIg se oweS 


(‘sz]04 OOS*EE 72 
yoM PUL S3[0A 0O0'F6 32 AIP safoA9 OQ 
uO 90BjInSs IoAO poysey AjsnotAeig) 
JoJeWILIp UNULTXeUL ,¢ IOAO 91441] & pue 
9A0013 9IIM 91} 944 03 YSIYy ‘ul g duinys 
e BUIAea] ‘aseq Je YO 4No alam szeOd 
-1yjy0d yjoq ydeoxe *Z “BIg se 9UIeS 


Ioye[NsuUt jo uolydiiosaq 


penuyuv0j—SyOLVINSNI ANIT JO SLISAL AONANOAYA-HOIH 


LG >» oo” IZ 

96 no” 02 

FG 66» 61 

8 non 8T 
9 noo” 41 
yd SZ» 91 
IZ » > SI 
GS 6z eunf | FT 

‘ON GI6E | ‘ON 

Joyensuy | seq | qsay 


IMLAY AND THOMAS 


2126 


‘yel1} pug Ul ITM 91] Japun peinyoung 


*[e11} pig UO eIIM 913 Jopun painyoung 


“panurjUOostp oIOM S4S9} USM ULIEM SEAL 
JOJEINsuy ‘s[eIy OST Ur emyzound oN 


‘STE111 OST ul aanqgound ON 


‘(ey WISI ‘peey yYsno1yy paingoundg 


‘opis auo 
uo yI[ds pue pouexor][q a10A\ sproryy pue 
4804 Joyye PoUTUIeXS UOYA WIP SEM UI 
‘Tey 1G ‘peey Ysno1y, poinjoung 


*yeoor}jed JaMOT Ut syooyo 
yBnosiyy Butssed ‘aoejins IeAO poysepy 


*yeoorqjed Jamo] UO syOeYyo YSnoIyy 
Butssed syreds ‘soejins IeAO paysely 


*yeoorqjed IaMoy UO syooyo Ysno01y4 
Butssed syreds ‘aoejins JaAO poysely 


—————————— 


459} 9} JO WNsay 


000‘ote 


000'908 


000°z08 


000°¢ Te 


000°80T 


000'0ZT 


000°SOT 


dex y1eds uo 
a8e1[/0A JOUIIOJsuUeIL, 


£1Z 


£23 


des 
Salles 


Aouenbasy Ysty 


Aap ‘seyo£0 OY 


Aip ‘sajo£o Q9 


4804 Jo dA 


—— aa nl 


urejaoiod ‘g¢ “BI Se aueg 


(yom ‘s3104 000'OL Pue 

‘AIp ‘S}[OA OOS‘STT 32 SAT949 09 UO B0RT 

-Ins IaA0 paysey ‘6Z Se ed4y sures ‘ee 

‘Insut ‘Arp ‘s}JOA 000°S6 32 soToAo 
09 uo JeAO poysey Ajsnoraelg) 
*urejaoiod ‘g “Bly se euleg 


(32a ‘S304 000'9L 

pue ‘Arp ‘s}JoA QOO'STT 32 safoA9 09 
uo 9oRjIns JeAo poaysep A[snotaaid) 
*9s01409]2 ‘F ‘Bil SB BUIeS 


(sq]04 QO0'TS 
ye 19M ‘SIJOA OOO'SIT 38 AIP Sef2A9 09 
UO VoRJINS 1aAO paysepy A[snotaelg) 
-yeootyj0d 1oddn 943 yo yo 
sem ,2z 7eq} ydeoxe ‘Z “BI SB AUILS 


(‘sqJOA QOOO'SOT 32 
ye Jam ‘SIJOA QOO'GZT 38 AIP seToA0 09 
UO a0RjINS JaAO poysey Ajsnotaeig) 
-yeoorjed iaddn 943 Yo yno 
sem ,£[ yeu} ydeoxe ‘Z “BLY se ouTeG 


(‘Arp ‘sajoAo0 99 UO S}]OA 


000‘9EI 38 J0AO poysey AjsnolAesq) 
‘g ‘BIg se sures 


*punoie [je 
yeooryjed 1addn yo yno ,F] Osje +s}e09 
-1yyed Jamo, uo Ajretsedse ‘pexZoeyo 
pue ‘A012 asovjins ‘Ioy}eeM OF pesodxa 
Zuo] useq pey ynq ‘[ “Bly se aureg 


"6 “ON 4894 
ur se pasodxe ynq ‘T “Big se euleg 


“yeooryjed amo] uo A[jetoedss *paxoaye 
pue ‘Aai3 soejins ‘Iey}vem OF pasodxa 
gu0] weeq pey ynq ‘T “Sry se ewes 


ne 


Joye[nsut jo uo1jzdiioseq 


penuyu0j—SaOLVIOSNI ANIT dO SLSAL AONANOAUA-HOIA 


oe no” o£ 
62 xo ve 6% 
og wus RZ 
73 » 9 2 
ee » 9» 9% 
te g AInf | 9 
Gs 62 ow 4Z 
or wks &@ 
6 cg eunf | 3% 
“ON ZI61 ‘ON 
royelnsuy ayeq qsoL 


ss. 


1912] HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS 2127 


in. (6 cm.) thick in comparison with a head thickness of one in. 
(2.5 cm.) in the old insulator of Fig. 1. 

Second Group. (Test 3) Normal Flash-Over Test, Wet, in Air, 
60 Cycles. 

These tests were made with the same electrical apparatus as the 
first group. Water was thrown on the insulator from three 
spray nozzles at one side, giving a very heavy ‘‘ scotch mist.”’ 
The water dripped very rapidly from the petticoats during the 
tests, but no direct measurement was made of the amount of 
water sprayed. The water was relatively pure river water. 

The insulator of Fig. 2 flashed over at approximately 95,000 
volts. 

Third Group. (Tests 4-6) Normal Test Under Oil, 60 Cycles. 

The insulators were immersed in good “‘transil”’ oil, 
bubbles under the petticoats and in the pinhole being carefully 
eliminated. The insulator of Fig. 1 punctured through the head 
at 205,000 volts, and that of Fig. 2 flashed over the surface, 
once at 240,000 volts and once at 250,000, except that the lower 
petticoat was punctured at a point intermediate between the 
edge and the central portion in the latter test. 

Fourth Group. (Tests 64-9) High-Frequency Test: apparatus 
as shown in Fig. 11. 

The insulator of Fig. 2, that is, the new insulator with the 
2-in. (5-cm.) thickness of head, punctured from the conductor | 
to the pin. The first two insulators tested failed on the tenth to 
fifteenth applications of voltage, and the third insulator on the 
second trial. 

This result was most surprising, since insulators of this type 
had flashed over the surface even under oil rather than punc- 
ture through the head at 60 cycles. The unusual character of 
this behavior made a furthur investigation imperative, and the 
following tests were made. 

Fifth Group. (Tests 10-15) High-Frequency Tests as in Fig. 
11. (continued.) 

Insulators of the type of Fig. 2 were altered in various ways and 
subjected to the same test. As electrose can be sawed and drilled 
such alterations could be easily made. The results were as fol- 
lows: 

a. With 4-in. (6.3 mm.) hole drilled at the base of the lower 
petticoat, the insulator failed by puncture through the head on 
the twenty-fourth trial. 

b. With 14-in. (31.7-mm.) turned off the edge of the upper 


2128 IMLAY AND THOMAS: {Dec. 13 


petticoat, the head failed as before on the sixth trial. This 
insulator had previously flashed over, as altered, at 60 cycles 
on 130,000 volts, dry. i 

c. With four equally spaced }-in (6.3-mm.) holes drilled 
through the upper petticoat 2} in. (5.7 cm.) from the edge, this 
insulator punctured in the head on the twenty-eighth trial. 

d. With the top petticoat entirely cut off, an insulator punc- 
tured in the head on the eighteenth trial. This insulator, as 
altered, had previously arced over on 60 cycles at 90,000 volts, 
dry. 

e. An insulator with both petticoats sawed off as closely as 
practicable, leaving a stump about 5 in. (12.7 cm.) high to the tie 
wire groove and a little over 5in. (12.7 cm.) maximum diameter, 
showed no failure in over 150 trials. Apparently this insulator 


LEAD FOH 


J 
rs 


x 
a KK 


\ 

1 

1 

i 

\ F 
i it 
\ 

1 =e' 
i] 

i} 

1 


{ 
| 
1 
i} 
1 
1 
| 
i 
1 
wel, 
| 


11-1643 —____——>| | 
Fic. 8—ELEcTrROSE INSULATOR OF FiGc.4—TypE E INSULATOR— 
Fic. 2, with BAND oF LEAD FoIL ELECTROSE—22,000 VoLTs 


ABOUT WAIST 


was capable of standing this application of high frequency at 
340,000 volts indefinitely. 

f. A similar test was made on an insulator as shown in Fig. 1 
with 1} in. (3.1 cm.) turned off the upper petticoat. This punc- 
tured the head as usual on the fourteenth trial. Previously 
this insulator had flashed over the surface on 60 cycles at 130,000 
volts. 

These results, which were all on electrose insulators, showed 
most plainly that the resistance to high-frequency stress, in this 
sort of apparatus at least, bore little relation to its strength 
against the normal 60-cycle stress. The question naturally 
arose, were these results peculiar to electrose? Some porcelain 
insulators were then obtained and high-frequency tests made 
upon them, as follows: 


‘ 


1912] HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS 2129 


Sixth Group. (Tests 16-18) High-Frequency Tests, as Shown in 
Pag. 115 

a. A porcelain insulator, No. 3007, recommended for 22,000 
volts, showed a puncture in the lower petticoat on the second 
trial, but suffered no further damage in 65 trials. This insulator 
had previously flashed over at 87,000 volts, dry, 60 cycles. 

b. A porcelain insulator, No. 3012, recommended for 35,000 
volts, showed a puncture first on the lower petticoat, then in the 
middle petticoat and then through the top under the tie wire. 
This insulator had previously flashed over on 127,000-135,000 
volts, dry, 60 cycles. : 

c. A porcelain insulator, No. 3002, recommended for 45,000 
volts, showed a puncture in the two lower petticoats on the first 
or second trial and a puncture under the tie wire in a few more 


+ Of 


te 6x4 | 


Fic. 5—Tvre E INSULATOR— Fic. 6—PoRCELAIN INSULATOR 
PorcELAIN—22,000 VOLTS No. 3012 


trials. This insulator had previously flashed over at 125,000- 
129,000 volts on 60 cycles. 

From these tests on porcelain insulators it appeared that this 
feature of failure on high frequency was not peculiar to electrose. 

It was surmised that the peculiar effect of high frequency was 
due to a different distribution of electric stresses produced under 
this condition, which distribution may be assumed to cause a 
concentration of potential at certain points. Some tests were 
therefore devised to verify this assumption. 

Seventh Group. (Tests 19-21) High-Frequency Tests, as Shown 
in Fig. 11. 

a. A new insulator of the type of Fig. 2 was covered with lead 
foil about the waist as shown in Fig. 3. This foil was entirely 
disconnected from any metal parts; but, in view of its electro- 
static capacity to the pin, it would change the distribution of 


2130 IMLAY AND THOMAS: {Dec. 18 


potential during the high-frequency attack. Its effect would 
obviously be toward increasing the effective size of the pin top. 
This insulator punctured through the head on the 59th trial. 
It had previously flashed over the surface at 138,000 volts on 
60 cycles. While this insulator was not proof against the high 
frequency, it stood up longer than any of the other electrose 
insulators, even longer than those with reduced petticoats, 
except the one without any petticoat. This result is very 
illuminating, as this insulator had all its petticoats intact. 

b. A test was made with a new Fig. 2 insulator with a metal 
cap, about 4 in. (10 cm.) across, on the top of the insulator. The 
electrical effect of this should be opposite to that of the lead foil 
of a above. This insulator showed a puncture in the head on 
the second trial. This insulator with cap had previously flashed 
over at 130,000 volts on 60 cycles, dry. 


| 
| 


——-----+4--- 
' 
1 
i 


Fic. 7—PORCELAIN INSULATOR FrG. 8—PoORCELAIN INSULATOR 
No. 3007 No. 3002 


c. The same test as ‘‘b’’ was made on a Fig. 1 new insulator and - 
the insulator showed a puncture in the top on the seventeenth 
trial. This insulator with cap had previously flashed over at 
124,000 volts on 60 cycles, dry. 

These last three results, while few, indicate pretty clearly the 
cause of the weakness as well as the nature of experiments re- 
quired to clarify this matter further. 

Those electrose insulators of the type of Fig. 1 which had been 
in service for some years showed a roughening and a bleaching of 
the surface to a light gray from the effects of exposure to the 
weather. Some of these old insulators further showed checks 
on the surface extending to various depths, mostly on the lower 
petticoat. Tests were made to get the effect of the weathering 
on the behavior of the insulator. 


1912] HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS 2131 


Eighth Group. (Tests 22-24) Weathering Tests, 60 Cycles, Dry. 

a. Two old insulators showed a dry flash-over on 60 cycles on 
105,000 and on 120,000 volts, respectively, a loss of insulating 
power of perhaps 10,000 volts, which was undoubtedly due to the 
arc passing through checks in the lower petticoat. The insulating 
power of these insulators was thus hardly lessened by the weather- 
ing, per se; at least as far as it had then progressed. 

b. A third weathered insulator with 14 in. (3.1 cm.) turned off 
the edge of the top petticoat flashed over at 108,000 volts, the arc 
passing through a check on the lower petticoat. 

A few days after the completion of those tests, to try still 
other conditions, a further series of tests was made with results 
as follows: 

Ninth Group. (Tests 25-27) High-Frequency Tests. 

These were similar to the previous high-frequency tests, but 
with the insulator mounted on a wooden pin with tin foil wrapped 
around the pin up toa point 3 in. (12.7 mm.) below the insulator 
and grounded. 

a. An insulator of the type of Fig. 2 punctured through the 
head, as before, on the ninth trial. This design of insulator 
(which insulator was newly made for this last set of tests) had 
previously flashed over the surface at 156,000 volts, dry, 60 cycles. 

b. An insulator similar to Fig. 2 but with 1} in. (3.7 cm.) 
turned off the outer edge of the upper petticoat, punctured 
through the head, but only after 113 trials. This insulator was 
nearly at the safety point. This insulator previously flashed 
over at 129,000 volts, dry, at 60 cycles or at 103,000 volts, wet. 

c. An insulator similar to Fig. 2, but with 2% in. (Sef cts) 
turned off the edge of the upper petticoat, resisted 150 trials 
without puncture. This insulator was found to flash over at 
119,000 volts, dry, at 60 cycles and at 81,000 volts, wet, under 
the rain test already described. 

Tenth Group. (Test 28). : 

The same high-frequency test on electrose insulators of the 
type shown in Fig. 4 showed no puncture in 150 trials. This 
insulator flashed over at 115,000 volts, dry, on 60 cycles and 
76,000 volts, wet. 

Eleventh Group. (Tests 29-30). 

The same high-frequency test on a porcelain insulator of the 
type shown in Fig. 5 showed a puncture from the tie wire groove 
to the pin top, on the third trial in the case of one insulator, and 
on the second trial on another insulator. This type showed a 


2132 IMLAY AND THOMAS: [Dec. 13 


flash-over at 118,500 volts, dry, at 60 cycles, in one case, and at 
95,000 volts in a second case, and a flash-over of 70,000 volts, 
wet, on the first insulator. 

These tests of groups 9 to 11 show that the use of a wooden 
pin, extending only a short distance out from the threaded 
portion of the insulator, considerably increased its power to re- 
sist the high-frequency stress. 

This result must be due to the prevention of the ground 
potential from getting up inside the insulator, so to speak. Its 
effectiveness is, however, somewhat limited by the fact that ex- 
tremely severe potential shocks, such as were here produced, tend 
to cause a discharge over the surface of the pin into the insulator 
pin recess. If this pin were cemented air-tight into the insulator 
the result would presumably be to increase the power of the in- 
sulator to stand high-frequency tests. 

Certain other tests which are of interest were made to measure 
the actual voltages reached on the insulator during discharge. 
Measurements were made by noting the voltages that were 
required to jump the spark gap marked ‘‘ measuring gap” in 
Fig. 11, under certain discharge conditions. 

a. During the high-frequency test on a Fig. 2 insulator, (test 8), 
sparks were observed in the measuring gap when it was set at 
10 in. (25.4 cm.), 104,000 volts, (needle points) but no sparks 
occurred when it was at 11 in. (27.9 cm.), 112,000 volts. There 
were 125,000 ohms (seven composition sticks) in the shunt 
measuring gap circuit when these readings were taken. This 
indicates a maximum voltage during the high-frequency attack 
of slightly over 100,000 volts. This result, which should be 
compared with the 150,000 (15-in. or 38-cm. gap) necessary to 
make the insulator flash over at 60 cycles, shows that there must 
have been a great local concentration of voltage on portions of 
the insulator at the high frequency. This is an important 
point in connection with surges produced by internal causes. 
If a 100,000-volt static voltage will pass over or through an 
insulator which flashes over at normal frequency only on 150,000 
volts, this fact should be recognized. 

b. With the same arrangement as in “‘a’’ above, except that the 
insulator was short-circuited by a No. 18 copper wire, drawn 
tight between pin and tie wire groove, a voltage sufficient to 
jump a needle gap corresponding to 15,000 volts was noted, and 
no spark occurred over the gap when set for 20,000 volts. No 
resistance was used in the measuring gap circuit in this test. 


1912] HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS 2133 


ce. With the conditions of test ‘‘b”’ above, except that five sepa- 
rate No. 18 wires were used to short-circuit the insulator, located 
at points equally spaced around its circumference, a spark gap of 
4 in., (12.7 mm.), corresponding to 10,000 volts, was jumped, but 
no spark was found with the spark gap set at a value to indicate 
15,000 volts. No resistance was used in the measuring gap circuit 
in these tests. 

Discussion oF TESTS 

The obvious meaning of these tests is of great import. Unless 
there is some reason for believing that the tests are only of 
limited application or are rendered misleading by some unob- 
served condition, they mean that many of the line insulators now 
in service may be expected to break down by puncturing under the 
attack of lightning rather than by discharge over the surface, 
which latter is recognized as the desired characteristic. And this 
in spite of the fact that these insulators may have been thoroughly 
tested on normal frequencies in the usual way and may have then 
always flashed over the petticoats asintended. The fact shown in 
these tests, that an insulator which did not puncture at 250,000 
volts on 60 cycles (under oil), punctured after a comparatively 
few shocks of high-frequency discharge, and without apparently 
opposing a resistance of much over 100,000 volts (10-in. (25.4-cm.) 
spark gap), shows how little can be determined from the 60- 
cycle tests, as to the lightning-resisting capacity of aninsulator. 

- While none of the tests were on trains of suspension insulators, 
the question immediately arises whether the same effects, that is, 
local concentration of voltage with high-frequency shocks, will 
not cause these insulator trains to puncture relatively easily 
from lightning even when withstanding satisfactorily the most 
severe tests of the usual sort. Such failure is very likely to be 
expected. High-frequency tests on such insulator trains should 
be made by all means, and without delay. 

The conclusion also is forced upon us, that if high-tension line 
insulators are to be adapted to resist lightning to the best advan- 
tage, the design of many of them should be radically changed. 
Such a design study will require much patient investigation. In 
view of the importance of these conclusions, a critical examination 
of our tests was made for the purpose of discovering any improper 
methods or errors that might account for the great weakness of 
the insulators under high-frequency shocks; nothing, however, 
so far has been found to explain more than a very small portion 
of the very great discrepancy between the results of the two types 


of tests. 


2134 IMLAY AND THOMAS: [Dec. 13 


Considering the material of the insulators, most of which were 
electrose, we should say that insulators made in at least four differ- 
ent lots, distributed over a period of several years, showed the same 
consistent behavior. Further than this, four different types of 
porcelain insulators were tested and all showed this effect, 
although the lower-voltage insulators showed it in a less degree 
than the higher-tension insulators. In the case of the insulators 
of Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 the shape of the insulator was the same and 
only the material was different. Of these, the electrose insulator 
behaved best on the high-frequency test. 

One very significant point is that no insulator failed on high 
frequency on the very first shock. In fact the strain of repeated 


shocks seemed to be far more severe than that of afew. Probably: 


there is a progressive hammering out of a path through the solid 
material of the insulator. It will be immediately suggested 
that this effect may be due to a progressive heating of the 
material by conduction or dielectric hysteresis, but we are inclined 
to doubt this. Investigations were made by exploring with the 
finger during the tests, and, while after a puncture, which would of 
course be followed by some arcing, there was often a very notice- 
able rise of temperature at the puncture, exploration before an 
actual puncture but after the occurrence of many shocks showed 
no detectable preliminary heating. Furthermore, there seemed 
to be no difference in the behavior of electrose and porcelain. 
This matter of dielectric loss and heating is of course one of the 
matters that should be carefully followed up in future tests along 
these lines. If the effect of the greatly increased severity of 
many shocks was due to the heating effect, it is not likely that 
the cutting off of the petticoats would be so effective in increasing 
the resisting power. . 

It has been suggested by some that porcelain deteriorates in 
quality with time or exposure to the weather. This hypothesis 
is supposed to explain the fact that insulators which stand up 
under tests and during the initial months of actual service then 
seem to fail far more readily at a later time. It is suggested by 
the behavior of the insulators of our tests that there was progres- 
sive deterioration under the intense stresses of these experiments 
(or under the attack of lightning in actual service), which, while 
due to electrical forces, are of a physical nature. This would be 
somewhat analogous to the well-known mechanical disintegra- 
tion of the surface of glass under repeated surface sparking. In 
this view, the repeated attacks of these tests represent the antici- 


1912} HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS 21385 


pated effect of several seasons of lightning storms; to put it 
another way, the tests serve as a measure of the service durability 
of an insulator, as far as lightning and static are concerned. 

These tests were made in a large transformer testing pit, but 
it is not likely that the presence of the grounded sides of the pit 
several feet away could have had any material effect on the 
results. 

While the 60-cycle tests and the high-frequency tests were 
made on different testing outfits, there can be no great error here. 
The 60-cycle tests were made on a 300,000-volt transformer, 
regularly and frequently used for such testing, and the ratio and 
spark gap methods of measuring the high-tension voltages were 
about five per cent apart, the voltage actually reported being 
the spark gap voltage as recommended by the Standardization 
Rules of the A. I. E. E. The character of the high-frequency 
tests was of course determined by the series spark gap and the 
constants of the plate condenser discharge gap. The high-tension 
condenser had approximately 72 sq. ft. (6.7 sq. m.) surface and 
a dielectric thickness of 42 in. (1.06m.) of air. The discharge 
path of the condenser was roughly rectangular in form, 5 by 
7 ft. (1.5 by 2.1m.), including the series gap and the insulator 
itself. 

An estimate of the natural oscillation frequency of this dis- 
charge circuit would be, roughly that it was of the order of 
1,000,000 cycles per second or higher. The noise of the discharge 
during the tests was very loud and some of the observers used 
cotton in their ears to avoid the disagreeable physiological 
effect. While the highest voltage of the high-frequency tests 
was in the neighborhood of 300,000-350,000 volts, and the 
quantity of the discharge great for laboratory tests, it was of 
course far short of lightning conditions in both particulars. The 
frequency, however, may have been comparable with that of 
lightning. 

The probability of the trustworthiness of these tests is greatly 
increased by the behavior of insulators in actual service, where 
punctures of a surprising character have occurred at the time of 
lightning or other disturbance of a static nature. We are in- 
formed that trains of suspension insulators and also pin type high- 
tension insulators which are carefully designed and shown by 
test at normal frequency to flash over before they puncture, 
still do in practise actually puncture under lightning strains. 
It is a fact, however, that many of these insulators at other times 


2136 IMLAY AND THOMAS: {[Dec. 18 


do actually flash over in actual service instead of puncturing 
under static stress, showing that either all insulators or all stress 
conditions are not the same. This matter cannot be finally 
cleared up without much experiment and research. 

Cause of the Peculiar High-Frequency Effects. Of the most in- 
terest and importance is of course the explanation of the cause 
of the great observed discrepancy between the effect of high- 
frequency tests and commercial frequency tests. It is too early 
to speak with certainty, but there is little doubt that the principal 
cause is the concentration of potential with high frequency upon 
some local part of the insulating material, with the result of the 
breaking down of this portion and the throwing of the potential 
on some other part which is then also broken down. This gen- 
eral phenomenon is well known in related situations; for example, 
in the behavior of trains of small air gaps in high-tension lightning 
arresters. 

If a resistance and a capacity are connected in series and so 
adjusted that a given voltage at 60 cycles is evenly divided be- 
tween the two, and the same voltage at a much higher frequency 
is impressed on the two, it will be found that the resistance then 
receives nearly all the voltage and the condenser practically none 
at all. The same would be true to an even greater extent were 
an inductance substituted for the resistance. An adjustment 
may easily be arranged in which at 60 cycles the condenser will 
take all the voltage and at the high frequency the resistance would 
take all the voltage. In applying this principle to insulator 
service, it must be remembered that the change in frequency 
between 60 cycles and the frequency of lightning is enormous, 
the ratio being somewhere of the order of 1 to 1000 or 10,000, 
which gives range enough to permit even a small tendency of 
60 cycles to be transformed into a dominating effect on the 
lightning frequency. 

Consider Fig. 9; the small condensers indicate the capacity 
of various parts of the insulator surface to which the potential 
of these parts is due, and the small resistances indicate the 
insulation resistance of the corresponding dielectric material of 
the insulator. At 60 cycles, the charging current for the several 
small condensers, 1, 2, 3, can easily flow through the several 
resistances, 4, 6, etc., without the impressing of any very great 
potential upon these resistances. With a high frequency, how- 
ever, as just explained, the full potentiai may be impressed on 
the resistance for the moment, or, in fact, for as long as the high 


1912] HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS 2137 


frequency lasts. Thus the resistance 4 which charges the surface 
capacity 1, which is a relatively large capacity, may on high 
frequency have to support nearly the full voltage of the attack, 
which it is evidently not adapted to do. But there is also a 
leakage of current toward the tie wire and conductor which will 
flow over part of the path of the resistance 4. Since the surface 
of the pin is much smaller than that of the surface of the insulator, 
the concentration of leakage current will be greatest at the former 
and the first break or failure of the insulating material will occur 
at this point. When this occurs the voltage on the conductor 
and tie wire will tend to cause a puncture through this weakened 


Fic. 9—ILLUSTRATION OF ELECTROSTATIC CAPACITY OF SURFACE AND IN- 
SULATICN RESISTANCE OF THE VARIOUS PARTS OF THE INSULATOR 


material and thus make a puncture from the conductor to the 
edge of the top of the pin. This is what was actually observed. 
This explanation is, however, given rather as illustrative of the 
general tendency of the distribution of force, than as a correct 
picturing of the action in detail, for this would be very hard to 
establish directly. 

According to this view the effect of the lead foil of test 24, 
which showed a great strengthening of the insulator’s resistance, 
was to permit the charging of the small condenser 1 through the 
foil in virtue of the capacity of the foil to the pin and in virtue 
of the fact that a free charge of opposite sign could be repelled 


2138 IMLAY AND THOMAS: [Dec. 13 


to the lower end of the foil. So far as it goes, then, the foil test 
tends to confirm the distribution of potential assumed above in 
connection with the discussion of Fig. 9. 

Looking at this matter from another point of view, which, 
however, in substance is much the same, it is evident that the 
conductor and the wire on the top of the insulator form the 
electric equivalent of a hemisphere, and that the pin top is in 
effect a small discharge point near the center of the hemisphere. 
This form is one in which the distribution of electric field is most 
uneven, for its intensity is greatly concentrated at the center 
on the pin top, and much less intensity exists at the conductor 
and the tie wire. This condition is somewhat similar to that of 
a cable with a lead sheath and a relatively small conductor inside. 
It is found, in such a cable, that if the diameter of the conductor 
is smaller than that of the sheath by more than a certain ratio, 
little gain in insulation strength is made by increasing the thick- 
ness of the insulation and the diameter of the sheath. This is 
because the potential becomes more and more concentrated at the 
center and this part fails first, so that the added insulation is later 
broken down by itself. However, in the case of the tests here de- 
scribed, the effect of resistance and capacity in series, assumed in 
the discussion of Fig. 9, is probably present, for this sort of con- 
centration comes from high frequency only, while that described 
in connection with cables occurs at all frequencies. It is signifi- 
cant that the use of a metal cap only weakens the insulators 
in the tests (see tests 20 and 21), as would be expected from these 
explanations. : 

High-Frequency Tests. It will naturally follow from the condi- 
tions indicated by these tests, assuming that they are confirmed 
by later investigators, that it will be desirable to modify our 
methods of testing insulators for practical work by adding tests 
of their behavior on high frequency. Such tests presumably need 
not be made on all the insulators entering into a plant, but on 
each type, to show that the design is satisfactory. Such tests 
will be difficult to make, in the first place, because very high 
voltage and large capacity are necessary for making the tests, 
and second, because these tests are dangerous to the testing 
apparatus used and because so far there is no knowledge as to 
what limits of frequency, voltage, electrostatic capacity or 
number of repetitions of attack are necessary to give a proper 
measure of the conditions of actual service. These service con- 
ditions will undoubtedly vary greatly in different localities. It 


1912] HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS 2139 


can only be suggested here that further study of these phenomena 
be made as speedily and as exhaustively as practicable. 

Design of Insulators. Inthe matter of new designs of insulators 
to resisthigh-frequency discharges, much research should be done, 
but there are some guiding principles already clear. First, the 
more widely the live conducting parts of an insulator are sepa- 
rated from the pin, the less will be the stress. Second, the more 
nearly uniform the electrostatic field between these elements is, 
the better the condition. Third, wide and thin petticoats add 
very little strength to the high-tension insulator, for the electro- 
static capacity-of the surfaces of the outer parts is very great 
with regard to capacity of the parts nearer to the pin. It is 
very likely that the capacity of the wide petticoat of the insulator 
of Fig. 1 or Fig. 2 plays little part in its behavior on high fre- 
quency, since the potential stresses may be transmitted through 
the petticoat by virtue of the capacity of the lower surface in 
relation to that of the upper surface. This would account to 
some extent for the behavior observed. It is significant that the 
type which stood best, that of Figs. 4 and 5, had short and thick 
petticoats placed low down with regard to the pin top. The 
heavy ball of insulating material at and around the head of the 
pin is very likely the chief reliance of the insulator on high fre- 
quency. 

It will be noted that the design of the present suspension 
insulator has some points of disadvantage from the point of view 
of static stresses, if these tests are to be relied upon. 

Effect of High Frequency on Lead-Covered Cables. From the ane 
alysis of the necessary effects of applying very high frequency 
to structures having electrostatic capacity and high resistance in 
series, it is suggested that these high-frequency strains may have a 
very trying effect on lead-covered cables. Here the layers of the 
insulating material next to the conductor may receive a far 
greater concentration of potential from high-frequency stresses 
than from 60-cycle stresses, for example; in which case static 
disturbances may break them down at a lower voltage than under 
normal conditions. As the great susceptibility of cables to static 
disturbances has been frequently observed in actual service, 
a series of cable tests after the type of those here reported 
would be of the greatest interest. 

The great difficulty in such tests would be to get some reliable 
measure of the equivalence of voltages at high frequency and low 
frequency. 


2140 IMLAY AND THOMAS: [Dec. 13 


Fig. 10 shows the insulator and pin finally adopted by the 
power company. The pin consists of an iron base for attach- 
ment to crossarm, and metal sleeve with conical bore to receive 
a wooden pin, which is secured in place by the pressure produced 
in screwing the sleeve and base together. The wooden pin is 
mpregnated with bakelite to prevent absorption of moisture. 


y 
Yj 
- y eS 
y a 

wo 
i's] & 
uw 
ae 
=f 
iS 8 2"-PIPE THRD. 
2 WITHOUT TAPER 
pad 
Sw 
ell 3 
8 
° al f 
a4 
Mo. A £4 CA vi wee a eee 
Ow 

o 

ao 

E 

rc] 

° 


LIMIT) OF |T 
Be =) 
ste LI 1 [+f 2-1n's10 Locknuts 


ote ===5___1}{" PIPE THREAD 
WITHOUT TAPER 


Fic. 10—SEcTION OF INSULATOR FINALLY ADOPTED 


No attempt was made to cement the pin in the insulator, but this 
can readily be done if experience indicates that it is desirable. 
The insulator thus mounted on the combination wood and iron 
pin will withstand a breakdown test at 60 cycles between a 
conductor in the tie-wire groove and the iron pin, of 120,000 
volts, dry, and 85,000 volts, wet. It is highly probable that if 


- 


—— 


1912] HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS 2141 


time had permitted, a better design of insulator could have been 
developed, but the construction of a new line was under way and 
the order for insulators had to be placed. The design selected. 
was that which our tests had shown to be best able to resist the 
high-frequency discharges which we were able to obtain in the 
laboratory. It remains to be shown by experience whether 
these insulators will resist puncture from all lightning discharges 
to which they will doubtless be subjected. 

Suggestions for Investigations. We would make the following 
suggestions, the application of which will be clear from what has 
been said above. 

a. Those who wish to get an idea of the behavior of their 


HIGH TENSION 
TRANSFORMER 


Fic. 11—View or HiGH-FREQUENCY TESTING ARRANGEMENTS 


insulators on high frequency without waiting until a generally 
accepted test is developed, should utilize the arrangement of 
apparatus of the tests here described, which has been found very 
satisfactory and as practicable as any is likely to be. 

b. Those who wish to do research work on this line of investi- 
gation, should study: 

1. The effect of frequency itself on some standard type of 
test insulator, by varying the constants of the high-frequency 
discharge circuit. es 

2. The effect of high frequency on trains of suspension 1n- 
sulators. < 

3. The effect of the distribution and size of petticoats and 


2142 IMLAY AND THOMAS: [Dec. 13 


the control of the potentials of various parts of the surface of 
the insulators, for example, by the use of conductors distributed 
‘on the surface, as in the above lead-foil test, and especially the 
location of the petticoats with regard to the top of the pin and 
the thickness of the base of the petticoats. 

4. The effect of a wooden or other insulating pin. Especially 
the effect of cementing the pin air-tight in the socket. With a 
wooden-topped pin and an insulator so mounted and shaped 
that any discharge would take place to the crossarm and not to 
the pin, many of the electrical advantages of a metal pin would 
be obtained, with probably greatly increased possibilities of re- 
sisting puncture by lightning. 

5. The high-frequency test asa test, to determine the effect, on 
the behavior of any insulator, of variations of test frequency, of 
the amount of the excess series gap voltage over and above the 
flash-over voltage of the insulator, of the amount of static capacity 
connected with the high-frequency discharge circuit, of the 
length and character of the discharge path, and the effect of the 
method of securing the actual conductor and tie wire during the 
test. 

In conclusion we would state these tests are reported to the 
Institute for their great interest and suggestiveness, but with 
the full consciousness that they are far from complete from the 
broad point of view of the effect of high-frequency voltages on 
high-tension insulators. 


on ® 
ai . 
= WN 


A paper presented at the 278th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, New 
York, December 13, 1912. 


Copyright, 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


COMPARATIVE TESTS ON HIGH-TENSION SUSPEN- 
SION INSULATORS 


BY P. W. SOTHMAN 

This paper presents an account of work done in connection 
with the selection of a suitable high-tension insulator for a trans- 
mission line operated at 110,000 volts. It is a report of an in- 
vestigation giving a faithful account of the motives calling for 
the same, the method adopted and used to carry out the work, 
and the line of reasoning followed in classifying the results ob- 
tained. It is not intended to be a criticism of any individual 
design or of the valuable work which has been done by others 
in the same direction. The problem which had to be solved was 
well defined, requiring no more difficult task than to select from 
a number of insulators the one best suited for certain predeter- 
mined conditions. From the first to the last, the question 
was one concerned with engineering only, in which biased 
opinion or partiality was to be absolutely absent. How well 
this problem has been solved may be judged from the following 
account and perhaps more so by the tangible results obtained 
in the years following, during actual operation. 

When it was found that the line losses of the proposed power 
transmission could not be kept at a reasonably low figure unless 
the system was operated at 110,000 volts between conductors, 
the question of insulation became at once of greatest importance. 
Unfortunately, at that time, very few reliable data were avail- 
able with regard to the operating experience with potentials 
above 60,000 or 80,000 volts. Notwithstanding the lack of such 
practical experience, every manufacturer was ready to offer and 
guarantee an insulator for a transmission line operating at 110,000 
volts. Before an attempt was made to draw up specifications 

21438 


hyd 


2144 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec.18 


for these insulators, a thorough canvass of the situation was made. 
The different insulator factories were visited to ascertain the 
manufacturing facilities of the firms and their ability to turn out 
a rather large order within a specified time. Tests on the pro- 
posed insulators were witnessed at the works of the manu- 
facturers and all available information and data bearing on the 
subject were collected. 

While visiting these factories, one could not help being most 
peculiarly impressed by the widely varying methods of testing 
employed by the manufacturers to demonstrate the merits of 
their insulators. This applies especially to the application of 
artificial rain and to the facilities afforded for observing the effect 
of the test. As a matter of fact, every manufacturer had his 
own way of applying rain, and of interpreting the effects observed. 
It can easily be understood why tests on one and the same type 
of insulator would show two entirely different results, depend- 
ing upon where and by whom they were tested. 

In view of the seemingly erratic behavior of the insulators 
during these manufacturers’ tests, it was impossible to arrive at 
a definite conclusion. It became apparent that tests of this 
character should be performed under absolutely unvarying con- 
ditions in order to arrive at reliable figures, and arrangements 
were at once made to duplicate and elaborate these tests under 
conditions which could be controlled and changed at will to suit 
certain predetermined requirements. 

The testing equipment of which use was made in the following 
tests, consisted of a large platform over which was placed a gas 
pipe, resting at each end upon 60,000-volt pin-type insulators. 
The insulators were tested one at a time, the small trolley from 
which they were suspended being moved opposite a mark made 
in the pipe midway between the supporting insulators, while all 
other insulators were crowded to one side and out of the way. 
The test on one insulator completed, it was moved to one side, 
and the next insulator placed in the proper position. This 
method proved to work out very well, especially in connection 
with the rain test described later. 

The electrical apparatus consisted of two 50-kw. 2200/150,000- 
volt transformers in series, fed from a 25-kw. 220/2200-volt 
transformer. 

The maximum voltage which could be safely obtained with 
this combination was slightly above 330,000 volts, with the two 
transformers in series, the neutral point being grounded, and 


_ 


PLATE CXXV 
A. i E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fic. 1—TESTING PLATFORM FOR SUSPENSION INSULATORS [SOTHMAN] 


‘ Insulators supported from insulated pipe on small trolleys—Note groups of nozzles 
ee background for wet tests—Also spark gap in front—Rain gage is shown on left of plat- 
orm. 


tt 
il 
i! 


I 
uy 


ean 
fis i 
HU Ie 


Fic. 5—TEstTiING PLATFORM FOR STRAIN INSULATORS [SOTHMAN] 


Insulator sections at either end of insulators under test are inserted to prevent leakage 
co ground. Nozzles are located directly above insulator. 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2145 


225,000 volts with one transformer alone and ungrounded. The 
voltage was controlled by means of a water rheostat in the low- 
tension circuit of the high-tension transformer. ‘The readings 
were taken on an alternating-current voltmeter previously cali- 
brated with spark gap in accordance with the Standardization 
Rules of the A. I. E. E. (1907). The voltmeter was connected 
across the low-tension side of a one-kw., 2200/110-volt trans- 
former, the latter being connected across the low-tension side of 
the high-tension transformer. 

All tests were performed at night in complete darkness. In 
order to have a permanent record for comparison, photographs 
were taken of each insulator during the several tests. The time 


os 


< 
50 KW, 


SPARK GAP 


INSULATORS 
UNDER TEST 


pp pp 


<-———-330, 000 V. 


50 KW 
AAV 


: 


H.T. TESTING TRANS. 


CoNNECTIONS OF Two TRANSFORMERS FOR $30,000 Vorts 


>| uP ro 
TO 230,000 } 


SPARK GAP 


te 
VOLTAGES 


ConnecTions or SINGLE TraNsrorwens ror 230,030 Yours 
Fic. 2—DIAGRAM OF CrRrcuITS OF HiGH-TENSION TRANSFORMERS 


on the clock dial appearing in the illustrations was used as a 
means of identification. 

The tests were applied in the following order: 

1 Dry test. 

2. Wet test. 

3. Parallel test, dry and wet. 

4. Puncture test, under oil. 

5. Mechanical test. 

The Dry Test consisted of 

a. Flash-over test on each section in order to exclude weak 
or punctured units. 

b. Potential test on each complete insulator, also on smaller 


2146 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS  [Dec. 13 


number of sections. Voltagewas applied and raised by successive 
steps and photographic records were taken while the test was 
progressing. 

Records were kept of the time on the clock dial, which was set 
for each new test, voltage applied, time of exposure, number of 
sections, and such other observations as were made during the 
test which could not be recorded on the photograph. 

In this manner, each type of insulators submitted was sub- 
jected to the same series of tests under exactly like conditions. 

The Wet Tests consisted of applying rain at 45 deg., the precipi- 
tation varying from 0.25 to 0.35 in. (6.35 to 8.39 mm.) and 
finally to 0.53 in. (13.46 mm.) of water per minute. Accordingly 
each insulator was subjected to three series of tests, in which 
voltage and precipitation were the 
variable quantities. The execution 
of these wet tests was very similar to 
that of dry tests. Photographs were 
taken and records made of each test 
and observations were carefully noted. 

For these rain tests, which were 
the most important of all, the follow- 
ing method was adopted. A number 
of nozzles of the type used for spray- —_- 
ing trees were secured to the ends of 
pipes cut to suitable length, and these, 
in turn, were connected to the water 
mains by means of a rubber hose and 
arranged to slide along a vertical 
post. Two groups of nozzles were used, and by means of this 
arrangement, it was possible to adjust the angle of precipita- 
tion, and by moving the nozzles closer or further away 
from the insulators, to adjust the amount of rain supplied per 
minute. It was found more expedient to entirely open the valve 
in the mains, thus operating with full pressure of the standpipe, 
and to regulate the amount of water by adjusting the number of 
working nozzles, their heights and distance away from the in- 
sulator under test. The amount of precipitation was determined 
by means of a specially constructed rain gage, consisting of a 
funnel-shaped vessel with a cover, provided with an aperture 
five in. (12.7 cm.) in diameter. The edges of the opening were 
slightly raised to prevent the water from spilling and splashing 
over the top of the funnel when striking it at an angle of 45 deg. 


Fic. 3—ARRANGEMENT OF 
Nozz_LEs FOR 0.53 IN. PRE- 
CIPITATION PER MINUTE 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2147 


The gage was held in the rain at the points where the several 
sections of the insulators would be located, and the quantity 
of water was measured with a graduated glass. As a rule the 
gage was operated for four minutes and the fall of water deter- 
mined from the amount gathered during that time. By setting 
the nozzles and adjusting the spacing, the correct amount of 
precipitation could be obtained, and this setting was left undis- 
turbed during each series of tests. One insulator after the other 
was moved to the mark on the pipe and voltage applied, beginning 
low and increasing by successive steps. 

It was found that although water flowed freely over all the 
sections, wetting an area of 7 ft. (2.13 m.) in diameter, on the 


Fic. 4—Rain GAGE AND STAND USED FOR DETERMINING 
FALL oF WATER 


platform, and thoroughly flooding the top of the sections, the 
inside of the insulators remained practically dry except for a few 
drops. For those reasons, it was necessary to apply the rain for 
some time before voltage was applied in order to arrive at reli- 
able and unvarying results. The water was turned off when 
insulators were changed and turned on again when ready for 
test. A long series of check tests showed that the precipitation 
was constant within the error of observation after turning water 
on and off, provided the valve was always turned on wide open. 

In most cases, the same underhung suspension insulators, 
strung horizontally, were subjected to a series of rain tests to 
ascertain their performance when used as strain insulators, but ~ 
on account of this horizontal position, required a somewhat 


2148 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS  [Dec.138 


different method of supporting. The insulator was strung be- 
tween two well-braced upright wooden posts. In order to pre- 
vent leakage to ground, a number of units were inserted between 
the posts and the insulator under test. The nozzles, twelve in 
number, were located directly above at a distance of 25 in. 
(63.5 cm.) from the center of the insulators, directing the spray 
of water, which could be raised from 0.22 to 0.5 in. (5.58 to 
12.7 mm.) and even 0.75 in. (19 mm.) per minute at an angle of 
45 deg. either toward the inside or the outside of the sections. 
The water was measured with the same rain gage used in previous 
tests, at eight different points within the space occupied by the 
insulator when in place, allowing the gage to remain thirty 
seconds in each of the eight positions. 

Parallel Test. A most interesting series of tests with all in- 
sulators connected in parallel was made later, in order closely to 
follow their performance simultaneously at different voltages. 
The insulators, composed of a proportionately smaller number 
of sections, were supported from the pipe, equally spaced, their 
lower ends connected by a common bus. Voltage was applied 
and gradually raised as in previous tests. As soon as a voltage 
was reached at which one of the insulators would show signs of 
distress, a photographic record was taken of the whole set, after 
which the failing insulator was disconnected from the bus and the 
voltage increased until one of the remaining insulators would 
fail, and so on. A similar series of tests was performed with the 
insulators subjected to rain. Each insulator had its own set of 
nozzles and the flow of water was regulated to be the same for 
every string. The test was made with. 0.15 in. (3.8 mm.) of 
water per minute at 45 deg. 

Puncture Test. Under ordinary conditions, it is almost 
impossible to puncture an insulator, in dry air, since a well- 
proportioned insulator will flashover at a voltage well below its 
puncture voltage. To obtain values for the puncture voltage, 
it is necessary to immerse the insulator under oil and to take a 
number of other precautions, like the protection of leads, etc. 
Following this plan, a series of tests was performed in which 
this voltage was determined for all the different types of insula- 
tors. 

Mechanical Tests. The testing device used to determine 
the breaking strength of suspension insulators, consisted of a 
frame-work in which the insulator was fastened by links and 
steel cables and the tension applied by means of a screw acting 


onalever. A robust dynamometer indicated the maximum pull 
i ’ 


ee ee 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2149 


exerted by the screw and that pull multiplied by three, the ratio 
of the lever arms, gave the actual tension on the hook of the in- 
sulator. Voltage was applied across the insulator while pulling, 
but it was found that the insulator punctured always at the 
moment of fracture, so this method was discontinued on sub- 
sequent tests. A number of tests were made with each type to 
arrive at a fair average figure, and photographs were taken of the 
appearance of the fractures. 

The above is a brief outline of the apparatus and methods 
used in making the tests on high-tension suspension and strain 
insulators. A number of post type insulators were also tested 
inasimilar manner. As there were but two types offered, neither 
of which met the specified tests, considerable development work 
was necessary until fairly satisfactory types were evolved. 

After completion of all design tests and before the final selec- 
tion of the insulator best fitted to fulfil the specified require- 
ments, one week was set aside for witness tests. This was done 
to demonstrate to the manufacturers and their engineers the 
method which was followed in making these tests and to give 
them an opportunity to make their own observations with regard 
to the results obtained under conditions controlled in accordance 
with the tests specified. These conditions, as mentioned before, 
were kept unaltered during all tests and were constantly checked 
and adjusted, if this was found necessary. 

The tests performed in the presence of the manufacturers were 
really nothing else but a repetition of the tests already made, and 
incidentally, served the purpose of furnishing an additional 
set of confirming results. In every case, these results checked 
closely with those obtained during previous tests, as theconditions 
under which each test was made could easily be duplicated. 


Test RESULTS 
SUSPENSION INSULATORS 


As to the method of comparing the performance of the different 
types of insulators under test, it became apparent from the start 
that no standards existed which could be followed or used as a 
guide. From an academic standpoint it would, perhaps, have 
been of importance to measure the watts lost for each type of 
insulator under varying conditions. This method may give 
results which would allow of direct comparison, but the difficulty 
of measuring power accurately under the conditions imposed by 
the test, and at such high voltages, appears to be out of proportion 
with the expected accuracy of the results. It was, therefore, 


2150 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS (Dec. 13 


decided to compare qualitative rather than quantitative results. 
Under the assumption, which should not be far from correct, that 
the power loss of an insulator would make itself manifest in a pro- 
portionate display mostly of luminous character, the direct com- 
parison of this visual display with the voltage required to create 
it should give a fair means of judging the relative insulating value 
of two insulators, provided all other conditions remained the 
same and unaltered. In applying this method in practise, there 
are, of course, a number of other considerations requiring atten- 
tion. For instance, the display of luminosity may appear gradu- 
ally in direct proportion with the voltage applied, or it may 
appear rather suddenly after a certain limit of voltage has been 
reached; or else, the display may appear to be localized at some 
parts or points, which, though a portion of the insulators, are of 
no value to its insulating quality and merely show faulty design. 
As will be explained later, the presence of such parts is always the 
cause of failure, regardless of the quality and design of the porce- 
lain parts themselves. Taking into consideration the many 
sources which contribute towards the discharge of an insulator 
under potential, and by following the system of comparison out- 
lined above, it was possible to classify the insulators according 
to certain well-defined merits and demerits. After balancing 
all merits of an insulator against all its demerits and by succes- 
sively eliminating those insulators possessing the greatest number 
of demerits, it was possible to arrive at one type which had the 
least number of disadvantages and the most of the advantages. 

In the discussion of the actual test results obtained, the differ- 
ent types of insulators are designated with the letters A, B, C, 
D, E, and F, in accordance with the half-tone illustrations rep- 
resenting the different makes. From the results of the dry test, 
it can safely be said that all insulators with the exception of 
types A and B withstood the tests of three times line voltage 
more or less satisfactorily. The following table gives the actual 
results in condensed form: 


Number of Brush discharge becomes Heavy static discharge but 

Type units visible at no flash-over 

A 5 150 kv. 330 kv. 

ms 5 250 * 330, “ on top 

D 5 250 “ on hook | 330 “ at point of 

hook 
E 7 200 “ on cotter-pin | Not excessive at 330 kv. 
F 5 250, * y ts? & 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2151 


From the wet tests, which were the most significant of all, 
the final results of the series executed with 0.5 in. (12.7 mm.) 
water per minute are given below: 


Discharge becomes visible 
Type Sections below Failure occurs at 
A 5 150 kw. 160 kw. 
(@ 5 225 * 265) 
D D 250) 280 “* 
E 7 2 Oe 2607) = 
E 8 250 ae 300—310 
F 5 250/54 300 me 


The first visible discharge occurs invariably around the top 
section, in the form of streamers radiating in a more or less 
oblique direction away from the edge of the top skirt. The 
subsequent breakdown of the insulator appears to grow gradu- 
ally with increasing voltage. This is especially noticeable on 
type A, whereas it is less prominent on other types; 7. e., they 
may hold out fairly well until a critical voltage is reached. 
Above this voltage, the insulator will fail rapidly with relatively 
slight increase of voltage. 

As a rule, more or less active discharge always takes place 
around the pin of the insulator within the hollow of the petticoat 
on all insulators designed along the orthodox lines of a pin 
insulator like types C, D, and F. This discharge is practically 
absent in the one-piece insulator E, which is not provided with an 
inner petticoat. Any discharge which occurs at the point where 
the pin issues from the porcelain disk is effectively broken up 
and confined within a small, concentric corrugation. 

The character of the breakdown is different for each type of 
insulator. Type A breaks down on account of the excessive 
leakage; the whole insulator becoming conducting, as it were. 
The breakdowns of the other types have more the character of a 
flash-over from one section to the next, the moment the voltage 
is high enough to break through the wet and conducting air en- 
veloping the sections. This breakdown voltage could be as- 
certained with fair accuracy, and these figures were used as merits 
or demerits in accordance with their relative values. 

From these records one feature is especially worthy of note. 
Almost in every case the discharge of the insulator was started 


2152 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS Dec. 13 


by asharp corner or point of the metal fittings by means of which 
the sections were held together. In all cases except A, B and D, 
the static field around the insulator sections was uniformly 
distributed in consequence of the almost symmetrically arranged 
parts occupying a space within this field. The word ‘‘ almost ”’ 
is used, as the presence of even slight projections like the head of 
a cotter-pin in the bolt linking the two sections together was 
enough to break up the air at that point after a certain voltage 
was reached. In case D this phenomenon was particularly 
noticeable. The metal parts in the shape of two prominent hooks 
were so large that the field was excessively distorted, creating 
highly uneven stresses in the-air. The highest stresses are 
localized at the sharp point of the hook, as is apparentthemoment 
the voltage is raised above a critical value. That this distortion 
of the field is always accompanied by a premature failure of the 
insulator can be proved by eliminating those unsymmetrical 
iron parts, covering them, for instance, as was done in some 
experiments, with a cylindrical metal shield. Although the 
striking distance is thereby somewhat reduced, the insulator 
is capable of withstanding a voltage at least 10 per cent over and 
above that which it was able to withstand with the hooks 
bare. Incaseof A the distortion of the field is especially prom- 
inent. As beautiful as the link feature appears from a purely 
mechanical viewpoint, it creates most unfavorable stresses in 
the air between the disks, likewise in the holes within the disks. 
The stresses in the porcelain cap are more uniformly distributed 
in all cases except A and B. In these latter, the dielectric is 
strained the most at that point where the interlinking metal 
parts have their least separation from each other. In all other 
cases in which use is made of a metal cap and pin, the stresses 
in the porcelain are higher closer to the pin, and decrease gradu- 
ally and uniformly towards the cap. As long as the highest 
value of this stress is well below the safe working limit the insula- 
tor is not endangered. But in every case, the diameter of the 
pin, together with the voltage it assumes, remain the determining 
factors for the highest stress of the porcelain within the cap. 
For this reason, it seems that no advantage is gained by the use 
of a two-piece insulator. Theoretically correct. the idea of using 
two thicknesses of porcelain would appear to offer a larger margin 
of safety. In practise, the idea cannot be worked out to its 
full efficiency, for the size of the pin cannot be increased without 
correspondingly increasing the size of the cap, making an in- 
sulator of this sort too bulky and altogether impractical. 
= 


PLATE CXXVII 


VOL. XXXI, 1912 


([NVYWHLOS] 


[Ind umnurtxeut sayeorpul JoyowoweusAg 
—1Y311 944 UO queWeBURIIe MaIOS Aq payetedo ‘I9A9] 0} SHUT] puv 9TqQed JO Suvat Aq poUds4se] ST UOIJDaS IOZE[NSUT 


SLSG@] IVOINVHOUJ, AOA ANIHOVINT DNITING—J ‘OI 


PLATE CXXVIII 


VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[NVWHLOS] 
Wy adAy 


‘1oye|nsul uresys posodoid & sl q ad& J —si0ze[nsur uolsuedsns jejnZe1 aie J pue ‘gq ‘d ‘OV sad], 
ISa], XOX GALLINANS SUOLVINSN] NOISNAdSAS—Y “91 
q ods q edéAy 9 edky q eddy, 


i 


Fic. 8a— Tyree A—160 kv.-3 IN. 
WATER PER MIN.—45 DEG. 


Under side of each section is flaming due 
to excessive leakage. 


PLATE. CXXIX 
Ax dc E. Es 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


|SOTHMAN] 


- — 
Fic. 8b—TyvE C—265 Kv.-3 IN. 
WATER PER MIN.—14) DEG. 
Breakdown of insulator i1 consequence of 


flash-over—Note the point of discharge on 
left side of cap of second section. 


PLATE CXXX 
Add, EE. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


Fig 8c—TyrpE D—280 kKv.-3 IN. 


WATER PER MIN.—45 DEG. 

Breakdowu of insulator in consequence of 

flash-over—Note localized discharges from 
point and back of hooks. 


|SOTHMAN] 

Fic. 8d—TyrpE E—SEVEN SEc- 

TIONS—260 Kv.—%3% IN. WATER PER 
MIN.—45 DEG. 


Breakdown of insulator in consequence of 
strong leakage from section to section—Note 
discharges trom points (cotter pins) on cap. 


Fig S8e—TypeE E—EIGHT SEC- 
TIONS—310 Kv.—% IN. WATER PER 
MIN.—45 DEG. 


Breakdown of insulator in consequence of 
strong leakage from section to section—Note 
discharge trom points (cotter pins) on cap. 


PLATE (€ XXXII 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


|SOTHMAN] 


Fia. 8f—Typr F—300 Kv.-3 IN. 
WATER PER MIN.—45 DEG. 


Breakdown of insulator in consequence of 
flash-over from section to section—Note 
heavy firing inside petticoat in first and 
second sections—Also point discharges (cot- 
ter pins.) 


PLATE CXXXIl 


[ap Eas 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


A. 


*qvoorzjod JaAO 
oZ1eyosip Buo0l4s yng ‘e]joiquin doy 1aAo o17e4S jo aduasqe 9}0N 
‘CISIHS IVLAJ GAdVHS-ATLLOG Ad GALOALOAd AOOH 
HLIM LOG “AM JTT LV (PD) NOILOAS ANVS—{6 “Il 
[NVWHLOS] 


*yooy jo yulod ye pazt[eoo] aZieyostp 930N 
‘AM JIT LV NOILOAS AaNQO—Q ddA L—6 SNE | 
[NVWHLOS] 


Fic. 10a—Typr D—FIvE  SEc- 
TIONS—280 Kv.—z IN. WATER PER 
Min.—45 DEG. 


Note discharge localized at point and back 
of hooks. 


PLATE CXXXIll 
A. |. E, E. 
VOL. XXXl, 1912 


[SOTHMAN] 


Fic. 100—TyrpE D—SAME AS 
Previous Test (a) Except Hooks 
PROTECTED BY BOTILE-SHAPED 
SHIELDS 

Note absence of distress, 


PLATE CXXXIV 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


|[SOTHMAN] 


Fic. 10c—SAME AS PRECEDING TEST (b) EXCEPT VOLTAGE RAISED 
To 3800 KV. : 
Note uniformly distributed discharge. 


PLATE CXXXV 
A. I.E. E. 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[SOTHMAN] 


Fic. lla—TyrprE B—FRACTURE Hie, lie——Dyer D—Hoox 
OccURRED AT 8000 LB. PULLED Our AT 9000 LB. 


Poor mechanical design—holding power 
of hook reduced to the shearing strength of 
cement, 


{|SOTHMAN] 


Fic. 11)—Type C—FRACTURES OCCURRED AT 15,000 LB. 


Note distortion of U-shaped eye-bolt indicating excellent holding power of construction. 


PLATE CXXXVI 
Awl. E. E- 
VOL. XXXI, 1912 


[SOTHMAN] 


Fic. 11d—TyvpeE E—FaILURE OCCURRED AT 7500 LB. 


Note sound fracture—eye-bolt pulled out at 10,800 lb. The latter was cemented with 


litharge and glycerine which had remained soft. 


[SOTHMAN] 


Fic. lle—TypeE F—AVERAGE BREAKING LOAD 6900 LB. 


Holding power of lips cut in eye-bolt very limited—Plaster of paris not suitable 


for cementing. 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2153 


From all these considerations it was found advisable to have 
the metal parts of the insulators as symmetrical as possible, 
presenting a smooth and even surface void of any projection 
whatever. In accordance with this suggestion the ball and socket 
type connection was subsequently devised by one manufacturer 
to meet this contingency. 

Another feature which militates against the use of a two-piece 
insulator is the fact that it is impossible to equalize the stresses 
in the two pieces under all and any conditions. In a dry condi- 
tion, the porcelain of the inner petticoat is far less strained than 
when the top section is wet and conducting. The working 
efficiency of the material is bad and the cost of a twe-piece 
insulator is necessarily high. 

Outside of the design determining the electrical efficiency of 
the insulator, the method of mechanically connecting the different 
units to a string is of no little importance. The practise of 
cementing a pin into a porcelain shell and subjecting the pin to 
a strain may, at first sight, be regarded by many engineers as 
a doubtful proposition, and it was in that light that the inter- 
linking feature of types A and B was devised. As already men- 
tioned, this link feature has proved to be a failure, at least electric- 
ally, and the cemented pin has so far given no cause for complaint. 
The breaking strength of the cemented pin, on the other hand, 
had been found to be far superior to the wire link type, in some 
cases being nearly twice as strong. The device of type C is un- 
questionably a most splendid solution of the problem, as for an 
actual holding power, this type can hardly be excelled. 

As stated elsewhere, it was possible to tabulate the test re- 
~ sults and to classify the insulators according to their merits and 
* demerits. How this was done will appear from the two follow- 

ing tables. The first table contains a summary of characteristics, 
4. e., a tabulation of all features which can be measured and ex- 
pressed in one or another unit. The first column of this table ~ 
contains characteristics like diameter, spacing, number of sec- 
~ tions, length over-all, open spacing between sections, widths, etc. 
A number of other characteristics relating to design are also 
added, like number of pieces, method of connecting the sections, 
material, etc., and finally, characteristics bearing directly on 
their electrical efficiency, like leakage distance, thickness of shell, 
dry surface, etc. Opposite each column representing the actual 
figures corresponding to each type of insulator were placed 
certain comments, indicating observations or deductions with 
regard to those particular characteristics. 


———— 


pooyy syeoo 
“30d OM], 
3104 
-9f9 Jo be 
2 728091740) 
SIppra pus 
doy usemjyog 
auou 
Ree. Ay[eorjoeig 
PASTOLGNS ‘mtx T 
pooy "Ur EFT 
cleat Rel eie tse aBreyo ory 
-sIp ainzeuleid 
qusaaid 07 s0Rjins pooy ASso[yy 
yjoours pue [voy poor) 
-sumutAS A[jOojied 
qyueseid plnoys 
‘astjovid ul paurey a[durig 
-qo jou aie suoTy 
-1odoid Jedoid poos utd 293]0q-eAq 
ynq aoa1id 9u0 Jayse[d 
uey} Jeyjeq Alle Jaqyseqely 
-o13e10984} 10}E[NS Elsv@) 
“ul ao01d OMT 
peg O48 | 
| *9 
tal 
“ATCT » 9 
-ueyooul you ‘ATV 
-OTIjO9]e sseJUeA | BUOT COOL Pe tA) 
-pe jo suorjoes Jo | a Me 
Jequnu oesiey | Ivey ooy » £01 
| -ur fg 
| 
| 
yeu y |squeurut0g aq edky 


\ 


sesuey 9113 
queioygng | -u0o seq 
04 
-2ef9 jo aseq 
pue dvo jo 
9e3pe Iamo’T 
utd 193400 
péq s0yzer 70 18d 
qUSTOIGNS ‘ure XT 
pUSTOINS “ay eT 
uMOJq YSIpper 
Ysteg 
rey tood ‘Asso]x) 
YB8n04 2 poor 
adurig 
poor utd 3 3[0q af0 
pUslytog 
os[e ‘osiey4yy 
3auO 
poos Aia A auoN 
OL 
oT 
» GF 
poo3 oe 
us ty 
EOF 
s}yUsUIULOD, q eds 


poop 


peq Ala, 
USPS 
poo 


poos) 


ped 


poos) 


Bry Oo], 


poss) 


a31e] OOF 


syusuIUIOD 


42091939d poor 
deo jo espe 
Jomo, pue 
yooy jo aseg 
yooy jo 
qd | 
“Ul OT/6 XZ | JUeLIgNS 
RE 02 pod 
uMOIG MOTO A 
Asso[yy peg 
Ite yy 
ajduris 
00 pooy 
pesioj doiq 
puelywodg 
OM] 
auoN peq AoA 
OZT 4st 
Z q3IH 
» 8 fears 0o7, 
» OS 
/ oes 
| LOL asojo COT 
jee coh ey 
qd edhjy |syuawur0og 


42001149g 


109-1 
jo oseq 
pue deo jo 
e3pe JamoT 


auoN 
‘ur § XZ 
“Ul FG 


uMOIg 


ysnoy 
poor) 


ajdutg 


uid 
pue 3700 
puelytod 
OMT, 


43tH 


100g eZury euC 
ule] 
-9010d jo sot} 
peq -IAB9 punole 
AlOA pue uy 
au0N 
JUSTTgNS ‘ure XT 
TIeus ooL ‘Ur $11 
ayeloo0ys 
ped ysnoy 
ped 
peq Ala ROB 
100g syUul] pue 
oIIM sseig 
auoN 
aug 
poor au0N 
ESF 
#6 
Hews a 2 
| » OF 
» 
ee ote 
ut {01 
s}UsUIUIOD Vy edAL 


SUOLVINSNI NOISNEdSNS LIOA-0O0O'OTT 4O SOILSINALIVUVHS AO AUVWAWNS 


ears *908jInS Aid 


see ‘aBi1eyo 
{ _SIp oinyeulolg 
weleetedeeetgggy 
“Aor, = 9190991 
****moTjoes Jod 
aouvjysip eseAeey 
iusisaqd 
IVOIMMLIa Ta 


sivodde 
aZIeyosIp ysnig, 


UleledI0g 

LOANJID{[NUD IE 
«drools “+= *su0My 
-0es jo jemouoy 

suo(joes U98M4 

{ -9q UOoOeUUOD 
“***Dasn JUSMIID 
“s]]@ys Jo Joquinyy 
UZtSap 1DIUBYIA TE 


coe ater *'e sis Beer 
-pury Ul oseyeolg 
a “"YyIBUaNS 


se eee “Cap [eI0OL 
*(*Q]) Worqoes Jog 
2148124 


“SuOoTJOeS Tod} 
-oq soeds uedg 
“++ "Buel [BJO], 
***SUO1JO9S JO “ON 
“BULDEGS 
*IOPOUIEIP JSOBIE'Y 

2333S 

“IVOINVHOAW 


SOISLIa}OeIEYD 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2155 


The second table is really a condensed statement of all results 
from actual tests, both electrical and mechanical. The table also 
contains the specification requirements. In compiling this 
table, a certain assumption was made which, although not 
absolutely correct, was justifiable in the light of the present 
comparison. For instance, in reference to the number of sections 
used, it was assumed that the share of line voltage per section 
was in direct proportion with the line voltage and number of 

sections. 

According to the values given in the table, each section of 
insulator is subject to a voltage of approximately 22 kv. in all 
cases, except in type E, where this voltage drops to 15.7 and even 
13.8 kv. per section, according to whether a complete insulator 
is made up of seven or eight sections, respectively. With the 
flash-over voltage per section known, the ratio of flash-over 
voltage to share of line voltage can be determined, this figure 
being equivalent to a safety factor against flash-over for the 
individual section. From the table it becomes at once apparent 
that type E has a very high ratio in comparison to type A, which 
has the lowest. Likewise, with the puncture voltage per section 
known, the ratio of puncture voltage to share of line voltage 
represents another safety factor against puncture, which, as in 
the former case, is the highest for type Z and lowest for type G 
The voltage per inch leakage distance has been found to be 
highest with type A, and lowest with type C, type E being 
next highest. 

The table also gives the approximate percentage of sections 
puncturing. During the long run of the test it was found that 
insulator sections would puncture for no apparent cause and a 
record was kept of all these failures. At the end of the test it 
was considered of importance enough to compare these percent- 
ages with each other, assuming that these values could be taken 
as a fair indication of the superiority of one insulator above the 
other, with reference to its dielectric strength. From the table 
it will be found that types F and A both had exceptionally high 
percentage of puncture as compared with the low percentage 
of type E. ; 

The average breaking strength of the different types of in- 
sulators as found from numerous tests are tabulated in the last- 
named table under ‘‘ Mechanical Tests.” The highest values 
were obtained with type C, the lowest with types E and F, all 
three types being cemented insulators. It must be said in d - 


[Dec. 13 


SOTHMAN 


2156 


HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 


“AX SS “AY SSS “AX 006 
Ajuappng ATUOppns 
IOAO-YSel yy aseVyeo] pue IOAO-Yse] yy] 
“AX 008 ‘AX OOF “AX 09G 
ne! 90°T a1 
Tad L6 9°8 
GL.°v u's °"S 
“AX OSG “AX OSS “AM SGS 
ques Jed ¢g yuso sod OT 
‘AST GET eAoge “AH SET 
» SOT ‘AY O8—EL 
“AW GS “AX 8° ET “AY LST 
suotjoes g suOTJOeS 2 
0028 OO8OT 
ooTS OOTS 
00GL ogs9L 
“a “aT 
4 edsy q adh 


“AX 026 
Ajueppnusg 
IDAO-YSP[ 


“AT O86 


LY 
a°9 
I’? 
“AY OSG 


quoo riod 0g 
‘AY OFT eAoge 
» 06 


"AM BZ 


O096T 

OO8L 

OOLOT 
“a1 


q ed4y, 


“AX 00G ‘AX 08 “AX 023 toreeeesocceesocqtman BUppIOu papusmrU0say, 
A[ueppns Ajyenpeiyy eoqrevessesevrereseerere eee *sino00 I9A0-YSP] 
IDAO-YSE] yy | VdVAVI] AIsseox| SOD e aie = fue Nye aes vo +++ + *+ginyrey Jo oInzeNn 
‘AH coz "AX O9T i see ‘ Ajeyeurrxoidde 42 eInpegq 
(-soyenSUT 
aja[duroo ‘,¢F ye aqnurur Jed Jazem “UT yjeq-euoQ) 
84831 12M 
16'0 i oe oe) ee eee AY Ul a0uR4sIp eBvyAee] ‘ul-euo Jad aBe1OA 
6's V9 coe merece wesc eosansneeeregs . (10z0RJ Ayoyes) 
a8b4[0A ou] JO oTeYs 07 o8e JOA ainjound ony 
8° oe: =<. . Boe eee eerste . sreeess*(royoey Ajayes)- 
93}[0A oul] Jo aTeYs 0} O3e7[0A JoAO-Ysey OCA 
“AM 622 “ote :. | CO. Bee ae +++ (10;8]NSUT aya{dui0o 
uo) MOlAq <IGISIA seurooeq aBIeqosIp ysnig 
quo tod gg queso tod cy “-Zutmyound suorjoes Jo yue0 Jed ayeurxoiddy 
» O81 » GET been eee eee ee ‘ aimpoung 
» $8 “AX OL—S9 a8ez[0A aut] jo 
oi0US (GouTE, SFE Gtr” "ri aaa * a I2A0-YSely 
"AW ZS SNe lh al a ee eee ea uorzoas Jed a8eqJOA aut] Jo aleyg 
18jsaq Kaq 
IVOINLOA19 
O00Z9T O00ZOT ysoysty 
0096 00L8 *qsamoT 
OOOFT Oft6 eselIAYy “aI 0008 Vee bp 6 Boas 6.2.4 CSS. S 6 ow vies aim uteij4s surjeeig 
coy “ay 1yjauads 
IVOINVHOAN 
sqyuoursimbeal 
2 adh V edéL uo1jeoyeds 


SUYOLVIOSN] NOISNadSNg 


LIOA-000‘'0IT NO SIsa] 40 SLIASAy 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2157 


fense of the last two types, that subsequent tests on regular stock 
insulators showed a breaking strength of not less than 8000 lb. 
(3628 kg.), the relatively poor results obtained by the former 
tests being due solely to the cement which had not properly set. 

From all observations and test results, the following conclusions 
were drawn up on which a classification of the various types of 
insulators, in the following order, was based: 

1. Type F. This type meets electrical requirements but not 
the mechanical tests. Design, however, can be readily modified 
to meet mechanical tests and incidentally, improve the insulator 
electrically. Percentage of puncture can be kept down by rigid 
inspection. Insulator shows high class of workmanship and 
material. 

2. Type E. This type meets electrical tests with eight sec- 
tions, but not the mechanical tests. Insulator should, without 
material modification of design, be able to come up to the re- 
quired mechanical tests. Slight increase in diameter should 
also increase electrical efficiency of insulator. Large number of 
open spaces between units isof advantage. Insulator is strong, 
durable, light and compact. Method of connecting units should 
be modified so as to present symmetrical and smooth surface to 
prevent premature discharge. 

3. Type D. This type meets electrical and mechanical tests. 
Insulator has, however, very faulty design. Diameter too large; 
weight and bulk too high. Inefficient cementing of hook. 
Hook feature to be condemned, causing distortion of field and 
premature discharge. As a two-piece insulator, electrical stresses 
of petticoats are not balanced. 

4. Type C. This type meets the mechanical but not electrical 
requirements. The insulator is far too fragile, causing excessive 
breakage in ordinary handling. Sections are too close upon each 
other, leaving too small a clearance between units. As a two- 
piece insulator, electrical stresses of petticoats are unbalanced. 

5. Type A. This type meets mechanical but not the electrical 
requirements. 

Final selection of the type E insulator was made in consequence 
of various favorable considerations. Type F is of European 
design and manufacture, and its selection would have entailed 
several difficulties, especially in regard to delivery. Next to 
type F, type E was found to be the most suitable and practical 
insulator, both from an engineering and a commercial point of 
view, and this consideration, together with the outlook for better 


2158 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS  [Dec. 18 


deliveries, determined its adoption. It must be mentioned that 
the diameter of the insulator was subsequently changed from 10 
in. (25.4cm.) to 11in. (28 cm.), and that the ball and socket type 
connection was universally adopted. 


STRAIN INSULATORS 


No special insulators were offered for use as strain insulators 
excepting the one designated as type B, which is but a variation 
of type A. In order to increase the efficiency of the suspension 
insulator for use as a strain insulator, one or two additional sec- 
tions were added by the manufacturers. From numerous 
tests similar in character to those performed on suspension 
insulators, it was found that none of the different types recom- 
mended by the manufacturer met the requirements of the speci- 
fications for wet test. Excessive leakage at voltages below the 
standard fixed in the specification (220 kv.) made their use as 
- strain insulators prohibitive. As one exception, type E, using 
as many as ten sections instead of seven, showed some advantage 
over the others, but even at its best was found to be not entirely 
satisfactory. Inevery case, failure of the insulator did not occur 
suddenly, but very gradually. Distress begins to be visible at 
voltages as low as 110 kv., this distress increasing in almost 
direct proportion with the voltage. 

After considerable experimenting with new designs and 
numerous combinations, it was found that the use of ten sections 
of the adopted insulator type E gave the least unsatisfactory 
results of all. With a modification of the design of the cap, 
increasing the breaking strength of the insulator, this type was 
finally adopted for use as strain insulators. 

The preceding sections of this paper dealt with the investiga- 
tion only in so far as it covered the selection of a suitable insulator. 
With this question settled, there remained one not less important 
part of the work, viz.: the supervision of the factory tests on some 
140,000 insulator sections. The specifications called for distinct 
electrical and mechanical tests on each unit, and the acceptance 
of the insulators was based on their ability to pass these tests. 
Outside of these specified tests, the insulators had to conform to 
certain well-defined standards as to shape, quality, finish, ete. 
The whole inspection and supervision of tests was comparable 
to a weeding-out process, and it was the duty of the inspectors 
to see that this process was carried out in conformity with the 
specifications. After successful completion of all factory tests, 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2159 


the insulators were packed and shipped to the nearest railroad 
siding where they were delivered to the contractors. 

Even though the specifications were drawn up with the utmost 
care, taking into consideration every phase of the work involved, 
it was found during the course of this investigation, and especially 
during the subsequent work at the factories, that they did not 
meet every contingency. In a number of instances it was found 
almost impossible to hold the manufacturer down to the terms 
of the specification, but that he had to be allowed a considerable 
margin in his favor. Although the manufacturer guaranteed 
to furnish insulators in accordance with samples submitted and 
approved, in the regular course of manufacture it was found 
to be a commercial impossibility to keep the standard at 
par with the hand-picked samples. In prescribing limits be- 
tween which variances were allowable, both mechanically and 
electrically, it proved to be a very difficult matter to draw a 
distinct line. After the contract was let and the manufacture 
was progressing, difficulties were encountered in determining 
when an insulator had successfully passed certain inspection or 
tests, requiring several conferences between manufacturer and 
engineers in order to come to a definite understanding. From all 
these experiences and observations, it was found that specifica- 
tions for high-tension insulators were susceptible of a number 
of amendments, which, if properly worked out, would go far 
towards minimizing possible misinterpretations and misunder- 
standings. 

In viewing this work now, after a number of years rich in ex- 
perience have passed, and in the light of all after events, it must 
be admitted that the problem of insulating high-tension trans- 
mission lines is yet far from being solved. Much valuable ex- 
perience has been gained which in the course of time will un- 
doubtedly be utilized to improve methods and means of effec- 
.tively insulating and protecting a transmission line. With 
special reference to the question of insulators and their future 
development, it will be understood by all, that work in this direc- 
tion can be carried out successfully only with a close co-operation 
between the ceramic and operating engineers. The question of 
properly designing and loading an insulator is one which presumes 
a thorough knowledge of transient phenomena occurring on a 
transmission line and their proper interpretation with regard to 
the effect on the insulators. Once these phenomena are known 
and their effect thoroughly understood, the drawing up of speci- 


2160 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS  [Dec. 13 


fications for{high-tension insulators will become a matter less 
open for conjecture. For it is quite probable that precautions, 
now taken in one direction, are often unwarranted and uncalled 
for, whereas, on the other hand, liberal allowances made in other 
directions may be of the greatest detriment to the line and 
insulators. 7 

In summing up the experience gained during the foregoing 
investigations, especially with regard to testing, the following 
points are presented as worthy of future consideration and dis- 
cussion. 

They are given in the form of an itemized list of headings or 
questions to which are added a few remarks, commenting on 
certain experiences gained either in the field, in the factory, or 
in the testing room. 


Design Test. 
What design test should be specified for insulators intended 
to work at a certain voltage? 


In the present case a dry test of three times line voltage was 
specified. Experience, however, seems to indicate that even 
though the insulator may meet this arbitrary condition, its 
safety against failure in actual operation is not thereby assured. 
It is a well-known fact that an insulator is never endangered by 
the steady static forces but rather by those sudden and transient 
movements appearing in a system and caused either by external 
or internal disturbances. It is not the steady dead-load which 
is dangerous to a bridge or structure, even though it may assume 
a value two or three times higher than the load for which it was 
designed, but those moving loads which will set up vibrations 
and surges in the structure, especially if they are rhythmical 
in character and coincide with the natural swing of the bridge. 
For this reason, soldiers are generally not permitted to cross a 
bridge while marching in step. Although the actual forces coming 
into play are insignificant in such cases, their effect may, under 
certain conditions, become disastrous. It is without doubt that 
the insulators of a transmission line are very susceptible to 
similar phenomena, and to guard against failure from these causes, — 
it will be necessary to impose tests of an entirely different 
character. 

Method of supporting insulator during test. Should insulator 


support be grounded and voltage applied to groove, or should 
voltage be applied between groove and pin, both ungrounded? 


At first sight, it may appear as if the manner in which the 
insulator is supported during tests is of no importance. As a 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2161 


matter of fact, the proximity of large grounded or ungrounded 
bodies close to the insulator under test will materially affect the 
distribution of the static field around the insulator, especially 
when these tests are performed with one side of the potential 
grounded; the best method of supporting an insulator and apply- 
ing a test would undoubtedly be the one which closely approxi- 
mates conditions under which the insulator works in actual 
operation. 


Capacity of testing transformer and generator. Method of 
regulation of voltage. Determination of correct voltage during 
test at any time. Should spark gap be used or static voltmeter, 
or should step-down transformers in connection with voltmeters 
be used? 

The kilowatt capacity of the testing outfit cannot be too large, 
for the puncture of a weak insulator may never be discovered 
but for the power back of the transformer. 

As to the method of regulating the voltage: It must be 
accomplished by means which do not alter the shape of the al- 
ternating-current wave form and the latter should be a true sine 
curve. From the different means employed today, like water 
rheostat, induction regulators, auto-transformers, etc., the 
method of regulating the voltage of the alternator by controlling 
its field current seems to offer the most advantages. 

In reference to the determination of the voltage, several 
methods are at present in vogue. The most common of these 
methods involves the use of a properly calibrated spark gap. 
An ordinary voltmeter in connection with a step-down trans- 
former is also used, and finally, in some instances, static volt- 
meters have given excellent satisfaction. Each of these methods, 
however, has its drawbacks. The spark gap setting is susceptible 
to atmospheric conditions. It may also introduce undesirable 
oscillations at the instant of discharge. The breakdown voltage 
of an insulator cannot be determined by means of spark gap 
alone, which in this case must be supplemented by a volt- 
meter reading. Another feature is the burning off of the 
points, each time the gap discharges, a matter which cannot 
always be avoided. The method employing step-down trans- 
formers is not altogether reliable and should be used in connection 
with a gap from which the voltmeter readings are calibrated. 
Undoubtedly the best method to ascertain the value of the 
testing potential is by means of a static voltmeter of suitable 


design. 


2162 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS © [Dec. 138 


Frequency, permissible distortion of wave form, effect of har- 
monics and high frequencies. 

The effect of the frequency upon the results is a matter which 
is very seldom fully appreciated. The value of the charging 
current increases in direct proportion with the frequency, and 
the effect of this current will naturally follow a similar law. An 
insulator tested at 60 cycles will show different results than when 
tested at 25 cycles, the potential being the same in both cases. 
If for any reason, the wave form of the alternator is not a true 
sine curve, the results may become extremely misleading, to say 
the least. In one case which is on record, a porcelain transformer 
bushing was tested at two different places under apparently 
identical conditions, and yet the results differed by nearly 40 per 
cent. The tests were checked and repeated several times with no 
better results until, finally, the wave form of one of the alternators 
was found to have a very pronounced 13th harmonic. Immedi- 
ately this harmonic was suppressed, the tests could be duplicated 
at both places without difficulty. The smaller the number 
of insulators tested, the smaller also the capacity of these insula- 
tors, the more pronounced will be any effect caused by higher 
frequencies appearing in the electrical system used for such tests. 
With a large number of insulators, and consequently, with a large 
capacity available, these higher frequencies will cause relatively 
little trouble, provided the amount of energy they represent is 
small. But in all cases where the capacity of the insulator tested 
is small, the wave form of the alternating current should be a 
pure sine wave. 

As to the number of insulators which should be tested in order 
to arrive at a fair average value, this is a matter left open for 
discussion. 

Effect of power factor upon test. 


The effect of the power factor on insulator tests is also left 
open for discussion. When a large number of insulators are 
tested simultaneously, the available load of the transformer is 
utilized to charge that large capacity and there will exist consider- 
able lead between this charging current and the impressed e.m.f. 
Whether or not this power factor has any influence on the test 
results is left open for discussion. 

What wet test should be specified? Should it be artificial rain, 
dew, salt water spray, etc.? Amount of precipitation per minute? 


Character of precipitation and means for applying the same? 
Angle at which this precipitation should be applied? 


— 


Ve 
. NN : 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2163 


Several means for approximating the conditions found in the 
open air are used at the present time. Artificial rain is applied 
which may vary between wide limits from a downpour to a mist; 
it may be applied vertically or at an angle, usually 45 deg. Or 
else the insulators may be confined within an air-tight room in 
which steam is left to escape until the insulators are completely 
enveloped in an atmosphere of steam and covered with a film of 
condensed vapor. Each test will yield certain results, but no 
two tests can be compared unless the conditions governing the 
tests are the same in both cases. Which of these methods is 
the most effective remains to be determined. It should 
always be chosen with regard to the facility for duplicating it 
at any time. In the present instance, the specifications called 
for 250 kv. with 0.5 in. (12.7mm.) rain per minute vertically 
applied, or 220 kv. applied at 45 deg. These figures may seem 
arbitrary, and far above the standards commonly used, but on 
the other hand, they also include a safety factor higher than it 
is customary to allow. The above rain tests are easily made or 
duplicated, which is a great advantage. On the other hand, 
the distribution of the water needs considerable improvement 
to approximate more closely real rain. 

What should determine the failure or the success of insulator 
under test? Should it be the luminous display when test is per- 
formed in absolute darkness, and if so, what should be the limit of 
intensity? Or, should the ratio of flash-over or breakdown 
voltage to voltage at which first sign of luminosity appears, be 
considered? 

With all conditions of test fully determined, and agreed upon, 
there remains the most difficult task of all; namely, to judge the 
performance of the insulator under test. The method followed 
and described elsewhere in this paper was the only one which 
promised to yield comparable results. This method, however, 


has the disadvantage of being a purely subjective matter. Even 


the comparing of photographic records is susceptible to that 
personal element always present. That the method is not free 
from objections has been realized from the start, but in the 
absence of some better way, it had, at least, the advantage of 
simplicity. It is quite evident that there must be other ways 
of determining the efficiency of insulators than by merely com- 
paring their luminous display either among themselves or with 
that of a standard. What this method should be, is an open 
question. Undoubtedly, the determining of watts lost would 
yield results free from the personal element if a reliable method 


2164 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS  [Dec. 13 


could be devised. In regard to the other method mentioned, 
in which the ratio of breakdown voltage to voltage at which first 
brush discharge becomes visible, is made the basis of comparison, 
it is likewise not always an easy matter to determine the exact 
value of this voltage. The breakdown voltage of an insulator, 
as arule, is fairly constant, but the voltage at which the brush 
discharges become visible depends largely upon various accidental 
conditions and eventualities which render its determination ex- 
tremely difficult. Consequently, this method should be viewed 
with the utmost caution. 
Puncture Test. 


Method of applying and performing test. Method of apply- 
ing electrodes. Number of samples to be tested in order to arrive 
at a fair average value. 


As a well-proportioned insulator will flash over before its punc- 
ture voltage is reached, it becomes necessary to test the insulator 
under oil. In this test, the most important feature is the appli- 
cation of electrodes. Unless the area presented is of sufficient size, 
erratic and unreliable results are obtained. The cemented cap 
and pin of sections of the suspension-type insulator form ideal 
electrodes in a test of this character, inasmuch as they distribute 
the stresses in the porcelain evenly and uniformly, also in ex- 
actly the same manner as obtains in actual use. 

Mechanical Test. 

What should this test be? Method of subjecting insulator 
to mechanical test according to whether pin insulator, suspension 
or strain insulator is tested. Method of applying load. Method 
of recording load at any instant. Should mechanical test: be 
performed with insulator under voltage? 

Routine Test and Inspection. 


Inspections for physical defects. What are the limits to be 
observed in rejecting insulators on account of mechanical imper- 
fections? 


There naturally exists considerable difference of opinion be- 
tween manufacturers and engineers as to the insulators which 
should be rejected. In most instances, the porcelain manufac- 
tured in this country will show an imperfect surface. This 
imperfection is caused by warping of body, discoloration, small 
cracks, flaws, grooves and foreign material adhering to glaze, 
bubbles underneath the glaze, etc. As a rule, foreign and 
especially German porcelain is faultless in those repects and there 


is never the slightest difficulty in rejecting insulators in these 
factories. 


————— 


eo |? 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2165 


What routine tests should be specified? Method of applying 
such tests. Number of insulators tested simultaneously. 
Method of applying voltage. Should these tests be continuous 
or should test be executed in stages, allowing for the removal 
of insulators failing during test? If insulators are subjected to 
time test, should the test be continuous? Is it good practise 
to subject insulators to flash-over test for any length of time, 
with regard to possible deterioration or fatigue of the porcelain? 
What conditions will determine the success or failure of test? 
Should insulators failing, be cut off automatically from the rest 
of the insulators under test? 

Two-Piece Insulators. 


Where insulators are made up of several parts, cemented 
together, should cement preparation and method of cementing 
be specified? Length of time allowed for setting? Should 
insulator be tested over electrically after cementing is done? 


Considerable difficulties were experienced in Germany with 
cemented insulators. The cement used in that country is either 
plaster of paris prepared in a special way, or litharge and glycerine 
and several other cements of secret composition. It has been 
found that after some time, the shells would crack, due—as was 
inferred—to the working of the cement used, and for that reason 
the cemented type insulator has been abandoned in favor of the 
single-piece type. . 

While the insulators which were selected as a result of these 
tests have proved to be highly satisfactory throughout a period 
of two years’ operation, there have been nevertheless a few char- 
acteristic failures. In most cases the ultimate failure of these 
insulators was due to puncturing, although there exists strong 
evidence that this failure was preceded by the cracking of the 
petticoats, through no apparent cause. In most cases when 
puncturing takes place, it affects all sections of the insulators, 
with the curious but nevertheless logical result that holes are 
burned through the insulator cap opposite the point of puncture 
in the porcelain and fusing the metal surrounding it. The 
size of the hole in the cap depends to a great extent upon the 
time setting of the circuit breakers at the power station. If the 
circuit breakers trip out instantaneously after puncture has occur- 
red, there may be no burning of the cap whatsoever. On the other 
hand, if the circuit breaker holds on for three or four seconds or 
even longer, the current to ground, which is limited through a 
resistance of large heat capacity connected between the neutral 
point of the transformers and ground, fuses the porcelain and 
adjacent metal parts. In one of these cases, where the holes 


2166 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS (Dec, 13 


through the caps were quite large, the circuit breaker did not trip 
out at all and one of the insulator sections, under the excessive 
heating action of the current to ground, finally came apart, thus 
automatically interrupting the circuit. 

It is arather difficult matter to determine the primary source 
of these failures. It may be due to cracks in one or two of the 
sections, which naturally tend to lower greatly the total insulating 
capacity of the insulator. If then, during a lightning storm, or 
during switching, surges are set up in the line, the weakened 
insulator becomes punctured as a direct result of any discharge 
occurring in the vicinity along the line. Considering the large 
capacity involved in the system and the power back of the trans- 
formers, this localized discharge in the insulator may immediately 
set up powerful commotions and oscillations which may affect 
the adjacent insulator and finally puncture one after the other in 
rapid succession. 

The cracks inside the insulator cap and also the falling apart 
of the insulator sections with no apparent cause may have 
been due to faulty insulators having accidentally passed 
inspection, or it may have been brought about by the sub- 
sequent expansion which takes place in the cement within the 
cap and around the pin. This cracking of the cemented insulator 
has been experienced in Germany, as mentioned elsewhere in 
this paper, although in these cases the insulators in question were 
pin insulators only. It is almost impossible to determine whether 
the cracking of the porcelain within the cap is actually due to 
the uneven expansion of the porcelain, cement, or metal cap 
under temperature changes, or whether they were a result of the 
puncturing of the insulators. The inspection of some 140,000 
sections of insulators was a task requiring much endurance, and 
although the work was carried out with great conscientiousness, 
it is quite possible that a few sections with a weakness in the 
porcelain cap which would not be detected by the ordinary 
routine test, may have passed by. There is also to be considered 
the theory of electrical and mechanical fatigue in the porcelain 
and cement respectively, which has already been discussed by 
several authorities. There seems to be no doubt that some such 
effect takes place, but the data which have been collected so far 
on the subject are not sufficient to permit of definite conclusions 
being drawn. To be able to insure absolutely continuous service 
over any transmission system may necessitate the sectionalizing 
of the line, where each section can be periodically tested at much 


1912] SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS 2167 


higher voltage, or else it may be necessary to remove the insulators 
in batches and test them individually, as has already been done 
by one of the large operating companies. 

At the present time there appears to be a rather unwarranted 
competition by the different manufacturers and operating com- 
panies to use excessively high voltages. There isa system already 
in operation at 145,000 volts and quite recently another company 
has contemplated the use of 180,000 volts. In view of the fact 
that operation at 110,000 volts has not yet reached a stage of 
maturity, and the fact that phenomena which were not antici- 
pated, occur on such lines, and which, even now, are far from 
being fully understood, considerable caution should be displayed 
before attempting the use of still higher voltages. A few years 
ago the suspension type of insulator was heralded as the solution 
for line insulation up to any voltage at which it would be practi- 
cable to operate for many years to come. The factor limiting 
the use of high voltages so far as the line was concerned was then 
considered to be the effect of corona and leakage into the atmos- 
phere. But from past experience it is almost certain that these 
views will need revision and that a systematic and thorough 
study of the properties of insulators is urgently required. 

Examples of the rather uncertain conditions manifesting them- 
selves in a high-voltage power transmission system are mainly 
the behavior of oil circuit breakers when large amounts of power 
have to be handled, the lightning arrester problem, and even the 
high-tension transformers. Most all of this apparatus, as will 
be admitted by the manufacturing companies, is yet in the stage 
of development, and it is very gratifying to see that a large 
amount of study is being devoted at the present time to render- 
ing these devices more reliable in service. 

The above criticism should not be taken as an indication of 
extreme conservatism or as tending to block the way to progress, 
but under the prevailing conditions, it is almost imperative that 
a word of caution should be spoken to prevent the somewhat 
extravagant use of the higher voltages when the use of lower 
voltages would answer the purpose equally well, and especially 
when the difficulties which are encountered with these extreme 
voltages may endanger the financial prospects of a particular 
power proposition. 

I cannot close this paper without mentioning the Ontario 
Power Company at Niagara Falls, in whose plant these tests 
were made. The president of the company, Mr. J. J. Albright, 


2168 SOTHMAN: HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


and vice-president, General F. V. Greene, and their engineer 
in charge, Mr. V. G. Converse, have given their heartiest support 
and assistance to the furtherance of this work in gratuitously 
supplying all necessary testing equipment, power and the help 
of their personnel for these tests. 1 welcome this opportunity 
to personally and publicly thank these gentlemen for the interest 
they have taken in this work, for their generous help and friendly 
cooperation. 


1912) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2169 


Discussion on “‘ HIGH-FREQUENCY TEsTs OF LINE INSULATORS” 
(IMLAY AND THOMAS), AND ‘‘ COMPARATIVE TESTS ON 
HicH-TENSION SUSPENSION INSULATORS ”’ (SOTHMAN), NEW 
York, DECEMBER 13, 1912. 


Ralph D. Mershon: There are a number of things in connec- 
tion with the paper by Messrs. Imlay and Thomas that are not 
clear to me, and which I would like to have Mr. Thomas elucidate. 
For instance, in Fig. 3 of their paper there is shown a metal band 
around the insulator, and it is said that the effect of that metal 
band is equivalent to increasing the diameter of the pin. That is 
not quite clear, neither is it quite clear that putting a cap on the 
insulator is equivalent to reducing the diameter of the pin, the 
opposite effect of the band. 

As to the change in voltage distribution over an insulator 
with change of frequency, I think there is no doubt about that, 
both from theoretical considerations and from measurements in 
connection with some high-voltage tests made at Niagara on 
which I reported to the Institute some time ago. These measure- 
ments were of the losses on insulators. The losses varied with 
the frequency.. Inasmuch as other measurements made at that 
time indicated there was little, if any, loss in the porcelain of the 
insulator, it appeared that the losses measured were mainly con- 
fined to the surface of the insulator. And the only acceptable 
explanation for the variation of these losses with frequency was, 
that as the charging current of the insulator changed with the 
different frequencies, the amount of charging current that had to 
flow over the surface changed, resulting in the change in the 
values of the losses. That change in loss would indicate a change 
in distribution similar to the one of which Mr. Thomas speaks, 
because change of loss, due to a change of charging current, 
means a change in the voltage absorbed on those parts of the 
surface over which the current has to flow in order to charge 
other portions of surface. 

There can be little question in the mind of any one who has to 
do with transmission lines that the main point brought out in 
this paper is correct; namely, that the behavior of insulators 
under high frequency is not the same as their behavior under 
commercial frequencies. Again and again insulators are punc- 
tured in service, which under test at commercial frequencies 
would flash over rather than puncture. This happens with 
wooden as well as metal pins, although it happens more fre- 
quently with metal pins. But you do not have to go to insulators 
to see there is a difference between action of high and low fre- 
quencies. You have seen a dry transmission line pole struck 
by lightning and shattered. Instead of taking the perfectly easy 
path through the air alongside the pole, the lightning preferred 
to go through the pole and smash it to pieces. I could under- 
stand how the lightning might choose a green tree with the sap 
in it, rather than the air alongside of it, but it is difficult to under- 


2170 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS {Dec. 13 


stand why it should prefer to go through a dry pole, which we 
have reason to believe would, if tested at commercial frequencies, 
flash over before it would pass any serious amount of current. 

High-frequency tests should be continued further, and the 
endeavor should be made, when more knowledge as to these 
phenomena has been obtained, to connect up the effect of high- 
frequency tests with the results of tests at commercial frequencies. 
In other words, the endeavor should be made to determine what 
tests at commercial frequencies (either as to voltage or time, or 
both) would constitute an equivalent of high-frequency tests, 
so that tests can be made under ordinarily available conditions, 
equivalent to tests at high frequency. 

In Mr. Sothman’s paper rather undue emphasis seems to be 
laid upon factors of safety relative to the line voltage. It would 
seem that our experience, extending over a number of years, 
has shown that the problem of insulating a transmission line is 
not so much a problem of insulating it against the line voltage— 
that is comparatively easy—but the problem of insulating or 
protecting it against lightning or lightning effects. 

On the last page of his paper Mr. Sothman has spoken in a 
rather discouraged way in regard to higher voltages. Now, while 
I agree with him that in some cases it would seem that higher 
voltages have been adopted than were justifiable, I think them 
unjustifiable on the score of economics rather than on the score 
of difficulties to be met with in operation. There is no particular 
reason to believe that the percentage of electrical troubles will 
be any greater with higher voltages, requiring an increased 
number of units in the suspension insulator, than there are now, 
though I can see some chance for a considerable increase in 
mechanical troubles. 

There is one other point I desire to take up that bears on both 
these papers, and on other work that has been done and papers 
that have been read before the Institute in regard to suspension 
insulators. 

The term ‘string efficiency ’’ has been used, presumably as 
being indicative of the way in which the impressed voltage distri- 
butes itself over a string of insulators. As I understand that, 
it is the ratio between the voltage required to flash over a string 
of m units and nm times the flash-over voltage of one unit. Inthe 
first place I protest against the term ‘“‘ efficiency ”’ as applied to an 
insulator. In engineering work the term efficiency is used to 
designate the ratio of output to input. It cannot, though, be 
properly applied to an insulator. Some such term as “ string 
ratio’ would be better, and would fit the case, and with your 
permission I will use it. 

The term “ string ratio’ is not necessarily indicative of the 
distribution of voltage over a suspension insulator. It would 
appear that in the adoption and use of this ratio as an indication 
of the voltage distribution, a point has been overlooked that is 
of considerable importance, especially where the suspension in- 


pI 


—-. - ~~ 


1912} DISCUSSION AT{NEW YORK 2171 


sulator is made up of units closely spaced. What I have in mind 
will appear from what follows. 

In order to simplify the discussion consider the very elementary 
form of insulating unit shown in Figs. 1 and 2, consisting of an 
insulating disk on each side of which is a metal hub representing 
the metal parts of the insulating unit usually employed. Also, 
for the sake of simplicity, assume that the flash-over value of any 
given distance is directly proportional to that distance. This, 
as we all know, is not strictly true, so that the following discus- 
sion will be in error quantitatively, to the extent that this assump- 
tion is wrong, although, as you will see, the assumption does not 
affect the discussion qualitatively, and does not therefore intro- 
duce any error in the general conclusion arrived at. 

In the figures the upper and lower surfaces of the units are 
designated by a and }, respectively. Let a and 6 also stand for 
such numerical values as will represent the flash-over valuesjof 


lane ———tly —> —g—> 

IC Ls aT arte ics y A 
% -<__— |,-——_—> = —— > 
EiGae l Fic. 2 


these surfaces. Then the flash-over value of one of the units, 
say No. 1 of either of the figures, will, when tested singly, be 
a; +b. Let c, the distance between the edges of the disks, be 
such that its flashing value is c. 

Suppose a direct current voltage be impressed upon the two 
insulating units of Fig. 1, the value of the voltage being just under 
that at which the insulator will flash over. There will be a leak- 
age over the surface of the units, and as the result of it the volt- 
age impressed will distribute itself between the two units 1 and 2. 

Now if the flashing value of c, the spacing of the insulator units, 
exceeds the value of b1 + a» the tendency will be for the current 
to flash around from metal to metal of each individual unit, 
making use of the metal connection between the units in traveling 
from one unit to the other, instead of flashing around the whole 
string of units from the metal of the upper one to the metal of 


2172 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS {[Dec. 13 


the bottom one. Under this condition the actual distribution of 
voltage over the insulator will be uniform, and the string ratio of 
the insulator will be unity. So, also, will the distribution of the 
voltage be uniform and the string ratio unity if the value of c is 
just equal to b; + de; 1.e. if the flash-over is just as likely to occur 
around individual units as it is over the combination. In both 
these cases, therefore, the indication of the string ratio agrees 
with the actual condition. 

If the flashing value of c be less than that of b; + ae the 
tendency will be for the current to flash through the path 
a, + ¢c + be, and if the impressed voltage be of a value just under 
the flash-over the impressed voltage will be distributed over the 
distance a; + ¢ + bo. Let us assume that c is of a sufficiently 
low value so that the latter condition holds. Then the string 
ratio of the insulator will be 


* a+ct+bs 
2 (ay a b;) 


Or, since in exactly similar units }; and bs will be identical, 


1 c 
R== + = 
2 0 te ae 
Or, more generally, 
1 c 
ea ae a we 
Sunilarly, for three units, as in Fig. 2, the string ratio is: 
ai+tctc+b; 1 2¢ 1 2¢ 
R = ES ea Sa ry peed — el in a 
Sauk hy. 3 8 (ope ae ee eee 
And for m units the string ratio is 
1 -—1 


n n(a + dD) 


Now let us examine equation (1) applying to Fig. 1. We see 
from the last term that if c is equal to (a + 0) the value of R is 
unity, which agrees with what has just been stated. If ¢ is less 
than (a + b) the value of R is less than unity. But suppose the 
values of a and b were exactly identical, as would be the case if the 
upper and lower surfaces were exactly similar and in exactly the 
same condition. Then, in that case, the distribution over the com- 
plete insulator when subjected to a direct-current voltage must 
of necessity be uniform, because the leakage over the insulator will 
equalize the voltage over it and cause each unit to take up its 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2173 


share of the voltage. It follows, therefore, that in this case the 
string ratio is no criterion of the distribution of voltage over the 
suspension insulator, because if c is less than (a + 0) the string 
ratio will be less than unity, and therefore indicate a non-uniform 
distribution; whereas, as a matter of fact, no matter what the 
value of c may be, the distribution will be uniform. : 

Let us examine the case of Fig.2. Aspreviously stated for Fig.1, 
if c has a value sufficiently high, the string ratio of the insulator 
will be unity because the individual units will always flash around; 
and, also, if ¢ has a value just equal to the flash-around value of a 
single unit, the string ratio will be unity. Butifc has a value less 
than the flash-over value of one unit so that the voltage will flash 
over the insulator by way of the path a, + ¢-+ c+ bz, instead of 
around the individual units, then the distribution over the insula- 
tor will not be uniform. Instead, each of the intermediate units 
will have impressed upon it the voltagec, while the upper and lower 
units will each have impressed upon it some voltage higher than c. 
This is due to the fact that in the case of the upper unit, for in- 
stance, the voltage upon it will be equal toa, plus that propor- 
tion of ¢ received by the surface 0}. That is to say, the voltage 
impressed on the upper unit will be 


and the voltage impressed on the lower unit will be 


a3 
6 4-10 
be + ag oe 
The middle unit will have impressed upon it a voltage 


ae bo 
Sant eee ee 


which, (since the insulators are all similar, and therefore the a 
surfaces all identical and equivalent, and the 6 surfaces all 
identical and equivalent) reduces to the value of c, as previously 
stated. It is evident from this that if another unit be introduced 
into Fig. 2, making four units in all, and the impressed voltage 
raised accordingly, the voltage on each of the end units will be 
the same as before, and the two intermediate units will be sub- 
jected to the voltage c. It is evident also that any number of units 
thus introduced will lead to a similar result. That is to say, the 
two end units will each be subjected to a higher voltage than each 
of the intermediate units; and the voltages on each of the inter- 
mediate units will be uniformly the same. But on referring to 
equation (2) we see that as is indefinitely increased, R ap- 
proaches the value 


C 


pee at+b 


ee 
2174 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 
In other words, the value of R would continually change, ap- 


c BIg? 
proaching more and more closely to the value Perey which, if 


the units were closely spaced, would be a small value, perhaps as 
low as R = 0.5, indicating a very bad distribution. Whereas, 
as a matter of fact, the actual distribution would not change at 
all, and might not be anything like as bad as indicated by this 
ratio. As a matter of fact, as previously explained, with the 
exception of the two end units, all the units of the system would 
each have impressed upon it the same voltage (the voltage cor- 
responding to the distance ¢), while the end units would have im- 
pressed upon them somewhat higher voltages. 

We have assumed so far that the flashing values of the upper 
and lower surfaces, a and 6, of the insulator are not widely 
different. 

Suppose, however, that the upper or a surfaces of all the units 
were wet and the lower or 0 surfaces all dry, as might be the case 
in arain storm. Then, as will be apparent on following the thing 
out, unit No. 1 of the string will receive less voltage than each 
intermediate unit, and the last unit of the string will receive 
more. It would appear, therefore, that even in the case of direct 
current one or both (depending on whether or not the upper 
surfaces are wet) of the end units will receive more voltage 
than will the intermediate units, if the spacing c is such as to 
have a flash-over value less than the flash-over value of a single 
unit. 

It would appear from the above considerations, therefore, that 
the string ratio may or may not be indicative of the distribution 
of voltage over a series of insulating units. If the spacing of the 
units is such that the flash-over value of the spacing distance ¢ 
is equal to or greater than that of a single unit, the string ratio 
will be indicative of the voltage distribution over the string. 
But if the spacing of the units is such that the flash-over value 
of the spacing distance is less than that of a single unit, the 
string ratio will not be indicative of the voltage distribution 
over the string. 

Now let us consider the conditions with alternating current. 
With alternating current we are, in addition to the above con- 
siderations, concerned with the question of capacity—the 
capacity of the individual units, each within itself (which I will 
refer to as the “internal capacity”) and the capacity of each 
unit to earth (which I will refer to as the ‘‘ external capacity ’’). 
So long as we consider direct current only, and we assume that 
there is leakage over the unit, the question of capacity does not 
enter, because the leakage will ultimately determine the distri- 
bution of voltage over the string. When, however, we come to 
alternating current we are concerned with leakage, internal 
capacity, and external capacity. Of these three elements, leak- 
age and internal capacity tend towards a uniform distribution, 
whereas external capacity tends toward a non-uniform distri- 


—ot 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2175 


bution. If the spacing of the units is such that the flash-over 
value of the spacing distance ¢ is greater than that of a single 
unit, then the string ratio will be a measure of the unequal dis- 
tribution of voltage due to the effect of external capacity. But 
if the spacing of the units is such that the flash-over value of the 
spacing distance c is less than that of a single unit, then the 
string ratio will be indicative of a distribution which is the result 
of the combined effect of external capacity and the end unit 
effect discussed above for direct current. 

That this is true will be apparent on examining some of the 
curves obtained on suspension insulators in which the number of 
units is plotted against the flash-over voltages. Not infrequently 
we have the following condition. With the units all dry, the curve 
is one having a bend in it, showing that added units are of less 
and less value. If, however, the insulator be subjected to a spray 
of water and another curve plotted, the curve will be practically 
a straight line. This straight line will not, however, if extended, 
pass through zero, but will cut the axis of voltage at a certain 
value. If now the spray be increased sufficiently and another 
curve taken,this third curve will be a straight line passing through 
zero. The reason for this condition is that the spray under which 
the second curve is obtained introduces enough leakage to mask, 
and practically do away with, the effect of the external capacity, 
thus producing a practically uniform distribution over all but the 
end units. The fact that the second curve when extended cuts the 
voltage axis instead of passing through zero is evidence of the exist- 
ence of the end unit effect discussed above for direct current. 
That is, it is evidence that the distribution of voltage is sub- 
stantially uniform over all of the units, except the end ones. 
When, however, the spray is further increased so that the flash- 
over value of each unit has been reduced so much that it is less 
than the flash-over value of the spacing distance between units, 
then the distribution is uniform over all the units, and the line 
passes through zero. Curves similar to those described above will 
be found in Fig. 2 of the paper* by Mr. Peek read before the 
Institute May 17, 1912. 

It would seem, therefore, that in considering the voltage distri- 
bution over a string of insulating units, the end unit condition pre- 
viously discussed with reference to direct current must be taken 
into consideration, especially if the insulating units are placed close 
together. It is even more important when one comes to consider 
an insulator with more than one petticoat, because in this case 
the two or more petticoats give a result very similar to that of 
insulating units very closely spaced. 

I believe, however, that the matter of string ratio and voltage 
distribution over the string is of a great deal less importance than 
that of the relation between the dry flash-over value and the 
puncture value of the unit. As previously stated, the problem 


*Blectrical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator, TRANSACTIONS 
-“A, 1) E. E., 1912, XX XI, Part*I, page 911. 


2176 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


of insulating the line against the voltage of the line is a compara- 
tively easy one. The difficult part is to insulate the line against 
lightning. It is easy enough to put enough insulating units 
together to hold the voltage of the line. It is not so easy to get 
insulating units of such characteristics as will insure that there 
will always be a flash-over rather than a puncture. And while it 
is desirable to have as good voltage distribution as possible, I 
consider voltage distribution entirely secondary in importance to 
a high puncture value of the units relative to the dry flash-over 
value of the unit. In this connection it is well to remember that 
a good voltage distribution with commercial frequencies does not 
necessarily mean a good one with frequencies equivalent to light- 
ning, and that therefore the endeavor for a good voltage distri- 
bution at commercial frequencies is, beyond a certain point, a 
waste of time which might be much better devoted to the en- 
deavor to increase the ratio of puncture value to flash-over value 
of the individual units. 

Paul M. Lincoln: Some of the deductions made by Messrs. 
Imlay and Thomas from the facts presented in their paper are 
deductions with which I cannot agree. In the first place, they 
use throughout this whole discussion the term “ high-frequency 
tests.” Now, they may be high-frequency tests or they may not 
be. There is not one iota of proof that the tests which they have 
described really do produce high frequency upon the insulator. 
The fact, if it is a fact, that high frequency exists on that insula- 
tor, is one that must be deduced entirely by inference. When a 
condenser discharges through a given circuit, if proper assump- 
tions are made, one may infer that the discharge is alternating 
and of high frequency. Whether it is high frequency and alterna- 
ting, or not, depends upon the amount of energy stored in the 
condenser as related to the rate at which this energy is dissipated 
once the discharge starts. It is my idea that if the discharge is 
alternating, the rate of decadence is so great that it is questionable 
whether the actual discharge is governed by the laws which 
govern alternating currents. When the rate of decadence is high, 
it requires only a relatively small number of alternations before 
the value of the voltage has dropped practically to zero. 

It is admitted, however, that the method of testing as described 
in this paper does produce an exceedingly sudden application of 
voltage to the insulator, and one that exists for a very brief length 
of time. I believe it is due to the fact that the voltage exists 
on the insulator for such a very brief period of time, that we find 
the unexpected results which have been described by the authors. 

There is one thing which has been omitted by the authors, 
and that is a minute description of just how the voltage is applied. 
The authors state that the “ application ”’ exists for a period of 
one to two seconds, but there is no way of telling how many 
shocks the insulator receives during a single “ application.” It 
may receive one shock every alternation, in which event there 
will be some 200 or 300 shocks per application, or it may be that 


ee 


An 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2177 


there is a shock only every tenth alternation, or some such matter, 
or it may be that there is a shock on the insulator a good many 
times per alternation. It would be interesting if we could have 
some data to settle this question. 

The authors have submitted some ‘ speculations,” as Mr. 
Thomas has called them, by which they attempt to explain. the 
results of the tests. They assume that in an insulator the distri- 
bution of voltage across its parts is determined by the fact that 
there is a resistance in series with a capacity, and that the very 
high frequency to which the insulator is subjected during the 
tests gives an entirely different distribution of potential over the 
insulator from what takes place when a frequency of 60 cycles 
is used. I have my doubts as to whether an analysis will show 
much weight to this contention. Suppose we have an insulator 
to which we apply a voltage. The voltage is brought by metallic 
conductors up to the material of the insulator itself. (Fig. 3). 
This voltage appearing on the metallic parts of the insulator 
causes a current to flow. This current will flow, due to two causes, 
first, because there is a capacity present, and consequently there 
will be a capacity current flowing through the insulator, and 
second, because the insulator is not a perfect insulator, but is 
to a slight extent a resistance, and con- 
sequently the voltage which appears 
will cause current to flow through 
that resistance. It is apparent that 
these two paths are not in series, but 
in parallel, so that any deductions 
which the authors make on the basis Fic. 3 
that the paths are in series will not 
apply. It is perfectly true that the current which flows through ° 
the capacity has a 90-degree lead over that which flows 
through the resistance, but I do not see that that has any par- 
ticular bearing upon the case. 

The tables given in the fourth, fifth and sixth pages of the 
paper by Messrs. Imlay and Thomas indicate that these so-called 
high-frequency tests were made with a transformer voltage which 
ranged between 300,000 and 350,000. Furthermore, the test on 
snsulator “No. 1” indicated that the solid part of that insulator 
would break down at a voltage somewhere around 200,000. They 
could not obtain a breakdown on No. 2 insulator, since it flashed 
over under oil, before breaking down, but it is fair to suppose that 
the solid dielectric of insulator No. 2 would break down at some- 
where around 300,000 to 350,000 volts, because it is a well-known 
fact that the dielectric strength of a solid dielectric does not go 
up in proportion to its thickness, and a dielectric two inches thick 
will not stand twice the voltage of a dielectric one inch thick. If 
the No. 1 insulator would stand 200,000 volts, it is fair to sup- 
pose that the No. 2 would break down at 300,000 or 350,000. 

That is about the voltage actually in the transformer during 
the so-called ‘‘ high-frequency ”’ tests, and it is my opinion that 


‘ 


2178 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS {[Dec. 13 


the only thing which is observed in this breaking down on the 
“high-frequency ” test is simply the result of a voltage of some- 
where around 300,000 to 350,000 volts applied to the insulator, 
and that 300,000 to 350,000 volts is what breaks down the solid 
dielectric of that insulator. You may ask why it does not break 
down the air path, as when a 60-cycle current is applied. My 
answer, as suggested early in my discussion, is that the time of 
application is so short that the air does not have time to break 
down. Dielectrics break down in two separate and distinct 
manners. The first way may be likened to the breaking down of 
an oak plank by the penetration of a rifle bullet. That is the 
manner in which all solid dielectrics break down, and in which the 
air breaks down under certain conditions. It is my belief, from 
certain tests which I have seen made, that the breakdown strength 
of air from the “ rifle bullet ’”? method is not so far different from 
that of solid dielectrics as many suppose. Air, however, may 
break down in another way, thatis, by ionization, but that method 
requires time. It does not actinstantaneously. Ionization occurs 
-by collision and is necessarily a progressive action, and it requires 
a certain appreciable amount of time for these collisions to extend 
from one terminal to another. Therefore, if the voltage is applied 


c 


d To 
CONDENSER 


TRANSFORMER 


a 
< 
o 


AIR 


Fic. 4 


to the insulator with extreme suddenness, it may break down by 
the “rifle bullet ’? method before the parallel air path breaks 
down by ionization. 

I think the statement by the authors that during the “‘ high- 
frequency ” tests not more than 100,000 volts was applied to 
these insulators, as indicated by the air gap, fails for the same 
reason. It requires time for the measuring air gap to break down, 
and even if the air-gap separation indicates only 100,000 volts, 
I do not believe it follows necessarily that there was a pressure 
of only 100,000 volts present. It may have been a much higher 
voltage. 

Another point which should be explained is the manner of 
determining the frequency of the attack upon these insulators. 
As I understand it, there is a condenser (d e, Fig. 4) connected 
in series with an air gap, c b, and the opposite terminal of the air 
gap is attached to the insulator, the pin f of which is attached to 
the other side of the condenser. It is my understanding that the 
million cycles per second which the authors have given as the 
approximate frequency of the voltage applications to the insula- 
tor, is that which will take place when the path is completed 


1912) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2179 


through the insulator; that is, the frequency is that determined 
by the condenser d e discharging through the inductance of the 
circuit dc baf e. It should be noted that the current cannot 
flow through this path until the breakdown actually occurs. 
Until that breakdown occurs the frequency is determined simply 
by static capacity of the insulator discharging into the condenser 
de through the path abcd. In this case the frequency will be 
governed by this static capacity of the insulator and the induct- 
ance of the circuit abcd. Since the static capacity of the insula- 
tor is exceedingly small compared to that of the condenser de, 
the theoretical frequency is largely increased. Consequently, 
instead of a million cycles per second, we may have a theoretical 
frequency of many times that, possibly a factor of one hundred 
to one thousand. It is evident, therefore, that the duration of 
time of strain upon that insulator is exceedingly short, and, 
according to my conception, this does not give time for the air 
to ionize between terminals. 

I agree with the conclusion of the authors that their tests have 
opened an exceedingly interesting line of investigation, and one 
which certainly ought to be followed up. 

F. W. Peek, Jr.: The term “line insulator ”” is rather a mis- 
nomer. The real line insulation is the air in which the conductors 
are immersed. At present the “line insulator ” is, at best, an 
electrically weak point which must be used for mechanically 
supporting the conductors. Fortunately, however, although 
the properties of the air cannot be changed, and a uniform 
gradient distribution not even approximated on the conductors 
in the air, the stresses can be very nearly balanced in the insulator 
by proper design or a proper understanding of the dielectric circuit. 
The development of the high-voltage insulator has been extremely 
rapid, and it was at first an overgrown telegraphinsulator. When 
the voltage was doubled, the insulation thickness was doubled. 
By this method of design an insulator may be actually weakened 
by the addition of perfectly good porcelain. The configuration 
of the parts is generally of as great importance as the quality 
of material entering into the parts. In general, that insulator 
would be best in which, when under voltage, the gradients were 
in all parts, internal and external or surface, in proportion to the 
strength of the parts; that is, everywhere equal, in a one- 
material insulator. The greatest advance in high-voltage in- 
sulators was the suspension insulator invented by Hewlett. 

Energy is necessary to smash insulators and to destroy insula- 
tion. The reason for the suddenly magnified importance of 
phenomena once negligible is increased energy. The energy 
stored. in the dielectric is 


eC 
2 


Thus stored energy increases as the square of the voltage. 
It is the transfer of this energy from one form to another, di- 


QO= 


2180 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


electric to magnetic, that causes excessive voltage rises, etc. In- 
cidentally, this is a good argument against the interconnection 
on the high-voltage side of several parallel transmission lines from 
the same station, as such interconnection not only transfers high- 
frequency insulator discharges from one line to the others, but 
also requires high-tension switching, which is in itself a source of 
trouble. 

The subject of insulator design and testing is of the utmost 
importance, as a single broken insulator may eat up the profits 
of an investment by causing thousands of dollars’ damage to 
other apparatus. 

In a paper presented on May 17, 1912, at Schenectady, on Elec- 
trical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator, I made the fol- 
lowing statement:* ‘‘ Hence, it seems that the arc-over (voltage) 
would not always indicate the best insulators for all conditions 
of service. As, for instance, with surge, sudden impulse, lightning, 
or transient voltages, a bad operating distribution would probably 
mean not flash-over, but punctured porcelain, or the porcelain 


Fie. 5 . Fic. 6 Fic. 7 Fic. 8 


would puncture before corona could form to distribute the stress 
better.” The object was to bring out the great importance in 
insulator design of well balanced or distributed stresses which the 
flash-over tests at low frequencies do not necessarily indicate. 
To illustrate the necessity of good balance, and as an explana- 
tion of failures at high frequencies, let us take an extreme case. 
Suppose an insulator is constructed as in Fig. 5. If voltage is 
gradually applied at low frequency the air on the surface breaks 
down as corona, becomes conducting and distributes the stress, 
or becomes, in effect, Fig. 7. Arc-over takes place before punc- 
ture. If, now, the whole is placed in oil or a drop of oil is placed 
at each point, the flux density is not distributed, as the air does 
not break down and even-up the high points, so to speak—no 
conducting path is formed, and the stress is localized and punc- 
ture occurs. . 

It takes a very short time, but an appreciable time, for air to 
become conducting, or for an arc to form. If the applied poten- 
tial and frequency are very high, or if high voltage is suddenly 


*Part I, page 926. 


—- 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2181 


applied—that is, with steep wave front—this high potential is 
across the insulator during the time that the arc is forming, or the 
air is becoming conducting to relieve the stress. The time interval 
may be sufficient for the porcelain to become shattered. High- 
frequency puncture should occur at about the same voltage as 
puncture under oil at low frequency where the arc-over is pre- 
vented by the oil. 

Let us now see if this applies to the interesting data presented 
by Messrs. Imlay and Thomas. 

Fig. 9 shows the connections used in these tests. .At the 
moment before high-frequency discharge, or arc-over, the in- 
sulator is practically at zero potential. When arc-over occurs, the 
insylator is thus raised very suddenly from zero potential to 
325,000 volts, or possibly double this, above zero. This is well 
above the puncture voltage, as shown by the test under oil, and 
if this voltage had been gradually applied, the stress at high points 
would have been gradually evened up by conducting air until arc- 
over occurred and the voltage across the insulator was reduced 
to zero. With the voltage suddenly applied the air does not be- 


aay 
€ = 325,000 e— 


a te 


Fic. 9 


come conducting to a great enough extent over the surface in 
time to relieve the insulators—hence, the porcelain is punctured. 
Complete puncture may not occur at the first application, but at 
first only cracks or chips in the porcelain, which gradually develop 
into puncture. If the petticoat is reduced as in the tests, the time 
lag for flash-over is reduced and less punctures should occur. 
There is still another effect which I have noted and which may 
have a bearing. If potential at low frequency is applied between 
electrodes, and gradually increased, arc-over occurs and the 
potential across the gap drops to zero, as indicated by a voltmeter 
placed across the gap. In other words, the low-frequency arc 
“‘ resistance ’’ is practically zero. If, however, at a frequency of 
say 50,000 cycles from a generator, the potential is gradually in- 
creased until arc-over occurs, the potential does not drop to zero, 
but may remain near the applied voltage, that is, the high- 
frequency arc seems in effect to have a very high resistance, or 
the high-frequency arc may play over an insulator surface with- 
out considerably reducing its potential below the applied value, 


2182 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS {Dec. 13 


which may still remain above the voltage at which puncture would 
occur at any frequency, as under oil where arc-over iS pre- 
vented. 

The effect of the time lag of corona means that a good insulator 
under transient voltages must have a good balance. The suspen- 
sion insulator should have high string efficiency, as brought out 
in my paper, previously referred to. This applied also to the 
parts that makes up the pin type insulator. There must also be 
ample margin between the low-frequency flash-over voltage in 
air and the puncture voltage under oil. 

An interesting point is here brought up in design, or spacing 
of disks. If potential is gradually applied across a string of say 
five insulators (as usually spaced) and gradually increased, flash- 
over takes place first on the unit nearest the line, then over the 
second, third, and so forth. As there is a time lag for flash-over 
at each insulator this means that a gradually increasing potential 
is suddenly applied on the units, just as in the T homas-Imlay 
tests. When the last insulator is reached the full applied voltage 
is for a short time before arc-over across, the insulator. This is 
far above puncture voltage. I have observed insulators punctured 
in this way during arc-over tests. Thus with low-frequency surge 
the insulator nearest the tower may puncture. This shows the im- 
portance of good string balance, or of having the design such that 
all insulators will arc over at the same instant. Perfect balance 
is in the present design hardly possible, so, after designing for 
the best possible balance, the insulators should be so spaced that 
arc-over voltage from line to tower is just below the arc-over 
voltage around one unit. 

Referring to Mr. Mershon’s remarks on string efficiency, we 
believed this to be a proper term*, as it is the ratio of the actual 
flash-over voltage to the maximum possible flash-over voltage. 
The question brought up by Mr. Mershon in regard to the method 
of obtaining the string efficiency is answered in the paper (p. 911). 

The question of the comparative voltage values of a given spark 
gap at low and high frequencies is of great interest. 

We have made some tests on spheres and needle gaps up to 
50,000 cycles sine wave. At this frequency both the sphere and 
needle types spark over a given gap at lower voltages than at 60 
cycles. The difference is not great, however, for spheres, where 
corona does not form before spark-over and heat the air in the gap. 
At very high frequencies or very suddenly applied potentials 
where the time element enters, it is probable that higher 
voltages are required for a given gap. 

Mr. Sothman in his paper has brought up many interesting 
questions. Regarding the question of test precautions, method 
of voltage control, power required, etc., I would refer to what I 
have said in the paper previously cited. I should like to add that 
while the needle gap has long been useful, we have about out- 


* See Electrical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator, in Part I of 
this volume of the TRANSACTIONS, page 911, 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2183 


grown it, and it is not reliable above 100 kv. Unless proper cor- 
rections are made for humidity the variation is very great, and 
the voltages indicated are generally too high. This effect is not 
noticeable where the electrode is such that spark-over takes place 
before corona forms. Such an electrode should be standardized. 


DESIRABLE TESTS AND SPECIFICATIONS. 


In closing my discussion I will summarize the test conditions 
which I believe should exist in order that uniform and reliable 
results may be obtained, and also additions which I believe should 
be made to specifications. 

Generators— Voltage Control and Power. 1. Generator wave 
free from high harmonics and reasonably close to sine wave. 

2. Control of potential by generator field over short range 
(never below half field) in combination with potentiometer 
method. ‘ 

3. Power sufficient to allow a true dynamic arc to start before 
an appreciable change can take place in the voltage or wave form. 

Transformers. A properly designed transformer, the ratio 
of which should remain practically constant. The iron should 
never be too highly saturated. For careful measurements the 
voltmeter coil is recommended. 

SparkGap. 1. Fairly reliable results can be obtained with the 
needle gap if correction is made for all of the variables, as 
humidity, etc. 

2. The sphere gap is recommended—always using a sphere 
large enough so that spark-over takes place before corona can 
form. Correction should be made for temperature and baro- 
metric pressure. 

3. Water tube resistances should be placed in series with the 
gap, limiting the current to about 0.5 amperes. 

Insulator Tesis. 1. The top of insulator string should be 
grounded. 

2. In determining flash-over tests, insulators must not be 
allowed to become overheated by arc. 

3. Temperature, barometric readings, frequency, and 
humidity should be recorded. 

4. The impulse test by transformer as made by Messrs. Imlay 
and Thomas seems better than the Tesla coil method, as in the 
former the maximum applied voltage is known. This is an ex- 
tremely important test, as it will indicate the life of an insulator 
due to lightning, high frequency, etc., and uniformity of porce- 
lain. 

Specifications. 1. Good string efficiency in the suspension 
insulator, and high efficiency between parts of pin type insulator. 
This can be determined in various ways. This test will deter- 
mine the relative values of various insulators at high frequency. 

2. Ratio of the puncture voltage under oil to the arc-over volt- 
age will determine approximately the relative value of insula- 
tors under high frequency. This ratio should be specified. The 


2184 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


~ oil test may also be made to indicate the uniformity of the por- 
celain. 

3. Possibly electrical test while insulator is under mechanical 
strain. 

4. Resistance of rain water should be specified or standardized. 

J. A. Sandford, Jr.: I believe that there is no one who has gone 
more carefully into comparative testing of suspension insulators 
from all points of view than Mr. Sothman. He realized at the 
time of taking up this work what most engineers have since 
acknowledged, that good comparative results can be obtained 
only when all tests are made with the same equipment and with 
as few variables in the test conditions as possible. 

Turning to the observations made by Mr. Sothman and 
particularly to the remarks on the type of insulators using the 
so-called hook and loop connection as compared with the others, 
it is useless to dispute the fact that from the point of view of the 
electrical performance of the insulator, this type does not show 
up as well under test as others, due to the discharge at the point 
of the hook. It is well to bear in mind, however, that this type 
of connection is very largely in use, both with the two-piece and 
one-piece suspension units, and has given entire satisfaction in 
competition on the same lines with two other styles of unit. 
The simplicity of the connection will appeal to many engineers, 
no tools being required to connect or disconnect the units when 
making renewals. 

Referring to the subject of mechanical strength, I believe there 
is no difficulty at the present time in producing single-piece 
units of short spacing and reasonable design and cost, that will 
have an average ultimate strength of 12,000 to 13,000 lb. (about 
5500 to 5900 kg.), and this may be increased to 15,000 lb. (about 
6800 kg.) by a slight increase in spacing. 

Passing now to the summary of Mr. Sothman’s paper and the 
questions raised therein for our consideration, I believe the 
author has come quite close to the reason why insulators fail on 
the line even after the most thorough test possible at the factory, 
when he says: ‘‘ For it is quite probable that precautions now 
taken in one direction are often unwarranted and uncalled for, 
whereas, on the other hand, liberal allowances made in other 
directions may be of the greatest detriment to line andinsulators.”’ 
This seems to be forcibly brought out by the findings of Messrs. 
Imlay and Thomas as given in their paper. I will discuss some 
of these points, taking up the various headings in the order given 
in the summary of Mr. Sothman’s paper. 

Design Tests. The specifying of very high flash-over tests, 
wet and dry, necessitates in suspension insulators either a few 
units having a high flash-over value and long spacing, or a greater 
number of smaller units with shorter spacing, each unit having 
a relatively low flash-over. The latter is a step in the right direc- 
tion, judging from the observations by Messrs. Imlay and 
Thomas, but up to the present it has not been carried far enough. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2185 


The ratio of puncture voltage of the unit to its flash-over value, 
and the ratio of flash-over of entire insulator to flash-over of 
single unit, should be increased. In order to accomplish this the 
flash-over of single units, must be reduced. Incidentally the flash- 
over values of the entire string will be slightly lowered, but an 
insulator will have been produced that is better able to withstand 
the effects of high-frequency disturbances, while sufficient factor 
of safety will still be obtained to take care of the steady applica- 
tion of static forces impressed by normal line potential and fre- 
quency. 

In pin type insulators we have to use large flaring parts in 
order to take care of the flash-over requirements. Judging from 
the tests of Messrs. Imlay and Thomas, the insulators could better 
stand the high-frequency disturbances if the diameters were 
reduced, thereby changing the capacity of the insulator, and thus, 
as in the case of the suspension insulator, giving a greater factor 
of safety against puncture. 

Method of Supporting Insulator under Test. For the com- 
paratively small number of tests necessary to demonstrate the 
performance of various insulators and their suitability for certain 
requirements, the best method is undoubtedly to support the in- 
sulators as nearly as possible in the manner in which they will be 
installed on the line; that is, with one end grounded. This 
method, however, necessitates a very large and expensive trans- 
former, and inasmuch as the tests are comparative only, it is 
my opinion that the tests can as well be made using a transformer 
with middle grounded. The latter method is preferable for the 
routine tests that have to be conducted in the regular testing 
racks, on account of having to insulate for only half of the total 
voltage. There is also less trouble from static, etc. (This is 
important, owing to the presence of lighting circuits, watchman’s 
clock circuits, sprinkler, water and gas systems. The company 
with which the writer is connected has recently installed 300- 
volt lightning arrester cells to protect the lighting circuits, but we 
have had insufficient experience to say whether or not they will 
eliminate the burning out of lamps.) No resistance should be 
used in series with the insulators under test. Other means than 
this should be employed to protect the transformer. 

Capacity of Testing Transformer and Generator. 1 agree with 
the author that the greater the kilovolt-ampere rating of the trans- 
former and generator used for testing, the better will be the re- 
sults. It is surprising to see the difference in appearance of 
the same insulator under test with first one equipment and then 
another. 

Means should be provided for changing the low-voltage con- 
nections of the transformer in order that the generator may be 
worked at all times with a fairly strong field excitation, if this 
method of control is used. It is my belief that field control offers 
fewer objections than any of the other methods that have been 
proposed, It is convenient to be able to vary both the exciter 


2186 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS {[Dec. 13 


and alternator fields, as very slow and gradual changes may be 
made by using the alternator field control for say 97 or 98 per cent 
of the desired range and then using the exciter field control for 
the balance. ‘ ; 

The determination of the voltage present at any time during 
test, is the most important element of the results obtained and is, 
unfortunately, very difficult to obtain accurately unless careful 
laboratory methods are resorted to. 

Inasmuch as we cannot hope to duplicate exactly our line 
operating conditions, the tests resolve themselves, as before stated, 
into comparative ones. It is probable that errors may be found 
in any method of measurement that might be introduced. How- 
ever, I believe that, given a transformer of good design and suffi- 
cient capacity, grounded at the middle point, and supplied with 
power from a single-phase generator giving a sine wave at all 
loads, the generator having been designed in connection with the 
transformer with full knowledge of the service to which the equip- 
ment is to be put, the most convenient method of measurement 
of voltage is by the use of a voltmeter coil at the grounded neutral 
of the transformer, using the ratio of transformation. If the 
equipment has sufficient kilovolt-ampere capacity and is properly 
designed, the error in using this method should be small, and in 
tests where all work is comparative, would be eliminated. This 
is certainly the ideal way for regular factory testing where an 
unskilled man is used to operate the testing equipment. The 
needle-point spark gap is subject to considerable error, and the 
resistance which should be used with it should theoretically 
vary with voltage at which tests are being made. It is not practi- 
cally possible, however, to vary the resistance with the voltage. 
I tried water, but have come to the use of resistance rods. Fre- 
quent discharges of the gap ionize the air and distort the results; 


also the method of operating the gap itself may introduce con- 


siderable error. 

With reference to the effect of frequency, the paper by Messrs. 
Imlay and Thomas brings out this point so strongly that I can 
add nothing further. I believe, however, that no appreciable 


difference in results will be obtained at any of the normal fre- 


quencies; that is, 25 to 1338 cycles. 

Concerning distortion of wave form, the table herewith gives 
a comparison of results obtained by using first an old smooth core 
single-phase machine, and second a 200-kw., three-phase, Y- 
wound generator running single-phase to excite a 250-kw., 60- 
cycle, 2300/4600/400,000-volt transformer. 


Single-phase Generator. Three-phase Generator. 


Primary |Secondary volts) Transformer Primary |Secondary volts} Transformer 


volts (spark gap) ratio volts (spark gap) ratio 
458.0 80.5 kv. 175.7 467.3 85.8 kv. 183.6 
519.2 90.0 kv. 173.3 517.5 99.5 kv. 192.2 
572.7 99.0 kv. 172.8 575.0 107.5 kv. 186.95 


631.0 111.7 kv. 177.0 


632.5 123.5 kv. 195.2 


SE eee 


1912} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2187 


The designed ratio of transformation of this transformer was 
173.9:1. The ratio as found under test before shipment was 
176:1. The only load on the transformer during the above tests 
was the spark gap. This goes to show how important a part is 
played by the wave form in the final results. The wave form of 
the single-phase machine referred to, is as nearly a sine curve as 
can be produced. Note how closely the transformer kept to its 
ratio. 

Wet Test. The best wet test to apply is the one which has the 
least number of variable elements connected with it. The great- 
est variable is the quality of the water itself. All others may be 
controlled with more or less accuracy. Figs. 10 and 11 reproduce 
a set of curves drawn from results of rain tests made on a number 
of 10-in. (254 mm.) corrugated suspension units first at Lisbon, 
Ohio, and then at Pittsfield, Mass. The same spray nozzles and 
insulator units were used in both cases. Plenty of power was at 
hand and the frequency was the same. Both generators had good 


RAIN DRY 
_——~ 


| | LISBON 
x| PITTSFIELD 


NUMBER OF UNITS. 
KH wownrR aan 


8 
s 


40 50 60 70 80 90° ~—100 

KILOVOLTS PER UNIT. 
Fic. 10—CoMPARATIVE TESTS ON InNsuLATOR No. 11138; LisBon vs. 
PITTSFIELD 


wave forms. The specific resistance of the water at Lisbon was 
880; that at Pittsfield was 7000. Also note the effect of throwing 
salt into the spray. It is my belief that condensed water should 
be specified, as it would not have such variable characteristics. 
Water of this character may have a specific resistance of 30,000 
ohms per cu.cm. The quantity of water sprayed on the insulator 
is of secondary importance, as it can be varied through quite a 
large range without changing the results appreciably. I have 
found that four Mistry nozzles supported at an angle of 45 deg. 
with the horizontal and supplied with water at 45 |b. (20.4-kg.) 
pressure if placed about three ft. (91.4 cm.) from the insulator 
give very good results. As to what is to determine the failure 
of an insulator, I believe the only way is to use what the author 
has called a parallel test, putting all styles of insulators to be com- 
pared under test simultaneously and selecting the one which 
shows up the best. All other methods are unsatisfactory, owing 


to the absence of any correct measure of the various phenomena 


2188 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


to be observed. The formation of corona or luminosity is partic- 
ularly indefinite. 

The puncture test under oil as conducted in the past amounts 
to little, and will continue to be of little value until the method 
of applying it has been standardized. The time element plays 
a most important part as the voltage is raised. A choice of two 
methods of handling the time and voltage elements may be 
suggested: 

First—Gradual and steady increase of voltage until puncture 
occurs. 

Second—Voltage increased by stated amounts at stated 
intervals, noting when puncture occurs. 

Further, a certain requirement should be set forth in a set of 
specifications to cover this item, based upon a certain per cent 
of line voltage. In every case the potential should be applied 
using as nearly as possible the same style of fittings as are to be 
used on the insulator in service. Atleast ten samples should be 
tested to give a fair average. 


= 


NUMBER OF UNITS. 
Bw wo eae 


20 40 60 80 100120140 160180 200 220 240 260 230 300320340 360 380 400 420 440460 
; KILOVOLTS. 


Fic. 11—CompaRATIVE TESTS ON INSULATOR No. 1113 


_ The usual methods of applying mechanical tests to pin type 
insulators might more properly be called pin tests, as I know of 
no insulator pin made that will stand nearly the amount that is 
required to break the insulator with load applied at the tie wire 
groove and perpendicular to the axis of the insulator. The test 
value to be specified depends largely on how great a factor of 
safety the purchaser is willing to pay for. 

All the above has to do with the selection of a proper type or 
size of insulator for a specified set of conditions. 

The inspection of the porcelain parts of insulators for physical 
defects and the agreement between the purchaser and manu- 
facturer as to what constitutes sufficient cause for rejection is 
often the most difficult problem of all. Mr. Sothman has hinted 
at this, and I believe many others have had a like experience. 
Personally, I believe that insulators showing cracks, blisters, 
large amounts of sagger deposit, pieces that show plainly that 
they are either over- or under-fired, or having crazed glaze, 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2189 


should be rejected. On the other hand, insulators showing dis- 
coloration—if not due to over- or under-firing—slight warping, 
or slight unevenness caused by small pieces being chipped from 
the ware before glazing, should be accepted. However, no matter 
what lines are drawn, it will finally. boil down to the judgment of 
the inspector, who can easily work a hardship on both the pur- 
chaser and manufacturer. 

The company with which the writer is connected has drawn 
up standard specifications for routine tests, which are used in all 
cases where specifications are not supplied by the purchaser. 
Voltages used of course depend on the insulator in question. The 
periods of time of test, so far as suspension units are concerned, 
we have fixed, as the variation in size of different insulators is not 
great; therefore the expense of testing is nearly the same for all 
styles we make. With reference to pin type, however, the sizes 
vary greatly, requiring voltages varying from 45,000 to 180,000 
volts. The smaller insulators, particularly below 22,000 volts, 
do not need to be tested so long as the larger sizes, as each porce- 
lain part in the smaller insulator is often as thick as in the larger, 
and the voltage per part very much less. Furthermore, a long 
time test on a very small insulator makes the cost of testing out 
of proportion to the price of the insulator. 

The specifications which we have adopted are the result of our 
experience in testing porcelain insulators, combined with what we 
find is being asked for in specifications issued by different engi- 
neers. They are not as voluminous nor as exacting as some, nor 
as short and indefinite as others. We feel, however, that they 
are so drawn as to insure the purchaser against receiving defec- 
tive material, without imposing undue hardships on the manu- 
facturer. 

In regard to two-piece insulators, I believe that the specifica- 
tions may properly contain a statement as to the kind of cement 
to be used, and if Portland is specified, a statement as to the time 
of setting. As to the method of cementing, I believe this should 
be left entirely to the manufacturer, as it is right to suppose that 
if the manufacturer is following up his methods closely with a 
view to turning out the best possible product in the most eco- 
nomical manner, and at the same time fulfilling all guarantees 
made, he is in better position than the purchaser to say how the 
details of the work shall be carried out. This applies to all other 
parts of the work as well as the cementing, and will be found to 
vary in the different factories. 

All insulators, whether pin or suspension type, should be 
tested after having been assembled and the cement is sufficiently 
set to allow of safe handling. There is a possible exception to 
this rule in the case of the very small two-part pin type insulators, 
as it is sometimes found advantageous to test these to flash-over 
when they come from the kilns, assembling the parts in the test 
pans without cement, thus testing both parts at once. Water 
is placed between the parts for this test. In the case of these 


2190 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS ~ [Dec.. 13 


small insulators it is then safe to cement the parts together and 
pack the complete insulators without further testing. 

The paper by Messrs. Imlay and Thomas at once suggests that 
it may be desirable to introduce some sort of high-frequency test 
into the list of tests to be applied in order to make a selection of 
the proper insulator for a given set of conditions. However, I do 
not believe there are sufficient data at hand, at present, to allow 
us to say just what this test should be or howit should be applied. 
Further, I doubt the advisability of using the same apparatus for 
this test as is used for the commercial routine tests at the 
insulator factory. 

Since it is coming to be generally acknowledged that the parallel 
test is the only good way to determine what is the most suitable 
insulator to meet a set of specified conditions, it seems to me that 
there should be available some place where such work could be 
done, using the same equipment and conditions of test at all times. 
At present non-interested companies that are equipped, so far as 
apparatus is concerned, to make such tests, do not like to go to 
this trouble to set aside a space and rig up for the various tests, 
as such work does not pay them, and not having arrangements 
especially for it, there is more or less danger of injuring the appa- 
ratus. 

If arrangements could be made with some laboratory or factory 
having the equipment and not directly interested in the sale or 
purchase of the insulators, in accordance with which this ap- 
paratus in a suitably equipped room could be available at all 
times, I believe that with proper use of such advantages there 
would be fewer mistakes made in insulating our transmission 
lines, and incidentally the owner of the equipment could derive 
considerable revenue from the making of comparative tests pre- 
liminary to the purchase of insulators for a transmission line, 
and from the use of such equipment for experimental and re- 
search work at very high voltages not at present possible except 
for experimenters connected with our large manufacturing com- 
panies. ’ 

We will be glad to give anyone copies of the specifications used 
by the company with which the writer is connected, or in any 
way to help in a movement for the standardizing of the specifica- 
tions and the methods of tests on high-tension insulators. 

A. O. Austin: There are a number of important points brought 
up in the papers by Mr. Sothman and Messrs. Imlay and Thomas, 
which deserve careful consideration, but the scope of these papers 
is such that it will be possible to discuss them only in a general 
way. I hope, however, that a few words in regard to the methods 
of testing and their discrepancies may be of interest, for I find 
that tests are only too often misinterpreted. 

The character of the testing apparatus has been given very 
careful consideration, so that in testing at flash-over, severe surges 
would be thrown upon the insulator in order to make the weeding- 
out process as effective as possible. This practise has been fol- 


— ————— 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2191 


lowed for a long time on pin type insulators and carried “even 
farther in the case of suspension insulators. By providing the 
proper regulation of testing apparatus, the picking up of power 
arc is prevented when insulators flash-over under test. 

For over four years, suspension insulators have been given 
routine tests under conditions similar to- those outlined in the 
paper by Messrs. Imlay and Thomas. The insulators are given 
this routine test one at a time under conditions much more severe 
than those at normal frequency and flash-over. This test is 
very much more severe than a long time test, and more nearly 
approaches high-frequency conditions under which the insulator 
must operate. 

In general, too much attention is given the wet flash-over values 
obtained on insulators, and not enough attention paid to surface 
stress and dielectric strength to meet line conditions. 

Several years ago the fad of designing insulators for high wet 
flash-over was responsible for many poor designs. While many of 
these gave fairly good results when mounted upon wooden pins, 
trouble was sure to follow when they were mounted on metal 
pins under severe conditions. In at least one instance these 
commercial designs were discontinued and the dielectric factor 
of safety increased in the other types. There will always be a 
considerable variation in tests under rain conditions made by 
different persons, but as the dry tests are very much more im- 
portant this should give but little trouble. 

Dry tests on the better types of insulators may be checked very 
closely on widely varying types of apparatus. It is of course 
recognized that insulators which have high surface stress or 
charging current, such as low-voltage bushings and the poorer 
types of insulators, will be greatly affected by frequency or 
wave form. This class of material, however, is rapidly becom- 
ing obsolete. 

The design of an insulator is necessarily a compromise of the 


’ elements producing dielectric strength, surface resistance, flash- 


ing capacity, and mechanical strength, and since the operating 
conditions on different lines may call for widely different relative 
proportions of these elements, it is very difficult to draw up gen- 
eral specifications. Lines operating at the same voltage but under 
different conditions may require a difference of several hundred 
per cent in the factor of safety of one of these elements, in order 
to produce the same degree of reliability. The relative numerical 
values involved are all-important, and the design of two insula- 
tors may be radically different in appearance but the same for 
operating conditions. There are some commercial insulators , 
which have been in use for several years, which were designed to 
mect the severe conditions of the high-frequency surges, and which 
involved the use of the screen shown in the paper by Messrs. 
Imlay and Thomas. These insulators have the further advan- 
tage of multipart construction, enabling a redistribution of stress 
between the outer and inner surface, by making use of the cement 


2192 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


zone. The relative diameter of the several parts was given very 
careful consideration, also the striking distance between con- 
ductor and pin. 

Some experiments were performed several years ago which 
show that there is a redistribution of stress in insulators through 
an air discharge, which is not visible to the eye. A discussion of 
this point would be too lengthy, but would throw considerable 
light on some of the tests performed by Messrs. Imlay and 
Thomas. 

I may add that the performance of these insulators has been 
more than gratifying and furnishes strong proof that the tests 
performed by Messrs. Imlay and Thomas imposed conditions 
similar to those found on the line. 

In a rather wide experience in investigating operating condi- 
tions, I have found that the information as regards insulator 
failure is only too often very misleading. An investigation 
usually shows that much valuable evidence which cannot be re- 
placed has been lost or destroyed. 

It may be interesting to know that type £ insulator tested by 
Mr. Sothman was the only insulator in the series which provided 
a thickness of material purposely to provide dielectric strength 
for high-frequency line surges. Operation showed that under the 
most severe conditions a still further increase in this regard was 
warranted. The insulator was further improved in this regard 
and this has been the only marked improvement in the suspension 
insulator since the tests made by Mr. Sothman. 

Before writing up a set of specifications to be used for inspec- 
tion it is of the utmost importance for the engineer to investi- 
gate as far as possible, so that his inspection will produce an 
increase in reliability in the product. 

Good appearance should be maintained, but there are other 
essentials not apparent on the face of the insulator which are 
very much more important for reliability in line operation. 

The methods in process of manufacture should be such as to 
produce the greatest degree of reliability. 

In general the insulators of foreign manufacture are superior 
to ours in appearance, but very inferior as regards reliability. 
Certain processes are used which have a very bad effect upon the 
insulator; the dielectric strength is sacrificed for appearances, 
and it has been found that serious cracking occurs after a short 
period of installation. This, of course, has been particularly 
noticeable where the multipart insulators were made up, and was 
pointed out by Mr. Sothman. 

The designs in use in this country are very much ahead of those 
of foreign manufacture when it comes to line conditions. Most 
of the large pin type lines in use in foreign countries are being 
supplied by American manufacturers. 

There is much to be said in regard to static puncture, for an 
investigation carried on in 1904 showed conclusively that a 
static puncture could be in the nature of a partial breakdown. 


a 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2193 


This was effected by a low voltage for mechanical stress, for the 
resulting failure was of a physical nature. 

F. M. Farmer: These papers are valuable contributions to 
a phase of electrical engineering activity which has been very 
much neglected in the deliberations of the Institute. Although 
matters pertaining to the transmission of electrical energy form 
a conspicuous part of the transactions of the Institute, practically 
nothing will be found about the testing of high-tension insulators, 
despite the importance which all engineers attach to the proper 
inspection and testing of insulators to be used for transmission 
line purposes. Contributions to this neglected subject are, there- 
fore, very welcome, and those of us who are especially concerned 
with the testing side of engineering work will be particularly glad 
to see attention drawn to the need for improvements in, and the 
standardizing of, testing methods. 

The standardization of methods of testing not only insulators, 
but all classes of insulating materials, is very urgently needed. 
It is probably safe to say that no two testing engineers, whether 
representing manufacturers, consulting engineers, or testing 
laboratories, will have the same ideas as to just how a high-tension 
test should be carried out, although it is well known that such de- 
tails as the method of controlling voltage, the amount of resistance 
and inductance in series with the specimen, and the arrangement of 
the spray in an artificial rain test, may have a marked effect on 
the results. We have available more or less standardized 
methods of testing other materials used in transmission lines. 
Methods have been fairly well standardized for physical 
tests of the tower members, for galvanizing tests, and for physical 
and electrical tests of the conductor materials, but practically 
nothing has been done on insulators, although they are the most 
important element in the transmission line. 

While the standardization of testing methods is very impor- 
tant, the definition of the terms used in connection with insulators 
should receive first attention. Different manufacturers and 
engineers use, in their catalogues and specifications, different 
terms for the same thing and describe the same phenomenon in 
different ways. For instance, the parts of a pin type insulator 
are called shells and petticoats; the components of a complete 
suspension insulator are called units, sections and parts; and 
the corrugations on a suspension insulator unit are called cor- 
rugations and petticoats. Also, what is static arcing and what 1s 
a power arc? Is flash-over voltage the potential at which the 
first intermittent static arcing, or continuous static arcing, or 
power arcing, occurs? The suggestion is offered that the atten- 
tion of the Standards Committee be drawn to the desirability 
of having some of these things officially defined. 

Referring to Mr. Sothman’s paper, it seems to me that it 
would have been advisable to separate the data pertaining 
strictly to types or designs from those which may be affected by 
variations in quality or methods of manufacture. For instance 


2194 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS -[Dec. 13 


while it is true that the ultimate dielectric strength, the tensile 
strength, and the number of punctures which occurred during the 
tests, will be affected by the design, it is also true that the quality 
of the material and the methods of manufacturing may affect 
the results to a greater extent, so that a poorer design of superior 
manufacture might show up more favorably than a better design 
of inferior manufacture. Therefore, when comparing the results 
of an investigation made for the purpose of selecting a type, this 
should be carefully borne inmind. Ofcourse, the ideal methods of 
making stich comparison would be to have various designs made 
by the same manufacturer and then the results would be affected 
in a similar manner by the inherent variations in clay composition, 
firing, cooling, etc. 

No figures are given in the various tables showing the number 
of insulators or insulator sections tested. This information 
would be valuable in connection with those tests which involve 
variations in the individual specimens of the same design and 
manufacture, such as dielectric strength, tensile strength, punc- 
tures during the various tests, etc. These data should be taken 
on a considerable number of specimens before definite conclusions 
can be drawn. 

Mr. Sothman refers to factory inspection of insulators and his 
statements emphasize the importance of careful and conscien- 
tious work at this stage. Porcelain insulators are inherently 
a variable product and the only method of determining whether 
an insulator is a good one or a poor one is by inspection and test 
of each andevery one. A large factor in the success of an opera- 
ting company is continuity of service, and this depends very large- 
ly upon the line insulators. It is apparent, therefore, that the 
inspection and testing cannot be too carefully or thoroughly done, 
and that the inspectors should be experienced men competent 
not only to make the electrical test but to judge accurately the 
quality of porcelain. With the present methods of manufacture, 
the quality of porcelain will vary from day to day and even in 
the same kiln, for it is extremely difficult to ‘“ fire’”’ porcelain 
just right—it may be “‘over-fired”’ or it may be ‘‘ under-fired ”’. 
Insulators that are not properly fired are inferior, but the high- 
voltage test cannot always be relied upon to weed them out. The 
operating company cannot afford to take any chances, no matter 
how small they may appear to be, therefore the inspector should 
be competent to detect such insulators and reject them without 
test. It is also desirable that the inspector have some experience 
in miscellaneous high-voltage testing of all classes of materials 
and apparatus in order that he may intelligently interpret the 
performance of insulators during the routine factory test. 

Referring to the points which Mr. Sothman suggests should be 
given consideration in the future discussions, the writer would 
propose that the item referring to generator and transformer 
capacity include the amount of resistance and inductance in the 
high-tension circuit of the testing transformer. It is customary 


‘pats des dee 


1912} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2195 


to use an impedance of some kind in this circuit to protect the 
transformer and obviously it may be sufficient to decrease the 
power available at the specimen under test and thus have an 
effect upon the results. 

Referring to specifications for wet tests, it is suggested that 
the minimum period of precipitation before the voltage is applied 
be stated. 

Routine tests and inspections on the product as it is being 
manufactured may be divided into two classes. One class in- 
cludes the preliminary inspection, the preliminary electrical test, 
the final inspection and test after assembling and the mechanical 
tests. These tests and inspections are made on each insulator 
and insulator part. The second class includes those tests which 
would only be made at occasional intervals to check up the quality 
of the product and insure that the standard originally established 
is being maintained, as for example, the determination of the 
dielectric strength under oil, the effect of immersion in water for 
a considerable period, the effect of application of potential for a 
long period, and ultimate tensile strength tests, 

Referring to the manner of making the routine electrical tests 
at the factory, the writer feels that such tests should be made as 
severe as possible, consistent with reasonable cost and fairness 
to the manufacturer. The operating company is very dependent 
upon the insulators on its transmission line in reducing interrup- 
tions of service to a minimum. While it cannot eliminate all 
chances of interruption, it is justified in taking precautions -at 
every stage in the construction of the line to eliminate sources of 
possible failure. Therefore, the inspection and test at the factory 
should be as severe as expense will permit and the electrical tests 
should include a long time test at continuous flash-over voltage 
after all insulators giving any signs of physical weakness have 
been eliminated. Of course the imposition of severe conditions 
on the manufacturer may mean a higher cost, but in view of the 
great investment in modern transmission lines and the impor- 
tance of continuity of service, a slight additional cost in the insula- 
tor item would seem to be entirely justified. Experience has 
shown that a continuous static flash-over test is more severe than 
a test at voltage just under continuous flash-over. This is prob- 
ably due to the high-frequency oscillations set up under such 
conditions, which produce the effects noted by Messrs. Imlay 
and Thomas in their paper. 

Ralph W. Pope: The relative merits of different materials 
and different forms of insulators have been a fruitful topic of 
controversy since the construction of the first telegraph line. 
Fluted porcelain insulators (then known as “‘ white flint ”) were 
used on the House telegraph line between Albany, N. Y., and 
Springfield, Mass., in the fifties. They were superseded by glass, 
which, so far as telegraph and telephone service 1s concerned, 
has appeared to be a “ survival of the fittest.” After reading 
these two papers, it appeared that glass for high-tension work had 


2196 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


been overlooked, as no tests of that material are included. In 
seeking for information upon the subject, I learned that glass 
insulators, although extensively used on the Pacific coast of the 
United States, have not always received the consideration which 
their merits deserve. 

Glass was the first material to be used for insulators on trans- 
mission lines in the United States, and it has shared with porce- 
lain this application. In France glass is extensively used for 
transmission lines, we understand, up to 100,000 volts, while in 
Italy many power lines are similarly equipped. There are 5,000- 
000 glass insulators giving good satisfaction over high-tension 
lines today in the United States. The question is one both of 
material and of construction. Fundamentally, glass is superior 
because, being of homogeneous character and a single material, 
the entire body of the glass acts uniformly as the insulating 
medium, whereas in porcelain the glaze appears to be the main 
factor of insulation resistance and differs in composition from the 
body of the substance, which is far inferior to glass in this re- 
spect. Now, when it is recalled that this glaze may be but a 
thousandth of an inch or so in thickness, it is obvious that any 
imperfections or unevenness in its texture are sure to be fraught 
with danger. This is further emphasized by recent improve- 
ments in glass manufacture which result today in a material, un- 
iform in character, of greater strength and specific gravity, where 
increased mechanical efficiency and strength are combined with 
the desired insulating properties. This improvement has fol- 
lowed technical developments in glass-making just as in steel and 
other industries, and is due primarily to a better understanding 
of the chemical and physical questions involved. In the first 
place, the raw material is now rigidly controlled by test and 
analysis and the substances entering into the batch are selected 
with due regard to the resulting product. For example, the 
elimination of all iron is considered of prime importance, and 
in the best factories, magnetic separators are used to remove 
such impurities from the raw material. Then again, the pro- 
portioning of the materials can now be done with great accuracy 
and by mechanical weighing and mixing, the composition can 
be controlled within narrow limits, so that the product is not 
only uniform and homogeneous, but conforms closely to the 
desired specifications. In this respect modern glass, as used in 
insulators, shows great strides over the product of fifteen years 
ago, which was too often uneven in composition and texture. 
Today not only are the materials carefully selected, weighed and 
mixed, but they are melted in large open-hearth Siemens tanks 
where the molten material, being in motion, is kept from separa- 
ting into layers of varying density, which, in former days, too 
often produced not only uneven, but cordy or stringy glass that 
failed to give the best results either electrically or mechanically. 
Modern methods of manufacture have done away with this, and 
at least one large and well known glass factory has had no cordy 
glass for ten years. ' 


EEE 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2197 


Unfortunately, glass manufacturers in the United States have 
failed to realize adequately the availability of their product for 
high-tension work. In the first place, for the new and unusual 
shapes required they at first demanded prices that, if not prohibi- 
tive, plainly suggested an undue profit. Secondly, the manufactur- 
ers have failed to consider sufficiently the electrical side of the 
problem and have not shown a progressive spirit in arranging 
testing plants and methods of test and experiment. Furthermore, 
such concerns as have developed improved methods of manufac- 
ture have failed to publish the results of their improvements, so that 
to many engineers the merits and relative economy of glass as 
compared with other materials, have never been made apparent. 
For these reasons, chiefly, porcelain has achieved a position in 
this field which modern glass insulators are now in a position to 
dispute. Just as the problem of a high-tension insulator was 
solved in porcelain by the suspension insulator, so similar designs 
have been developed for glass, which are now gaining wide vogue. 
It will be remembered that a porcelain pin insulator required for 
a 100,000-volt transmission line could be built only of such size 
and form as to cost the prohibitive amount of about $30, but 
that by combining a number of insulators by cementing to 
malleable iron fittings and suspending the cable, high-tension insu- 
lators of such capacity could be supplied at a cost of about five or six 
dollars. Likewise for glass, the suspension insulator has also 
been developed for high-tension lines, and types now in use meet 
all conditions in a most satisfactory. manner and often more ad- 
vantageously than porcelain. Instead of making the glass about 
three inches (76 mm.) thick as has been done with a pin type insu- 
lator, where stresses are almost unavoidable,the same result can be 
secured with glass ‘three-quarters of an inch (19 mm.) thick. 
This permits of perfect annealing and the development of a glass 
with practically the same strength as porcelain. In such disks 
corrugations of the necessary shape can be molded so that the 
cement holding the various segments together will have a firm hold 
and afford an insulator of strength equal to a solid piece. Today 
these composite insulators of glass have been developed to a point 
where samples of suspension insulators are supplied by glass 
manufacturers for comparative tests with those of porcelain, ir- 
respective of the voltage for which the line is to be used. For long- 
distance telephone communication, comparative tests have been » 
made of glass insulators and those of other materials along 
parallel lines and the practical results, as shown in more distinct 
enunciation, have coincided with the reports from the testing 
laboratory, while the power lines on the Pacific coast where glass 
has been used all return satisfactory reports. One objection to 
glass insulators has been that they could only be used with wooden 
pins. The more perfectly annealed glass insulators have been 
used with iron pins dipped in pitch and stand up as well as the 
porcelain. Another objection has been that internal stresses are 
caused in the piece, due to poor annealing. This has been elimi- 


2198 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS . [Dec. 13 


nated by flash-over tests of say five minutes and by the more 
perfect methods of annealing. 

But, for the present consideration, we can take up in some de- 
tail a test of some glass suspension insulators which shows their 
present condition and possibilities. These were ten units of 
glass, all of the same size and style, sent to the testing laboratory 
without previous tests or inspection. These samples were ten 
in. (254 mm.) in diameter, fitted with malleable caps and eyebolts. 
The record of the tests given herewith is a factory laboratory 
test designed to show the general run of manufacture so that the 
samples showing defects of manufacture would not figure in 
engineers’ or contract tests. These tests follow the standard 
methods usual with high-tension insulators and imitated as 
nearly as practicable the conditions of service. 

A test of ten insulators follows. The test speaks for itself. 


FLASH-OVER VOLTAGE, Dry 


Voltage at first Voltage at continuous 
Specimen number intermittent flash-over flash-over 
1 76,600 83,650 
2 78,600 84,650 
3 78,600 83,650 
4 79,650 86,700 
5 75,600 83,650 
6 Punctured through head at 60,500 volts 
ve 78,600 88,700 
8 Punctured at bottom of cap at 76,600 volts 
9 78,600 88,700 
10 Punctured through head at 78,600 volts 
TEST AT CONTINUOUS FLASH-OVER FOR FIVE MINUTES 
Specimen number Voltage applied Remarks 
88,700 Heated slightly. 
* 88,700 4 4g 
5 86,700 Punctured through head after 
4 min. 45 sec. Considerable 
heating noted. 
4 86,700 Heated slightly. 
3 86,700 Punctured through head after 


1 min. 5 sec, 


FLASH-OVER VOLTAGE UNDER Spray OF 0,2 IN. (5 MM.) PER MINUTE (APPROXIMATE) 


Specimen number Voltage at first Voltage at continuous 
intermittent flash-over ‘flash-over 

1 46,350 50,400 
2 43,350 48,400 
4 45,350 49,450 
7 45,350 49,450 
9 44,350 48,400 
Maximum DIgLEcTRIc STRENGTH—PUNCTURED UNDER OIL 
Specimen number Volts at puncture 

1 184,650 

2 110,900 

4 114,900 

7 88,700 

9 114,900 


EEE eee 


=e." 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2199 


E. E. F. Creighton: The importance of the study of line 
insulators is obvious to the engineer of electrical transmissions. 
The paper of Mr. Sothman is of a different nature from the one 
by Messrs. Imlay and Thomas. They are both valuable con- 
tributions to a subject to which more attention is needed and 
has been needed for some time past. . 

Instead of commenting directly on these papers it is the inten- 
tion of the writer to look at the subject from still another view 
point, in an endeavor to explain the theory of the phenomena. A 
correct explanation and analysis is needed to aid in the solution 
of the problem of insulator design. Much of the following 
analysis is, however, of the nature of hypothesis based on obser- 
vations of experiments extending over a period of several years. 

Measurement of High-Frequency Potentials. Because of its 
prominence, and furthermore, because of the great ignorance 
concerning the factors entering into the designs and tests of high- 
tension line insulators, it is, probably, the most important ele- 
ment today in the successful transmission of power. ne 
known factors which cause a line insulator to fail are diversified. 
They range through successive steps from choice of material, to 
the nature of the applied strains: There are, probably, factors 
to which we have not given name or even recognition. Further- 
more, we have a number of fixed ideas, taken from standardized 
practise, which have led us somewhat astray. The most impor- 
tant of these false ideas is that a spark gap necessarily represents 
the voltage given in the Institute rules. Spark gaps have been 
checked many times since Dr. Steinmetz made the original 
curves and have been often used at generator frequency. No 
one, so far as the writer knows, has made a systematic study 
of the relation of gap length to voltage, at high frequencies. 
There isa difference. In general, one can say that the higher the 
frequency the lower the potential that is necessary to produce 
a spark across any definite spark gap. There is, possibly, an 
upper limit of frequency above which the reverse law holds: 
that is to say, with any further increase in frequency the poten- 
tial to produce a spark across any definite gap may actually be 
on the increase. The foregoing conclusion is based on reasoning 
from the standpoint of dielectric spark-lag. There can be no 
question as to the reality of spark-lag. It has been measured 
indirectly!. Under particular conditions the writer has been 
able to so magnify it as to measure it with an oscillograph and 
even with a stop watch.’ 

A possible explanation of how the potential to cause a spark is 
increased, as the time of alternation of the high-frequency oscilla- 
tions becomes less than the time of the dielectric spark-lag, 
follows. SD ; piers 

As an hypothesis, it is assumed that if, in a given brief time, 


1. Disruptive Strength with Transient Voltages. J.L.R. Hayden and 


_C. P. Steinmetz, TRANSACTIONS A. I. E. E., 1910, XXI1X, I], p. 1125. 


2. See Discussion, TRANSACTIONS A.1.E.E., 1910, XXIX, II, p. 1214. 


2200 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


ionization has taken place over only a limited zone around an 
electrode, this ionization may be more or less destroyed by each 
reversal of potential. With less total ionization between two 
electrodes it may require an increased potential to produce a 
discharge. 

It seems probable that local de-ionization around a spark 
accounts for the fact that successive sparks in air between elec- 
trodes or around an insulator choose new paths. Each high- 
frequency spark has an opportunity to cool below the con- 
ducting temperature, before the next one appears. The spark 
relieves the potential strains in its immediate neighborhood. 
The successive spark naturally follows a path that is left part- 
ly ionized by the previous application of potential. This is 
some new path. 

Some Problems Relating to Standardization. To the experi- 
menter, the very natural question arises in the course of his work 
—what constitutes a discharge as a basis of measurement? In 
the development of lightning arresters in one protective appara- 
tus laboratory the engineers have found it expedient to measure 
the current and potential of discharges ranging gradually from 
a few billionths of an ampere up to a thousand amperes. 

The discharge of lowest current is the invisible conduction 
with which we have been made familiar by the writings and work 
of J. J. Thomson and others. This ionization can not be ignored 
while we are in search of a stable foundation for measurement. 
Under certain conditions this ionization, which is for convenience, 
in testing lightning arresters, termed “cold” ionization, may 
affect the spark potential for seconds or even minutes after it 
has been produced. 

As the current is further increased there appears at the elec- 
trodes the faintest blue brush discharge, sometimes called the 
“silent discharge.” This blue brush discharge grows into a 
dense blue discharge and becomes noisy. As the current is 
still further increased there appear little white threads of light 
in the denser parts of the brush discharge. In the next stage the 
blue discharge has disappeared and there is nothing seen but the 
whitish spark. The spark is apparently more highly conducting 
than the brush discharge. Further increases in current increase 
the brilliancy of the spark. In the next stage a crater is formed 
in an electrode which furnishes arc vapor. As the current den- 
“ity increases the resistance of the arc decreases. 

During these different stages of discharge the potential across 
the electrodes has risen and fallen irregularly—sometimes grad- 
ually and in a few points abruptly. 

What potential of discharge is to be used as a basis of measure- 
ment? I see no answer at present. 

At normal frequencies the potential that will cause a short- 
circuit arc is the one chosen. Everyone who has tested the 
dielectric strength of oil is familiar with the “ b.d.s.i.” spark 
(b.d.s.i. = break down at short intervals). It is customary to 


1912) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2201 


neglect these small preliminary sparks which occur before the 
final potential of complete failure is reached. 

We are all familiar with the curves of spark potential of needle 
gaps and sphere gaps. At low values of gap length it requires 
more potential to spark the sphere gap than the needle gap. But 
as the gap lengths become greater these two values of spark 
potential gradually approach each other. For very large gaps 


= a 
| ce 
& 
7 f= Fi 
Ae) 
A 
| eo 
vie | 
6 
5 
nD 
ul 
ae 
o4 
= 
3 
a 
— 
o 
43 
a 
wl 
wd 
Zz 0.005 7 
UY MICRO=FARAD 
Z iit | a 
wie 0, 0.367 M.H, 2) | N.G. 
a MILLI-HENRY | x | 
VA | SHer 
EA | CONNECTIONS WHICH GAYE 
: A | DOTTED LINE|IN FIG. 12 
v7, | 
Va 
L | 
1 2 5 6 7 


3 4 5 
SPHERE GAP-INCHES 
BETWEEN TWO % IN. BRASS RODS WITH HEMISPHERICAL ENDS 


Fics. 12 anp 13 


The curves in Fig. 12 show the relation of spark potential of a needle gap ahd a sphere gap 
at frequencies of about 4,000,000 cycles per second and somewhat less. . : . 

Fig. 13 shows the general connections of the circuit . With no inductance in series with the 
spark gap under test, the relation between the sphere gap and the needle gap is given by the 
upper curve. This curve shows the same general relations as the tests at 60 cycles. When, 
however, the inductance is placed in series, as shown in Fig. 13, the needle gap and sphere 
gap become equal in length for the same potential. The dotted line shows the relation. 


5 ee ee 
The broken line, drawn in at 45 degrees for reference, shows the position of the curve 
equality between the needle gap length and the sphere gap length. 


there is very little difference in spark potential between needles 
and small spheres used as electrodes. In the measurement 
of high-frequency discharges, however, the conditions of test 
may be adjusted to give practically identical curves for both 
the sphere and needle gaps. (See Figs. 12 and 13.) 

In the measurement of the discharge potential of a multigap 
lightning arrester, as shown in the circuit connection of Fig. 14, 


2202 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


the potential indicated by the needle gap is always much higher 
than the potential by transformation. Although the actual 
potential may be greater than the value given by the ratio of 
transformation of the transformer, there is evidence to show that 
it is not as high as indicated by the needle gap. 

The difference between the two values of potential is really due 
to the oscillations set up by the sparks between the cylinders 
nearest the line terminals. As the potential of the transformer 
is increased, more and more of these arrester-gaps spark over, 
until finally the spark runs entirely across from terminal to 
terminal. Since it requires only about 2000 volts to spark over 
a single gap, and since each successive gap breaks down like 
the fall of a “‘ card-house,” it is reasonable to conclude that the 
oscillations set up by the sparks on the end gaps do not raise the 
potential by more than a few per cent. Since the indications 
of the needle gap may easily be 50 to 100 per cent above the 
potential by transformation, one must necessarily conclude that 
the high frequency causes the spark across the needle gap to 
form more easily. Other examples could be given, but the 


MULTIGAPS 
A 


NEEDLE 
~ 1 GAP 


ee 


GEN. 


QO0Q 
loODD0000000 


TRANSFORMER 


Fic. 14 


Circuit connections for showing the variations in needle gap when local high frequencies 
are superimposed on the 60-cycle wave of potential. 


foregoing is sufficient to cast doubt on the needle gap as a device 
for measuring potentials at high frequency. 

Let us look next to the use of the electrostatic voltmeter. First 
of all, the electrostatic voltmeter measures effective but not 
maximum values of potential at normal frequencies. At high 
frequencies the usual type of electrostatic voltmeter does not 
seem to measure anything. To illustrate: an electrostatic volt- 
meter was calibrated on 60 cycles and found approximately 
correct. It was then attached to a 200,000-cycle Alexanderson 
generator through a small step-up transformer. At three-quart- 
ers of the full scale deflection it sparked over and thus short- 
circuited. Two questions arise—did the lower potential, as 
indicated by the deflection, cause an internal spark due to the 
better conduction of the air under high-frequency stresses? 
Or, did the excessive value of brush discharge which, due to high 
frequency, occurred at the edges of the vane, cause an erroneous 
deflection? The mechanical repulsion of the brush discharge on 
the edges of the vane might naturally prevent the vane from 
moving up to the position corresponding to the impressed po- 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2203 


tential. Thus the standard electrostatic voltmeter fails in its 
application to high-frequency measurements. 

_ In all these measurements, it may incidentally be noted, there 
is always the possibility of the occurrence of localized resonance. 
A stationary wave might raise the potential locally to nearly 
double value. 


THEORY OF DISCHARGE AT AN INSULATOR 


The electrostatic strains on an insulator under test cause two 
well-known distinct phenomena: 

1. A direct stress through the porcelain. 

2. Corona streamers over the surface. 

_ 1. The Stress through the Porcelain. This presents no espe- 
cial difficulty in its analysis, so long as we do not insist on knowing 
too intimately the sub-atomic processes. There are two metal 
surfaces separated by solid porcelain. In the intense field the 
potential gradient between the metal parts is fairly uniform. At 
the sharp edges of the metal, such as, for example, the pin of an 
insulator, there is a local concentration of static stress, which 
may be the cause of the beginning of a failure by puncture. 

If there is a flaw in the porcelain in the strong part of the 
electrostatic field, naturally, this locates the path of puncture. 
If the flaw is outside the strong part of the field, puncture isa 
matter of accident. The probabilities of puncture under this 
condition will be discussed later, as it comes under the category 
of superficial discharge. 

What is a flaw in the porcelain? What produces flaws? How 
are flaws to be distinguished from universally weak porcelain? 
These are questions that should be answered by the manufac- 
turer of porcelain for electrical purposes. My understanding 
of the situation at present is that they are all too busy manu- 
facturing porcelain to spare the time for anything else. The 
possibility of studying this subject carefully is not given to many 
engineers. The man who should know is the operator of a fur- 
nace. The processes have been developed by cut and try 
methods and even at the scientific “ best” the temperature 
throughout a furnace in practise may vary from top to bottom 
and from center to edge. The problem, it seems, in firing por- 
celain is to raise the temperature to a point such as to soften the 
porcelain and sinter it into a solid mass and yet not go so far 
above this temperature as to make the porcelain melt down. 
“ Under-firing ’’ produces weak porcelain containing flaws, and 
the insulators are punctured in subsequent test. “ Over-firing ”’ 
allows the insulator to warp out of shape and it is scrapped before 
it comes to test. 

Flaws may come also from local impurities, insufficient curing 
before firing, improper dimensions, or improper rate of firing. 

Irrespective of other factors, there is a marked effect resulting 
from the periodicity of the potential of test. Our tests have not 
shown directly that dielectric hysteresis in porcelain is a factor, 


2204 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


because there is no method of predetermining the presence of 
a flaw. The fact that puncture is most liable to occur in spots 
that are not initially at the maximum electrostatic stress would 
lead one to believe that it is most frequently the accidental 
flaw or locally weak spot that fails, rather than a damage to the 
good porcelain resulting from the rapid alternation of potential. 
However, on the other hand, in using a battery of glass Leyden 
jars, the evidence seems conclusive that when a high-frequency 
discharge takes place it is the heating effect of hysteresis or at 
least the alternating effect of the high frequency which causes 
puncture. Leyden jars have withstood more than five times as 
much undirected potential as alternating potential. The fre- 
quency was about a million cycles per second. These statements 
have reference specifically to very high frequencies. The 
difference between 25 cycles and 60 cycles is relatively negligible. 

By inductive reasoning from experiment it seems certain that 


ELECTRODE 


' 
CONCENTRATED | } 
STATIC FIELD | 


—->>s._STATIC FIELD 


| | PORCELAIN 


i| 
egTROEe | 
| 


ELECTRODE i | 
O06 I 


Fie. 15 


Illustration of the spark which takes 
place when the air is over-stressed. The 
arc is prevented by the fact that the 
porcelain has a greater dielectric strength 


Fic. 16 


This illustrates at the corner of the 
electrode the dense field which has a com- 
ponent parallel to the surface of the porce- 


lain. When the potential gradient reaches 
the critical value for air a horizontal 
spark starts along the porcelain. 


than air. 


high frequency is more severe on the flaws in porcelain than low 
frequency. At the surface checks and flaws the possibility of 
damage, then, is increased not only by the greater potential 
gradient due to the depth of the flaw but also by any increase 
in the frequency of oscillation. 

2. Corona Streamers over the Surface of an Insulator. It is 
evident that if an insulator must fail, it should do so by spark- 
ing around through the air rather than by puncture. There are 
two important questions: What makes the arc go around?—and, 
what forms or designs favor this? Mr. A. O. Austin, as stated in 
his paper* at the Chicago convention, 1911, used a working 
theory of surface resistance to aid in improving the design. 
Where the surfaces are wet, and they are usually more or less 


*The High-Efficiency Suspension Insulator, TRANsActions A.I. E. E., 
1911, XXX, TII, p. 2308. 


1912} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2205 


moist, there is a real surface resistance that must be taken into 
account. Putting, aside the matter of rain tests, there is a 
phenomenon of discharge over the surface which I think can be 
distinguished from conduction by “ surface resistance.” This 
is shown in several gradations in Figs. 15, 16 and 17. The 
requisite parts to give this phenomenon are two electrodes 
in air and a sheet of insulation separating them. A primary 
requisite of the insulation is a dielectric strength greater than air, 
If at the same time the insulation has a dielectric constant greater 
than air, this greater constant will also tend to magnify the sur- 
face corona on the sheet of insulation. In Fig. 15, it is assumed 
that the insulation is of porcelain which has a dielectric strength 
seven times as great as air and a dielectric constant four times 
that of air. As the difference of potential on the electrodes is 
gradually increased, the air breaks into a conducting spark, but 
there is no damage to the porcelain as it is at only one-seventh . 
of its dielectric strength. 


ELECTRODE 


PORCELAIN PORCELAIN 


=" spark 7 


| 


i} 
ELECTRODE. | il 
HH | ELECTRODE" | 
Mi We 
Fic. 17 Fic. 18 
This represents a single spark running This shows, for the purpose of analysis, 
out from the electrodes along the surface an artificial separation of the capacity 
of the porcelain and the electrostatic field between two electric sparks into four 
at the advance points of the spark which zones. The use of this figure is explained 
causes it to continue to move forward in the text. 


along the surface of the porcelain. 


As the potential gradient at the edges of the electrodes rises 
(Fig. 16), the air will be put under more and more stress. Since 
the porcelain conducts the displacement current four times as 
readily as air, it tends to draw the electrostatic lines in air 
closer to the edge of the electrodes and thus increase the density 
there. 

Fig. 17 represents the condition when the horizontal electro- 
static forces at the surface of the electrode reach a gradient above 
30 kv. per cm. This causes a spark to run out along the porce- 
lain on each surface, in the same relative position. Since the 
spark is more or less of a conductor of electricity, the electrostatic 
lines will extend beyond its outermost point and thus will con- 
tinue to overstrain the air, in advance of the extending spark. 
This overstrain turns into a brush discharge and then.a spark 
discharge. Thus the spark length gradually but rapidly grows. 
As a distinguishing mark this surface spark will be called creeping 
spark. If there were no losses of energy to weaken the spark it 


2206 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


might be possible to spark over an indefinitely extended surface 
merely by raising the potential gradient of the electrodes above 
the dielectric strength of the air. ~ 

What gives the spark its volume or intensity of current? 
The growth of the corona spark consists in supplying new elec- 
trostatic condensers with electric charge. The sparks on opposite 
sides of the porcelain form the plates of a condenser. 

For the sake of convenience the length of a given spark (Fig. 
18) is divided into four arbitrary zones and so numbered. When 
the spark first reached the capacity of zone 1 it was carrying 
current to charge condenser 1. As soon as condenser 1 became 
charged, the current in the spark would have dropped to zero if 
it had ceased to move forward toward the next zone. Its move- 
ment into a new zone necessitated a further supply of electricity 
to the capacity of that zone. 

When the spark reaches zone 4 it may be that the condenser 
of zone 3 has not yet received its full charge, due to the drop in 
potential, along the spark, from the electrodes to zone 3. 
If the spark increases in conductivity zone 3 will get more 
potential, and therefore, more charge. As a result of this con- 
dition the spark tends to attenuate as its length increases. One 
might say that the attenuation is due principally to the drop 
of potential along the spark. 

So far, we have considered only the first impulse that starts 
the spark—the equivalent of applying a constant direct poten- 
tial to the electrodes. The lag in the formation of the spark at 
the point gives a limit to the current that is drawn through the 
spark. If, however, the applied potential is rapidly alternated, 
then the condensers formed by the sparks as electrodes must be 
supplied with new charges of opposite sign at each alternation. 
When the electric charge changes from positive to negative 
(or vice versa) the current supplying the charges does not change 
in direction. For this reason, and others, the current in the 
second impulse will be much greater than in the first. 

If the alternations are sufficiently rapid to prevent complete 
de-ionization of the spark streak, each subsequent alternation 
will find a spark path already partially made and consequently 
the re-establishment of the spark will be facilitated. Since the 
creeping spark forms with less obstruction it will be able to 
extend itself farther from the electrode than it would at a lower 
frequency. 

If we knew that the spark-lag was located mostly in the 
initial dark discharge rather than in the subsequent blue brush 
discharge, we would be in a position, at this stage of the hypoth- 
esis, to state that the higher frequency would lessen the spark- 
lag. Further studies of creeping spark-lag are needed to under- 
stand the details of the discharge over insulators. 

As the frequency of oscillation increases, there is no doubt 
that the creeping sparks are magnified in intensity and in length. 
Furthermore, their location is somewhat determined by the 
frequency. 


Eee 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2207 


Does this magnification of the creeping spark always increase 
as the frequency increases? Exact experimental data are lacking. 
Since, however, we are launched into an hypothesis it may be 
extended to cover the condition of extremely high frequency. 
So far, frequencies of the order of only 100,000 cycles per sec. 
have been considered (wave lengths about 4 mile long). The 
matter hinges on two factors, the rate of creeping of the spark, 
and the possibility of having a wave length less than the length 
of the creeping spark. 

We do not know the rate of creeping of the spark, but if the 
wave length is less than the distance to the edge of the porcelain 
it is highly improbable that the creeping spark could extend 
beyond a half wave length. The energy loss in the spark is so 
great relatively to the energy stored in the capacity of the 
creeping spark that probably little of the energy returned from 
this local condenser would be available to extend the spark. (A 
spark wave 6 in. (152.4 mm.) long has a frequency of the order 
of 24 million cycles per sec.). 

Furthermore, with such high frequencies the decrement due 
to the resistance of skin effect in the conductor must be very 
high and may need to be taken into account. Although it can 
not be considered as settled, it seems tenable to assume that 
beyond a certain very high frequency of unknown value the 
creeping sparks begin to lessen, but at the same time the danger 
of puncture may also lessen. 

The Effect of Surface Conduction as Distinct from the Effect 
which Causes the Creeping Spark. If the top surface of the 
porcelain shown in Fig. 17 is covered with rain water the electro- 
static forces will be distributed over the surface by the conduc- 
tion of the water. This will change the electrostatic field on the 
under side of the porcelain. The current in the creeping spark 
on the lower side must be drawn through the water on the upper 
side. This brings into effect the surface resistance. 

The general effect of placing a good conductor over one 
surface of the porcelain is to facilitate the formation of creeping 
sparks from a narrower electrode on the other side. 

Impressed Potential, Creeping Spark-Lag, and Dielectric 
Spark-Lag. In these three factors is the crux of the problem. 
To assist in establishing the relations, a specific hypothetical 
problem is assumed. A gradually increasing potential applied 
to an insulator makes it spark around at 100,000 volts, at 60 
cycles. Under oil the head of the insulator punctures at 130,000 
volts at 60 cycles. Under oil, again, an identical insulator 
tested at high frequency punctures at 120,000 volts, due to the 
more energetic effect of high frequency in puncturing. (We have 
no standard for measuring high-frequency potential and we do 
not know what frequency will-cause a decrease in the puncture 
potential from 130,000 volts to 120,000 volts, but the equivalent 
condition exists.) 

Now, with the insulator in air, if any potential between 100,000 


2208 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 138 


and 130,000 volts at 60 cycles is applied, the creeping spark will, 
in due time, cause the insulator to “ arc around.” If a certain 
high frequency between 100,000 and 120,000 volts is applied 
the result will be the same. 

But if more than 130,000 volts at 60 cycles is applied, the 
insulator will puncture if the dielectric spark-lag of the porcelain 
is less than the lag of the creeping spark. The same relation 
should hold for the high-frequency test. Herein are four factors 
to be determined: 1. The law of decrease in creepage spark- 
lag with potential. 

2. The law of decrease of creepage spark-lag with increase 
of frequency. 

3 The law of decrease of dielectric spark-lag in the porcelain 
for increase in potential. 

4. The law of decrease of dielectric spark-lag in the porcelain 
for increase in frequency. 

A design must be made which gives a low value of lag to the 
creeping spark. 


Metuops oF TESTING INSULATORS 


1. Generator at 25--60 cycles, step-up transformer, and 
increase of potential by variable excitation. 

2. Generator at 100,000 cycles, step-up transformer, and 
increase of potential by variable excitation. 

3. Single sudden disruptive discharge from Leyden jars 
(or equivalent). Source of power a static machine or other 
direct current. 

4. Oscillating transformer supplied with power at 60 cycles. 

5. Multiple disruptive discharges from a condenser charged 
by potential from a transformer at 60 cycles. 

The choice of a method has been dictated at times by its 
availability. Among the five there are some which give equiva- 
lent effects. From the analysis of the problem already given, 
there are certain characteristics that are desirable to give the 
insulators certain kinds of strains. These are: 

1. Gradually increasing potential at 60 cycles. 

2. Gradually increasing potential at high frequency. 

3. Suddenly applied potential (Jess than puncture value) at 
high frequency. 

4. Suddenly applied potential (greater than puncture value) 
at high frequency. 

The test for puncture of an insulator under oil is not one to 
be included as a standard test. Although it has a value in 
investigations of the dielectric strength of porcelain, it has no 
practical value for general use, due simply to the artificial con- 
dition it imposes. The oil cuts off the natural relief path over 
the surface of the insulator which it is desirable that the dis- 
charge should take. The criterion of quality in an insulator 
depends exactly on this relation, namely, that the insulator 
shall spark around rather than puncture under the application 
of sudden excessive potentials of high frequency. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2209 


What Value of High Frequency should be Used? ‘This is an 
open question. It may be regarded from three standpoints: 

First (the present-day standpoint), the insulators are made 
to withstand gradually applied potential at 60 cycles with a 
resultant flash around the insulator through the air. They have 
sometimes a further imposed test. This is an endurance run at 
a potential somewhat below the potential which causes a “ flash- 
around.” The fairness or need of this test might well be ques- 
tioned. The insulator is never subjected to such a strain in 
practise. So far, then, it is not a fair test. If the test, however, 
is equivalent to some strain that actually occurs, such as the 
oscillation of an arcing ground, or if the test is necessary at the 
factory to eliminate weak porcelain, it must be proved so. 

The assumption is made in the above test, wittingly or other- 
wise, that lightning occurs very infrequently and cannot be 
allowed for in the construction of the insulator. 

Second, from the standpoint of protection, the insulators 
should be made to withstand the sudden high-frequency poten- 
tials of lightning. What are these conditions exactly? Nobody 
knows and no one is willing to undertake the expense of the 
investigation. A little is known, but the imposition, blindly, of 
any arbitrary high-frequency test may be unfair. 

Third, from the manufacturers’ standpoint, it is a question 
of production. How many insulators will be left after the high- 
frequency test is made? One answer is, it depends on the design. 
Many insulators, however, of a design particularly adapted to 
high frequency may even be punctured if the imposed test is 
sufficiently severe. What potential in excess of the average 
puncture potential of the porcelain is to be applied? How long 
is the application to be made? How sudden must be the appli- 
cation of potential? 

Known and Speculative Conditions of Strain on Line I nsulators. 
Putting aside normal conditions of potential as being so safe to 
the insulator as to require no comment, there are left two types 
of abnormal strains: namely, lightning, and surges from arcing 
grounds. 

In the extreme, the value of potential and suddenness of 
application of a direct stroke of lightning may be said to be 
greater than anything we can produce in test. In other words, 
the most severe potential test of the laboratory is permissible. 
On the other hand, the time of application is short. It is usual 
to have several successive lightning discharges in a fraction of 
a second. The frequency is unknown. Dr. Steinmetz’s calcula- 
tions and our uncertain tests put the value at perhaps a half- 
million cycles. This frequency, for other reasons, may be higher 
than should be used in test. 

The surges from arcing grounds are, fundamentally, of more 
moderate values, although they may have superimposed upon 
them ripples of much higher frequencies. For the oscillation 
of a line one may find 1000 to 20,000 cycles per sec.; for the 


2210 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


oscillation of a transformer, frequencies of the order of 20,000 
cycles; for the oscillation of a coil of a transformer, frequencies 
of the order of 100,000 cycles per sec. Except for the particular 
condition of resonance, the potential of these surges may be 
considered, tentatively, at least, as double the delta potential; 
the time of application as } sec., where the arcing ground 
suppressor is used, and several minutes, otherwise. How to 
measure in test the potential of this high frequency is yet to be 
determined. 

General Effects Found in High-Frequency Tests of Insulators. 
As the frequency of the applied potential increases there is an 
increased tendency for sparks in the air to cling to the surface 
of the porcelain in the form of creeping sparks. For example, 
a pin type insulator consisting of several pieces, when tested on 
60 cycles, had a spark formed over the upper surface of the top 
skirt, but at the edge the spark jumped straight to the pin. 
When the same insulator was tested on 200,000 cycles the spark 
followed every surface on the three skirts. 

On other insulators of the suspension type having several 
concentric rings of petticoats under the skirt the very high 
frequency would cause the spark to follow the long path over 
the surfaces of these petticoats rather than jump from edge to 
edge as it does when a lower frequency is applied. 

There is, fundamentally, a great difference between the tests 
at 60 cycles and the high-frequency tests, not yet brought out. 
This comes from the nature of the circuits. In the 60-cycle test 
the first spark is usually followed by an arc which necessitates 
opening the circuit. The arc potential is always much less than 
the spark potential, so the instant the arc forms the potential 
strain on the insulator is relieved. Furthermore, there is usually 
but a single streak or spark for each test. In the high-frequency 
tests, successive sparks are being rapidly formed and extinguished. 
If the parts are symmetrical this spark forms continually in 
new positions. It follows the surfaces. The insulator is literally 
bathed in a succession of sparks which feel for weak spots 
everywhere in the porcelain. One test of this kind may be made 
the equivalent of a thousand tests at 60 cycles—everything else 
in the comparison being neglected. (This bathing of the insu- 
lator in sparks was shown in the demonstration tests made at 
the meeting by Mr. Stewart Thomson and Mr. H. E. Nichols.) 


SUMMARY AND SOME CONCLUSIONS 


The probable relation of spark potential to gap length may 
perhaps be expressed as follows: With a given length of gap, the 
potential to cause a spark decreases as the frequency increases, 
up to a limited value of high frequency. Above this critical 
frequency the potential to cause a spark increases with a further 
increase in frequency. This change in the law probably comes 
from dielectric spark-lag. 


Neither the needle gap nor the usual electrostatic voltmeter 


PLATE CXXXVII 


VOL, XXXI, 1912 


“4893 94} Aq peinjound uMOYS SI s1oje[nsul 
3014} 9S9y4} jo YSIp Joddn oyy “HsIp epprur 94} wor 
uses oq Avur se ‘4ye00T440ed 03 YeooT}4ed UO; YYySIeEI4s dunt 
SIoqj}O aTITyM ‘s}vootyjod oY} PuUNoOIe sdevjJInNS ay} JoAO ssed 
syieds ay} JO sut0g + *10}e[NSUT 9dAy UOTSUadSNS B JO SJITHS 9} 
punoie Aouenbelj ysty jo syieds o1e4s 9Y44 JO Jooye Bulyyeq 
a4} eerysnq{]I Of Ajireuttid poonpordes st ydeisojoyd sty yp 


[NOLHD1auD] 0G IIA 


tot 


COTY) 


“JIIYS I[PPIUl 9Yy4 JO 9OVJINS JouUT 9Y} WoO, yIeds 9Y} UO} SUOTJOOYAI BY} oIe ‘adpe 
ay} Woy (“UW F'GZ) ‘UL [T noe A]JUsIedde Sutpus ‘syieds jo Joquinu & 10Je[NSUT 944 
JO J1IMS JSoT[eus oy4 uo ‘ajdurexe Jog ‘ulefaoIod 9Y4 jo 9oRjInSs YJoOWIS 944 WOI} 
UOTJOIHeI SII WOI] peysmMsutystp oq ysnur ysIeds [vor ayy ‘syIeds osoy} BUIMITA UT 

*poyeljsnyi sie sysreds 
durmf pue syieds ao8edeae10 yyoq ‘Aouenberjy Ienoryied sty} yy ‘uld 944 04 sqIT¥s 
ay} Jo se8pe sy} wory dumf 0} Aouspue4 104ve18 ve sey Y1eds oy4 onyeA sIyy MOTEq 
solousnbelj I0j faovjins 9Y} OF BuUl[O 0} AoUapuds4 JoqyeaIs e& sey YIeds ay} anjea styy 
eaoqe salauenbely Joy ‘sepAO QOQO‘OSI Joqe sem Aduenbal syy ‘“Jewriojsuesy 
SulyeyiIoso ue WoIj JOye[Nsut ue 03 TelZUN}0d Jo uOT}eoT[dde 944 Jo UOTJeIIsNII uy 


[NOLHDIaxd] 61 “SIA 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2211 


measures high potential at high frequencies. Furthermore, 
due to resonant effects in a transformer, the ratio of the trans- 
former.is also unreliable. 

The subject of insulator tests is divided, primarily, into: 
first, the direct strains on the molecular structure of the por- 
celain, with a consideration of the weakening effect of flaws, 
and, second, the creeping spark which forms over the skirts of 
the insulator. A jump spark 10 cm. long will easily turn into a 
creeping spark 50 cm. long. 

There are four factors of importance to be considered in con- 
nection with the testing of aninsulator. First, there is the actual 
value of potential. It must be above the puncture value to 
have any possibility of causing puncture. The frequency must 
herein be taken into account. The second important factor is 
the suddenness of application of potential. ~The third important 
factor is the spark-lag of the creeping spark, and the fourth, the 
dielectric spark-lag of the porcelain to puncture. 

Assuming that the application of super-spark-potential is 
suddenly made in a time less than the time of spark lags, then 
there are two possible results. If the dielectric spark-lag of the 
porcelain is less than the lag in the formation of the creeping 
spark, the porcelain punctures. If, on the other hand, it is 
greater, the spark passes around the skirts and relieves the 
potential strains. 

There are five different methods of test given. When the 
design of insulators makes it practicable, these tests can be 
reduced to one. If a porcelain insulator will stand a sudden 
application of high-frequency potential above the puncture 
value (for short, a super-spark-potential) without puncturing 
the porcelain, it will withstand any of the other tests. No 
standardization of test is possible at the present time. More 
experimental work must be done. 

The most severe strain is that of lightning. Heating by the 
dynamic arc which follows the lightning stroke may break an 
insulator but there is, in general, no necessity of allowing the 
arc to play long enough to do this. 

The high-frequency test has the advantage of giving many 
successive strokes which cause shifting creeping sparks. These 


shifting creeping sparks search out the flaws in the skirts. 


In the demonstration tests made by Mr. Thomson and Mr. 
Nichols, a frequency of 180,000 cycles from an oscillation trans- 
former was applied successively to several pin insulators and to 
a pair of suspension insulators. The usual result of the test on 
the pin type was to puncture one skirt after another, until the 
last one was left. A single skirt withstands the high-frequency 
strains better than two or more. The suspension type insulators 
in test refused to puncture, although the discharges were passed 
over them for nearly a minute. In every case most of the sparks 
crept over the surface of the porcelain. These effects are shown 
in Figs. 19 and 20. 


2212 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


H. Winfield Secor (by letter): This paper on the high-fre- 
quency testing of high-voltage insulators seems of prime import- 
ance, and it is a matter that should be followed up closely by 
both manufacturers and engineers. 

Referring to Mr. Lincoln’s remarks, in regard to whether the 
current applied to the insulator under such high-frequency test 
as described, really was impressed at a potential of as great a 
periodicity as mentioned by Mr. Thomas, I would say that in 
accordance with Thompson’s well-known equations, applying 
to an oscillation circuit such as employed by Mr. Thomas, 
which is not greatly different from the ordinary wireless trans- 
mitting circuit, the following holds true: 

Mr. Thomas’ arrangement of the high-frequency test com- 
prises a closed oscillating circuit, and whether or not an alterna- 
ting—or, if you please, an oscillating—surge is caused to be set 
up in that circuit and to act on the insulator under test depends 
upon whether or not the resistance, squared, of the closed oscilla- 
tion circuit is smaller than four times the inductance divided 
by the capacity of the circuit. In case it is smaller the condenser 
discharge is oscillatory or alternating in character, but if 


4L 
> a 
- ¢ 


then the condenser discharge is not alternating or oscillating 
in character. In view of this it seems quite probable that the 
insulator is not always subjected to a high-frequency alternating- 
current test, as the oscillation period of this circuit is a function 
partly of the capacity of the insulator being tested, and partly 
of its resistance. 

Having these conditions under which to work, the number of 
shocks in a given time to which the insulator is subjected can 
be found by means of a wave-meter calibrated to read frequency 
per second, instead of wave length, provided, of course, that 
the circuit conforms to the above-mentioned rule so that the 
condenser discharge is oscillatory or alternating. In this con- 
nection I believe the new direct-reading wave-meter, developed 
by Dr. Seibt of Germany, would be of service, indicating in a 
similar manner to the ordinary direct-reading instruments, by 
means of a pivoted needle moving over a graduated scale, the- 
wave length at any instant, and conversely the frequency of 
the alternations, or, also, the number of shocks applied in a given 
time to the insulator being tested. As suggested by Mr. Lincoln, 
a decrease in each train of waves or oscillations takes place, and 
the peaks of the decreasing waves, equivalent to each half-cycle 
of transformer primary current, follow a logarithmic curve, and 
the logarithmic decrement may easily be determined by means 
of a Marconi decremeter. At the frequency mentioned in Mr. 
Thomas’s paper, viz.: 1,000,000 cycles per second, the wave 
length is 300 m., as the velocity of ether waves is 300,000,000 m. 
per sec., and this wave length is easily read on any ordinary 


& 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2213 


wave-meter, or on Dr. Seibt’s instrument, also much lower wave 
lengths corresponding to several million cycles per second. 
Lightning discharges have a very high frequency, generally, and 
a varying potential that is enormous, and in view of this it does 
not seem that insulators will ever be built that can be guaranteed 
to stand any lightning, but these high-frequency tests are certainly 
a pene step in advance and are to be highly commended, in my 
mind. 

E. S. Lincoln (by letter): I noticed with particular interest 
Mr. Sandford’s remarks relative to a laboratory for high-voltage 
investigations, and I wish to state at this time that such a 
laboratory is under construction. It will be fitted for both testing 
and research work, with a special department for high-voltage 
investigations. The maximum potential will be 1,000,000 volts at 
60 cycles with a capacity of 1000 kv-a. Details of this laboratory 
will be furnished to the Institute in the near future, but I wish 
to mention the fact at this time so as to inform those who are 
interested in this subject that they will have the facilities for 
making any test that they may desire. 

Ford W. Harris (by letter): I should like to ask if it is possible 
to add to Mr. Sothman’s paper, or rather to the tabulation, a 
column showing the number of sections tested. Abaeisy sme 
number of different insulators actually tested. This is important, 
as, if all the insulation tests were made on a single string, a con- 
siderable error might be involved due to peculiarities of the 
insulators involved. In dealing with a problem of this nature 
average results are sought after and the only way to get average 
results is to test a considerable number of sections. 

The second point that would seem to me to be pertinent is 
the question of the costs of the various types involved. For 
example the insulator “ type A ” would appear to be materially 
cheaper than those having a metal cap, and it might be that, 
by using a larger number, the same or better protection could 
be obtained at lower cost. In considering this phase of the 
matter the additional cost of structure to accommodate the 
longer length of string would also have to be considered. What 
the power user is really buying is insulation, and a little addi- 
tional information from Mr. Sothman would be interesting. 

I have not had any considerable experience with transmission 
lines but have used a considerable number of insulators 
that were originally designed for such lines in various 
types of switching devices. When used for such purposes 
the question of mechanical strength is a critical one. I 
have come to two conclusions. First, that for cementing 
insulators together and cementing on caps and cementing in 
pins, there is nothing better than neat Portland cement. Such 
cementing must, however, be watched very closely and the parts 
kept wet. A good method in the case of pins is to invert the 
insulator and fill the petticoats with water. Portland is a 
hydraulic cement and needs lots of water. The second point 


2214 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS {Dec. 13 


is that the use of line insulators in disconnecting switches 
and the like is poor economy. It is true that most op- 
erators prefer to use the same insulator on disconnecting 
switches and the line on account of ease of carrying spare parts, 
but the average insulator is entirely too weak for such use and 
much better results may be obtained by the skilful design of 
special porcelains with larger fastenings. I have often wondered 
if the characteristics of ordinary line insulators could not be 
materially improved by applying the same analysis that we have 
applied to those for disconnecting switches. 

The photographs reproduced are very interesting, but 
photographs of discharges are somewhat likely to be mis- 
leading, due to the unfortunate characteristic they have 
of integrating the discharges. That is, they photograph dis- 
charges that occur at different times and the result is the sum of 
all the discharges that occur during exposure. Even if the expos- 
sures are made absolutely the same there is an accidental factor to 
be considered in that such discharges are more or less intermittent 
and vary greatly in their violence from second to second, even 
with the conditions maintained absolutely constant. This is 
quite generally understood, however, and Mr. Sothman has 
doubtless given them for their value as qualitative measures 
rather than as quantitative. They certainly show just what we 
may expect during the time of stress on an insulator. 

Charles Rufus Harte (by letter): The determination of 
Messrs. Imlay and Thomas that a grounded pin tends to con- 
centrate stresses upon an insulator and thus reduce its factor 
of safety is particularly interesting to the writer, who for some 
years has taken exception to the desired practise, first of the 
telephone companies, and now of the joint committee specifica- 
tions for high-tension crossing protection, in calling indiscrimi- 
nately for grounding pins and grounded strips on crossarms at 
these crossings. 

Where a transmission line has such construction throughout 
its length there is no distinction, but it has always seemed to 
the writer, and a number of instances had confirmed that belief 
prior to the evidence of this paper, that to ground the pins at 
the crossings alone, takes away a considerable proportion of the 
protection it is intended to create by the use of higher safety 
factors for insulators at this point. 

Edward Bennett (by letter): In the ‘‘ Discussion of Tests ”’ 
in the paper by Messrs. Imlay and Thomas, great importance 
is attached to the fact that the potentials causing puncture of 
the insulators were of high frequency. The implication is that 
the puncture of the insulators is to be attributed either to some 
difference in the nature of 60-cycle and high-frequency stresses 
or to some difference in the distribution of the stresses through- 
out the body of the insulating material at high and at low fre- 
quencies. It is further stated that the insulators which did not 
puncture at 250,000 volts on 60 cycles under oil, punctured 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2215 


after a comparatively few shocks of high-frequency discharge 
and without apparently opposing a resistance of much over 
100,000 volts (10-in. (25.4 cm.) spark gap). 

It would seem, however, that under the conditions of test 
shown in Fig. 11 of the paper, the breakdown of a 10-in. measur- 
ing gap would indicate the application between line-wire and 
pin of a potential far in excess of 100,000 volts during the interval 
of time required to bridge across the 10-in. gap or, in general, to 
establish a conducting flash-over path. 

The breakdown of a spark gap is not an instantaneous phenom- 
enon; our knowledge of the rates of breakdown of the series gap 
and of the flash-over path does not permit of the formation of 
an estimate of the value to which the potential between the line- 
wire and pin might build up during the interval of breakdown. 
It is conceivable, however, that with a 25-in. (63.5-cm.) series 
gap and the transformer adjusted as stated, the potential across 
the insulator might build up to 500,000 volts. 


CHOKE 
colt 


e 


HIGH TENSION 


O 
oO TRANSFORMER 


Fie. 21 


i} 


If this is the case, the puncture of the insulators is not to be 
attributed to the high-frequency stresses alone, but partly, or 
possibly largely, to the application of extremely high potentials 
for short intervals; that is, the interval of the “ spark-lag ”’ of 
the protective path—the flash-over path. To eliminate from 
the tests an unknown high potential, a third plate might be used, 
as indicated in Fig. 21 of this discussion, with the insulators 
connected by extremely short wires between two of the plates, 
as shown. : 

Whatever the explanation, the paper emphasizes the fact that 
the insulators puncture in service which are protected by flash- 
over under prevailing testing conditions. The paper is of great 
importance because it brings this out so clearly, and emphasizes 
the need of tests, such as those described, more nearly represent- 
ing service, conditions. 

F. F. Brand (by letter): The high-frequency tests outlined 
by Messrs. Imlay and Thomas are, I believe, the first recorded 


2216 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS {Dec. 13 


in which an attempt was made to subject insulators to a definite 
test similar to a lightning disturbance. 

There are one or two points I wish to raise with reference to 
the statement that the potential drop across the insulator was 
apparently only 100,000 volts. The method of measurement was 
to connect a spark gap in multiple with the insulator, and in 
series with this spark gap was a high non-inductive resistance. 
At a frequency of approximately 1,000,000 cycles per second 
the charging current from the line side would be considerable, 
and the radiation current also would be appreciable, therefore 
the voltage drop across this resistance might be quite high. 
Furthermore, the spark gap was some 5 or 6 ft. (1.5 to 2 m.) from 
the insulator, so that the inductance was appreciable. There- 
fore, we do not know that the voltage indicated by the spark 
gap represented the actual voltage across the insulator when it 
arced over. Furthermore, we do not know whether the spark 
gap is accurate at a high frequency. 

The explanation the authors give of the cause of breakdown 
is quite feasible. It may also be possible that, while the energy 
required to disrupt that small part of the dielectric which repre- 
sents the resistance which is in series with the capacity of the 
insulator, is greater than the energy required to disrupt the 
air around the insulator, due to the inductance of the path around 
the insulator, and to the fact that the air usually breaks down by 
corona which requires time to form, the air does not have time 
to break down before the dielectric adjacent to the pin is dis- 
rupted. Each further impulse produces this failure until the 
whole insulator head is punctured. 

It would appear that a more careful study of the gradient 
around the sharp edges of the pin would solve this difficulty. 
In an electrose insulator we might mold a sphere of metal into 
the insulation and screw the pin into it. 

In regard to suspension insulators, if the potential balance 
over the string depends to any great extent on the leakage 
current, at high frequency this would be obliterated by the larger 
charging current through both the shunt and mutual capacity, 
and thus the voltage required to arc over the string would 
decrease. Also, if the potential balance is dependent to any 
extent on corona formation, with a sudden application of voltage, 
as by a wave with a steep front, the potential rises to a high value 
before corona forms and thus the distribution of potential is 
not the same. 

Furthermore, the links connecting the units have an inductance 
which is not negligible, and as the frequency increases, the voltage 
drop across this inductance increases by the frequency times the 
increased current through the insulators to ground. This 
voltage is in opposition to the voltage across the insulators; 
thus the sum of the voltages across the insulators no longer 
equals the total voltage across the string, but is higher, thus 
causing the insulators to arc over at a less total voltage across 


— ——— 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2217 


the string. The puncture of the line unit would not necessarily 
occur unless the potential gradient is excessive at some point. 

Since the above tests were made, I have tried with the same 
apparatus and voltage the effect of high frequency on a small 
string of suspension insulators, but did not succeed in breaking 
them in 150 flashes, possibly due to the fact that the excess 
voltage over the arcing voltage of the string was not proportion- 
ately as great as in the tests described in the paper. 

Mr. P. M. Lincoln has raised the point that the frequency of 
oscillation as given by the authors is not correct, but that the 
insulator reflects the wave of potential—this is not exactly 
correct. The frequency of oscillation given by the authors was 
calculated from the constants of the circuit when the insulator 
had arced over. The oscillation before this is the oscillation 
with the capacity of the insulator in series with the inductance 
of the connections and the main capacity. Inasmuch as the low- 
voltage capacity of the insulator, that is, before corona forms, 
was less than one-tenth of the main capacity, the insulator 
would be subjected to an oscillation practically at a frequency 
equal to that caused by its capacity only with the inductance of 
the circuit, and the potential across the main condenser would 
be sustained until the insulator punctured or had time to arc 
over. 

Mr. Peek has suggested that the reason why the insulators 
punctured is due to the sudden application of a voltage in 
excess of the puncture voltage at normal frequency, and is not 
due primarily to the high frequency of the oscillation. This can 
readily be tried by applying an impulse test at a voltage less 
than the low-frequency puncture voltage. 

Turning now to a consideration of the paper by Mr. Sothman, 
I wish to call attention to the errors in results which arise if 
the method of testing does not correspond to service conditions. 

Practically all line insulators are used between line and ground, 
therefore the grounded end of the insulator string should be 
grounded during test. Due to the fact that each insulator has 
a capacity to ground, as well as a mutual capacity with reference 
to the other insulators, the voltage is not divided uniformly over 
the total string. The arcing voltage of the string usually occurs 
when the line unit reaches the arcing point, thus the arcing volt- 
age of the string is not equal to the arcing voltage of one unit 
multiplied by the number of units. This discrepancy is increased 
the greater the number of units from line to ground, and the 
greater the ratio of the shunt to mutual capacity. Thus in 
testing with the neutral of the testing system grounded, as 
apparently was done by Mr. Sothman, the number of units 
between line and ground is one-half the total number in the 
string, and the voltage from line unit to ground is one-half the 
total voltage on the string. 

Neglecting,the change of potential balance due to corona and 
the leakage current, for a string of five insulators, similar to the 


2218 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


type A shown, the dry arcing voltage with one terminal grounded 
is 281 kv. The arcing voltage with the neutral grounded, 
calculated from the ratio of shunt to mutual capacity, would be 
332 kv. Seven units similar to the type ZH shown should arc 
over at 357 kv. with one end grounded, and at 450 kv. with the 
neutral grounded. Five units of the type D shown should arc 
over at 308 kv. with one end grounded, and 368 kv. with the 
neutral grounded. 

Thus we see that we do not even get a correct comparison 
between the types, as the ratio of shunt to mutual capacity is 
not the same for different types, also the number of units used 
in the string is not the same. In practise this difference is 
not so great as the calculations show, due to the potential 
balance being changed by corona formation, but there is liability 
of serious error in results with the neutral of the testing system 
grounded. 

Regarding the author’s list of specifications and tests I would 
make the following suggestions regarding some of the points 
raised. 

Method of Support. The insulator should be supported as 
nearly as possible asin service. Normally the top of the insulator 
string should be grounded in suspension insulators, and the pin 
in pin type insulators. Tests thus should always be made with 
one terminal of the testing transformer grounded. The insulator 
should be supported by approximately the same size apparatus 
as the service crossarm. The voltage should be applied to a 
conductor the same size as the line conductor, of a length suffi- 
cient to prevent concentration of stress on the ends affecting the 
test. The insulator should not approach closely any large 
bodies, and in a string of suspension insulators the line should 
probably not be closer than twice the length of the string from 
the ground surface. 

Capacity of Testing Transformer and Generator. These should 
be large enough to give a fairly heavy dynamic arc, and to 
prevent very great distortion of the wave shape, also to prevent 
the regulation of the testing system being changed by the insula- 
tor load. In general, a testing transformer with a normal rating 
of 0.5 to 1 ampere, high-tension winding, with a generator of 
equal rating to the transformer, is sufficient. ; 

Method of Determining Voltage. This should be by a device 
which indicates the maximum of the voltage wave, such as a 
spark gap. The ratio of the transformer should be checked 
against the spark gap when connected to the insulators, and this 
ratio used as a final means of determining the exact voltage. 

Method of Regulating the Voltage. This should be one which 
avoids distortion of the wave shape. The potentiometer method 
is undoubtedly the best, that is, with shunt and series resistance 
or reactance. In large power outfits this, however, is both bulky 
and wasteful of power, and a method using generator field con- 
trol within small limits and a multiple-circuit generator or low- 
tension winding on the testing transformer is very satisfactory. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2219 


Effect of Frequency.. Commercial tests are usually made at 
60 cycles, the variation between results at this frequency and 
other operating frequencies being small. High-frequency tests 
are particularly a design test and should be made only on a few 
sample insulators or a specified small percentage of the insulators. 
These tests are difficult to execute, to duplicate, and are at 
present destructive to the insulators. The impulse test outlined 
by Messrs. Imlay and Thomas is probably more definite than 
the sustained oscillations produced by an oscillation circuit, in 
which the maximum voltage is unknown. Also a sustained test 
is probably unfair to the insulator by reason of the heating of the 
dielectric under sustained high-frequency voltage. 

Wet Test. Two conditions of artificial rain are required for a 
general wet test, depending on the climate the insulators are 
to be used in. One is precipitation in large drops as in a thunder 
storm, the other being more nearly a mist. A precipitation of 
0.5 in. (12.7 mm.) per minute for the large drops and about 
0.25 to 0.3 in. (6.35 to 7.62 mm.) per minute for the mist 
gives severe enough results. The mist can be readily produced 
by sprays in which compressed air is used to atomize the water. — 
In this way the mist is blown up under a shallow petticoat of an 
insulator. The specific resistance of the rain plays a very import- 
ant part in the results. In general a fairly high specific resistance 
should be used to approximate rain conditions. In Pittsfield, 
Mass., the city water has an average specific resistance per cu. 
em. of 7500 ohms. The rain should be at an angle of 45 deg. to 
the horizontal for vertical insulators, and 45 deg. to the inside 
of horizontal or strain insulators. 

Corona. The insulator should certainly show no corona at 
normal operating voltage, and an insulator which does not show 
corona until practically the arc-over point is best, as such an 
insulator is less likely to be disrupted by sudden impulses of 
potential which may rise to a very high voltage before corona 
has time to form. : 

Design Test. A design test of twice the line voltage under 
wet conditions should be a good value, the value of the dry arc- 
over not being so important, provided it is not less than the 
wet test, which can occur in badly proportioned strings of sus- 
pension insulators. The test should be made at a barometric 
pressure equal to the mean pressure at the maximum altitude 
at which the insulator string is to operate. If this test is not 
feasible as a regular test the results should be corrected for 
altitude from experimental tests on certain of the insulators. 

Max H. Collbohm (by letter): The subject treated in the two 
papers on testing of insulators, particularly the high-frequency 
test, is of considerable importance to the transmission engineer 
for the reason that practically all insulator breakdowns are 
caused by external or internal lightning strokes of inherent 
high frequency, while hardly any insulator is damaged under 
normal operating conditions. 


2220 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


The writer has observed on two transmission systems—44,000- 
volt and 66,000-volt, 65 mi. (104.6 km.)—that breakdowns 
occurred most frequently on the strain insulators on dead-ends 
along the line, although these were composed of more units than 
the ordinary suspension. In one instance practically every strain 
insulator on the whole line was damaged by a single inductive 
stroke caused by accidentally closing a short-circuited line 
under full potential. This was very likely due to a high-fre- 
quency surge finding an easier path through the insulator in 
direct line with the power cables than over the loop connecting 
the two dead-ended lines and offering probably a high impedance 
under high frequency on account of its curved form. 

The writer has previously suggested a high-frequency insula- 
tor test at extremely high voltage and sudden application in: 
order to determine the capacity effect of the insulator under 
lightning stresses. He believes that the inherent fatigue of the 
insulator material is an important factor in the self-protecting 
qualities of the insulator against the very short lightning strokes. 
This is again a point in favor of a grounded system (over resist- 
ance) as against an ungrounded system, on account of the 
absence of the probability of continuous arcing grounds pro- 
ducing high frequency. 

The puncture between pin and top of insulator is probably 

due to the high potential gradient at the pin with its small 
dimensions and sharp corners, and improvements could be 
effected, as indicated in the papers under discussion, by care- 
fully avoiding sharp corners and small curvature on the pin, 
and by increasing the thickness of the material around the pin. 
As a further means for protection the writer would suggest 
the adaptation of a fairly large metal disk on the pin of each 
insulator in the row, as close as permissible to the head of the 
pin without reducing materially the flash-over resistance by 
approaching the petticoats too closely, and also equipping the 
insulator cap likewise with an extension of its lower rim in the 
form of a horizontal disk. This would serve, for one thing, to 
obtain a more even distribution of static stresses by shielding 
the pin as far as practicable, and it may furthermore have the 
more important function of a condenser, the action of which may 
eventually be sufficient to pass to ground any high-frequency 
charge, thus being similar in operation to the high-frequency 
arrester of recent European development. 
_ Another protection to the insulator may be available in the 
installation of arcing rods, both above and below the insulator, 
the comparatively sharp end points of these rods tending to 
break down sooner than arcing rings would, on account of the 
higher potential gradient at the ends. The writer is completing 
the erection of a 66,000-volt line equipped with these arcing 
rods and awaits with great interest the effect of this arrange- 
ment during the coming lightning season. 

The installation of arcing rods seems to have had a beneficial 


1912} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2221 


effect on one 6600-volt line put into service a year ago which 
has gone through a number of very severe storms, the effect of 
which was shown by the burning up of an outdoor fuse box and 
by the almost continuous operation of the electrolytic arrester, 
with final damage, without having caused the slightest injury 
to even a single insulator. 

It is the writer’s opinion that ideal conditions can only be 
obtained by developing each insulator so as to act as its own 
arrester, either by giving it sufficient conductance under high- 
frequency conditions by means of additional condenser capacity, 
probably arranged as mentioned above, or by preventing the 
passage of high-frequency energy over the insulator proper 
by providing a suitable choke coil between the power conductor 
and insulator (which in case of suspension insulators could be 
arranged with comparative ease and cheapness between wire 
clamp and suspension hook by a few turns of iron wire) and 
letting the arcing rods take care of the main discharge (preventing 
service interruption by the use of a grounding rheostat of lowest 
permissible current-carrying capacity to avoid opening of 
switch). 

Regarding the insulator test as a test, the writer believes that 
it ought to be made under conditions closely approaching those 
under which the insulators have to operate: 

All insulators intended for steel towers should be placed on 
steel crossarms with cable attached, to get exact static stress 
distribution. . 

All insulator wet tests should be made with a strong air 
current directed horizontally against the insulators to get the 
effect of a wind carrying the rain into the insulators. 

All insulators for service along the coast should be tested with 
salt water. 

Strain insulators should be tested horizontally with rain 
applied alternately, or perhaps simultaneously, from both sides. 

All high-voltage tests to be made under mechanical loading. 

With these points considered, the test itself (as for the buyer’s 
interest only) should otherwise be conducted about as follows: 

1. Mechanical test (continued throughout the entire test). 

2. Wet test on completed unit with hardware attached. 

3. Wet test on string of units with cable attached. 

4. High-frequency high-voltage test (wet) on string of units 
with cable attached. 

5. Dry test on single unit. 

6. High-frequency test (dry) on string of units with cable 
attached. 

7. (Optional). Tests Nos. 3, 4 and 6 repeated with arcing 
rods attached, to determine proper dimensions for the latter in 
combination with the particular insulator pattern. 

P. W. Sothman (by letter): Referring to Mr. Mershon’s 
criticism that rather undue emphasis has been laid upon factors 
of safety relative to the line voltage, it must be borne in mind 


2222 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


that owing to the lack of operating experience with potentials 
as high as 110 or 120 kv., the question of line insulation was, at 
the time, obviously one of paramount importance, and the tests 
were conducted with the end in view to ascertain first of all the 
insulator best suited to work safely at a voltage arbitrarily placed 
at twice the operating voltage under the worst condition. The 
fact that insulators may fail owing to suddenly applied excess 
voltages or surges along the line due to lightning discharges or 
other disturbances was even then pretty well appreciated and 
the records show that the selection of the type E insulator was 
made mainly because of its superiority in resisting puncture as 
compared with other insulators which stood up equally well with 
regard to the double line voltage test. 

The use of still higher voltages appears to encounter certain 
limitations, and although it is now fully realized that the problem 
of insulating the line against lightning disturbances is one quite 
different from that of insulating against line voltage only, it is 
nevertheless apparent that a radical departure from the method 
employed at the present time for insulating the line must be adopt- 
ed, if transmission voltages much above 130 or 150 kv. are to be 
used in future. A mere increasing of units of the present suspen- 
sion insulator will not afford the insulating value which could be 
expected from the amount of porcelain and space employed. An 
increase in insulation simply by increasing the dimensions of 
the material either in linear or in cubic direction proportionately 
to increased line voltage, will not work out satisfactorily with 
the present methods of insulator design, and unless a more 
scientific method is devised the use of higher voltages should be 
considered with more conservatism than has been displayed in 
some cases. 


L. E. Imlay (by letter): We set out to develop a pin type 


insulator adapted for use on 44,000-volt circuits which would 
not puncture with lightning discharges. The plan we adopted 
was to take an insulator already designed for 44,000-volt service, 
subject it to the stresses which it would receive in actual service, 
and vary its size and shape until the desired result was secured. 
The nearest approximation to lightning that we could obtain was 
the discharge from a 750,000-volt, 500-kw. transformer. 

In the course of the tests we found that the most effective way 
to secure the desired results was to reduce the width of the 
petticoats. When these were entirely removed the desired 
result was obtained, so far as resisting puncture was concerned. 
This is shown by test No. 14, in which the insulator consisted of 
a cylinder of electrose about 5 in. (12.7 cm.) high and 5 in. in 


diameter. This insulator, however, would not answer our | 


requirements, as it flashed over the surface on 60 cycles wet at 
33,500 volts. It is highly probable, however, that the insulator, 
even in this form, would have been adequate for 44,000-volt 
service in places where its surface would not become covered 
with dust from chemical works and where rain water only could 
get on it. 


——_ 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2223 


The idea of a high-tension line insulator without petticoats 
was so novel that we could not make up our minds to go any 
further in this direction, although the next logical step would 
have been to increase the height of the cylinder until the required 
leakage surface was obtained. We finally adopted a compromise 
design involving the use of a wooden pin. which was equivalent 
to lengthening the cylinder. We retained considerable of the 
petticoat feature, but a plain cylinder without these projections 
would probably have been better. 

Transmission lines can be adequately protected from lightning 
by the installation of a sufficient number of overhead guard wires. 
If the system is of sufficient importance to warrant the expense ° 
necessary to provide this method of protection, insulators we 
already have available are adequate. If, however, this expense 
is not justified, insulators should be provided which will not be 
injured by lightning and which will remain in condition after 
lightning discharges and the arcs consequent thereto have 
passed over their surfaces, so that the line can be placed in service 
immediately after an interruption. Such an insulator will 
perform the functions of a lightning arrester. I believe each line 
insulator should be an adequate lightning arrester and a system 
equipped with such insulators should have no need of an elabor- 
ate lightning arrester equipment at the stations to protect the 
generating and transforming apparatus. I trust the slight 
amount of work which we have done in beginning this investiga- 
tion will lead to the development of a reliable insulator which 
will answer these requirements. 

P. H. Thomas (by letter): By the expression “high fre- 
quency,” in our paper, is meant an abrupt or steep wave-front 
rather than a sustained high-frequency vibration. It is very 
unlikely that anything more than a very few rapidly decreasing 
waves would be produced by the high-potential discharge of 
this apparatus. 

Care should be taken to distinguish between the breakdown 
of insulating material by constantly applied sustained high-fre- 
quency potentials, and the tests of this paper. The former may 
cause the failure of very strong insulators in virtue of the rapid 
cumulative heating due to the dielectric losses produced by the 
alternating high-intensity static field, while in the tests described 
in our paper the high-frequency shocks were not sustained and 
a space of time occurred between each application and the next. 
No evidence of heating could be found either inside or outside 
the insulator until after an arc had passed. 

Perhaps the most interesting question raised during the dis- 
cussion is that of the cause or nature of the marked preference 
of the high-frequency discharge for puncturing the insulator 


-Gnstead of flashing over. It has been argued that an air gap 


requires a certain amount of time to break down, which time is 
greater than the amount of time required for the solid material 
to break down, and consequently that if the time of application 


2224 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


of voltage were too short to permit the air gap to break down 
when its normal breakdown voltage limit was reached by the 
rising wave, the impressed voltage would go on rising above this 
limit until the breakdown limit of the solid material was reached. 
This explanation seems plausible enough and will explain the 
phenomenon, provided it be true that the spark gap in air does 
require alonger time to break down than the solid material, and 
provided, further, that the actual minimum limit of time required 
for such a breakdown in air is actually greater than the time 
required for the potential to rise to its maximum in these tests, 
and at the same time, that the time required for the breakdown 
of the solid material is less than the time required to reach full 
potential. If all of these conditions are true it is a rather remark- 
able coincidence. 

It does not seem probable to the writer that there is any such 
length of time required to start a discharge across an air gap as 
is required for the potential to rise in the present case. It is true, 
as pointed out by Mr. P. M. Lincoln, and more in detail by Mr. 
Brand, that the initial discharge to the insulator top before 
breakdown will be at a higher frequency than the main discharge 
(perhaps four to six times as high), yet the period is so long com- 
pared with the numerous known instances of sparks from far 
higher frequency, that its likelihood seems very small. 

If an air gap could not break down as rapidly as the voltage 
was impressed on the air gap in this case, it would not be possible 
to operate Tesla coils as they are operated, for the voltage on 
the terminals of the coil secondaries would be reversed before 
a spark could occur. Similarly with the famous Hertz researches, 
where far, far higher frequencies were used than in these tests. 
Hertz could not have gotten sparks from his very high frequencies 
if a spark gap could not break down in a period as short as that 
of these tests. 

It may be argued that a short gap would break down more 
readily than a long one, but this would not seem to be the case, 
since the longer gap will have a proportionally higher voltage. 
In the case of the present tests the available voltage was far 
higher than the normal resistance of the spark gap, and further, 
there was immediately available a very large amount of stored 
energy from the condenser. Another point should be considered, 
that it is not necessary, in order to relieve the potential strain 
on the solid material, that a spark be established all the way 
across the gap, but merely that the charge be able to escape 
from the live metal parts into the air. 

Finally, if the air cannot break down quickly and a potential 
of 300,000 volts is thus impressed upon the solid material of 
the insulator head, those insulators having a head only 1 in. 
(25.4 mm.) thick should have invariably broken down, for they 


failed under oil at 200,000 volts. As a matter of fact there was — 


little difference in their behavior from that of those with 2-in. 
(50.8 mm.) heads. 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2225 


Mr. Peek has suggested that in the normal tests of insulators 
the formation of corona at 60 cycles permits a redistribution of 
stress over the surface of the insulator and enables it to stand 
a higher applied voltage than would otherwise be the case. 
This action is very similar to the explanation given in the paper, 
except that the effect is there attributed to insulation resistance 
rather than corona. In Fig. 9 of our paper the insulation leak- 
age paths are illustrated as through solid material, but the same 
aed would be produced if they were over the surface of the insu- 
ator. 

Mr. Brand’s discussion is much to the point, and is especially 
valuable as he was present at the tests and was familiar with 
all the apparatus. 

Mr. Mershon has asked why we consider that the effect of 
the metal foil band is to increase the effective size of the pin, 
as shown in Fig. 3 of the paper. This is because the band tends 
to take the same potential as the pin on account of its superior 
electrostatic capacity to the pin and hence acts electrically 
as part of the pin. 

Referring more broadly to the testing and inspection of high- 
tension insulators, I wish to say that Mr. Sothman’s paper gives 
an excellent treatment of the subject and fulfills the plan of the 
High-Tension Transmission Committee that this meeting should 
give a foundation or a text for a thorough general discussion of 
the subject, with the hope that at some later meeting it may 
be possible to arrive at some concrete agreement as to the essen- 
tials of a satisfactory test. 

While many thoughts are suggested by Mr. Sothman’s paper 
and the discussion thereon, I wish to call attention only to the 
point made by Mr. Brand, viz., that when a string of suspension 
insulators is used, its test strength will be greatly altered by a 
grounding of one end of the string. This effect will be the more 
marked the greater the number of units in the string and the 
greater the capacity of the individual insulators to ground, as 
compared with their internal capacity. Mr. Peek’s admirable 
paper treating of string efficiency* makes this clear. 

I would here suggest as a probable explanation of the apparent 
relative weakness of a string of insulators when used as strain 
insulators, the fact that the units will have a larger capacity 
to ground when in a nearly horizontal position than when ver- 
tical, and will therefore have a less string efficiency. if this 
be true, some designs should suffer more than others from being 
used in an inclined position, and the strings composed of many 
units should be the most affected. 

R. F. Hayward (communicated after adjournment): It is 
probably safe to say that no long-distance transmission line that 
has been equipped with insulators designed on any reasonable 
basis has ever experienced the slightest difficulty from rain or 
snow. This is absolutely true, at least, in the writer’s experience. 


* Electrical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator, in Part I, p.. 907. 


2226 HIGH-TENSION INSULATORS [Dec. 13 


Consequently all tests of insulators for breakdown under arti- 
ficial rain conditions, with ordinary frequencies, while being 
important, should be looked at more in the light of standard tests 
for strength of iron or steel or cement; in other words, some- 
thing that has got down to more or less settled conditions. 

In the writer’s experience with high-tension transmission at 
50 and 60 cycles over long distances and wide areas in Utah and 
Mexico, after eliminating breakdowns due to the mechanical 
destruction of insulators from outside sources, the only brea 
downs of insulators that have passed through the standard tests 
have occurred in cases where there has undoubtedly been a high- 
frequency discharge of some kind or other, whether from light- 
ning or as the result of some sudden surge, as from a heavy short- 
circuit. 

I do not think that people interested in high-tension transmis- 
sion can have the importance of high-frequency tests too strongly 
brought before their attention, and I look forward to any inves- 
tigations that may throw additional light on this matter. 


CODE OF PRINCIPLES OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 
OF THE 
‘AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


ADOPTED BY THE Boarp oF Drrecrors, March 8, 1912. 


. General Principles. 
. The Engineer’s Relations to Client or Employer. 

Ownership of Engineering Records and Data. 

. The Engineer’s Relations to the Public. 
. The Engineer’s Relations to the Engineering Fraternity. 
. Amendments. 

While the following principles express, generally, the engineer’s rela- 
tions to client, employer, the public, and the engineering fraternity, it 
is not presumed that they define all of the engineer’s duties and obliga- 
tions. 


Hmiovow > 


A. GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

1. In all of his relations the engineer should be guided by the highest 
principles of honor. 

2. It is the duty of the engineer to satisfy himself to the best of his 
ability that the enterprises with which he becomes identified are of legiti- 
mate character. If after becoming associated with an entervrise he finds 
it to be of questionable character, he should sever his connection with it 
as soon as practicable. } 


B. THE ENGINEER'S RELATIONS To CLIENT OR EMPLOYER 


3. The engineer should consider the protection of a client’s or employer’s 
interests his first professional obligation, and therefore should avoid 
every act contrary to this duty. If any other considerations, such as 
professional obligations or restrictions, interfere with his meeting the 
legitimate expectation of a client or employer, the engineer should inform 
him of the situation. 

4, An engineer can not honorably accept compensation, financial or 
otherwise, from more than one interested party, without the consent 
of all parties. The engineer, whether consulting, designing installing 
or operating, must not accept commissions, directly or indirectly, from 
parties dealing with his client or employer. 

5. Anengineer called upon to decide on the use of inventions, apparatus, 
or anything in which he has a financial interest, should make his status in 
the matter clearly understood before engagement. 

6. Anengineer in independent practise may be employed by more than 
one party, when the interests of the several parties do not conflict; and it 
should be understood that he is not expected to devote his entire time to 
the work of one, but is free to carry out other engagements. A consulting 


2227 


2228 CODE 


engineer permanently retained by a party, should notify others of this 
affiliation before entering into relations with them, if, in his opinion, the 
interests might conflict. 

7. An engineer should consider it his duty to make every effort to 
remedy dangerous defects in apparatus or structures or dangerous con- 
ditions of operation, and should bring these to the attention of his 
client or employer. 


C. OWNERSHIP OF ENGINEERING RECORDS AND DATA 


8. It is desirable that an engineer undertaking for others work in 
connection with which he may make improvements, inventions, plans, 
designs, or other records, should enter into an agreement regarding their 
ownership. >. 

9. If an engineer uses information which is not common knowl- 
edge or public property, but which he obtains from a client or em- 
ployer, the results in the form of plans, designs, or other records, should 
not be regarded as his property, but the property of his client or em- 
ployer. 

10. If an engineer uses only his own knowledge, or information 
which by prior publication, or otherwise, is public property and ob- 
tains no engineering data from a client or employer, except performance 
specifications or routine information; then in the absence of an agree- 
ment to the contrary the results in the form of inventions, plans, designs, 
or other records, should be regarded as the property of the engineer, and 
the client or employer should be entitled to their use only in the case for 
which the engineer was retained. 

11. All work and results accomplished by the engineer in the form of 
inventions, plans, designs, or other records, that are outside of the field 
of engineering for which a client or employer has retained him, should be 
regarded as the engineer’s property unless there is an agreement to the 
contrary. 

12. When an engineer or manufacturer builds apparatus from designs 
supplied to him by a customer, the designs remain the property of the 
customer and should not be duplicated by the engineer or manufacturer for 
others without express permission. When the engineer or manufacturer 
and a customer jointly work out designs and plans or develop inventions 
a clear understanding should be reached before the beginning of the work 
regarding the respective rights of ownership in any inventions, designs, 
or matters of similar character, that may result. 

13. Any engineering data or information which an engineer obtains 
from his client or employer, or which he creates as a result of such infor- 
mation, must be considered confidential by the engineer; and while he 
is justified in using such data or information in his own practise as forming 
part of his professional experience, its publication without express per- 
mission is improper. 

14. Designs, data, records and notes made by an employee and refer- 
ring exclusively to his employer's work, should be regarded as his em- 
ployer’s property. 

15. A customer, in buying apparatus, does not acquire any right inits 
design but only the use of the apparatus purchased. A client does not 


EEE ——-— = 


a0 2229 


acquire any right to the plans made by a consulting engineer except for 
the specific case for which they were made. 


D. THE ENGINEER’S RELATIONS TO THE PUBLIC 


16. The engineer shoyld endeavor to assist the public to a fair and cor- 
rect general understanding of engineering matters, to extend the general 
knowledge of engineering, and to discourage the appearance of untrue, 
unfair or exaggerated statements on engineering subjects in the press or 
elsewhere, especially if these statements may lead to, or are made for the 
purpose of, inducing the public to participate in unworthy enterprises. 

17. Technical discussions and criticisms of engineering subjects should 
not be conducted in the public press, but before engineering societies, or 
in the technical press. 

18. It is desirable that first publication concerning inventions or 
other engineering advances should not be made through the public press, 
but before engineering societies or through technical publications. 

19. It is unprofessional to give an opinion on a subject without being 
fully informed as to all the facts relating thereto and as to the purposes 
for which the information is asked. The opinion should contain a full 
statement of the conditions under which it applies. 


E. THe ENGINEER’s RELATIONS To THE ENGINEERING FRATERNITY 


20. The engineer should take an interest in and assist his fellow ens 
gineers by exchange of general information and experience, by instruction 
and similar aid, through the engineering societies or by other means. He 
should endeavor to protect all reputable engineers from misrepresentation. 

21. The engineer should take care that credit for engineering work is 
attributed to those who, so far as his knowledge of the matter goes, are 
the real authors of such work. 

22. An engineer in responsible charge of work should not permit non- 
technical persons to overrule his engineering judgments on purely en- 
gineering grounds. 

F. AMENDMENTS 


Additions to, or modifications in, this Code may be made by the Board 
of Directors under the procedure applying to a by-law. 


HISTORY OF THE CODE 


At the Milwaukee Convention in May, 1906, Dr. Schuyler Skaats 
Wheeler delivered his presidential address on “Engineering Honor.” It 
was the sense of the Convention that the ideas contained in this address 
should be embodied in a Code of Ethics for the electrical engineering 
profession, and to this end the following committee was appointed in 
October, 1906: 

SCHUYLER SKAATS WHEELER, Chairman. 
H. W. Buck CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 

In May, 1907, the committee reported a code to the President and Board 
of Directors for discussion at the June Convention at Niagara Falls. It 
was discussed and adopted by the Convention but later the adoption had 
to be set aside on account of the provisions of the Constitution prohibiting 


2230 CODE 


Conventions from acting upon questions affecting the Institute’s organiza- 
tion or policy. 

It was taken up by the Board of Directors on August 30, 1907, revised, 
printed and submitted to the membership for suggestions to be sent to 
a new committee appointed by President Stott. 

It lay dormant until June, 1911, when, in accordance with a resolution 
of the Board of Directors, President Jackson appointed a committee. 
The personnel of this committee, as reappointed by President Dunn in 
August, 1911, is as follows: 

GEORGE F. SEVER, Chairman. 
H. W. Buck CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 
SAMUEL REBER Henry G. Storr 
SCHUYLER SKAATS WHEELER 


This committee’s work was presented in a report to the Board of’ 


Directors on February 9, 1912, when the code was tentatively adopted. 
After a month’s careful analysis and consideration of numerous sugges- 
tions from the advisory members of the committee and others, the 
completed code was adopted at the meeting of the Board of Directors on 
March 8, 1912. 

At the meeting of February 9, the title of the committee and of the 
code was changed from that of Code of Ethics to Code of Principles of 
Professional Conduct. 

The committee was assisted by eighteen advisory members appointed 
by the President. Their names are appended. 


WitiiaM S. BARSTOW HENRY H. Norris 
Louris BELL RaLeH W. POPE 
Joun J. Carty Harris J. RYAN 
FrANcIS B. CROCKER CHARLES F. Scott 
DuGaLp C. JACKSON SAMUEL SHELDON 

A. E. KENNELLY WILLIAM STANLEY 
Joun W. Lies, Jr. Lewis B. STILLWELL 
C. O. MAILLOUX EL1inu THOMSON 


RateH D. MERSHON W. D. WEAVER 


ee 


= oe 
*y 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR THE FISCAL 
YEAR ENDING APRIL 30, 1912 


The Board of Directors of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers herewith presents to the members of the Institute its annual report 
for the fiscal year ending April 30, 1912. 

Brief summaries of the work of the various standing and special com- 
mittees are included in the report, and also a detailed financial statement 
showing the condition of the respective funds of the Institute, the receipts 
and disbursements for the year, the assets and liabilities, and acon- 
densed cash statement. 

Notwithstanding the fact that the disbursements for the year far exceed 
those of all previous years, as a result of the constantly increasing activ- 
ity and scope of the Institute, there is an excess in the receipts over the 
disbursements of $5,574.35. 

Upon recommendation of the Finance Committee, the Institute pur- 
chased for investment,, in June 1911, $15,000 par value Wilmington 
Del., 43 per cent. registered bonds. 

The Board of Directors has held nine regular monthly meetings at 
Institute headquarters during the year, and one meeting at the Chicago 
Convention in June 1911. 

The Annual Convention was held in Chicago June 26-30, 1911. sitive 
registered attendance was 578 members. and 386 guests, a total of 964, 
which was the largest convention attendance in the history of the Institute. 

The Pacific Coast Meeting was held in Portland, Oregon, April 16-20, 
1912, and was attended by 210 members and guests, including delegations 
from all the principal Pacific Coast cities. 

A three day meeting under the auspices of the Pittsburgh Section and 
the Industrial Power Committee, in conjunction with the Association of 
Iron and Steel Electrical Engineers, was held in Pittsburgh April 25-28, 
1912. The attendance at this meeting was 265. 

At the Chicago, Portland and Pittsburgh meetings, in addition to 
the large number of excellent papers presented and discussed, the pro- 
grams included inspection trips and other interesting features arranged 
by local committees, which were both enjoyable and profitable to all 
who participated. 

During the year President Dunn presided at the Pittsburgh meeting and 


“at the Pacific Coast meeting at Portland. He also visited the Sections 


at Ithaca, Cleveland, Boston, San Francisco, Los Angeles, St. Louis and 


Lynn. 
At the Chicago Convention the resignation of Mr. Ralph W. Pope 


2231 


2232 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 21 


as Secretary of the Institute, was tendered and accepted, and the Board 
of Directors, in recognition of Mr. Pope’s long and loyal services to the 
Institute, appointed him to the position of Honorary Secretary, in which 
capacity the Institute still has the benefit of his long experience in its 
affairs. 

Mr. Pope devotes his time principally to the welfare of the Sections 
and Branches, and during the year he has visited the following Sections: 
Ithaca, Schenectady, Chicago, Cleveland, Toledo, Washington, Min- 
nesota, Indianapolis-Lafayette, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Portland, 
Seattle, and Vancouver; also the Branches at Armour Institute and 
Lewis Institute, Chicago, and Throop Polytechnic Institute, Pasadena. 
Upon his return trip from the Pacific Coast Convention at Portland he 
also addressed a meeting of members at Spokane, Wash., where a move- 
ment is on foot to establish a Section. 

At the first meeting of the Board of Directors in the present adminis- 
trative year, held on August 22, 1911, there was inaugurated a policy 
of publicity in Institute affairs, and accordingly a resumé of the 
actions of the Board has been sent to the technical press and all Di- 
rectors and members of committees immediately after each meeting. 

Mr. S. Z. de Ferranti, President of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, 
of Great Britian, visited this country in September, 1911, in company 
with several other prominent engineers. A luncheon in honor of the dis- 
tinguished guest was given by the Institute officers and past-presidents 
in New York on September 29th. 

A delegation of Institute members attended the International Elec- 
trical Congress and the meeting of the International Electrotechnical 
Commission held in Turin, Italy, in September, 1911. Reports of both 
meetings were published in the November, 1911, issue of the Institute 
PROCEEDINGS. 

At the October meeting of the Board of Directors, the President was 
requested, in view of the cordial hospitality shown by the Italian author- 
ities and members of the Associazione Elettrotecnica Italiana to the 
representatives of the United States and the American Institute of Elec- 
trical Engineers attending the Congress at Turin, to appoint a committee 
to draft suitable resolutions expressing the appreciation of the Institute 
for the honors and distinctions the American representatives had received. 
In reporting these resolutions at the November Board meeting the 
committee suggested that in the case of the Associazione Elettrotecnica 
Italiana a more substantial evidence of appreciation and good will 
would be fitting and desirable, and recommended the presentation to 
the Associazione of a bust of Joseph Henry. Arrangements have been 


made for the formal presentation of the bust at the Annual Meeting on . 


May 21. 

A bronze bust of the distinguished German scientist, Hermann von 
Helmholtz, was presented to the Institute last fall by Mr. Edward D. 
Adams, to whom the Institute is indebted for many benefactions in the 
past. The formal presentation of the bust to the Institute was the feature 
of the Institute meeting held in New York in November 1911. The 
Verband Deutscher Elektrotechniker was represented at- the meeting 
by Dr. Adolf Franke of Berlin. 


1912} REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2233 


On October 13, 1911, resolutions were adopted by the Board directing 
the Editing Committee to regard as standard practise and to continue 
the insertion in its publications of metric equivalents, after each expres- 
sion of values in English measures; also that the Institute adopt the 
standard international symbology decided upon by the International 
Electrotechnical Commission; also that the Institute adopt as the standard 
direction for expressing advancement of phase ir graphic diagrams of 
alternating-current quantities the counter-clockwise direction standardized 
by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 

The President was also authorized to correspond with the officers of the 
leading European societies of electrical engineers with a view to establishing 
reciprocal visiting member privileges for the mutual advantage of European 
electrical engineers visiting the United States and American engineers visit- 
ing the various countries of Europe. 

At the November 1911 meeting of the Board a new By-law was adopted 
providing for preliminary nominations of officers of the Institute by 
petition. This has met with general approval, as was evidenced in the 
recent nominations for officers for 1912-1913. 

On January 12, 1912, Mr. F. L. Hutchinson, formerly Assistant Secre- 
tary, and Acting Secretary since Mr. Pope’s resignation, was appointed 
by the Board of Directors as Secretary of the Institute, to fill the un- 
expired term of Mr. Ralph W. Pope. 

The Board also unanimously approved the proposed amendment to 
the Constitution providing for the appointment of the Secretary by the 
Board instead of his election by the membership, and directed that this 
amendment be submitted to the membership for a vote. 

At the same meeting, in accordance with the provision of the Consti- 
tution by which Honorary Members may be chosen from among those who 
have rendered acknowledged eminent service to electrical engineer- 
ing, Professor Andre Blondel, of Paris, Mr. C. E. L. Brown, of Baden, 
Switzerland, Dr. Emil Budde, of Berlin, Mr. Sebastian Z. de Ferranti, 
of London, and Professor Antonio Pacinotti, of Pisa, Italy, were elected 
Honorary Members. These were the first names to receive the distinc- 
tion of honorary membership since 1892. 

A trip to the Panama Canal for members and their guests was author- 
ized by the Board last fall, and on January 17, 1912, a party of 59 mem- 
bers and guests sailed from New York on the steamer Almirante. Another 
party of 51 members and guests left New Orleans on the steamer Cartago 
on January 20. The parties combined at Panama, and were afforded 
unusual facilities for inspecting the engineering features of the great 
canal. A report of the trip was published on page 283 of the March 
PROCEEDINGS. 

On February 9, the Board adopted a resolution recognizing the pro- 
priety of permitting the use to the members of the columns of the Pro- 
CEEDINGS for the expression of their criticisms and views on Institute 
affairs. Since the passage of this resolution ‘‘ The Forum ’”’ has been 
used to a considerable extent for the discussion of various questions, 
particularly the constitutional amendments. 

In addition to the work mentioned in this report, much has been ac- 
complished by the various permanent and special committees as re- 


2234 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 21 


ported from time to time in the Institute PROCEEDINGS. From the fore- 
going statements and the following brief reports of the work of many 
of the committees, it will be seen that the Institute’s field of activity 
is constantly broadening, and that a vast amount of useful work has been 
accomplished during the past year. 

Sections Committee.—The Sections Committee is able to report an 
increased activity in its work during the past year. In line with similar 
statements of previous years, the activities of the Sections Committee 
are summarized in the following table. 


Year Ending 


May 1 May 1 May1 | Mayl : May 1 
1908 | 1909 1910 1911 | 1912 
SECTIONS en 
Number of Sections.......... 21 24 25 | 25 28 
Number of Section meetings | 
GIG 0 ot audepcetta iis. aisle om } 141 169 IRG a} 208 231 
Total.attondance. .e5 Sviels.cis 7,476 16,427 16,694 | 15,243 19,800 
| 
BRANCHES . 
Number of Branches......... 22 26 31 36 42 
Number of Branch meetings ~ / | 
Olah ca akaeerenstees oneka. oe | 143 | 198 | 237 | 255 281 
Attendance Ye. <seeenes aes PRa128 8,443 | 10,255 10,714 | 10,255 


| \ | \ 


The foregoing table does not show by any means all of the increased 
activities of our various Sections. Not only has the amount of work 
increased as indicated in the foregoing table, but the character has during 
the last year or two shown a marked improvement. The number of origi- 
nal papers which is being produced by our various Sections is increasing 
to an astonishing degree. Practically every Section now has presented 
at its meetings original papers of a value which is comparable to that of 
the papers presented at the regular Institute meetings. Not only have 
the Section meetings themselves shown increased activity and improved 


character, but the recent movement to hold regular Institute meetings” 


in various parts of the country has done much to stimulate Section 
activity. In addition to the regular Section meetings shown in the pre- 
ceding summary, regular Institute meetings have been held in Boston, 
Mass., Portland, Oregon, Pittsburgh, Pa., and in Schenectady, N. Y. 
Some of these meetings have occupied a period of three days. 

As indicated in the summary, three new Sections have been added 
during the past year; namely, at Lynn, Mass., Indianapolis-Lafayette, 
and Vancouver, B. C. These new Sections have taken hold well, and 
already 20 meetings, with a total attendance of 2,249, have been held by 
these three new Sections. 

Six new Branches have been added during the year as follows: Uni- 
versity of California, Ohio Northern University, Oklahoma Agricultural 
and Mechanical College, Rose Polytechnic Institute, University of Vir- 
ginia, and Yale University. 


ee 


1912] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2235 


The uniform basis of Section expenditures which was adopted a year 
ago is working to the satisfaction of all concerned. 

In brief, the Sections Committee reports a satisfactory year. 

Meetings and Papers Committee.—During the year this committee 
has arranged for eight regular meetings in New York, and has co-operated 
in and approved the programs for the Pacific Coast Meeting held in 
Portland, Ore., April 16th to 20th, 1912, and the Industrial Power Meet- 
ing held in Pittsburgh, April 25th to 27th, 1912. A total of thirty technical 
papers were presented and discussed at these meetings. The committee 
has also approved the plans and program for the meeting to be held in 
Schenectady, N. Y., on May 17th. At this meeting, which is under the 
auspices of the Schenectady Section, ten papers will be presented. 

At the 1911 Annual Convention held in Chicago under the auspices 
of last year’s committee, 35 technical papers were presented. Prepara- 
tions are now being made for the 1912 Annual Convention to be held in 
Boston, June 24th to 28th, at which about 35 papers upon a wide variety 
of subjects will be presented. The program will include joint sessions 
with the Illuminating Engineering Society and the Society for the Pro- 
motion of Engineering Education. 

New York Reception Committee.—This committee was established 
by the Board of Directors in December, 1911, to raise funds for and 
to take charge of the smokers which have been held in the Institute 
rooms immediately after the technical sessions at the New York meetings. 
These smokers have enjoyed an increasing popularity very greatly in- 
creasing the attendance at the meetings and affording an excellent 
opportunity for social intercourse of members and their guests. The 
finances to defray the expenses of the smokers have been collected by 
the Reception Committee in the form of voluntary contributions. 

This committee also arranged for a dinner which was attended by 
members of the Board of Directors and several Past-Presidents on April 
Ist, 1912, in honor of Mr. C. E. L. Brown, of Switzerland, who had 
recently been elected an Honorary Member of the Institute. 

Railway Committee—The committee avoided any efforts to obtain 
papers which would not add materially to electric railway information, or 
which might be in the nature of duplication of other papers. 

One notable contribution along a new line was arranged for by the 
committee; that by President Samuel Insull of the Commonwealth 
Edison Company, on the general subject of consolidating power plants, 
and treating the railway demands, whether urban, interurban or trunk 
line, simply as large customers in a general system. On the presentation 
of this paper it was decided to have it revised and printed for presentation 
at the Annual Convention in Boston in June for discussion. 

Realizing that much of the opposition to the electrification of trunk 
line railways is due to lack of detailed operative information, as well as 
figures of first cost of installation, a series of blanks have been prepared 
by a sub-committee which it is hoped may be filled up by the various 
important steam railways operating electrical sections so that there may 
be strictly comparative information at hand. 

High-Tension Transmission Committee.—Every Section and Branch 
has held a special meeting on high-tension transmission work, and there 


2236 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 21 


has been an extremely broad and general discussion of all active high- 
tension subjects. There is to be a regular Institute meeting at Schenec- 
tady in May, half of which will be devoted to high-tension transmission 
work, and a session will also be devoted to the subject at the Annual 
Convention at Boston in June. There has been a great deal of cor- 
respondence with different Sections and Branches, and in many cases 
speakers have been arranged for by the committee. 

Electric Lighting Committee.—The Electric Lighting Committee has 
obtained five papers during the year on electric lighting subjects. One 
of these was presented at the Pacific Coast Meeting held in Portland, 
Oregon, in April, and the other four will be presented at the Institute’s 
Boston Convention in June. 

Industrial Power Committee.—The Industrial Power Committee 
organized in Pittsburgh, in connection with the Pittsburgh Section, a joint 
meeting with the Association of Iron and Steel Electrical Engineers. The 
meeting was held April 25-27, and 10 papers on various subjects relating to 
industrial power were presented. The committee has also obtained a 
number of papers for presentation at the Annual Convention. 

Telegraphy and Telephony Committee.—This committee has held one 
meeting during the year, and has carried on considerable correspondence. 
The committee has obtained a number of valuable papers dealing with 
telegraphy and telephony. Some of these were presented at the Pacific 
Coast Meeting in Portland, Oregon, in April, and others will be presented 
at the Annual Convention in Boston in June. 

Power Station Committee.—It was the intention of the Power Station 
Committee to have a meeting under its auspices at which would be 
presented a number of brief papers descriptive of the latest developments 
in the constituent parts of a typical large power station. As the season 
advanced, however, it was found that the amount and variety of material 
offered made it unnecessary to set aside a meeting for this specific purpose 
but the main items were covered in other meetings during the year. 

Electrochemical Committee.—At the beginning of the season the 
Electrochemical Committee endeavored to get a sufficient number of 
papers on electrochemical subjects to devote one of the regular monthly 
meetings of the Institute in New York to electrochemistry. It was not 
possible to obtain the papers in time for such a meeting, and the com- 
mittee therefore decided to postpone the presentation of the papers until 
the Annual Convention. The committee has succeeded in obtaining 
for the convention six papers, and a session will be devoted to the subject. 

Electrophysics Committee.—This new committee was created by the Board 
in recognition of the fact’ that Electrophysics has ceased to be solely science 
and has become an important practical factor in electrical engineering. It 
was appointed late in the year and therefore has not been able to accomplish 
as much as it might have done if appointed at the usual time. No meetings 
have been held during the few months that elapsed since the committee was 
appointed, but it has secured a number of papers on various subjects included 
within the field of electrophysics for the Boston Convention, and it is 
believed that next year’s committee on electrophysics will find it possible 
to secure a larger number of valuable papers on this subject. 

Educational Committee.—The Educational Committee was reorganized 
on account of the resignation of the original chairman and the appoint- 


OO EE EEE EEE 


~~ 
cA: 


1912] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2237 


ment of his successor last October. At the first meeting thereafter, it 
was decided to take up the consideration and study of vocational and 
industrial education in the United States. The subject was divided into 
parts, as follows: 

A study of the present schools now established in which distinction 
is made between those maintained by industrial corporations for their 
own purposes, those maintained by public taxes, and those maintained 
by private benevolences; the second part, a study of the laws in existence 
for the establishment and maintenance of vocational schools; third, 
from the data gathered, the presentation of such elementary principles 
as appear from experience to be wise in the development of this particular 
form of education. 

The committee divided the country into several sections and members 
were assigned to sections for gathering data and information with regard 
to existent schools. A member of the committee was assigned for the 
project of gathering together all laws on vocational education at present 
existent in the United States. Much work has been done by the com- 
mittee as above outlined and arrangements have been made with the 
Meetings and Papers Committee to have the results presented at the 
Annual Convention. 

Editing Committee.—Since April 30, 1911, there have been edited and 
published 12 numbers of the PRocEEDINGS. The total number of 
pages contained in these PROCEEDINGS is 2,582. Of these, 404 pages have 
appeared in Section I, and 2,178 in Section II. Volume XXX _ of 
the TRANSACTIONS, consisting of the papers and discussions presented 
during the calendar year 1911 and the report of the Board of Directors 
for the fiscal year ending April 30, 1911, will be issued in three parts, 
and will contain about 2,700 pages, more than any previous volume of 
the Institute TRANSACTIONS. With the third part still to be printed, the 
first two parts contain 1,742 pages, only six pages less than the whole of 
Volume XXIX. 

The reports and discussions submitted by the Sections and Branches, 
and the discussions presented at the regular Institute meetings, have been 
edited and published under the supervision of the Editing Committee. 

Standards Committee——The Standards Committee has held monthly 
meetings in New York. It was voted that no new edition of the Standard- 
ization Rules should be issued this year. A sub-committee was, however, 
appointed to collect material for a complete revision of the Rules. 

A post-card invitation was issued from the Institute office to all Mem- 
bers and Associates requesting that suggestions for amendments and modi- 
fications in the Rules should be forwarded to the secretary of the com- 
mittee, with a view of being included, if approved, at the next revision. 

A special sub-committee was also appointed to consider the modifi- 
cations in the Rules for the rating of machinery. _ 

The following subjects have occupied the attention of other special 
sub-committees during the year: electric cable terminology, definitions 
for the Committee on Code of Principles of Professional Conduct, co- 
operation with like committees of other societies, international copper 
resistivity standards, questions of international nomenclature and 


international rating. Action was taken on some of the above subjects, 


ac well as on others not included in the list. 


2238 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 21 


Communications have been held with the Bureau of Standards, and 
also with the American Society for Testing Materials, in regard to the 
preparation of a new electrical table of copper wires. 

Communications have also been exchanged with the U. S. National 
Committee of the International Electrotechnical Commission. 

Code Committee.—The Code Committee held a meeting on March 12, 
1912, with representatives of the National Electric Light Association, the 
Association of Edison Illuminating Companies, and the National Inspec- 
tors Association, and concurred in a joint recommendation to the National 
Fire Protection Association in regard to the grounding of secondaries. 

On March 27, 1912, Mr. Farley Osgood, representing the A. I. E. E., 
attended the annual conference of the Electricity Committee of the 
National Fire Protection Association. Mr. Osgood’s report is printed 
in full in the May PROCEEDINGS. 

Law Committee.—The Law Committee, in its advisory capacity, has 
during the year presented its views with reference to the provisions of 
the Constitution bearing upon actions of the Sections; the publication 
of the names of candidates for nomination, and the management of the 
library; also upon certain proposed amendments of the Constitution 
with reference to the appointment of the Secretary by the Board of 
Directors, and providing for an additional grade of membership. The 
committee has also presented its opinion with reference to the Code of 
Principles of Professional Conduct. 

Under the Constitution, the Law Committee, being an advisory com- 
mittee, has undertaken no constructive work other than such as may 
be involved in the consideration of the subjects brought to its attention. 

Library Committee.—In accordance with Section 24 of the By-Laws 
of the Institute we beg leave to submit herewith our annual report for 
the year ending April 30, 1912, showing the state of the library and in- 
cluding the names of all donors to it. 

During the year a mezzanine floor with shelving capable of holding 
about 15,000 volumes has been erected at a cost of $6,196. The additional 
shelves have been filled with the books most frequently. referred to; 
they are reached by a low staircase and the books are accessible to all 
readers. The appearance of the main room has been much improved by 
this addition and the efficiency of the service of the attendants has been 
increased thereby considerably. A number of additions have been made 
to the library furniture and a new system of illumination has been installed 
at a cost of $1,481. 

A system of compilation of references to engineering literature, by 
special search through the publicationsin the library, has been inaugurated, 
the searches being made by the regular library attendants. Since itsinaugu- 
ration 181 such investigations have been made, most of them at the request 
of members residing outside of New York City. Duplicates of the related 
reports are kept on file and it has already been disclosed that several 
requests are likely to refer to the same subject matter. 

The subject card catalogue of the Schuyler Skaats Wheeler collection 
is practically completed, a few minor items remaining to be entered. 

The attendance has increased-over the previous years, even though 
the main library room was closed for three months during the alterations 
and evening admission was prohibited during September, 1911, 


OO EE 


1912] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2239 


The joint library of the Founder Societies now contains 50,000 volumes, 
receives currently 650 periodicals, and has over 1100 sets of periodicals 
and transactions. The growth amounts to about 3000 volumes per an- 
num in all languages and this includes nearly all the worthy books issued 
in the restricted field which the library represents. 

Statistical information concerning the library and its use during the 
year, including a list of donors, is given in the following tables: 


Donors 
May 1, 1911—April 30, 1912 

NDING DBS ORS a cies tesa ashe aie a eee tenes acco yrs eeu te et ates o alec 8 
PTV ARESON a Ds otiete s daniels Woutiteus eich ens. fis eyes as, Ss cage lolcteeliotace soe) ORO) ke 2 

Ame Ee Gon CELT UIN Gu siais oka sO eioheye.e 0 SS ee ETE hy 
ALLGEMEINE ELEKTRICITAT GESELLSCHAFT..............-. 1 
AMERICAN ELECTRIC RAILWAY ASSOCIATION.............-. 5 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS.......... 8 
AMERICAN SCHOOL OF CORRESPONDENCE.........20.00se00: 5 
PREINOUD RTO Ne Steere eer Seat Giiusese. at heme chaias vere oe 
BECNS DLC U ae Viemilenein me meme at eisl coe ewe teer ese: © sisi eie 0 nwo ere) eo8 %. 3,9 3 
BERLINER ELECKTRICITATS, WERKE. .....0-.0¢¢00 0030 1 
BEARISTONZS=SON, &: COMPANY: ciaas ais ceuas cist a6 4 eee exes walls 1 
CARD WEE Tans DIMAIRD © ciate «:ciescyelens ol beoucerwyelis 2) tis ass ivpea eis les Sie ed 1 
CANADA. COMMISSION OF CONSERVATION.................. lL 
CTD TERU NTE, Coe TOINES = ee Ben BE eerie DROS SCR Cure Ons one iene ane 1 
DAWES WIE LDAMIS (GOMPANY)c5 cco ceo co5 0 smal) be © siereretene) sia 1 
DINONEECRUCLBILE £COMPA NiViots cima or vieitels beth shatuneheLasatiy los ahar Wwe < 
LOW ABET ECTRICAME ASSOCIATION: . v PataG ties cae Mates 1 
LOW AGENGINDSERING) SOCIDDYcren, 2 .eiela eve tass «i meee NE Se 83 1 
TALL EEMINISTE RIOD I AGRICOLDURA: s6is0 22 )ei css 2 sire Geter 1 
AKSEINUNIES I VA AEs rete crates ace Nels oitelschsluenei arenes ws (6 ks She arene ois euelie 8 2 
PACS NEE LAAN CO NE AN Ving Were odhlekaclacinid wis cutee Sevres! a a Win ebiles 2 
IMGAMIATe ONIR MRC Sat O vty cas luzaetopete Gia ate re tale ve SERONG os ee Nk OIE 63 
MARYLAND. PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION..........-.--+--. 2 
MASSACHUSETTS GAS & ELECTRIC LIGHT COMPANY.......... 1 
MEGRA WA PUBLISHING COMPAN Vir nye «ej: le slo +1 crojene’s mieie alewe «+ nh il 
NATIONAL ELECTRIC LIGHT ASSOCIATION.....-........... 1 
\ NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION.............--+- il 
NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION...............-- Il 
NEW ENGLAND WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION.........-.02+5 1 
NEW YORK STATE. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR............--- 4 
NEWER ORICE SDA TIED LIBRARY. letawinpor a acloris is @ ete 4 me wiais a welss 1 
ONTARIO. HYDROELECTRIC POWER COMPANY............4-- 1 
RUGEY PNGINEERENG» SOCIDE Ys c-cie sono oso ors elateenee's) o sllods) aves 2 
SPON & CHAMBERLAIN..........-- tye Ay Se EE I 
SELON Ge WEBS LER meee o Meme raha tet al ool 6 wore eb el aire) sail ou i ee all 
U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. 105.0200 SE Eee ee ws 1 
U. S. NATIONAL WATERWAYS COMMISSION.........--+.0+-4 1 
UNIVERSITY OF LONDON PRESS.......--2 eee cece ter ntees 1 
1 


UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI... .- sete reer r eer ereres eet ie 


2240 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 21 


VAN NOSTRAND, D. COMPANY......-------eeeee-seereeces 9 
VILLAS Gos er aia acces oo ote ane» fo Nee eI aa ee 3 
WEAVER SOW. Dive cte cee eee keer? oe rao alcint bya ateba atetretiea sins irae 3 
DONOR UNKNOWN ls wc che cise ge ee (ol overt eel omelets: ota taxes ete apr) Seaton 1 
OLD MATERIAL. cca foo be eee ee ED ote aoe lie eaelta Pra etcetera 30 
191 
PEExChan ges. 2.6 sis oleisyeitle leis ee etnies imirehetreteet = oa bole 108 
Purchases and old material accessioned..........---+-- 191 
= 299 


Total accessions 


The following tabulation gives the state of the accounts from which 
the Library Committee is entitled to draw. 


DoNATIONS (GENERAL LIBRARY FUND) 


Dr. Cr. 
Balance Mayle 1910, oi. .c2 oc ce es $264.52 
Interest May 1, 19120)... 23... <0 6.68" Unexpended. 0 5.0%.. cence sa rears $271.15 
$271.15 $271.15 


MaiILLoux ENDOWMENT Funp ($1000) 
(Proceeds for the maintenance of certain sets of periodical publications) 


Balance. May, [5 LQ) 1. cj. ciose:s is wie $41.35 Expended 435.40 tsi Sak Wobeieands ae $7.80 
niMerGett crt sc 2) dianilecas aso rigsaere. Sieiasa x 45.00 Unexpended..... ee beeen eens 78.55 
$86.35 $86.35 


INTERNATIONAL ELEectrricaAL CoNnGRess or St. Lours, 1904, FuNb 
(Proceeds available for the purchase of non-American international electrical literature) 


Invested ine New work’ Gity 2494 “bomdse ex se swe 5,24 sn ihe wuaists cpa tere a) fst oes $2268.00 
Addi.ions to the fund 


OTS Cee SRT PESOS hte raat torent ae mace eaten 63.60 
Total Pan asecas sw hacowo MM TReT REM ASELe esl eb Tae iste ete ak a $2331.60 

Balance on hand May 1, 1911.....$219.12 
Interest to May 1, 1912........... 90,00. » Unexpended........cpalt. cease ame $309.12 
$309.12 $309.12 

WEAVER DONATION 
(Available for the purchase of early electrical literature) 

Balance on hand May 1, 1911...... $6524¢  -Expended acct sic chk VASE DE Shes $58.75 
Unexpended: ssi. onse news salen eines 6.69 


ee 


A 5s 


1912] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 9241 
INSTITUTE APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT 
Appropriation for the year..... $4500.00 Salary (one-third) of librarian, 
assistants, cataloguer and 
desk attendant May 1, 1911- 
ly EO WR en os cone ae $2700.00 
One-third running expenses of 
library May 1, 1911 to April 
SURO. 5 sumone Oe 257.98 
BOOS cs ay a oesie nad ects pea ayers ant ee 555.16 
SabseriptionS... sera «950 oer 62.80 
PnStibance rr... wetsuit retorts 88.21 
Deyhetokbole 5 cea ees ae oiy Gia cas 181.42 
IMiscellameOUS iic..-.7e fo ratouers cherries 2.25 
$3847 .82 
Unexpended balance..........- 652.18 
$4500.00 
STATISTICS OF LIBRARY MAY 1, 1912 
Source Volumes Pamphlets Valuation 
Report of May 1, 1912... .......--+ esse sees 15,293 1343 $28,035.28 
(Darctiaser sk sae Gl olaue Ga bits nail “ike 181 10 604 .37 
Gifts and exchanges. .....- 6:62 seer eee eee 267 2 569.50 
Old material accessioned........--..++eeeues 10 20 25.00 
T5751 1375 $29,234.15 


In the following table are given the figures for the total valuation of 


the Library property: > 
Fees edd Beier atlons ote actrees im, acncinnarn ts nano Sean conesyin mgt as trees $29,234.15 
Rien. § ad Rah ty hades Gige bebe GL Dae O OD OAT CAEN ON ACM Sae ia aie 1,761.05 
Furniture, catalogues, cases, etc... 5... 5002s eee re etter ete ten ens 376.00 
$31,371.20 
LIBRARY ATTENDANCE 
Day | Night Total 
— ae, 

May, EQUUE Re Were oe nicer: eee teretare eters are 833 375 1208 

June, Ce et yo sarriie dean tar hese oat eae tata sche 637 310 9AT7 

July, Bee ys, He OI cde icrayttes wists! = ahs: 40H 610 Closed 610 

August, CEE Pear casee Nie. odessa) susueniess, eColgueileh* 550 if 550 

Senamaaey SN Aboten 88 oto ac iOe Ot i eae ae 608 : 608 

October, CU Sine Seite Sea coe dod BO ome ono Ue 661 252 913 

ENG UCT Ee wks alee cyaictel aris Rsm ero oR. ~ eksiieeTetnS she 720 283 1003 

TOWN Se lou cue se ancian Gamay Co oaaoe torso 853 287 1140 

January, (OUOLS, Ale e oe odor so Boao Ubon Oe: Same 728 298 1026 

February, CN EE Pree atic, fone hates Necsyeiatiaininde 813 273 1086 

March, CRE MR Meer ctietin ts Mus ohare cess aT LN W sifs! ol "ettevay od 869 326 1195 

April, as ae ee Tastee ible o seahg Joel onses de 719 343 1062 

Total May, 1911-April, 1912.....--+:-+++> 8601 2747 11,348 

10,514 


Total May, 1910-April, 1911.....----+++-+-+> 7473 3041 


2242 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 21 


The income from the C. O. Mailloux Fund of $1000 has again been 
used to maintain the four important periodical sets which were originally 
presented to the library by Mr. Mailloux. 

Respectfully submitted, 
FREDERICK BEDELL 
MorGAN BROOKS 
ALBERT F. GANZ 
Otis ALLEN KENYON 
SAMUEL SHELDON, chairman. 
Library Committee. 


Public Policy Committee.—One of the first acts of the Board was to create 
a Public Policy Committee to which could be referred the increasing number 
of important issues affecting the Institute’s public relations. 

On November 10, 1911, the Board referred to this committee an in- 
vitation to the Institute from the National Waterways Commission of 
the U. S. Congress, to take part in a hearing at Washington, D. C. on 
November 21, 1911. 

A sub-committee of the Public Policy Committee consisting of President 
Gano Dunn and Mr. H. W. Buck prepared a preliminary report of its 
views on the development of water powers, which draft was modified 
by the Public Policy Committee and its Advisory Members to conform 
to and represent their joint opinion. President Dunn and Messrs. H. 
G. Stott, chairman, Calvert Townley, Lewis B. Stillwell, and John H. 
Finney, members of the committee, represented the Institute at the hear- 
ing in Washington. The brief presented by the Institute delegation 
and a report of the hearing were published in the December, 1911, Pro- 
CEEDINGS. ; 

The Institute representatives were given the first hearing on the after- 
noon of November 21 and the entire morning of November 22, and through 
them the thanks of Chairman Burton and other members of the Commis- 
sion were transmitted to the Institute for the information given in the 
printed brief and for its representation at the hearing. 

Patent Committee.—The Patent Committee was appointed but re- 
cently and is not yet prepared to make a final report. Thus far the work 
of the committee has been accomplished by correspondence between the 
chairman and the members of the committee. Four members of the 
committee acted as conferees at an important conference on patent matters 
held in Washington on April 15 and 16 at the call of the Patent Law As- 
sociation of Washington. 

This committee was established by the Board of Directors as a result of 
the initiative of the St. Louis Section in urging improvements in the patent 
laws of the United States. 

Code of Principles of Professional Conduct.—Originally this com- 
mittee was known as the Committee on a Code of Ethics. Its ap- 
pointment was the result of a discussion at the Milwaukee Convention, 
held in May 1906, following the presidential address of Dr. Schuyler 
Skaats Wheeler, on ‘‘ Engineering Honor.’”’ It was the sense of the con- 
vention at that time that the ideas expressed in Dr. Wheeler’s address 
should be embodied in a code of ethics for the electrical engineering 
profession. A code was prepared and discussed at the Niagara Falls 


1912} REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2243 


Convention held in June 1907. Later in the same year the code was 
revised, printed and submitted to the membership for suggestions. 

No further action was taken on the code until June 1911, when in 
accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors, President Jackson 
appointed a committee to take up the question. The committee was 
reappointed by President Dunn the following. August on his accession 
to office. 

This committee’s work was presented in a report to the Board of 
Directors on February 9, 1912, when a code of principles was tentatively 
adopted. After a month’s careful analysis and consideration of numer- 
ous suggestions from the advisory members of the committ2e and others 
the present code as printed in the April PROCEEDINGS was adopted at 
the meeting of the Board of Directors on March 8, 1912. 

The name of the committee was changed on February 9, 1912, to the 
Committee on Code of Principles of Professional Conduct. 

The committee is now considering suggestions which have been sub- 
mitted to it since the adoption of the code. 

Relations of Consulting Engineers —The Committee on Relations 
of Consulting Engineers has considered at its several meetings the matters 
referred to it, also the proper procedure and general scope of its work. 
The committee expects to be able to formulate its recommendations after 
further conferences with the representatives of other societies and of the 
various interests concerned. 

United States National Committee of International Electrochemical 
Commission.—The president and secretary of the Committee, with 
President Dunn of the Institute, attended the meeting of the I. E. C. 
at Turin (September 7-13, 1911) as delegates from the United States. 
A provisional report of the meeting was submitted by the secretary of 
the committee to the Institute’s Board of Directors, in October, and was 
published, by their direction, in the November issue of the PROCEEDINGS, 
Vol. XXX, No. 11, pages 2437-2448. 

A brief official resumé of the Turin meeting, in French and English, 
was printed and issued by the central office of the I. E.C., in London, 
in November, 1911, marked Publication 12. 

At that meeting the U. S. National Committee communicated, through 
President Dunn, to the I. E. C., a cordial invitation from the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers to hold a meeting in San Francisco in 
1915. This proposal was formally adopted. 

Under the instructions of the Board of Directors, the last edition of 
the Standardization Rules, issued by the Institute this year, contains a 
brief resume of the decisions of the Turin meeting, and also a slightly 
abridged copy of the Central Office’s publication No. 9, on “ Rating of 
Electrical Machinery,’’ being extracts from the rules of various countries. 

At the Turin meeting the I. E. C. appointed three international special 
committees on the subjects of “‘ Nomenclature, ” ‘‘ Symbols, ”’ and ‘* Rat- 
ing of Machinery, ” respectively, to report at the next plenary meeting 
in Berlin in 1913. 

The United States Committee endeavored to have delegates attend 
meetings of the two latter special committees. After some delays, Presi- 
dent C. O. Mailloux left New York on April 24, to attend, as U. S. dele- 


2244 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 21 


gate, the meeting of the ‘Committee on Rating of Machinery”’ at Paris, 
set for May 8. 

The committee has secured from the Treasury Department at Washing- 
ton an order that all official reports of the I. E. C. may be admitted free 
of duty into the United States, as scientific publications, under paragraph 
517 of the Tariff Act. 

The committee has held monthly meetings in New York City. It has 
carried on a considerable amount of correspondence with the Central 
Office and of communication with the Standards Committee. 

International Electrical Congress, San Francisco, 1915.—The project 
of holding an International Electrical Congress during the Panama Exposi- 
tion at San Francisco in 1915, first took shape in the Spring of 1911 when 
a group of Pacific Coast members organized and sent Mr. H. A. Lardner 
as a delegate to bring it to the attention of the Institute officers in New 
York. This matter was first brought to the attention of the Board at 
the June, 1911, meeting, at which a committee was appointed to consider 
the matter. Upon the recommendation of this committee the Board 
adopted resolutions in August, 1911, to the effect that the Institute 
should initiate and organize such a congress under the authority of 
the International Electrotechnical Commission. The desired authority 
was granted by thelatter body atits meeting in Turin in September, 1911. 

The following officers of the Committee on Organization of the Congress 
have been appointed by the President: Dr. Charles P. Steinmetz, Presi- 
dent; Dr. A. E. Kennelly, Vice-President in Charge of Program; Mr. 
C. O. Mailloux, Vice-President in Charge of International Relations; 
Mr. W. D. Weaver, Vice-President in Charge of Organization; Mr. 
Henry A. Lardner, Vice-President in Charge of Pacific Coast Relations; 
Dr. E. B. Rosa, Secretary; Mr. Preston S. Millar, Treasurer and Busi- 
ness Manager. 

John Fritz Medal.—The John Fritz Medal for 1911 was awarded to 
Sir William Henry White, for ‘‘ notable achievements in naval archi- 
tecture. '’ The presentation was made at a dinner of the Society of 
Naval Architects and Marine Engineers at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, 
New York, on Friday evening, November 17, 1911. The attendance 
included representatives of the principal engineering societies of the United 
States. 

Edison Medal.—The Edison Medal Committee, at its meeting held 
on November 20, 1911, selected from the names of the candidates sub- 
mitted for consideration in accordance with its by-laws, the name of 
George Westinghouse, to be voted upon in December following. 

At the meeting of the committee on December 15, 1911, a vote taken 
in accordance with its by-laws resulted in the award of the Edison Medal 
to Mr. George Westinghouse, ‘‘ for meritorious achievement in connection 
with the development of the alternating-current system for light and 
power.’’ The presentation of the medal is to be made at the Annual 
Convention to be held in Boston in June. 

Indexing Transactions Committee.—The Indexing Transactions Com- 
mittee has had prepared during the year synopses of all papers presented 
before the Institute up to and including the year 1910, and index cards 
have been prepared covering, in detail, the contents of these papers. 


1912] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2245 


The papers and cards have been largely classified and samples of typo- 
graphical arrangement have been obtained. The entire index will be 
ready for the printer this coming summer and should appear in the fall. 
There will be two parts to the index; one part covering papers up to 
and including 1900, and the second part, papers from 1901 to 1910 inclu- 
sive. The index for the year 1911 will appear in the volume for that year. 

Additional Grade of Membership.—The Additional Grade of Member- 
ship Committee (originally appointed under the name of the Inter- 
mediate Grade of Membership Committee) has considered during the 
present administration the data collected by the committees of previous 
years, and, after further investigation and discussion, prepared a draft 
of amendments to the constitution for consideration by the Board of 
Directors at its December meeting. This report was then revised in the 
light of criticisms and suggestions obtained from members of the Board 
and others, and resubmitted at the January meeting of the Boatduaat 
this meeting, the last draft with slight modification was unanimously 
adopted by the Board and recommended for submission to the membership 
as a constitutional amendment. 

The final form of the report was of the nature of a compromise between 
the rather widely varying views of the committee arrived at'by vote at 
numerous meetings held. The substance of the amendments has been so 
fully set forth in various explanatory statements published in the 
PROCEEDINGS that no further explanation is here required. The duties 
of the committee, with the exception of assisting in expounding the amend- 
ments for the benefit of the membership, were practically completed with 
the acceptance of the amendments at the Board’s January meeting. 

Board of Examiners.—The Board of Examiners has held 10 meetings 
during the year. It has considered and recommended for action by the 
Board of Directors a total of 1616 applications of all classes. A summary 
of these applications is as follows: 


Recommended for election as Associates... ....-+++++- 808 
Not recommended for election as Associates..........- 2 
Recommended for transfer to the grade of Member.... 60 
Not recommended for transfer to the grade of Member. 25 
Transfer applications considered but held for additional 
RTC TILE LON Ace cee ees cee cane d=: lenewsaboeuew one) siehe = 7 
Recommended for enrolment as students........-..-- ee 714 — 
GNA 5 Chota fete caw cabin cua chon Rese Rae ar aan 1616 


In addition to applications for admission and transfer, the Board has 
considered and reported upon a number of questions that have been 
submitted to it by the Board of Directors during the year. 

Membership.—A circular letter was mailed to each member of the 
Institute on November 28, 1911, asking for names of desirable candidates 
for admission to membership. The co-operation of Section officers was 
also enlisted. As a result, over 1,200 names were received at Institute 
headquarters. Each of these candidates was communicated with 
promptly and supplied with literature relating to the Institute and the 
advantages of membership. 

The total number of applications received during the year is 1,025. 


2246 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 21 


A complete report showing the total membership, the additions and 
deductions, and the net increase for the year is given below. 


Hon. | 
Mem. Mem. Assoc. Total 
Membership, April 30, 1911. | 1 689 6,427 rig eles 
Additions: 
Honorary Members 4 | 
New Associates...........2+6- 855 
Translerredbyrties<acacas evikeea) 1 49 
Reinstatedio. as 2a aii eee | 1 27 
Deductions: . 
Died sahce cis esieaccres Saari 1 3 29 
Resigned Hii4...uer- dw da tees | | 6 | 150 
Droppodaineuyag acil- tapvesra ones 551} 351 
Lranstorred anu <) ccnta ene ee 1 49 
ee eS le —— ais eae es aa Be 
Membership, April 30, 1912........ 5 | qa | 6,730 | 7,459 
Net increase during the year in membership.....................:. 342 


Deaths —The following deaths have occurred during the year: 

Honorary Member.—Antonio Pacinotti. 

Members.—Caryl D. Haskins, E. W. Mix, W. D. Sargent. 

Associates.—E. H. Anderson, Edwin H. Bennett, E. H. Berry, D. E. 
Black, E. B. Boor, W. R. Brixey, Lon D. Caldwell, F. T. Clarke, C. C. 
Cokefair, E. Copley, F. S. Davenport, I. T. Dyer, H. W. Fellows, J. B. 
Fleming, L. A. Freudenberg, W. C. Getz, H. L. Hart, Junzo Itoh, W. S. 
Johnson, E. M. Kenly, M. McIntyre, O. C. Poste, Roger P. Stebbins, 
H. H. Sykes, R. H. Thomas, E. G. Tracy, R. A. Turner, G. A. Wilson, 
Chas. I. Young. 

Total deaths, 33. 

Resignations.—Resigned during the year in good standing: Mem- 
bers, 6; Associates, 150; total 156. 

Delinquents.—Dropped as delinquent during the year, 356. 

Finance Committee.—The following correspondence and _ financial 
statements form a complete summary of the work of the Finance Commit- 
tee for the year. 

Boarp or D1rEcrors, NrEw York, May 14, 1912. 


American Institute of Electrical Engineers. 

Gentlemen: Your Finance Committee respectfully submits the fol- 
lowing report for the year ending April 30, 1912. 

During the past year the committee has held monthly meetings, 
has passed upon the expenditures of the Institute for various purposes, 
and otherwise performed the duties prescribed for it in the Constitution 
and By-laws. Peirce, Struss and Company, chartered accountants, 
have audited the Institute books and their certification of the Institute 
finances follows. 

In company with your Secretary and a member of the firm of chartered 
accountants, the committee has examined the securities held by the 
Institute and find them to be as stated in the accountants’ report. 

In accordance with the authority of the Board an investment from the 
surplus funds of the Institute was made during the past year amounting 
to $15,000.00 par value Wilmington City 4} per cent registered bonds. 


1912] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2247 


The expenditures of the Institute during the past year have been con- 
siderably increased due to the constantly broadening scope and activity 
of the organization, and particularly due to the increased amount. of 
technical material published in the ProcEEDINGS and TRANSACTIONS 
resulting from the extension of the policy inaugurated a few years ago 
of holding Institute meetings in various parts. of the country. Not- 
withstanding the increased budget of expenditures made necessary 
by reason of these extended activities, it is gratifying to note that the 
accompanying increase in income has resulted in a comfortable surplus 


SoS eeacabyest- Respectfully submitted, 


A. W. BERRESFORD 
Chairman, Finance Committee. 


Mr. A. W. BERRESFORD, New York, May 10, 1912. 
Chairman Finance Commtttec. 
Dear Sir; In accordance with your instructions, we have audited the 
books and accounts of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
for the year ended April 30th, 1912. 
The results of this examination are presented in four exhibits, attached 
hereto, as follows: 
Exhibit ‘‘A”’ Balance Sheet, April 30th, 1912. 
Exhibit ‘B’’ Receipts and Disbursements for general purposes for 
year ended April 30th, 1912. 

Exhibit ‘‘C’’ Receipts and Donations for designated purposes, also 
expenditures for year ended April 30th, 1912. 

Exhibit ‘‘D’’ Condensed Cash Statement. 

We beg to present, attached hereto, our certificate to the aforesaid 


exhibits. Yours very truly, 


(Signed) PErrcE, Struss & Co. 
Certified Public Accountants. 


Mr. A. W. BERRESFORD, New York, May 10, 1912. 
Chairman Finance Commuttee. 

Dear Sir: Having audited the books and accounts of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers for the year ended April 30, 1912, we 
hereby certify that the accompanying Balance Sheet is a true exhibit 
of its financial condition as of April 30th, 1912, and that the accompanying 
statements of Cash Receipts and Disbursements are correct. 

(Signed) PErrcE, Struss & Co. 
Certified Public Accountants. 


2248 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


[May 21 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
BALANCE SHEET, 


Exuisit A 

ASSETS 
CasH: 
Land, Building and Endowment Fund....--.-.++++++++0005 $5,307 .53 
General Library Fund........-e see ce cee etree r cere ees 271.15 
Life Membership Fund......... 0-2 -:seeceeee tte eersr eres 4,827.28 
General Cash"in Bankes.ii... cecere ale cine 0 + ocaisals ov elele ws ows 9,277.02 
Mailloux Fund, Interest.........-. 02 se eee cere rete renee 78.55 
Weaver Donations oo.o..cre cco cisiercin om ow wteuie sie as sigs lees ee sme. 6.69 
International Electrical Congress of St. Louis Library Fund, 

Tri SPS tiie ier cilia. tales Oh ra ate ives co naltthela reinseidite, wilalaysha ie letereryle 372.72 
Total’ Cash deposituars < oc.4.0.00wele oe ae melvin sisal eisiel=e1= Sinise 9,734.98 
Secretary’s Petty Cash on hand......-. 10-0 sees seer eens 750.00 
Land, Building and Endowment Fund, acgrued interest...... 55.28 
General Library Fund, accrued interest........---+-0+e5++5 2.82 
Mailloux Fund, accrued interest......... 0:0 eee eee cere eres 22.50 
International Electrical Congress of St. Louis Library Fund, 

ACCTUS ANtEredbs sipse doa ale cwi>  llelol ere ety ualwre eye wale «lopeia wile 45.00 
Life Membership Fund, accrued interest..........+--+++++++ 40.00 
Mailloux Fund, principal (Bond).........0.eee ee ee cere eee 
International Electrical Congress of St. Louis Library Fund, 

Ni ¥. City 44% Bonds, duc LOTT. 2.0.56 oo Ges ce ani nies vines 
New York City 44% Gold Bonds, due 1957, par............ 30,000.00 
Premium on N.Y. 44% Gold Bonds... 0.00.00 ct cneees 1,952.50 
Chicago, Burlington & Quincy 4% Bonds, due 1958 (par 

rea 146) Sib 5 OO) oa 0 oy se icof elnh ssun) San pure neva inielaty Pain pi eeLsinie as 14,606 25 
City of Wilmington, Del. 44% Bonds, due 1934............. 15,000.00 
Premium on City of Wilmington, Del. Bonds............... 997.50 
Westinghouse Elec. & Mfg. Co’s stock... ........-0-0-eeeee 50.00 


Equity in Engineering Societies Building (25 to 33 West 39th 
SSEVOGU) casiacate civiere.s s.0 a's ainsi creete OS he tee erat a Siemenrere tie Reale 353,346.61 


One-third cost of land (25 to 33 West 39th Street)........... 180,000.00 
ExDYary: V OLUNSS SNA EREUTOS se a vin wank wil, s/o egy eisivaleiees vile 30,905.78 
DransROtlOnase cee see A ks eee ee ween ate ot te eee tae 9,008.50 
OGine Parniture and: Fixtures. .<01c.15.'c ne dale rsh wh nie ene 7,915.64 
Worka.of Art, Paintiviga: ete:d.ves Sotti de cc peice tewiy le tena’ 2,656.35 
DGGGOS i sce ss Seanad act ind Wye SRE Niel ROS oh tao Ghiha aaa 463.35 
AccouNTS RECEIVABLE: 

Members for current. dues.) 65 cea watitun « aiclaie etary eieaxsanals 240.00 
Members for past dues, suspense account..............00005 8,132.00 
Members for entrance Tées ia.'75 i ialew ak ole les aie e share ahi errs 115.00 
Special Tee raGetts ss scr siwstecreine Malceenem oeisreninidin elie 76.32 
Migcellan eoteaicigcs:.%, +s, cuasals\shes.s, area. gare ays bis eat suum aie ie seca sad 265.65 
AGVOTHSINEH caisinste «v9.5 «ps ale 6:3 celine eiaTE ora Se aero eee 2,016.25 
Accrued interest’on bonds: .0.. 2... 01 cacteene sete stents 831.25 
Accrued interest on bank balance... .........0000ccccecece 132.19 


TDR Bs 554 ss:atoce:eintnslensiar Wie aioleis sp. ale oleae. eet testa Set eae 


$683,035.68 


10,405.96 


10,484.98 


165.60 
1,000.00 


2,268.00 


62,606.25 


533,346.61 


50,949.62 


11,808 .66 


1912) REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2249 


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
Aprit 30, 1912 


LIABILITIES AND SURPLUS 


FunNps: 
Land, Building and Endowment Fund..........-+eeueeeree $5,362.81 
Greferaliii brary tnd. jaja + olaivie cise s/o 016 ap0s a.0\0)e olepe «> eiesivele . 273.97 
Life Membership Funds. o. 5 0.0 c6 secs ce ve emencsor eee 4,867.28 
Matitomam barn ee nersteis cr ciatseeis seve ae leis. Aol ce wieirein leis lens sieve 1,101.05 
International Electrical Congress of St. Louis Library Fund: 
ES TIAL SMMC etere ee her ress oh e\ahaialia To, of are1 aus eicvete\aliob ers’ @lclsteye siete 2,268.00 
Cad rOM eNOS bac encieyercuncd eres isucleisTonsiedess less iolistat loll okeleiaie 372.72 
INGCLHEG AHCETESEs s ciaicle sicve cle cheleserelereiele vo eons wiereleleleie sic ave 45.00 
— —— $14,290.83 
Reserve for Furniture and Fixtures..........ss sees sere eeee 2,946.39 
Accounts Payable, subject to approval by the Finance Com- f 
Te ys enero ns SOR OND COC OO Orn OPO OIGIbeTs crs 6,984.68 
United Engineering Society (for cost of land)..........--+++- 54,000.00 
eRespaliAaliictese mics ss) s cece cei uke ssocehenasofore ete =: isisie xis 0.80.8 wielale 78,221.90 
SURPLUS: 
TES (GET repaint erei nen RAPA ES © cl Bin Ohuneto.Si Gns once oe nC Ci aa 9,277.02 
New. York City Bonds... . 2.0.0.0. vcdecs recs ee seen ee renee 31,952.50 
CMB es ON Bondss). citiettetr a nolan ais vistcieiares we e+ Sivie elewisiee 14,606.25 
City of Wilmington, Del. Bonds............+-e-eeerereeeee 15,997.50 
In property and accounts receivable........-+-+++eeereceee 532,980.51 
——_—__———.._ 604,813.78 
Total Liabilities and surplus........ Ea else's, 0% midiefestolarsie $683,035.68 


2250 


REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


[May 21 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS FOR GENERAL PURPOSES FOR YEAR 
ENDED ApRiL 30, 1912 


EXHIBIT B 3 
RECEIPTS 
Entrance Fees..... 4,303.00 
Current Dues..... 66,879.00 
Pastel iseg hee cic 4,102.50 
Advance Dues..... 450.00 
Students Dues..... 4,113.00 
Transfer Fees... .. 500.00 
Badges crac on, 1,740.00 
——————=——_ $82,087.50 
Sales, Transactions 
CEC r sisie sa eras 3847.43 
Subscriptions, Pro- 
CEEMINGS) y ae cian.» 2,084.50 
Advertising. ...... 9,513.41 
Binding wae Jone 138.00 
Exchange........... 19.31 
——_——. . 13,102.65 
INTEREST: 
Bondar. cm..7 2,625.00 
Bank Balance 597.48 
; —— 3,222.48 
Petals, ;..ccdek $98.412.63 


DISBURSEMENTS 

Stationery an 

Peisttinig 5 2 4,425.85 
Postageiis oenee dae 2,849.85 
General Expense... 2,582.27 
Meeting Expense... 5.034.21 
Section Meetings.. 9,271.33 
Badges purchased. 1,643.72 
Salariesiact.o eka 11,821.00 
Indexing Transac- 

tlons ins gowsee 822.20 
Interest on Mort- 

PASE ccc tran 2,160.00 
Office Furniture 

and Fixtures. ... 981.04 
Adver. Expense.... 3,339.41 
Year Book and 

Catalogue....... 2,896.86 
EOXPLOSssecisterieae 220.87 
Interest refunded. . 71.25 
PROCEEDINGS: 

Prinung swe ecoe 7,934.32 

Paper and Enve- 

lopetiaanieaeen se 6,002.84 
Engraving...... 1,663 .34 
Binding and 
Mailing <ooes 4,137.31 

Salariesisgore.4s 4,084.00 
TRANSACTIONS: 

Mol. 20 eo cro 8,135.76 

Vol 80 jo. siete 4,413.03 


LrBRARY_ (including salaries) 


UNITED ENGINEERING SOCIETY 
Assessments for office space 


Total sc arctecneee enieeeee 
Excess of Receipts over Dis- 
bursements.s.s<, eee 


$48,119.86 


23,821.81 


12,548.79 
3,847.82 


4,500.00 
$92,838.28 
5,574.35 


$98,412.63 


——— 


1912] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2251 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
RECEIPTS AND DONATIONS FOR DESIGNATED PURPOSES, ALSO EXPENDI- 
TURES FOR YEAR ENDED AprRiL 30, 1912 


EXHIBIT C 

RECEIPTS 
Land, Building and Endowment Fund, Donations, Interest, etc.. 316.16 
Genetal Pabrarye bund, Enterestee.c mic cicleletialeedsisieie 2 Wie elm iedaioutle)> xfs 6.63 
Compounded INDermPD SKS Ante aie rcretsess aie aietste ois, custele ayeledelnn revere (5; eis 504.29 

International Electrical Congress of St. Louis, Library Fund, Donations 

/hatGlabahncpgochtin oa Bb 8 Gott 6 Ohad HinietLO Dic OORT Len oatats Ooh O.cicth cnENC RO CROC MO RO I 103.95 
Wirelicimtkttnd cari berestepyen. perjaaite iets, «tiie ciale ie alae vy nielienente SU ekatiens 45.00 
GertiticaterOl MS DOSI Gee. - serdelrincieecie cle nie «soi ee ene, nore re:oureve delailolc a ane ne loons 1,000.00 
ASCE cll ae Pn SC ee aay a Seae ron Meet isce: av 8 he atis Totes apg Sere STON, ola ales Shee 1,976.03 

EXPENDITURES 
WA guile E98) twee tarae aierctete ce siete ctetote ers Wisie sel ore nla sudo le 8a, ¢ce: auece le a 7.80 
Life Moermbership, Fiatid cise cies ie cele orare ie creme atelier t) we ccensin «i 420.00 
City of Wilmington, Del. Bonds and interest 16,087.50 
Ae ay Te) ALAC Ca siete oeeiel co cus wees 22) veheiaunie iol ia cerelie eG stein tes nicl si oe 58.75 
Special Library Account... 2b coc ccc cc sce e tne cnet eee ct te nneee 76.32 
Shel OO Sg hg bo 8 On Om Od 2 Oo OOS OCOD: CT Onen 1 DO IOI SO NCE ROR BCE 16,650.37 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
CONDENSED CASH STATEMENT 


ExHIBIT D 
Cash on deposit April 30, 1911.......-.....ee eee ee erences $29,240.93 
Secretary’s Petty Cash, April 30, 1911..........----e+e see 750.00 
SSS SS SS $29,990.93 
Receipts for general purposes, Exhibit “ Bure tiacy arsthuesn eter 98,412.63 
Receipts for designated purposes, Exhibit Seah on a dlstets Soar ere tabels 1,976.03 
——_——_——_ 100,388.66 
130,379.59 
Disbursements for general purposes, Exhibit ““B".......... 92,838.28 
Expenditures for designated purposes, | DSdast oyhiy ALO eaeto do aomc 16,650.37 
——————— 109,488.65 
Balance on hand April 30, 1912........ 50sec eee eee ee eee ; 20,890.94 
On deposit for designated purposes, tat pub, soc) ates wiort os) aie 10,405.96 
* On deposit in General cash, Exhibit “ ARS eer teteratihe wustarter aie 9,734.98 
Secretary’s Petty Cash, Exhibit ‘A ".......-..-+++ +e eeeee> 750.00 
— 20,890.94 
Property acquired during the year, Office Furniture and 
NE EATOS TT saa ic leiohe riley sie ele oleilelbeisicleisue riser biel eVe) oun sn raayer ates 981.04 
* This includes the following unexpended balances: 
iailloumieirmidicse tnt vies else ae vo eis Holello,e «wie o.e)as)\s ig giomererens 78.55 
Weaver Donation.........+-:eseceeeeeerese : 
Int. Elec. Congress of St. Louis Library Putri etiert wchaicie ni Cee 


RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS PER YEAR PER MEMBER 
During each fiscal year for the past seven years. 


Rie Te ieekte oon yaieke cle ate Sielenardv'exs.ciele 1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 
Membership, April 30, each year. . 3870. 4521 5674 6400 6681 7117 7459 
OS a a pe 
Receipts per Member........-+-- $12.77 $12.21 $13.01 $13.21 $13.35 13.37 $13.19, 
Picpiseements per Member....... 10.48 11.62 11.73 10.49 12.03 11 .03 12.44 


sce ED Sa lg eA, es Rae 
Credit Balance per Member.... $2.29 $.59 $1.28 $2.72 $1.32 $2.34 $.76 
Respectfully submitted for the Board of Directors, 

F. L. HUTCHINSON, Secretary 


New York, May 21, 1912. 


INDEX 
PAPERS AND DISCUSSIONS 


Application of Electric Drive to Paper Calenders. (Illustrated.) 

PSO Aa rSe LR ere ee AP ala obs Os Sas Sie wi RIG: Sem 1959 
Code of Principles of Professional Conduct.....-..+++.-+-- ee: 2227 
Comparative Tests on High-Tension Suspension Insulators 

(Illustrated.) (P. W. Sot mam) Ree hn Metre gel lpn 


Compensating Wattmeters. (Illustrated.) (A. L. Ellis.).*.... 1579 
Determination of Power Efficiency of Rotating Blectric Machines. 

(Illustrated.) (H. M. OVW) amc ghee Oe ele ated os aeraaue o 1695 
Development of a Successful Direct-Current 2000-kw. Unipolar 

Generator. (Illustrated.) (B.G. MEQTIENTES) tors tele Gat late =e fakes 1811 


Economical Speed Control of Alternating-Current Motors Driving 
Rolling Mills, The. (Illustrated.) (F. W. Meyer and Wilfred 


EE 2 te Rn ON ior aa vier 067 
Effect of Temperature Upon the Hysteresis Loss in Sheet Steel, 

The, (Illustrated.) (Malcolm WGA MO TAED Won oo ere Lee. 2025 
Electrical Measurements with Special Reference to Lamp Testing, 

(Illustrated.) (Evan J. HEA WARDS) dee. ey Meleas ooete Seeeces ale ee 1517 
Electrical Transmission of Electrical Measurements. (Illustrated.) 

COP SAIS Phy PR ete Pena SR eI SS «to 1537 
Electricity on the Farm, (Illustrated.) (Putnam FAVE TES) eres Ge 1985 
Excitation of Alternating-Current Generators. (Illustrated.) 

Re FLSA OE.) tte ease iore, wenden. raat n as eae es 1841 
High-Frequency Tests of Line Insulators. (Illustrated.) (L. E. 

Imlay and Percy H. THOMGS. Jer ca ony po 2 tes owes ht fetal 2121 
Hot Wire Instruments. (Illustrated.) (A. W. Pierce and M. E. 

Ee NE Oe ol sino sa ie ey eR Yee 1591. 
Incandescent Lamps as Resistances. (IMlustrated.) (7. H. 

; Amrineé.)......- Ce Eleni ote eat Om Slaroro oir ian Daa tae 1525 
Induction Type Indicating Instruments. (Illustrated.) (Paul 

eG a ep ee ones wp le eet ee gt tt 1565 
Perrin Vducatiomsane eerie cnt tee tee ete ae 1309 
Industrial Illumination and the Average Performance of Lighting 

Systems. (Illustrated.) (C. E. GIEWEL rete op geen ee 1257 
Localizers, Suppressors, and Experiments. (Illustrated.) (E. E. 

F. Creighton and J. T. Whittlesey.) ...c0ee cere tenet tenes 1881 
Measurement of Alternating Current of Low Value. (Illustrated.) 

TAPE G UN cman. Jee rks. emotes ee pie eet eee nets hese « 1489 
Measurement of Energy with Instrument Transformers. (Illus- 

trated.) ‘(Alexander armel aceon coke cer oo et 1545 


Measurements of Maximum Values in High-Voltage Testing. 
(Illustrated.) (C. H. Sharp and F. M. Farmer.) SAS Benet Gor 
Measuring Stray Currents in Underground Pipes. (Illustrated. ) 
(Carl Hering.).... ses esses et ae: Deg een iain eseiie oy one 1449 
Metering Large Direct-Current Installations. (F. V. Magalhaes.). 1541 
Military Telegraph Lines Using the Polarized Sounder as Receiving 


Instrument. (Illustrated.) (George R. (GIGI nonce OOO 1429 
Motor Starting Currents as Affecting Large Transmission Systems. 
(Illustrated.) (Pi Mie LAMCOM.) «ieee 2 aia nia OR Bo ee 789 
Operating Characteristics of Large Turbo-Generators. (Illus- 
trated.) (A.B. Field.).....+.+--++: eines minetes 0 3 Si wees 1645 
Permeability Measurements with Alternating Current. (Iilus- 
trated.) (L. T. Robinson ial tis 10h Sétit) socieos Ole Oma 1609 


vil 


viii INDEX 


Potential Transformer Testing. (Illustrated.) (J. R. Cratghead.). 
Power Requirements of Rolling Mills. (Illustrated.) (Wilfred 


A) Le Or cies en eter RO Te sd dr is or Sty wero St 
Problems of Interior Illumination, The. (Illustrated.) (Bassett 
JOMES,” JL.) cc sucee-ctoleetecartege apse ors den aito cel areas Oe ate eerie ieee ee 
Relay Protective Systems. (Illustrated.) (L. L. Elden.)...... 
Report of the Board of Directors for the Fiscal Year Ending April 
Oe) Eh Bees ie, ae) arene late rye enn Sheol is Go cgiaty cle so 


Resonant Circuit Frequency Indicator. (Illustrated.) (W. H. 
Praticand SOR Pir10Ce.) sos. Sie 3 vi oe 
Runaway Speed of Waterwheels and Its Effect on Connected 
Rotary Machinery. (Illustrated.) (Daniel W. Mead.)..... 
Single-Phase Induction Motors. (Illustrated.) (W. J. Branson.). 
Squirrel-Cage Induction Generator, The. (Illustrated.) (H. M. 
Hobartianduk.. Knowlton... .chasan cee. oe . Se a eee 
Testing of Instrument Transformers, The. (Illustrated.) (P. 
G. AgneweandsFEB iStsbec.).. 5 Weaios ok eee eee See 
To Measure an Alternating-Current Resistance and Compare It 
with the Direct-Current Resistance—Electrodynamometer 
Method. (Illustrated.) (Edwin F. Northrup.)............. 
Transient Reactions of Alternators. (Illustrated.) (William A. 
Durginsand, Reid.) Whatehedd. vs een 2 Mende ee dae 
Tubular Electrodynamometer for Heavy Currents, A. (Illus- 
trated.) CP, G. A gnew,)\.. ccc tg naeo net ces ei ae 
Use of Reactances in Transformers, The. (Illustrated.) (W. S. 
UE O08)... vis e.cctscrwcinne scp Re a A ee 
Vibrations of Telephone Diaphragms, The. (Illustrated.) 
(Charles=F.. Meyer. and. J.B. Whitehead.). .sscg.. 4Jec222. 
Wheatstone Bridge—Rotating Standard Method of Testing Large 
piesa Watt-Hour Meters. (Illustrated.) (C. H. Ingalls 
and J. Cowles.)t.. wezntis So... ¢ SeiaetRi he ae elt ee 
Wiring of ae Buildings for cep ceipnan se Service, The. were 
ted.) (Frederick L. Rhodes.) . Tye hee 


1627 
2051 


1273 
1911 


2231 
1595 


1937 
1749 


1721 
1635 


1501 
1657 
1483 
2015 
1397 


1551 
1367 


EE 


INDEX OF AUTHORS 


AGamMmcrOmtObt, eA«, DISCUSSION. « .aiem one es 1361, 1684, 1808, 
Agnew, P. G., Paper, 1483, 1635; Discussion............. 515; 
iiexancderson, H. E.. W,. DISCUSSION... cj. eemeres eee tietele nals sie > 
Mnrinemls Heasbaper, 1525;. Discussion. ........10soticieis . + a + ols ade 
EMCI a) POTOSI OTa aieatie easy nee ome chee 2) ofa one Miehewetatee pelt tye abe. 
PALES yea Vers DASCUSSLOM oe pani) fans o cheveleteln ele + cMelenetortliadsvoiers elie ayellale 
Ball jos, Paper, 1609s Discussion... . . 6 cie-i. eee et eee 
Bat kena tiny ml ISCUSSIOIie mnie cnn a jaleetetn oh behadals wv nieue ecto iekors’ «Rhone 
Pann orelp abl s . ADISCUSSLOL Mek eeraten ers, ie retsiols «tle ie = apm m sie orien 
Bates, Putnam A., Paper, 1985; Discussion. .2004, 2005, 2006, 
ipecell mmrecdeticlk pO¢SCMSS1Oi cal oe how Greed vale ahh the oles bb oliinenb ae oles 
Bennett, Edward, Discussion (Illustrated).........-..-.--.0u+: 
Eliss OL Ne, TRewoyercai ean senciae 5 cit tard cas scgs ruc. mercies Choi area aa 
orriatata pve ac a DISCUSSIOMs ca. yc < sm + MPO Reueltue go tie gots Riles vomne 
[Secret CH MPEP ae DD ISCUSSTOME scp. dare ciciey otcdan- meaner etohe sartnle » levore y:Toneuoteuetient 
HSE UENO LA mV ootall in) eDEUTIC Tos a eetee sels, aire Nies a, opto a te cehiegenen el ay oto oteligile (olelshedess 
fort well pi Ce ISCUSSIOME athe) Weetars title tempat. ius aecplas 1298, 
@panplin,, Bz A.) Discussiom. .-. 0-0 0.6. 62. Eek hve 
Cheney, Edward J., Discussion. . 2... 2... 6.0.0 eee e cere eee ees 
‘Chiseloi, IBS Wie IBIS CInSs ile | hana ono oes ot taarg come acne Guus Lio 
Clewell; C. E., Paper, 1257; Discussion...............+-- 1297, 
@oellbohm, Max Hi; Discussion. “22.0... 65 se. dene 
(On LeSr ae Wis DEL cy tae f ease «ate > « Meeleneteneiieacne! oletelsbessh chain = niche) od 
Bom eee DISCUSSIONC tips ieee eins ce oe ore 1558, 1599, 
Craighead, J. R., Paper, 1627; DISCUsSsiOnEe emitoat cha beens 1559, 
Grawtord,) Wo W., Discussion... 04.1. sn eet Gee nomen iets so 
Creighton, E. E. F., Paper, 1881; Discussion 1933 (Illustrated)... 
Mriotr tom ple New WISCUSSIOM. eee wien oie oils Meet snuetede tone one 
Crosby, Fred Bickford, Discussion (QU sR Con 5 ra eee. ae Chole: 
Wiemec error.) ISCUsSsiOma. Ljamntarams ts) -lelsyereict stele s v4evobs ie te ep nlnbtt ans 
Doyle, E. D., Discussion (Illustrated)..........-++ see eee e ees 
Durgin, William A., Paper, 1657; ADI SCUISSIO MA Aas ote hare okaa® 
Dyckerhoff, A., Discussion (Illustrated). ......-+ +e s seer cree 
Edwards, Evan J., Paper, 1517; Discussion.....«3...---+++.... 
Elden, L. L., Paper, 1911; Discussion..........---+-++++5: 1933, 
Ellis, A. L., Paper, 1579; Discussion. ..........+-sse esses 1514, 
Farmer, F. M., Paper, 1617; IB RcYercecer cyl. 50 Ue! Oem sce Go BRR Jie gee 
Field, A. B., Paper, 1645; Discussion.........--- sees eeereees 
Rot ers Ala ti ob on WISCUSSLO Men. ieee le secm eh ronenaiel at. aoe et oi Betas 
raniiamy W . SaeDISCUSSION. 2... a Seen ee ace oe eke 1354, 
Ganz, Albert F., Discussion (lihetsiine veal) ce 6.5 eee Gn Ubon 1464, 
Gilmartin; John, Discussion... i... 0. HRS ee bee Ss 1563, 
Be Ah ESC SSIG Dt rctisgs en oss Se dc ose ian tee As 
hid Goepres, fo, PAPEL vc 7 fait a oe en «INS ere So es 
is, Selby, Wiscussion cipal «5 Fe a8 A oie ppnow soe 
Hagood, Lee, Discussion (Illustrated)! 6)... ea ee ene Eee OG 
Riles GaN La iscusiON. MLPA ens 2 ny mg renee oan * 
Hammer, William J., Discussion. ........-..-+ 4+ eer sree tree 
Parris, Ford W., Discussion... ee wee teh eee 28s 2120, 
Harte, Charles Rufus, Discussion.....-... +++ sss esse eu sre rest 
Hayward, R. F., TDSC TSS LOR ioe ete etre «Vat ca nes AER NE Tig Bro 8a s 
Hering, Carl, Paper, 1449; TOSS STO Tce, ieee ha iad le dea nye ae 
Pople wjobn NM., Disctission si 55. )s'4e'. felipe eee ee ee eee 


x INDEX 


Hobart, H. M., Paper, 1721; Discussion..... 1681, 1809, 1878, 
Hopkins, N. Monroe, Discussion. .......-+++seeee seers eerees 
Imlay, L. E., Paper, 2121; Discussion... Sssctd Sette eee 
Ingalls, C. H., Paper, 1551; Discussion.........+++++--.-++ss2ee 
Jackson, J. P., Discussion.........+-+++eeeeeeeess 1349, 1354, 
Jones, Bassett, Jr., Paper, 12732) Discussions. j.62.1. stele eats 
Kennelly, A. E., Discussion......+-++++eeeeeeeeee 1296, 1424, 
Knowlton, E., Paper, 1721; Discussion.........---+++++++++0-: 
Kyle, Elmer L., Discussion. ..... 2... - sees seen eee nee eee eee 
Lamme, B. G., Discussion...1682, 1683, 1719, 1811, 1877, 
Lincoln, E. S., Discussion. .... 0.6... ee ese ees n eee e eect eee eees 
Lincoln, Paul M., Paper, 1789; Discussion (Illustrated), 1602, 


1882= (illustrated). 25 cies sc... beieiataebeliartneln lei aha -pevegere aul 
Lloyd, M. G., Discussion...........++++++ 1512, 1533; 1624; 
Bof, E. A., Disctission . 0. 0 fi ose «a elas o.« 5 oie einen ent eet 
Tirckiesh, M., Discussions: 2.0 5.2 2 m~ e ee niniaale tee ela tenons 
MacGahan, Paul, Paper, 1565; Discussion...1534, 1562, 1605, 
MacLaren, Malcolm, Paper, 2025; Discussion...........-- 2046, 
Magalhaes, F. V., Paper, 1541; Discussion fGh4r-E61 5... ee 1560, 
Manson, George K., Discussion. .......... +e eee eee renee eee 


Maxwell, Alexander, Paper, 1545; Discussion (Illustrated). .1478, 
McClellan, William, Discussion.......... 000.0 css e eee ee ee Saee 
McConahey, W. M., Discussion. ..........-+ se eee reece ee eeees 
McGowan, M. J., Jr., Discussion... ........5 62250 e vee scees 
McKenney, Lester, Discussion. .........-+-+ee ese seeeeee 1807 
Mead Daniel, Wa; sPaperai. cites as coin tise ae ihe 0, otek pte tapes ena 
Mershon, Ralph D., Discussion 2046 (Illustrated)............... 
Merrifield, J. D., Discussion. ...... 6.502.000 eee oe os eae 
Meyer, Charles F., Paper, 1897; Discussion................++. 
Meyer, PF. Ws; Papers. usc. sins oie oe wince ov oynis on) Sos Sietenia te ele wielitin ioiallean 
Millar’ Preston’ S., DisCussion< Jc.) citrate oe atare & opaleta la cia nteiete ete 
Moody, W. S., Paper, 2015; Discussion. ............+..++s200- 
Moore, Di McKarlan, Discussion: <0. .:cis sve cis ote « ocatseetctengrte te ate te 
Morse SPh Cis PAD soc alates die a zie ounein hs wiatole ainda ROE ent og ais 
Miss, iSantord Ac; Discussioni sia cjo is bose mete a Cente per te iio eee 
Mowbray, William J., Discussion.........s..6.s0+0+2-:- 1558, 
Moyer, J. A., Discussion 
NewmaneM.G., Papert... gc vic oa eves » oinio,s ohtelptomregitcte nines iota meee 
Nicholson, I:..C., Discusstonsmiaiims Soloists AEE Oaa lees ae 
Noeggerath, J. E., Discussion (Illustrated 
INGrris! H.H.,- Discussion... 4... «. Lette fe Sete he acre ene 
Northrup, Edwin F., Paper, 1501; Discussion (Illustrated) 
Olin, E. M., Paper, 1695; Discussion 
@sborn, Harold. Discussion, oases yo) te <M eds tan ie eerere nes 
Peek, F. W., Jr., Discussion (Illustrated) 
Petty, wDavid M., Discussions... 0s .clhrrsemetet steel CPaosl eee et eton te he 
Pierce, A. W., Paper, 1591; Discussion............. 1601, 1606, 
Pierce, George W., Discussion (Illustrated) 142 

Pope, Ralph: W.., Disctission 3.0/5 ci. seen rktitehe einai ne areeee RSD nels ee 
Pratt, W. H., Paper, 1595; Discussion...... 1511, 1560, 1600, 
PRICE TOW Ra5y PAPEL v.o.o seheyseuiete scl GN RR Tiered oda MURMM at ede ties Ske ena otas 
Raymond, W. G., Discussion 
Reed; Taylor, Discussion... ies ac «se oe sa selene « RRC e tote tate vee tieyens 
Reist; Henry:G., Discussions acc arnt -< oie a. eee oie, oh eee 
Rhodes, Frederick L., Paper, 1867; Discussion 
Robinson, L210, Paper, 1609; Discussion aetis. arenas elena 
1515, 1561, 1625, 1640, 

135 


ew eee ae ae Se A kg ah 


© 0 0 wh SrENGs 1 oh VUO er A PeRe ome Ue re 


ele ew ele 6 om eres id ele bec: O10, wie wer 618 


Orne 6.00 0.0 CMe Cee elaSie oe 66 Ot s Oe Cw sla e 


Rohrer, Albert L., Discussion 
Roper}D..W.., Discussion 2. \s...c oiaiaes. a osdoh ts eee rene eRe eae 
Rosa; Edwards B:,: Discussion... a... snureene 1478, 1514, 1640, 
Rowe, E: B., Discussions «cicsccsike awe Goishe le shee pe eae oe 
Rushmore,, D..B.,, Paper, 1841; Discussionty.-eine tiie: «ence 
Sandford, J. A., Jr., Discussion (Illustrated) 


INDEX 


SAMO Mme LSCUSSIOM«n S cctiet a. nan. chie fu Giencss sac wecatonae. 
Deon mo larles Ey, OISCHSSTOM,. 26 0.<,c00) oo ee ees aces. 1294, 
Scott, Roscoe, Discussion (Illustrated) 
Secor, H. Winfield, Discussion 
Sever, George F., Discussion 
DAM ew AG OlpH rm ISCUSSLOMes 6. a sn ce a astevads oop nutes be a ea ee 5 
Sharp, Clayton H., Paper, 1617; Discussion 

VG, EE aR 


De paLdsom acacorce, De WWiscussion... s.02..:.225.%. 1419, 1425, - 


Silsbee, F. B., Paper, 1635; Discussion 
Seinen mE lanl OISCUSSIOMstie cect Sey seok Sess ane coche guess cs len 
Sothman, P. W., Paper, 2143; Discussion 
Le cate am Crm lea OTS CUSS1O Miwa ceyeiews WAMhe efi ccmeeeeee sah cited aie wns 
Sivan (Coleg IBNSe rise ovciieg 2 5 <a, Bee 25 yn ee 
DLO mmEbe ndcyalcrss DYIGOUSSTONe ce cece wey. mnatite. Cee cs Ea oe Cs eae 
SII S ese Ey Chwa iiNet EIS CUSSION J Meise ations ce retin ago accom cher + 
Sykes, Wilfred, Paper, 2051, 2067; Discussion....:......:.....: 
acorn Oli eISCUSSIOMeks. nteda « a6. Tors sis, oe vaio erste dase aE a 
shbomaswmbercy bls, Paper, 2121s) Discussion... ...m>e-o+. eee 
SG msonee DO LiMiseOUS CUSSION ries cacccnpe ra ltuclsiex.c.. es 2 sree ce ic 1626, 
Sorento niki, DISCUSSION Let cots cin ears Gas, G etm a ee ae a 
MMe cShetm ape a DOLE a tracts oe vin ose tel Sie wit anal hens wi glemn a RES 
Wea eypaulm Wars TS CUSS1O tte soc) au Stone so 13 wx cosa aye fool os ouers Sa 1561, 
Wiaenss “We be, Disctissionie «a: 2 et... oe. 1688, 1810, 
Wietimeres bran DISCUSSION... os. se. ase n- 1425, 1480, 
Wiestconbmbayce N-. Discussion (llustrated). -.. ing. a. eee 
NMinicehnecdctelpebe, WISCUSSION 2 cities teayer ses saer + + allares 1397, 1424; 
WidingiaGeyal, TRS, 215 lena Beem eves ruin area ek oe aas aleve eet rea nt a ean 
(i eleven l/h ARE ped ake Oss oe re) halo to © Ath rh O cleat Re ee ee 
WHAISTOmMe Ae EDASCUSSION S54 ic astra ne Sethe Se gneve, Scone 1349, 
SEE oo tated miele DISCUSS OM renee setae a SPS eRe iso Sa) Geena ee, ea recalls eon 
Wieodbrtcdoe: salbester, DISCUSSION. co can eee ets at gue ot eta» 
WiDGCsOWwer ini. Discussion, (illustuated iiss (i 2).05..5..-5- ce 


Re 


1686 


ele 4 pxt : 
‘ 


i 


SYNOPTICAL AND TOPICAL 


INDEX 


OF 
A. E. E. TRANSACTIONS 


Vol. XXXI, Parts I and II 


The main headings under which these synopses are classified were ar- 
rived at by a careful study of all the papers contributed since the organi- 
zation of the Institute. 

The method of making this classification may be called the automatic 
method, since it is created by sorting the papers themselves into groups 
and then naming the groups. 

Many papers fall naturally into several different groups and in such 
cases they are inserted under as many different heads as it is thought 
they rightfully belong. : 

The classified synopses are designed for those searching for compre- 
hensive information on any given topic, while the subject index is intended 
for those looking up specific and definite data or information. 


MAIN SECTIONS OF SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


: Page 

LX Hducation,. ¢ choc c sie sips Qealo oe de dee eee ee 3 
25, General TROL Ys iio. -o-my sega or Sad ovees oy cek caoral eee 3 
3. Measurements and Instrumentss...e 2 salem eic ae ere eee 4 
4 Dielectric Phenomenas.......-. 6a. eo we'5o5. ee mle) ves ENS Shee 9 
5. Blectric@onductorsy. 4. Gti «A Mod ok 3. ocean  eee 11 
6. Magnetic:Properties and Testing of Ironas 1.0 eee nee 12 
be Batberi GS aj. :o/.nctas Seger Pane oe aes are ee ee 13 
8. Transfotmersi. 20% uso Sgre< sang vlatgae Denar ee oe 13 
95 Electrical) Machinery and Apparatus. ae o.com eee . 14 
10:> Prime Movers and-Steam Boilers..-. 5) aacae ee oe 18 
LL Power Plants scacho.08 susioate roa pete. ike eiieieeee ae eee 19 
122 Parallel Operations... va. acai ee eeanten eee 22 
13 a Transmission Linesicc sans ssa Gee coe acre ceiue Saat 22 
14. Electric Service Disturbances and Protection.................. 26 
LO. Distr bition SyStEMis. wu a5) .15-<.. ccs cl caste eae cree 29 
L6i Control Regulation and Switching sds... sesso ere ae 30 
Tas MER OUSO Go ings 5, si oss © <aain beh Hick apstaentaa eek ticoct deat hana ee 33 
LS Lighting apd Lani pe: ¢ . ct «qian siete ai cosa eae ee 34 
19, Hlectricity in the Army and Navy. ..<s .. <¢. +4508 oa eee 36 
20. Miscellaneous Applications of Electricity...................... 37 
zi, Lelephony and Telegraph: «2a... cir ncon cide. com ee 39 
22. Miscellaneous Topics and Institute Affairs..................... 41 


————————— ee eee 


1. EDUCATION | 


INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION 
Preliminary Report by the Educational Committee 


Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1309-1347 


Part I. Introduction. Comparison of American and European laborers. 
Outline of purpose of the investigation, suggesting a classification of 
industrial schools and mentioning conditions desirable in the organ- 
ization of such schools. 

Part II. Provision by law for vocational training in the United States, 
being a survey of the educational enactments of the various states, that 
of Massachusetts being given in detail. 

Part III. Description of typical vocational and industrial schools, 
conducted by the Government, private individuals, electric corporations 
and railroads, giving many statistics in tabular form covering the char- 
acter of the students and the courses. 

Discussion, pages 1348-1366, by Messrs. Henry G. Stott, J. P. Jackson, 
A. L. Williston, Albert L. Rohrer, W. S. Franklin, Henry H. Norris, 
J. W. L. Hale, W. I. Slichter, William McClellan, Professor Diemer, 
Comfort A. Adams, F. C. Caldwell, M. J. McGowan, Jr., W. G. Ray- 
mond and Harry Barker. Need of industrial education from economical 
and humanistic standpoints. Data on the Bridgeport Industrial School. 
Functions of corporation schools. Use of existing industrial equipment 
for educational purposes. Plan of Fitchburg co-operative school system. 
Definition of professional work. Application of natural selection vs. 
artificial selection in education. Defects in modern educational sys- 
tems. Basis of organization of Land Grant Colleges. 


2. GENERAL THEORY 


ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION OF IRON BY DIRECT CURRENT IN STREET SOIL 
Albert F. Ganz Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1167-1176 


Experimental investigation of the relative corrosion of different kinds 
of iron in two typical street soils. Comparison of actual electrolytic 
corrosion with that calculated by Faraday’s law. 

Discussion, pages 1177-1178, by Messrs. Carl Hering, Edward B. 
Rosa, Irving Langmuir, C. H. Sharp and Albert F. Ganz. Corrosion 
of iron in cinders. Voltage of electrolytic corrosion of iron. 
SIMPLIFICATION OF ELECTROTHERMAL CALCULATIONS, THE WATT AND 
THERMAL OHM 
Carl Hering Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1191-1201 

Advantages of absolute systems of units. Energy factors in heat 
transmission and selection of units for measuring such factors. Factors 
for converting the new units into those already in use. 


3 


4 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Discussion, pages 1202-1205, by Messrs. H. B. Gale, Carl Hering, 

Alfred H. Cowles. Definitions of factors of heat energy. 
VACUA 

W. R. Whitney Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1207-1216 

Improvement of vacuum by condensing vapors. Blackening of in- 
side of vacuum tubes and lamp bulbs. Edison effect. Crookes radio- 
meter for measuring pressure in a vacuum. Effect of temperature on 
life of vacuum lamps. 

Discussion, page 1217, By Messrs. W. R. Whitney and Alfred H. 
Cowles. Gases held within glass containers. 


THE CONVECTION AND CONDUCTION OF HEAT IN GASES 
Irving Langmuir Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1229-1240 


Method of calculating heat dissipation from straight wires, freely 
suspended in gas, based on author’s theory of equivalent conduction 
through film of gas. Application of method to Kennelly’s experiments. 

Discussion, including that of paper by W. D. Coolidge on ‘‘Metallic 
Tungsten and Some of Its Applications,” pages 1241-1242, by Messrs 
C. M. Green, William J. Hammer, Carl Hering, W. D. Coolidge, H. M. 
Hobart and Irving Langmuir. Plating tungsten. Relation of external 
temperature to temperature rise of electrical machinery. 


THE VIBRATIONS OF TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 
Charles F. Meyer and J. B. Whitehead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1397-1418 


Experimental study of vibrations of telephone receivers and trans- 
mitters at different frequencies and currents. Relation between fre- 
quency, current and amplitude of vibration, shown graphically. Re- 
sonance curves, curves for receiver and transmitter. 

Discussion, pages 1419-1428, by Messrs. George D. Shepardson, 
George W. Pierce, Alan E. Flowers, A. E. Kennelly, John B. Taylor, 
John B. Whitehead, Frank Wenner and Charles F. Meyer. Effect of 
temperature on vibration of telephone diaphragms. Variation of in- 
ductance and resistance of telephone transmitters and receivers when 
vibrating. 


3. MEASUREMENT AND INSTRUMENTS 


MEASUREMENTS OF VOLTAGE AND CURRENT OVER A LONG ARTIFICIAL 
POWER-TRANSMISSION LINE AT 25 AND 60 CYCLES PER SECOND 
A. E. Kennelly and F. W. Lieberknecht Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1131-1163 


Design and construction of an artificial transmission line. Methods 
of measuring e.m.f. and current distribution in artificial equivalent of 
very long transmission line. Results of test, giving space distribution 
of current and e.m.f. both as to magnitude and phase. Results in 
tabular and curve form. Appendix—Method of measuring line im- 
pedance. 

.. Discussion, pages 1164-1165, by Messrs. Charles P. Steinmetz, John 
Price Jackson, Charles F. Scott, John B. pions and A. E. Kennelly. 
Praise of experimental investigation. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 5 


SIMPLIFICATION OF ELECTROTHERMAL CALCULATIONS, THE WATT AND 
THERMAL OHM ; 
Carl Hering Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1191-1201 


Advantages of absolute systems of units. Energy factors in heat 
transmission and selection of units for measuring such factors. Factors 
for converting the new units into those already in use. 

Discussion, pages 1202-1205, by Messrs. H. B. Gale, Carl Hering, 
Alfred H. Cowles. Definitions of factors of heat energy. 


CHARACTERISTICS AND APPLICATIONS OF VIBRATION GALVANOMETERS 
Frank Wenner Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1243-1254 


Mathematical analysis of the performance and design characteristics 
of the vibration galvanometer. Equations expressing the interrelations 
of the various design constants. 

Discussion, pages 1255-1256, by Messrs. Jefferson E, Kershner, Frank 
Wenner, W. H. Pratt, R. A. Gray, Albert F. Ganz, George F. Sever, 
N. Monroe Hopkins, John D. Ball and M. G. Lloyd. 


MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS IN UNDERGROUND PIPES 
Carl Hering Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1449-1463 


Description and theory of several methods of measuring the current 
into or out of an underground pipe. 

Discussion, pages 1464-1482, by Messrs. Albert F. Ganz, Edwin F. 
Northrup, George F. Sever, Edward B. Rosa, Alexander Maxwell, 
Frank Wenner, Clayton H. Sharp and Carl Hering. Description of 
numerous methods of measuring current and resistance of underground 
pipes or similar circuits. Haber’s earth ammeter. 

A TUBULAR ELECTRODYNAMOMETER FOR HEAVY CURRENTS 
P. G. Agnew Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1483-1488 


Theory, construction and performance of the instrument. 

Discussion, incorporated with the paper by Edwin F. Northrup on 
“To Measure an Alternating-Current Resistance and Compare it with 
the Direct-Current Resistance—Electro-dynamometer Method.” 


MEASUREMENT OF ALTERNATING CURRENT OF LOW VALUE 
M. G. Newman F Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1489-1499 


Use of separately excited electrodynamometer as ammeter. Experi- 
mental studies of errors involved when using this instrument for measur- 
ing exciting current of telephone transformer, exciting current in silicon 
steel iron-loss test specimen and condenser charging current. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Edwin F. Northrup 
on “To Measure an Alternating-Current Resistance and Compare it 
with the Direct-Current Resistance—Electro-dynamometer Method.” 


TO MEASURE AN ALTERNATING-CURRENT RESISTANCE AND COMPARE IT 
WITH ,THE DIRECT-CURRENT RESISTANCE—ELECTRO-DYNAMOMETER 


METHOD 
Edwin F. Northrup Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1501-1510 
Theory and method of execution of very refined method of a.c. résis- 


‘tance measurement. . 
Discussion, including that of papers by P. G. Agnew on “A Tubular 


6 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Electrodynamometer for Heavy Currents” and M. G. Newman on“ Meas- 
urement of Alternating Current of Low Value,’’ pages 1511-1515, by 
_ Messrs. W. H. Pratt, J. D. Ball, Frank Wenner, M. G. Lloyd, Taylor 
Reed, A. L. Ellis, Edward B. Rosa, L. T. Robinson and P. G. Agnew. 
Relative advantages of various instruments for measurement of very 
large and very small currents. Some characteristics of the water-cooled 
dynamometer, the portable dynamometer, wattmeter, the thermo- 
ammeter and the tubular dynamometer. 


ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO LAMS TESTING 
Evan J. Edwards Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1517-1523 


Accuracy attained in commercial lamp testing. Description of lab- 
oratory standard a.c. voltmeter. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by T. H. Amrine on “In- 
candescent Lamps as Resistances.”’ 


INCANDESCENT LAMPS AS RESISTANCES 
T. H. Amrine Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1525-1531 


Resistance and resistance-temperature characteristics of various com- 
mercial, carbon, tantalum and tungsten filaments. Use of four-lamp 
bridge. 

Discussion, including that of paper by Evan J. Edwards on ‘‘Elec- 
trical Measurements with Special Reference to Lamp Testing,’’ pages 
1532-1535, by Messrs. Clayton H. Sharp, A. E. Kennelly, M. G. Lloyd, 
Paul MacGahan, T. H. Amrine, and Evan J. Edwards. Use of Howell 
indicator in lamp testing. The tungsten lamp as a resistor for a con- 
tact making voltmeter. 


ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION OF ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS 
O. J. Bliss Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1537-1540 
Arrangement of standard meters for transmission of wattmeter read- 
ings to a distance. 
Discussion incorporated with that of paper by C. H. Ingalls on ‘‘Wheat- 


stone Bridge-Rotating Standard Method of Testing Large Capacity 
Watt-Hour Meters.” 


METERING LARGE DIRECT-CURRENT INSTALLATIONS 
F. V. Magalhaes Vol, xxxi—1912, pp. 1541-1544 


Brief discussion of various methods of watt-hour meter arrangements: 
one large meter, several smaller meters in parallel, meters on individual 
loads, shunt type watt-hour meter. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by C. H. Ingalls on ‘‘Wheat- 
stone Bridge-Rotating Standard Method of Testing Large Capacity 
Watt-Hour Meters.”’ 


MEASUREMENT OF ENERGY WITH INSTRUMENT TRANSFORMERS 
Alexander Maxwell Vol. xxxi—1912, pp (1545-1550 
Effect of ratio and phase angle upon the accuracy of watt-hour meters 
under various load conditions. 
Discussion incorporated with that of paper by C. H. Ingalls on ‘‘Wheat- 


stone Bridge-Rotating Standard Method of Testing Large Capacity 
Watt-Hour Meters.” M 


——————————————EEOO 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 7 


WHEATSTONE BRIDGE-ROTATING STANDARD METHOD OF TESTING LARGE 
CAPACITY WATT-HOUR METERS 
C. H. Ingalls and J. W. Cowles Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1551-1557 


Use of special differential galvanometer on the usual rotating standard. 
Theory and method of use. 

Discussion including that of papers by O. J. Bliss on ‘Electrical Trans- 
mission of Electrical Measurements; F. B. Magalhaes on “Metering 
Large Direct-Current Installations;’’ Alexander Maxwell on ‘ Measure- 
ment of Energy with Instrument Transformers;’’ pages 1558-1563, by 
Messrs. William J. Mowbray, E. P. Fox, J. R. Craighead, F. V. Magal- 
haes, W. H. Pratt, L. T. Robinson, T. W. Varley, C. H. Ingalls, Albert 
Ganz, Alexander Maxwell, Paul MacGahan, Elmer L. Kyle and John 
Gilmartin. 

General remarks on commercial electrical measurements. Use of 
shunt with watt-hour meters. 


INDUCTION TYPE INDICATING INSTRUMENTS 
Paul MacGahan ~ Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1565-1577 


Discourse on the advantages inherent to the induction type instrument. 
Torque equation and performance curves for ammeters and voltmeters. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by W. H. Pratt and D.R. 
Price on “Resonant Circuit Frequency Indicator.”’ 


COMPENSATING WATTMETERS 2 
A. L. Ellis Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1579-1590 


Outline of requirements of wattmeter for the measurement of small 
values of alternating-current power at low power-factors. Description 
of improved method of compensation and results of tests comparing new 
instrument with older type compensated in ordinary way. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by W. H. Pratt and D. R. 
Price on ‘Resonant Circuit. Frequency Indicator.” 


HOT-WIRE INSTRUMENTS 
A. W. Pierce and M. E. Tressler Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1591-1593 


Field of application for hot-wire instruments. Accuracy tests. 
Discussion incorporated with that of paper by W. H. Pratt and D. R. 
Pierce on ‘‘Resonant Circuit Frequency Indicator.” 


RESONANT CIRCUIT FREQUENCY INDICATOR 
W. H. Pratt and D. R. Price Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1595-1598 


Theory of instrument. Design of reactance for precision work. 

Discussion, including that of papers by Paul MacGahan on “Induction 
Type Indicating Instruments; A. L. Ellis on “Compensating Watt- 
meters; and Messrs. A. W. Pierce and M. E. Tressler on “Hot-Wire 
Instruments,’ pages 1599-1608, by Messrs. F. P. Cox, W. H. Pratt, 
Albert F. Ganz, A. W. Pierce, F. V. Magalhaes, William J. Mowbray, 
Paul M. Lincoln, F. H. Bowman, N. Monroe Hopkins, Paul MacGahan, 
W. H. Pratt, A. W. Pierce, and John Gilmartin. 

Advantages and disadvantages of induction and hot-wire type instru- 
ments. Advantages of light moving system. Use of power-factor 
meter for frequency indicator. ; 


8 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


PERMEABILITY MEASUREMENTS WITH ALTERNATING CURRENT 
L. T. Robinson and J. D. Ball Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1609-1615 


Study of general relations between maximum flux density, maximum 
exciting current and magnetizing current. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by C. H. Sharp and F. M. 
Farmer on ‘‘Measurements of Maximum Values in High-Voltage Testing.”’ 


MEASUREMENTS OF MAXIMUM VALUES IN HIGH-VOLTAGE TESTING 
C. H. Sharp and F. M. Farmer Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1617-1622 


Use of electrostatic voltmeter with synchronous reversing commutator 
across one section of a series of condensers. Introduction of fee term 

““peak-factor.”’ 

Discussion, including that of paper by L. T. Robinson and J. D. Ball 
on “Permeability Measurements with Alternating Current,” pages 
1623-1626, by Messrs. E. D. Doyle, M. G. Lloyd, Clayton H. Sharp, 
T. W. Varley, L. T. Robinson and Elihu Thomson. Leakage loss with 
electrostatic voltmeter. Limitations in the use of alternating current 
for permeability measurements. Comments on ‘‘peak-factor.”’ 


POTENTIAL TRANSFORMER TESTING 
J. R. Craighead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1627-1633 


Analysis of errors resulting from resistance of the detector circuit 
when making ratio and phase angle test by the balance method. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by P. G. Agnew and F. 
B. Silsbee on ‘‘The Testing of Instrument Transformers.” 


THE TESTING OF INSTRUMENT TRANSFORMERS 
P. G. Agnew and F. B. Silsbee Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1635-1638 


Bureau of Standards modification of potentiometer or balance method 
of testing shunt and series instrument transformers. 

Discussion including that of paper by J. R. Craighead on ‘‘Potential 
Transformer Testing,’’ pages 1639-1644. Relative merits of vibration 
galvanometer and reversing key as detector in balance method of test- 
ing instrument transformers. 


DETERMINATION OF POWER EFFICIENCY OF ROTATING ELECTRIC MACHINES 
E. M. Olin Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1695-1718 


Detailed analysis of the summation of losses method as applied to 
the various types of rotary electric machinery. Methods of determin- 
ing the various losses and tabulated results of numerous tests on all classes 
of machines discussed. Correction factors for load losses that can not 
be separated, are tabulated for different types of machines operating at dif- 
ferent loads. Disadvantages of input-output method and actual com- 
parison of this method with summation of losses method. 

Discussion pages 1719-1720, by C. M. Green, B. G. Lamme and E. 
M. Olin. 


HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS OF LINE INSULATORS 
L. E. Imlay and Percy H. Thomas Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2121-2142 


Account of method of testing line insulators with high-frequency, 
high potential e.m.f. to determine their behavior under lighting stresses. 
Discussion of the design of insulators for lighting stresses. Compar- 


ew 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 9 


‘ ative test on electrose and porcelain. Suggested outline for future in- | 
vestigation along the same line. 
Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. W. Sothman on 
“Comparative Tests of High-Tension Suspension Insulators.” 


COMPARATIVE TESTS ON HIGH-TENSION SUSPENSION INSULATORS 
P. W. Sothman Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2143-2168 


Account of experimental study of various types of line insulators to 
determine the specifications to be adopted by the Ontario Power Com- 
pany in equipping a 110,000-volt line. Description of tests and sum- 
mary of results. 

Discussion including that of paper by L. E. Imlay and Percy H. Thomas 
on ‘High-Frequency Tests of Line Insulators.” pages 2169-2226, by 
Ralph D. Mershon, Paul M. Lincoln, F. W. Peek, Jr., AYO. Austin, EF: 
M. Farmer, Ralph W. Pope, E. E. F. Creighton, H. Winfield Secor, 
E. S. Lincoln, Ford W. Harris, Charles Rufus Harte, Edward Bennett, 
F. F. Brand, Max H. Collbohm, P. W. Sothman, L. E. Imlay, P. H. 
Thomas and R. F. Hayward. Analysis of e.m.f. distribution and string 
ratio in strings of suspension insulators. Effect of high-frequency stresses 
on insulators. Nature of high-frequency stresses. Points to be ob- 
served in testing insulators and outline of standard specification for 
tests. Properties of glass insulators for very high-tension work. 


4, DIELECTRIC PHENOMENA 


ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SUSPENSION INSULATOR 
F. W. Peek, Jr. Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 907-930 


Experimental investigation of the operative characteristics of sus- 
pension insulators connected in series. Development of equations for 
calculations of the arc-over e.m.f. The string efficiency, the e.m.f. 
distribution and the capacity of strings of suspension insulators of var- 
ious types. Comparison of theoretical results with actual tests. 

Discussion, including that of papers by Messrs. E. E. F. Creighton and 
F. R. Shavor on “Compression Chamber Lightning Arrester and the 
Protection of Distribution Circuits;”’ E. E. F. Creighton, H. E. Nichols 
and P. E. Hosegood on “Human Accuracy ; Multi-Recorder for Light- 
ning Phenomena and Switching;” E. E. F. Creighton, F. R. Shavor and 
R. P. Clark on ‘Studies of Protection and Protective Apparatus for Elec- 
tric Railways” and J. H. Cunningham and C. M. Davis on ‘‘Propag- 
ation of Impulses over Transmission Line’ and T. A. Worcester on 
“Some Mechanical Considerations of Transmission Systems,’ pages 
951-954, by Messrs. E. M. Hewlett, Paul M. Lincoln, R. J. McClelland, 
C. Edward Magnusson, Andrew McNaughton, Harris J. Ryan, R. Pp. 
Jackson, Charles P. Steinmetz, Charles F. Scott, R. Philip Clark, Cas- 
sius M. Davis, T. A: Worcester, and F. W. Peek, Jr. Method of cal- 
culating the e.m.f. distribution in a string of suspension insulators. 
Comparison of test data with results calculated by the Peek formulas. 
Effect of ground wire on strength of transmission structure. Inherent 
self-protective characteristics of a.c. railway circuits. Care of aluminum 


d.c. arrester. 


10 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


CORONA LOSSES BETWEEN WIRES AT HIGH VOLTAGES 
C. Francis Harding Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1035-1050 


Account of experimental investigation on a transmission line at Pur- 
due University. Comparison of experimental results with formulas 
of various investigators. Results plotted as curves. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by J. B. Whitehead on 
“‘The Electric Strength of Air.” 


THE LAW OF CORONA AND THE DIELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 
F. W. Peek, Jr. Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1051-1092 


Summary of equations and laws of corona covering previous and 
present investigations. Tests of effect of temperature, frequency, spac- 
ing, wire diameter, water, oil, etc. upon corona phenomena. Also tests 
and calculations of disruptive energy of air. Relation between power 
loss and surface gradient. Stroboscopic examination of corona. Me- 
chanical vibtation of electrified lines. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by J. B. Whitehead on 
“The Electric Strength of Air.”’ 


THE ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 
J. B. Whitehead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1093-1118 

Experimental study of physical laws underlying the phenomena 
attendant upon the breakdown of air under electric stresses, being an 
important contribution to the ionization theory of corona. Effect of 
subdivision of conductors upon corona. 

Discussion, including that of papers by C. Francis Harding on ‘‘Corona 
Losses Between Wires at High Voltages’ and F. W. Peek, Jr. on ‘‘The 
Law of Corona and the Dielectric Strength of Air,’’ pages 1119-1130, 
by Messrs. John B. Taylor, A. E. Kennelly, C. P. Steinmetz, C. Francis 
Harding, F. W. Peek, Jr., J. B. Whitehead and A. S. Langsdorf. Gen- 
eral remarks on corona. Comparison of tests on actual line with cal- 
culated results for corona loss and critical gradient. Observed vibration 
or swinging of high-tension lines. 


MEASUREMENTS OF MAXIMUM VALUES IN HIGH-VOLTAGE TESTING 
C. H. Sharp and F. M. Farmer Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1617-1622 


Use of electrostatic voltmeter with synchronous reversing commutator 
across one section of a series of condensers. Introduction of the term 
“peak-factor.”’ 

Discussion, including that of paper by L. T. Robinson and Jab Bat 
on “ Permeability Measurements with Alternating Current,’”’ pages 1625- 
1626, by Messrs. E. D. Doyle, M. G. Lloyd, Clayton H. Sharp, T. W. 
Varley, L. T. Robinson and Elihu Thomson. Leakage loss with elec- 
trostatic voltmeter. Limitations in the use of alternating current for 
permeability measurements. Comments on “peak-factor.” 


HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS OF LINE INSULATORS 
L. E. Imlay and Percy H. Thomas Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2121-2142 


Account of method of testing line insulators with high-frequency, 
high potential e.m.f. to determine their behavior under lightning stresses. 
Discussion of the design of insulators for lightning stresses. Com- 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 11 


parative test on electrose and porcelain. Suggested outline for future 
investigation along the same line. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. W. Sothman on 
“Comparative Tests of High-Tension Suspension Insulators.” 


COMPARATIVE TESTS ON HIGH-TENSION SUSPENSION INSULATORS 
P. W. Sothman Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2143-2168 


Account of experimental study of various types of line insulators to 
determine the specifications to be adopted by the Ontario Power Com- 
pany in equipping a 110,000-volt line. Description of tests and sum- 
mary of results. 

Discussion including that of paper by L. E. Imlay and Percy H. 
Thomas on “High-Frequency Tests of Line Insulators.’’ pages 2169- 
2226 by Ralph D. Mershon, Paul M. Lincoln, F. W. Peek, Jr., A. O. 
Austin, F. M. Farmer, Ralph W. Pope, E. E. F. Creighton, H. Winfield 
Secor, E. S. Lincoln, Ford W. Harris, Charles Rufus Harte, Edward 
Bennett, F. F. Brand, Max H. Collbohm, P. W. Sothman, L. E. Imlay, 
P. H. Thomas and R. F. Hayward. Analysis of e.m.f. distribution and 
string ratio in strings of suspension insulators. Effect of high-fre- 
quency stresses on insulators. Nature of high-frequency stresses. 
Points to be observed in testing insulators and outline of standard spec- 
ification for tests. Properties of glass insulators for very high-tension 


work. 
5. ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS 
NOTES ON UNDERGROUND CONDUITS AND CABLES 
Cc. T. Mosman Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 755-781 


Exhaustive experimental investigation of a certain underground con- 
duit single conductor alternating current installation to determine the 
temperature distribution in the conduit ducts and cables under various 
conditions of ventilation and load. Results plotted in the form of curves. - 

Discussion, pp. 782-809, by Messrs. A. E. Kennelly, L. L. Elden, 
William L. Puffer, William Clark, E. N. Lake, G. A. Burnham, David 
Harrington, George W. Palmer, Jr., Philip Torchio, C. T. Mosman, 
and R. W. Atkinson. Generalization of author's results. Results of 
other tests on the heating and carrying capacity of underground cables. 
Practice of various central stations in underground cable opera- 
tion. Ventilation of conduits. Observed sheath currents, e.m.fs. and 
losses. Calculation of induced current and e.m.f. in lead sheath of 
single conductor cables. 


LOCALIZERS, SUPPRESSORS, AND EXPERIMENTS 
E. E. F. Creighton and J. T. Whittlesey Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1881-1910 


Experimental study of effect of grounding upon e. m. fs. in three phase 
system, followed by oscillographic tests made to determine the applica- 


12 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


bility of localizers and arcing ground surpressors to the distribution sys- 
tems of the Public Service Electric Company of New Jersey. Detailed 
discussion of oscillograms of current and e.m.f. in the system under 
various grounding conditions. Charts of insulation resistance of system 
of underground and overhead conductors under various weather condi- 
tions. : 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by L. L. Elden on “ Relay 
Protective Systems.”’ 


6. MAGNETIC PROPERTIES AND TESTING OF IRON 


PERMEABILITY MEASUREMENTS WITH ALTERNATING CURRENT . 
L. T. Robinson and J. D. Ball Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1609-1615 


Study of general relations between maximum flux density, maximum 
exciting current and magnetizing current. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by C. H. Sharp and F. M. 
Farmer on ‘‘ Measurements of Maximum Values in High-Voltage Test- 
ing.’’ 

MEASUREMENTS OF MAXIMUM VALUES IN HIGH-VOLTAGE TESTING 
C. H. Sharp and F. M. Farmer Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1617-1622 


Use of electrostatic voltmeter with synchronous reversing commutator 
across one section of a series of condensers. Introduction of the term 
“ peak-factor.”’ 

Discussion, including that of paper by L. T. Robinson and J. D. Ball 
on “ Permeability Measurements with Alternating Current,” pages 
1623-1626, by Messrs. E. D. Doyle, M. G. Lloyd, Clayton H. Sharp, 
T. W. Varley, L. T. Robinson and Elihu Thomson. Leakage loss with 
electrostatic voltmeter. Limitations in the use of alternating current 
for permeability measurements. Comments on ‘‘ peak-factor.” 


THE EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE UPON THE HYSTERESIS LOSS IN SHEET STEEL 
Malcolm MacLaren _ Vol, xxxi—1912, pp. 2025-2035 


Experimental investigation of the rate of heating upon hysteresis 
losses and permeability of iron. Hysteresis loops obtained at non- 
magnetic temperature. 

Discussion, pp. 2036-2049 by Messrs. Philip Torchio, L. W. Chubb, 
C. A. Adams, David B. Rushmore, W. M. McConahey; Charles F. 
Scott, H. M. Hobart, M. V. Ayres, W. S. Moody, Ralph D. Mershon, 
Malcolm MacLaren, W. L. Waters, and M. G. Lloyd. Construction 
and electrical constants for external reactance built for 20,000-kw. gen- 
erator of New York Edison Company. Relation between relative me- 
chanical strength under short circuit and the size of. a transformer. 
Disadvantages of transformers and alternators designed to have high 
reactance. References and results from investigations made by various 
experimentors on iron and other magnetic materials at extre mely high 
and low temperatures. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 13 


7. BATTERIES 


3 ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 
Putnam A. Bates Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1985-2003 


Review of the present state of the art of applying electricity in agri- 
cultural undertakings. Specific data from irrigated farms, stock farms 
and others, covering central station and isolated plant practise. Power 
requirements of such enterprises and rates changed by central stations, 
use of storage batteries. 

Discussion, pp. 2004-2013 by Messrs. J. D. Merrifield, L. L. Elden, 
Putnam A. Bates, J. A. Moyer, Sanford, and Adolph Shane. 


8. TRANSFORMERS 


SOME FEATURES OF THE OUTDOOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION 
F. C. Green Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 323-327 


Brief description of the requirements of apparatus for outdoor substa- 
tions. List of transformers now in operation.’ Data on moisture con- 
tained in air, effect of heat on insulation strength of oil, etc. 

No discussion. 

MEASUREMENT OF ENERGY WITH INSTRUMENT TRANSFORMERS 
Alexander Maxwell Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1545-1550 


Effect of ratio and phase angle upon the accuracy of watt-hour meters 
under various load conditions. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by C-H. Ingalls on ‘’ Wheat- 
stone Bridge-Rotating Standard Method of Testing Large Capacity 
Watt-hour Meters. : 


POTENTIAL TRANSFORMER TESTING 
J. R. Craighead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1627-1633 


Analysis of errors resulting from resistance of the detector circuit when 
making ratio and phase angle test by the balance method. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by P. G. Agnew and F. B. 
Silsbee on ‘‘ The Testing of Instrument Transformers.” 


THE TESTING OF INSTRUMENT TRANSFORMERS 
P, G. Agnew and F. B. Silsbee Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1635-1638 


Bureau of Standards modification of potentiometer or balance method 
of testing shunt and series instrument transformers. 

Discussion including that of paper by J. R. Craighead on “ Potential 
Transformer Testing,’ pages 1639-1644. Relative merits of vibration 
galvanometer and reversing key as detector in balance method of testing 


instrument transformers. 


THE USE OF REACTANCE IN TRANSFO RMERS 


W. S. Moody Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2015-2023 


Analytical discussion of transformer design with reference to the pro- 
duction of high internal reactance. Description of magnetic shunt 


14 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


method of transformer construction. Effect of high internal reactance 
on mechanical stresses. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Malcolm MacLaren 
on ‘ The Effect of Temperature Upon the Hysteresis Loss in Sheet Steel."’ 


9. ELECTRIC MACHINERY AND APPARATUS 


OPERATION OF TWO ALTERNATING-CURRENT STATIONS THROUGH 
PARALLEL CIRCUITS, AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LOAD 
AND WATTLESS CURRENTS BETWEEN THEM 
J. W. Welsh Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 449-457 


General analytical discussion of parallel operation of alternators and 
alternating current stations. Division of load and current under various 
conditions of connecting circuits and of speed and voltage adjustment. 
Vector diagrams illustrating effect of different conditions upon magnitude 
and phase of currents and e.m.fs. 

Discussion, pages 458-470, by Messrs. Waldo V. Lyon, H. Y. Hall, 
Gano Dunn, P. M. Downing, W. A. Hillebrand, Lester McKenney, 
J. W. Welsh, R. Howes, F. R. Brainard and A. S. McAllister. Division 
of load between alternators and alternating current stations. Effect 
of adjustment of excitation. Design of transmission line for intercon- 
nection of station to be operated in parallel to give maximum synchron- 
izing power. 


AIR GAP FLUX DISTRIBUTION IN DIRECT-CURRENT MACHINES 
Charles R. Moore Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 509-525 


Account of experiments made on a d. c. machine to develop an ac- 
curate and rational method of calculating a full-load flux distribution 
from design data. Description of test apparatus and methods. Discus- 
sion of results. Development of method of calculating permeance, 
m.m.f. and flux for both full and no load conditions. 

Discussion, pp. 526-528 by H. Weichsel. Effect of armature flux on 
flux distribution. 


SELF-STARTING SYNCHRONOUS MOTORS 
Carl J. Fechheimer Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 529-585 


Analytical and experimental study of the starting characteristics of 
synchronous motors with revolving field structure. Discussion of effects 
of various factors upon the starting characteristics at standstill and 
during acceleration. Results of tests plotted as curves to determine the 
quantitative effect of various operating and design factors upon thestarting 
and accelerating characteristics. Starting characteristics of various 
types of load, such as fans, centrifugal pumps, motor-generator sets, etc. 
Mathematical predetermination of the starting characteristics of synchron- 
ous motors. Appendix giving mathematical development of formulas. 

Discussion, pp. 586-604, by Messrs. R. B. Williamson, F. D. Newbury, 
H. M. Gassman, A. M. Dudley, W. J. Foster, B. G. Lamme, Francis B. 
Crocker, C. P. Steinmetz, Bradley T. McCormick and C. J. Fechheimer. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 15 


General remarks on design of synchronous motors for favorable starting 


characteristics. Explanation of half-speed running of synchronous 
motors. 


DIRECT-CURRENT AND ALTERNATING-CURRENT MILL MOTORS FOR 
AUXILIARY DRIVES 
Brent Wiley _ Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 605-618 


Analytical discussion of the design requirements of d. c. and a. c. motors 
for steel mill service. Characteristics of series and compound d. c. motors 
and induction motors with wound secondary. 

Discussion, pp. 619-626, by Messrs. Alexander C. Lanier, M. A. Whiting, 
R. B. Treat, Gano Dunn, F. R. Fishback, A. G. Ahrens and Brent Wiley. 
General remarks on choice of motor for steel mill auxiliaries; a. c. vs. 
d. c. motors. Method of rating motors for intermittent service. 


ELECTRIC BRAKING OF INDUCTION MOTORS 
H. C. Specht Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 627-640 


Theoretical, mathematical analysis of induction motor performance 
with a. c. and d. c. braking. Development of equations for design of 
such systems. : 

Discussion, pp. 641-648, by Messrs. H. E. White, H. F. Stratton, Gano 
Dunn, John C. Reed, Clark S. Lankton and H. C. Specht. Advantages 
of electric braking of d. c. motors. 


ELECTRIFICATION OF A REVERSING MILL OF THE ALGOMA STEEL COMPANY 
Bradley T. McCormick Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 645-652 


Description of flywheel motor-generator set and equipment for re- 
versing mill plant giving general design data for the generators, motors, 
controllers, etc. 

Discussion, pp. 653-658, by Messrs. David Hall, B. T. McCormick, 
Wilfred Sykes, R. A. Black, H. C. Specht. R. B. Treat and H. W. Cheney. 
Effect upon inertia of dividing units. European practice in rolling mill 
drives. Time required to reverse Algoma mill, test. 


THE OPERATION OF A LARGE ELECTRICALLY DRIVEN REVERSING ROLLING 
MILL 
Wilfred Sykes Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 659-681 


General description of electrically driven universal mill of the Illinois 
Steel Company. Detailed description of the flywheel motor-generator 
plant and controlling equipment with design data, performance character- 
istics and test results. Power required to operate mill and load character- 
istics. ; 

Discussion, pp. 682-684, by Messrs. R. A. Black, H. C. Speeht, R. 
Tschentscher, James Farrington, Bradley T. McCormick and E. Fried- 
laender. Relative economy of two-high and three-high rolling mills. 


ELECTRICAL CONTROL OF A LARGE MINE HOIST 
H. W. Cheney Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 685-699 


General description of induction motor hoist in No. 5.mine-of the 
Woodward Iron Company, Birmingham, Alabama. Detailed descrip- 
tion of design and performance of water rheostat. Experimental data 
for rational design of water. rheostats. 


16 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Discussion, pp. 700-708, by H. M. Gassman, W. O. Oschmann, H. E 
White, Wilfred Sykes, F. L. Stone, E. Friedlaender, H. W. Cheney and 
M. A. Whiting. Data on the design of water rheostats; general remarks 
and experience in their operation. 


FREQUENCY 
D. B. Rushmore Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 955-972 


Comprehensive review of the quantitative relations between frequency 
and the operative characteristics of electrical apparatus and distribution 
circuits showing the difficulty of fixing a universal standard frequency 
for commercial circuits. The effect of frequencies upon the design and 
operation of electrical systems as to cost and satisfactory service. Table 
of frequencies used in various typical systems covering central stations, 
railways and many industrial plants. 

Discussion, pp. 975-984, by Messrs. Samuel Sheldon, John J. Frank, 
B. G. Lamme, G. H. Stickney, W. J. Foster, H. R. Summerhayes, Charles 
F. Scott, N. J. Neall, J. R. Worth and E. A. Lof. Effect of frequency 
upon the design and operation of transformers. Historical résumé of 
commercial practice in the choice of frequency and discussion of the 
reasons therefor. Performance of lamps on low frequency. Method of 
choosing between 25 and 60 cycles in generator design. 


THE TRANSIENT{REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 
William A. Durgin and R. H. Whitehead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1657-1680 


Demonstration of the existence of transient impedance in alternators 
and experimental study of its effect upon the performance of large turbo- 
generators under short-circuit conditions, alone and connected in parallel 
with others to a distribution system; also its influence upon cross currents 
in paralleling such generators. Tests showing the effects of external 
reactance and resistance on short-circuit currents and resulting torques. 
Results plotted as curves. 

Discussion, including that of paper by A. B. Field on ‘“‘ Operating 
Characteristics of Large Turbo-Generators,”” pp. 1681-1693, by Messrs. 
H. M. Hobart, B. G. Lamme, P. M. Lincoln, Henry G. Reist, Comfort A. 
Adams, A. B. Field, Sanford A. Moss, H. R. Woodrow, W. L. Walters, 
and William A. Durgin. Relative advantages of external and self-con- 
tained blowers for cooling of turbo-alternators. Desirability of cleaning 
air for cooling purposes. Use of dampers to prevent potential rise in 
the field circuit caused by short circuits. Value of maximum torques 
under short circuits. Value of external resistance in protecting turbo- 
alternators. 


DETERMINATION OF POWER EFFICIENCY OF ROTATING ELECTRIC MACHINES 
E. M. Olin Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1695-1718 


Detailed analysis of the summation-of-losses method as applied to the 
various types of rotary electric machinery. Methods of determining 
the various losses and tabulated results of numerous tests on all classes 
of machines discussed. Correction factors for load losses that can not 
be separated are tabulated for different types of machines operating at 
different loads. Disadvantages of input-out-put method and actual com- 
parison of this method with summation-of-losses method. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 17 


Discussion pp. 1719-1720, by C. M. Green, B. G. Lamme and E. M. 
Olin. 
THE SQUIRREL-CAGE INDUCTION GENERATOR 
H. M. Hobart and E. Enowlton Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1721-1747 


Analytical discussion of the design of induction generators for operation 
at very high speeds and in large units. Some results of studies made on 
induction generators in the Interborough Rapid Transit Power House. 
Comparison of the design, operation and economic features of synchronous 
and induction generators. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. M. Lincoln on 
‘‘Motor Starting Currents as Affecting Large Transmission Systems.’ 


SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTORS 

W. J. Branson Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1749-1787 

Development of complete vector analysis of single-phase induction 
motors applicable even to the smallest commercial sizes. Method 
compared with actual tests. Formulas for secondary no-load current 
as reflected in the primary, for the construction of the current circle and 
for the speed of single-phase induction motors developed from the trans- 
former theory. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. M. Lincoln on 
“ Motor Starting Currents as Affecting large Transmission Systems.” 


MOTOR STARTING CURRENTS AS AFFECTING LARGE TRANSMISSION 
ares SYSTEMS 
P. M. Lincoln Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1789-1800 


Reason for limiting the size of motors connected to a given system. 
Account of extensive investigation of starting conditions found in a certain 
system where a number of cotton mills are connected to a transmission 
net work. Recording wattmeter records on mills and transmission line. 
Starting data on different types and sizes of induction motors. 

Discussion, including that of paper by H. M. Hobart and E. Knowlton 
on ‘' The Squirrel Cage Induction Generator ’’ and W. J. Branson on 
“ Single-Phase Induction Motors,” pp. 1801-1810, by Lee Hagood, 
Comfort A. Adams, E. F. W. Alexanderson, Lester McKenney, H. M. 
Hobart, E. Knowlton and W. L. Waters. Use of synchronous condenser 
in connection with a system fed by induction generators and synchronous 
generators, operating in parallel. General remarks on calculation of 
core losses and eddy currents in induction generators. 


DEVELOPMENT OF A SUCCESSFUL DIRECT-CURRENT 2000-KW. UNIPOLAR 


GENERATOR 


B. G. Lamme Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1811-1835 


Account of the experiences obtained and difficulties overcome in the 
practical development of a large unipolar machine. Description of origi- 
nal construction and subsequent modifications giving reasons therefore. 
Overcoming of troubles incident to current collection, ventilation and 

insulation with very high speed operation in an extremely dirty atmos- 


phere. 
Discussion, pp. 1836-1840 by Messrs. J. E. Noeggerath, Elihu Thomson, 


18 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


and W. L. Waters. Comparison of another solution of a similar problem 
with that described in the paper. Very early experience in the design 
of unipolar machines. 


EXCITATION OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS 
D. B. Rushmore Vol. xxxi—1i911, pp. 1841-1876 


Excitation requirements of alternators and characteristics of various 
types of exciters. Brief description of different methods of alternator 
excitation and voltage regulation. Circuit diagrams and principles of 
operation of various types of voltage regulators, including the booster 
system, and systems developed by Tirrill, Thury and Chapman. Choice 
of exciter arrangements together with collection of circuit diagrams, show- 
ing typical arrangements used in modern practice. 

Discussion, pp. 1877-1880 by Messrs. B. G. Lamme, H. M. Hobart, 
J. Lester Woodbridge, E. A. Lof, and Lester McKenney. General re- 
marks on the choice of excitation system. 


THE ECONOMICAL SPEED CONTROL OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT MOTORS 
DRIVING ROLLING MILLS 
F. W. Meyer and Wilfred Sykes Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2067-2095 


Classification of speed requirements of rolling mills followed by analy- 
tical discussion of various methods of induction motor control including 
rheostatic, multi-winding, cascade and regulating machines of various 
types with special reference to the last named. Late developments in the 
use of frequency changers as regulating machines, three-phase commutator 
motors for direct drive. 

Discussion, including that of paper by Wilfred Sykes on ‘* Power Re- 
quirements of Rolling Mills pp. 2096-2120 by Messrs. John M. Hipple, J. 
H. Wilson, Selby Haar, Edward J. Cheney, Bayse N. Westcott, David M. 
Petty, Fred Bickford Crosby, L. T. Robinson, H. L. Barnholdt, G. E. 
Stoltz, Wilfred Sykes and Ford W. Harris. General remarks and ex- 
perience in the choice of motor equipments for rolling mill drives. Method 
of testing steam driven mills relative merits of different methods of speed 
control. Notes on recording instruments for tests. 


‘ 


10. PRIME MOVERS AND STEAM BOILERS 


PLANT EFFICIENCY 
An Analysis of the Losses of a Hydroelectric System. 
J. D. Ross Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 471-484 


Description of-plant and analytical discussion of the losses in the gener- 
ating and distributing system of the Seattle Municipal Light and Power 
Company. Efficiency-load characteristics and losses of different elements 
of the hydraulic and electric systems. Tables and curves. 

Discussion, pp. 485-490, by Messrs. Gano Dunn, J. D. Ross, S. J. Lis- 
berger, R. Howes, J. B. Fisken, L. F. Harza, O. B. Coldwell, and H. Y. 
Hall. Efficiency of Pelton wheels. Importance of plant efficiency. 


EE ———— == 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 19 


OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS OF LARGE TURBO-GENERATORS 
A. B. Field Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1645-1656 


Trend of modern practice in the choice of size, speed, ventilation and 
regulation of large turbo-generators. Benefits derived from allowing 
poorer regulation. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by William A. Durgin and 
R. H. Whitehead on ‘“ The Transient Reactions of Alternators.” 


THE RUNAWAY SPEED OF WATERWHEELS AND ITS EFFECT ON CON- 
NECTED ROTARY MACHINERY 
Daniel W. Mead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1937-1958 


Elementary principles for turbine governing followed by brief review 
of the hydraulics of impulse and reaction wheels with special reference 
to the determination of the runaway speed. Practical example of cal- 
culation. Fundamental data given for various commercial types of 
impulse and reaction wheels. 

No discussion. _ 


11. POWER PLANTS 


SOME NOTES ON ISOLATED PLANTS 
Percival R. Moses Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 15-45 


Brief analytical discussion of the interdependence of the various factors 
in the design of isolated plants for the production and utilization of 
energy for heating, lighting, refrigeration, driving machinery, etc., Actual 
load requirements in different types of plants, together with costs, equip- 
ment used, log sheets and load curves. Cost of electric energy produc- 
tion in different types of isolated plants. 

Discussion, pp. 46-68, by Messrs. R. P. Bolton, John C. Parker, Arthur 
Williams, George W. Martin, Charles K. Nichols, John W. Lieb, Jr., 
S. N. Clarkson and Clarence P. Fowler. Criticism and defense of author’s 
figures and methods of analysis. 


CENTRAL STATION, ELECTRIC POWER FOR RAILROAD OPERATION 
Frederick Darlington Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 69-79 


Advantages of electric energy over steam in railway operation. Reasons 
for purchasing electric energy from central stations. Gain in economy 
due to larged mixed loads. 

Discussion, incorporated with paper by George I. Rhodes on “A 
Method of Studying Power Costs with Reference to the Load Curve and 
Overload Economies.” 


A METHOD OF STUDYING POWER COSTS WITH REFERENCE TO THE LOAD 
CURVE AND OVERLOAD ECONOMIES 
George I. Rhodes Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 81-100 


Mathematical analysis of the cost of producing electric energy, based 
on assumption of certain relations between load and losses in steam-elec- 
tric plants. Effect of load-factor and overload capacity on cost of energy 


20 | SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


production. Relation between first cost and operating charges on over- 
load. 

Discussion, pp. 101-114, by Messrs. H. G. Stott, Hartley Le H. Smith, 
P. M. Lincoln, C. O. Mailloux, Farley Osgood and G. I. Rhodes. Criti- 
cism and defense of author’s methods. Definition of rating. Mathe- 
matical expression of efficiency of prime movers. 


THE RELATIVE COSTS AND OPERATING EFFICIENCIES OF POLYPHASE AND 
SINGLE-PHASE GENERATING AND TRANSMITTING SYSTEMS 
H. M. Hobart Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 115-147 


Details and comprehensive analysis of the cost of producing electric 
energy, transmitting it and delivering it to the working conductors of a 
railway system, by the straight single-phase system and by the three- 
phase synchronous converter substation system. 

Discussion, pp. 142-166, by Messrs. W. C. Smith, C. M. Green, H. M. 
Hobart, B. A. Behrend, Dugald C. Jackson, A. E. Kennelly, C. T. Mos- 
man, W.S. Murray, Edgar Knowlton, John B. Sparks and Roger T. Smith. 
Relative merits of single-phase and d. c. railway systems. Costs and 
efficiencies from actual practice. 


THE RELATION OF CENTRAL STATION GENERATION TO RAILWAY ELECTRI- 
FICATION 
Samuel Insull Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 231-282 


Comprehensive analytical discussion of the advantages and savings 
to be derived by combining all electrical power plants in Greater New York 
into one unified system. Results attained by unification in Chicago 
“compared with group systems in New York and Boston. Load curves 
and characteristics of different classes of service in New York, Boston 
and Chicago. Much well-digested, statistical information on industrial 
power, lighting and railway service. Appendix on power requirements 
of Chicago electrified steam roads showing saving of unified energy supply 
system over independent group system. 

Discussion, pp. 283-322, by Messrs. John W. Lieb, Jr., Dugald C. Jack- 
son, Charles P. Steinmetz, Lewis B. Stillwell, Benjamin F. Wood, Cary T. 
Hutchinson, Bion J. Arnold, Samuel Insull, Frank J. Sprague, Hans 
Lippelt, William McClellan, Perey H. Thomas, W. G. Carlton, Calvert 
Townley, S. D. Sprong, W. S. Lee, William B. Jackson, Lee H. Parker, 
C. O. Mailloux, P. W. Sothman, C. L. de Muralt, N. W. Storer, Edward 
N. Lake. General remarks on feasibility and desirability of supplying 
electric railways from unified systems of electric energy production. Ad- 
vantages of unified system in organization, economy and favorable opera- 
ing conditions. Defense of separate power plants for railways. 


OPERATION OF TWO ALTERNATING-CURRENT STATIONS THROUGH 
PARALLEL CIRCUITS, AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LOAD 
AND WATTLESS CURRENTS BETWEEN THEM 
J. W. Welsh Vol. xxxi-——1912, pp. 449-457 
General analytical discussion of parallel operation of alternators and 


alternating current stations. Division of load and current under various 
conditions of connecting circuits and of speed and voltage adjustment. 


— 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 21 


Vector diagrams illustrating effect of different conditions upon magni- 
tude and phase of currents and e.m.fs. 

Discussion, pp. 458-470, by Messrs. Waldo V. Lyon, H. Y. Hall, Gano 
Dunn, P. M. Downing, W. A. Hillebrand, Lester McKenney, J. W. Welsh, 
R. Howes, F. R. Brainard and A. S. McAllister. Division of load between 
alternators and alternating current stations. -Effect of adjustment of 
excitation. Design of transmission line for interconnection of stations 
to be operated in parallel to give maximum synchronizing power. 


PLANT EFFICIENCY 
An Analysis of the Losses of a Hydroelectric System 
J. D. Ross Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 471-484 


Description of plant and analytical discussion of the losses in the gen- 
erating and distribution system of the Seattle Municipal Light & Power 
Company. Efficiency-load characteristics and losses of different elements 
of the hydraulic and electric systems. Tables and curves. 

Discussion, pp. 485-490, by Messrs. Gano Dunn, J. D. Ross, 5. J. Lis- 
berger, R. Howes, J. B. Fisken, L. F. Harza, O. B. Coldwell, and H. Y. 
Hall. Efficiency of Pelton wheels. Importance of plant efficiency. 


DOES IT PAY THE AVERAGE COAL MINE TO PURCHASE CENTRAL STATION 
POWER 
Graham Bright Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 737-747 


Detailed analysis of the cost of producing electric energy at the coal 
mine and cost of changing over for central station service for requirements 
of coal mines. Cost data from actual practice in coal mine power plants. 

Discussion, pp. 748-754, by Messrs. E. D. Dreyfus, George R. Wood, 
H. M. Gassman, E. T. Penrose, Wilfred Sykes, W. N. Ryerson, jal ING 
Miller, and Graham Bright. Cost data on energy production at coal 
mines. Central stations vs. independent plants. 


FREQUENCY 
D. B. Rushmore Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 955-972 


Comprehensive review of the quantitative relations between frequency 
and the operative characteristics of electrical apparatus and distribution 
circuits showing the difficulty of fixing a universal standard frequency for 
commercial circuits. The effect of frequencies upon the design and 
operation of electricalsystems as to cost and satisfactory service. Table 
of frequencies used in various typical systems covering central stations, 
railways and many industrial plants. 

Discussion, pp. 973-984, by Messrs. Samuel Sheldon, John J. Frank, 
B. G. Lamme, G. H. Stickney, W. J. Foster, H. R. Summerhayes, Charles 
F. Scott, N. J. Neall, J. R. Werth and B. A. Lof. Effect of frequency 
upon the design and operation of transformers. Historical resume of 
commercial practice in the choice of frequency and discussion of the rea- 
sons therefor. Performance of lamps on low frequency... Method of 
choosing between 25 and 60 cycles in generator design. 


22 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 
12. PARALLEL OPERATION 


OPERATION OF TWO ALTERNATING-CURRENT STATIONS THROUGH 
PARALLEL CIRCUITS, AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LOAD AND 
WATTLESS CURRENTS BETWEEN THEM 
J. W. Welsh Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 449-457 


General analytical discussion of parallel operation of alternators and 
alternating-current stations. Division of load and current under various 
conditions of connecting circuits and of speed and voltage adjustment. 
Vector diagrams illustrating effect of different conditions upon magni- 
tude and phase of currents and e.m-fs. 

Discussion, pp. 458-470, by Messrs. Waldo V. Lyon, H. Y. Hall, 
Gano Dunn, P. M. Downing, W. A. Hillebrand, Lester McKenney, 
J. W. Welsh, R. Howes, F. R. Brainard and A. S. McAllister. Division 
of load between alternators and alternating-current stations. Effect 
of adjustment of excitation. Design of transmission line for intercon- 
nection of stations to be operated in parallel to give maximum synchron- 
izing power. 


THE TRANSIENT REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 
William A. Durgin and R. H. Whitehead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1657-1680 


Demonstration of the existence of transient impedance in alternators 
and experimental study of its effect upon the performance of large 
turbo-generators under short-circuit conditions, alone and connected in 
parallel with others to a distribution system, also its influence upon 
cross currents in paralleling such generators. Tests showing the effect 
of external reactance and resistance on short-circuit currents and 
resulting torques. Results plotted as curves. 

Discussion, including that of paper by A. E. Field on ‘‘ Operating Char- 
acteristics of Large Turbo-Generators.”’ pp. 1681-1693, by Messrs. H. M. 
Hobart, B. G. Lamme, P. M. Lincoln, Henry G. Reist, Comfort A. Adams, 
A. B. Field, Sanford A. Moss, H. R. Woodrow, W. L. Walters, and William 
A. Durgin. Relative advantages of external and self-contained blowers 
for cooling of turbo-alternators. Desirability of cleaning air for cooling 
purposes. Use of dampers to prevent potential rises in the field circuit 
caused by short circuits. Calculation of maximum torques under short 
circuit. Value of external resistance in protecting turbo-alternators, 


13. TRANSMISSION LINES 


SOME PROBLEMS OF HIGH-VOLTAGE TRANSMISSIONS 
Charles P. Steinmetz Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 167-173 


Brief description of the factors most prominent in limiting extremely 
high-voltage transmissions, insulators, capacity, corona, transformer ca- 
pacity; transformer connections, etc. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of E. M. Hewlett on ‘ Character- 
istics of Protective Relays.” 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX . 23 


CHARACTERISTICS OF PROTECTIVE RELAYS 
E. M. Hewlett Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 175-184 


General advice concerning selection of relay characteristics for pro- 
tection of various apparatus assembled in different types of distribution 
systems. 

Discussion, pages 185-202, by Messrs. David B. Rushmore, C. Se 
Ruffner, F. W. Peek, Jr., Percy H. Thomas, A. E. Kennelly, A. 5. Mc- 
Allister, Farley Osgood, C. O. Mailloux, C. C. Badeau, Charles W. 
Stone, E. M. Hewlett, G. A. Burnham and E. A. Lof. General remarks 
on high-tension transmission problems. Advantages, disadvantages 
and requirements of protective relays for use on large systems. 


DESIGN OF TELEPHONE POLE LINES FOR CONDITIONS WEST OF THE ROCKY 
MOUNTAINS 
A. H. Griswold Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 427-443 


Description of weather conditions on Pacific Coast and causes of pole 
deterioration. Properties of Western poles. Pole testing and apparatus. 
General instructions for pole line erection. 

Discussion, pages 444-447, by Messrs. H. Y. Hall, Gerald Deakin, 
W. D. A. Peaslee, Gano Dunn, D. P. Fullerton, P. M. Downing, S. J. 
Lisberger and A. H. Griswold. Effect of concrete casings on butt rot 
of poles. 


OPERATION OF TWO ALTERNATING-CURRENT STATIONS THROUGH 
PARALLEL CIRCUITS, AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF LOAD 
AND WATTLESS CURRENTS BETWEEN THEM 
J. W. Welsh Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 449-457 


General analytical discussion of parallel operation of alternators and 
alternating-current stations. Division of load and current under various 
conditions of connecting circuits and of speed and voltage adjustment. 
Vector diagrams illustrating effect of different conditions upon mag- 
nitude and phase of currents and e.m.fs. 

Discussion, pages 458-470, by Messrs. Waldo V. Lyon; H. Y. Hall, 
Gano Dunn, P. M. Downing, W. A. Hillebrand, Lester McKenney, 
J. W. Welsh, R. Howes, F. R. Brainard, and A. S. McAllister. Division 
of load between alternators and alternating-current stations. Effect 
of adjustment of excitation. Design of transmission line for intercon- 
nection of stations to be operated in parallel to give maximum syn- 


chronizing power. 


PRACTICAL JOINT POLE CONSTRUCTION 
J. E. Macdonald Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 491-500 


Description of the Los Angeles system of joint pole construction and 
operation. Outline of joint agreement between operating companies. 
Illustrations of different types of contruction. 

Discussion, pp. 501-508, by Messrs. A. H. Griswold, L. B. Cramer, 
Gano Dunn, O. B. Coldwell, S. J. Lisberger, H. R. Wakeman, J. B. Fisken, 
and J. E. Macdonald. Further particulars of the Los Angeles systems; 
fixing of liability, schedule of pole share distribution; tree trimming, pole 


line easements. 


24 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


PROPAGATION OF IMPULSES OVER TRANSMISSION LINE 
J. H. Cunningham and C. M. Davis Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 887-896 


Description and analysis of tests on artificial transmission line to de- 
termine the e.m.f. and current impulses traveling along the line when 
switching under various conditions. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. W. Peek, Jr., on “Elece 
trical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator.” 


SOME MECHANICAL CONSIDERATIONS OF TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 
T. A. Worcester Vol, xxxi—1912, pp. 897-906 


Analysis of factors that cause mechanical stresses in transmission towers 
bringing out the economical advantages of the flexible tower. Cost of 
transmission tower line construction. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. W. Peek, Jr., on ‘‘Elec- 
trical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator.” 


ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SUSPENSION INSULATOR 
F. W. Peek, Jr. Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 907-930 


Experimental investigation of the operative characteristics of suspension 
insulators connected in series. Development of equations for calculations 
of the arc-over e.m.f. The string efficiency, the e.m.f. distribution and 
the capacity of strings of suspension insulators of various types. Com- 
parison of theoretical results with actual tests. 

Discussion, including that of papers by Messrs. E. E. F. Creighton and 
F. R. Shavor on ‘‘ Compression Chamber Lightning Arrester and the 
Protection of Distribution Circuits;’’ E. E. F. Creighton, H. E. Nichols 
and P. E. Hosegood on ‘‘ Human Accuracy: Multi-Recorder for Lightning 
Phenomena and Switching,” E. E. F. Creighton, F. R. Shavor and R. P. 
Clark on “‘ Studies of Protection and Protective Apparatus for Electric 
Railways’ and J. H. Cunningham and C. M. Davis on ‘‘ Propagation of 
Impulses over Transmission Line’? and T. A. Worcester on ‘‘ Some 
Mechanical Considerations of Transmission Systems,’’ pages 931-954, 
by Messrs. E. M. Hewlett, Paul M. Lincoln, R. J. McClelland, C. Edward 
Magnusson, Andrew McNaughton, Harris J. Ryan, R. P. Jackson, 
Charles P. Steinmetz, Charles F. Scott, R. Philip Clark, Cassius M. 
Davis, T. A. Worcester, and F. W. Peek, Jr. Method of calculating the 
e.m.f. distribution in a string of suspension insulators. Comparison of 
test data with results calculated by the Peek formulas. Effect of ground 
wire on strength of transmission structure. Inherent self-protective 
characteristics of a.c. railway circuits. Care of aluminum d.c. arrester. 


CORONA LOSSES BETWEEN WIRES AT HIGH VOLTAGES 
C. Francis Harding Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1035-1050 


Account of experimental investigation on a transmission line at Purdue 
University. Comparison of experimental results with formulas of various 
investigators. Results plotted as curves. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by J. B. Whitehead on 
‘The Electric Strength of Adr.’’ 


o's 


P. M, Lincoln 


. SYNOPTICAL INDEX 25 


THE LAW OF CORONA AND THE DIELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 
F. W. Peek, Jr. Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1051-1092 


Summary of equations and laws of corona covering previous and present 
investigations. Tests of effects, of temperature, frequency, spacing, 
wire diameter, water, oil, etc. upon corona phenomena. Also tests and 
calculations of disruptive energy of air. Relation between power loss 
and surface gradient. Stroboscopic examination of corona. Mechanical 
vibration of electrified lines. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by J. B. Whitehead on 
“The Electric Strength of Air.” 


THE ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 
J. B. Whitehead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1093-1118 


Experimental study of physical laws underlying the phenomena at- 
tendent upon the breakdown of air under electric stresses, being an 
important contribution to the ionization theory of corona. Effect of 
subdivision of conductors upon corona. 

Discussion, including that of papers by C. Francis Harding on ‘ Co- 
rona Losses Between Wires at High Voltages” and F. W..Peek, Jr. on 
“The Law of Corona and the Dielectric Strength of Air,” pp. 1119-11380, 
by Messrs. John B. Taylor, A. E, Kennelly, C. P. Steinmetz, C. Francis 
Harding, F. W. Peek, Jr., J. B. Whitehead and A. S. Langsdorf. General 
remarks on corona. Comparison of tests on actual line with calculated 
results for corona loss and critical gradient. Observed vibration or 
swinging of high-tension lines. 


MEASUREMENTS OF VOLTAGE AND CURRENT OVER A LONG ARTIFICIAL 
POWER-TRANSMISSION LINE AT 25 AND 60 CYCLES PER SECOND 
A. E. Kennelly and F. W. Lieberknecht Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1131-1163 


Design and construction of an artificial transmission line. Methods 
of measuring e.m.f. and current distribution in artificial equivalent of 
very long transmission line. Results of test, giving space distribution 
of current and e.m.f. both as to magnitude and phase. Results in tabular 
and curve form. A ppendix—Method of measuring line impedance. 

Discussion, pp. 1164-1165, by Messrs. Charles P. Steinmetz, John 
Price Jackson, Charles F. Scott, John B. Taylor and A. E. Kennelly 
Praise of experimental investigation. 


MOTOR STARTING CURRENTS AS AFFECTING LARGE TRANSMISSION 
SYSTEMS 
Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1789-1800 


Reason for limiting the size of motors connected to a given system. 
Account of extensive investigation of starting conditions found in a certain 
system where a number of cotton mills are connected to a transmission 
net work. Recording wattmeter records on mills and transmission line. 
Starting data on different types and sizes of induction motors. 

Discussion, including that of paper by H. M. Hobart and E. Knowlton 
on ‘ The Squirrel-Cage Induction Generator’’ and W. J. Branson on 
‘« Single-Phase Induction: Motors,’ pages 1801-1810 by Lee Hagood, 
Comfort A. Adams, E. F. W. Alexanderson, Lester McKenney, H. M. 


26 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Hobart, E. Knowlton and W. L. Waters. Use of synchronous condenser 
in connection with a system fed by induction generators and synchronous 
generators, operating in parallel. General remarks on calculation of 
core losses and eddy currents in induction generators. 


HIGH-FREQUENCY TESTS OF LINE INSULATORS 
L. E. Imlay and Percy H. Thomas Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2121-2142 


Account of method of testing line insulators with high-frequency, 
high-potential e.m.f. to determine their behavior under lightning stresses. 
Discussion of the design of insulators for lightning stresses. Comparative 
test on electrose and porcelain. Suggested outline for future investiga- 
tions along the same line. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. W. Sothman on 
“Comparative Tests of High-Tension Suspension Insulators.’ 


COMPARATIVE TESTS ON HIGH-TENSION SUSPENSION INSULATORS 
P. W. Sothman Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2143-2168 


Account of experimental study of various types of line insulators 
to determine the specifications to be adopted by the Ontario Power Com- 
pany in equipping a 110,000-volt line. Description of tests and summary 
of results. 

Discussion including that of paper by L. E. Imlay and Percy H. Thomas 
on “‘ High-Frequency Tests of Line Insulators.”’ pp. 2169-2226 by Ralph 
D. Mershon, Paul M. Lincoln, F. W. Peek, Jr., A. O. Austin, F. M. 
Farmer, Ralph W. Pope, E. E. F. Creighton, H. Winfield Secor, E. S. 
Lincoln, Ford W. Harris, Charles Rufus Harte, Edward Bennett, F. F. 
Brand, Max H. Collbohm, P. W. Sothman, L. E. Imlay, P. H. Thomas 
and R. F. Hayward. Analysis of e.m.f. distribution and string ratio 
in strings of suspension insulators. Effect of high-frequency stresses 
oninsulators. Nature of high-frequency stresses. Points to be observed 
in testing insulators and outline of standard specification for tests. 
Properties of glass insulators for very high-tension work. 


14. ELECTRIC SERVICE, DISTURBANCES AND 
PROTECTION 


CHARACTERISTICS OF PROTECTIVE RELAYS 
E. M. Hewlett Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 175-184 


General advice concerning selection of relay characteristics for protec- 
tion of various apparatus assembled in different types of distribution 
systems. 

Discussion, pp. 185-202, by Messrs. David B. Rushmore, C. S. Ruffner, 
F. W. Peek, Jr., Percy H. Thomas, A. E. Kennelly, A. S. McAllister 
Farley Osgood, C. O. Mailloux, C. C. Badeau, Charles W. Stone, E. M. 
Hewlett, G. A. Burnham and E. A. Lof. General remarks on high- 
tension transmission problems. Advantages, disadvantages and require- 
ments of protective relays for use on large systems. 


‘ 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 27 


COMPRESSION CHAMBER LIGHTNING ARRESTER AND THE PROTECTION 
OF DISTRIBUTION CIRCUITS 
E. E. F. Creighton and F. R. Shavor Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 811-824 


Description of the construction and operative characteristics of a low- 
priced lightning arrester for medium potential circuits. Tests made to 
determine the practical merits of this lightning arrester. Specifications 
for protection of pole transformers and directions for installation of light- 
ning arresters for this purpose. Outline of actual method pursued in 
experimentally developing this type of arrester. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by F. W. Peek, Jr., on “Elec- 
trical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator."’ 


HUMAN ACCURACY: MULTI-RECORDER FOR LIGHTNING PHENOMENA AND 
SWITCHING 
E. E. F. Creighton, H. E. Nichols and P. E. Hosegood Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 825-850 


Examples of unreliability of human impression when observer is under 
stress of excitement. Use of multi-recorder in diagnosing conditions 
which produce an accident. Description of the construction and opera- 
tion, of several types of multi-recorders which are capable of recording 
the time of occurrence of any phenomenon that can be made to close an 
electrical contact. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by? he Weebeeks arom 
“ Blectrical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator.” 


STUDIES OF PROTECTION AND PROTECTIVE APPARATUS FOR ELECTRIC 
RAILWAYS 
E. E. F. Creighton, F. R. Shavor and R. P. Clark Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 851-886 


Experimental investigation of effects of high frequency on car wiring. 
Experience with the aluminum arrester in the protection of railway cir- 
cuits. Additional devices used with d.c. aluminum arresters to increase 
their durability. Comprehensive study of magnetic blow-out type of 
arrester with oscillographto determine the quantitative value ofthe various 
factors entering into the design of the gap and the circuit to which it is 
connected. Many oscillograms of current and e.m.f. in a metallic arc. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by, Ban W.c Peeks, oJa.n.0n 
“ Blectrical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator.” 

we 


PROPAGATION OF IMPULSES OVER TRANSMISSION LINE 
J. H. Cunningham and C. M. Davis ~ Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 887-896 


Description and analysis of tests on artificial transmission line to de- 
termine the e.m.f. and current impulses traveling along the line when 
switching under various conditions. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. W. Peek, Jrj2-on 
“Plectrical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator.” 


ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SUSPENSION INSULATOR 
F. W. Peek, Jr. Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 907-930 


Experimental investigation of the operative characteristics of suspension 
insulators connected in series. Development of equations for calculations 
of the arc-over e.m.f. The string efficiency, the e.m.f. distribution and 


28 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


the capacity of strings of suspension insulators of various types. 
Comparison of theoretical results with actual tests. 

Discussion, including that of paper by Messrs. E. E. F. Creighton and 
F. R. Shavor on ‘‘ Compression Chamber Lightning Arrester and the 
Protection of Distribution Circuits,” E. E. F. Creighton, H. E. Nichols 
and P. E. Hosegood on ‘‘ Human Accuracy: Multi-Recorder for Lightning 
Phenomena and Switching,” E. E. F. Creighton, F. R. Shavor and R. 
P. Clark on ‘‘ Studies of Protection and Protective Apparatus for Electric 
Railways’ and J. H. Cunningham and C. M. Davis on “ Propagation of 
Impulses over Transmission Line’? and T. A. Worcester on ‘‘ Some 
Mechanical Considerations of Transmission Systems,” pp. 931-954, by 
‘Messrs. E. M. Hewlett, Paul M. Lincoln, R. J. McClelland, C. Edward 
Magnusson, Andrew McNaughton, Harris J. Ryan, R. P. Jackson, 
Charles P. Steinmetz, Charles F. Scott, R. Philip Clark, Cassius M. 
Davis, .T. A. Worcester, and F. W. Peek, Jr. Method of calculating 
the e.m.f. distribution in a string of suspension insulators. Comparison 
of test data with results calculated by the Peek formulas. Effect of 
ground wire on strength of transmission structure. Inherent self pro- 
tective characteristics of a.c. railway circuits. Care of aluminum d.c. 


arrester. 
THE TRANSIENT REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 


William A. Durgin and R. H. Whitehead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1657-1680 


Demonstration of the existence of transient impedance in alternators 
and experimental study of its effect upon the performance of 
large turbo-generators under short-circuit conditions alone and 
connected in parallel with others to a distribution system, also, its 
influence upon cross currents in paralleling such generators. Tests 
showing the effect of external reactance and resistance on short-circuit 
currents and resulting torques. Results plotted as curves. 

Discussion, including that of paper by A. B. Field on ‘ Operating 
Characteristics of Large Turbo-Generators,"”’ pp. 1681-1693, by Messrs. 
H. M. Hobart, B. G. Lamme, P. M. Lincoln, Henry G. Reist, Comfort 
A. Adams, A. B. Field, Sanford A. Moss, H. R. Woodrow, W. L. Walters 
and William A. Durgin. Relative advantages of external and self-con- 
tained blowers for cooling of turbo-alternators. Desirability of cleaning 
air for cooling purposes. Use of dampers to prevent potential rises in 
the field circuit caused by shor€-circuits. Calculation of maximum 
torques under short-circuit. Value of external resistance in protecting 
turbo-alternators. 


LOCALIZERS, SUPPRESSORS, AND EXPERIMENTS 
E. E. F. Creighton and J. T. Whittlesey Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1881-1910 


Experimental study of effect of grounding upon e.m.fs. in three-phase 
system, followed by oscillographic tests made to determine the applica- 
bility of localizers and arcing ground suppressors to the distribution 
systems of the Public Service Electric Company of New Jersey. Detailed 
discussion of oscillograms of current and e.m.f. in the system under various 
grounding conditions. Charts of insulation resistance of system of under- 
ground and overhead conductors under various weather conditions. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by L. L. Elden on “ Relay 
Protective Systems.” 


~ 


——— 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 29 


RELAY PROTECTIVE SYSTEMS 
L. L. Elden Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1911-1931 


Review of present practice in the use of balanced protective relays, 
based on the Merz-Price (England) systems as applied to high-tension 
a.c. distribution system. Typical installation of the system also brief 
description of similar system by Hoéchstadter in Cologne and Faye- 
Hansen and Harlow in England. 

Discussion, including that of paper by E. E. F. Creighton and J. T. 
Whittlesey on ‘‘ Localizers, Suppressors, and Experiments,” pp. 1932-1935 
by Messrs. D. W. Roper, Harold Osborn, L. C. Nicholson, E E. F. 
Creighton, L. L. Elden and E. N. Crichton. ‘ 


THE USE OF REACTANCE IN TRANSFORMERS 
W. S. Moody Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2015-2028 


Analytical discussion of transformer design with reference to the pro- 
duction of high internal reactance. Description of magnetic shunt 
method of transformer construction. Effect of high internal reactance 
on mechanical stresses. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Malcolm MacLaren 
on“ The Effect of Temperature Upon the Hysteresis Loss in Sheet Steel.’’ 


15. DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 


SOME FEATURES OF THE OUTDOOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION 
F. C. Green Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 323-327 


Brief description of the requirements of apparatus for outdoor substa- 
tions. List of transformers now in operation. Data on moisture con- 
tained in air, effect of heat on insulation strength of oil, etc. 

No discussion. 

PRACTICAL JOINT POLE CONSTRUCTION 
J. E. Macdonald Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 491-500 

Description of the Los Angeles system of joint pole construction and 
operation. Outline of joint agreement between operating companies. 
Illustrations of different types of construction. 

Discussion, pp. 501-508, by Messrs. A. H. Griswold, L. B. Cramer, 
Gano Dunn, O. B. Coldwell, S. J. Lisberger, H. R. Wakeman, J. B. Fisken 
and J. E. MacDonald. Further particulars of the Los Angeles systems, 
fixing of liability, schedule of pole share distribution, tree trimming, 
pole line easements. 


NOTES ON UNDERGROUND CONDUITS AND CABLES 
Cc. T. Mosman i Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 765-781 


Exhaustive experimental investigation of a certain underground con- 
duit single-conductor alternating-current installation to determine the 
temperature distribution in the conduit ducts and cables under various 
conditions of ventilation and load. Results plotted in the form of curves. 

Discussion, pp. 782-809, by Messrs. A. E. Kennelly, L. L. Elden, 
William L. Puffer, William Clark, E. N. Lake, G. A. Burnham, David 


30 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Harrington, George W. Palmer, Jr., Philip Torchio, C. T. Mosman, and 
R. W. Atkinson. Generalization of author's results. Results of other 
tests on the heating and carrying capacity of underground cables. Prac- 
tice of various central stations in underground cable operation. Ven- 
tilation of conduits. Observed sheath currents, e.m.fs and losses. 
Calculation of induced current and e.m.f. in lead sheath of single-conductor 
cables. 
FREQUENCY 

D. B. Rushmore Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 955-972 

Comprehensive review of the quantitative relations between frequency 
and the operative characteristics of electrical apparatus and distribution 
circuits showing the difficulty of fixing a universal standard frequency 
for commercial circuits. The effect of frequencies upon the design and 
operation of electrical systems as to cost and satisfactory service. 
Table of frequencies used is various typical systems covering central 
stations, railways and many industrial plants. 

Discussion, pp. 973-984, by Messrs. Samuel Sheldon, John J. Frank, 
B. G. Lamme, G. H. Stickney, W. J. Foster, H. R. Summerhayes, Charles 
F. Scott, N. J. Neall, J. R. Werth and E. A. Lof. Effect of frequency 
upon the design and operation of transformers. Historical résumé of 
commercial practice in the choice of frequency and discussion of the 
reasons therefor. Performance of lamps on low frequency. Method 
of choosing between 25 and 60 cycles in generator design. 


MOTOR STARTING CURRENTS AS AFFECTING LARGE TRANSMISSION 
SYSTEMS ; 

P. M. Lincoln Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1789-1800 

Reason for limiting the size of motors connected to a given system. 
Account of extensive investigation of starting conditions found in a certain 
system where a number of cotton mills are connected to a transmission 
net work. Recording wattmeter records on mills and transmission line. 
Starting data on different types and sizes of induction motors. 

Discussion, including that of paper by H. M. Hobart and E. Knowlton 
on “ The Squirrel-Cage Induction Generator’’ and W. J. Branson on 
‘ Single-Phase Induction Motors,"’ pp. 1801-1810 by Lee Hagood, 
Comfort A. Adams, E. F. W. Alexanderson, Lester McKenney, H. M. 
Hobart, E. Knowlton and W. L. Waters. Use of synchronous condenser 
in connection with a system fed by induction generators and synchronous 
generators, operating in parallel. General remarks on calculation of 
core losses and eddy currents in induction generators. 


16. CONTROL, REGULATION AND SWITCHING 


ECONOMIES IN RAILWAY OPERATION 
F. E. Wynne Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 208-229 
Analytical discussion of the effects produced by various factors in- 
volved in the reduction of dead weight and energy consumption. Selec- 
tion of gear ratio and armature speed for given service. Relative merits 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 31 


of field control and standard series rheostat method, substantiated by 
tests. 
No discussion. 


SOME FEATURES OF THE OUTDOOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION 
F. C. Green Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 323-327 


Brief description of the requirements of apparatus for outdoor sub- 
stations. List of transformers now in operation. Data on moisture 
contained in air, effect of heat on insulation strength of oil, etc. 

No discussion, 


ELECTRIC BRAKING OF INDUCTION MOTORS 
H. C. Specht Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 627-640 


Theoretical, mathematical analysis of induction motor performance 
with a.c. and d.c. braking. Development of equations for design of such 
systems. 

Discussion, pp. 641-643, by Messrs. H. E. White, H. F. Stratton, 
Gano Dunn, John C. Reed, Clark 5S. Lankton and H. C. Specht. Ad- 
vantages of electric braking of d.c. motors. 


ELECTRIFICATION OF A REVERSING MILL OF THE ALGOMA STEEL COMPANY 
Bradley T. McCormick Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 645-652 


Description of flywheel motor-generator set and equipment for revers- 
ing mill plant giving general design data for the generators, motors, 
controllers, etc. 

Discussion, pp. 653-658, by Messrs. David Hall, B. T. McCormick, 
Wilfred Sykes, R. A. Black, H. C. Specht, R. B. Treat and H. W. Cheney. 
Effect upon inertia of dividing units. Huropean practise in rolling mill 
drives. Time required to reverse Algoma mill, test. 


THE OPERATION OF A LARGE ELECTRICALLY DRIVEN REVERSING ROLLING 
MILL 
Wilfred Sykes Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 659-681 


General description of electrically driven universal mill of the Illinois 
Steel Company. Detailed description of the flywheel motor-generator 
plant and controlling equipment with design data, performance character- 
istics and test results. Power required to operate mill and load charac- 
teristics. 

Discussion, pp. 682-684, by Messrs. R. A. Black, H. C. Specht. R. 
Tschentscher, James Farrington, Bradley T. McCormick and E. Fried- 
laender. Relative economy of two-high and three-high rolling mills. 


ELECTRICAL CONTROL OF A LARGE MINE HOIST 
H. W. Cheney Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 685-699 


General description of induction motor hoist in No. 3 mine of the 
Woodward Iron Company, Birmingham, Alabama. Detailed descrip- 
tion of design and performance of water rheostat. Experimental data 
for rational design of water rheostats. 

Discussion, pp. 700-708, by H. M. Gassman, W. O. Oschmann, H. E. 
White, Wilfred Sykes, FL. Stone, E. Friedlaender, H. W. Cheney and 
M. A. Whiting. Data on the design of water rheostats; general remarks 


and experience in their operation. 


32 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


HUMAN ACCURACY: MULTI-RECORDER FOR LIGHTNING PHENOMENA AND 
SWITCHING 
E. E. F. Creighton, H. E. Nichols and P. S. Hosegood Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 825-850 


Examples of unreliability of human impression when observer is under 
stress of excitement. Use of multi-recorder in diagnosing conditions which 
produce an accident. Description of the construction and operation of 
several types of multi-recorders which are capable of recording the time 
of occurrence of any phenomenon that can be made to close an electrical 
contact. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. W. Peek, Jr. on 
“ Electrical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator.”’ 


PROPAGATION OF IMPULSES OVER TRANSMISSION LINE 
J. H. Cunningham and C. M. Davis Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 887-896 


Description and analysis of tests on artificial transmission line to de- 
termine the e.m.f. and current impulses traveling along the line when 
switching under various conditions. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. W. Peek, Jr. on 
““ Electrical Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator.”’ 


EXCITATION OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATORS 
D. B. Rushmore Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1841-1876 


Excitation requirements of alternators and characteristics of various 
types of exciters. Brief description of different methods of alternator 
excitation and voltage regulation. Circuit diagrams and principles of 
operation of various types of voltage regulators, including the booster 
system and systems developed by Tirrill, Thury and Chapman. Choice 
of exciter arrangements together with collection of circuit diagrams, 
showing typical arrangements used in modern practise. 

Discussion, pp. 1877-1880 by Messrs. B. G. Lamme, H. M. Hobart, J. 
Lester Woodbridge, E. A. Lof, and Lester McKenney. General re- 
marks on the choice of excitation system. 


THE RUNAWAY SPEED OF WATERWHEELS AND ITS EFFECT ON CONNECTED 
ROTARY MACHINERY 
Daniel W. Mead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1937-1958 


Elementary principles for turbine governing followed by brief review of 
the hydraulics of impulse and reaction wheels with special reference. 
to the determination of the runaway speed. Practical example:of cal- 
culation. Fundamental data given for various commercial types of 
impulse and reaction wheels. 

No discussion. 


THE ECONOMICAL SPEED CONTROL OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT MOTORS 
DRIVING ROLLING MILLS 
F. W. Meyer and Wilfred Sykes Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2067-2095 


Classification of speed requirements of rolling mills followed by analy- 
tical discussion of various methods of induction motor control including 
rheostatic, multi-winding, cascade, and regulating machines of various 
types, with special reference to the last named. Late developments in 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 33 


the use of frequency changers as regulating machines, three-phase commu- 
tator motors for direct drive. 

Discussion, including that of paper by Wilfred Sykes on ‘‘ Power 
Requirements of Rolling Mills,” pp. 2096-2120 by Messrs. John M. Hipple, 
J. H. Wilson, Selby Haar, Edward J. Cheney, Bayse N. Westcott, 
David M. Petty, Fred Bickford Crosby, L. T. Robinson, H. L. Barnholdt, 
G. E. Stoltz, Wilfred Sykes and Ford W. Harris. General remarks and 
experience in the choice of motor equipments for rolling mill drives. 
Method of testing steam driven mills. Relative merits of different 
methods of speed control. Notes on recording instruments for tests. 


17. TRACTION 


CENTRAL STATION ELECTRIC POWER FOR RAILROAD OPERATION 
Frederick Darlington Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 69-79 


Advantages of electric energy over steam in railway operation. Rea- 
sons for purchasing electric energy from central stations. Gain in econ- 
omy due to large mixed loads. 

Discussion, incorporated with paper by George I. Rhodes on “A 
Method of Studying Power Costs with Reference to the Load Curve and 
Overload Economies.” 


RELATIVE COSTS AND OPERATING EFFICIENCIES OF POLYPHASE AND 
SINGLE-PHASE GENERATING AND TRANSMITTING SYSTEMS 
H. M. Hobart Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 115-147 


Details and comprehensive analysis of the cost of producing electric 
energy, transmitting it and delivering it to the working conductors of a 
railway system, by the straight single-phase system, and by the three- 
phase synchronous converter substation system. 

Discussion, pp. 142-166, by Messrs. W. C. Smith, C. M. Green, H. M. 
Hobart, B. A. Behrend, Dugald C. Jackson, A. E. Kennelly, C. T. Mos- 
man, W.S. Murray, Edgar Knowlton, John B. Sparks and Roger T. Smith. 
Relative merits of single-phase and d.c. railway systems. Costs and 
efficiencies from actual practise. 


ECONOMIES IN RAILWAY OPERATION 
F. E. Wynne Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 203-229 


Analytical discussion of the effects produced by various factors involved 
in the reduction of dead weight and energy consumption. Selection of 
gear ratio and armature speed for given service. Relative merits of 
field control and standard series rheostat method, substantiated by tests. 

No discussion. 


THE RELATION OF CENTRAL STATION GENERATION TO RAILWAY 
ELECTRIFICATION 
Samuel Insull : Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 231-282 
Comprehensive analytical discussion of the advantages and savings 
to be derived by combining all electrical power plants in Greater New York 
into one unified system. Results attained by unification in Chicago 
’ compared with group systems in New York and Boston. Load curves 


34. SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


and characteristics of different classes of service in New York, Boston 
and Chicago. Much well-digested, statistical information on industrial 
power, lighting and railway service. Appendix on power requirements of 
Chicago electrified steam roads, showing saving of unified energy supply 
over independent group system. 

Discussion, pp. 283-322, by Messrs. John W. Lieb, Jr., Dugald C. 
Jackson, Charles P. Steinmetz, Lewis B. Stillwell, Benjamin F. Wood, 
Cary T. Hutchinson, Bion J. Arnold, Samuel Insull, Frank J. Sprague, 
Hans Lippelt, William McClellan, Percy H. Thomas, W. G. Carlton, 
Calvert Townley, S. D. Sprong, W. S. Lee, William B. Jackson, 
Lee H. Parker, C. O. Mailloux, P. W. Sothman, C. L. de Muralt, 
N. W. Storer and Edward N. Lake. General remarks on feasibility and 
desirability of supplying electric railways from unified systems of electric 
energy production. Advantages of unified system in organization, econ- 
omy and favorable operating conditions. Defense of separate power 
plants for railways. 


FREIGHT TRAIN TESTS ON AN ELECTRIC INTERURBAN RAILWAY 
S. T. Dodd Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1001-1017 


General description of the electric freight equipment of the Fort Dodge, 
Des Moines and Southern Railway, followed by an account of the method 
and results of tests made to determine the power and energy requirements 
of freight trains under regular service conditions. Graphic and tabular 
records of results. 

No discussion. 


ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION OF IRON BY DIRECT CURRENT IN STREET SOIL 
Albert F. Ganz Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1167-1176 


Experimental investigation of the relative corrosion of different kinds 
of iron in two typical street soils. Comparison of actual electrolytic 
corrosion with that calculated by Faraday’s law. 

Discussion, pp. 1177-1178, by Messrs. Carl Hering, Edward B. Rosa, 
Irving Langmuir, C. H. Sharp and Albert F. Ganz. Corrosion of iron 
in cinders. Voltage of electrolytic corrosion of iron. 


MEASURING STRAY CURRENTS IN UNDERGROUND PIPES 
Carl Hering Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1449-1463 
Description and theory of several methods of measuring the current 
into or out of an underground pipe. 
Discussion, pp. 1464-1482, by Messrs. Albert F. Ganz, Edwin F. North- 
rup, George F. Sever, Edward B. Rosa, Alexander Maxwell, Frank 
Wenner, Clayton H. Sharp and Carl Hering. Description of numerous 


methods of measuring current and resistance of underground pipes or 
similar circuits. Haber’s earth ammeter. 


18. LIGHTING AND LAMPS 


ARC VS. TUNGSTEN STREET-LIGHTING IN SMALL TOWNS 
C. E. Stephens Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 365-396 
General analysis of street lighting problems. Classification of streets 


for illuminating purposes. Requirements of street lighting design, 
operation and maintenance. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 35 


Discussion, pp. 352-363, by Messrs. Gano Dunn, S. C. Lindsay, F. H. 
Murphy, A. A. Miller, H. M. Friendly, G. R. Cooley, W. A. Hillebrand, 
R. Howes, George H. Sampson, J. B. Fisken, Alexander Martin, O. B. 
Coldwell, Lloyd D. Gilbert and A. G. Jones. Defense of tungsten lamp 
for street lighting. 


FREQUENCY 
D. B. Rushmore Vol. xxxi 1912, pp. 955-972 


Comprehensive review of the quantitative relations between frequency 
and the operative characteristics of electrical apparatus and distribution 
circuits showing the difficulty of fixing a universal standard frequency 
for commercial circuits. The effect of frequencies upon the design and 
operation of electrical systems as to cost and satisfactory service. Table 
of frequencies used in various typical systems covering central stations, 
railways and many industrial plants. 

Discussion, pp. 973-984, by Messrs. Samuel Sheldon, John J. Frank, 
B. G. Lamme, G. H. Stickney, W. J. Foster, H. R. Summerhayes, Charles 
F. Scott, N. J. Neall, J. R. Worth and E. A. Lof. Effect of frequency 
upon the design and operation of transformers. Historical résumé of 
commercial practise in the choice of frequency and discussion of the rea- 
sons therefor. Performance of lamps on low frequency. Method of 
choosing between 25 and 60 cycles in generator design. 


VACUA 
W. R. Whitney : Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1207-1216 


Improvement of vacuum by condensing vapors. Blackening of inside 
of vacuum tubes and lamp bulbs. Edison effect. Crookes radiometer- 
for measuring pressure in a vactium. Effect of temperature on life 
of vacuum lamps. 

Discussion, pp. 1217, by Messrs. W. R. Whitney and Alfred H. Cowles. 
Gases held within glass containers. 


METALLIC TUNGSTEN AND SOME OF ITS APPLICATIONS 
W. D. Coolidge Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1219-1228 


Properties of wrought tungsten and commercial uses to which it is 
being put. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by Irving Langmuir on 
“The Convection and Conduction of Heat in Gases.” 


INDUSTRIAL ILLUMINATION AND THE AVERAGE PERFORMANCE OF 
LIGHTING SYSTEMS 


C. E. Clewell Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1257-1272 


General discussion of design of industrial lighting systems. Organiza- 
tion and arrangement of lighting data for easy reference. Design and 
test data from actual installations. Detailed-study of depreciation of 
illumination due to dirt. Relation between lighting cost and labor 


cost. : 
Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Bassett Jones, afte 


on “' The Problems of Interior Illumination. 


36 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


THE PROBLEMS OF INTERIOR ILLUMINATION 
Bassett Jones, Jr. Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1273-1292 


Descriptive analysis of the problem of interior lighting, being a discus- 
sion of the various factors that should be considered in the design of light- 
ing systems wherever the aesthetic side is concerned. Outline of the 
method of procedure in such designs, followed by recital of actual course 
pursued in the design of the lighting system for a large banking room. 

Discussion, including that of paper by C. E. Clewell on ‘“ Industrial 
Illumination and the Average Performance of Lighting Systems,”’ pp. 1293- 
1307, by Messrs. D. McFarlan Moore, Preston S. Millar, Charles F. Scott, 
A. E. Kennelly, E. B. Rowe, C. E. Clewell, Clayton H. Sharp, F. C. Cald- 
well, G. H. Stickney, William J. Hammer, E. A. Champlin, M. Luckiesh, 
Roscoe Scott and Bassett Jones, Jr. General comments on industrial 
and aesthetic lighting. Depreciation of illumination. Method of figur- 
ing the labor saving due to improved lighting in factories. Daylight 
vs. artificial light for lighting purposes. 


ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENTS WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO LAMP TESTING 
Evan. J. Edwards Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1517-1523 


Accuracy attained in commercial lamp testing. Description of lab- 
oratory standard a.c. voltmeter. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by T. H. Amrine on “ In- 
candescent Lamps as Resistances.”’ 


INCANDESCENT LAMPS AS RESISTANCES 
T. H. Amrine Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1526-1531 


Resistance and resistance-temperature characteristics of various com- 
mercial, carbon, tantalum and tungsten filaments. Use of four-lamp 
bridge. 

Discussion, including that of paper by Evan J. Edwards on “ Electrical 
Measurements with Special Reference to Lamp Testing,” pp. 1532-1535, 
by Messrs. Clayton H. Sharp, A. E. Kennelly, M. G. Lloyd, Paul Ma- 
Gahan, T. H. Amrine, and Evan J. Edwards. Use of Howell indicator 
in lamp testing. The tungsten lamp as a resistor for a contact making 
voltmeter. 


19. ELECTRICITY IN THE ARMY AND NAVY 


MILITARY TELEGRAPH LINES USING THE POLARIZED SOUNDER AS RECEIVING 
INSTRUMENT 
George R. Guild Vol, xxxi—1912, pp. 1429-1448 
Description of single-impulse induction telegraph system with special 
reference to the application of a polarized relay to two systems devised 
by the author. Many circuit diagrams. 
No discussion. 


wwe 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 37 


90. MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATIONS OF ELECTRICITY 


CENTRAL STATION POWER IN COAL MINES 
W. A. Thomas Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1-14 


Brief description of the uses of electrical energy in coal mine operation. 
Description of flywheel-equalizer hoisting plant. Analysis of energy re- 
quirements of coal mines, with regard to cost of service. Advantages 
of central station service to small mines. Rates charged for mine service. 

No discussion. 


DIRECT-CURRENT AND ALTERNATING-CURRENT MILL MOTORS FOR 
AUXILIARY DRIVES 
Brent Wiley Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 605-618 


Analytical discussion of the design requirements of d.c. and a.c. motors 
for steel mill service. Characteristics of series and compound d.c. motors 
and induction motors with wound secondary. 

Discussion, pp. 619-626, by Messrs. Alexander C. Lanier, M. A. Whiting 
R. B. Treat, Gano Dunn, F. R. Fishback, A. G. Ahrens and Brent Wiley. 
General remarks on choice of motor for steel mill auxiliaries, a.c. vs. d.c 
motors. Method of rating motors for intermittent service. 


ELECTRIFICATION OF A REVERSING MILL OF THE ALGOMA STEEL 
COMPANY 
Bradley T. McCormick Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 645-652 


Description of flywheel motor-generator set and equipment for reversing 
mill plant giving general design data for the generators, motors, control- 
lers, etc. 

Discussion, pp. 653-658, by Messrs. David Hall, B. T. McCormick, 
Wilfred Sykes, R. A. Black, H. C. Specht, R. B. Treat and H. W. Cheney. 
Effect upon inertia of dividing units. European practice in rolling mill 
drives. Time required to reverse Algoma mill, test. 


THE OPERATION OF A LARGE ELECTRICALLY DRIVEN REVERSING ROLLING 
MILL 
Wilfred Sykes Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 659-681 
General description of electrically driven universal mill of the Illinois 
Steel Company. Detailed description of the flywheel motor-generator 
plant and controlling equipment with design data, performance charac- 
teristics and test results. Power required to operate mill and load 
characteristics. 
Discussion, pp- 682-684, by Messrs. R. A. Black, H. C. Specht, R. 
Tschentscher, James Farrington, Bradley T. McCormick and E. Fried- 
laender. Relative economy of two-high and three-high rolling mills. 


ELECTRICAL CONTROL OF A LARGE MINE HOIST 

H. W. Cheney Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 685-699 
General description of induction motor hoist in No. 3 mine of the Wood- 

ward Iron Company, Birmingham, Alabama. Detailed description of 

design and performance of water rheostat. Experimental data for rational 


design of water rheostats. 


38 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Discussion, pp. 700-708, by H. M. Gassman, W. O. Oschmann, HB 
White, Wilfred Sykes, F. L. Stone, E. Friedlaender, H. W. Cheney and 
M. A. Whiting. Data on the design of water rheostats, general remarks 
and experience in their operation. 


NOTES ON THE USE OF ALTERNATING CURRENT IN UNLOADING COAL 
W. N. Ryerson and J. B. Crane Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 709-722 


Description of, and operation data on several types of coal dock unload- 
ing plants in Duluth-Superior Harbor. Load characteristics from 
tests. Rates and methods of charging for central station service. 

Discussion, pp. 723-736, by Messrs. Wilfred Sykes, C. T. Henderson, 
E. Friedlaender, R. R. Selleck, R. E. Hellmund, Albert Kingsbury and 
J.B. Crane. Experience and operating data on electric coal dock plants. 
A.c. vs. d.c. dock equipment. Cost of dynamic braking. Overshooting 
of recording wattmeters. Energy consumption of electric coal docks. 


DOES IT PAY THE AVERAGE COAL MINE TO PURCHASE CENTRAL STATION 
POWER 
Graham Bright Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 737-747 


Detailedanalysis of the cost of producing electric energy at the coal mine 
and cost of changing over for central station service. Power requirements 
of coal mines. Cost data from actual practise in coal mine power plants. 

Discussion, pp. 748-754, by Messrs. E. D. Dreyfus, George R. Wood, 
H. M. Gassman, E. T. Penrose, Wilfred Sykes, W. N. Ryerson, H.N. 
Miller, and Graham Bright. Cost data on energy production at coal 
mines. Central station vs. independent plants. 


OZONE: ITS PROPERTIES AND COMMERCIAL PRODUCTION 
Milton W. Franklin Vol. xxxi—1912, pp.985-995 


Historical notes on ozone. Description of various methodsof ozone pro- 
duction and many of the different types of ozonators that have been de- 
veloped. Characteristics and properties of ozone. 

Discussion, pp. 996-999, by Messrs. C. E. Skinner, Mathew O. Troy, 
J. Lester Woodbridge, W. L. R. Emmet and Milton W. Franklin. 


THIRTY YEARS’ PROGRESS IN THE ELECTRIC FURNACE 
F. A. J. FitzGerald Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1179-1187 


Brief review of early work in the development of arc, resistance and 
induction type furnaces. Statement of some of the problems en- 
countered in furnace design. ; 

Discussion, pp. 1188-1190, by Carl Hering, Alfred H. Cowles, W. B. 
Jackson and F. A. J. FitzGerald. Early work of Cowles. Invention of 
carborundum and siloxygen. 


APPLICATION OF ELECTRIC DRIVE TO PAPER CALENDERS 
E. C. Morse Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1959-1983 


Detailed analysis of the operating characteristics and power require- 
ments of super-calenders. Experimental determination of the various 
factors that enter the problem of drive selection, and discussion of relative 
merits of different methods of drive. Brief notes on power requirements 
of sheet calenders and platers. 

No discussion. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 39 


ELECTRICITY ON THE FARM 
Putnam A. Bates Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1985-2003 


Review of the present state of the art of applying electricity in agri- 
cultural undertakings. Specific data from irrigated farms, stock farms 
and others covering central station and isolated plant practise. Power 
requirements of such enterprises and rates charged by central stations. 
Use of storage batteries. 

Discussion, pp. 2004-2013 by Messrs. J. D. Merrifield, L. L. Elden, 
Putnam A. Bates, J. A. Moyer, Sanford, and Adolph Shane. 


POWER REQUIREMENTS OF ROLLING MILLS 
Wilfred Sykes Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2051-2056 


Analytical study of the power requirements of rolling mills showing 
the relative effects of factors such as temperature of metal, volume, method 
and rate of displacement; etc. Example of calculation of power require- 
ments for a mill. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by F. W. Meyer and Wilfred 
Sykes on ‘‘ The Economical Speed Control of Alternating-Current Motors 
Driving Rolling Mills.” 


THE ECONOMICAL SPEED CONTROL OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT MOTORS 
DRIVING ROLLING MILLS 
F. W. Meyer and Wilfred Sykes. Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2067-2095 


Classification of speed requirements of rolling mills followed by analy- 
tical discussion of various methods of inductor motor control including 
rheostatic, multi-winding, cascade and regulating machines of various 
types with special reference to the last named. Late developments in 
the use of frequency changers as regulating machines, three-phase commu- 
tator motors for direct drive. 

Discussion, including that of paper by Wilfred Sykes on ‘‘ Power Re- 
quirements of Rolling Mills ” pp. 2096-2120 by Messrs. John M. Hipple, 
J. H. Wilson, Selby Haar, Edward J. Cheney, Bayse N. Westcott, David 
M. Petty, Fred Bickford Crosby, L. T. Robinson, H. L. Barnholdt, 
G. E. Stoltz, Wilfred Sykes and Ford W. Harris. General remarks and 
experience in the choice of motor ,equipments for rolling mill drives. 
Method of testing steam driven mills. Relative merits of different 
methods of speed control. Notes on recording instruments for tests. 


21. TELEPHONY AND TELEGRAPHY 


AUTOMATIC PRIVATE BRANCH EXCHANGE DEVELOPMENT IN SAN FRANCISCO 
Gerald Deakin Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 365-396 


Description of advantages and mode of operation of automatic apart- 
ment house and commercial private branch exchanges. Cost of opera- 
tion and maintenance compared with manual system for the same service. 
Cost and maintenance statistics. 

Discussion, pp. 397-404, by Messrs. H. M. Friendly, Gerald Deakin 
A. H. Griswold, A. H. Dyson, D. P. Fullerton, R. W. Pope, A. E. Burgh- 


40 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


duff, W. Lee Campbell, Lloyd D. Gilbert and Arthur Bessey Smith. 
General remarks on operation of private branch exchanges. Description 
of automatic branch exchange connected to public branch exchange. 


THE APPLICATION OF AUTOMATIC SELECTING DEVICES TO TELEPHONE 
MULTIPLE SWITCHBOARDS 
Alfred H. Dyson Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 405-415 


Brief description of modern manual multiple switchboard followed by 
automatic call distributing switchboard. Analysis of the advantages 
and savings resulting from the use of the latter system. 

Discussion, pp. 420-425, by Messrs. A. H. Griswold, A. H. Dyson, 
H. M. Friendly, Gerald Deakin, A. E. Burghduff, and Arthur Bessey 
Smith. Advantages of automatic call or traffic distributing system over 
the manual system. Factors that effect the efficiency of telephone op- 
erators. 


DESIGN OF TELEPHONE POLE LINES FOR CONDITIONS WEST OF THE ROCKY 
MOUNTAINS 
A. H. Griswold Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 427-443 


Description of weather conditions on Pacific Coast and causes of pole 
deterioration. Properties of Western poles. Pole testing and apparatus. 
General instructions for pole line erection. 

Discussion, pp. 444-447, by Messrs. H. Y. Hall, Gerald Deakin, W. D. 
A. Peaslee, Gano Dunn, D. P. Fullerton, P. M. Downing, S. J. Lisberger 
and A. H. Griwsold. Effect of concrete casings on butt rot of poles. 


PRACTICAL JOINT POLE CONSTRUCTION 
J. E. Macdonald Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 491-500 


Description of the Los Angeles system of joint pole construction and 
operation. Outline of joint agreement between operating companies. 
Illustrations of different types of construction. 

Discussion, pp. 501-508, by Messrs. A. H. Griswold, L. B. Cramer, 
Gano Dunn, O. B. Coldwell, S. J. Lisberger, H. R. Wakeman, J. B. Fisken, 
and J. E. Macdonald. Further particulars of the Los Angeles systems, 
fixing of liability, schedule of pole share distribution, tree trimming, 
pole line easements. 


THE WIRING OF LARGE BUILDINGS FOR TELEPHONE SERVICE 
Frederick L. Rhodes Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1867-1394 


Design and construction of telephone wiring for office and loft buildings, 
hotels and apartments. Actual examples giving cable layouts and general 
data. ; 

Discussion, pp. 1395-1396, by Messrs. Edwin M. Suprise, George K. 
Manson and F. L. Rhodes. 


THE VIBRATIONS OF TELEPHONE DIAPHRAGMS 
Charles F. Meyer and J. B. Whitehead Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1397-1418 


Experimental study of vibrations of telephone receivers and transmitters 
at different frequencies and currents. Relation between frequency, 
current and amplitude of vibration, shown graphically. Resonance 
curves, curves for receiver and transmitter. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 41 


Discussion, pp. 1419-1428, by Messrs. George D. Shepardson, George 
W. Pierce, Alan E. Flowers, A. E. Kennelly, John B. Taylor, John B. 
Whitehead, Frank Wenner and Charles F. Meyer. Effect of temperature 


“on vibration of telephone diaphragms. Variation of inductance and 


resistance of telephone transmitters and receivers when vibrating. 


MILITARY TELEGRAPH LINES USING THE POLARIZED SOUNDER AS RECEIVING 
INSTRUMENT 
George R. ‘Guild Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1429-1448 


Description of single impulse induction telegraph system with special 
reference to the application of a polarized relay to two systems devised by 
the author. Many circuit diagrams. 

No discussion. 


22. MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS AND INSTITUTE AFFAIRS 


THE DEBT WE OWE TO HENRY AS A SCIENTIST 
Michael I. Pupin Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1019-1026 


State of electric science before Henry. Brief sketch of Henry’s achieve- 
ments and side-lights on his character. His true position among the great 
electrical scientists. 

No discussion. 


THE RELATION OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING TO OTHER PROFESSIONS 
President’s Address 
Gano Dunn Vol. xxxi—1912, pp- 1027-1034 

Definition of engineering, tending to show that it is a method rather 
than an occupation. 

No discussion. 

METALLIC TUNGSTEN AND SOME OF ITS APPLICATIONS 

W. D. Coolidge Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 1219-1228 


Properties of wrought tungsten and commercial uses to which it is 


being put. 
Discussion incorporated with that of paper by Irving Langmuir 


‘“The Convection and Conduction of Hzat in Gases: 


on 


CODE OF PRINCIPLES OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 
Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2227-2230 


REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDING 


APRIL 30, 1912 
Vol. xxxi—1912, pp. 2231-2251 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Acceleration characteristics, centrifugal pumps.................. 552 
motor-generator set................ 554 
motors. (See Name of Motor). 
various machines. (See Name of Ma- 


chine). 
ventilating fans. 72. sent. oO ee ere eee 552 
railway; economical. ...i0+) ese aiiwes abaeusnclrataieh cia Rene 217 
train; freight Service... «d.treie isa ae eae ence eon 1016 
Accutacy, human limitations on acne se Sula bec ieee 825 1517 


Acyclic generators. (See Generators). 
Air, corona phenomenon. (Also see Corona). 


dielectric: strength, LOSSES aia: oc toes etd arene ks aaa eae 1051 
disruptive critical e,m.f.) formula, srs 4c secrete eee .- 1052 
CHERRY sh ohevencstdeus ve Sak aad es Meastorsy thie celathy ieee eee 1082 
definition: .. o6 .mete ocistasbesmkitet ae 1083 
effect of density 2... a.cuc. oe eee ‘oh LOO 
TAP WMOOT SYNCHTONOUS, CHOLCGs. cemeteries sieneneiter eee 596 
gradient, disruptive, effect of conductor diameter............ 1056 
GENSIEY ge ska evans ates 1054-1059 1060 
PFESSUTEs, cars ohana eno 1054 
temperature. S7ai4, Ass sees 1054 
ionization by Coronas... sas Mk beaten kare eee eee ee 1094 
Algoma Steel Co., reversing mill installation..................e- 645 
Ammeters, electromagnetic, moving vane, losses................ 1592 
Haber’s earth; experiencesitings* uae eee 1478 
hof-wire, Characteristics. ..c.ie. «1 + <sice ca 1591 
losséee.” AROS ae ee ee eee 1592 
induction, performance curvesessieese 6.) so. ee 1575 
temperature,compensations: wy. 64s sa uate . 1605 
EREOFY.s Sar aiteitei tka oh tial oRaS ceae eOn n 1571 
LOPGUe CQUAION 01.0.6 6 nee ne ene 1572 
thermo, measurement small currents......... ....... 1512 
Amortisseur winding. (See Winding, squirrel cage). 
At DELS SuCISCOMErY (date. :.. 5° aoc Anew gen pene ee 1019 
Antennae, use in lightning arresterss +... ce csc se ke a eee 814 
Arcing-ground suppressor applied to cable system................ 1933 
tise im: cable systems... -sn5 wun ee ee EG 
Ares’ cable, grounded; characteristics! '. 2/2) 2h 274. eee 1906 
metallicPourrentioscillogramss, +: sehen see aenie eee 873 885 
Quam Laoscillograime <i sec eae en ne 873 885 
Armature connections, double-commutator generator............ 668 
construction, steel mull’ sérvice ws. ., 1.0.0. oben one 606 
flux distribution. (See Flux Distribution). 
reaction, drop in voltage due to reduction of flux....... 522 
TRCEU PEMICtATICE: <..\.0i a. amie an eee eee vteik Se ae 516 
Atmosphere, moisture saturation form various temperatures...... 328 
Auto transformers. (See Transformers). 
Batteries, primary, Volta’s discovery, daté............-+2. ba. 1019 
storage, use in isolated plant, 2. 27 je es eee 2006 
With exciters:7tts...< SRS ee ee 1875 
Bearings, requirements for rolling mill drives.................... 649 
steel mull motors, desig tic visas si ieee enema 608 


TOPICAL INDEX 43 


Bibliography, generators, a.c. induction, squirrel cage............ 1747 

anlhoeyel GvxomneNnlone aod. Gabby cots Wo oop ead oor 273 

RolleRS COR abc daa Soc Oo ORD OG 8 Deh ointment oFo fo meee tes 742 

eR eCEAL IOI. Mate -[s, Wi ptsuntet= Gsyern svg TeITNSIMUE wo aioe = 101 

Ane WTOOn, \COSby erected wo eta erictirs 1m lareeiete into oo oan 45 
foundations. (See Foundations). 

lose, Glsstieaitstils so pas gnc so bbs one od. Cemeeecroe me aoe ere 82 

SOTA AV GUC erent toni Rercd ann Ea ewer ca ee iy Pas ea etsy toeinee dies: 744 

icosters Lor EXCIber COMLTOL: gest. « oe. sale wimlele ele efslieiel ofs!si <joueie ele 1866 

Bigsllobate nohwnalehacbley GOsic oon On oes ceo Ob) cud acura ay ooo coor 733 

MOMS CHOs eae wc coon oaoe Bb DO ouinenT oe 641 642 

HIACICTL ON eee LE GOTO Ey. oe Ge ees 627 

calculations. cater. fe Oo eo) 

motors, a.c., coal handling plants, cost.......-....++-+- 7(7 #33 

chaaewaltey CER eotn sco meGoseocerouasr os 6 ome 723 

Bebe, fOut lamp. 2.2 <2 wxdhsid (eidties Dae Slelbatisie's « Sarees « 1539 

incandescent lamp testing............-..++---- 1532 

Brushes, choice, generators, acyclic..... 2... sess eee e eee eee 1830 

contact resistance, high-speed.............---+e eee eees 1822 

ReHerators, ACYCIC. giao .miieie. ania Sneckie sel eee = 1817 

resistance measurement. ace .celv ne nee bees ee ee eee ees 1698 

Buildings, boiler house, cost...-...-2+s sree eee e steer teen ees 742 

Pepreciation. «6... besiege. cies spere lo wie ciel eon 101 

power plant, Costs j.ciectimdsines Ht en ee ee es 742 

ables, bonding, practice cut cise cs bee tint e sere eters ee 787 

faults, predetermination..... Oe eae ae eae CeO 1900 

treadisctpation.... - 2, ‘eels Pome Iawiet «eke eso 755 

high-tension, arcing-ground, eharactenstiCs..c...sbe sas: 1906 


capacity, conditions when erounded...,.0. L8ds4 
insulation resistance measurements in oper- 


ALOIS ba oe ean eke os) eas 1901 
potentials when grounded............----: 1883 
induced current, calculation........---- ++ sero eee eee 806 
eumt., caletlation: ccs athieitt emer on tee 806 
lead, high-frequency stresses. ......-- +--+ sess eee ee oor, aw 
one-phase grounded, relation between e.m f.andresistance. 1898 

power lost 
in ground and potential to STOUT st agmin ined «itis sel 1899 
paper-insulated, carrying GADACILY: cose ot eerie ee ae 803 
reactance, calculation..cic..s.- cece cee e ere recente es 806 
resistance, thermal..... 1.0 see sner- sewer erence tree eeee 805 
rubber-insulated, carrying capacity.....---+-seeerereeee 803 
sheath currents, calculation.......-+--++sere rere reece 807 
; TSE Loe cet ceed bO tr cate reson Dns 795 
single-conductor, bonded, sheath currents.........++-+++- THE 
NS Snipe dos SOO OOCnaea 777 
temperature characteristics..........-- 778 
distribution and insulation. 778 
three-phase, potential equation..... ..--++---- cin ere 1909 
triple-conductor, sheath losses.....+.+-+++ seeree rr rees 802 
underground, carrying capacity.....-+---e+see sree es 802 
weatherproof, carrying capacity ...--..+-++ seer reer tees 803 
Cambric, maximum temperature. ... 0.06 -eeesc eee teen ere es 756 
Gierimal ALOp. op ets Meier Chloe. aloha plete a Pesan seers 5H ire Hs te 757 
varnished, maximum temperature......--++--+s+ee0s 756 
Capacity, electric, parallel wires, triangular arrangement......... 1115 
Carbon, resistance-temperature Characteristic... 4). 25> - > 1526 
treated, resistance-temperature characteristics.....-.... 1529 
Carborundum, discovery... 05.0.2. dee eet er eens 1184 1188 
Gars, baggage, weighty coh bet owes ria Sys s pee ee 276 
day coaches, ua oe bt OE oe oat eT oA ae ea 276 
dining, weight.........---+++- DO EEE LOGE 276 
electric, choice of gear ratio.....-.-- seer terete 211 


44 TOPICAL INDEX 


Cars, electric (continued) 


ead: weights. jo crac cratornicletech terre) tee etel rset eiete Mame] aaa 204 

MiIlCA Eis sreadeila onsedole nico leer nina level -retrte ke fol oweter ey ae mOrE Re 204 

PLOCECEION «0s one eon sre) Hier st vatanaile tayel ance: whaler ne 852 

two-motor vs. four-motor. .)...02.0.e eee ee see = 210 

Pullman, steel, weight..........---+ eee eee e scene 276 

Weight (Suc Raauaieed Manes oe ened ee oke itera 276 

surburban trailers, weight.............+++----+-- 276 

Cells, voltaic;-date of discovery: ....).. 2-5 2/5120 tele vie = tie = 1019 
Gentral stations, advantages... ..).. a6 \ep0e = ici sieie > a ehenelnter elelataie 76 
over isolated plants 22% ..>\-..-2---- 59 

frequency standard.c) 12900? 27 2-5-0 oem 971 972 

rates. (see Rates yes <6 cag sms 4: ene cereals ear 
Chapman regulators (see Regulators) ... ...-...-seeeee eee eees 

Gireuit, breaker, inventor... cssccu sae ste ee Pen aie ol et oleae eee 193 
diagram, Alexanderson alternator............-.+++++++5 1851 
generators, a.c. compensated. wi 07... .---..-: 1853 

Coal handling, bridge tramway, power requirements......... rly aso fils: 
cable car, power requirements............5.-.+.-. 718 

docks, azc. vs: d.c. operation . Syne oe ee 727-730 86734 

bridge tramway installation............... 710 

cable car installation. <s#< 94:2. een aoa 712 

dG. Visi, a5 C. Operation. ...nacminee see 727-730 734 

electric, comparison of different types...... 716 

machinery, classification............. Aer et li) 

man trolley installation ict 90s. Se 714 

power consumption.........:..5.. 728-729 735 

TeCUirementSes Gr TM, ae ee ee eel 710 

service, central station rates...........-.- 720 

Duluth=Saperior Haebor, Heevweek «6 6 eae 709 
dynamic>braking, CoStccn.c neareetes aire + sles Snes 723 

electric plant, air operated switches, advantages... 724 

man trolley << ¢.. a. (co SEMA Cae eee re el heinettens 719 

MARL, CAPACITY IN «aie sare eke erie 723 

mines (see Mines) 

storage capacity, Duluth-Superior Harbor................. 709 
Cobalt hysteresis at low temperature, tests... ............-+...- 2048 
Collector rings, generators, acyclic, construction................ 1832 
difmicilties.2 2. ate aoe eee 1837 

Wears SRT PARR eee 1834 

high-speed construction. . ac. . Wainer einen 1832 

wear, cenerators; ACyChore stay shies eas eile 1834 

Colleges, Land Grant, basis of organization........./09..0.044. 1365 
Commutating pole, design, steel mill service.................... 607 
Commutators, contact resistance, measurement................. 1698 
design, steelmmill service... asics ehae keane 606 

speed wmotorseeneratOrsss Mileheins ois da ce ecisr ev ree 656 

Condenser’ charge; energy equation... 5... ips cnse eet dew en wo ele 2179 
OSCIATOLyy,..,.... sere wterek Siete ete el on ee ee 895 
discharge, oscillatory <. e7Hyeeh, fo haeiat..teer ee nr eee 895 © 
synchronous, use with induction generators........... 1802 

tinfoil, construction. Wpeaiee sasaki eed eee ov eR ne ner 1135 
Conductance, thermal, conversion factors! Miyee0 0. etiam. 2 oh 1198 
Conductors, underground pipes, current flow............-...... 1450 
Conduits, construction, central station practice................. 784 
current capacity, effect of lightly loaded cables........ 768 

ducts, temperature distribution test....0.. 252. ..2%.. 25 757 

energy dissipation per duct-foot..:......6....0.0..05. 784 

manhole, ventilation test 2s.. ...u sass ot ae nen emer 761 

summer ratings compared with winter ratings......... 786 
temperature distribution, tests................ 771-773 774 

in’ ducts, ‘testes eee 766 767 


effect of air circulation as. Wace ae 767 


“So 


TOPICAL INDEX 45 
’ Conduits, temperature effect of (continued) 

lightly loaded icables..) 7 i...) - 768 
foreedr venti atiOMeneetins © <li «suet 769 
Destino MeTHOGM Me rtstetieree oc el-= cles gisele 776 
THESIS Si. dip cacions ob eo cu ong Oncaea olcyh cr tecaCign Dra 800 
IBORAOD OCS Onl Wg baie lobo de so cao usu 785 
underground, manhole, ventilation test.........---+.-- 764 

temperature distribution, natural ventila- 
| a Coe A en a tbe tui A Uek ee aera eae 762 763 
ventilation, practicability..........--.+seeee eres 792 794 
winter ratings compared with summer ratings........-- 786 
Contact-e.m.f., current collection, generators, acyclic..........-- 1822 
@ontactes tungstemin stele tet ies eerie ein ecient 1222 
Control, e.m.f., effect of frequency. +... 2-56 t eee eee eee eee 983 
speed, motors, a.c., CalenGerianivier: saree dels tirta et 1971 1973 
COMMMMUCATOT eee Terese eo = eels 2092 
induction, cascade..........-..-++-+: 2076 

commutating regulator, di- 
direct connected....... 2079 

commutating regulator, 
motor driven.:..,...-. 2080 

commutating regulator, 
number in operation... 2115 


commutating regulator, 
power-factor compen- 


GeO 0a. 5 0, SicatAtao IO IOI 2081 
frequency changer, oper- 
Maile 6.0 ogee aideore OID 2085 


frequency changer with 
regulating transformer. 2034 
frequency changer with- 
out regulating trans- 


ROTICT eee ici 2 2088 
meulti-winding........... 2074 
pheostatiCcens.- a2 «l= ae 2112 
d.c., calender drive.......+---++-++> 1972 1973 
railway, field method.......:..+++++-2-: 220 
SENN os aauoo od 223.0 220 
weight reduction, methods....... 209 
requirements for calender Gimhy cents anninecns 1971 
rolling mills, rheostatic, COSt..)..60. 22. ee ee 2073 
Fae FlaVele yoy oot ole. eee 2071 
Convection, forced, Kennelly’s experiments compared with calcu- 
AREAS cas ke Aco kG ne LOTT OM ae OIC Ca 1237 
free, Kennelly’s experiments compared with calcula- 
BST nee clec ie Ue cece iaas OR ee Oe a ea 1234 
Converters, frequency commercial speeds........-+0- eset e rece 967 
practical combinations...... Fin atko oe 967 
mercury arc, life of tube.......-.-.-+Fseeeer resets 147 
MOWer-LACLOl. «1 aioe. vet et oes 147 
replacement of synchronous.....------ 147 
tungsten leading-in-wires......---+++-> 1241 
synchronous, cost, effect of frequenicy.....+-2--.+.2- 968 
(2 ae 3 oe ete occ a Shae 968 
effect of frequency.....------+-+> 976 
CMinicnOy erence te See 131 
GRASS mo cS SIRI eo SURO Oana eam ena ae 1706 
Copper, conductivity, (EERE. os onthe: oie 6 cat Ne ecg ORe aca Na alba 804 
Peeistivityy ClOCUTIC So smt crcl wy pte eee SY er ute 1222 
TASES 0 8S, cath Sets Gee pM OI mS ae 804 
Corn production, various states......-.-.--.s-sscsrrt sr 2010 
Corona, concentric evlinders, gradient formula... .. ete LUG 


visual, effect of density. :., 1062 


46 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Corona (continued) 


critical e.m.f., relation to air density..............+--- 1054 

disruptive, formula. .22,.)...-----6 1052 1058 

subdivided conductors.............-. 1106 

visual, formitla.scn: ae eee 1052 1058 

oilksurfacesformula.... Jaseenscemine 1057 

water surface, formula............ 1057 

diametetiveasurement-+.ecl eae Bee eee eee 1101 

with tiltra-viglet ss... 6a cemneks) <tietee ieee een 1104 

without ultra-violet... mek eu)-7) eee 1104 

disruptive energy, definition... ........2--2--++eeeee-- 1084 

effect: of air density jinn taekiasisa. eres 1085 

conductor diameter......... 1086 

relation to air,density.&. s¢.ts - a= 1087 

effect. of atmospheric condition) 4.25 .<s)2-enele-=- seer 945 

conductor diametetsyaiereng a>). eee eee 1056 

freeionizationass¢cieeeeene ee ae bee eee 1099 

freqwencYiesnsiectes) Says elt eee See eee 961 1055 

Oil: surkacewediisceiictii ee FE es ool eee ees 1055 

PLESSULB. Guests. <caieee ASR Sedo We eke ee eae ee 1054 

surfacenfinishe.:. x. cle aMiatias qaiitea namie 1055 

temperatireiierss ae i iaia ve - oeoercies ane 1054 1060 

waterisurtacede. |. saeroener ae se oe eee 1055 

e-ta.f- ,eftectuof oilksurface; testis.n.ck: co maser eee 1079 

water.sturtace: teste s.8 ook Sbeies aos 1079 

parallel wires, relation to spacing, test........... 1068 

wire diameter. ........ 1075 

Pee’: formula compared with tests............... 1047 

formulas ;-practicalwatsecki: = 2. Atlee es ee be 1058 

gradient, disruptive, effect of temperature.............. 1059 

ormulader st. Joa tanes coe ee 1058 

spark-over, relation to wire diameter, test...... 1074 

visual, effect of frequency, formula............ 1064 

temperatutes..2. 575. cases 1059 

fogstonmula se: fee oes ae eee 1081 

parallel wires, relation to spacing test... 1068 

ronization of ‘ain. \.s4iel- needa ee tae os tena eae 1094 

MOSS cisteie oa ss mgpcoyadehaw sth ateiain C'S ba De Meme Reacts, Reatseche las, seabs 1051 

below. critical. emi. formula tek awa a > cue eee ie 1052 

Gefinition(s: «01's s0j105- she ae ie © Pane ee neeeea 1053 

formula compareduwith, test. aviv. sdloee pena eee 1125 

formulas... ow cdtepseee, ac ase see ion cteenew ne eee 1043 Re 
law} below. critical pointyiiiia.n! vehi es .)eeyaelt omen 1121 

DL WTS wgectin SDs as aatp. slo tat Resa sare SRR er pri eo aaa eee ae 1053 

gneéasurement; method sawntewas as Meee Moen ee ae 1036 

Peek formula compared with test............... 1045 1048 

power-factor,: test: «sponta Aneta earths Geter ee 1042 

stormy weather morimulas cuss denisenties on ce ee eee 1058 

BOSE...) .: svortecete ‘ial Ftbr aw. 5 wa caceled nual BEN Cys eeprom ere 1040 

circuit diapramis... cnueactereee ont cee oe 1037 

transmission;lines;it« bechgueeeonherats ete. one ee Oe 1035 

different) Spacings:....i%s¢ sels «eee 1043 

formnulans te igus ae settee 1058 

parallel conductors, gradient, visual, effect of density.... 1062 

quadrilateral arrangement.......... 1110 

triangular arrangement............. 1110 

relation to spark-over, concentric cylinders............; 1065 

parallel swités... sana tro ieee 1065 

resistance, formula.3 asiAfe> ete ee Oe ee 1076 

spark-over e.m.f., concentric cylinders, relation to cylinder 
radius. «... \untsjaeeinieseep ae ae eee 1077 
parallel wires, relation to spacing test... 1068 


small wire, formula Me ein Sea ee 1076 


wit 


i Hilt i te i 


——E————— 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Corona (continued) 


Sha awa ti lage LEO DOSCOD Cumin poe cusu-,-Pe ieee crus: , L057 
SCN CMTC Ee GUCOMCCUONS I sa ere eais a sauou aware -herdeants 4 aebers 
HectSPOSCIU OSTA ply stitbha Dl Gr. mem 6p i ileuks «cur AMEN ster 
MICAl ete ctOmiTequen Cyn nr n.taao ne aol ee eee «-s - 
(ORSSSUNE WESUES a 1h 5 bc oe ug ae crprororge oo c 
ema ESNALIO, UES bres: gained stele m= 6 <1 pote or 


Corrosion, electrolytic, cast-iron pipe, testis win-inss. a5. - +--+: 


GAGS Vengo nakenloyl ann bono 4 bie Ceres 
ALOMMDUDSMSURESt ISON MCCS aamlenmer i aaiee sees 
TURONMP ROL Nee a ad Ee aay Saeco 7 crue cen aE 
MUM MIMeVOlLLASeS akOMMPIPS. . lenis 1 «nie 
SEO DIPS mbeSUMi athe del Meaaeen sine anise Bi 
WTOC INOM MLDS tect magkes wyaichee 22.2 p= = = 
AeOMwemiped Ge cimuctia Gd ensaatertn ls Aebatioy= oes cs ci-peas = 


OTe eo 


RIG OL CCAD CO eet ee waco aston s crgily enahcns eaters eres 
SG Cian) tg hee Orne Ie Onstrnar OD eaters Orne. cu acan arnt 


Galera ses. Goalies ahs ge Peau O eco 200 G0 Sor cearmminen 
converters, synchronous, effect of frequency.......-------- 
energy, electric, apartment house plant...... .-.....---+) 
COAImEMIME SER VACE serra. chews anes herd enem en oe 

Cirech Of LOACsEACLOL at set iseie a cicle eer ai le 75 

Over-load eCONnOMYyen-n- ss. 0 wos 

dndusthial, plants... cielass salir 4 lstlar- uate ts 

isolave@splatiuche meter i etcterla aici ct-1=0-7-. 

Vosedanls oa ue co tten Od © Ome OU OO roe Ep iosces ae 

lonte bul Ganenplamitweeidias forse 2 
OficewDuUNCingplantways.s- sgt ee 2 

railway operation. ......-..+--+ee eee eeee 

° Steam plantsaws. abies. Gees tae eee 

Bushes, CONVEY OL sty end bidet aate ee Re athe RG a oes 
LOMA LOT He oe ee GE ee EEL sees Dene ai ee 

TENE OOD Cre Dee Oe oe ORI Cock Ran mete 

ie oo Pio ke Oe ee a ee 
(HSC Seg TOME C OS a ec toc hae ee a 


Ingles peed wetitlsnsa = = ee he oe Ke ee ee eee es 

VOumus DOC, 1A MaM 1S aie oi cipitidl Bale ps = 
medium-speed...... cvs eee cee eee eee 
Pacdawareriicaterce mite birdie retinitis s 
Fonndationse eee De nite cme cists oe oy crocs 
generator, a.c., single-phase......-+-.--+-+seereerrre tees 
Picee-phase, .c 2... s sews Pre tee ees 

UVERING, SURGREKO VOSA. Gc. og 5 O.y'0 Ao Ue ORO cacao 

AS oe a hone ee On eRe Once Onn ear 
Iigiieapeetln. ao yluae elie eters ett 

EEC Pn OI coat ee eae 

effect of frequency......--.5-+- eee eer teers 

heating apartment houses.... 0.0.2 0-4 esse rere eerste 
department Stores, «..0Pi/seeich aici eyes He: 

Potelae ce Ae e ee erae R Mict persgh este het at ° 


ObRCe HUGS, case 2 sueene cpg REN ot toe ee 


labor, coal mine power plants......-.-.----++s+reerrerees 
ROADIE pA, GP Ola, ONO SOE OI ho cuaiOnar cate ns ae kA aU aad 
HENCE CELOgL aL OSI Dy ot cic ore. ane sae a ceuth ne UNE + Sic ot 

BOe el nels aie: Fae sete er: 
PATE ee Ste ee eee ORE adie 


47 


48 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Cost (continued) 


motor-generator, 150 kw..........0. 0020 deste tees we ceee 
piping, power plant......... 0. eeee ere ce beste cece cas 45 
poles, Cedar. ....c.. c¢suir= see «Pee ae ie enerers 
installation .< cis a dcphtevarcha ip ee ae et chee ee 
power plant, coal mines...........----eeee sees ceeeeees 
OPEration . jn Naee AMS eN Pe seiwials apse oie we ate 
superintendence: ...tfv.ae ele sles ele eee 
tirbosseneraton: ta pteiete irr tk cto yea eters eee 

producers, Sassi tion Paces WOT ga pra aie 
PUMPS, MINE sons opis woe BSie anvils whales © ibelaes ovr oie ae ae 
service, electric, apartment houses....../.....-.-.+.-+--- 
department storessie trates aa ae 

hotel sss Foe web Soe ae rane eee 

manutacturing buildings (yess Gm. ete.» 

Office: buildings: wc ayccterto ecco gs Steno eae 

substations ts ..k.ieee byte wee acc hie Oe ls ek ee 
OPeratiOn 6.5.00 Mhsia.s cherie ch pha iueketn te cheer ier 

Switch boatrdSs.cktatkseitero a oie o = cuaisieu tie ier ee eanere e 
transforMers.co sotts ws Se aiaiss Spiele aie pir ear I 
singlé-phas@ssc. nels emi cise ook eee eed Bema 
three-phasesiis. = 6 dqietals ts wis ental eek elaine hee SR 

three-unit power plant compared with two-unit............ 
LOWES osm mek owhe Makan rea aNeO aM Rgeh Ot ete eae iets ores tt OLE 


Cotton insulation, maximum itemperaturen.on sore a see ene 
Cream separators, power requirements... We... 42-4 - -- 
Crops, production, various states. c hi a aeeniteleaebanly erie tee ea 
Current, alternating, measurement, low values............. 1489 


Dairy farms, use of electricity 
Dairies, output increase from vacuum grooming 
Daylight, artificial, production 
Depreciation, boilers 


carrying-capacity, cables, underground................ 
paper-insulated cables............3.. 

rubber-insulated cables.............. 

weatherproof cables................. 

wires, caleulationmineret «.M...< eke 

collection, difficulties, generators, acyclic............... 
generators acy Clic: vn.cu5 inn See 
contact.e.m.f. mwiiteenne ce 

surface speed, generators, acyclic............ 

density, rheostats, water ..\..., desis « 694 
measurement) dary ZeVAlUes.. < vieien oy oes » eee 
separately excited electrodyna- 

IMOMELERMatoe selena sien aes 1490 

phase-shifting transformer, wave distortion 
short-circuit distribution system, equations............. 
generator, a.c., intitial peak definition...... 

turbo, equation. ..cnieeeee 

intial peak, tests1660, 

maximum equation... 

CESUSKEAOs 05 o-0 aera sooty e 


various external resist- 
anes Pee. one 
momentary, definition 
stray. (See Stray Currents). 
in underground pipe, measurement 


4 DIA Ue leur kets: evareta Ses. 0.ua! wig 
Vicia reerte wt elie Ain Yen obispo we 


buildings: )....00ieomeeee eee en oo ee eee 
machinery 


© 0,816 6 6 aya ee) 8) G, 5, S eoeneety Siete) 6, 0 (pe «ioe 4: a ANelel els 


— oe 


ee 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Diaphragms, circular, vibration period, equation................. 
/ ERESRV TALON MONIES TIOAGSH Ss wes. .ikle cles Reewee ob la kie 
WMtelectrcrenereyreduatiO me yes sick perceive. fiele tse- lo eiwisSleleMte fl clas 
strength, air. (See Air). 
: ; various materials. (See Name of Material). 

Disruptive e.m.f. for air, (See Air). 

Distribution cables, arcing-ground suppressor, use............... 
capacity current, one-phase grounded........ 
fawléswpredebermiNatiONaMreisi. cia ale =< a 
grounded, current and e.m.f. oscillograms.... 

phase relation, oscillograms....... 
relation between e.m.f. and resist- 


high-tension, capacity conditions......... 
when grounded 
potentials when 


eTOuNnded..aae ee 

insulation resistance measurement........... 

HOlmMUaWealeMeSSeSinm sub cael a eller ele a 

three-phase, potential equation............. 

Ciccrrae HIG LEILeN pie er rae arenes esa co rial ohare iel’> ohm pee serene 

UGSSCSIM AE Pe oc cat erietects se penole aenens aiken 
feeders. (See Feeders). 

PROCCUL OU Wen cia wrtd vrs Clerc wiclnye sai ates ae 

high-tension, efficiency........-------++-+esseeeee- 

hOSSSSA shi thce o Ree aioe Gea eee cnr ee 

PATA MLOSSES Mate es eC ee asie ne ayes ie) Sulogeiiena eles = 

ring system, protection, relays.........---+.--+++-: 

system, insulation resistance, clear day........-..-- 

ET baa C Ee oslo ae one gag 

SINOWELY 2 GAs ateue @ ove oat 

MO HOMO A Ga Tes bil CLIOMS ciate ac) een cll ce ais eros 

Rigo WSubllennvoysl, io. 5 pao naco 6 eee on OOK 

OIRO eCMGlMiG nena sco a0 coer amatoaae ood oe 

CITCUMh CIA STAM ga -rersgerclels: loi ei 


interconnected circuits..........-. 

Merz-Price system, possibilities... . 

Public Service Elec. Co. of N. J., insulation re- 
sistance measurement... dassen- sce 6 cnn e 
short-circuit current, equations............-- 
Diversity-factor, advantage... .- 2... ieee ee eee eee ete 
atEt SHANI COX she os Cot hoc, cut B Oho Co ROR eR ci 
isolated plant, Chicago.w.«. ieee cece ee eee 
cS light and power, Bostons«......1..-6 eee eres 
Clik a0) 5 ges beso oc Oc oman one 

iNiSige Solel’: oA Oe Beene Ceo e ae 

HIng ONG Ching Cero RA eC On 0 St Aone ae 
3rd Avenue, N. Y. Railways........... 
Brooklyn Rapid Transit..............: 

Hudson é) Manhattant mam... .02 2c .~% 
Interborough Rapid Transit.:.......-- 

New York Central, electric zone........ 

New Haven & Hartford, elec- 

GTICIZGMO Ma. ae tee atasele s siete 

Pennsylvania, electric zone........-+++ 

Reams era CORN ALaaey aes sere cdl Miah as: » 


railways, Public Service Corporation, N. J.. Ge 
Stree mOOShOIna se. aime ire ogi 
GEhicagOngwes «eee ale segs gE 


Drafting room, Malia Tilt aed OLieaemnceee to eattaicrstac 2 ccstet a sah -WaLenopti abe = 


50 TOPICAL INDEX 


Duluth-Superior Harbor, coal handling plants.......-...+++++++ 709 
Dynamotors, losses... 5.3 2.413.042 eae ate sre 1706 
Education, colleges. (See Colleges). 

industrial, Bridgeport school...........+-++2+e+e005 1352 

corporation schools.......2--+-+++++s+e+5 1335 

Panctionss6).bac ere 1355 

defects present methods............--.-++- 1362 

Ritchburgischoolvstpe -hieeas <- ae 1358 

fundamental requirements............-.-- 1350 

Government support, Alabama........... 1317 

Arkansas hess oe 1317 

California i145 92 ae 1317 

Connecticut. 4.2. 1317 

Gebrpiat in. a... 526 ae 1317 

Tlhinois nn. cs eee ee 1317 

Indiana:« ude eee 1317 

Lowa s0uu2.s See See ae 1317 

Katisases aon citar 1317 

Mainesriss. a2 asees 1317 

Maryland. icc. oka. 1317 

Massachusetts...... 1317 

Michiganieh ack 25 ot 1318 

Minnesotaa/exkr <i). . 1318 

Nebraska, 22..snn oe 1318 

New Jerséy vouch. 2 1318 

New. York. ..g25 cece 1318 

North Dakota....... 1318 

Ohiow see sees fos. 1318 

Oregon. Actas ees 1318 

Pennsylvania....... 1318 

Texasicsdsst eee ee 1318 

Wtahyiies see eee 1318 

Vermonty..s.0tic me 1318 

NVirginiay 3% o~ oe 2s ae 1318 

Wisconsin. «Ge se 1318 

high schools, New York State............. 1333 

laws-of Massabliuseitsito. auc. aves ee 1315. 328 

New. York StatesDepts ee ten. tee 1331 

Ohio 2.) StU Oe Soe te aga eee 1362 

organization oases oo. eee 1314 

outline scheme. «eae Sereee 1319 

Plato's’ plan soos =. ie ets rete mrtotes 1361 

public schoolsiNews York esteem «semen 1327 

railroads, corporation schools........ Sascn, Fee 

Pennsylvania, telegraph school... 1356 

statistics. ay ee eek Seed sete 1345 

standpoint of individualjaenmenem ure aerate 1359 

use.of factory equipment)... ).. 2 sma seceee 1357 

Efficiency, converters, measurement.)..y.2 0 Oo. So me. se lee 1697 

synchronotis: ee Aen ahs Oren eee 131 

curve;-generator, 3000ikwiaarer ee oe ee eee eee 669 

rolling mill motors aa Meee ee eee ee 668 

distribintiony high=tensiotineren. csc seis cae eee eters 479 

CLaMSIOLMIETS. .ai.sro Geek Peete cite eae eee 481 

dynamotorsmieastirementyccs meee io. te eee 1697 
electrical machinery, calculation, summation-of-loss 
methods .e. .2sscnett} Rec Sen ee iG hee ee aero 

teeder regulators du.s,.aaeiv. Ween sb tk eae satan ee rere 481 

werierators yi Ts Ned, Site thea ee Oe eens 131 

a.c. turbo, single-phasesyy...<. 6 so veel 123 Deon 

threé-phase.jacen se eter 123-157 

human lossés\in industry ®e%. 22. oe Fe ataeee pa es ye 1850 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Efficiency (continued) ‘ 
HedtAMe a SENEet WCLUSLEH IS VSCOM M8 aie coe wise wig) Saw eet « 
SCHLESSY. SLES Mme ietee « estn. Mie ona 
measurement, input-output method, accuracy......... 
vs. separate losses method. 
separate losses vs. input-output method. 
TAO OARS NIRS Soon oboe a) 6h ooo cho amon ieee creo 
measurement..... NS a ae ate eee 
MIOTOLS MEN GAIe LION premiers acres Pale 6+ oi c.s eracos = 
commutating regulator control...... 
frequencyschangetpager cic. risks «ws 
FHeOstatiCiCOMbrol vereeeaciers =< .)6 sis ous 
Scherbitissy stem tonick-acl- «erste 2113 
Tan MIRC UAs: sic Site & colors See CRORES 
TEA SUES TN CTL Mays en enh RM SR AENS eke! v5! esis sole 
power plants, importance. ....:.....--- +2. cee sees eee 
Primemovers, LOTMUlA ..cnity toga daste eee ee 
rolling mills, commutating regulator................. 
regulating motor control..........+.«-%. 
FEV ELSITIG A, Mavety foes Nees Sener alenaeG cee bstsers 
sheostaticucontrolas. .cmmeiii. «2079 
Sth Stahl Olean rere eysnons uence aes cae fore Io MEME -pebleuolsaShouslore wostai- 
WETS OMT OHSS Se ey ooete oo Cad a Oana Eoin O Gig oy Don eer 


Riel orbu Mee 54 Gie-glntyS tio wOO Ui Om co sao hake 

WEG on bios Gana adn ees oa Lec a ob eal one comes 
lakes oon yo ON aoe doc ou om on 

turbines, water, Francis type......2...-.6s.2see 474 

IDAlioN Tigo ccoonc ye Ap oadoc depo 474 

TEACTION CULATIONS. maers now Geeta tenes = 

MABE OUE INC LELS ee es at reierae isl antennae alesis irene louie fe 
Electricity, state of art, 18th century...... 0.0.6. - ee reer sees 
HGVGHACERI Tec Ramgu ae tad So cmns 8 coe cant Comicon cr 


TER aaoe Oa Ee OD 0) ato 7 SOR corde rae 6 Occrat 
SReel aremeanity ae Ob og ced oOo D DOs one oo Coico 
Electrical engineers. (See Engineers). 
Electrodynamometers, separately excited, current measurement... 
Sensibilsby ae - 1497 
ERD DIOUEN?. “ok CS Cee ba icinc one Ome oreo ome \ne coon 
EicherinyheSee drum co doe Udo ceara ae 
GONG ERUCLION Men aor clei averse = 
design constants. ..........--++..+> 
Gisadvantaeestas ua cikiiee > s «- 
PCLLOLINAMCE set Patios ts. 2 ol 2 = 
water-cooled, advantages.........-.-+++- 
Electromagnet, discovery, date..........-++ ++ eee eee eee e ences 


Electro-physics, state of art, 18th century.....-..--6+-+e+eee ees 


Biimf., discovery, date..... 06. p00 fee n er ee ee neem ee seen es 


electrostatic voltmeter with condensers.......-...-+++++: 


SE REL Shae MAB coe CR Ona Ol cee oem ee 1124 

spark gap and coil, calibration..........-- 

WAH SPAT ADs ceils lp uMees ore .ANOE) ool ts 

Energy consumption, coal mine service... -....-.-eee reer seers 
railroad, freight, Chicago.......-.....+5+-- 

trafic, Chicagory oaks... 

increase due to cold. .........7... 

passenger service, Chicago......... 

switching service, ....... of ..- 2s 

(ROME ae tei Cee tk ok er cr ae 


478 


1490 
1498 
1483 


1038 


52 TOPICAL INDEX 
Energy consumption, railroad (continued) 
transfer service s..o9 Jeera neers: 268 
trains, freightiags fame. «ac pte eae 1010 
switching 2). Jian eee Bee 1011 
électric; cost; analysisy<. 26 2. 56. ce eens em ew ie ese wnls 83 
apartment house plant........-.+.+-+-+++- 44 
department store plant..........-+-.+--+-. 45 
efiect! of loader Gaeta eerie 84-85 88 
hardware manufacturing plant............ 44 
hotel® planta sje eee 5 Stee ele kere te ape 45 
jronttoundryt plamtiss. oer ares oie > iodo ee 44 
locomotive works plant...............+--- 44 
loft: building splantiinnn2 eee eee ee 43 
office building plant... 2.5.2.6. ..22.--200% 44 
railroad operation... Titi iarenleraelere (= ates wes 133 
power station 22). (s/h. EAR Se. os 300 
silk mill plant «<2. da. 0s ates eek ee 45 
stearn plantar eynaitel igi eri sata eee cee 74. 
production, concentration, advantages.............-.-- 233 
supply, apartment houses, cost......-....--+e++++eee- . 26 
department stores;{costi: 222080. OS6e < 5% ie 26 
hotels, costs sc-sn cit eos eins tate Rie ete ae ete Re t= 26 
manufacturing buildings, cost................-. 26 
office building, costa... eesewene manele eres elae el rete 26 
Engineering, definition’. ....ostjcins «5 © o- < x Spee ee eee eine 1027 
electrical, definition... i... .5-ee see UY EBIM A ces 1033 
Engineers, illuminating, character of work...............-.---- 1274 
occupation, importanceHgys .; ek tame wiele semete! Merrie ts 1028 
ownership of data,). oss. 0eaa. stores aioe as aioe ttaaetee ts 2228 
relation to: client gain taine rere eeiais wees rence eran torre 2227 
SmMiplOVErs -. <j. 3c bw cic! oe epee eto eRe ae 2227 
fraternitys. .... Gee Sarat Ue ER eee ee 2229 
PUD A sivinveTs wiecct gsr whereloral ee wacked eee, Sole 2229 
successful, requirements; s.joa0 ments 5 ercinrlene iets 1032 
Engines; elevator) cost. .cu csi <0 os = o.c8 ik ee CNN MMne Deletes tamed 742 
fart COSts...c nicl) Rae ene Ons ORs Stee OIERNE «colonel ie ale 742 
LAS, COE... cis is! its G Soccatelte) oem en SMRC REDE Pak sleet te. «: ny Rete Re ten SO 45 
sparkplug polarity. isn tebe aioe wienehenele mec enna 1088 
Specific ConstimpHony 24k ewin tee ecto een 66 
hoisting, Coste leee Aces, 5 citi hn wea MAME eee ope incense 742 
Oly COST» ovacc-aicia ae hel» Flee aPC AIGR ss tence yeealhal aioe mini iCaSeie 45 
steam, compound condensing, low-speed, cost.......... 45 
non-condensing, medium-speed, cost... 45 
COS i. ase fave dsr SREP INRION nero ons ona te seats 742 
indicator, Tecordinggnwneine. © oe ee ei een to eral 2108 
SCrap.Valuey tI AAT ROAM, ccna oh aorta 744 
simple, high-speed); costii, nen een eter aawelene eee 45 
low-speed meosbureceh tax 12, ORR eas 45 
HKertlers,; characteristics. awe eis oe his, ours Aleks «iis ~ meverc be eietaneecuce eemete 1845 
choice of number ofwunits:i 5.220). yoni Rei. ee aoe 1867 
commutating pole, CAA. cd RGR pera eee rarer 1877 
chatacteristiess Mites eee 1847 
compound, sta bilityiesww Garis Re ceric een. 1878 
wotind)vewshinb 73 2... ste nanemeteas 1847 
CeSigt s.2a) aN ROE RAE NR Lele 1848 
method. of driving ie tc... Reon Ae ee eee oe eee 1878 
NramibEr;-CHOUCE sos. witetiond ave SNe EER aT ce Le 1879 
rating determinationswih2 earners Cohen eee 1847 
Saturation: Curves Adin cioe ee oan eae mien eet 1846 
shunt. vs: compound=weattaxrdligsnnmec crews. cacrsners cucietPevene 1847 
speed, practice: .2.927,. 730 vite: ican eeu eee 1848 
useof storage batteries 92. sane e.ahnw se uuie-k theo tate 1875 
voltage practice:!.’. . 5.5 723na eee tee eee 1848 


TOPICAL INDEX 


TOS AEC OCLC ee Re PN Ate eet op eG) 5 die ware Gun cho REMAN SE 

LEBER OD ON tca seh. SSOP OCS oS Se SI MCRD oe nC near enPmeOEE 

Fans, ventilating, acceleration characteristics 

MEMS eUIGEROL CLOCLEICILY.. aon huey Meieiniels cleteretter ele os 308 owes Oe 
Feedpumps. (See Pumps). 

Hecdawalerphea terse COSt vac. cere ieee = eM rns be oe Ns was 

Heeders, protection, Dalaticenrelay were cteier- enn ree ceils = 

magnetic balance system......... 1928-1929 

LE SUlAatrOrsme Cleric yanreta tea Pern Nn. ws we «eles a 

‘ OSSESRe AS PoP aie aT eens oleae om Fens 

Filaments, carbon, color at different temperatures............... 

effect of temperature characteristic........... 

maximum resistance in commercial lamps..... 

resistance-candle-power characteristics........ 

resistance-efficiency characteristics........... 

resistance-temperature characteristics......... 

tantalum, color at different temperatures............-. 

resistance-candle-power characteristics... . 

efficiency characteristics......... 

powercharacteristics. |. .7.-.-...- 

temperature characteristics...... 

tungsten, maximum resistance in commercial lamps.. . 

resistance-candle-power characteristics...... 

efficiency characteristics.......... 

power characteristics:...-.:...-. 

temperature characteristics....... 

iour milisetred tency Standard... ceude ek ee taite leer oo 

Flux density, generators, a.c., turbo.......--.-- sete eee ee ene 

distribution, armature, d.c., brush position on oscillograph film 

calowlatedicunvere sai). snes 

effect of compensation.......... 

ACES. oie oe ontrulG Cr ene eG 

Goldsborough’s method......... 

neutral point location on oscillo- 


Shifted! pOsitiOne mnt. tertreeies « o- - 

testing apparatus............... 

machine, d.c., calculating curve............++- 
GHEGE Gi SIOIES oo 6 a oe bo orto Ores 
Flywheel-motor-generator for reversing tsllsciVien ena. ve cat al 
rolling mills, general design......... 
fOUMAAONS weer aes ss es ore 
induction motor, performance......... 

{er tia TEGUCHON same eid cee 0 sae 
installation, wiring diagram..........- 
reversing mill drive, dimensions........ 

energy return by roll mo- 


HOTS eCCSU we «bie emis « + ors 

ROSES ete ere ste eiatene > 

starting apparatus, general design...... 

Flywheels, rolling mills, disadvantages....... angen BPE ems = 

Fort Dodge, Des Moines & Southern Ry., freight service......... 

map of system........- 

Foundations, boiler, cOst..jo0 ss... ede ee eae eee eee 

GG ee ie eS RAD cy Sacacieyt choke eee ae 
flywheel-motor-generator, reversing mill drive..... 

Freight, tonnage handled At OhiCATOM eyes Ne nares cacti Mo we 

Prequency, a.c. practice. 2 is... veces ie eee Pee ee nee on cet 

changers. (See Converters). 
commercial development, historical notes.........+-. 


vo 


1 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Frequency (continued) 


Furnaces, electric, arc, inventor 


Galvanometer, differential for watthour meter test 


Generator, a.c., characteristics, effect of excitation 


effect.on COFOMa:<.. ok Geis d ora sete stot eral <t etaeienat = sneeels 
generator designs a.\:\. cms Litaateiee oleitlem me 955 
induction motor; Cost.2.%.. < saresia ite ae tale ohede 
design. Jausht. Sana. ates 
Jightiniy © <6. <1. cists store cones ol emltatey atetred i omatet er aes 
parallel operation.2a25% acide - eile 
Tailwayedesigninc aise «sever 5-1 spt ore 
skin effect .s.¢ 25. 205 CR eS oe ete 
SWitOhin gh c Bikaye:c nee 5 NR) Fah cores eae 
synchronous converter design.........-. 968 
MOtOL/ Gesign Jssee reise ot aig 
transfonmer design jr satiate Geietale «sis ater 958 
transmission: line:design.: (i-2 36 2... owe cee 
Hertzian waves sivisits epee els ae OO ote a ea 
light: taysis2cd aati Pet CREE eR ed neta ete 
lighting system, Choice sj ills a Sa se inicio soles es 
lig bitaviny yueit eocreere ral ih atin at teed tana solo coroner : 
measurementyyc Ne. Yes av Sere ow, sal at ale Babel sats : 
hich wwialtucsttes. s5 0 - <tr aisle eareebe ceeontene 
with: powet-factor meter. ......2..5.565 

meters. (See Meters). 
natiralétransmission) limesis isso ste olatels oes waren nena 
sounceniphestands bleawinite. 2-03 dele iene ae 
towest audibles Syanine oso 3 Sere +) oe sist Sh nee 
standard*:ceméntemillsacnient < fos oy cela ee eee 
central stations: 2 as tat wsete oor ead sian 
flour-nuills: «.. «des § tne ae eee eee 


Pail ways. lis fees aca ale se aiotata peeeeneeenete 

steel nmillisi..3% ciate oe co shakecd orca aie een Var : 
transmission Systems: Jvc. 4+ 42 aes eee 
standardizationanyg ee Uwe «5 oa~ s ool oe ae eke ae nae - 
historicalwnotes: . <0 shred wee a een cies 

witra-violet reyes! hese RIG ota tare ae a et aemcee 
wireless telegraph 
x-ray 


carbon electrodes, improvements............. 
design features; sinaas) wlee stares eee 
earliest typellizg. amnsete. Wei. Ne tt eee oe 
induction. type, inventions sis +h ces se oes ; 
inventor, oval Hse MOM MIMghed «.v distene sue taweds F 
resistance typewinventiontt..1.05. 4.e0e-0ae eae : 
tungstenswoundninralleiein oy... tee oats: ' 
vibration) characteristics, so $vene aoc eumenee eee 
EST ix Nola F oushet laces eee ee 
enerpyneMiciency ons .a.45. oe< 4 : 
phase-angle equations................. 
sensitivityiatierhnreh acct SAN eee 
calculationsecnindt amd .sne 

compensated, circuit diagram 
composite-wound 
elaitiirequationrs wtyRomege rte eer eae 
excitation, booster system 
CAPACIEY access cecanntal a ee OE 

effect of power-factor 

layout 


ee es 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Generator, a.c. (continued) 


hish=speed  lemiitingicapacityossae <>... +0s¢ 25 


induction, connection diagram.............. 1724 
CONST TIS otecaas Grete Sie Shee 'eles toes 
for interconnection of small water pow- 

CL Seen ee gee ea es ee ca terse s 


power-factor, variation with air gap... . 
squirrel cage, bibliography............ 
SE QUORAWHICIM OG see tenets eis sic saree ece eos 
use with synchronous condensers...... 
leakage reactances, discussion...........-.-+.+-- 
LOSSES See eS ea TI MMM EL SON sceicenel shuts: 6 78 
SAUUMA WOM: CLEVESMM TG ities eee oe ceks «eis ss a 
Self-exciting, Alexandersonitypes..c 56.2. ....05.. 
short-circuit current, external resistance, advan- 


initial peak, definition.............. 
POST MEG MTUUTOIMSeES RNa eeie ie site loy ong ooo 
torque absorbed by rotor........... 
equation. ..6. 666s eee eee eee 
Vanious Tesistancesu4......... 
single-phase, cost compared with three- ee 
three-phase cost compared with single-phase... 
Dut Oo ehiEICA lS Pee Gn CHONCEs «tae iels (ius tacelige's~ « 
Gamiperss Cilecttmeneaeai tele aessuare ses es + 
OSSECH AEWA MIPte Netto eoscehe-* eis. eceess 
induction, cost various power-factors...... 
HOSES ALCS Ure APIRE NG ale oc) cranes: or" ite 
rotor construction......... 1727 
SPATOmCONSERUCTIOMe re Pi .5cr<i0- 31: 
TOOpayppleswbeSboe meer. cine o 2: 


WeltilatiOonhe . ein enw s «ie sls se 
VWSUSVMIChTONOMS= eae ie eye oc 1727 

HOSS OS POSSE Me Hee ae tot = Tope sors Uo lorcet esa 
MOCELO PTAC tI COMeess aaleimmcstee tere Gore a ete < 
TEACHANPORRCCU Meenas) eter ees iene ciel. 
RMU OT, COs a 6 bd Sele OD ame Oe 
short-circuit current, equations.........+. 
initial peak, tests.1660 

various external re- 

PCWATICES Pe ste cies 3 5 

various external re- 

SISBATICES SAE cates ches 
Cuditurmistnessesimcrsas = ce tots 

various exX- 

ternal react- 


maximum equation......... 


momentary current, definition. 
value.. 
MELLOMamatlCesayh Lemme slice 
EOSUS rea cater ln tele ieee aon dbet's Nae 
torque absorbed by rotor.. 
calculation=zieme..6 ko 
equation......... 1673 
maximum, equation.. 
CR Sa ee CN or eee 
various values of react- 
ancpetl oso, 


56 TOPICAL INDEX 


Generator, a.c., turbo (continued) ; ‘ 
single-phase design compared with three- 


phases). “eile cer iebmre apoio 9 

efficienGy-s... 2.0 «1-17 pumas 123° _ 1a 

LOsséoteee t-te kts eer oage 123. bh 

SPCCOS <a -berst since sae 50.8.4 gael . 1645 

synchronous rotor construction.......-.-. 1727 
three-phase design compared with single- 

phasesda.cti ch nae a eee 19 

CHICIENCYseck bie ee oe 123° slow 

lOSSes¥ scl. Seen ao i oe 123. tog 

transient reactance, test... ..< 5 suela 10 <1 «= sue 1662 

winding pitch-factor.........-.++-+++++0- 1843 

acyclic, 2000 kw., construction..........+-++++-- 1814 

construction wavs. seh aice + eee 5 we ees 1812 

CeSiO sce ee sie, ns crenata cen 1813 1836 

earlycconstructiony: . <..2..02 +224 om 1839 

peripheral speed... +. ...-.-+-+s2--es0e 1813 

Saturation! CUrveSuie a. ssi) =e ae 1818 

belted; scrap waltiess....c. bs ds 0cassse spe Seen 744 

cost, effect of frequency. .........---2-++-++-+--> 958 

d.exrhelt-connectedyans toi. tet ine etree © et 45. 

commutating pole, losses..............-+--- 1705 

COSEE oS. SII ede ee Ae es etary res 742 

direct-connected, low-speed, cost........-... 45 

double-commutator, 6400-kw.............-. 669 

high-speed, direct-connected....-....-....-. 45 

lossesij5eent re cose wc a ae 1705 

design; frequency, effect. 2.6. 54. ss ee Ho ee . 980 

Piiiter riley gis Been Pit cud op ee I Peek ie Sic 131 

e.m.f StormulaeecheNen 5 c.o: rss se oie aie ‘ 955 

flux distribution. (See Flux Distribution). 
frequency, effectiomcost... 2... soe een esse ees 958 


insulation. (See Insulation). 
losses. (See Losses). 
parallel operations. (See Parallel Operation). 


protection, American practice........-..+-+.-.+- 1911 
balance rela ynacaleee ear aren or iaar ers , wOZe 
relay Charactersticuris wns s.. 0 seein 176 


rating. (See Rating). 
unipolar. (See Generators, acyclic). 
ventilation. (See Ventilation). 


Glass advantages for high-tension insulators................+--- 2196 

Globes, dirty, lightiabsorptions © gcicewe se cn eles eee omelet: 359 

Ground wire, strenghteninpieiiectstemcmtigents Gs es eas 933 952 
Heat conductivity, various materials. (See name of Material). 

Agwalawsrehinces i feet and pee tet Sache ah Gren creer 1193 

Obnnaistlaw ivi rt, oe cae ee ae eae 1194 

Heating, apartment: house; Coste hGGienc. =. ve auins + sve eateries pies 23 

building, effect, of ventilation design...-..5 2.0652 uneen 4 20 

department storesiicostiunae peeiocevale kicpraicaei eee tae 25 

generators, turbo,lossspermdegree rise... 2 hoe ee nals 1739 

hotels, ccOst: i ..dskea vue RO a cr case et ge ' 24 

office. buildings cost: asmradh si. ekieottueme os cin ete oie 24 

Heénry..asia: scientist imc wetter steht a etd acto ie eee 1019 

Hoist, area limit switehespiselessneSs. 5 ost -101- eosin ian eoeee 701 

minekielectricalucomtabliis:c .):cicu viens tab) ee ey a ee eee 685 

CONNECHONS): sc Siaecestshume eee more 689 

installation, layoutite.«t2+ date eee keer ee 690 

power: test... 2:92.41. Raa Mirai crete eee 698 

Hoisting, ‘fiywheelkequalizer plan... cick mcs ace 5 

favorable conditions,.....:.... - 8 


Hot-wire instruments. (See Instruments). 


———— 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Hysteresis loops at non-magnetic temperature.................. 

measurement, high-temperatures, method....... 

non-magnetic temperature............ 2031-2032 

Lossratmvarlousivem peratinesass. perme oi eriels rere. o> 

sheet steel, effect of temperature................00.- 

Pest wanival ure dhe place. alam ae wertkesisth| Glee te, 6 mes oees 

various materials at high temperature, tests.......... 

low temperature, tests........... 

deetioadtomitransmission lines. 7 ...-ciiekele Fe ci enbtsh stiles cies 
Ilgner system. (See Flywheel-motor-generator). 

Illinois Steel Co., reversing mill, performance test............... 

rolling mill installation, description... 

Meena tOnenc TAL PiW1e LOOT wel cps col sete BOMB 3. afels Sales oc ysnere.< = 

Mime aCe uCOIS, CONS EIACUIOM ee ip ierdeaens oiuiese steeds Meldeo tens 6) aro Suara) ile = 

firme e bance COM Sritl Gl OLS ebsites ccc ict eT Hee ee ovcjlatevard icone Goa sew tela ls 

Induction, electromagnetic, law, discovery, date................ 

Industrial education. (Also see Education). 


SUA CISUICS Sot Noeel ete Pee Pee aba Potten east 
inane yeas, CI mv Hl Olermaeom pe ne 65) ca rrao0s pein bus > ce more 
Imstruments, electric, zero scale settimg.. .. .:.. 6esinc amis spe enn oe 

electrodynamometer. (Also see Electrodynamo- 


AUICLCE Peet. cpap eshmes tee « 
moving-coil type, characteristics 
stray field er- 
; TOPS). neyan 2 : 
overload characteristics........ 
separately excited......... 1490 
UND OKUH eV Bs tty toro to CLR ore Rene eee 
electromagnetic, moving-iron type, characteristics. . . 
stray field errors. 
overloadscharacteristicstmime.. 2 - 
horizontal shaft, limit of maximum weight.......... 
ratio of torque to weight........... 
Iotewine MACCUL AC ya CESt mii. ieee he arciel- cnet sijelo * 
(initinorats, Gh h ayec|s gop an go oe Ome OOG ac 
ANSE Olay PMCALION. | wean a acl 0 -Poviim aie 
temperature coefficient. ..........-26-..-. 
GTEC Mec anD oleae eRe eae 
indications, transmission to a distance............-- 
imaduction: by Pe, PACCUTACY =. Wome es <6 ao oe ee wee 
CHAFACLETISUICS qa nctime et bebe © soe 
ima Ree KO aS Ge aches aot nO OaeIREeS eo 
GVverloaGmOraucsames + cr. wr sae ne 
(EINSCGN A ore Oo ERO Se caine See mC OI 
moving system, light weight, advantages .1599-1601 
recording capillary, ink feed.........-..+..-..+--- 
Spankwdisadyvantages.:..lecs 2+ le» « Bas 
switchboard, readability, various scales...........- 
Sealecs ChanceGin raises sie spetca + + cele ss 
space requirements, various types..... 

wattmeters. (See Wattmeters). 

Insulation, cambric, maximum temperature. .......-..+++-eee+e- 
conductors, coal handling docks.........-...++++04+5 
cotton, maximum temperature. .........--.2+e eee ees 
generators, acyclic, GuCERTRBINE KEG), yaad olen eto oe em ace 
mill motors, maximum temperatures...........+--0+- 
rubber, maximum temperature........-..++-+sees0es 
varnished cambric, temperature........-...00-2+055 : 

Insulators, lightning-proof.......-.2- eee eee eee eee nee 
line, cemented, specifications............-.+e5 essere 

corona, streamers effect..... 0... cece rece eee e ees 
design features. ccc e ee ee eet eee ee ete 
for lightning stresses.......--+-.++2++++-> 


58 TOPICAL INDEX 
Insulators, line, design (continued) 

: be Gublineni. Gane a» ere mee clot 2160 2184 
discharge theory ES ce ee ey 2203 
electrose, flash-over test.........-.- ees e eee cree 2123 

high-frequency test.........-..+.++++- 2124 
failuretrom Hehtoitig. . ctera-ie eee tener 2121 
glass,ad vantages (am Joc. sei risieit ee. tao 2196 
grounded pin, effects i. aie... 3. ee ew ee 2214 
high-frequency stresses. .....----.+-+++e+ees 2136. 2177 

efecto Eras. eee 2210 

ShEOL y2e ATA Re a fie eee 2180 

timelelement. .. ce aces ce 178 

GESTS. orercions srokethieleNee SNOrEnee 2124 2133 

advantages! (2 Shah 4 serrt oe 2211 

testing, specifications». J]. --.es 2209 

INSpection [ie LAS ie hoa ale crore err ae 2164 

factorntiy NOR Sees .s eRe 2194 

mechanicalstestn stole eee See Mot . 2148 
OUCNE? onc .cp erates oa ote aes . 2164 
parallel CESE...cccct-o cel ASRS Hekate SET tee aeereee Gees 2148 
pin, grounded, effects: J. 7 ew assem tate 1a teen oli 2214 
porcelain, high-frequency test.................+.- 2129 
protection, arcing’ fOUSAi.. 6 45 se cial oe eee 2220 
puncture stresses. 2. Sa) Surg deter ite ien cena ee 2203 
tests. 13 25 wae Ghbertes wits i aeretare eee 2148 
Oubtlinet! t..dcmenecde ome coats ee 2164 
din CESEST OE Nae eet ieie 5 slerecelt sane « ecu oe ee 2 2145 
effect oftwater quality. —- <<... ase ae . 2S 
specifications: wre eee ere tas 2219 
stirface-conduction effect... 102 ooo as sheers 2207 
suspension, arc-over, effect of moisture.......... 931 
e.m.f., calculations compared 
with tests..: (oa. 943 
de yer yt AIO. 911 
CSTR eo ced coe tae 911 
tests compared with 
calculations........ 943 
RESUS cote. cia cts Miro eevee 913 914 
Variolis TYPeSt AOR, wo 915 
capacity distribution, calculation. .... 918 
~ SQUBHGH O.o5 gote nets en een 921 
MmeasitemMent. {on wate oe cienis 935 
characteristics, calculations .......... 922 
compared 


withtests 927 
tests compared with 


calculations........ 927 

various types......... 2154 

classification. Pam eyo) sunern ne erences 2153 

disk Spacing?) MOMNIe fw sn deceae eehstee 2182 
effect of grounding on dielectric 

Strengths te foo eae 2225 

electrical’ characteristics 45000 ae. . . 907 

é.m, frdistribution mates ee aerate ks 2171 

calculation..916-919 934 

equations... ./.'... 921 

high frequency..... 949 

LESTE GT, LAIIRRAAS, .. wn ea 

glass, advantages... yn sue eh eee 2197 

OSTEO Oe Be RE 2198 


hook and loop connection, comments.. 2184 
performance testa re ems pent ee ~~ 1908 


————————— 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Insulators, line, suspension, performance test (continued) 
: compared with calcu- 
Vations Mien pein, « 


PAU IGOS crotch, Ser ar ER eke Ee Ors 
Spechicationsiowtlinesns seem sel hie 
string efficiency, definition.. .911—2170 
Jequation so... .60 ss 

Latio, delimitioninehlest: .- - 2170 

CeSt PTECAULIONS wet. aint od ey Nancie = se 
results, OntariorvPwre Gol. ..6 de. - 
bestine equipment, «cae eies aes = ; 
EVES NCA PACE Vette ors Me sees eegce n= 
fash-over voltagenrn).taackeer . 
limbationsemeeresdes fered 

test, Ontario Power Co., requirements. 
testing equipment, Ontario Power Co.. 


HCE MOUM Sheela teiech techie as « 2208 

plant, specifications..2160—2218 

specifications. .2160—2183—2219 

wave-form distortion......... 

Airaime tests Ontario Power Comnsmneerttenl ce ear thier - 

testing plant, specifications........... Plies fee pn Cee 

Wave LOLI CISuOrblOnin caw eins arin eis «pene: Js 

Tonization, free, effect on corona... .... 00... cece eee ee ees 
frommcentral wite, PLOPeTtieSsiiie. alte elie nee 


CORO rir sy RASA OEY SEBS EIFS Cy one: ey 2 4 5,5 
lions, travel, distance, parallel wires). e422. 3922 ues ee 
nea Casts Tesistivity, pCLECLIIC. 65 ts mire elevated MiSep eile = 2 se 
critical magnetic temperature. ...........0 02 Fees ewe eee 
hysteresis at high temperature, tests..............+..++++- 
essesmcal culations: meres a oceierery 2) felsic ears = = 4+, - 

due to tooth frequency, formula................-+-- 

Irrigation, humid districts, feasibility.................++s sere: 
pumping loads, Mt. Whitney system, Southern alsin 

Pacific Pwr. & Lt. Co., Wash......... 

San Joaquin Lt. & Pwr. Corp., South- 

. ‘apn (CHlbiic Bos 6 comnts BB Laas a5 cee 

U. S. Reclamation Service, summation of work........ 
aboriconditions, Muropeataaqy.-)-)-lecyipineett stele lake mee ee as 
classification bymhOlstoiser meta eee eee ee 

cost, coal mine power plants........... 200. eee eee eee eee 

skill, European compared with American..........-+--+- : 
Panaps, carbon as resistors. pce. are eae Se ce ee ne 
commercial types, candle power ranges......-..-.+++++:> 

: LOLAEIVIGISIZE ame et tet ie ey was ohejers| + « : 

design for low frequency...) 22. eee eee eee ees 
incandescent asiresistOrsice. 022 6a. De ee ee ee ee 
blackening by mercury.........--..+-+-+-- 

Bi disomncthe@us, ocuckir antes lanes sila of! 78 segs ae 

life, effect of temperature..........-.---5-- 

radiometer pressure gage.....-..-+--++-++- 

ParikalUIMEas MESISCOUSEM I. tect c tone weeielete af sotellaye « aces we es 
testing, four-lamp bridge. .... 2-6. 100s. eee te ee ete ene 
tungsten aS TreSiStOrs.....2e tb. . . sae ee eee eee es 1527 

Ete eS ee aoa 8 oe. OR 

Oy EE Pe AOR es gee A ee os ge oc ad 


Leakage reactance. (See Reactance). ae 
; various machines. (See Name of Machine). 
Light, absorption by dirty glassware... 00.052. e. eee eee eee 
eoloredparequency Mt. citi. ee ee eee ee eee 
Cy ee gg ee ne eS ee wh 


59 


60 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Lighting, banking room, design, descriptions... .cciciaetsipsieia Jets sre 


Lightning arrester, aluminum, d.c., care 


colors, relative importance. .......- 02+ eee e cece eeees 
cost, effect on labor efficiency. ....-.++++++eeeeeeeeeee 
relationstO’ WARES.é «cio kewl eo bir mse our ionew yrueinieiovaie 
depreciation, Causes...... 6.6. seer eee rere eee eeee 
design, absorption method........---..eeeeeeeeeeeees 
Aux amethoG ap cee ee ook ae tise lols esas coheed 
required, calculation. ..........+-+++s-+0+- 
method of procedure..........---+.++-esee> : 
point-by-point method..........---+++++++-+: 5 
effect of frequen Gy ici’ oetcisere eres 6) aneto te nls) vialeis memset 
OM OYE. « «x rel VRRP EE NI os « Wn : 
WARES: c-1). no eRe ae ee Beka neie ole omit ee eee 
esthetic principles? <i 721 tame i= ai a> © 21 iii oe as 
factories,. classifications 2 tilts .- 6. 2 sees eee ene ce eeee 
effect of dirt accumulations.............--- : 
OMreficieneyis,. cio.c1sue esas lear ie ae 
on workman efficiency. ..............- 
tungsten systems, data...........+.seee sees 
eMiClENCY:, 1. ts cera 
lamp Spacing wChartwisccie: shes -/s «<i se em 
lossiduie toldirty glassware s.. J2eicle <5 + rie aieite eee 
reflectors. (See Reflectors). 
shadows;-consideration. ... cjf08 i 2. 2. Ste ia ee 
street, classification of service............6....22-+--- 
cluster system, efficiency...........2.----2000- 


glassware cleaning)... sagan cats ideo anette F 
ideal light: distribution... .7 5... .-keoreme as 
loss byzdirty. glasswareriit 220 tck) .ealseeee) 
present: Practice... .. 55 scis « olmpeie ee Neiaiel te elu hatet tus 
PTINCIPIES.. .. «<< 6, « one seaiehadorel tate anaes Nee ee 
requirements., ...qisent Sesto Rieck [see trendy. Rit atede 
series system, efficiency... ./ clas . . Cita wteis! atetener ear 


tungsten, . experiences ©.k ict e see = 
maintenance cost.....0..55.... 
systems available), ee seins sc oe ays ease ets 
circuits, installation. .....:... 
railway car protection, experience... 
ANTENNAE: PUTPOSE.< Kiwi es ore SENS whe. pisses de elle 
arcing ground suppressor in cables........... 
compression chamber type....00....0.0.0.0% 
characteristics...... 
development, tests, outline 
discharge recorders 
endurance. test. .ata aerate lagiseilciee wom egs 
ground connections, specifications............ 
magnetic blow-out, arc chute, design......... 
current oscillograms. . .873 
GESISn SIE: cadens bios 
e.m.f. oscillograms.....873 
DEWEY DEINE ecie scree 
pole type, installation specifications.......... 
railway cat, location. Saline ential. aah aeete 
choice of type 
EYPES. 6 eee eee eee were cence 

resistors with by-passes 
series resistance, \USema ima aes t «eens 
resistor; design cat si seta memaiereraet 
disturbances, automatic recording. 2 .W ik. uu. ee sree 
line insulators, suggested investigation... 


eee ble alg 6 ede O78) 6 te levevene 


abnle shen ahve rele wig wle @ ee gue) eo erene es 


ec 


© Ble: 8g: oP pe er ever chee & 6 © weet 


TOPICAL INDEX 61 


Lightning disturbances (continued) 
railways, experience..../.......00...0.. 8659 


COUSIN ones Go chide Seno DOD Pabehn 6 Cao SS pane micnecaca 814 
protection, insulators arcing rods............sesesaes 2220 
5 : railway cars, effect of wiring......... in 852 
Lightning-proof TIISULLERC OTHER ee en cue hartge toncn eet ouausieae Soke Abs» 2140 
Lines, pole. (See Pole lines). / 

|LGase Grunge, charinsaa@rus Wieden Wier 4 dun OG 6 OO oO enoe cid omen 30 
Gtccee rt er cen ners ce Oke 33 
automatic telephone, private branch exchange...... 378 
BOStOUmE CISOTING Of ohn tice eer tessa ais eo acs 255 
Cotal wcailyvee meme eet ee aca i. ae oes ene . 240 
Droodive Ldison Cons daily. 2... 2. sac Rad ena « 236 
Chicago total, dawyic. eas cs nye ee et pees 241 
COA lpm S Me Ma bet ne eee eaetiee Masetaneteueas so ni wie anes 11 
Commonwealth Edison Company.............. 254 255 
department stoves: Souter tnuoe gis orcs 8 34 35 
i BGRH ESS, 6 5:4 ecu aeonercrentatds Aeetain Saker tte oom CaON ee enema 30 
rin, HORMONE ot She ae beer tc beta dae om soap comes 6 39 
isolated plant, Chicago ,daily...........+......--- 241 
SET VACCINE ae ite ad nie rerovessuenats 27 
uae saul, Lewis 6 Cees dogeins anes comme amos gaan 38 
light and power, Boston, daily...........-++-.++6- 240 
(Chicaeo,wCatlye mews ait de eles . 241 
ivan Worle, clang oe5 so o nmin 0 ob Gor 235 
Hottubtuildaneweetmeiier eh ce soca oe wae le sue 35 
IWexcamtilc Biildimeespems oss sues > ste el wielenn > 37 
INewsaVonke Edison Commerce ce cles a cleils oe ate 254 
Gletilive ssiscuca ct aaie-0 oro ae eer 236 
TOtall, GENO ss ao ds.om oS bubs Ome cea oer 235 
GURKS (OEIC. © oe domeeweses oo cree pombe ion 36 37 
Public Service Corporation, N. J., daily............ 236 
railroad, 3rd Avenue, N. Y. systems, daily......... 237 
Chicago Elevated, daily...........-....-. 248 
freight traffic, daily.............- 244 
electrified steam roads, N. Y., daily....... 235 
Hudson & Manhattan, daily............- 237 

Interborough Rapid Transit system, N. Y., 
yee Geto a nee eee eee ot irae She 237 

New York Central, electric zone, N. Vir, 
GUIS. Wo ice o. oR ecteie ab oO aa Occ apo 238 
N. Y., N. H. & H., electric zone, N. Y., daily 238 
Penn. electric zone, N. Y., daily.........-- 238 
Public Service Corp’n, daily........-.--+-. Sst 
steam, Chicago, daily.........-....--- 241 244 
passenger service, daily.... 244 
street, Boston, daily.......-..--++++++205 240 
Chicago, daily... ese ie 241 243 
INewa Won omClath ym seri. orm o 2 2 esol ournaly 235 
Sher iit GSS Se -coleciiertia nein? OSD ta a i ena 38 
diagram, rolling mills..25 775-2. <5. 2065 
Load-factors, Boston Edison Company, daily.....----+--+s++++) 251 
light and power, daily.......----+++++++: 2 253 
Brooklyn Edison Company.....-.--+--++++re0es 5 BS) 
On Qn eae 252 
COAIMMINIGISEr VICCU nee ues + aur ete ola. 2 or le 740 
Fee iit say ok es eae OC eee em aa : 13 
Commonwealth Edison Co., Chicago, daily.... .240 251 
effect of coal mine operation, cost......-.+-+++-++ 748 
on cost of electric energy....------+ +++: ++5 75 
isolated plant, Chicago.......-.-+--++seertrete 241 


light and power, Boston......-..--++-seerrerrres 240 


62 TOPICAL INDEX 


Load-factors, light and power (continued) 
i (Chica SOne aa a ieee ns Te ae ee 


Public Service Corp’n, daily...... 
New. York Edison Co. «....\s<.cwssagele ontitt ote b -/-ialsieise 


Public ‘Service Corporation, IN. Joos. ae ieee eee 
LairGad Old. AVENUG, MNee NN cteynte eee eee omer 
Gat Y: 5 te acy. a soe : 

Boston; dail y7. -eserh- See eee : 
Brooklyn Rapid“Transit Coy cish. --2 er 


Chicagor dail yi no. nekeiarions hes ieee 
freight service, «© hicago. o.oo mus oa lets ae 
érathG OMICACO eee ie ci are 244 
Hudson'& Manhattan. a6 tase a ee 
Gai eo ac auireks mete 

Interborough Rapid Transit Co.......... 


New York Central, electric zone,......... 
a EW gi tase eed c 
NoYeuN. BW oH. electric Zone, 7. see 
daily. 52. 
Pennsylvania, electric zone: ......./....... 


PASSENLEF SEPVICEs.... cs ayahty Ade < 244 
railways, street, Boston 


GIST SR eds © gan SETS ose 
ING WY On CObVe ce. ccc ciel sete 235 
Publicfser vice, Corps. canteuse eae 
relation to cost of energy production............. : 
telephone cperatoticn.« sac ase hinea eee eee : 
Mocalizer, definition, oacnun. wer ciese,s OF tales Uc oem ose 
osses, converters,-Syncbronous\...u..c0ceite = he eet atins cla oeie > re 
core, generators, induction, effect of magnetic wedges.. ... 
damper, generators, turbo 
CYAN OL OLS. ia.3cte Geeta cl aeetion «Oe IRIS. Sec are ores aa en 
frictional, electrical machinery, measurement............ 
MEASULCIMEMER .cscseeaesk hy] ot alsaiatn oceans en tare é 
MOtor-geneLravors Arr. cee eevee mle a oS 
ZENETATOLS, Ai Cocco as Bree vet ove el, cae alle al eed ie PERO En a ets ey ee 
acyclic 

d 


Ue pee 8 ee © 2 © 0 618 6 6 ie eae isle exele is sie &) hy sub) shale 


COMM ULATING “POlera trode elm sisic ie calmer 
turbo, bearing and windages: wcpitinoiha ss. 
COPDED arta thas GOL we ictan Tee ae 


Le © oe © 0) 16 me) Diwe vue, wutep BPaidne uous: & aie: es ee) = 


iron. (See Iron). 
electrical machinery, measurement 
load, motor-generators, correction factors 
motors, d.c., correction factors 
motor-generators 


at Oe Cron ys Cn a pe 
ogeye, 6's /0),0, Sue) pers en ® 
& # ppeirditals Vote laifolieva le © he syieue 0 

ae ee Care 6 e eyeie)e eleLe wyeneresers @isimeee)'y) ww less. % ie. 


© ee eG elles Sime pliegen is O © lawercielens, 


RN = ee — —~ 


TOPICAL INDEX 63 
Losses, motor-generators (continued) 
PLCCMENCVECMENy CLA Me tate htaccess cs Ba, 1706 
AGHICHLOMMGLCR Gere hin. Sa, Siegen 1706 
synchronous-direct current............. 1706 
UO L OMS e ue Ofna t Op eeptee ttn. Seis soars sock bc Diene cts 2) 1704 
Gicuserrre. 0 youd chet tet IOS SiG nee ie Rea 1704 
GOmarnbacin OM POlC.sse cm witha c aise e/aters 5 ce Sisto 1703 
MMC UCIMOM mea teNSeCONMCATY ewe late eo cise ciae 1704 
GO MIMGESeCOMGCivametne rts Masts txt cuts sa. < 1704 
SRIF LANCCON TORUS Gi Riko puters PUR coORS GRO OS Et En eee ane 1704 
rotational, electrical machinery, measurement............ 1700 
Wi mcawom cimiculites, SENETALOTS, ACV CHC feng. c oe cee ode wre os wna 1822 
requirements Tolling imi driveSere 4... s. cces 649 
Mevehtinemy mae PLCClAt OMe rit rs ssc sis ene 2) vie oi wa Guc ae oa eiaie e @ 101 
Manutacturing, value of space for power plants................. 62 
Measurements, electrical, transmission to a distance............. 1559 
WiehemeinecienCy mUNCOnyLete Mita miei e eis eee ss cleus oa Hele Sueies 1597 
power-factor for frequency measurement................ 1603 
WAT ENOion OSSEN eee ener occas icc cise eta wun eudie diene : 478 
Milkine machines, power requirements... 6.6... ee lee ces es 1998 
Mills, cement. (See Cement Mills). 
flour. (See Flour Mills). 
paper. (See Paper Mills). 
steel. (See Steel Mills). 
Mines, coal, central power plant, advantages................ 749 «751 
StAtIOMEVSEPLIVAte. Plantier ec aii re oo. aie 747 
Best OMmeDelr eve PEOUUCEION Gre st Sus os ours ¢ ones oxen 745 
PULCMASCOM ne miwe sages) oie hs etfs an sci 745 
CEC MOMVOlLA re IIUCbUAT ONS!) )6 <2. gels <2 seis 748 
SISCURICHCULLCCE GO VAIN ary e) siecle cicos islets agcke ste ene he 2 
SA ey COmesbinyye Gs, oAwaes oOo ee ae Oo e 0 aD aero 9 
equipment, power requirements........-........-+- 9 
ois imeeprODlemy, LeALULES 0a, 7s) cuewels chee ei «et oss 4 
loaGdmcharaclvetisuicsaeais sire ¢ 1 wort eleue ore = © yee oo 740 
NO ATOMCUT CMe nectar teats oat fees cacy eke ails, a enchalig, Nel «> : ual 
operation central station, advantages..............- 10 
eCGst, effector load-tactOfeg.5- 2. re 748 
power plant, equipment cost........-....---+++---- 742 
FOE (UIE SUS ms a8 Gulk o Uno On ao Ue ogee 738 746 
PLITMEY LOPELALIONst sles cee cule on ehe sie oe wes 1 
(OCH OS, COSiin.c de eae uote ln oon Cad Oils Orcas cine cio 742 
WGES Gi, ICCA eredigesa cue Do OC Sommerer 7 
electric, frequency standard...........06-+- +e eee trees 971 
hoisting, flywheel-equalizer plan............ cp ene tee 5 
lamps, flicker, frequency, relation to eye strain........... 978 
M.m.f. distribution, armature, d.c., full load..................-. 520 
Quem InAeInem NOMOAG sen cman roatecte ie. sia ues +. - 520 
@ne tOrarmattiure distribution... . 6... ees sine sees es 515 
eldecouudistibtiiOtan ety ae ues oo seeks + aie 515 
Motor-generators, acceleration characteristics.....-......++++++5 554 
(LON so csc Gretta MC CARR ENS SCO CRRA ON NONI 743 
input-output measurement, accuracy.......... 1709 
fest, circuit diagram. .|.....-%.. - 1710 
load losses, correction factors..........--..-- 1715 
MoE. dus i Der BRel S ORCS cole Ue ee ete 1706 
(Also see Losses). . 
starting torque with new oil and bearings...... 555 
synchronous, efficiency.......----++++++++++: 478 
torque required to start.......--5.+s sesso 554 
Motors, a.c. commutator, LOCC O OM eee iets Le stereo as eee «og 1704 
(Also see Losses)....-.-.++-++++: 
rolling mill drive,..........40..-..05- 2091 
speed regulation............-++-+eeee 2092 


64 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Motors, a.c. commutator (continued) 


use with induction motor and flywheel. 


induction, braking dic.....-...s.-65 a haa ean water per 
WS: Aros op eae ecu eee 

torque, calculation..........+4+. 

cutves, calculation....... 

with alternating current......... 

cage secondary, losses.......6 64.4 seer nes 

Ottis. taut aa enemas sagt Deis aU 743 


eutfent locus, pfoof..........5 Fey 
demagnetizing effect of secondary cutrent.. 
design, effect of frequency......+.++. ie 
efficiency. (See Efficiency). 
electric. braking :,..c0).0 dia-s-te > tee ee 
mill-type, wound secondary, characteristic. 
performance curves. ...-.- +++ +++eeer eee 
power-factor. (See Power-factor). 
reactance calculation.........---++-+-+:+: 
single-phase, analysis of performance... ... 
circle diagram............+- 
center locus.... 
data necessary. 
DT OGLE isis, Secs 
current equations with short- 
circuited secondary. . 
ACGALIONS 525 nin Father SRG 
equivalent reactance........ 
transformer... <5 
locked point, location....... 
locus diagram, proof........ 
performance calculation..... 
effect of prim- 
ary reactance. 
secondary currents, no-load. . 
slip calculation: .ccie. --s- = 
small size, performance...... 
speed calculation........... 
starting torque equations1758 
transtormer Theory.c... .-."-)-" 
VeCtOr Gia prams) iciewe sos 
speed-torque calculation, variable resist- 
AlLOE: paseksivua-it oer : 
curves, variable secondary re- 
SISLAUCCaak ce fouske eich 615 
equations, variable secondary 
TESISUANICESS.... csi etsiere eae ice 
starting characteristics, variable secondary 
TESISLANCE +¥. te peuc! sydien’ «tel tehsil 
conditions in cotton mill......... 
two-phase, circle diagram...........+...- 
: ANALYSIS. se a eee 
Equivalent CICUItSs..qine coe 
torque start equation......... 
weight, effect of frequency..........----- 
wound secondary, losses... 2.26 s e's 


synchronous, acceleration characteristics, tests....... 


with damp- 
ers.. .548 
without 
dampers.. 
effect of varying exciting 
or hiad crak eesty oon pao eo 
air-gap ChO1CC 7.4 seers + ties ee eee g 


ee ——— 


ee 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Motors, a.c. synchronous (continued) 
amortisseur winding, calculation.......... 


compared with induction motor........... 
desienwetect or LreGuUenCcy.. os... ace ce 
effect of varying exciting current......... 
end connection reactance, calculation..... 
field connections at starting.............. 
_ half-speed running, explanation....... 587 
ANGAUctHOMon COlmin Glounsw army tre sere o 
laminated pole, induced e.m.f., test....... 
VSmSOLGIpOlG an cietrs o's oc.: 
leakage reactance, calculation........... e 
SSES Ss calcein de mae oe ae Dae na gsomiers 
Peactance Calcmlationase «act cei icles = srs 
rotor losses, Calculation: cu... s ae o. ss 
Tesistance; calculations... 5.2 0-0 «- 
SlovplecheChOlCes erica ties rls) eee 
single-phase, reactance, calculation....... 
solid pole, induced e.m.f., test............ 
Veelaminated poles... 00 < 
speed-power-factor characteristics, 
solidupolew cr: 551 
characteristics with 
dampers 548 
characteristics without 
dampers... . 
speed-torque characteristics, solid poles 551 
with dampers 
without 
dampers. .. 
starting characteristics, assumption....... 
effect of hysteresis 
laminated poles 
with dampers, 
calculation..... 
with dampers. 548 
without dampers, 


GeShamavserne eke a 

CONnNeCtIONS ee enon de hers 540 

Stare vs.) Geltas. os. * 

current, calculation......... .565 
design for uniform torque...... 


to reduce phase unbalance. 
effect of higher harmonics....... 
mutual inductance..... 3 

phase unbalance...... ; 
reversing excitation..... 
self inductance......... 
temperature.........-. 
non-uniformity of torque.......- 
power-factor, effect of rotor re- 
Sistancessaene mesa cas. 546 
rotor input, no dampers.......-- 
squirrel cage, copper-loss equa- 
{Elo}, oly > oc arog pee are 
torque, effect of rotor resistance. . 
solid poles, calculation... 

tests, without damp- 

Crs: spies ts 2 


66 - TOPICAL INDEX 


Motors, a.c. synchronous (continued) 


stator reactance, equation..........-..-. 584 
formulasck #0 ee ele ee 557 
tooth tip leakage, calculation............. 582 
z Gehnshion! <\.mccome.e aes 533 
effect of short pitch..... 583 
zigzag leakage, caleulations.. 20.2... o6 06 581 
AenntHOA Pe Le 1 Ad a. Rea ee 533 
effect: of short pitch.....7- 583 
d.c.; 4000. hp., desten data. ae. matress ere 668 
armatures. (See Armatures). 
braking,possibalities.... sas\ien nme ake oe aera - 9 G40 
commutatingsnoles losses: wires: -adnie!- < scree oes = eae 1703 
mill servicers: «5s cites shine 621 
steel millicervice. ... 2 esc ans hers 625 
compound, mill-type, characteristics............... 611 
load losses;-cerrectiondattorss. <..3 62 oan ee ee 1716 
LOSSES. .,<:csrens ag RP eA eee RS Sees or de aetna 1704 
~ rolling mill, 2000, bp. dimesasiopss:; +... s os oe aes 666 
VeLicioncCys gushes Mien ale cone ron 668 
series, nmll-type,-characteristics;, . <6 4-0 sete eae 611 
steclinill applications .:.ntiniemecs. dare ee eee 619 
efficiency. (See Efficiency). 
elections. pasolineic.)(-. odershere ca eiae clei Cane eee nee 2005 
flux distribution. (See Flux distribution). 
gasoline: vs.xélectiien: ic < 7 iets arcu OE ee ee 2005 


insulation. (See Insulation). 
losses. (See Losses). 


mill-ty pe, specitica tions... -..-1mieiiietc1 ite ere ae 606 
railway, armature speed, choice:. 1... aes Ge ee eel eee 211 

control. (See Control). 
field method; advantages... 5.5...0%. 221 
gear cpratio, CHOICE... &.<.6 <0. 2 os ace ee ee 211 
heating, effect of gear ratio... ...5-aite ae eee . 228 

rating. (See Rating). 

intermittent Service.) . oc ses eee . 609 
weight. reduction by ventilations: noece aoe ee tianee ee 207 
methods... sks ore meantes aeons 205 
Multi-recorder, circuit connections..................0-- 840-841 848 
construction sys skeeracine eae Gam ee . 838 
designdifficulties: :... seme aac eeeet ines oe ee 835 
for diagnosing trouble in power stations.......... 831 
testing motormenvalkini sacsoce sore see 833 
theoreticaluinvestigation..jac.<siess oe ee 833 
operation» princi plesid trans tgtls sc keer ee ee 842 
pencil.typereaord s*. kein duet cost teeter 836 
, printing type; secord, .....0 ersaoeed Os ae 837 
Mt. Whitney Power & Electric Co., map of territory..... 1987 
Nickel, hysteresis at low temperature, tests..........-.0.0..00. 2048 
Osis Production, Various ctatests ee ene an ope eee nes 2010 
etated's discovery, date: eininbiegicdades Marita oe eee eae 1019 
Ohm slaw wheat Low. .iéiu-< woes shear oe ee 1194 
Oil, dielectric strength, various temperatures................... 333 
Oscillograph, use in corona loss testing...... 1049 
Ozonatare. Berthelot. ....s:.. cain: eee dies ark tee ee ae ee 989 
eneral Electric... 4. ucaeetantn Sakic O: wit meee 993 
SAFE... »..2:y bovilthos-woadgenreti area eek ee ee 990 
RF Eah 30 a0, Sane Apheinis aaa tel aiuto 991 
SRLCEIY,, 61,» sare wisps ah, bo ehae faa ee cadena en 996 
Stemens & Halske,. 7... cs che eee Nee eee 989 


GSA 8G) ew GS-0 0 6 6 wis Ww aué nol Me a hb Oka Sasa) elles 


——— ss eee > al 


—— 


—_—_—— 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Ozone (continued) 
CESTON SAI CUSIAS. 25 oo ae AO GTO oe ee ere 
SXAOIOSKVSRD UO Mell Core mea ane eerie Rial cna reiticct a oz. ote ch gionieel'v sin ates : 
generators. (See Ozonators). 
INASMETICHPLOPELLICS. |. aca evel - Fike ON te ERR oC eee 
PLOGU ChHOMsGhlernt Cal okOCCSSe teem cusiscartia nhs vis % ofa.v- cencael.sveus 
CleCuiNe UN COL iar oe ae PE eases eng ah aysT ques 
hee EEO lytic wnat rtarr eed Nias, aletatic, cused greene, oot 
GUC CUROSLAUIC wamamme nay teteiae ras oxen tienes chs, essa, 3 
ClO WROXUG a Gtk awerras Wan ucewr ont Sica sie eo ope aus : 
Racioneowers welch. CO. Mmapron LELTIGOL Yen... 6-6 26 ce va ees 
Paper mills, calenders, drive, cost various methods.............. 
CUSAINCE CI Tyre teen anette Sean crue aiaus aoc ee a eS 5 
CEAS TRON CAVOY Sat, Me Oh ae eRe 
POMEL MTE CULE TOMES cua accue Noor aio salen ous eeomsnere 
sheet-power requitements.......- «2.06... - 
Sint Olean GOR CUMING wemciatereindcesBvay.5, Sirona) seats 
ONO LOLAC TIC rem ere wacints lee gr eryt fe 0 
nnishing machinery, electric) drive..2.....2- 0. v0... : 
IROCMEM CV estat Gear weer aerate cie: uitoolm oferta sie cke a 
PLA GELS MOONS Ulll Cl Ol eb. eaten olor ieesioitrar- Wiehe Cato. efyeuoh eres, 
DOWEL NEC UINe MCMC tay ge Any yetee natal alt ofa ar 
Sheesscalenders. CONStIUCHON 0 pn mse ae cuss nels see ae 
super calenders, driving requirements.............. 
PatallelmoperatiommalCenma LOLS: pm-t ect lo cys cic 2+ sPeiow! a(S enceweus sc 
GivAS1OM) Ol CUT Cibo tr, chee -nabe vis ens : 
NOC Aas yor ec 458-465 


effect of field adjustment.......... 
POWEL-TaCtOL sen. ciy< - n+ = 

PeCUROL He Gea Gils bMmIOMU yam mye aul hos 6 ala% sts 452 
HEC MEN C Virus cis epsps eet el sya stat 
governor adjustment.............462 
generators, cross currents, various external re- 
SISHAMGOS At ecdepe AMAL eM c= eo. os 

TUL pPOMCLOss CULLEMUSae se. 0. Gs. ac 
SUGNBONISS PRO LAS Ake > oe Gicio a -c:0 on Rao Egan cares 
Gesiontemar cinematics scale she s.s 

effect of governor adjustment..... 

[Piao NAMES ole wAomio ole 
MMMltiplecincuits......... 

synchronous machines, effect of field adjust- 


transmission lines;protection................ 

circuit diagram181 

Dyenletaeen, CleanNOr.: coli coe One ee lo go om hon csc micio ainaeeeao 
Pelton wheel. (See Turbines). 

Permeance, air gap, d.c. machine..........-.-... seer eet eee 

Permeability curves, electrical steel........----.. seer ee eeee 1613 

measurement with alternating current.............. 

limitations.... . 

Pipes, underground, resistance measurement............ 0000008 

MOOCStAVE; {riCtion LOSSES. cj es ee tate et ee 

Piping, power plant, cost... --.-.. 6. fees este tne etree eet eees 45 

Platinum, melting point........-..-- see eee eee ees 

radiation at melting point. ..... 0... css ees se eee e sees 

PESIStIVILY, CIECHTIC Le ale eee ee ewan es 

EP oponit, TCERMINOR. 6. emesis vont ee tee 

Pole lines, construction, cost........ a ee ae SS ore 

Joint Operation. yc... 1.10.4 Meese eee en 

Sy Sea tT acy oe ec Oe gee) OS CRON OI ge i i aa 

joint operation, agreement... ......- esses seer seers 

CODSEILOOMn wate vers. cece Hs oriaie 8106 wee 


68 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Pole lines, joint operation (continued) 


distribution of shares, schedule........ 
electrical hazard?.-. 72 sess) ee 
elimination of Waste. ..-. 5... ¢s0-- - 9 
MAXIMUM VOLMALC I ee ee oie eke ae 
numbering system... -.:....+..--.5--- 
operating records.....-...---.+-+--+: 
OPPanization ac cise sree iets tie 
practical results 7 V2. = ol. o's are =. as 
realationSya0s cent a ee seas ae 
SAVING eter es ee oe eee ae eee arn ee 
State la waste fo teks siete sl heen 
theertriminine ee tele chee ser eee 


Poles, butt rot, effect of concrete casing........-.-++ essere eee 
cedar, market pricesye 5 ante ais eres te es n> eo 
Eastern white cedar, rate of decay.................- aS er 
installation: Gost: foe Pee ste aie eect abets eons tttet waemeietat trate 
Lawson cypress, properties............--2.+eseee este eee 


strenothiys tr. sels sce reas where tae pine atone 


Port Orford cedar, properties... 0. csr. re ine + nee 


rot, theory.... 


: 


Stretigbhwenes ce eine oe ter aie serie tere : 


strength, modulus of rupture, formula.................-.- 
PLEStSPECIMENS > neice oie ee alee are tee en 
teste apparatus, socen «1s Caley cmt aetna ee 
tests< deflection; correction factors .c. seia« -<Wiciie ns ce eis ene 
timber sdestructive AntwenCes. «<crmic = cisieics nase eles) e « etee eran 
transmission supply, Pacific Coaste. jes ess = ele eee 


western cedar, 


Classification: \caus + aig. Seek aie ee ee 
DIOPCLULES re ete ere ne es hess Sait aoe eens 
rate of Gecays. en ee sks ce eee 
specifications. ance <n see se ei 
Strength oe ec nice 8 Opittee he tpl eus pe een eee 


red cedar, causes of weakness... ....ses scum ae eee 


requirements, 


coal handling Gockss.en aie 728-729 

CLCAM"SEPATALOTS: oe toes eto eneke pier aa 

milking Machines seasick os selene oe Oe eee : 

Mine HOSS 5. Sorcerers he Sse ea eee et OC 

railroads, increase due to cold........... 270 

reversing mill analysis: (. gas sere 675 
t 


rolling millgy ce) Wer. oe cca. ceieaeperei ere rence 
Steel mill roller fablesG.ce. 42 1 ost eee 
trains, freight. oS secon Abies eevee ee eae 
Switching; sick. - ee eee 

ealendafs, papers own, oe art a tieatt tare eee 
SHECGINs oi. chco.t aio eee meer ones 

coal handling, bridge tramway..........717 


dOCk: 4 5. ao km eee eee 


creat separators.j.5 00 gee iw cee eee 
dairy fatmsi ue ceic ae eee 
milking“machinest f.a- cess senate as 
mines; hoisting plant; tests...) ccsnieiieiie 
platers; paper nitlls.-e. ahe ge ae eee 
railroads, freight service 


3 5p) © 0.0 6 8 aie eo ele @ \e6) =) 


reversing mills 


oe 0.6 0 1 © eee 8) eel PLe Wl 8 ese hehe) 6! 9 eile 


TOPICAL INDEX 69 


Power requirements (continued) 


Polling mill ee penwse stake tyes 678-679-680 2051 
steel mail larxiliaries myasnen. one aes are 609 
OHALIG eRECTO ING wate comico ous: sgWOe eer me ae ee 56's 1010 
various machines. (See name of Machine). 
Power-factor, compensation with commutator machine.......... 2078 
COLOM AN OsStep ert rece casialn es oie teams eeu tate Re, 1042 
elect OM alternator CxCitaliOn. seer ie oe. 1844 
generator, a.c. induction, variation with air-gap.... 1733 
motor induction, 1300 h.p..................5---- 670 
STA INGIZ Ree EARN curs st oe ae aes 1785 
speed regulator................. 2118 
rolling mills, commutating regulator control....... 2104 
FHeOsva wiCeCOnUrol sreeaneiae iil <r kk 2104 
Power-plants, coal mine, operating force............/.....+.+..- 739 
economy, effect of over-load efficiency............ 92 
GHICLENC Ye dmM portance wwe eis etter ele oe eins asi 489 
Pa doiein VER TOWny sh aca ate oo Sue opine Oa cmer Sa 1867 
hydroelectric, hydraulic losses..................%. 472 
loscest distributioniy aqme. ss. ss ss 482 
isolated, apartment houses, log sheet.............. 28 
COSHIOL OMELA LOM mt wo rteees clars selene lepine 62 
Gestion petkectrOn Wea bie emus cine te ai 18 
refrigeration plant........ 19 
(EXOWONRG & Sins ole ona ethene Sent GO 19 
EMELINE NA aeons wa coer ye ahs baie 8 16 
fuel costs, New Rion Citymenbmec ac ona ci 16 
h.p.in New York City.) 7.t=..----.--.+- 16 
Thaoheiprmiell, (oferslseraiha 6 6 ao olaaaoie Hilo ura oalcK 28 
labor cost, New York (CHESTS cam am Gate pie oor 16 
location of PCL CE Vista ena. «| oho ciel. FS. 21 
nimberamNew work City... ..-cce 1-4 - 15 
Olice bulldine los Sheet..we a. 0g a. -- 4 - 29 
operation, general conditions............. 16 
TOON es ones cua o ola ighORMO Cae ipean Ona dr ora 53 
Lehigh Navigation Electric Co., announcement.... 185 
operation, labor problem........-....--++++eeee 1348 
machines.rum abtull loads. ast. -< mes 485 
protection, circuit diagram........---.-++++seees 178 
single-phase generator, COSt.......-.--+.-+e+seeee 125 
superintendence, COSt.........--- ++ seers beers 742 
Phepmaluetuciencys arte we beeen ee So tee es 288 
three-phase generators, Cost, .....--+.2+-sserrres 125 
three-unit, cost compared with two-unit........... 40 
two-unit cost compared with three-unit.........-.. 40 
WAT EERRHULIE S \Bont) Oh auart de. cn cute ceucetihN on Seon tiene eee 2002 
Potentiometer, Drysdale, 2.C.. 2... ee eee es 1138 
Peace lostitute, curriculum 0. oso. eee ee ee eee 1324 
student statistics. . 1326 
Prime movers, efficiency at over- -loads, effect, on 1 production cost. 92 
OMIT A CLO COSLER RITE aiile.srib ails dais rhe aye aia bee's 45 
fee acieselfen ions AE oN eigen oho 7 ote 82 
Producers, gas, cost.. hte Een pete eae ic Pee een eee 45 
Professional work, definition. . eae OU 
Protection, feeders, magnetic balance system... _, .. 1928-1929 1930 
transformers. . Oe Since. ee OO 
transmission lines, ‘limiting Pecan ks ae i agen PEOSS 
Pumps, centrifugal, acceleration characteristics. . Po gene 552 
starting characteristics. . Lo See sys: 
cay a Rtn tile ome eS oe aie = cue asain + > rs 
Galatians) sit Mok cOlg pan Dated SOR Rea aCe Ns aoe 
¥ 744 


Water, SCTAP VAlUCS....c.a 0s bes eee ee ale te eee 
turbine driven, power-speed characteristics..........+--: 1940 


70 TOPICAL INDEX - 


Radiation, bright metallic surface, formula...............-+-.++- 1232 
copper, room temperature........602.se0--e--+--s-- 1288 
platinum, room temperature. Ren Re ee rc: 1233 
Wien’s laws oc ges te ees Ie ee ene 1232 

Radiometer for vacuum measurement...........--.--+0s ss +eee 1212 

Railroads, acceleration (also see Acceleration) economical........ pA lyf 
braking, economical: yey £sclerslaieys i= Ketter si-ee enema ena 218 
cars (See Cars) 
coasting, economical. . uate Phau cs veo Rn te eae 218 
economics, limitations. . Sai ae asia 321 
electric, a. c. lightning disturbances vs. d.C...... 000: 794 

single-phase compared with d.c.......... 153 
cost compared with d.c. 134 

economy compared with d.c. 
substation system........ 163 
merits, compared with,dse.; Ars 34a ees 139 
armature speed, ChOLCG sc). ae wee ieee ees 211 
car) dead weipiite..- <a) dmueraiae Serine, seas 204 
mileage. «01,2 cainds ae hegiom taste eee 204 
cost, single-phase.energiyn.-- «=> 0<c+ sake anuemene 134 
dca COSt Of CNET at Ales susie otk at See ene 133 
lightning disturbances vs. a.c. <iaié: ova 0:5' 2 
economies. 3; Patines Seeshic woke ao eens 217 
energy consumption Shays ik Pane: aieatee ie pee 160 
effect of gear ratio....... 227 
purchase; advantages. .-.. 2c) «eos er 316 
TOASOMS: & lacey 6,1 Beek 72 
freight service, acceleration. . cy ORG 
tractive effort... .. 1016 
energy consumption.......... 1010 
power consumption........... 1010 
ratio of revenue to train weight. 1014 
speed-time curves............ 1016 
tests. ire ee LS 
tractive effort-time curves..... 1016 
frequency, Choices. scars en OL ee 969 
stan dagticed .dater 2s aie eee 971 
gear ratio, ChOItG agence cee ve gc 211 
City.S@nvaCe $.capes atest eastern se ae 212 
effect on energy consumption...... 227° 
heating: «dent swan 3a 228 
interurban Services. onsconpi.. see Eee 
SUtburbanesenvice ax25,2..co wen erie 215 
power compared withisteam, methodsan «oa. 70 
protective: apparatisocn..- tir teen eae 851 
reduction of dead weight. .<.... cin tm cuiae case 205 
switching service, energy consumption........ 1011 
power CORREA ig. ca Pe 1011 
electrification, bibliography. . Sins «aetna eee 
Chicago, freight service load........... 259 
group operation, map......... 257 
passenger service, analysis.... 275 
loads cin: at 261 
power requirements, analysis. . 266 
saving of unified system over ; 
group system...... 280 
switching service load........ 259 
unified system, map.........- 258 
SAVINS-O8, COS can oceataniwan erate apace 272 
: zone, map Chicaro. er some me eee 256 
steam, power requirements,,...1)90h ee ee 266 
Rain. gage COnstruchien.. .i:...0...0. eeienen ee teiaRe eee ae Assn ea ag chaatege 6 NG 2147 


nozzles for insulator tests... .s «aici een een ee 2146 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Rates, central station, coal handling, dock service. Batten as 
MUM EM PLANTS eerie hs Pes cane te Male 
service, general a ap fee Garis eienace ee 
electric energy, railroads, Chicago.. : 
railways, street, Chicago. 
irrigation pumping, Southern California. . 
rural service, Southern California. . 

Rating, calculation, intermittent service. “cls senile conti Spe Rem 
conduit ducts...... ae tet oe, PAO a Ce 
machinery, definition. . , 
motors, root mean- square methods, defects. 

Rays, light, frequency... Ct Pare 

Reactance, cables, ealculation..... Renee ante 

conductors in rectangular slot, caleulation............ 


round slot, calculation ese AP RO OEE : 


leakage, motors, synchronous, Calculationeeme mtr ear 
motors, synchronous, stator, formula. . 
transformers, calculation. . aig ee 
Reactors between line and transformer, danger. Bee PRT te eh tie if 
hysteresis losses, errors. : Pde ROSEN eo it 
FEOTEC ORE CCSIOn Neem Are ask hee eee See <r Sees le aie 
SdcymCumrem UleLNOTS mtadtyrn airs tame ae ene sie 
pancake winding design... ............ ++ esse eeeeeeee 
protective, design. . : 
constants. Rtas hye tae 
for 20,000 kw. generators. S ae teeee 
vs. internal reactance. sige cate 
Reclamation, U. S. service, summation of work... 
Recording wattmeters (see Aga as 
Reflectors, cleaning, cost. 
designed for desk lighting. . : 
Regulation, electrical machinery, measurement. 
e.m.f., booster control. fee 
Tirrill regulator. . Soot 5 othe emee Ohana eee 
Regulators, Chapman, method of operation. . ye eh ete eect: Neato 
emt, exciters fon user with)... 1-6 ee ee ee 
Thury . damp 
: construction. . 5 Did Gun Cyaactuer QUEEN. Ceeaciitertcs oeciae 
Tirrill, circuit diagram nap icecipoecigahutiubaties Soni: ReaeMehe erent aragore 
for postin e two or more 
PST aS.  Pesrens erin 
compensation for line ome 
constant exciter e.m.f.. 
large systems.. : 
method of operation. . ? 
protection against short- circuits. 
Relays, American practice, review. of Te: 
application, American practice. 
balance system.... Bn obi ecm ee ear eee 
current balance system. Co Sklar d Roan Cane eee 
definite time-limit, CE speed 
disadvantages in large systems. . 
e.m.f. balance system...... bt ewes 
Faye-Hansen and Harlow v system. 
generator protection. . : at 
Hochstader system. . Aes Sage eter 
inverse-time overload eH areeMCTIAIOn ek. a ewe 
selective, characteristic............+.++555 
magnetic balance system. . ahaa San A ae 
Mera P rice SySueIl orig uw cress e+ as horus ne os 
application. 2.0.6. ee ees 
eepy Pe balance... ..50-. as as oh 1923 
magnetic balance.....sseeeee seer eres 


72 TOPICAL INDEX 
Relays, Merz-Price system Sibel ee ion 
aad with overload in ring system..... 1926 
overload, used with balance in ring system.............. 1926 
protective, accuracy, relies Se, a gaterstoatt aI nts eweaeetiase 195 197 
INVENEOF 2c dis tne oo cous ap eenenets sie ed telnet 192 
transformer protection. 25% wfin'e oleiSe nfo sete tenets atest Nate nee L074. 
Report; board of directors. 121s :.¢ elena) s +) ieesieis elas «hese ae 2231 
financescommittee sin. =. ce cs 2 seyein sioloteielshe weetalataie iatann 2246 
library committees (Rp 2 a. ws nics) oie feeiekay aly toate mete cues 2238 
Resistance, a.c. compared with d.c. measurement.............-- 1501 
measurements, a.c. and d.c. method................- 1508 
Busbars iiss. ete silage eens ogee reals 1470 
closed. Circuits. 2ictecueteietel a cychsletrestersteee 1467 
underground pipes.............+.+++- 1474 
thermal) conversion factors: i am sccmycese «teria alors 1197 
TOW. "(1111 Gocg oa, vero « chaominanecie © el = cue heme iee 1195 
Resistors, filament lamps, characteristics... ......j..<-s<sse5s- 1527 
for lightning “arresters:. 1:1. |... 1-s-enn tts hie ae ee 818 
lightning arrester. ./.- 44: ..:0on papier wen eer 872 
tiingsten: application. 102. v-< sc 4 5a ieee 1537 
Rheostats,, water: choice of solttionca. ses eerie ale neesteee eee 704 
CONSCEUCHION 35> <0 corcts ional aio: toca ake eee 692 
électrode area nti iy 2 wits -tacds a ee 694 702 
evaporation ‘energyiciercremicteutioroa the es eke 703 
level regulations pian aie aciee tunes ce ahora 693 
resistance, effect;of temperature... =. o..-5-. me 695 
salt, solution for best Tesults..o.e=< soni eee 692 
three-phase, plate arrangement............... 695 
volume determination. sic sien cere aan tener 696 
watts per unit volumiessen wea nn eee 696 
Rolling mills, cooling, relation of surface to cross section......... 2060 
direct. pressure, detiniting ass sa ater aie eee 2055 
drive, motor, a,c: commltator,scsl een eee 2091 

efficiency (see Efficiency) 
European practice: Aniuieccuis on eckeeeae Coane 655 
tiv wheels, disadvantages: ac. saeco eee 2097 
hand-operated speed, relation to thickness of metal. 2069 
indirect pressure, Genni tion iene a. toner eee ee 2055 
load diagram. . dh shad grleyvabtelee a Neligks a muta Oi 
motors, d.c., 2000 h. D. ‘dimensions. . rere. we 
inertia redtictions,\, passe aerate ee ee 666 
size determination.ssa- nn cc fami ee ee 2061 
pass sections, typicale & wa eer ewa ae nen ee 2057 2058 
power consumption, calculations.................- 2063 
COLL WIC. succowsrccmepvenert seeder 2060 
effect of chemical composition 

of Steel <i: f.Aianaaioete 2060 
density of steel........ 2060 
displacement pressure. 2055 
temperature metal.... 2058 
volume displaged...... 2053 
; relation to section reduction... 2064 
copper losses, scien piecewe tl etter 675 676 
tor accelerations vate, vc. Renee 675 676 
WOTK. sinhsnap a stacey cae eee ..675 676 
friction and iron losseae: gu. seat were 675 676 
required to displace metal, sea Oe 678 
requirements, determination....... Servecreron 200M 
pressure required for different temperatures. . ~«- 2059 
reversing, Algoma Steel Co., description........... 645 
bearings, requirements o Abalaye ie iye iamtie oae 649 


. electric, first American.................. 659 


-ud 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Rolling mills, reversing, electric, first (continued) 
IDpraqoy ever ale acy Ae cu ce eee 
energy stored in rotating parts........... 
SenerallayOubiee ses yom tee eis tees ele 
generators, general requirements......... 
motors, seneral requirements. -.0...5. >. . 
DECOMMANCEMUCS hem eet eeeit ete arctetenotetel ene 
DOW ETELEC UUeTm eit S aie ieee lnenates) atl inet 
timelotereversals testsa-r sere sere ere eos 
Vise CLmeea hi in aeccyavare sia aan ere ines sleet ts 682 
rheostatic characteristics, speed control............ 
speed control, commutating regulators ........2076 
characteristics. 
TU GeVid CCM OLOLAAc eels eet ne 
regulating motors, number in opera- 
ELODIE Mes gee Tk meter hates Crete tailor ora ot 
MCC ULTCTIMC IES Maree). erohaes ves Nala) rect 
THeEOStAtiChIMet lO Cwecrren.)s terete 
steam driven, testing method.................+--- 
Rotors, reactance, calculation... .. 0.5.6... ees eee eee eee 
Rubber insulation, maximum temperature............+.505-05- 
San Joaquin Light & Power Corp., rural service..........-+..--- 
Saturation curve for armature COTe.......- 2. . see e eee eee eee 
Schools, industrial, classification. .........-. 5562s see c eee eee 
corporation functions.........-...++ esse eeee 
Bitchpiunesehoolee ss. a sie ato rae see 
New. Edison Compatiy.< senses ee ee leer vs 
Telephone Company.........-+++--++-: 
OLLADIZATION,. . qos see Mee eet ree ee ses wees 
Prati Dustitute eases scr. Ge sta cnemres oe 
railroad, courses taught..:.......-.+++-+0+5- 
OTSANUZ ALON pepe eal ee eeterat ote pe) se 
New) Yorke Centraljag. corms: 
Pennsylvaniayogtoe awe oe 
CTE OSs i bO.dia Gussie o G:OWd.0, og UROL Ole 
Wentworth Institute ..........6.--.-+5see- 
CULtiCultm sare shee ee 
Seattle Munic. Lt. & Pwr. Co., plant description..........-.--+: 
Short-circuit currents (See Currents) 
torques (See Torques) 
GilgxicompCisCOVETY fo ve. cent tree ce rte ee eee eee 
MES iver tia wie CelmitlOneeits = ose) uke = ugelt eet s ee es 
Bite oct. CC MatiGh.: ...ewsge oo. + alee eee he HE RS teres 
Smithsonian Institution, organization.......... 6. seers eer tees 
Sound absorption, reaction upon sounding body.......----++++: 
highest audible, frequency... ..7 02.86 eee eee eee eee 
lowest audible, frequency.....-2.---. see etree eters 
Spark-gap, calibration, effect Of ATEQUCTICY.. «tees sah. ve ee 
ATUGHTCCATICE) ra tute 6 oe aiid wie ies 
Sec OMinewa ce ok miote fond oe tcc eee 
polarity for ignition purposes........-.-+++ssresee es 
Spark-plug, gas engine, eMail yarns oh gtes 8 3 RE eae. 9 es 
Squirrel cage winding (see Windings 


Stators, reactance, calculation.........---+ssserrr strstr 

Steel, high-silicon, exciting Current, testes seast omc es oe oe eet t 

mills, a.c. vse d.c/ auxiliaries... 660. eater ee tees 

auxiliary motors, choice.......... ++ seer sree 
specifications. .......+-++++ss++> 


power requirements.......---+++-- 
commutating pole motor, performance.........-+-+- 
d.c. VS. a.c. alixilarieS..<.6. 2.5 -. se eee een 
frequency standard..........0--e esses ee seeeeccees 


971 


74 TOPICAL INDEX 
Steel, mills (continued) 
roller table, power consumption with oil............ 613 
mitho wtoul vee cae 613 
rolling (See Rolling Mills) 
suitability ofsdiciimators:. semen cin .tt-weeeeee 619 
voltage conditions....... er Pe Ties! 
silicon, effect of transformer losses. . cris Bip eis CR 
tungsten changes at high temperature, decks, noe psnue ee 2048 
Stock farms, use.of electiicityekie teers ae ieee enue kee 1995 
Stray. ctirrents "COpsasion, teSt nue /)-seeie hela ke Ghee 1172 
Measuremeniticscer. i (et Pears oe eee 1449 
with Haber’sammieten. i.jaace-0, 6 1478 
source identification. . - aie mies oe he eee 
underground pipes, measurements.............-. 1464 
testiniovo witht. cjac cin <oy wee 1462 


Street lighting (See Lighting) 
Strength, various materials (See name of Material) 


String ‘efficiency "delinition bates om nae erie ch ect Gee Ole 
Sturgedn's discovery, datete.- satasictss onic meek cee eee ee 1021 
Substation all-daygetiiciencys.:...+. .:. 0... eee eee 478 
; cost.. its ae Se eee 132 
efficiency, ‘effect of load-factor. eaten ee ae ete Rone 116 
Indoor*Gonstruction, i<%s,.13.2,.)ebeues <cgs tava eee ee 324 
labor andisupoliesicost.:. <.;.<etes lend seston ok eee na 117 
inaintenance cost & jagleeeIol-g\. Se eee 117 
meter: LOSSES: <.o. eS hae si ASO oe ei eas or wee ae 478 
operation ‘cost cx:s Paeaies selon Sueee ne ee eine re eae 117 
Outdoor =desipns suse aie Renee ti nia Sere ie 325 
effect:of moisture saan Meta «ee cen 
sun ‘heat. teizMicet Sere (ok See ore 328 
operation. . sihotteende Satna ee eerie 334 
transformer type. ASAE: GS SA, cM ee Re CER Ee Bee 329 
protection, Merz+Price:syatenpengeen'. ee ae lee eee 1925 
railroad, advantagesncqams careers: © cin ene 305 
synchronous converter,losses. . ae Rirrettatcrn ¢ LLv 
transformer losses............ ua le 
Sarees, artificial, line) experinients:Gqops.6 . chee oe ee 191 
Swiech boards; costs 1..:-2..;Seett.a wns ee ec See 45 
telephone automatic call distributing, advantages... 424 
description... 408 

reduction of 

multiple 

jacksray ae 420 
manual multiple, description........... 405 
Operationncss .cebi@naee 406 
Sorleches! air controlled, cold weather troubles................... 734 
air-operated, advantages osn.c. mise erence 724 
Switching, effect of frequency’. . .wiiensisdel. bs gee eau oemeianesen 970 
long transmission lines testehknc. douse uy nee 889 


Synchronous generators (See Generators) 
motors (See Motors) 


Tantalum, resistance-temperature characteristics. . big ASic/indectis hate tae 
Telegraph, central battery system, polarized sounder............ 1433 
Henryisumvenition. <1)! aan Ri eee cae ea 1023 

induction, circuit, description........ aie gnsieat Aye, Le 

closed circuit to open ‘repeater. . os oy alte Cerna aD 

open circuit to open repeater.............. 1445 

SVSUCII . . «ina: bel Rm ReRE ont ii eee a ee ae Pe 1434 

invention, Gite. ...... | cata aes eter ae, eee 1023 

INVeNtO?...2 Gee . . «0 bongs UAE eee eng 1023 

repeater, indtetion System. sa weenie een en ae ee 1436 

sounder, polanized type. act. en arn eeeen Wneaen eae oe 1431 


Uns} Army, induction outfit 
wireless, frequency. i..cilutiemeueee PEN ON Al se 956 


EE ee 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Telephone, automatic, power consumption..................05. 
private branch, advantages, ...cs........ 

exchange, apartment house 

advantages..... 

apartment house 

description... 

circuit diagram. 

commercial, ad- 

vantages..... 

description. 


depreciation.... 
energy supply.. 
Ill. Tunnel Co., 
description... 
maintenance 


blOnIAert.ce 

traffic perform- 

ance.. 

sphere... 

trouble record. 

diaphragms, free vibration, lowest loads............ 
RESONANCE CULVESH mina tmentaek alee 1405 

temperature effect on vibration period. . 

variation of inductance and resistance... 

vibration, amplitude current characteris- 

tics, different frequencies. ... 

fOKrcCesMequation. ..%.. 0.4.5: 

ARG on Bone DIO Ot. ORIOL SIE epee 

Ibvelse TemXernOlsls Ac ro dey ooh aed Be Ge 0 cat Oee cere ener 
jee Slacvebmy oof nes 00 ao oth ao care ania 

MAD al mPOWEIACONS UMA TION ton ielettie ge chars a iereie we oe 
private branch exchange, cost .............. 

of operation. . 

depreciation...... 


lifer ar iain s «ales : 


traffic delays...... 

office building, design of conductors...............- 

EStiManines (hAliC) Mer-wirskcsomicms ac. a 

operator, efficiency, LOSSH MMASINES persian = cheat oles lane 

relation to positions handled.... 

bey RyGWeKe, oO SNe Ms. coats Goat nC Ce 

SoM dalle on oS eae ad enn ee 
switchboards (See Switchboards) 

trafic, callsiper dine pereday.j..ne ss nec ee. oe oe 

connections per operator..... 


data, automatic private branch exchange. noes 


delays, automatic compared with manual..... 
percentage calls trunked.................. 
saving due to automatic call distributing... 
subscriber’s operators required.............. 
transmitter, relation between current variation and 
current, various frequencies......... 
PAGOMATACORCLIEV © peree orscsaue raisin eeIar os cha 
water-tight, farm USC, c2neayas sills ee ange ee 
wiring. (See Wiring). 
Temperature, critical, PASCO TLOMG arcsec ee kee wee eee ke 
distribution, conduits, underground, test.......... 
PUSIMATCOUOCA DIES wa secteereniersyie sss oleae 
maximum, various substances. (See name of Sub- 
stance). 


76 TOPICAL INDEX 

Temperature (continued) é 
measurements, resistance method......... sense 788 
resistance characteristic, galvanized iron wire...... 
rise, relation to room temperature.............:-. 


Testing, electrical machinery, summation-of-losses, method....... 
various machines. (See name of Machine). 
Textile mills, starting conditions, test..........---++--+-++seeees 
power demand; test... <1 Aetec1- siete ters 
‘Thermal ohmeeonversiomtactor. .cc .ae ac «is <2 ate eile wile ale oleae tele 
Géfinition MAb oso onic oe ee eee Pr 
resistivity, various materials. (See name of Material). 
Thury regulators. (See Regulators). 
Tirrill regulators. (See Regulators). 


Torque, short-circuit, generators, a.c. turbo, test.............-+- 
various external react- 

allcess. wise enter 

various external re- 

Sistancéesy.24.-cae 

IE GWETS y COSEN VATIOUS SPADS es. <s,aje1s 06 ayelsiels celta ee ee 
PACEOLRS MOL TSALE LY co ieiisie coke 10, 6 we 5 yeu stake <retel sts ee oie eee eee 
flexible field of applicationin.:: «> esi. a's ires osteo : 

Ge TIGIC coe ie gerbera rer arabs eoreyenl oe eran alot Sede oe ee: 

(Hoyo otek: Wiley ec we AD a ee hi SP ec ec 


lines. (See Transmission lines). 
Tigi devs. flexable.5 5, qian ehe croebers TORR as salle Ne ofanaieeancteer : 
stresses: classification... suse en eee Sane cae 
wire breakagenxe wives ie eich wss.4 eine ale aan onene 
WittdwlOads,..2 Hatton's oe rotary Reta Ns hosts: no in aiiee Rte thee 
“REAaIN Tesistance sire1g ht\SELVECC ances «ale oye ay vests al svalos ec) s eene cere 
On Curves; Mrei ght ServicGucr ws «cistern «owen oe 
grades, freight wWervicel i. 2.06 aceiosvaae vere 
Transformers, auto, design for higher reactance................. 
core-type, design for higher reactance............. 
magnetic shunt construction........... 
COST ci 5 Sane s, aie le aha Wane nae Moret cl ol Rian RM er eyte a iat rere ene “ 
design, effect of frequency<msen usec © ee aaron ee 
for higher reactance, difficulties........... 
distribution.efficiency:. ...)... seidi oe eels ee ae 
LOSSES... sisinialeBrolete ie temtace hee enorme 
@.mit., Lormitilarc cai title eca keene ene are 
frequency, effect/om: designt eke «soc niemete sree < 
high-tension, distributed capacity................ 
star vs;isolated delta. ingen cele one 
instrument, loading siieen oreeeeee niet Se nee 
testing. diced unten sete usec ay eee 
vibration galvanometer as detector.... 
internal reactance, effect on short circuits, early ex- 
planation. 298 Sine eae ee ae 
Sitges; ACtIONT AG pee Ale ee cee cee 
mechanical strength on short circuit, relation to size. 
outdoor high-tension, installation................ 
listi@t those imuoperation stats fae. et eee 
TeECUiT em Cres. Tone sh. Ree tenennere inka rene ets 
output), effect ot frequencyiirsmeerh.cr eterna eres 
pole-ty pe; provecbiOw-7 Meee rea icin tuos, 5 cceecar in eee 
protectin, arrester tests Wanita nie cic nuchal ee eee 
balance relay Saae. foe niccte on ene tat: 
current balance relay. aes vine arawemnes tes 
relay characteristicnyncs se enters an een 
reactance;-calctilation.qiens aise momreereneeiene orien: 
regulation, effect of frequency 
series, effect of loading ica) 4s lactam ee ris 
selection for balance relay systems......... 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Transformers, series (continued) 


EOStIN Cert aed ie che oie aire atis ose le ves. 54.0% 
self-contained detector.............. 

shell-type, design for higher reactance............ 
_ magnetic shunt construction........... 
short-circuit stresses, effect of external reactance... . 


Calculatiniot yak. bicito cnet) 

shunt, balance methodiof testing.--5..........-.- 
GUTOLS tater eects 

ECSU Oe eee den RECMEN, hewceesc Fetes 6 foo ers aug antes 

RIM LOL ASCMCOS bapatvh. Greet ere cys csc Silene Get. 


compared with three-phase....... 
step-down, all-day CMICIENC Yaa sae cite sete voie vee 


CHICLEHCVAmw ttc emia cine een ies ae ee 131 

TOSSES eerste ae eue Tete eos so haces asters 
SUCPatIp alleGay CHICLEMCY: 35.6 sicko aie sei icles ales 
Suey oh ok Hoo aoa wou > EDC 131 

LOSSES eu ere were rane eRe hans aus yee 


telephone, exciting current, test..............-++-- 
synchronous reversing key as detector... 

testing, vibration galvanometer as detector........ 
GhHree=pHASE; -COSt- lejos ely © » ele suajerereiere  yelepeiaielo e+ 
compared with single-phase...... ; 


Transmission cables, capacity currents, one-phase grounded...... 


RAOvAIMCOLN MauhESy on se omocad sen aa soo NEO oo bao Soko 

high-tension, advantages..........-- ++ seeee eres 

line, artificial, construction.........--.2.5.-.)-. 888 

EXPELIMENLS. yyw nae cho sy sel iets es 

OPCT AMON nacido e ohelere ores =reeteye = 

conductor size, effect on cost........-...++++ 

current and e.m.f. measurements.........--- 

distribution, inductive load.......... 

non-inductive load. . 

one end free........ 

design, effect of frequency.........--++++++- 

for maximum synchronizing power.... 

parallel operation of stations...... 

GRIGIO 65 he gce Bho 0 ee 0 boom vos GmIOIOns 

e.m.f, distribution, inductive load...........- 
Guelend- free prays on oe oe 

equivalent circuits, 60 cycles and 25 cycles.... 

experimental, Purdue University...........-- 

ground wire, strengthening effect..........-- 

high-tension, all-day efficiency........------- 

ChICleHCyjaerme = eye a a) 

NOSSES MINN aes acter ere tence Shee 


icedoadh an werent: BER Py Sint sche estas, ote oto, eS osie.segole 
impedance measurement with static voltmeter . 
impulses, equations. ....-.-.+---+seeeeee ees 
propagation. 0.0.65. 0s ieee eee ees 

long distance, surge experiment......-..----- 
DOLE SPACE: /u/s wi (oe Sesh aiae a0 elles + ee ws eee eee 
protection American practice.....--.-+-+++-+ 
limiting factors. ..4..2...2 ++. -++s- 
regulation, effect of frequency.....-.--+-++-: 
ECUAtION. apes ase ny lee aes 
single-phase, ra ona compared with three- 


spacing for different sized conductors, ......+: 
three-phase economy cornpared with single- 
PUGSOING wre «ee recline eee 

HOSCCOME Hohe vie cveteiert civics ieecees brs 


78 TOPICAL INDEX 
Transmission line (continued) 
traveling impulses, test......-..---+-+++0s- _ 889 
WI OAC i cate ee a aus oud ele ois ok aiteyate pate Geaeeae 900 
WILE DIGAKAGEs so nd-o)sheles ekste: Siels oye ape anor tem 902 
plant, losses, distribution...............-+:--+-++ 482 


single-phase, cost compared with three-phase. 134 
three-phase cost compared with single-phase. . 134 


system, connections...........-.- 178-181-182-199 201 
eMCiencys: .. 2 s.-oscle nei eee ee lish! 

frequency standard..............------05 971 

in and around New York... 2.2.0... «. +=. 247 

protection, circuit diagram................ 178 
disadvantages of relays......... 186 

under New York, unified... . 25520... 5.2) 248 

unified; advantages... nena: ce ete tae 319 

compare with group method....... 280 

in New York, possible savings..... 264 

Miangsten, conductivity, heat... 060s «smi cs eta pie else ate Sede 1222 
Gopper plating \o ee. eraser cretenete a ere terete et ener een ean - 1241 
KL@HSEEV Ste ee oD ote eee ete obec Soeiertes exe ciale Oaks ees etenaene 1221 
Ai ChHiiyea sd . Pee ne Sh a ea eee e nene en nee ema anes 1221 
electric furnaces yy. cus. pote eee atte rea ore eke renee 1226 
hardening qualitiess ee oe se eee 1221 
MAGNETIC’ Properviess 1a. siete ae eRe te > Gere crete nae 1221 
Melting poli: :.2 view ale ase Shere eee ae acre ee ee 1220 
PLOGUCHON.-. 7 Wclee, sate ae eee ae ane teen ata eee 1219 
projectiles... 2.2 Ls crc Reiter tere rents aoe, oti ror ants alana 1226 
radiation. at melting) pPOmtene: eee. - a liemtis species rene 1226 
resistance-temperature characteristic.............-.-- 1528 
resistivity, electHieritn eoucites aes een << aikiog nie cena 1221 
temperature coefficient, electric resistivity............ 1222 
CXPANSIOD. os occas wee stele ee 1222 

PENSUSSETFEN OTM: ck cals wcue toe tinteae ciel teagan ete nee 1221 
USES EEE She aetete. coe ahaing gies 6 siets  iaea Sue eae eT ae 1222 
‘Diurbines, steam, deprectation ss +. 45 ss ae ree enter ere 101 
water, Prancis type, emeiency!. 2. kin ales mee 474 475 
POVELINES THEOL Y) oe sete «rae causa lets Mote eaetens 1939 
Impulsive Lorce: Ve aw eke cca eee ee ae oie ieee 1944 
over-speed determination’: 92.2000. 2 < s.ese oe 1938 

Pelt Git, theorycccus etenc leks cnbasune eiaercrake 1944 

type GINCIENCY Tan eee ce cee an 474 475 

reaction, efficiency ‘equations: .. 250. .......:0% < 1957 

VAriOUS W1AmOSe Manat sjar cela 1953 

performance characteristics........... 1954 

POW EMSQUBTIONS: . tie et eee cucu ee 1956 

run and measurement, various makes.. 1951 

runaway speed, various makes........ 1953 

speed equations. (aioe feats soe cee 1956 

THEORY te EI, ie eee tie cae eee 1950 

runaway speed, theoryce..... cst. cee ee . 1943° 

speed, ‘sélection ie rcaitan. «aioe ehon rn sie . 19387 
tangential, efficiency, various makes........... . 1949 
runaway speed, various heads....... 1948 

makes....... 1949 

WHEOLY festa Mates «: caainas octhe.s eet ahenenaee 1944 

Vacuum improvement by vapor condensation.................. 1208 
measurement with radiometerne... ... aos facet een 1212 
Production. ;: os. TA. Waa: See eee oe eee 1207 
Ventilation, building, effect of heating design................... 20 
condttits. 2. 5. dilaveeee Sota tiene ee ee 792 794 
generators, a.c) titbo; induction. ener.) ae ee 1743 
acydlit. SJS9C0T fo BAST ee ee ee 1824 


1655-1681-1685 1690 


ee on ene 


Se eee 


— 


———————— ee — 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Ventilation, generators (continued) 
TWEE YS NGh ets hing ay OO Ao en 
Siialimait-ga pee miaeilcae isu che oes bale 
turbo, loss); per cubicfootiof air.......... 
Krol Cagemeoainhamdl moedocksomn sh cupraienes gine ic cee Gveaa 


PMnES Heel OL UCEMAtIONS) sts sie hoes en. ys orcs ; 

Voltmeters, electrostatic, leakage elimination................... 

LOSSES MEA STAEM MEN hati aieecs acing 6 

induction type, performance curves................. 

laboratory standard for lamp testing................ 

static, impedance measurement................0.0. 

Noli anseciscomenya Gabena atria ceri ite ite claus a 5 ve Peusts shen. e ew Ste ws 

Water sbotline point, vVantOUs Pressures cynic. cee te swe ws: 

CVAP OU LONRE ISL Aycters. cuentas Oh riclayeret alae era nce ee Ses eos di eels wie 

HG ey San oy ERIS Atay tees sag GS coda ceo bs Gant St Sloe ee aaa meee eae 
rheostat (See Rheostat) 

Watt-hour meters, accuracy, effect of instrument transformers..... 

instrument transformers 

various power-factors 

CHIOLE CrOlghaiia peice Mea RoRre rc ate veleme nie. te else is 

SIZ CIOLUMES LCI ea rt aateere Ganeee cus aa) Me : 

ans tallationcmetnodsaewedemtacie tr. hibe ci. ota) «2-62 

rotating standard, influence external field....... 

shunt operation, difficulties......... ace eee 


i WSSEUMO MAT CE SIZE Guce mnEen arte Pht te cknry a's ayes cans 
WME CLEC LS HIG MIT OAM S= COM «CULT EM tape ory nea sich tars Sets eosceuen 
compensated, chatactermstiGsy 65-4 «ere ds) ne ce ea on 
Cd VaCUrrentrerrOLrsny, sanrent ons unas oe 
performance curves. ....0.......-.1582 
use OL-concentric:cable....0...0-2.24)- 
electrodynamometers. (Also see Electrodynamo- 

meters). 
eddiy=currenbierrors. 2... .a. « 
recording indications, transmission to a distance..... 
OVCLS WN OOUMG ns aes eM akeIeter reese ck ne» 726 
We CLOCUIIC) TEECUENCY austin «image «cle sh eis as Sleptene ches ech s 
Wave-form distortion in existing transformer................-.. 
Nisa tiemeOn Ui ONs i @ORCOO skye iWen Mion eric alelaile Wiel). «s.0 suet «6 
PACH CMOS tant te.Tamis ie a8 er alo oe sie slate. ante 
TEENIE, oo, cae Oden ek POR eee 
WESC On, atte Bas U OG aaa 
Wiheateprocdtuctioms VATIOUS States... pramwetns swale ore nee ae 
RWalla peu ene xP LESSLOM ce ae. ty eile) owed <-xejejer 2m oie + sleie ele e Gres ene Fe 
Ward loAdlommrAustiissiOM 1iMES. 4. = cts sue spelec « = 6 creed oe ates 
HONE, og 6 CURD Bo QO UNIO RS Ose CnCIC I Teas 
SCG SE ads MO leer co eae eee ee a 
WOOGTUISS aces oS Fo Ot ence OPE oop CERO Pact Dito Orr romero cari 
- \iecalaenilll, jayonwrsey Esl aie Saeco s Soin omteo.o noe Deron porn 
Windings, generators, induction, effect of pitch...............++5 
UCLA CUOL Mensur eae inte azre icust sage ctatersiely «> Sapna ve > 
WENT A LOLs. Ca apebe sage" sieain ale =, + slacale te «ie 0 
squirrel-cage, calculation.........-...-...+eee eee eee es 


Wire, aluminum, skin effect, equation...........-..2+- +e sseeeee 
EOMUSCULO MME ACT EIOM vel vyickas udegetNe reso 5) oot) cate AMI Es 3 
losses, forced ventilation, calculation......... ; 
free ventilation, CalbctilatiOms ccm ass aes eS ae 
copper, skim effect, equation........... 6... eect reece eee 
current capacity. (See Current-carrying-capacity). 
iron, galvanized, temperature-resistance characteristics..... 
Wireless telegraphy, (See Telegraphy). 


80 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Wiring car, electromagnetic induction, test........--+eeeeeeeeee 


electrostatic induction, test. ......++ seers errr ee es 
high-frequency induction, tests hicctth bie oc 10 arena cnn 
protective apparatus. ....---++seeerrrs se sserrnses : 
relation to lightning protection........+++++++++s20% 


diagram, apartment building......-.---+-++-++sas0° 1391 


automatic telephone, private branch exchange... 
Chapman regulator.......-+-.eeeeresseereces 


COrONa LOSS; TEStecitael «2 + o0.0. «isis > weliesenr iy eae 


current balance relay........---+ eee eee ereees 
electric mine hoist..........-- sees cece ee eens 
excitation systems........+-++-+ 1869-1870-1871 
Faye-Hansen and Harlow system.....-----;--: 
feeder protection, balance relay.........++- 1923 
flywheel-motor-generator, rolling mill drive...... 
generator protection.......-++++seeeeeeereeees 
Hochstader relay system........--+++++eeeeeee 
hotel <& saasicacesp wd feiss = oe aie RUN stor 


loft, buildings aa. o c-cm ieee See ee ee 
mine hoisting plant.........-- eee reer eects 
motor-generator, input-output GESES .c:5! aim, Sia ateeegete 
multi-recorder... ...s.4hs = -/eetesinae& ee os 840-841 
office building, eleven story.......--+-+++-+205 
Hudson Terminal..... .1380-1381 
resistance measurement, a.c. and d.c 
Tirrill regulator... scene 1854-1856-1857-1858 
transformer protection...........-+++eeee ee eees 
watt-hour meter test with differential galvano- 
meter ....cp4we GA aed See ove) os ars hm sees aewiarens 


66,3) 6 ee Te enema 


flywheel-motor-generator installation for reversing mill... . 
installation, electric mine hoist...........--++ee+e seers : 
telephone, apartment building........... lates wy cokes 


classification of buildings..............--+--+- 
Thotelsiseccccpc Hikes eee cisie tore seekers renee tae reoneae 
inclusion of building plans............- Sf wera 
loft buildings... ...jgteletete tebe teMety alet clere efor eseienen= 
office building... o<ss surements oben isie res 

Hudson Terminal..........:.:«: 
subsidary boxes, standard sizes..........++++- 


Woodward Iron Company, electric hoist installation............- 
Be Ray; {LEQueney’:.... oop. 0:4 sim aa, ith Mata sone < mmiers. © vox aon Renin 


tube; tungsten target. <1... cms sneluieeei tins #16) le) sue a eceleleis 


SE 


——— ” 


DATE DUE 


PRINTED IN U.S.A 


GAYLORD 


SSP EE 


