Senteme nae 


SS SESS AN NS ASSESS NG CEE RISES SRN AERIS NG SR ES SSS SW ST SRS SSN 


SMA SNe pongo gH 


one 


ST 


SARE AARON 
bee S iS a J pipe” So ake a 
ASSN SENNA GRAAL NAAN AE SNORE DN NN ENE NN DD 
- ‘ SS . See ~ Seth oe eed Jie? 
Ss x 5 ts ys < ‘ Aen Bd . 
oats in ’ a Se aa ’ : 
RNS e 5 - - Raat , ect 


pve ry OF ULINOIS 
J RST AIGA 
Na = Ne gel 


EDWIN T. BLAKE 


TRANSACTIONS 


OF THE 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE 


meee rRICAL ENGINEERS 


JANUARY 1 TO JUNE 30, 1908 


VOL. XXVIT, PART I 


PUBLISHED BY THE oe 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
33 West THIRTY-N INTH STREET 
INE We VORA IN. Yo. UL S.A. 

1909 


Copyright, 1908 
by the 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


Press of Mcllroy & Emmet, 22 Thames Street, New York 


OFFICERS AND BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 


1907-1908. 


PRESIDENT. 
HENRY GORDON STOTT. 
Term expires 1908. 


JUNIOR PAST-PRESIDENTS. 
~ SCHUYLER S. WHEELER. : SAMUEL SHELDON. 


VICE-PRESIDENTS. 


Term expires 1908. Term expires 1909. 
H. H. HUMPHREY. JAMES G. WHITE. 
A. H. ARMSTRONG. W.C. L. EGLIN. 
FRANK G. BAUM. L. A. FERGUSON. 

: MANAGERS. 

Term expires 1908. Term expires 1909. Term expires 1910. 
CUMMINGS C. CHESNEY. JOHN J. CARTY. MORGAN BROOKS. 
BANCROFT GHERARDI. A. M. SCHOEN. HAROLD W. BUCK. 
CHARLES L. EDGAR. PAUL M. LINCOLN. PERCY H. THOMAS. 
CALVERT TOWNLEY. PAUL SPENCER. BENJAMIN G. LAMME, 

TREASURER. SECRETARY. 
Term expires 1908. 
GEORGE A. HAMILTON. RALPH W. POPE. 
New York, N. Y. New York, N. Y. 


PAST-PRESIDENTS. 


NORVIN GREEN, 1884—-5-6. LOUIS DUNCAN, 1895-6-7. 
FRANKLIN L. POPE, 1886-7. FRANCIS B. CROCKER, 1897-8. 

T. COMMERFORD MARTIN, 1887-8. A. E. KENNELLY, 1898-1900. 
EDWARD WESTON, 1888-9. CARL HERING, 1900-1901. 
ELIHU THOMSON, 1889-90. CHARLES P. STEINMETZ, 1901-2. 
W. A. ANTHONY, 1890-91. CHARLES F. SCOTT, 1902-3. 
ALEX. GRAHAM BELL, 1891-2. BION J. ARNOLD, 1903-4. 
-FRANK J. SPRAGUE, 1892-3. JOHN W. LIEB, JR., 1904-5. 
EDWIN J. HOUSTON, 1893-4-5. SCHUYLER S. WHEELER, 1905-6. 


SAMUEL SHELDON, 1906-7. 


STANDING COMMITTEES. 


C. C. CHESNEY. 
C. L. EDGAR. 


GEO, A. HAMILTON. 


Library Committee. 
EDW. CALDWELL, 
Chairman. 
MORGAN BROOKS. 
MAX LOEWENTHAL. 
F. A. SCHEFFLER. 
PHILIP TORCHIO. 


Sections Committee. 
PAUL SPENCER, 
Chairman. 
WILLIAM ESTY. 
H. H. NORRIS. 
D. B. RUSHMORE. 
B. WOODWORTH. 


Law Committee. 
C. O. MAILLOUX, 
Chairman. 
A. H. ARMSTRONG. 
H. A. LARDNER. 
E. A. SPERRY. 
C. A. TERRY. 


SPECIAL COMMITTEES. 


High-Tension Transmission 
Committee. 
(Sub-com. of Meetings and 
Papers Committee.) 
RALPH D. MERSHON, 

Chairman. 
F. G. BAUM. 
C. C. CHESNEY. 
B. G. LAMME. 
PAUL M. LINCOLN. 
W.S. MOODY. 
W. N. RYERSON. 


Code of Ethics Committee. 


SCHUYLER S. WHEELER, 


Chairman. 
BION ae OLD. 
H. W. 


ihat CARTY: 
L. A. FERGUSON. 


& F. SCOTT. 
SAMUEL SHELDON. 
C, P. STEINMETZ. 
L. B. STILLWELL. 


Committee on Increase of 
Membership. 

Das, RUSHMORE, 

Chairman. 

A. W. BERRESFORD. 

S. S. DICKENSON. 

GANO DUNN. 

BANCROFT GHERARDI. 

F. L. HUTCHINSON. 

S. M. KINTNER. 

A. P. PECK. 

W. L. WATERS. 


Executive Committee. 
H. G. STOTT, Chairman. 


RALPH W. POPE. 
CALVERT TOWNLEY. 


Board of Examiners. 
HAROLD W. BUCK, 
Chairman. 
H. H. BARNES, Jr. 
MAURICE COSTER. 
W.C. L. EGLIN. 
GEORGE F. SEVER. 


Editing Committee. 
GEO. F. SEVER, Chairman. 
W. H. BROWNE, Jr. 
PERCY H. THOMAS. 


Standards Committee. 
SAMUEL SHELDON, 
Chairman. 
B. A. BEHREND. 


c. 7 “STEINMETZ. 
STILLWELL. 
& W. STRATTON. 


Building Fund Committee. 


ies VeISw Chairman. 


Committee on Forest 
Preservation. 

. H. PORTER, Chairman. 

. G. BLACK 


Railway Committee. 
(Sub-com of Meetings and 
Papers Committee.) 

A. H. ARMSTRONG, 
Chairman, 

WM. ee 

H. ST. C. PUTNAM. 

C. W. RICKER, 

N. W. STORER. 


Educational Committee. 
(Sub-com. of Meetings and 
Papers Committee.) 

HENRY H. NORRIS, 


Chairman. 
GANO DUNN. 
DUGALD C ‘eee en: 
(OMOR MAILE UX. 


CHARLES Ff SCOTT. 


JOHN J. CARTY. 


Meetings and Papers 
Committee. 
PERCY H. THOMAS, 
Chairman. 

A. H. ARMSTRONG. 
PAUL M. LINCOLN. 
RALPH D. MERSHON. 
H. H. NORRIS. 


Code Committee. 
F. A. C. PERRINE, 
Chairman. 
J. C. FORSYTH. 
A. M. SCHOEN. 
GEORGE F. SEVER. 
H. A. SINCLAIR, 
H. S. WARREN. 
ARTHUR WILLIAMS. 


Finance Committee. 
CALVERT TOWNLEY, 
Chairman. 
H. W. BUCK. 
BANCROFT GHERARDI. 


John Fritz Medal 
sentatives. 
HENRY G. STOTT. 
SAMUEL SHELDON. 
SCHUYLERS.WHEELER. 
JOHN W. LIEB, Jr. , 


Repre- 


The International Electro- 
technical Commission. 
United ee JMetional Com- 


ELIHU THOMSON, 
President, 
CEpeee Bx SCOTT, 
t Vice-President 
SAMUEL SHELD ON, 
d Vice- president. 
BAB ARNOLD 
EHREND. 
Peake Or 


UGALD C. JACKSON. 
FRANCIS W. JONES. 
ARTHUR E. KENNELLY. 
BENJAMIN G. LAMME. 
W. A. LAYMAN. 

JOHN W. LIEB, Jr. 
CLAYTON H. SHARP. 
CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 
LEWIS B. STILLWELL. 
HENRY G. STOTT. 
SAMUEL W. STRATTON. 


Committee on Poeraplty, 
WM. D. WEAVER 


Section and Branch Secretaries. 


ADOLPH SHANE, 
Iowa State College, 
Ames, Iowa. 
H. F. BAXTER, 
556 S. State St., 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 
Co Jy VUNDT, 
Southern Bell Tel. & Tel, Co. 
Atlanta, Ga. 
B. F. KENYON, 
University of Texas, 
Austin, Texas. 
CHAS. G. EDWARDS, 
Electrical Commission, 
City Hall, 
Baltimore, Md. 
J. A. CLARKE, Jr., 
Lehigh University, 
Bethlehem, Pa. 
A. L. PEARSON, 
93 Federal St., 
Boston, Mass. 
H. S. BUCHANAN, 
University of Colorado, 


Boulder, Colo. 


J. A. THALER, 
Montana Agricultural Col- 
lege, 
Bozeman, Mont. 
J. E. SNOW, 
Armour Inst. of Technology. 
Chicago, Ill. 
P. B. WOODWORTH, 
Lewis Institute, 


Chicago, Ill. 


J. G. WRAY, 
Chicago Telephone Co., 
Chicago, III. 
A. C. LANIER, 
University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, O. 
C. C. BUCHANAN, 
University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, O. 
F. M. HIBBEN, 
10207 Wilbur Avenue, 
Cleveland, O. 
H. D. CARPENTER, 
University of Missouri, 
Columbia, Mo. 


F. C. CALDWELL, 
Ohio State University, 
Columbus, O. 
H. L. BACHMAN, 
533 South 3d St., 
Columbus, O. 
E. C. WRIGHT, 
Oregon Agr. College, 
Corvallis, Ore. 
C. R. RHODES, 
University of Arkansas, 
Fayetteville, Ark. 
H. H. NORRIS, 
Franklin Hall, Cornell Uni- 
versity, 
Ithaca, N. Y. 
H. T. PLUMB, 
Electrical Eng. Dept. Pur- 
due University, 
Lafayette, Ind. 
H. P. BRODERSON, 
University of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kan. 
L, E. HURTZ, 
Lincoln Tel. Co., 
Lincoln, Neb. 
J. W. SHUSTER, 
University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, Wis. 
KIRK H. LOGAN, 
Kansas State Agr. College, 
Manhattan, Kan. 
F. D. NIMS, 
Mexican Light & Power Co. 


City of Mexico. 


S. R. INCH, 
Uniy. of Montana, 


Missoula, Mont. 


F. W. WALTER, 
National Bank of Commerce, 
Norfolk, Va. 
GUSTAV WITTIG, 
University of Maine, 
Orono, Maine. 
C. D. PRESTON, 
Penn. State College, 
State College, Pa. 
H: F. SANVILLE, 
597 Drexel Bldg., 
Philadelphia, Pa. 


R. A. L. SNYDER, 
1332 Fulton Building, 
Pittsburg, Pa, 
H. L. SMITH, 
Stanley-G. I. Elec. Mfg. Co. 
Pittsfield, Mass. 
M. K. AKERS, 
State College of Washington, 
Pullman, Wash. 
C. M. DUNCAN, 
Washington University, 
St. Louis, Mo. 
H. I. FINCH, 
5228 Kensington Ave., 
St. Louis, Mo. 
A. L. ABBOTT, 
165 E. 4th St., 
St. Paul, Minn, 
G. R. MURPHY, 
11 Hawthorne St., 
San Francisco, Cal. 
W.C. ANDREWS, 
General Electric Co., 
Schenectady, N. Y. 
W.S. WHEELER, - 
3120 East Union Street., 
Seattle, Wash. 
M. VESTAL, 
Leland Stanford, Jr., Uni- 
versity, 
Stanford University, Cal. 
RA; PORTER; 
Syracuse University, 
Syracuse, N, Y. 
GEO. E. KIRK, 
The Nicholas, 
Toledo, Ohio. 
W. G. CHACE, 
126 Confederation Life Bldg. 
Toronto, Ont. 
ELLERY B. PAINE, 
University of Illinois, 
Urbana, III. 
PHILANDER BETTS, 
Metropolitan Bank Bldg. 
Washington, D. C, 
S. W. FARNSWORTH, 
Worcester Poly. Inst. 
Worcester, Mass. 


Local Honorary Secretaries. 


JAMES S. FITZMAURICE, 


210 George St., Sydney, N. 5S. W. 


H. F. PARSHALL, 


Salisbury House, London Wall E. C., London. 


ROBERT B. OWENS, 


CLARE F. BEAMES, 


McGill University, Montreal, P. Q. 


WILLIAM B. HALE, 


for Porto Rico and West Indies, 


San Juan, P. R. 


W. G. T. GOODMAN, 
Adelaide, South Australia. 


ROBERT J. SCOTT, 


1a Independencia No. 6, City of Mexico. 


Christ Church, New Zealand. 


CONTENTS. 


Frontispiece—Portrait of Henry Gordon Stott, President of the 
TTS BIGUEEy Suc eral wa 6. oe Scho ok laden fe Oy oa Ray oterroh eaten 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, JANUARY 10, 1908. 


A Single-Phase Railway Motor—By E. F. Alexanderson. (Jllus- 
rated \rncarec uh woes & «che, Oa a eee Pace lehsl ae ees 
pase by L. B. Stillwell, B. G. Lamme, W. B. Potter, 

O. S. Lyford, Jr., W. I. Slichter, S. M. Kintner, Chas. P. Stein- 
metz, W. S. Murray, E. F. Alexanderson, Elmer A. Sperry. . 
The New Haven System of Single-Phase Distribution with Special 
Reference to Sectionalization—By W. S. Murray (Jllustrated.) . 
Discussion by W. S. Murray, L. B. Stillwell, W. B. Potter, 

Ov Swlaydoud J tiasscatdeia tema skoiys brs aos mete meee are chen yee 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, JANUARY 24, 1908. 


The Best Engineering Education—By Chas. F. Scott. (dIlustrated.) 
Electrical Engineering Education—By Chas. P. Steinmetz........ 
Discussion by Chas. F. Scott, Chas. P. Steinmetz, L. A. 
Osborne, H. E. Clifford, F. B. Crocker, H. W. Buck, W. S. 
Franklin, L. B. Stillwell, Albert F. Ganz, J.G. White, W.E.S. 
Temple, L. A. Ferguson, Samuel Sheldon, P. H. Thomas, 

W. L. Robb, C. O. Mailloux, Philip Torchio, H. G. Stott, 

A. E. Kennelly, H. B. Coho, A. S. McAllister, O. J. Ferguson, 
HW Blake: Dugald. Jacksoinse. chon aus ees Meee 


MEETING AT PHILADELPHIA, FEBRUARY 10, 1908. 


The Single-Phase Commutator-Type Motor—By B. G. Lamme. 
(Tidbits ated.) . Sak siiikoen ote thestle «sto goths Te eee eee 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, FEBRUARY 14, 1908. 


The Non-Synchronous Generator in Central Station and Other 
Work—By W. L. Waters. (Illustrated.)................0.- 
Some Developments in Synchronous Converters—By Charles W. 
Stone..~. (Lllgstrated.) 2.2 im sass, ate cetitiobecste cane heen oe 
Some Features of Railway Converter Design and Operation—By 
Jie, Woodbridge: "UUitsstrateds). meee ace seen ee 
Discussion by Chas. F. Scott, Paul M. Lincoln, F. G. Clark, 

Chas. P. Steinmetz, Comfort A. Reece R. Bibbins, J. B. 
Taylor, W. L. Waters, J. E. Woodbridge, Charles W. Stone... 


vil 


86 


137 


vii 


MEETING AT TORONTO, FEBRUARY 20, 1908. 
Alternating-Current Feeder Regulators—By W. S. Moody. ~(II- 


lustrated.) 
Discussion by R. G. Black, J. Kynoch, R. S. Kelsch 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, MARCH 13, 1908. 


Notes on Electric Haulage of Canal Boats—By Lewis B. Stillwell 
277 


andpline ot. GlaimPutnam 9 WUustrated-\2.... 5-6. 065... er: 
Discussion by Richard Lamb, Chas. P. Steinmetz, L. B. 
317 


Stillwell 


MEETING AT PITTSBURGH, APRIL 1, 1908. 


Characteristics of Motors for Large Shears—By Brent Wiley. 
CLUDE CL CON) Ree a ee MN RNS, Oe is nn | WU) oe ee an 321 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, APRIL 10, 1908. 


The Engineer’s Activity in Public Affairs—Public Utility Com- 
F 335 


missions and Franchise Valuations—-By Henry Floy......... 
Discussion by Geo. S. Coleman, Chas. F. Lacombe, H. M. 
Brinckerhoff, L. A. Ferguson, H. L. Doherty, W. W. Freeman, 
354 


Henry Floy 


MEETING AT PITTSBURGH, MAY 6, 1908. 


Calculation of the Starting Torque of Single-Phase Induction 
Motors with Phase-Splitting Devices—By I. E. Hanssen. p 
373 


(HUTS AGHGII Vian, ®G0- elon at Cn ath FOS ORL ALE TEE ROO CRRA eT Te 


CONFERENCE ON THE CONSERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES, 
WHITE HOUSE, WASHINGTON, D. C., MAY 13-15, 1908. 

Conservation of Power Resources—By H. St. Clair Putnam. 

UPD SEROTEC oeeskteb aA. nome ge ae ee ee See 317 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, MAY 19, 1908. 
on the 


Comparative Tests of Lightning Protection Devices 
Taylor’s Falls Transmission System—By J. F. Vaughan. : 
39 


(UOT TO IE Nexo sca tu Oh On Ont, Ee RE A a ESP RO a coe 
Studies in Lightning Performance, Season 1907—By N. J. Neall 
ONPI STOEL) Sm OD IO ee BO eeag elena cn ara 421 
Discussion by H. W. Buck, P. M. Lincoln, J. F. Vaughan, 
P. H. Thomas, V. E. Goodwin, E. E. F. Creighton, H. G. Stott, 
CHIDO MOOV nen itn mares 655 ia eet ee 449 


viii 


MEETING AT ATLANTIC CITY, JUNE 29-JULY 2, 1908. 


The Evolution of Engineering. (President's Address)—By Henry 
Gordon’ Stott 520 al Uae. © oe ale lee gen Sey Sh tered sea 
Discussion by Chas. F. Scott..... 2.2. -<---e-sscceeeseeses 
Electricity as Viewed by the Insurance Engineer; Should the 
A. I. Ex E. Interest Itself in Fire Protection?—By C. M. God- 
Gard osc See Slane were rsa ed stl aie ele ieee 
Discussion by. Chas,. P.. Steinmetz. 2-22 - es nearer er 
Water-Power Development in the National Forests. A Suggested 
Government Policy—By Frank G. Baum.................. 
Discussion by J. H: Finney, E. R. Taylor, P.. P. Wells, 

A.H. Babcock, H.G. Stott, Chas. P. Steinmetz, Wm. McClellan, 

ees OC. He Porter,” J. A. eBrirttom yoo cet terete aie 
A Study of Multioffice Automatic Switchboard Telephone Systems— 
By W. Lee Campbell. (Jllustrated.)................-.;..- 
Discussion by A. B. Smith, John Wicks, E. A. Mellinger, 
Morgan Brooks, L. E. Hurtz, Samuel G. McMeen, W. Lee 
Campbell isc fe ee eae ee epi ce act a ee 
Wireless Telephony—By R. A. Fessenden. (Jllustrated.)....... 
The Measurement of Rotary Speeds of Dynamo Machines by 
the Stroboscopic Fork—By A. E. Kennelly and S. E. Whiting. 
(Tilastrated.) 3.5.65 50 RA SO ee eee ee 
Discussion by J. B. Taylor, C. A. Perkins, C. H. Sharp, 

A; Es Kennelly. sins ays Peer orn dae Sea 
Notes on the Electric Heating Plant of the Biltmore Estate—By 
Charles*E.) Waddell>= (illustrated) cies 1 etree eee 
Discussion by P. H. Thomas, E. A. Sperry, C. E. Waddell, 


Some Engineering Features of the Southern Power Company’s 
System—By J. W. Fraser. (Uustrated.).. 00.5 ...5-0. an 
Discussion by J. H. Finney, W. S. Lee, D. B. Rushmore, 

P.M. Lincoln, Chas. P. Steinmetz, P. H. Thomas, J. W. Fraser. 


A paper presented at the 224th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Lugineers, 
New York, January 10, 1908. 


Copyright, 1908, by A. I. E. E. 


A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR. 


BY E. F. ALEXANDERSON, 


The various single-phase railway motors which have been 
developed during the past few years have been styled in general 
as either repulsion or as series motors. 

The characteristics of the compensated series motor are 
well known; they comprise an armature, an exciting winding, 
and a compensating winding, usually all connected in series. 
One of the principle objections to this type of motor is the genera- 
tion of an electromotive force in the coils of the armature which 
are short-circuited by brushes at the instant of commutation, 
due to the alternating character of the field. On this account 
this motor is limited to use on low terminal voltages. 

The repulsion motor (invented by Elihu Thomson) has a short- 
circuited armature and a rotating flux. At speeds near synchron- 
ism the electromotive force of alternation in the short-circuited 
coils is counterbalanced by an electromotive force of rotation. 
The energy is introduced into the stationary winding and the © 
motor can be wound for any desired voltage. 

The most prominent types of single-phase railway motors 
which have found commercial application are: 

1. The compensated repulsion motor (Latour-Winter-Eich- 
berg). This motor has a short-circuited armature and an extra 
set of brushes for producing compensation, with a view to ob- 
taining a higher power-factor. 

2. The compensated series motor (Eickmeyer-Stanley-Lamme). 

3. The compensated series motor with shunt-excited com- 
mutating poles (Milch-Richter). In this motor, a commutating 
field is produced locally by coils in the stator. 

The motor to be discussed in this paper is neither a series 


1 


2 ALEXANDERSON : SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS [Jan. 10 


nor a repulsion motor in the generally accepted sense, but em- 
bodies the best features of both. For lack of a better name 
it may be called a ‘series repulsion motor’. The windings 
resemble those of a series motor, and the armature and stator 
are permanently connected in series. A general diagram of 
the motor is shown in Fig. 1. The terminal voltage of the series 
repulsion motor can be selected with greater liberty than ir 
a series motor, but not so arbitrarily as in the case of a repulsion 
motor. 


WWW yz Transformer 


Fiz / 

Its advantages over the straight compensated series motor are 
very marked. The commutation is so radically improved that 
resistance leads are unnecessary and it is feasible to build the 
motors in larger capacities. 

In its performance it resembles the series motors with commu- 
tating poles, but offers several distinct advantages over the same. 
Instead of producing a commutating flux locally by coils on the 
stator, the conductors in the armature are located in such places 
where the desired flux will naturally exist. This arrangement 
simplifies the stator winding considerably. The compensating 


1908] ALEXANDERSON ; SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS 3 


winding of the series motor is replaced by an inducing winding 
with twice as many turns, and the energy is introduced 
either in the stator alone or in the stator and rotor together. 
By this arrangement, as will be explained later, the starting 
torque is doubled for the same commutation and the same 
supply of current. 

In the compensated repulsion motor the commutating field 
becomes too strong as soon as the speed appreciably exceeds 
synchronism, unless special arrangements are made to suppress 
this field locally. The motor under consideration is not limited 
by the synchronous speed, as the repulsion motor feature is 
reduced at the high speeds, and its action follows more closely 
the performance of a series motor; the number of poles can there- 
fore be selected with the same liberty asin a series motor. This 
is of great importance for the motor characteristics, particularly 
in regard to weight and starting torque. Furthermore, no extra 
set of brushes, nor any series transformer, is required, which makes 
the motor equally well adapted for direct and alternating current. 
These being the most important general characteristics of the 
motor, there are a number of features which are of interest, 
particularly to the designer. Before entering into these de- 
tails it will be necessary to give the general theory of the repulsion 
motor, together with the general theory of commutation. 

The pure repulsion motor has a rotating field, and it appears 
plausible that commutation may be good in a rotating field, 
provided the armature rotates at approximately the same 
speed as the field. However, a rotating field is not in itself a 
guarantee of good commutation. 

When the field becomesellipitical in shape, it is difficult to grasp 
the phenomena of commutation unless the field is resolved into 
its components and expressed as functions of time and space. If 
this is done, the following field components influence the 
commutation, as illustrated in Fig. 2. 

A. The ‘main field ’, which is the torque-producing field, 
and corresponds to the field in a series motor. 

B. The cross-field magnetized by an exciting current flowing 
in the armature, and serving to transfer the energy from rotor 
to stator. This field is in quadrature with the main field in time 
as well as space. 

C. Another cross-field magnetized by the difference between 
the ampere-turns of the armature and the inducing winding. 
This field is in phase with the main field, 


4 ALEXANDERSON : SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS [Jan. 10 


D. The leakage flux around the commutated coils. 

The conditions for perfect commutation are as follows: 

1. The electromotive force of alternation of the main field 
should be neutralized by the electromotive force of rotation in 
the cross-field designated ‘‘ B ”’. 

2. The magnetomotive force of the stator should be larger 
than the armature reaction; the difference, which is the 


field designated ‘‘C’’, should be large enough to overcome the 
voltage due to the leakage flux. 
If these conditions are fulfilled, the commutation is identical 
with that of a direct-current motor with commutating poles. 
The first condition is found at synchronous speed in a repul- 
sion motor, and theoretically in a series motor at infinite speed, 


1908] ALEXANDERSON : SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS 5 


In a series repulsion motor it can be obtained at any speed by 
varying the proportion between series and repulsion motor 
action.* 

This, however, meets only one of the fundamental conditions 
necessary for good commutation; there are others which will 
affect commutation as much as will shifting the brushes of a 
direct-current motor from the right to the wrong side of the 
neutral. 

The type of motor which is generally referred to as a repulsion 


Near /7eld 


motor is that with a continuous stator and rotor winding, and the 
brushes shifted in the direction of rotation as in Fig. 3. 

If such a motor is used as a series motor with the stator and 
rotor connected in series, it is apparent from the diagram shown 
in Fig. 4 that that part of the windings which is included in the 
angle represented by the shift of the brushes constitutes the 
exciting coils, and the lines of force are distributed as shown on 
the diagram. The brushes are shifted in the direction of rotation 
and are located on the edge of the active field. It is well known 

* Diagrams have been shown by Milch & Latour with a voltage im- 
pressed on the armature circuit in order to meet this condition. 


6 ALEXANDERSON: SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS [Jan. 10 


in direct-current practice that the brushes of a motor ought to 
have a backward shift, if any, but never a forward shift: and it 
is therefore obvious, considering the direct-current features 
that this motor cannot commutate well. In the repulsion motor, 
the armature currents are induced by the transformer action, 
but the distribution of the currents is substantially the same 
as described above for the series motor. This difficulty has led 
to the design of an armature winding as shown on Fig. 5, by 
which the electromotive force due to the cutting of the active 
flux is eliminated. The magnetization is produced by a 


War? (-/e/7 


fig F. 


separate stator winding located symmetrically with respect to 
the brushes. This gives a distribution of the fields as shown 
in Fig. 5. The armature conductors under commutation 
are located on the edge of the field flux, so that both sides of 
the coil are under an equal flux of the same polarity. 

There is another way of looking at this phenomenon which 
leads to the same result: the winding of the repulsion motor 
can be separated into an exciting winding and an inducing 
winding, in this case the brushes are located in the neutral of 
the stator winding. The armature is the short-circuited second. 


i908] ALEXANDERSON: SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS 7 


ary of the inducing winding and must consequently have sub- 
stantially the same total number of ampere-turns. The two fields 
that are excited by the stator and rotor individually are shown 
in Fig. 6 (a). The rotor field is peaked and stator field is flat- 
topped, giving a resulting field as shown by the cross-section part 
of the diagram. Consequently, there is a resulting peaked field 
opposite to the brushes where the conductors under com- 
mutation are located. This field is excited by the armature and 
has all the detrimental effects of armature reaction. Fig. 6 (b) 
shows how this is overcome by a fractional pitch winding on the 


Nar 


armature. It also shows why only one definite winding pitch 
gives the correct result, whereas a greater or less ratio gives a 
field in the wrong direction. 

The correct combination in Fig. 6 (b) shows the rotor flux 
slightly lower than the stator flux, whereas if there were no leak- 
age the currents and corresponding fluxes would be equal, 
but actually, the primary is a little higher due to the leakage. 
The difference between these two fluxes acts as a commutating 
field; but, on the other hand, the higher the leakage, the higher 
will be the commutating flux needed to overcome the leakage. 


8 


ALEXANDERSON ;: SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS 


vr 


full P/tCch 


L1G. OA 


Correct P/tch 


fig. 6b 


700 Short Pitch 


fig. Oc 


i(Jan. 10 


1908] ALEXANDERSON : SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS 9 


If, however, the armature is short-circuited through a reactive 
coil. the resulting flux is increased without introducing leakage 
in the armature. Since the field of the motor is a reactive coil 
itself that must be excited, a convenient way of introducing re- 
actance into the motor armature is to use the motor field or a 
part thereof for this purpose. That it is beneficial for the 
commutation of a repulsion motor to introduce the field in the 
armature instead of the stator circuit was experimentally 
demonstrated long ago by E. W. Rice, Jr. The reason for 
the improvement as explained above, is that the reactance of 
the field changes the ratio between stator and rotor ampere-turns 
so as substantially to offset the wrong distribution of currents 
with the full-pitched winding. The fact of the reactive coil 


Lilectrormotive force Of AILErniatlo/y 
SSC-Ci CUE CT by LY US/e. 


Casita Seas 


el |e | Se 
cae ea a Se ee ee 
Sees 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 HOO 1200 1300 19.00 L500 4600 1700 800 
R.PM of 4-pole Motor 


kg. 7 


being the field winding is in this respect immaterial, and it has 
been proved that the field of a similar machine introduced in 
the same place gives the same result. 

The above discussion demonstrates how the two fundamental 
conditions for good commutation can be fulfilled in aseries repul- 
sion motor at any speed without the aid of commutating poles. 
Instead of creating a commutating flux artificially in a place 
where the commutated conductors happen to be, the conductors 
are located in a place where the correct flux will naturally exist. 
By controlling the value as well asthe phase of the different 
fluxes as described, perfect commutation can be obtained 
at any speed. : 

Fig. 7 gives a comparative diagram of the alternating voltages 
in the short-circuited coils of a series repulsion motor for 25 


10: ALEXANDERSON :: SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS fJan. 10 


cycles and for the same motor when used as a series motor for 
15 and 25 cycles. The improvement introduced by the frac- 
tional-pitch armature winding is a separate matter and is of the 
same character as the change from an ordinary direct-current 
machine to a commutating-pole machine. 


STARTING 


The starting of a single-phase motor is materially handicapped 
by the fact that the alternating nature of the main field sets up 
currents in the armature coils which are short-circuited by the 
brushes. This same difficulty is experienced in all known types 
of single-phase commutator motors. Although the principle 
involved is the same in the motor under consideration, the 
practical result gained by the arrangement employed is a starting 
torque twice as high as would be possible in a corresponding series 
motor for the same commutation andthesame supply of current. 

This double starting torque is obtained by winding the stator 
with twice as many turns as the armature. The motor starts 
as a repulsion motor with the armature short-circuited as shown 
in Fig. 8. The current as it enters the stator has only half the 
strength of that in the rotor, owing to the ratio of stator to 
rotor turns. The short-circuiting switch of the rotor carries 
only half as much current as the rotor itself. because the current 
in the short-circuited connection is only the difference between 
the stator and the rotor current. |The inducing winding, the 
field, and the armature are connected permanently in series; but 
with the connections shown, the field is in series with the stator 
circuit at starting and with the rotor circuit when running. In 
starting, the rotor carries twice as much current as when running, 
in order to give the same field strength—in this manner doubling 
the starting torque. The sparking at starting is quite insignifi- 
cant up to a certain value of the voltage short-circuited by a 
brush, but beyond this point the commutation rapidly becomes 
bad. This critical value is about the same as that which gives 
a reasonably good commutation in running. For a pure com- 
pensated series motor, therefore, the same remedy must be looked 
for in running as in starting conditions, and the natural solution 
is to design the motor fox a low voltage or to use resistance leads. 

In ordinary series motor equipments, the difficulty arises that 
a higher starting torque is usually required than the full-load 
running torque, and if the short-circuited voltage is permissible 
in running, it will get too high at starting. A starting torque of 


1908] ALEXANDERSON: SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS il 


twice full load (one-hour rating) torque is, however, usually more 
than enough, and therefore the short-circuited voltages can 


[TOMey eile) 


aooamp (es) 
- =GrOunT = = 
SLA LING PU UG 


fg 8 LG. F 


be kept below the critical point, while the torque is increased 
above normal. It is, however, not only the critical value of the 
voltage, but also the time that such a voltage is maintained 


le ALEXANDERSON : SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS (Jan. 10 


that determines what is permissible. In this respect any repul- 
sion motor has a great advantage, because the sparking disap- 
pears altogether as soon as the armature has reached an appreci- 
able speed. Furthermore, a voltage could be allowed in start- 
ing with double torque which would not be permissible with 
normal running torque, on account of the short time-element 
of the starting condition. 

The general principle which has been discussed for regulating 
the field in starting an alternating-current motor can be applied 
in different ways; it was first employed by Eichberg, who used 
a variable series transformer in the field circuit. Particular 
attention may, however, be called to the simplicity of the arrange- 
ment described here, where the same result is acccomplished 
through the inherent characteristics of the motor without the 
use of any additional apparatus. The same principle can be 
appplied to series motors by the use of a series transformer 
or some suitable controlling device, but it involves the disad- 
vantage of doubling the current which is to be supplied to the 
motor through the control system, whereas when starting as 
a repulsion motor, increased torque is gained by a local current 
superimposed on the main current by induction. 

Control. Inregard to the practical application of the system, it 
may be mentioned that several four-motor equipments for alter- 
nating and direct current have been in operation for some time. 
The alternating-current control equipment has a total of seven 
contactors and areversing switch. This gives four points on the 
controller which seems quite satisfactory for motor-car operation, 
though any number of steps can be added to take care of loco- 
motive operating conditions. 

The preferred method of control is the one shown in 
Figs. 8 and $. In starting, the armature is short-circuited 
and the full secondary voltage of the transformer is impressed 
upon the inducing and exciting windings. The current flowing 
through the stator continues through the armature, but due to 
the ratio of turns of inducing winding and armature winding, 
an additional current of equal strength to the stator current 
flows through the local circuit uf the armature and the short- 
circuited connection. In the running connection, part of the 
power is introduced in the stator and part in the rotor, and the 
field winding carries the same current as the armature; that is, 
twice the stator current, thus giving a relatively greater field 
strength than in the starting condition, just as would be pro- 
duced by a series-multiple connection of the field winding, 


1908] ALEXANDERSON : SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS 13 


Although the total potential impressed upon the stator and 

rotor is the same for starting and running, the result of changing 
the connection so as to transfer the energy input from the stator 
to the rotor has the effect of increasing the resulting voltage of 
the motor. This is due to the ratio of transfcrmation between 
stator and rotor. In this manner a higher speed is obtained 
by impressing a higher resulting voltage, and the same change 
of connections makes the motor adapted for a higher speed by 
changing the ratio of series and repulsion motor action. 
- Power-factor. The only motor that has an inherent claim 
on unity power-factor is the direct-current motor. In every 
alternating-current motor a certain amount of wattless volt- 
amperes is consumed in magnetizing the field, and in leakage, 
so that the maximum torque is limited to a lower value than 
with the direct-current motor. An alternating-current motor 
with inherently good power-factor is one with high overload 
capacity, and this must be due to a comparatively small pro- 
portion of volt-amperes being consumed for magnetization. 
There are, however, artificial methods of bringing the power- 
factor of the alternating-current motor up to unity. For ex- 
ample, an induction motor can be shunted by a condenser, and 
a commutator motor can be arranged so as to generate a certain 
amount of volt-amperes in order to supply its own magnetiza- 
tion. Any arrangement for this purpose does not improve the 
torque characteristics of the motor, any more than’a condenser 
improves the performance of the induction motor; it improves 
only the phase displacement of the supplied current. The effect 
on the system can be corrected equally well by other machines 
on the same system adjusted for leading current. 

The alternating-current series motor has a higher power-factor 
than the three-phase induction motor with the same magnetic 
structure, because the series motor generates a certain amount 
of volt-amperes. The power-factor of a series alternating-current 
motor can be increased to unity by displacing the phase of the 
field current; for instance, by shunting the field with a non-induc- 
tive resistance. In fact, the higher power-factor is due to inter- 
nal shunt currents, the core-loss as well as the short-circuit cur- 
rent in the brushes having the character of shunts on the field 
winding: Eliminating the core-loss as well as the short-circuit 
currents in the brushes would, therefore, evidently improve the 
motor itself, although it would lower the power-factor. 

The following is a short statement of the functions of the dif- 


14 ALEXANDERSON ; SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS | [Jan. 10 


ferent fluxes in a repulsion motor. The motor is understood 
to be designed, as described before, with a definite degree of 
fractional pitch and the brushes in the neutral position. 

-* Power-factor of the repulsion motor with field winding in stator 
circuit. In a repulsion motor, the current passing through the 
inducing winding produces a corresponding current in the arma- 
ture. By the rotation of the armeture in the main field, an 
electromotive force is generated in the armature, which causes 
a magnetizing current which is superimposed upon the main 
current, and it is this magnetizing current that causes the 
voltage to be transformed back to the primary. In other 
words, the current is transformed from the stator to the rotor 
and the electromotive force generated in the rotor is trans- 
formed back to the stator. One flux is needed to transform 
current and another flux to transform the voltage. These two 
fluxes are out of phase. The voltage flux is generated in the 
armature by rotation and does not consume any volt-amperes 
from the line. The main flux as well as the current flux and 
the leakage flux consume volt-amperes. 

Power-factor of the repulsion motor with field winding in arma- 
ture circuit. The theory of this motor is the same as above, 
except that it takes more flux to transform the current because 
the armature circuit includes the impedance of the field. Why 
this increased flux is good for the commutation has been shown 
above. The same magnetizing current for the voltage flux as 
described above flows through the armature, and in this case 
through the field also. This magnetizing current displaces the 
phase of the main field, and consequently the electromotive 
force of the machine. The displacement tends to lower the 
power-factor and the result is the same as if the volt-amperes 
of the voltage flux had been supplied from the line. Jn other 
words, the motor has the same inherent power-factor as a single- 
phase induction motor. 

A series repulsion motor as developed for railway service has 
only one-third to one-quarter repulsion motor action, this being 
the proportion that gives sparkless commutation from synchron- 
ous to double synchronous speed. The lowering of the power- 
factor due to magnetizing current is therefore very slight, and 
with the greater liberty in design that is gained in the series 
repulsion motor, the power-factor is practically the same as in 
a series motor. 


The analysis of the phase displacement also indicates how 


1908] _ALEXANDERSON: SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS 15 


the power-factor can be corrected by shifting back the phase 
of the field current. This can be done in the series repulsion 
motor as well as in the series motor by shunting the field by a re- 
sistance according to the suggestion of Mr. A.S. McAllister. It 
can also be done, as has been experimentally demonstrated, by a 
slight degree of separate excitation of the field derived from 
the main transformer or from the stator coils. However, any 
raising or lowering of the power-factor of phase displacement 
does not affect the tractive effort or heating of the motor; it 
only changes the voltage that has to be applied in order to over- 
come the inductive drop. As soon as any artificial method of © 
raising the power-factor involves any complication, for instance, 
another set of brushes on the commutator, it will probably 
prove preferable to improve the constants of the system by using 
synchronous machines wherever power is used for other purposes. 

Resistance leads. The use of resistance leads, which has been 
so much discussed, has been found to be unnecessary in motors 
of the type described. Certain motors which have been operated 
for a considerablé time as series motors, and then rewound so 
as to embody the features described in this paper, have shown 
an increased life of brushes and commutator up to the standard 
of good direct-current practice. The improvement in commu- 
tation was so great that it was possible at the same time to in- 
crease the thickness of the brush and the output of the motor. 

Selection of frequency. In regard to-choice of frequency, the 
series repulsion motor again gives greater liberty. Whereas 
the starting torque can be doubled on either 15 or 25 cycles, it 
may be mentioned that a series motor which was almost inopera- 
tive at a certain load at 25 cycles, after rewinding, as described, 
was tested as a series repulsion motor, and found to give excellent 
commutation at 40 cycles, at the same load. It can therefore 
be said in general that 25 cycles is entirely satisfactory for all 
geared motor work; it is preferable in that the combination 
of motor and transformer weighs less at 25 than at 15 cycles. 

A general discussion of the selection of frequency really falls 
outside the scope of this paper, as the motor referred to is 
equally well applicable to 15 or 25 cycles. It is, however, the 
impression of the author that the only argument that remains for 
15 cycles is the direct-connected motor for high-speed passenger 
locomotives. It. is, therefore, a question whether the policy of 
the railroads in regard to frequency should favor 15 cycles 
because of the requirements of the design of a particular type 


16 ALEXANDERSON : SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS [{Jan. 10 


of locomotive with a limited use, when the treight work as well 
as the multiple-unit motor trains can be handled more economic- 
ally at 25 cycles. 

Economy of material. The motor described can be built in 
larger capacities than the series motor. The principal reason 
for this is the inherently good commutation and increased start- 
ing torque which make resistance leads unnecessary, thereby 
eliminating the heat generated by the resistance leads, and also 
gaining space in the slots, which can be used for copper. Further- 
more, it is possible to increase the flux per pole without .mpairing 
the commutation. 

The fractional pitch winding which is used primarily for the 
sake of commutation is also advantageous from the point of view 
of economy of material. The saving extends not only to the end- 
connections, as is the case with the fractional-pitch induction 
motors, but also to the stator winding, inasmuch as only the 
active armature conductors, or only about 80% of the total, 
need to be compensated for; whereas with the full-pitch arma- 
ture, the entire winding must be compensated for. In neither 
case is it possible to utilize more than about 80% of the total 
pitch as effective pole arc, because of the space occupied by the 
field winding. This principle is applicable to any type of com< 
pensated machine of the Deri type for alternating or direct 
current, except when the commutating pole is used. 

The fact that the number of poles in the series-repulsion 
motor can be selected without regard to the synchronous speed 
is animportant consideration, The tractive effort of an alterna- 
ting-current motor referred to the periphery of the armature is 
directly proportional to the number of poles employed, provided 
that the same flux per pole is used and the same current density 
in amperes per inch of circumference. The allowable flux per 
pole depends upon the type of winding and thickness of brush, 
but the same limitations exist for all known types of motors. 
The formula for tractive effort given below is deduced from 
the fundamental formulas for commutator machines, but it is 
of special interest because it brings all motors to the same basis 
and shows the advantage of liberty in selecting the number of 
poles. 

The tractive effort in kilograms at armature periphery = 

flux 


1 
x . A Rae ES. 
amperes per cm. X Vay number of poles x 98 


1908) ALEXANDERSON: SINGLE-PUASE MOTORS 17 


The, o:.ly constant in this formula is the acceleration of gravity, 
9.8, in the metric system. 


Tractive effort in pounds at armature periphery = 


flux 
Sak 

This formula also indicates which method can be considered 
to obtain as high a starting torque as possible with a given 
number of poles. The starting torque depends only upon the 
flux per pole and the current-density. The permissible flux 
can be slightly increased by use of resistance leads. A consider- 
ably larger increase can, however, be obtained by raising the 
current density momentarily without changing the flux. This 
is the method that has been adopted in the motor described. 

-At first glance it may appear that this method would lead 
to an overheating of the winding. This, however, is not the case. 
In a motor of this type the /?R losses are of about the same 
magnitude as the losses due to the field and the rotation. The 
total losses of the motor are therefore not increased by the square 
of the current, but more nearly in proportion to the current. 
Furthermore, when an increased starting torque and increased 
acceleration are obtained by increased current, the duration 
of the excessive current will be so much shorter, with the result 
that a train can be brought up to a certain speed with only 
slightly higher heating if this is done at a higher rate of accelera- 
tion and with the use of an increased current. 

In summing up the preceding the particular advantage of 
the motor described may be claimed to be: 

1. Good commutation at all speeds without the use of resist- 
ance leads. 

2. Larger capacities possible than with the series motor. 

3. High tractive effort possible, due to the liberty of selecting 
the number of poles. 

4. Increased starting torque, possible because of the inherent 
ratio of winding turns, without supplying an increased current 
from the main transformer. 

5. Simplicity of construction. The stator is the same as in 
the series motor, in fact easier to construct due to the greater 
liberty of placing the field-winding in slots. The armature is 
constructed according to standard direct-current practice with 
the conductors soldered into the commutator bars. 

6. Equally well applicable to direct and alternating current 


ee 


amperes per inch X xX poles X 0.089 


is A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR {Jan. 10 


Discussion on “A StnGLE-PHaseE Rattway Motor.” New 
York, JANuaRy 10, 1908. 

L. B. Stillwell: The announcement of a new motor is always 
interesting. When its novel features are such as tend to ma- 
terial improvement of performance or reduction of cost, it is not 
only interesting but important. When to improvement of per- 
formance and reduction of cost is added the consideration that 
the new motor is of a type upon the success of which depends 
largely the solution of the most weighty problems that electrical 
engineers are called upon to solve, the publication of the results 
of the inventor’s work is an event in the annals of engineering. 

Mr. Alexanderson and his associates are to be congratulated 
upon the production of a single-phase alternating-current 
motor possessing apparently at least one feature of marked origi- 
nality and of much practical value—the elimination of the idle 
resistance in the armature winding is an important step. I 
have not been able to ascertain from the paper how much this 
step costs in other directions. The author states frankly that. 
the motor is a compromise, combining, as he believes, the good 
features of the series compensated motor with those of the re- 
pulsion motor. Whether the compromise is an advantageous 
one, whether the characteristics of the new motor, under the 
conditions imposed in practical service, are such as render it, on 
the whole, superior to its competitors, is the question at issue. 

The question of superiority is to be determined by com 
parison, not of one but of a number of factors. The strong point 
of the new motor appears to be its ability to commutate at high 
speed without sparking; at the moment of starting, however, 
the sparking apparently may be serious. Further light should 
be thrown upon this point. It would be interesting also to know 
what the power-factor is, both at starting and at speed. 

But more important than either of these is the ratio of output 
to weight, since in heavy railway traffic motors must be placed 
within certain defined limits of space; for other things being 
equal, the best motor is the one that, within such limits and 
within reasonable limits of temperature and commutation, is 
able to deliver the largest sustained output. 

In the paper entitled, ‘On the Substitution of the Electric 
Motor for the Steam Locomotive ”’, presented at the 214th 
meeting of the Institute by Mr. H.S. Putnam and myself, the 
question whether 25 cycles or a lower frequency; for example, 15 
cycles, should be adopted for heavy railway work was asked, and 
the opinion was expressed that ‘‘ a frequency of 15 cycles is pre- 
ferable and should be adopted.”’ The oral discussion was energetic, 
and in the written discussion with which it was closed Mr. 
Putnam and I incorporated the following statement of opinion 
and summary of the positions taken by a number of distinguished 
engineers who had participated in the discussion: 

The oral discussion which followed the presentation of the paper was 
conclusive, beyond our expectation, as regards frequency, So far as the 


1908} . DISCUSSION AT NEW VORK 19 


general practice of engineers who may adopt the single-phase alternating 
current :s concerned, we regard the matter as practically settled by the 
facts and opinions brought out by the discussion. The designing engi- 
neers of both the Westinghouse and General Electric Companies testified 
emphatically to the great increase in power of motors which can be 
realized by reducing the frequency, and while several speakers questioned 
the wisdom of now adopting a standard, no one came forward to argue 
that the higher frequency is preferable. 

Mr. Lamme, to whom, more than to any other man, we owe the single- 
phase motor, stated that at 15 cycles the output-of a given motor is from 
25% to 40% greater than at 25 cycles and that his company had verified 
this by actual test. 

Mr Storer testified that: ‘ You can get at least 30% greater output from 
motors with 15 cycles than with 25 cycles’. 

Mr. Slichter, the engineer of the General Electric Company, who has 
immediate charge of the work of designing single-phase motors, said: 
‘There seems to be a unanimous opinion that the output of the motor 
may be increased some 30% to 35% by a decrease in frequency from 25 
to 15 cycles.’ 

Mr. Potter, chief engineer of the Railway Department of the General 
Electric Company, after pointing out some of the difficulties in the way 
of the adoption of 15 cycles, said: ‘I do not think, however, that we can 
look for the ultimate development of the single-phase motor of 25 cycles’. 

eae ce 


The paper and the discussion have established the fact that the increase 
in cost of the power house equipment consequent upon the suggested re- 
duction in frequency is far more than offset by the reduction in cost of 
electric equipment of rolling stock consequent upon the adoption of 15 
cycles. 

During the discussion of Mr. Sprague’s paper presented on 
May 21, 1907, announcement was made of a new motor which it 
was claimed performed so well at 25 cycles that the argument in 
favor of 15 cycles for heavy railway work was materially weak- 
ened. The motor referred to was that which has been disclosed 
this evening by its inventor. 

In Mr. Alexanderson’s paper little is stated relatively to per- 
formance of the new motor at frequencies lower than 25 cycles 
per second beyond the statement in reference to its commuta- 
tion that it, ‘is equally well applicable to 15 or 25 cycles ”’, and 
that ‘‘it can, therefore, be stated in general that 25 cycles is 
entirely satisfactory for all geared motor work; it is preferable 
in that the combination of motor and transformer weighs less 
at 25 than at 15 cycles.” Regarding the statement that the 
commutation is equally good at 25 or 15 cycles, it is to be re- 
gretted that the author does not show in Fig. 7 the curve of the 
electromotive force of alternation short-circuited by brushes 
when the motor is operated at 15 cycles. It is obvious that 
commutation at 15 cycles will be improved, and there is no 
reason suggested why this improvement, expressed in percentage, 
should not be as great in the case of this motor as in that of the 
series compensated motor. In the second statement quoted, 
one of the principal advantages of the lower frequency is en- 
tirely ignored. The relative aggregate weight of motor and 
transformer is unquestionably important, particularly in multiple 
unit work; but much more important, at least in the field of 
heavy electric traction, is the power of the motor that can be 


20 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR [Jan. 10 


placed in a given space on the truck. The factor of cost is also 
against the 25-cycle motor. From the facts given, I believe that 
this new motor will gain as much in ratio of output to weight at 
a given speed by reduction of frequency from 25 to 15 cycles, 
as will the series compensated motor. 

It seems to be a fair generalization to say that alternating- 
current motors having speed characteristics resembling those of 
the direct-current series motor will gain approximately 30% 
in torque, and will also gain materially in sustained power by 
reducing the frequency from 25 to 15 cycles per second. I find 
nothing in Mr. Alexanderson’s paper to indicate that this motor 
is an exception to the general rule. If I have not understood it 
I shall be most happy to be corrected, as no one can question the 
weight of the arguments against the adoption of a new standard 
frequency, and such adoption can be justified only by the exist- 
ence of controlling considerations such as those to which I have 
referred. 

‘B. G. Lamme: This paper describes a certain type of single- 
phase commutating motor, and comparison is made with the 
series compensated type, generally to the apparent disad- 
vantage of the latter. It is intimated that this motor does what 
the series compensated motor cannot do. The theme of the 
paper appears to be that successful commutation of alternating 
currents has at last been obtained. Instead of accepting these 
conclusions, I am free to state that I do not see that this motor 
does, or can accomplish more than has already been accomplished 
successfully by a properly designed series compensating motor. 
Further, I claim that the series compensated type, as already 
built, is in certain features so far ahead of the type described in 
this paper, that it looks like exaggeration when a comparison is 
made in figures. In this paper, describing what is claimed to be 
a new and superior type of motor, no characteristic curves or 
data are given, and consequently no quantitative comparison 
can be made with other designs. 

Let us first consider the starting conditions and characteristics. 
The general scheme of starting is based on the use of a relatively 
weak field at the beginning, the field induction being increased, 
for the same torque, after sufficient speed has been attained to 
make the commutating poles effective. Theoretically, assuming 
no saturation of the magnetic circuit, this increase in induction 
could be approximately 41 per cent, but practically it would be 
but 20 to 30 per cent., the material in the machine being worked 
economically. The object of this relatively weaker field at start 
is to lower the voltage in the coils short-circuited by the brushes. 
Referring to commutating motors in general, the author says: 

The sparking at Start is quite insignificant, up to a certain value of 


the voltage short-circuited by the brush, but beyond this point the 
commutation rapidly becomes worse. 


The author admits that it is necessary either to keep below 
this critical voltage or to use preventive leads. This is the parting 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 21 


of the ways. It is either necessary to limit the design of the 
motor to such proportions that the induction at start can be 
kept down to such a low value that the short-circuit voltage is 
below the critical point, or, t» take a broader course, to use 
preventive devices and thus raise the critical point and increase 
the output andimprove the performance. Apparently theauthor 
does not believe that preventive leads, or resistance leads as he 
calls them, permit sutticient increase in the short-circuit voltage 
to represent any great gain in the operation. I disagree with 
him here, and will give some figures which I think will bear out 
my point of view. 1 am going to compare this arrangement 
with the series compensated type by assuming both to be applied 
to a motor corresponding to the present New Haven locomotive 
motors, which have a normal rating o/ 250 h.p. at 220 rev. per 
min. at 25 cycles. 

This size of motor is selected for comparison principally be- 
cause I have more data of various combinations of windings of 
armature and field than on any other large motor. In bringing 
through the first New Haven motors numercus arrangements 
were tested, such as fields with under- and over-compensation, 
commutating poles, etc., and armatures wound with and also 
without preventive leads. The combination giving the best 
all-round results is that used on the New Haven equipments. 

These New Haven motors are worked at the time of starting 
at a high induction per pole, and in consequence at a high short- 
circuit voltage. Therefore, as this is a practical case it is fair to 
use it in making the comparison. But before making the direct 
comparison I shall digress slightly to take up the subject of cur- 
rents flowing in the armature windings of single-phase commutator 
motors. Two currents should be considered: first, the working 
current which is fed into the brush and which passes into the 
commutator bars, through the connections, or leads, into 
the main armature winding; and secondly, a local or short- 
circuit current which passes from the short-circuited coil out 
through the lead or connection to one commutator bar, then 
through the brush to the adjacent bar and back through the 
lead to the coil. This local current is dependent upon the voltage 
generated in the short-circuited coil and upon the impedance in 
the closed circuit. If this local current could be limited to values 
approximately the same as the working current in the coils, 
then it could be taken care of very readily by the ordinary re- 
sistance of the brush, brush contact, etc.; but unfortunately a 
short-circuit voltage low enough to give this condition would give 
absurd proportions in the motor. In order to obtain a reason- 
able capacity from these single-phase motors, it is necessary to 
work at an induction giving a short-circuit voltage so high that 
this local current would usually be many times greater than the 
normal working current in the coils. It is for the purpose of 
reducing this short-circuit current to a more moderate value 
that preventive leads are added. It has been assumed that the 


99 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR [Jan. 10 
addition of these leads means an increase in loss. However, as 
the purpose of the leads is actually to reduce the excessive local 
current, the result is a very considerable decrease in loss by the 
use of these leads. The following figures will indicate wherein 
these leads are beneficial. 

Taking up again the comparison which I proposed to make, 
let us consider that, with either scheme of winding, the motor 
starts under double normal full load or one-hour torque. This 
condition occurs very frequently in the operation of the New 
Haven equipments, and is even very considerably exceeded at 
times. Under this condition of double torque, the motor with 
the series compensated winding has an induction of approximately 
1.25 times normal and a working current in the armature and 
field of approximately 1.6 times normal or one-hour current. 
The preventive leads are so proportioned that the local or shoit- 
circuit current at this overload torque is, roughly, about 1.25 
times the normal working current in the armature conductors. 
Next, applying the scheme described in Mr. Alexanderson’s paper 
in order to get twice full-load torque, the ficld would have normal 
full-load induction, and the armature would have double normal 
current, compared with a field of 1.25 and an armature current 
of 1.6 in the compensated series motor with preventive leads. 
This double currant in the armature with normal field strength 
would not look so bad if it were possible actually to operate 
satisfactorily under this condition without preventive leads. 
But with the high normal induction per pole on the New Haven 
motors, the tests show that it is utterly impracticable to start 
with normal induction in the field without preventive leads in 
the armature, for the short-circuit or local current is excessive 
and causes vicious and destructive sparking. Our data indi- 
cate that, without preventive leads, and using brushes of 
medium low resistance, such as are used in ordinary generators 
and motors, this New Haven motor will give a short-circuit of 
about seven times normal working current in the coils with nor- 
mal full-load induction in the field. This condition is prohibitive 
and is far beyond the critical poinc mentioned before. Even 
reducing this induction to 70 per cent. of its normal value, the 
short-circuit current is still about five times normal current, 
which I consider to be too high. However, let us assume this 
value. The field strength at double torque would, therefore, 
become 0.7 instead of normal, and the armature current for the 
double torque would have to be increased to 2.86 times normal 
instead of double. The current with this arrangement would 
then be as follows: 

Short-circuit approximately 5 times norrnal. 

Working current 2.86 times normal. 

These should be compared with the compensated series arrange- 
ment in which these values are: 

Short-circuit 1.25 times normal. 

‘Working current 1.6 times normal. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 23 


The total current required by the brushes and commutator 
in the compensated series motor would therefore be approxi- 
mately one-third that required if the scheme described in this 
paper were used. Let us carry this analysis a little further. 
Assuming that we could start satisfactorily with the 0.7 normal 
induction indicated above, then when speed is attained a 40 
per cent. stronger field could only be obtained provided there 
were no saturation in the magnetic circuit. But taking satura- 
tion into account, the increased induction would hardly be 30%. 
It is evident, therefore, that in order to accommodate the start- 
ing conditions, the normal induction must be sacrificed some- 
what; and with the highest permissible field at start the normal 
induction would be considerably lower than if preventive leads 
were used. Another interesting point to be noted in these 
figures is the comparison of relative inductions at start with the 
two arrangements. It may be seen that the motor with pre- 
ventive leads shows 1.25 times normal induction, while the 
method proposed in this paper shows 0.7 normal. The gain in 
induction by the use of preventive leads in this case is approxi- 
mately 75%, and even with this increase in induction I am confi- 
dent that this motor would make the better showing as regards 
sparking and burning at the commutator and brushes during 
starting, due to the greatly reduced local currents. The above 
figures also indicate clearly the disadvantage of trying to im- 
prove this condition by the use of high-resistance brushes. Nec- 
essarily the life of such brushes would as indicated be considera- 
bly shortened by the excessive currents. 

This method of considering the currents flowing in the arma- 
ture shows very clearly why 15 cycles is more advantageous 
than 25 cycles in the alternating-current commutating motor. 
As the short-circuit voltage is a direct function of the frequency, 
as well as of the induction, it is evident that with the same 
limiting short-circuit voltage, the induction could be increased 
in the ratio of 25 to 15, or 66%. It is evident, therefore, that 
the limit of induction at start is thus raised enormously. In 
practice, however, unless the motor is worked at extremely low 
saturation, the full gain of 66% can not be obtained either at start 
or at speed; for in order to obtain the greatest economy in weight 
and dimensions it would be natural to work the material at as 
high saturation as permissible, and in practice there would be 
only about 30% gain. As we could work 66% higher with the 
same short-circuit voltage, this increase of only 30% means that 
the short-circuit voltage is thus less than 80% that of the 25- 
cycle motor of corresponding design. There is thus about 30% 
greater output due to the higher induction, and at the same time 
this is obtained with a lower short-circuit voltage and therefore 
with more favorable starting conditions. 

I have expanded on this starting condition, for experience with 
large motors shows that it is a most difficult one to meet in loco- 
motive work. Also, tests indicate that the local or short-circuit 


24 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR [Jan. 10 


current is a maximum at start, being close to the theoretical 
value, but falls off rapidly as the machine speeds up. 

Mr. Alexanderson intimates that even if the losses are exces- 
sive in the armature winding at start, yet the quick starting and 
acceleration will greatly reduce the danger from this source. 
This may be true of small equipments where light torques are 
required, and quick acceleration always possible; for heavy work, 
however, there are many occasions where it is necessary to start 
very slowly and run slowly for a considerable time. I shall 
cite some of the tests made with the locomotive equipped with 
two 500-h.p. motors and exhibited at Atlantic City at the Street 
Railway Convention last October. This machine was given 
some very severe tests last summer at East Pittsburg, in the 
presence of prominent railroad engineers. In some of these 
tests the locomotive was operated for five minutes at speeds of 
from two to three miles per hour, and this while exerting more 
than double torque. This represents less than one-tenth the 
normal or rated speed of the motor. The motor was also held 
at standstill for considerable periods, developing excessive torques 
in attempting to start trains with the brakes set. Under this 
condition a motor without preventive leads would, unquestion- 
ably, have been ruined. This condition of the motors at stand- 
still, with a heavy current flowing, is particularly liable to be 
met with in freight service, especially if two or more locomotives 
are working independently with a very heavy train. It will be 
impracticable to start all the locomotives at the same instant, 
as they may be in different parts of the train; consequently, 
one locomotive may develop a high tractive effort at standstill 
for some little time before the other locomotives are thrown in. 
To meet such conditions in practice requires a motor that can 
be held at standstill for more than an instant when developing 
heavy torque. It has been claimed by some engineers that 
under this condition the preventive leads, or resistance leads as 
they are called, must necessarily burn out, because they have a 
large loss in them at this time. It is under this very condition 
that the motor with the preventive leads shows to great ad- 
vantage over the one with excessive short-circuit currents, and 
without such leads. As mentioned above, this explains why 
the latter type of motor is liable to be injured during a failure 
to start; it will not do simply to say that on account of rapid start 
and quick acceleration the motor will not be injured. In freight 
service, the opposite condition of starting must be handled with 
certainty. 

It may be said that Mr. Alexanderson’s motor is a true com- 
mutating-pole type of machine, but instead of using a separate 
pole placed in the interpolar gap the two edges of the main pole . 
are used as an interpole. This may be illustrated by the follow- 
ing diagrams. 

In Fig. 1 is shown the ordinary arrangement of winding with 
an interpole, the winding being the full pitch, In Fig. 2 the 


bo 
Ov 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 


interpole is shown at one side. In Fig. 3 the pitch of the coils 
is shortened and the interpole is widened a corresponding amount 
so that this pole still covers the armature coils. The pitch is 
narrowed until the two sides of the coil lie under the two edges of 
the main pole. The width of the interpole is, therefore. such that 
it would overlap the main poles, if superimposed. It is evident 
that the centre of this interpole is useless and could be cut away 
as shown in Fig. 4. As this pole overlaps the main poles in 
position, it is evident that the edges of the main poles themselves 
could be used as interpoles if the winding surrounding the inter- 
poles is properly placed in the main poles so as to surround these 
two edges. This is just what the compensating winding does. 
The effect, therefore, is the same as if interpoles were used, for 
part of the main pole is converted into an interpole, as shown 
in Fig. 5. However, since it is evident that part of the main 
pole is converted into an interpole, it is also evident that part of 


FIGI 


FiGE 


the main pole, used as an interpole, represents that much loss 
in the effectiveness of the main pole. In other words, the 
armature coil does not surround all the induction from the 
main poles, but only part of it, and in consequence of this re- 
duced effective induction the counter electromotive force of 
the machine is reduced. Another way of putting it is that the 
effect is the same as reducing the number of armature turns. In 
order to bring the effective induction of the main poles up to 
the required value, more exciting ampere-turns are required, 
This means that the power-factor of the machine is lowered 
somewhat by this arrangement. 

In these single-phase motors the object is to get the polar area 
as large as possible, so that with a given total induction per pole 
the excitation, or exciting ampere-turns, may be as low as pos- 
sible. This insures a high power-factor. In Mr. Alexanderson’s 
motor this condition seems to be departed from considerably. 
In the Siemens-Schuckert motor the com:mutating pole is placed 


96 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR Jan. 16 


in the interpolar gap and excited in shunt with the main circuit: 
This arrangement gives the benefit of the full pitch winding, and 
the effective polar area is relatively high, possibly 15% higher than 
in the motor described in this paper. In the motor designed 
by me the polaf area is relatively a little less than in the Siemens- 
Schuckert, possibly from 3 to 5 per cent. 

In reference to frequency, the author says broadly, but without 
argument, that there is little or no field for the 15-cycle motor. 
The only basis for this statement is apparently that good com- 
mutation is now possible at 25 cycles. In the discussion of the 
paper by Messrs. Stillwell and Putnam last January, it was not 


FIGY 


the question of commutation which was advanced as the reason 
for the adoption of 15 cycles, for 1t was stated plainly that 15- 
cycle motors could be made to commutate well. ‘The greatly 
increased ratio of output to dimensions was given as the principal 
reason for the adoption of the lower frequency. I see abso- 
lutely nothing in this paper to change that conclusion. The 
motor described this evening, if properly designed, should show 
just as much improvement at 15 cycles as the series compensated 
motor; for, as explained before, the use of a lower frequency 
will allow about 30 per cent. increased induction. In fact, this 
motor, being worked at a relatively lower induction at start than 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 20 


the series compensated type, and therefore at less saturations 
should show a relatively greater per cent. gain at 15 cycles as 
regards starting, and when at speed should also show practi- 
cally the same per cent. gain as the compensated type. Ofcourse 
this is not on the basis of simply taking a given motor built for 
25 cycles and operating it on 15 cycles, which will show a small 
gain. But the excitation, or exciting ampere-turns, must be 
increased, and this can be done at the lower frequency without 
reducing the power-factor; for the inductive volts across the 
field winding are a function of the frequency as well as of the 
induction, and thus any reduction in frequency will permit an 
increase in the induction of the motor. A 30 per cent. increase 
in the induction of such a motor means a 30 per cent. increase 
in the counter electromotive force of the armature; and with 
the same current flowing, the output and the torque are increased 
at least in proportion to the field strength. It is in this feature 
of increased induction that the principal gain with lower fre- 
quency is to be found. This increased induction is obtained 
with less short-circuit ng in the armature and also with less ex- 
citing voltage in proportion to the counter electromotive force, 
and consequently with higher power-factor. If it were possible 
to design a 25-cycle motor of large capacity and moderate speed, 
so that it could be worked at high saturation, then there would 
not be so much gain in weight and cost by the use of lower fre- 
quency, for extra material would have to be added to the mag- 
netic circuit when the induction is increased. But on the 
larger sizes of 25-cycle motors the iron cannot be worked to high 
saturations because it is not permissible to put in excitations 
sufficient to saturate the motor. In fact, it is in general diffi- 
cult, in such motors, to get in cnough excitation for the air-gap 
alone, unless the field volts are made undesirably high, thus 
lowering the power-factor. In consequence, on large, moderate- 
speed, single-phase, 25-cycle motors there is a strong tempta- 
tion unduly to reduce the air-gap in order to keep down the exci- 
tation and thus decrease the size of the motor. In the 15-cycle 
motor, on the contrary, a considerably larger air-gap can be used 
than on 25 cycles, due to the fact that there is much more mar- 
gin for excitation without reducing the powcr-factor below 
desirable limits. 

If the commutation at speed were the only limit in the 25- 
svcle motor, then it would be correct to say that with this limit 
raised sufficiently there would be no necessity for the lower 
frequency, but as the present limits in design of large 25-cycle 
motors lie in the excitation permissible with good power-factor, 
and in the short-circuit voltage at start, it does not seem to me 
that the problem is solved by simply applying a different method 
of obtaining commutation when running. The real limits 
which affect capacity still remain, and I do not see wherein the 
motor aescribed this evening changes the broad problem in any 
way. I believe that if Mr, Alexanderson continues his investiga- 


28 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR [Jan. 10 


tions, especially with large motors for heavy railway service, he 
will be forced to the same conclusions. 

_W. B. Potter: The single-phase motor described by Mr. 
Alexanderson possesses a number of novel features, but the 
essence of the improvement is the better inherent commutation. 
Because of better inherent commutation it is possible to modify 
the other features affecting the performance of the motors which 
have heretofore been subordinate to commutation, with the 
natural result of greater reliability, decreased maintenance, and 
greater capacity for a given amount of active material. 

It is very desirable that the motor equipment of a motor car 
should be able to develop sufficient torque to slip the driving 
wheels; for an electric locomotive this is particularly desirable. 

Mr. Lamme questions whether a single-phase series repulsion 
motor will have an output equal to that of a series motor. I 
call his attention to a recent test of a series repulsion motor 
having the same armature dimensions and number of poles as 
the series motor on the New Haven locomotives to which Mr. 
Lamme refers. I understand that this New Haven motor has a 
limiting tractive effort of about 5000 Ib. The series repulsion 
motor on the basis of the same diameter of driving wheels gives 
a tractive effort in starting of 7500 lb. and good commutation 
up to 75 miles per hour. 

An electric locomotive is, figuratively, a draft horse, and its 
value as such is proportional to the weight on the drivers. In 
whatever degree the draw-bar pull is limited by the motors, 
the value of the locomotive, as a tractive machine, is decreased 
to the same extent. In the handling of any service, sufficient 
draw-bar pull to start a train is absolutely essential, the horse- 
power rating for maintaining the schedule being subordinate 
and depending upon the degree of continuous service. As 
affecting reliability, the motors are liable to injury from over- 
load unless the load is limited by the slipping of the wheels 
rather than by the commutation or current capacity of the 
motors. 

With any probable design of motor car or locomotive, the 
geared series repulsion motor will be able to slip the wheels 
even if geared for maximum speeds as high as 75 miles per hour. 
In the light of present knowledge, the problem is somewhat 
more difficult with the gearless series repulsion motor. With 
respect to the torque of the gearless motor, the state of the art 
to-day is not unlike that associated with the geared motor 
about two years ago. 

In the many problems that arise in e.ectric traction, a liberal 
discount may well be allowed for improvement. For those 
concerned in development and design, progress in new and un- 
tried fields is a privilege and duty, but for those interested only 
in the earning capacity a conservative attitude will usually best 
insure economic results. I would not counsel undue caution, 
but even with the radical improvements which have been made 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 29 


in the single-phase motor, it does not yet follow that single-phase 
traction is properly applicable to all conditions. A knowledge 
of the art of compromise constitutes the basis of most of our 
work, but the equations to be considered are lacking in their 
most essential feature if they do not contain the dollar sign as 
applied to each particular problem. 

O. S. Lyford, Jr.: Many of us thought the repulsion motor 
dead, and we rather hoped it would stay dead, not that we had 
anything particular against that type of motor, but because we 
are beginning to get acquainted with the series single-phase 
motor which is serving us well. I should like to see one type 
perfected rather than two or more. If, however, the develop- 
ment of the motor which Mr. Alexanderson has described means 
a reduction in the cost of single-phase equipment, it will be 
welcome, as the price of such equipment is now certainly close 
to the prohibitive limit. 

W.I.Slichter: The motor described has so many new features 
in its make-up that it is rather perplexing to grasp the frinciple 
of its action as a whole. It may be of interest to discuss these 
features separately and from a slightly different point of view 
from that taken by Mr. Alexanderson. In explaining the 
motor it is necessary to consider separately, the conditions of 
starting and running, as certain features are introduced simply 
to assist in starting, and other features are employed only to 
function when running. 

Starting. In all single-phase commutator motors there is a 
definite value of the flux per pole above which it is inadvisable 
to operate, since the electromotive force of transformation in 
the short-circuited coil undergoing commutation becomes so 
great as to give unsatisfactory commutation. This limitation 
is particularly strict at starting, when the armature is at rest or 
moving very slowly. As the motor speeds up it would be possi- 
ble to use a higher flux value; first, because each coil is under 
the brush for a shorter period; secondly, because there are various 
means of counteracting the electromotive force of transforma- 
tion by devices dependent upon the speed of the armature. 

But in all series type motors the natural characteristics in- 
volve a decrease in current with increasing speed, and hence 
a decrease in flux. If, therefore, a motor is designed with a 
proper value of flux at starting, it will have too little flux at 
running; if with a proper value’ at running conditions, it will 
have too great a flux and bad commutation at starting. This 
limitation does not prevail in direct-current motors, since any 
value of flux may be used without harmful effect. 

In the motor under discussion the compensating or inducing 
winding and its inductive relation to the armature turns are 
made to act as a series transformer. By winding the com- 
pensating winding with twice the number of turns as are on the 
armature, there will be twice as much current in the rotor asin 
the stator when the rotor is short-circuited, and the same cur- 


30 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR [Jan. 10 


rent in both members when the rotor is open-circuited. This 
gives an approximation of the ideal conditions in a single-phase 
commutator motor—that of operating at all speeds with the 
strongest field compatible with good commutation. 

Running. Under running conditions we find in this motor 
three very important new features contributing to good opera- 
tion. 

1. The proper field strength at all speeds, as just mentioned. 

2. By means of a fractional pitch in the armature (Fig. 1), 
the coil undergoing commutation is placed in a position under 
the pole piece, where it is very strongly influenced by any 
magnetomotive forces in the compensating winding, so that 
the latter winding is able to act as a real commutating pole as 
well as a compensating winding. 

3. The compensating winding is made to carry two com- 
ponents of current—a series current and a shunt, or repulsion 
motor current. It may be likened to a commutating pole hav- 
ing two coils, one a series coil serving very effectively, due to 


PiGeal: 


the favorable position of the coil undergoing commutation 
(brought about by the fractional pitch), to produce the good 
effects on commutation that a commutating pole does in a 
direct-current motor; in other words, to correct for the harmful 
electromotive forces of self-induction and armaturereaction. 
This is accomplished by making the compensating winding 
stronger than the armature winding, thus the excess of com- 
pensating winding magnetomotive force sets up a local flux at 
ee corners or tips of the poles which becomes a commutating 
pole. 

The shunt coil, shunt component of current or repulsion motor 
current, corrects or reduces the electromotive force due to 
transformer action in the coil undergoing commutation by a 
happy combination of phase relations, as shown by the follow- 
ing vector diagram, (Fig. 2). 

E, is the line or terminal voltage of the motor. 

[, is the series-load current of the motor lagging behind E, 
a small amount, as in normal running conditions. 

gm and ¢, show the time-phase-position of the two fluxes, 


1968} ” DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 31 


motor and compensating, produced by J,. These have different 
space-positions. 

e shows the harmful electromagnetic force of transformation 
in the short-circuited coil, 90° behind gm, because dm» produces 
it by induction. 

A portion of E, is now impressed across the compensa ing 
winding in shunt, producing a flux 4, 90° behind E,. But the 
compensating winding is wound opposed, or 180°, to the arma- 
ture winding which throws this flux down to 4,. 

The armature coil moving in this flux has generated in it by 
rotation an electromotive force, e,, in phase with ¢, which is 
approximately opposed to e, combines with e to make the re- 
sultant e,, which is of very small magnitude and of such phase 


¢ Ne 


Fic. 2 


as to be subject to the corrective influence of the flux ¢, of the 
ordinary compensating winding. 

The final result is that the commutation troubles of the 
single-phase commutator motor are corrected in the logical 
way of removing the cause instead of the half-hearted way of 
reducing the effect, as is done with high-resistance leads. 

A certain number of wattless volt-amperes are consumed in 
producing this effect, but a considerable amount of energy is 
saved and removed from a place which is particularly sensitive, 
the commutator, and a very large saving is effected in main- 
tenance. 

One of the immediate results of the development of this motor 
is the fact that it makes the need of 15 cycles for single-phase 
railway work a great deal less important than with either the 


32 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR [Jan. 19 


plain repulsion motor or the plain series motor. As brought 
out in the discussion, of Messrs. Stillwell and Putnam’s paper, 
the greatly increased cost of generators and transformers at 
15 cycles is a considerable handicap to that frequency, and 
with the former types of motors a 15-cycle system showed a 
lesser cost only in very heavy work where a large number of 
heavy motors were required. With the new motor, a con- 
siderable portion of the field of the 15-cycle motor has been 
conquered, and although the new motor is slightly better at 
15 cycles than at 25 cycles, it will probably be found that there 
are very few cases where any 15-cycle motor and its transformer 
will weigh or cost as little as this type of motor and transformer 
at 25 cycles. 

In the control of this type of motor it will be noted that the 
sequence of steps is very simple, and that each contactor handles 
only one half the maximum current used, thus the switches 
or contactors will be reduced in size and number and the equip- 
ment made considerably lighter. Also, due to the fact that 
the terminal voltage of the motor is higher, there is a saving in 
the weight of the car compensator or autotransformer. 

Mr. Alexanderson’s scheme of using a fractional pitch wind- 
ing on the armature overcomes the principal objection that was 
found in the use of the repulsion motor in this country. The 
objection being that the simple repulsion motor does not operate 
satisfactorily on direct current, due to the fact that with a 
full-pitch winding commutation would take place in a field 
unfavorable to commutation, since the neutral space is neces- 
sarily restricted in this type of motor. 

To be successful in this country, any single-phase motor must 
be capable of operating over the existing direct-current systems. 
This gave the series compensated motor an advantage over the 
repulsion motor for interurban work, but with the motor under 
discussion to-night, this difficulty is removed. We have de- 
veloped a repulsion motor which operates perfectly satisfactorily 
on direct current. 

S. M. Kintner: I am disappointed because Mr. Alexanderson 
has not told us more about the behavior of the motors in actual 
service. The theory is nicely worked out, but I for one would 
be better satisfied with less theory and more matter of aquan- 
titative nature. For instance: 

1. What is its power-factor? 

2. How does it compare in weight with standard direct- 
current motors of equal torque? 

3. How does its commutator wear in service requiring fre- 
quent acceleration with large torque and corresponding heavy 
currents ? 

4. What character of brush is used, and what life in car- 
miles is obtained? 

5. How long can it stand locked with 150% full-load torque? 

6. How does it stand sustained overload torques of 150 per 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 33 


cent.—200 per cent. of the hour ratings, for periods of 3 or 4 
minutes, when operating at normal speed and also at very low 
speeds? 

The above conditions are the critical ones in the operation of 
single-phase motors, and it is upon their ability to stand such 
tests and service that their value should be based. Mr. Alexan- 
derson’s commutating-pole motor will probably give good 
commutation when running, but so will any well-designed series 
compensated motor with preventive leads. It is not the run- 
ning but the starting condition that is the troublesome one; 
it is then that motors with preventive leads show their 
greatest superiority over those without them. The proposed 
method of obtaining improved running commutation is of 
questionable value when it is obtained, as Mr. Lamme has pointed 
out, at the sacrifice of starting torque and power-factor or by 
increase of motor weight. 

The power-factors of a certain line of series compensated motor, 
with which I am familiar have the following values: 

Twenty-five cycle motors, varying in size from 75 to 250 h.p. 
at their hour ratings, power-factor = 85% to 90%. 

Fifteen cycle motors, varying from 75 to 500 h.p. power- 
factor = 88% to 94%. Some of these 15-cycle motors are 
simply 25-cycle motors adapted to the 15-cycle service. All 
of these values are taken from motors having reasonable speeds 
and good commercial air-gaps. 

Data on weights on those same motors show that in comparison 
with the standard line of direct-current motors on a basis of 
percentage weights for equal torques, the 25-cycle motors 
weigh 33 per cent. more, while the 15-cycle motors weigh 10 per 
cent. more. The weights in all these are total motor-weights, 
including gears and gear-cases. 

In checking over these values a noticeable matter was the 
limitations that the 25-cycle motors were reaching; for the larger 
size motors the percentage weights were increasing quite rapidly. 
This was not noticeable within the limits checked on the 15- 
cycle motors. This limit in the 25-cycle motor is caused largely 
by the increase in iron necessary to keep down the inductive 
element and consequently secure a reasonable power-factor. 

Recent calculations show that in a given space it is possible 
to get a 500-h.p. motor on 15 cycles, but the best that could be 
designed for equally good performance on 25 cycles was 360 h.p. 
From this it is evident that 39 per cent. greater output 1s possi- 
ble in the same space with 15 cycles. This indicates very clearly 
the need of 15 cycles for the heavier class of service. 

The motor described by Mr. Alexanderson is limited in pre- 
cisely the same manner as the series compensated type, and at 
smaller ratings. It will also be benefited, so far as output for a 
given weight is concerned, by the use of 15 cycles. 

In dismissing the question of 15 cycles, Mr. Alexanderson 
admits that for large gearless motors for high-speed service 


34 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR [Jan. 1¢ 


there is an exception. Why except this class of service? Is 
commutator speed the reason? 

A comparison of two 4-motor equipments made up of 75-h.p. 
motors at 25 cycles and the same motors adapted for 15 cycles 
giving 95 h.p., shows very clearly the gain in tractive effort and 
horse power possible with the 15-cycle motors. The total elec- 
trical apparatus per car was but 5 per cent. heavier with the 
15 cycles, but the gain in horse power was 26 per cent. Ona 
basis of total car-weights, the differences were 1.6 per cent increase 
in weight on 15 cycles and a gain of 26 per cent. in horse power. 

The commutator wear in service requiring frequent and rapid 
acceleration is a serious one. A commutator that will not 
take a gloss, will rapidly consume brushes and soon go to pieces. 
If the currents are heavy at starting, and the starting frequent, 
the commutator is apt to have copper drawn from bar to bar 
and thus short-circuit certain coils. To show the limitations 
of a motor of this character, a test should be conducted as 
follows: the motor should be mounted on a shaft driving large 
fly-wheels, the inertia of which corresponds to that of heavy 
cars accelerating from rest. Thecontrol should be arranged so 
that as the wheels are accelerated the proper sequence of 
switch operations and voltages is applied to the motor. 
When a predetermined speed is reached, the power is cut 
off and the motor allowed to coast for a fixed time, when 
brakes are applied and the wheels brought to rest. This 
same cycle is repeated automatically by a motor-driven 
control, the single-phase driving motor being thus subjected toa 
service more severe than any it is apt to meet in operation on 
acar, This is an excellent test of the motor’s ability to stand 
heavy currents while at rest, also while accelerating slowly, 
as it is connected rigidly to the shaft and gets the full force of 
the first rush of current. 

This test should be continued for a week or more. The 
current used should be much in excess of the motor’s ratings, 
and forced air will be necessary to keep down the temper- 
atures to safe limits. The test is not one of temperature, but 
one of commutation under abnormal service conditions. 

This test is also quite effective in determining carbon-brush 
characteristics. Within the last few days I have compiled some 
data gathered from a road operating approximately 100 motors 
of this kind, each of 100-h.p. capacity. This road reports the 
car-miles per brush as follows: 

October November December Average 

14,600 15,550 15,450 15,200 
The motors from which these data were taken are in very 
hard service, the cars averaging over 200 miles per day. On 
one run the car is compelled to make 583 miles per day, During 
October one car ran 10,740 miles; during November, 9,400 miles, 
Another road using s‘milar motors reports approximately 13,000 
car-miles per brush as the average for the last two months. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 35 


These motors have all been in operation over a year and have 
brushes of a medium grade, such as are used on direct-current 
motors and generators. 

The ability of motors with preventive leads to stand excessive 
overload torques when locked for periods of 10 or 15 seconds 
has been demonstrated repeatedly by testing them after being on 
cars or installed on locomotives. These tests have been made 
by applying power with the brakes locked, and at other times 
by attempting to pull trains upon which the brakes were not 
released. The requirements of overload are largely at starting; 
they are not so important when running. During the last year 
and a half I have followed closely the operation of about 600 of 
these motors; I do not recall a single case of trouble that could 
be traced to a preventive lead burning out. 

While many may look upon preventive leads as a luxury, in 
my opinion they supply the most economical design possible 
with single-phase motors in the present state of the art. I be- 
lieve that they will continue to be used until some one devises 
a motor that is not subject to the short-circuit action in starting, 
as well as in running. Mr. Alexanderson’s motor does not fulfil 
this requirement, and I see no reason why it could not be im- 
proved by adding preventive leads. 

Mr. Potter says that with the Alexanderson motor it is feasible 
with motors of the same dimensions to get 50 per cent. more 
tractive effort than that of the New Haven motors. So long as 
the torque of motors depends upon the number of conductors on 
the armature, the limits of which are determined by the size 
of commutator with reasonable bar-width; secondly, upon the 
induction per pole, which is admittedly lower than that in the 
New Haven motor; and, finally upon current—my opinion is 
that it cannot be done with reasonable currents for the possible 
size of commutator. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: It is true and has been well known 
since the early days of electrical engineering, that any direct- 
current motor can operate on alternating current if its mag- 
netic field is laminated so as to be responsive without excessive 
loss to rapid alternations of magnetism. But there were two 
great objections to this motor, both well recognized in the art 
before any extensive work was done; these objections were im- 
practicably low power-factor and hopelessly bad commuta- 
tion. I remember reading as far back as 1889 in Mr. Gisbert 
Kapp’s at that time classic booklet on alternating-current ma- 
chinery, the proof that the single-phase alternating-current 
motor can never be of any practical use, because its power-factor 
must be too low for practical use. The first problem that had 
to be solved in getting an operative motor was to raise the 
power-factor to practical values. This was undertaken and 
solved about eighteen years ago by Rudolf Eickemeyer, who 
gave us the compensating winding, which is now used in all single- 
phase alternating-current motors. He recognized that to give 


36 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR [Jan. 10 


a good power-factor, the single-phase commutator motor must 
have few field turns, many armature turns; that is, a weak 
field withastrongarmature. Tobe able to use these proportions, 
the armature reaction and self-induction must be neutralized 
by a compensating winding; a coil surrounding the armature 
as closely as possible and energized either by the main 
current in series and in opposite direction to the armature 
current, or closed upon itself and energized by its secondary 
induced current. Eickemeyer gave us both types of oper- 
ative alternating-current commutator motors, the conduc- 
tively compensated, and the inductively compensated. Thirteen 
years elapsed before the electrical industry caught up with 
Mr. Eickemeyer’s work, and the compensated series motor 
was applied to commercial service. 

Independent thereof, and starting even earlier, an apparently 
entirely different type of motor was experimented upon and 
designed by Elihu Thomson. This was the so-called repulsion 
motor. On converging lines these two motors have continued 
throughout the intervening period, until now in Mr. Alexander- 
son’s series repulsion motor they merge intoone. Mr. Alexander- 
son’s motor is not a compromise between the two types of 
motors, but a modification of the repulsion motor so as to give 
at all speeds the perfect commutation that the repulsion motor 
has only at synchronous speed; that is, perfect commutation at 
all speeds by producing the condition of synchronous commuta- 
tion at any desired speed. 

After Mr. Eickemeyer’s work was concluded, and the com- 
pensated series motor had arrived, there remained the problem 
of commutation, which has been the great problem of the 
alternating-current railway motor during the last few years, al- 
though frequently it has been more or less hidden under state- 
ments regarding size, weight, etc. Looking into the design of 
the compensated series motor, it will be found that there ‘s no 
other inherent reason why it should differ essentially in weight 
or size or capacity from the direct-current motor, if it wer not 
for the severe limitations in the design imposed by the problem 
of making the commutation sufficiently good not to be 
self-destructive in too short a time. The problem of getting 
reasonably fair commutation means that the alternating-current 
motor has to be designed with eight or twelve poles, where the 
direct-current motor would have four or six poles. It means 
that the alternating-current motor has to be supplied with a 
very large commutator to receive current at 150 or 200 volts, 
while the direct-current motor commutates much smaller cur- 
rents at 500 and 600 volts. It is as easy to insulate 600 volts 
alternating current as 600 volts direct current, and so nobody 
would choose such large low-pressure currents and bulky com- 
mutators if not forced to it by the problem of commutation. 
So weight and size must be sacrificed to get moderately reason- 
able commutation, Some advantage is gained by the intro- 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 37 


duction of high resistance or high inductance leads. It must be 
realized, however, that the high resistance or high inductance 
leads, suggest, in a measure, the old saying, ‘‘ Out of the frying 
pan into the fire.”’ Reducing the short-circuit current by inter- 
posing resistance or inductance results in a drop of potential 
across the resistance or inductance which appears at the edge 
of the brush when the brush leaves the commutator seg- 
ment. So sparking can not be entirely stopped by this means. 
The logical way to improve commutation is to remove the cause 
of sparking, the short-circuit current under the brush. 

Some years ago one of my assistants, Mr. Milch, investigated 
the short-circuit current under the brushes, and found that it could 
be eliminated by impressing a commutating field upon the 
motor at the commutation point, or in quadrature with the 
main field. By giving the compensating winding more ampere- 
turns than the armature, or by using a series commutating pole 
or an interpole arrangement that works successfully in the 
direct-current motor—the commutation of the single-phase 
alternating-current motor cannot be improved, because the 
alternating current has an intensity as well as a phase, and the 
magnetic flux of the inter-pole being in phase with the main 
flux and main current, is wrong in phase. A commutating 
flux is necessary; a flux that differs in phase from the 
main flux, and is approximately in quadrature therewith. The 
production of such a magnetic flux, or a true commutating 
flux varying with the speed in the proper manner and differing 
in phase from the main flux, is what makes this series repulsion 
motor commutate perfectly at all speeds. 

Another valuable featttre of Mr. Alexanderson’s work is the 
investigation of the distribution of the magnetic field. It is 
not sufficient merely to have the two quadrature components 
of the magnetic field of proper intensity and proper phase; what 
is essential in commutation is not the total quadrature field, 
but the field at the point where the brushes stand. This fact 
made it necessary to investigate the local distribution of the 
magnetic field over the armature circumference. The result of 
this work, then, eliminated the question of commutation from 
the alternating-current single-phase motor at all speeds. 

It is true that at standstill the short-circuit current is still 
there, and must always be there, except that it may be inter- 
changed against voltage by inserting resistance or inductance. 
It must not be overlooked, however, that the harmful effect of 
the short-circuit current is a function of the product of the cur- 
rent and the time during which the current exists; in this re- 
spect a motor in which the short-circuit current practically 
disappears at extremely low speeds has the advantage over a 
motor in which the short-circuit current retains the same relative 
proportion to the main current throughout all the speeds up to 
the highest. I believe this feature is the explanation of the 
great difference between Mr. Lamme’s theoretical conclusion 


38 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR [Jan. 10 


and Mr. Alexanderson’s practical experience on one and the 
same size of motor. 

It appears to me, therefore, that the second and last serious 
problem of the alternating-current motor which still remained 
after Eickemeyers work, the problem of commutation, has 
finally been solved by the work recorded in the paper before us. 
The alternating-current single-phase motor is in practically as 
good a shape as the direct-current motor, and I may perhaps 
say that with this work the second period in the development of 
the alternating-current railway motor, the period of youth, is 
concluded. 

W. S. Murray: It is better to eliminate the cause of, rather 
than remedy, a deleterious effect. Thus an arrangement which 
naturally produces a proper commutating flux without especially 
providing extra means for it (such as commutating poles) is 
certainly a most valuable point gained. 

Again, the elimination of resistance leads on account of the 
elimination of the cause requiring them is a welcome charac- 
teristic. We are all aware of the advantages, in high powered 
electric locomotives, of gearless construction; we are likewise 
aware, in this form of construction, of the high ratio of weight 
on drivers to tractive effort developed with alternating-current 
motor construction. In consequence of this unfortunate rela- 
tion, should the entire electric locomotive weight be on drivers, 
it is impossible to design the motor equipment of sufficient ca- 
pacity to slip the wheels of the locomotive; and as the trans- 
former action is a maximum at starting, unless the locomotive 
enigneer shuts off power promptly upon finding the locomotive 
incapable of moving its trailing load, the resistance leads will 
burn out. 

Mr. Alexanderson gives the general superior characteristics 
of his motor over those of the repulsion type. Since the intro- 
duction of the series compensated motor, I had been under the 
impression that the repulsion type could hardly be considered 
a competitor, due to the bad operating characteristics above 
synchronous speed, as explained in Mr. Alexanderson’s paper.. 
This new type of series-repulsion (which by the way might have 
its name reversed and be called repulsion-series, as it has to start 
before it runs) combining the good characteristics of the repul- 
sion type for starting and the good characteristics of the series 
type for running, brings about a worthy competitor and lifts 
the mark of alternating-current traction to a higher notch. 

Alternating current no longer recognizes direct current as a 
competing agent in the transfer of power. Commercially, they 
are in limitation to each other in this respect from a unit point 
of view in the ratio of 1 to 10,000; and so even though low trans- 
mission losses by alternating-current transmission may com- 
pensate for increased costs of traction apparatus, with its at- 
tendant lower efficiencies and greater non-revenue weights, 
it is a welcome sight to observe the alternating-current motor 


e 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 39 


designer, not satisfied with this, but setting up for his model of 
accomplishment a motor the equal in every respect to its direct- 
current confrére. 

' The feature of producing double torque at starting by short- 
circuiting the armature and without increasing the line current 
is a characteristic that lends itself in much value to traction 
necessities. Although the point is not brought out, I assume 
that this arrangement prescribes that the motor operates at 
half.of what the speed would have been had the short-circuit 
not been applied to the armature. In this connection it would 
be interesting to know what change of relation takes place be- 
tween time and the temperature of the motor when developing 
double torque, also how the power-factor of this motor com- 
pares with that of the series compensator type for starting and 
low-speed conditions. 

It would be interesting, further, to know how the weight per 
axle horse power one-hour rating compares with direct-current 
. motors of the same size, also what the ratio of hour to continuous 
capacity prevails in this class of motor. 

E. F. Alexanderson: In answer to Mr. Stillwell’s question 
whether the increased capacity in changing from 25 to 
15 cycles applies in the same rate to the series repulsion as to 
the series motor, it can be said that if the heating of the motor 
is the limitation, it does not apply; if the starting torque is the 
limitation, it does apply. In the case of a motor that can slip 
its wheels, the heating is the limitation; in that case the 15- and 
25-cycle motors have virtually the same output. 

A direct-connected motor may be called upon to give higher 
torque than is practical to obtain on 25 cycles, and in this case 
the ratio holds. 

I thoroughly appreciate Mr. Lamme’s contention that re- 
sistance leads increase the torque of the series motor by allow- 
ing the increase of the flux which is one factor necessary to 
torque. The other factor is the current, and by changing the 
ratio of excitation the current can be increased more than the 
flux could be increased by the use of resistance leads. The 
motor gives double torque with normal flux, and double current 
and normal torque with 70% flux and 140% current. The 
eross-currents in the brush may seem excessive, but they do 
no harm. 

On a 50-ton locomotive that has been in service for half a 
year, hauling trains of about 400 tons, the motor slips its wheels 
without damage to the commutator, although it has not the 
improved arrangement for starting referred to in this paper. 

Mr. Lamme made particular reference to the New Haven 
motor with a rating of 250 h.p. at 220 rev. per min. for one hour, 
I am familiar with this motor, because I have designed a repul- 
sion motor for the same purpose with the same outside dimen- 
sions. This motor has been tested and has an output of 280 
h.p. continuously, and 350 h.p. for one hour at the speed indi- 


40 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR (Jan. 10 


cated by Mr. Lamme. This increase from 250 to 350 h.p. at 
the hourly ratings of the two motors is fully as high as the in- 
crease claimed by changing from 25 to 15 cycles. 

A higher output can be obtained from the series repulsion 
motor for the same reason as in the 15-cycle series motor, by 
working the iron to saturation. If the higher flux were ob- 
tained by increasing the field turns, the effect would be, as stated 
by Mr. Lamme, a decreased power-factor. The power-factor, 
h wever, does not depend upon the number of ampere-turns in 
the field, but upon the ratio between excitation and armature 
reaction. By abolishing the resistance leads and allowing more 
room for copper, the armature reaction can be increased simul- 
taneously with the field excitation and without affecting the 
power-factor, and the increased output is gained by increased 
voltage as well as increased current. 

Mr. Kintner gave some data on the wear of brushes, A num- 
ber of equipments of this type have been in operation for some 
time, but I am sorry that I cannot give the ultimate life of 
brushes, because they have not yet worn out. Brushes that 
have been in service for 10,000 miles show a wear of ;#; in. and the 
brush looks like new, so that there is no other limitation to the 
life of the brush than the amount that it can be fed down in the 
holder. The commutator assumes a brown polish like that of 
a good direct-current motor. 

Elmer A. Sperry (by letter): It seems to me, that Mr. Alexan- 
derson’s paper indicates an epoch-making advance in the art 
of railway-motor design. In connection with the remarks that 
have been made in reference to slipping versus non-slipping 
drivers, if I understood the remarks correctly, it was stated that 
the dead weight of the equipments for heavy traction work 
range so high that it is impossible to get motors with power 
enough to slip the drivers sustaining these weights. I take 
this theory of the locomotive to be almost revolutionary. I 
think there is no railroad superintendent who would consider 
a steam locomotive that could not easily slip her drivers as worth 
putting a fire into. I have been engaged for some years in de- 
signing and manufacturing locomotives for the most strenuous 
sort of work, and I remember reading a paper before this In- 
stitute about fifteen years ago, describing some aspects of these 
machines. I most cordially agree with Mr. Potter, that one of 
the most essential features, and one which must not be neglected 
in the design of a successful electric locomotive, is that it should 
be possible at all times to slip the drivers, even under conditions 
of heavy sanding. In this connection it might be stated that if 
it is considered important for the steam locomotive, it is certainly 
doubly so for the electric locomotive, where slip is necessary as 
a preventive of excessive overloading of the motors; this is a 
consideration of importance to us, but a point that does not 
in the slightest affect our competitor, the steam locomotive. 

Several years ago we started to build rack-rail locomotives, 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW VORK 41 


principally for mine haulage. Since that time we have in- 
Stalled several hundred miles of this equipment and new in- 
Stallations are going on constantly. Here there is no safety- 
valve for the electric motor, no slipping has been possible, and 
we have had no little difficulty in adapting motors to this ser- 
vice. They have had to be designed and re-designed until a 
successful machine of to-day is, in case of emergency, able to 
slip the drivers, including the pinions up out of the rack, without 
damage to the motor. Leaving the rack occurs at a point 
between 180% and 200% of draw-bar pull. 

I would emphasize what I have said, and add a note of warn- 
ing to the designing engieer: a locomotive that can not slip its 
drivers will not be able to stand in competition with one designed 
easily to accomplish this function. 

E. F. Alexanderson (by letter): Regarding Mr. Lamme’s 
remarks concerning the use of resistance leads, I would say that 
in the series motor the function of the resistance leads is dual; 
first, to assist in commutation, and secondly, to help in start- 
ing. In the series repulsion motor the problem of commutation 
has been solved, and therefore the only field of usefulness for 
these leads would be at. starting. If resistance leads were the 
only solution to obtain good starting, they would be used in the 
series repulsion motor, as series repulsion motor with resistance 
leads would give the same increase in rated capacities, and the 
same improvement in commutation, as would be effected by 
changing the frequency of the series motor from 25 cycles to 15 
cycles. 

The above statements. are verified by actual tests. Messrs. 
Lamme and Storer have given examples of tests before the 
‘ Institute, which show that a 100-h.p., 25-cycle series motor when 
operated at 15 cycles is rated at 125 h.p. Other tests have been 
made on a 75 h.p. motor operating as a series repulsion motor at 
25 cycles, and operating as a series motor at 15 cycles. The 
results of these tests show that the heating was lower in the 
former than in the latter instance. Another series repulsion 
motor of 450 h.p. continuous output when running at 400 rev. 
per min. showed that the heating was only 5° cent. higher 
when operated on alternating current at 25 cycles than 
operated on direct current. 

The characteristic curves given in Fig. 1 relate to the last 
named motor, and it may be of interest to state that this same 
machine has delivered 800 h.p. at 310 rev. per min. with almost 
sparkless commutation. An examination of the power-factor 
curve shows that its general nature varies somewhat from that 
of the series motor in being more constant through its entire 
range of operation, and it gives a speed curve more nearly re- 
sembling that of the direct-current motor than can be obtained 
with the series motor. 

As this power-factor ranges from 90 to 94%, it certainly does 
not need to be apoligized for, as some the other speakers seem 


42 A SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAY MOTOR [Jan. 10 


to think. If my remarks in the text of the paper are taken as 
apologetic, I must explain that I was comparing the power- 
facter of the series repulsion motor with that of the Latour- 
Winter-Eichberg motor, which at least is worthy of as much 
consideration as the series motor. 

In answer to questions about the ability of the series repul- 
sion motor to exert a torque at standstill, I reply that motors 
have been tested with the armatures blocked and have given 
double their normal torque for one minute. A large number 


IT 
Lor 


(7/ 


OCharacteristie Cll-ves 


Pre 


Power, 


Series Feptis/or? Motor 


LIANG) 


S 


RPM ard 4p? 
Soot Pourrs iorgue 


me 
ARS eae 
HERSeE 
BaRRM 


700 v/ b 
statinled z hapepatete pee 
9 GEL EP isi telateta ete be Pee 
00 400 600 800 £000 1200 400 4500 1800 2000 2200 
bina ns 
Ta] 


of series repulsion motors are in operation without resistance 
leads and no difficulty has been experienced in starting, al- 
though these motors have not the improved features of starting 
which are referred to in the paper. 

Actual tests that have been made will best serve to show 
the starting ability of these motors. On one occasion a train 
of 250 tons was hauled by four-motor equipments consisting of 
125 h.p. motors. This train was started on a one per cent. grade, 
and as a further test two motors were cut out and the remaining 
two motors started this 250-ton train on the same grade. 


A paper presented at the 224th meeting of the 
American Institute of Electricadl Engineers, 
New Jork, January 10, 1908. 


— 


Copyright 1908. By A. 1. BR. 5. 


THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM OF SINGLE-PHASE DIS- 
TRIBUTION WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO 
SECTIONALIZATION, 


BY W. S. MURRAY. 


The method and distance chosen for sectionalizing the 
high-tension wires supplying power for alternating-current 
traction is worthy of careful consideration. Local conditions 
play so important a part in the correct conclusion of method 
and proper-distance to be applied, that no precedent or con- 
vention can be followed and standardization is quite out of 
the question. 

In advance of taking up the concrete subject at hand, doubt- 
less it will be of interest to touch upon several alternative 
distributing systems that were considered by the engineers 
of the New Haven road before the final adoption of the system 
of single-phase distribution and sectionalization now in service. 
Some of these were: ; 3 

1. 11,000-volt, three-phase generation at the power house; 
transmission along the right-of-way at this voltage; step-down 
transformers furnishing trolley voltage at 3300; track mileage 
divided into three equal linear parts, each part being supplied 
by an individual phase. 

2. The same arrangement as (1) with the exception that 
step-down transformers furnish 6600 volts to trolley. 

3. 11,000-volt, three-phase generation at power house; 
transmission along the right-of-way at this voltage; track 
mileage divided into two equal linear parts, each part having 
its.trolley connected through the transmission line to one of 
the three terminals of the power-house bus-bars, the remaining 

43 


a4 MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM.  [{Jan. 10 


bus-bar being connected to the tracks, thus making a common 
connection for the two trolley sections. 

Diagrams 1, 2, and 3, Fig. 1, represent in the simplest form the 
three above described arrangements. It follows, of course, that 


4TRANSFORMER 

TRANSFORMER 
DIAGRAM *2@. 
JIOOOVOLTS. 
11000 VOLTS. 
CIAGRAM #3 


TROLLEY, 3300 vo_TsS 
DIAGRAM #1 


TROLLEY, 6€00 VOLTS 


30 
TROLLEY 


Prase C, 
PHASE Cc, 


+TRANGFORMCER. 

\41000 vo_Ts, 
-GENERATOR 

X11000 vouTs, 39 
«<GENERATOR 
+GENERATOR. 


+-TRANSFORMER 
PHRASE Cc, 


F 
4 
° 
> 
° 
° 
LU) 
n 
> 
Wl 
4 
4 
° 
c 
t 


PHASE B, TROLLEY, BS600VOLTS 


PHaee B, 
11000 VouTs. 


+TRANSFORMER 


+TRANSFORMER 
TROLLEY 11000 VOLTS 


_TROLLEY ,@6€00 VOLTS 


’ 
FEEDER zz 


CIimACcUIT BREAKER. 


SECTION Brean 


G 
Wa PHASE INSULATIOIN 


the phased divisions in each case could be further individually 
subdivided into sections wherever desirable. The presentation 
of these three methods of distribution by no means prescribes 
the limit of combinations that may exist, aS many others of 
an interesting character have been suggested. 


La AA PRIS CE SN ER A NNN ET a 


“pre rea aGF0a MARS, 0M Tow mama 


vO,88 0 
3° .8.S1 


Fics 


en FR Ye : 


ee yeahs 
BALAN | 4 amc CMM GMT avr eel anonmominaan” 
é 


rae a Se ee a c 


Fe we 


BRNO. 1S: 


4 ry 


HOV MaBARD) 
RaveszeoAR D 


oo a RaW es 
nedia ely. a fh.ve. 2 ani. ths 
py on. ‘ 


M) Ti mo iste tion 3 10 Fie 2 2. 


Srenneineienenien iether eoan erent ete ee 
ite. + ¥ 
) —< 
‘Ps 
——S i ES EES hd NEON 


uGoow | MaT eve" WortWaiateta 


2 Ot PGE © We Wax 


22 Ss Se 


© 83 nawor * 


=) 


1908} MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM. a 


4. 11,000 volt, three-phase generation, transmission along 
the right-of-way at this voltage, only one phase being applied 
to all sectionalized trolley wires throughout the zone of electri- 
fication. The three phases are also carried throughout the 
electrification zone, and are at all points available for polyphase 
motors, such as would be used in railway machine shops and 
for the operation of motor-driven generators in local direct- 
current railway plants owned by the railroad company. 

In Diagram 4, Fig. 2, there is shown diagramatically the 
actual scheme of single-phase distribution which has been 
adopted, and is now in service. 

There are advantages to be gained in any one of the above 
mentioned alternatives, but the single-phase distribution as 
described under 4 carries with it advantages, the sum of which 
far outweighs the sum of the advantages in the others. Ina 
word, the distribution, as described under 1, 2, and 3, would 
seem to offer a better opportunity to distribute the load in the 
three-phase windings of the generators, and yet this is open to 
question on account of the possible unequal distribution of trains 
in the individual phased sections; but the greatest and deciding 
disadvantage to any of the three-phase distribution schemes 
is the complication that results in the overhead system, together 
with the fact that for an equal weight of overhead copper the 
efficiency of the single-phase system is higher than any of the 
polyphase arrangements. From the foregoing, I believe it 
will be generally conceded that the single-phase scheme of 
distribution is the best. 

A modification of arrangement 4, which was considered, 
may be mentioned; namely, 11,000-volt, three-phase generation, 
single-phase distribution for traction with step-down trans- 
formers distributed along the line, their secondaries furnish- 
ing 3300 or 6600 volts to the sectionalized trolleys. For the 
reason that the life-hazard in using 11,000 volts was not consid- 
ered to be greatly increased over that of 3300 or 6600 volts, and 
in view of the higher efficiency, lesser currents to be collected 
by locomotive shoe contacts, greater reliability, and the lower 
operating costs (no transformer sub-stations) the advantages of 
the 11,000-volt direct transmission to the sectionalized trolleys 
was immediately apparent, and the problem became simply 
one of insulation. ; 

As concerns the choice of three-phase generators in connection 
with single-phase distribution for traction purposes, again 


46 MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM. _ (Jan. 10 


local conditions were the real factors that framed this conclusion. 
Single-phase or balanced polyphase voltages are undeniably 
more desirable than unbalanced ones; at the same time when 
proper allowance and arrangement are made for the unbalanced 
voltages, and there is a decided market for polyphase power, 
it is difficult to escape the conclusion that it is a desirable and 
necessary adjunct to the system. In connection with its 
application to the New Haven electrification, it may be said 
that synchronous motors will be shortly substituted for steam 
engines in one of our lighting plants. Such arrangements will 
bring about the centralization of power generation, and by 
proper field adjustment of the synchronous motors the general 
power-factor of the single-phase system will be raised. 

Having touched upon some of the determining factors that 

brought about the arrangement of three-phase generation 
and single-phase distribution, the remainder of this paper will 
be confined to a discussion of the methods and lengths involved 
in the sectionalizing of the single-phase distribution, and as 
the power wire (which is the outside wire marked P in Fig. 4) 
plays only an unimportant part in its applications to the trac- 
tion system, it will not be referred to again. 
_ An examination of the electrical connections made in and 
on the power-house, line, and locomotives would bring out 
the strong similarity of the New Haven System to the well 
standardized direct-current, (not alternating-current-—direct- 
current) system. Indeed, I think it can be fairly said that the 
current in either case has the same path to follow, the only differ- 
ences lie in the nature of the current (alternating and direct) 
and the voltage. In either case the path is from one bus-bar 
of the station to the feeder and trolley, thence to the locomotive 
and from there to the rail and return to the other station bus- 
bar. In the alternating-current system is noted, of course, 
methods of installation common to high-tension practice. 

Single-phase distribution offers an excellent opportunity for 
sectionalizing. As may be seen in Diagram 4, Fig. 2, the system 
consists simply of the track trolleys, two auxiliary wires immedi- 
ately adjacent, and the necessary switching complement. A\l- 
though these auxiliary wires have been called feeder wires and 
while, as a matter of fact, they do serve to increase the capacity of 
the overhead system, this is not their principal function, as the 
amount of copper included in the trolleys would suffice to be 
within the economic figures of copper loss. The auxiliary wires 


1908] MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM. 47 


are installed to serve as by-passes, in the event of it being de- 
sired to cut dead any or all of the trolley wires in any section. 
Thus by this system of auxiliary by-passes any degree of sec- 
tionalizing can be used, and any or all trolley voltages in sections 
can be removed without interrupting the continuity of the 
voltages throughout the zone. ies oe 

The lengths of sections are governed entirely by local con- 
ditions. No two sections of the 14 that exist in the 21 miles 
of New Haven electrification are the same. It is seen, however, 
from these figures that the average length of sections is 1.68 
miles, that none of these is over 2.19 miles or less than 1.07 miles. 

The best reason that can be assigned for the use of sections 
is in order that line troubles may be localized. There are many 
others, and some of a most important character. Indeed, it 
may be said that were the line absolutely immune from trouble, 
such as grounding, mechanical failures, etc., there would still 
be many good reasons for sectionalizing it, and these reasons 
will develop as the subject is further studied. 

One of the most attractive features of single-phase distribu- 
tion is the elimination of sub-stations with their fixed and 
operating charges, and unlike the alternating-current—direct- 
current scheme of distribution, where the length of section is 
settled by the equation of load and copper to meet it, the 
single-phase system is not bound by these limiting electrical 
conditions. Line-loss is forgotten in the establishment of a 
mechanical construction, the amount of copper in which is 
only a fraction of the amount required for an equivalent loss 
for the same amount of power transmitted in the alternating- 
current—direct-current systems. This convenience of trans- 
mission with low loss permits sectionalizing ad libitum and the 
local conditions are accorded almost the entire privilege of de- 
cision. The advantage of such a relation between operation and 
distribution was immediately apparent to Mr. E. H. McHenry, 
Vice-president of the New York, New Haven & Hartford Rail- 
road Company, whose suggestion that the electrical and train 
signal blocks be made co-terminus was adopted. It will be noted, 
then, that of the fourteen electrical sections between Woodlawn 
and Stamford, nine of these are co-terminus with the signal 
towers. In each of these towers, there is installed a small 
panel containing the pilot-switches controlling the trolley 
(and by-pass) circuit-breakers installed on the anchor bridges. 
Aside from the economical features of this scheme of control, as 


48 MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM.  [Jan. 10 


no operators other than our present signal operators are required, 
the value of placing the distribution in the hands of this class 
of men is most important, their constant attention to matters 
pertaining to the operation of trains bring about the attention 
which should be accorded to the distribution of current; their 
thorough understanding of the conditions of traffic on the vari- 
ous tracks permitting the most intelligent handling of electrified 
and de-electrified trolleys, assuring at once prompt and reliable 
service in the matter of handling a situation when cross-overs 
have to be made on electrified tracks, and while repairs are be- 
ing made on others from which the voltage has been removed. 
The value of placing the distribution system in the hands of 
the signal operators may be again illustrated by saying that 
should an electric train run past a stop-signal set by the operator, 
or should the operator desire to stop a train in his block he 
has only to trip the pilot-switch controlling the trolley circuit- 
breaker, from which the train is drawing its power, and signal 
the operator in the adjacent tower to do likewise. The indi- 
vidual value of this protective perquisite is an illustration of 
the use of sectionalizing outside of the question of line troubles. 

As before stated, it is impossible to elect some standard dis- 
tance for sectionalizing the line and then apply it to a steam 
road undergoing electrification. It is possible to conceive of 
an entirely new electric line subjected to this hypothetical 
course of procedure, but even in this extreme case it is difficult 
to escape the exceptions that could be taken to it; for example, 
what a strange coincidence it would be to find fifty towns just 
two miles apart along a railroad’s right-of-way. On the other 
hand, how important each town would be whereat to locate a 
signal tower with its complement of electrical equipment. 

In the discussion of sectionalization it would seem proper, 
therefore, that instead of specifying the length of sections, to 
specify the number to be used over a given total distance; 
their individual length varying in accordance with the local 
conditions peculiarly related to them. Upon this basis, it will 
be interesting to enumerate the following advantages and dis- 
advantages peculiar to a choice of a “small number’”’ and 
a ‘‘large number ”’ of sections over a given distance. In this 
table it should be remembered that usually the items of advan- 
tage for the ‘‘ small number ’”’ of sections will be items of dis- 
advantage for the ‘larger number ”’ and vice-versa. Also it is 
assumed that the signal towers along the right-of-way average 


1908] MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM. 49 


Bee SO SOS 
Sata SOO DOS WH 0°9.. 


Z 


PLT Sate RY ES EE RE AERTS, Sea a GREE eee, 


creck erinareomeccmcncossr eee: am RR Mama, si 


seme ie 


semmemncertet sete 


P : 
4 
4 
“3 
Z 
: 
: 
% 
: 
< 
B 
. 


TTT 


a ede 
SIS eK KAKO 


wy 
Lyn 
f 


= 
ord 
Eiko 


50 MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM.  [Jan. 10 


about one and a-half miles apart and that electrical sections 
of this length, or longer, will be classed as a ‘“‘ small number ” 
and sections shorter than this will be classed as a “‘large number.”’ 

A tabulation of the advantages and disadvantages of the use 
of a ‘‘ small number ”’ against a “‘ large number ”’ of sections is 
as follows: 


“ee 


SmaLtL NuMBER 


Advantages Disadvantages 
1 Co-terminus tower scheme more 1 Difficulty of locating grounds 
easily arranged. increased. 
2 Less switches to maintain. 2 Greater section of track cut dead 
3 More reliable; due to less fre- in case of ground or other 
quent grounding of line. trouble. Disadvantage, how- 
4 Less cost. ever, related to cross-overs. 


83 Larger section breakers required 


In advance of a discussion of the items in the above table 
it is fair to assume that convenience of construction of the ap- 
paratus required for either the long or short sections may be 
equated. Thatis to say, the work-train service, in either case, 
would be about the same, and the structures to be put up of a 
character which would require much the same general superin- 
tendence and engineering. 

In the case of the long sections, it would, of course, be neces- 
sary to splice the messenger cables, as they could hardly be manu- 
factured on single reels greater than two miles in length, but the 
splicing process would not be a matter of great inconvenience, 
and would not detract from the value of the cables. 

On the other hand, in the case of the shorter sections a greater 
number of anchor bridges would be required for the supply 
of sectionalizing switches, but this form of structure would not 
increase, to any extent, the difficulties of erection, or would 
the placing of apparatus upon them interfere with regular 
traffic. 

Taking up the discussion of the above tabulation of advan- 
tages and disadvantages for the small number of sections versus 
the larger number; or, stated in another way, sections of greater 
length versus sections of shorter length, we note that under 
“ advantages.”’ 

1. Co-terminus tower scheme more easily arranged. In my 
estimation this is by far the most important factor favoring a 
small number of sections. It is quite clear that with a great 
number of sections, their termini would fall at points between 
towers, necessitating some form of substation or building for 


1908] MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM. 51 


the electrical operators. This would be inconvenient, both 
for the railroad company and the operator, on account of the 
cost of maintenance and operation for the former, while the 
latter would be far removed from his living point. 

The reason that the co-terminus scheme is more readily ar- 
ranged with the use of long sections is apparent, in view of the 
fact that no convention is necessary to be followed in regard to 
standard distances, it being at the option of the engineer to choose 
such towers as are already located on the line as a termini of 
electrical blocks. 

2. Less switches to maintain. This advantage is immediately 
seen, in view of the number of switches being directly propor- 
tional to the number of sections, and I believe there is general 
agreement that a switch in any line does not increase the relia- 
bility of that line. 

3. More reliable; due to less frequent grounding of line. At 
the present stage of the art, the anchor insulators, which have 
given the best results from a combined mechanical and electrical 
strain point of view, have been of corrugated cylindrical form. 
In this form their insulating value is unquestionably less than 
the mushroom or petticoat type of insulator, and experience 
indicates that they are very much less reliable than the mush- 
room or petticoat type (this form of insulator is used to support 
the messenger cables on intermediate catenary bridges). It 
is my belief, however, that by suspending some form of protec- 
tive shield or petticoat from the anchor insulator, its insulating 
value will be greatly enhanced. The blast from steam locomo- 
tives seems to produce a very rough enamel of coal dust and cin- 
ders, which, on account of deeply imbedding itself in the insula- 
tor, is almost impossible to remove, in consequence of which 
insulating values are greatly reduced. 

4. Less cost. It is immediately apparent that the cost would 
be much less on account of the elimination of a larger amount 
of switching apparatus and the heavy bridge work required at 
all anchorages. 

In the table of ‘‘ Disadvantages ” we note: 

1. Difficulty of locating grounds increased. This is quite 
apparent, in view of the fact that there are a greater number 
of insulators between the circuit-breakers, but experience in 
actual operation has indicated that this is not a serious matter, 
as the offending insulators are very quickly located, and there 
is also being perfected at this time a resistance scheme of measure- 


52 MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM. _ {Jan. 10 


ment by which the point of ground can be approximated within 
5 % of its actual location; and upon the perfection of this ap- 
paratus this difficulty will be eliminated. 

2. Greater section of track cut dead in case of ground or other 
trouble; disadvantage, however, related to cross-overs. This 
trouble would be of a more serious character if it were railroad 
practice to include a great many cross-overs on the main line. 
The average distance between cross-overs on the New Haven 
road is even greater than the distance of the electrical blocks; 
in consequence of this, should a section become dead on account 
of a ground, it is possible that the train would have to cross 
over at a distance from the trouble greater than the length 
of the electrical section. Railroad engineers look upon cross- 
overs as a necessary evil (remembering their high cost of main- 
tenance, together with the necessity of interlocking machines 
in conjunction with them) and it is fair to assume that their 
distance apart will not be decreased for the convenience of short- 
ening the electrical sections; hence, this difficulty cannot be 
classed as one of special moment. 

3. Larger section breakers required. In the use of longer 
sections, it is apparent that more trains may be drawing power 
from the section breakers, in consequence of which it is necessary 
to design them for greater capacity and they will be called 
upon to open larger propulsion currents. The difficulty of this, 
however, fades in the maximum demand upon the breakers 
being a short circuit, and as this is a duty a section breaker 
of any capacity has to stand ready to perform, this objection 
might be considered as not existing. 

It would be a strange state of affairs if it were impossible to 
improve upon any principle or form of construction adopted. In 
regard to principles which have governed in the electrification 
and sectionalization as adopted by the New Haven road, 
I have found by careful inquiry into the opinion of those who 
are responsible for the operation of our electric trains and the 
distribution of currents to them, that if any change were to 
be made, possibly some advantages would accrue in the use of 
a longer section. 

In regard to form of construction. It is fair to say that there 
are many changes that can be and are being made, which will 
greatly increase the efficacy of distribution. It is my obser- 
vation that the New Haven electrification has been looked 
upon as a radical departure from engineering practice. There 


1908] MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM. 53 


is no question about the justice of such a remark when view- 
ing the matter as a whole. If, however, we segregate each link 
in the chain which forms the whole, I believe it will be found 
that no one link is a particular departure from a practice that 
has existed many years. It has simply been the putting to- 
gether of old principles into a new form. One exception can be 
made to this statement. The alternating-current railway 
motor is new, and yet an exposition of its characteristics, such 
as in its speed and torque curves, show that within it the old 
underlying principles prevail. Its complements, the power- 
house and line, involve no new principles that have not beer 
tried out under various forms and conditions. A high-tension 
moving contact has nothing new or of a disturbing nature about 
ite 

When the form of electrification of the New York division 
came up for decision, there was an easy path of the least resist- 
ance open to the engineers of the New Haven road. A form of 
electrification had been adopted and applied to traffic rails over 
which the New Haven trains were obliged to go in their entrance 
to New York City. An acceptance of this form of electrification 
would have simplified and made easy the duties and responsi- 
bility of the engineers of the New Haven road. The right path, 
however, is not always the easiest, and the principles which 
existed in their minds were of a character that required a radical 
departure from the easy and tempting alternative. There is 
an old saying: ‘‘ Nothing that is worth while ever came 
easy,” and such has been the case with the New Haven road. 
We have encountered unexpected difficulties, which are always 
common to initiative, none of them, however, has been of a 
character which could be interpreted as a menace to the general 
principles involved. The difficulties have either been corrected 
or their correction is easily in sight. 

The last six months of operation have offered the opportunity 
for a collection of valuable data, and the following observations 
and recommendations are offered in the hope that they may 
be of some value to other engineers interested in the electrifica- 
tion of steam roads: 

1. In one-, two-, three-, or four-track railroads, the single- 
phase distribution should include besides the trolley wires, by- 
passes or feeders. 

2. Electrical sections should not average less than 1.5 miles 
in length; greater averages are entirely acceptable and in- 
dividual lengths should be governed by local conditions. 


54 MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM. | [Jan. 10 


3. Twenty-two feet is a safe general working distance of 
troHey from rail. , 

4. The de-insulating effect of steam locomotives stack dis- 
charges is a most important consideration to be kept in mind 
in the matter of properly insulating high-tension wires from 
ground, 

5. High insulation factors should be used where high-tension 
construction due to low bridges is brought nearer the rails than 
the normal height of 22 feet. Strong mechanical shields should 
be used to deflect locomotive blasts from messenger insulators 
at low bridges. Care should be exercised in the installation 
of these shields so that high-tension conductors and ground 
are at safe working distance. Wherever possible insulators should 
be installed away from the direct line of the locomotive blast. 

6. Auxiliary wires in connection with the electrification, 
if they cannot be carried over highway bridges as aerial con- 
ductors, should not be carried under, unless they are enclosed 
in lead-covered cables, with end-bells properly enclosed in 
suitable housings at points where the conductors change from 
aerial to lead-covered cables. 

7. All circuit-breakers connecting feed wires (or by-passes) 
to the trolley bus-bars should be equipped with time-relays, 
so that any short-circuit will immediately open the trolley- 
breakers, thus locating the trolley section grounded. Equip- 
ping the feeder breakers with time-relays insures continuity 
of voltage on wires not affected by the short-circuit. Each 
trolley-breaker pilot-switch should be provided with a light to 
indicate when it opens, and an announcer bell should ring in the 
signal tower at the same time so that the operator is promptly 
notified. 

8. On account of deleterious influences of weather and loco- 
motive stack discharges, together with general inconvenience 
of getting at bus-bars and switches when installed on anchor 
bridges, all section oil-switches should be installed in switch 
houses erected at the side of the tracks, with lead-covered cable 
connections between trolley and switches. 

9. Signaling should be arranged so that the operator can 
prevent the engineer from spanning two sections by his locomo- 
tive shoes in the event of the advance section being grounded, 

10. All signal towers should be interconnected with a reliable 
telephone service. Immunity from electromagnetic and electro- 
static disturbance in the telephone system can be secured by 


or 


1908] MURRAY: THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM. 5 


using twisted-wire pairs enclosed in lead-covered sheath, the 
sheath being grounded frequently. This suggestion is more 
particularly applicable to the interrupted or tower-to-tower 
telephone system. In this case the distance of exposures of 
the telephone wires is not great, and thus the summated effect 
of electromagnetic induction is negligible. In the case of the 
through telephone line where the circuit is uninterrupted 
throughout the zone of electrification, again the lead sheath 
and twisted pair are respectively effective in removing all static 
charges, and electromagnetically balancing the circuit; but on 
account of the cumulative action of the electromagnetic in- 
duction, either compensating transformers or a system of im- 
pedance coils installed across the telephone circuits at inter- 
vals of two miles (this distance may be less, depending on the 
electromagnetic density) with their central points grounded 
should be used. Either method will satisfactorily remove the 
impressed voltage due to electromagnetic induction. The im- 
portance of reliable telephone service between operating towers 
cannot be too greatly emphasized. 

The above mentioned are some of the fundamental requisites 
which design and practice have brought out in connection 
with the New Haven electrification. Design and practice are 
many times good friends, but if a difference of opinion arises, 
practice will, in nine times out of ten, have the better of the 
argument. Experience, the great teacher, has brought out 
either the efficacy of the original design or the proper modi- 
fication of it. 

The observations and recommentiations above cited, are 
those that have been impressed upon the writer during the 
period of operation so far attained. Except for certain minor 
and easily remedied details, experience to date with the 
New Haven arrangement of single-phase distribution would 
indicate that the fundamental principles involved have been 
correctly applied, 


56 THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM Jan. 10 


Discussion on ‘“‘ THE NEw HAvEN SYSTEM OF SINGLE-PHASE 
DISTRIBUTION, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO SECTIONALIZA- 
TION.” New York, January 10, 1908. 


W. S. Murray: A retrospect always reveals more than a 
forecast. A perusal of the paper indicates to me, as doubtless 
to you all, that what has been touched upon is only a small 
percentage of the interesting and valuable data that could have 
been included were it at the election of the author to give his 
undivided attention to the subject. 

I shall not attempt to apologize for what the paper lacks, and 
can simply say that odd moments, particularly those occurring 
while riding on the trains of the railroad company, supplied the 
time during which the article was written. 

There has been no attempt to go into either the electrical or 
mechanical specifications of the distribution system. These 
were all included in the several contracts existing between the 
railroad company and the manufacturers and contractors, the 
general outline of which covers all points bearing upon the 
physical performance of the material furnished. As far as it 
was possible to anticipate, various weather conditions were con- 
sidered in the design of all parts subject to changes of tempera- 
ture, to wind, and to ice formation. We have passed through 
several snow, ice, and wind storms, and combinations of these, 
and all the iron structures, messenger, trolley, and feeder wires, 
have satisfactorily demonstrated the factors of safety which 
were included in their design. 

A description of the electrical and mechanical details of the 
distributing system of the New Haven road has appeared in the 
columns of the engineering papers. My aim to-night has been 
more to acquaint you with some of our experiences rather than 
our theories. Therefore, fully conscious of many glittering 
omissions germane to the subject, and counting on the discussion 
to bring them out, I shall read the paper. [Here Mr. Murray 
read his paper.] 

The discussion of double or single catenary construction on 
main-line electrification was intentionally omitted from the 
paper. A choice of the one or the other must be a compromise 
of a great many considerations, the principal ones being the 
number of tracks to be electrified, and local conditions; but there 
is one fact that has been conclusively demonstrated to me, 
namely, either the trolley wire or the trolley shoe must be flexible, 
whether the construction be for main or for branch lines. Of 
course in the single catenary construction a flexible contact 
conductor is provided. In the triangular construction, the con- 
tact conductor is rigid. This requires a flexible shoe, which in a 
degree is secured by the spring pantagiapn arrangement. Ex- 
perience, however, has forced upon me the conclusion that the 
pantagraph must be still further supplemented by a light but 
strong mechanism which will insure flexible contact between the 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 57 


shoe and trolley wire, thus not ofering a great deal of inertia 
in movement when the shoe meets the hard spots of the line 
which exists at the catenary hanger points. 

A form of construction we have adopted in our East Port- 
Chester yard, in which the latitudinal catenaries are supported 
by cross-catenarics—in some cases spanning as many as ten 
tracks—has about it a great many attractive features, and I am 
not too sure that experience will not bring out the possi- 
bility of using the cross-catenary for main line work. Such an 
arrangement, if more frequently reinforced with cross-bridge 
anchorages such as now used in the New Haven electrification, 
will bring a lighter and cheaper construction, and possibly 
afford a greater opportunity in insulating the overhead system 
from ground. I can see no reason why single catenary spans 
need be made any less than those used in the double catenary 
construction, as the cross-rigidity that may be desired can be 
obtained by tying into adjacent latitudinal catenaries, all of 
which, of course, are subject to the pull-off construction at present 
employed. Of course there are a great many pros and cons 
about this, and again we are forced to the conclusion that to-day 
is not the time for standardization, as it will pay not to accelerate 
our conclusions at a greater rate than the operating evidence 
upon which they should be based. 

Still another point that has not been touched upon in the 
paper, is the great flexibility offered in the double-switch arrange- 
ment of supplying power to a trolley wire at the two extremities 
of its section. It is readily seen that if trouble exists in one of 
the circuit-breakers supplying a trolley wire in any given section, 
this switch can be immediately cut out and all the power sup- 
plied from the remaining switch at the other end. This flexi- 
bility, of course, is secured in virtue of the low loss due to high- 
tension transmission, and the employment of by-passes or 
feeders, to which previous reference has been made. 

An impression has come to me that I might have dwelt more 
fully on the details of the system of distribution. As stated 
previously, it has been so universally described in the engi- 
neering papers that I have felt as if I were writing about results 
and experiences with something the general parts of which we 
were all acquainted. If I have universal support in this im- 
pression, I can only offer in amelioration, Diagram (4), which 
assembles all the links of our transmission chain, the functions 
of any one link of which are common knowledge. 

L. B. Stillwell: I have not found time to read Mr. Murray’s 
paper carefully, and I do not propose to criticize the sectionaliza- 
tion of the New Haven and Hartford trolley or its feeder layout. 
I have a very high opinion of the importance of these parts of 
the plant, which unquestionably are too often neglected. There 
are cases where very large investments have been made to insure 
continuity of service in which, judging by results, the invest- 
ment has not been made in the right place. Instances might 


58 THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM (Jan. 10 


be mentioned in which, at great expense, excess generating 
capacity has been installed adequate to take care of the service, 
even in case of destruction of 50 per cent. of the total generating 
plant, and yet when the feeder layout was under consideration 
oversights apparently have occurred as the result of which very 
severe interruptions of service have followed. Unquestionably, 
therefore, criticism of the organization of supply circuits for 
large distributing plants, particularly for railway service, is 
highly beneficial. I say particularly in railway service, because 
in industrial power service the interruption of a feeder now 
ordinarily involves only a local and a very temporary failure 
of service; whereas in railway operation if we stop trains on one 
part of the line we are liable to hold up the entire operation of 
the railway. 

W. B. Potter: The ordinary 600-volt trolley line is of little 
value as a standard with which to compare the 11,000-volt 
catenary under steam railroad conditions. Considered as an 
example of good construction, I have never seen the equal of 
the catenary to which Mr. Murray refers. As to the relative 
reliability and maintenance of such an overhead high-voltage 
trolley compared with a 600-volt third-rail, under conditions 
necessitating joint operation with steam, I believe this to be a 
debatable question. 

I agree with Mr. Murray as to the desirability of a through 
feeder in parallel with the different sections; I do not see the 
need, however, of two such feeders on the same phase as the 
trolley wires. For local power the combination of the single 
feeder with the trolley wires would seem sufficient reserve. If 
any accident involved all four of the trolley wires, it would prob- 
ably include the feeder as well; in case it did not, a single feeder 
could supply power beyond the break. 

As to the length of the main-line sections, I favor from three 
to five miles, rather than less; as this question affects the relia- 
bility of operation, it seems that a reduction in the number of 
switching appliances would be favorable. Five-mile sections 
have proved satisfactory in third-rail operation, and there 
appears to be no reason for shorter sections with the high-voltage 
trolley, unless it is the greater liability of the longer sections to 
break down. It seems desirable, however, that at track cross- 
overs there should be a short section controlling the main-line 
and cross-over tracks, the better to insure cross-over movements 
in the event of interruption on the main-line sections. — 

Twenty-two feet seems to be a generally recognized standard 
height of trolley wire. It is unfortunate that this height cannot 
be maintained throughout, as it would then be possible to use a 
much lighter form of pantagraph. Overhead bridges, with their 
limited clearances, often necessitate a vertical movement of the 
collector of from seven to eight feet, and this condition requires 
a pantagraph structure more liable to derangement. 

Depreciation of the catenary insulation from steam locomo- 


1903] . DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 59 


tive smoke would naturally be expected, and the extent of trouble 
from this cause seems to have a bearing on the permissible 
trolley voltage. Conditions might well arise where either copper 
or efficiency would have to be sacrificed for reliability. 

The suggestions with regard to time-relays and switch indica- 
tion are in line with well established practice. As to the method 
of operating the circuit-breakers, | understand that they are at 
present controlled from the main power circuit. Should not 
some means be provided for operating these switches in the 
event of failure of power? As these circuit-breakers are near 
signal towers, where manual operation could be conveniently 
applied, would not this be the more reliable method? Lever 
connections would provide certainty of operation and would 
not interfere with the automatic tripping. The proposed change 
from the bridges to switch houses would simplify the mechanical 
connections. 

There is no doubt as to the desirability of guarding against 
the spanning of two trolley sections, as there is always the 
possibility of one section being grounded. Such accidents will 
occur. If the two pantagraphs or trolleys are far enough apart 
to span the section insulators, the only safeguard seems to be a 
fuse located between the two collectors. 

O. S. Lyford, Jr.: Mr Murray’s paper is written from the 
point of view of operation of a multiple-track road: when 
viewed from the standpoint of single-track operation, this sub- 
ject has some rather different aspects. For instance, Mr. Murray 
says: 

Me In one-, two-, three-, or four-track railroads, the single-phase distri- 
bution should include, besides the trolley wires, by-passes or feeders. 

I do not take exception to this statement as relating to two-, 
three-, or four-track roads, but it does not necessarily apply to 
single-track roads. The objects of sectionalization are three: 
first, to minimize the interference with the operation of the 
road in case of line trouble; secondly, to locate the fault quickly; 
and thirdly, to reach the fault with a work train. 

As to the first object, to minimize the interference with opera- 
tion, I think it is quite apparent that a parallel feeder is not of 
much use as a by-pass in a single-track road of moderate length. 
Take, for illustration, the Erie road south from Rochester, Fig. 
1. This is a single-track road, running from Rochester to Mount 
Morris. Power from Niagara Falls is received at a sub-station 
at Avon. At present the lines north and south from Avon are 
operated as two legs of a three-phase system, the common point 
being connected to the track. Avon is a junction-point with an 
east and west line of the same road. Rochester is about nine- 
teen miles from Avon, and Avon is about fifteen miles from Mt. 
Morris. With a schedule speed of about twenty-four miles an 
hour and hourly service in each direction, it is apparent that a 
dead point anywhere on the line will, in a few minutes, block all 
trains on one side of the junction. The ability to move trains 
up to the dead point will not materially help the service. 


60 THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM [Jan. 10 


The Erie line is divided into sections, but the principal object 
of sectionalization is to locate the fault quickly. The section 
breakers are ‘‘ jumpered ” through hand-operated switches and 
are placed near passenger stations or signal towers. If there is 
trouble, the system operator, by telephone orders, can have the 
section switches opened in sequence and quickly locate the 
section on which the trouble occurs. Mr. Murray speaks of 
special apparatus being developed to test for faults and locate 
them quickly. If such apparatus be produced, it will probably 
be more convenient than the use of section switches. 

Considering the third object—to reach the fault with a work 
train—even with short sections such as have been discussed to- 
night, the work train, if operated by trolley, could not get within 
three-quarters of a mile or so of the fault, and it would be im- 
practicable for the men to have to go the rest of the way on foot 
to make the repairs. The logical conclusion, therefore, is that 
the work train should be operated by an independent unit, either 
a steam locomotive or a gasolene car, preferably the latter, be- 
cause it is more easily put in service. 

Independent operation of long sections between important 
points is desirable. Usually, however, this will be best ac- 
complished by high-tension feeders, rather than by by-pass 
feeders operated at the trolley voltage. The Erie system has 
been planned so that if the electrification is extended beyond the 
limit for economical transmission at 11,000 volts (for instance 
from Mt. Morris to Dansville) the present transformers may be 
connected so as to obtain either 11,000 or 22,000 volts, and 
22,000-volt feeders may be carried to the distant section, serving 
the trolley wire through autotransformers. This plan allows 
transmission at double voltage and saves copper without appre- 
ciable complication. 

Another case may serve to illustrate the conditions which 
arise in single-phase operation. The Denver & Interurban 
Railroad line from Denver to Boulder has a single-track main 
line and two single-track branches (see Fig. 2.) The powerhouse 
isabout 2 miles from the Louisville branch and 5.2 miles from 
the junction point. Power is supplied over two feeders from 11,000- 
volt, single-phase generators to the junction point. The length 
of the Marshall branch is 12.8 miles, Louisville branch 12 miles, 
and the Denver line 15.2 miles. 

In this case it is obvious that there will be material advantage 
gained by being able to operate each branch independently, 
and provision has been made accordingly; but by-pass feeders 
for each branch would not help matters much in case of line 
trouble. The trolley wire, in this case, as with the Erie, has been 
provided with section breakers placed about 4 miles apart 
for convenience in locating faults. 

There are other things to be taken into account besides the 
actual line trouble; that is to say, the problem is not merely 
to locate and repair the fault, On any railroad provided with 


1908] 


DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 


61 


LAKE ONTARIO 


RE Cie Sapeare 


b= 
~* = 


SLZMILES- PFAILROAD SINGLE TRACK. 
SUB-STATION 


SS 


s22nMites CATENARY CONSTRUCTION 
IsMILes. FEEDERS. 


x 
TOATTICA 


SECTION BREAK. 
e 


PASSENGER STATION. 


TO CORNING 


GENESEO 


ERIE RAILROAD 
ROCHESTER OIVISION. 


MT. MORRIS 


MAP OF ECECTRIFIED LINES 


1000 VOLT, SINGLE PHASE, 
TROLLEY CONSTRUCTION, 
TO DANSVILLE 


iGerL 


f=) 
bo 


THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM [Jan. 10 


; L 
Re PRS \ a 
1! LousviLLe\\\, 
\ BRANCH \% 
PANN _ 
\ \ 
SS, 
| BOULDER LAKE W\. 
! .\ 
) \ 
4} \ : 
=x MARSHALL (//’ \ 
ee SS 
-e. . 
ELDORADO >~ MARSHALL ' 
~ 
SPRINGS Ss. BRANCH i 
‘ 


/ 
\ / 
/  cousvicte £/ 


E Soe POWER HOUSE 
SUPERIOR RA G 
~ 


LAFAYETTE 


= 


_ 


LOUISVILLE JCT. 


x 
~] SeuekSS ELECTRIFIED TRACKS H7.ALC. 
\ 4 MILES | 4 . 500 VOLT. 
BURNS ICT. 9} SECS FEEDER LINES. 
BROOMFIELD rs SSiMLES CATENARY CONSTRUCTION. 
} X SECTION BREAKS. 
f @ PASSENGER STATION. 
‘ 
/ 
CHURCHES 
4 
\ 
\ 
x 
* SEMPER 


\ 
\ 
ANSTEES &) 


i THE DENVER & INTERURBAN RRO. 
ji MAP OF ELECTRIFIED LINES 

(I HARRIS 1,000 VOLT SINGLE PHASE 
\ TROLLEY CONSTRUCTION 


DENVER 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 63 


a positive block system, the process of having the ru_es set 
aside so that a ‘‘special”’ can proceed against the block is 
about as difficult as to repair the fault itself. Most of the time 
of a service interruption is consumed in reaching the fault, not 
in locating or repairing it. Sectionalization does not help this 
part of the probiem. 

The natural answer to all of this is that the high-voltage 
trolley system must be put up so that line troubles rarely occur. 
That looks like quite a task with 11,000-volt operation, but as 
one gets acquainted with this high voltage construction most of 
the difficulties disappear. One important feature, according to 
present practice, is the exclusive use of porcelain for insulation. 
At first it looked as if the porcelain could not safely be subjected 
to the heavy physical strains of the catenary construction, but 
it has been found that standard forms of insulators, when 
properly harnessed, can be tested out with 14,000 lb. compression 
and 22,000 volts electrical strain at the same time. Thus far 
the physical strains in the catenary circuits do not exceed 5,000 Ib. 
per wire, and there will be a factor of safety of about three 
for an insulator in a single wire or half that, if one insulator is 
used for both messenger and trolley wires. The use of built-up 
insulators is not promising. The use of wood, although the 
wood may be a good insulator, has the objection that if there 
be leakage across the wood and the wood be burned in two, 
then down comes the catenary construction. With porcelain 
properly harnessed, the only result of a broken insulator is 
reduced insulation. The line does not come down, because 
the harness is interlocked. With two insulators in tandem, 
the line will remain operative. 

Mr. Murray’s third recommendation of 22 ft. for general 
working distance of the trolley from the rail, seems to be about 
right, as has been said once or twice this evening, and this means 
a standard clearance of 24 ft. above the rail for the “ through ” 
'and ‘‘under” bridges, and still greater clearances for other 
overhead structures, whenever physical conditions permit. In 
a large majority of cases (barring tunnels and city street-cross- 
ings) new construction can be designed for 24 ft. clearance with- 
out much difficulty or material effect in cost. The troubles of 
the electrical engineer will be materially reduced if the railways 
will make this the standard clearance for new construction. 

The feature of high insulation factors for construction under 
low bridges should be characteristic throughout the entire in- 
stallation, for the reasons which I have given. There is no 
reason for not having such an insulation factor. 

Mr. Murray also speaks of the auxiliary wires passing under 
bridges, and advises the use of lead-covered cables with end- 
bells. A short section of insulated cable, in a grounded sheath, 
in the middle of a long overhead line, is a mighty difficult thing 
to install properly so that the insulation will not be frequently 
broken down. Inasmuch as the trolley wire has to go under 


C4 THE NEW HAVEN SYSTEM [Jan. 16 


the bridge, and the trolley must be bare, it would seem possible 
to put the auxiliary wire under the bridge in much the same 
- way, and with equal safety. 

One gratifying feature about catenary construction erected 
on grounded brackets or grounded bridges is that there are 
grounded structures close to and frequently above the live wires, 
and consequently little probability of disturbance from lightning. 
The Rochester division of the Erie road has been in operation 
for about eight months, and through nearly all the lightning 
season of last year there was practically no disturbance on the 
11,000-volt system due to lightning, although there were bad 
thunder storms through that district, and a nearby high-tension 
line was struck repeatedly. On the other hand, in the single- 
phase system there occur occasionally heavy disturbances re- 
sulting in surges approximating lightning in severity, and if 
anything but porcelain be used for insulation (for instance, in 
the case of lead-covered cables above referred to) I should an- 
ticipate that such surges would occasionally break through the 
insulation. 

On this Rochester division there is a telephone system on the 
same poles with the trolley line. With proper transpositions 
and suitable means for removing the “ static’’ from the tele- 
phone line, it operates satisfactorily and without shock to the 
operators. 

W. S. Murray: I am happy to feel that Mr. Stillwell bears 
me out along the ideas of a practical investigation. I think that 
mental reservations on this floor, where our mistakes may be 
brought out and discussed, is a great error. Our mistakes 
teach us more than our theories, and I think this floor is the 
place to discuss our troubles as well as our successes. 

Mr. Potter spoke of pinning his faith to the third-rail instead 
of the overhead construction. In regard to that, I can simply 
say this is a problem much larger than the one we are discussing 
to-night; but I have reason to believe that on long-distance 
traction work the question of operating expense will unquestion- 
ably be the paramount feature, and hold the overhead construction 
and alternating-current transmission direct to motors a neces- 
sity. I can almost say that experience bears me out in this 
regard, even within restricted zones of electric traction. 

I think that the necessity of two feeders can be explained 
quickly by saying that in the event of trouble the .interlocking 
of the feeder system as established on the New Haven road is 
such that if trouble occurs on one feeder, by by-passing around 
through switches on the anchor bridges we are enabled to cut 
out any feeder-section and make repairs, thereby giving a more 
reliable continuity of service. 

I thoroughly agree with Mr. Potter that the sections should be 
greater in length. I think that from three to five miles sounds 
reasonable, but local conditions govern better what the actual 
distance should be, I am quite convinced that were we to draw 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 65 


up specifications for the New Haven electrification again, I would 
be in favor of a longer section. This, as brought out in the 
paper, does not interfere with the conterminous arrangement of 
towers, which is most important. 

In regard to pantagraphs operating under low bridges, Mr. 
Potter has brought out an important and deleterious feature of 
the overhead system. It isa problem that must be solved. We 
first started our electrification by a system of supports under 
low bridges, at vcry short intervals, and the result was, due to 
the effect of the locomotive blasts, that grounds developed very 
rapidly, This trouble has been overcome by eliminating the 
large number of supports, resorting to only two; and, instead of 
having the insulation in the middle point directly over the track, 
-as at first installed, it has been placed at the side, so that the 
locomotive blasts do not affect the main insulators. Since we 
changed the construction to the latter arrangement, we have 
experienced absolutely no trouble in the grounding of the con- 
tact conductor (or messenger cables which are connected to it) 
under low bridges. This form of construction has been in use 
for four or five months. 

In regard to the fact that for mechanical reasons we have to 
increase the copper in overhead construction high-tension work, 
the fact also must not be overlooked that the total copper is 
still in a minute ratio to the amount of copper required for an 
equivalent amount of power with the same loss transmitted on 
the alternating-current—direct-current system. 

Operating the anchor bridge switches by levers would bring an 
increase of operating cost. 1 do not approve of this, particularly 
as lever arrangements in switches have been abandoned as 
cumbersome in places where quick action is required, and such 
a place as the operating towers calls for quick action. 

In general, I agree with Mr. Lyford about the single-track 
feeder arrangement. In its application to long distances, how- 
ever, I think a feeder arrangement for single-track construction 
is quite necessary, particularly where the headway is short and 
the traffic heavy. Should such trouble as he spoke of develop 
in the middle of the line, it is not uncommon in railway practice 
to operate to that point on both sides. In such a contingency 
the feeder or by-pass offers quick relief; it is not costly, and is 
constantly saving power. I certainly agree with him in regard ~ 
to porcelain insulation in the place of moulded material, if it is 
possible to obtain the tension and compression strains in porce- 
lain that is obtained in molded material. 

Mr. Lyford’s suggestion to use the same form of feeder con- 
struction under low bridges as is adopted in the trolley is a good 
one, provided the clearances can be obtained under the low 
bridges in question. Abutment walls are so near to the tracks 
that it becomes a rather difficult thing to put in this kind of 
construction, especially if, besides feeders, other wires, such as 
power wires and signal wires, have to be taken care of. 


A paper presented at a special meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, January 2A, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I.E.E. 


THE BEST ENGINEERING EDUCATION 


AN INTRODUCTION TO A DIGEST OF THE PAPERS ON ENGINEERING 
EDUCATION IN THE TRANSACTIONS OF THE AMERICAN IN- 
STITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, WITH A VIEW TO RE- 
NEWED DISCUSSION OF THE POINTS CONTAINED THEREIN 


BY CHAS. F. SCOTT 


The recent rapid development of the electrical industry owes 
its vitality to the engineering school. Its graduates have done 
the designing, constructing, operating, and directing which have 
made possible the rapid progress and wide extension in the use 
of electricity. The ideals, the equipment, and the methods in 
engineering education, as well as the number and size of the 
schools, show a remarkable rate of progress. In fact, the ad- 
vance in the electrical industry, in engineering education, and 
in the American Institute of Electrical Engineers closely cor- 
respond when measured numerically. There has been a close 
interrelation between them. 

The future prosperity of the industry and of the Institute 
depends upon the efficiency of engineering education to an ex- 
tent which one realizes more fully the closer he studies the 
subject. It well merits our best thought. 

A review of the papers which have been presented to the 
Institute on engineering education shows that among our mod- 
ern professors there are those who are active and alert and up- 
to-date. There is a marked agreement. between the teaching 
profession and the engineering profession, both in an apprecia- 
tion of the importance of the subject and in the general purposes 
which the engineering school should aim to accomplish. As 
engineers, it is quite unnecessary to argue that our schools 

67 


68 SCOTT: ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


should be more efficient and that their graduates should be better 
equipped for the work they are to do, as the professors are 
urging us to tell them how to accomplish these very objects. 

Before discussing how to do something, it would be well to 
decide what it is we desire to do. What do those who use en- 
gineering graduates want them to be able to do? Ideas have 
varied. Some expect trained artisans, others. trained engineers 
who are ready at once to do any kind of engineering work. 
Some expect technical specialists; while others call for men 
of ability who have a general preparedness for doing any kind 
of work. Some are disappointed if graduates are not im- 
mediately productive; while others provide courses of practical 
training. As all boys are not alike, and as their future em- 
ployers have different ideas, and as their jobs will not be the 
same, it reasonably follows that there is room for more than one 
kind of training in college. The problem is not wholly ab- 
stract; it is vitally concrete. Its solution is not a rigid and 
narrow one, but it involves general policies. The details of 
method are to be determined by varying conditions and are 
to be adapted to the varying personal qualities of the young 
men. 

In general, instruction in engineering schools is of three 
varieties: 

a. Practical or industrial. 

b. Scientific. 

c. Cultural. 

Practical or industrial studies are intended either as illustra- 
tions of scientific principles or as a direct preparation for bus- 
iness or professional life. 

Scientific studies are the foundation for the applications and 
make the latter possible. 

Cultural studies broaden the student’s mental horizon, offset 
the narrowing effects of technical studies, and prepare for ac- 
tivities which are not purely technical. 

The best engineering education is that which fits the indi- 
vidual student for his largest development and usefulness in 
the long run, not necessarily immediately after graduation. 
The problem, therefore, is to divide the four years spent in 
school among the three classes of studies in such proportion as 
will bring about the best results. 

The problem is largely one of elimination, as, if all the studies 
were included which have been suggested as being essential or 


1908] SCOTT: ENGINEERING EDUCATION 69 


desirable in the training of an engineering student, the college 
period of 4 years would have to be increased to possibly 
20 or 30 years. 

Among the questions which arise in the discussion are the 
following : 

1. The desirable characteristics of the acceptable graduate 
with respect to: 

a. Practical familiarity with electrical apparatus which will 
enable him to be immediately useful, versus a less practical 
and more general training, which is to be supplemented by an 
apprenticeship course or its equivalent. 

b. Specialized technical training and technical knowledge, 
versus a broader education aimed to develop intellectual power 
rather than the acquisition of technical knowledge. 

2. The arrangement of subjects and courses which will best 
produce the desired results. The following questions arise: 

a. The relative attention to be given to the practical or in- 
dustrial, the scientific, and the cultural. 

b. The relative proportion between subjects which are valu- 
able for imparting technical knowledge and those affording 
training in scientific and logical methods. 

c. The relation between school instruction and practical work; 
whether one should precede the other, and if so which one 
should come first, or whether they should alternate once a 
day, once a year, or at some other rate. 

d, The importance of current engineering practice; of lectures 
by practising engineers; of discussion of current topics in local 
meetings of the Institute. 

e. The degree of desirable differentiation in courses or 
methods on account of differences in the characteristics of in- 
dividual students or in the fields of work they expect to enter. 

f. The sequence of subjects—whether the theroetical ground- 
work should be laid during the first few years and the practical 
subjects reserved until the latter part of the course, or whether 
an intermingling of the two in accordance with the concentric 
method outlined by Professor Karapetoff is to be preferred. 

I venture the prediction that the solution which will find 
most general acceptance will be that which gives to each stu- 
dent the training which fits him for his largest individual de- 
velopment; that for those who are qualified to take an active 
rather than a passive attitude toward their work the broader 
education, which emphasizes training rather than knowledge, 


70 SCOTT: ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan 24 


will be chosen; that a fairly intimate intermingling of college 
work with practical work will be found to conduce to the eff- 
ciency of each, and that the field in which the greatest difference 
of opinion will be present will be with regard to the proposed 
concentric method. This system clashes with time-honored 
educational ideals, but it presents arguments which are so ra- 
tional that the existing method must assume the defensive. 

Those who were present at the Niagara convention will re- 
call that the discussion on the papers of Professors Norris and 
Karapetoff was one of the most animated during the convention, 
and that it was brought to a close only on account of lack of 
time, although it had continued for nearly an hour after the or- 
dinary hour for adjournment. It was the interest in this dis- 
cussion which led to the appointment of an Educational Com- 
mittee by the Institute, and which has led to the present sum- 
mary (prepared by Professor Norris, chairman of the Educational 
Committee) of the educational papers in our TRANSACTIONS as 
a basis for the active continued discussion of this important 
subject. 


DIGEST OF INSTITUTE PAPERS ON EDUCATION 
1892. ANNUAL CoNVENTION, CHICAGO 

Robert B. Owens. The first formal paper on engineering education 
was presented by Professor Owens under the title, ‘‘ Electrotechnical 
Education ’’’. The value of the manual element is emphasized and at- 
tention is called to the departments of mechanic arts which had been 
attached to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Washington 
University, and others. A technical school [according to the author] is 
primarily a place for the preparation of men who expect to earn their 
living as engineers. It is not a school of general culture nor is it a school 
of exact science. It is a device to save time, and teaches the applica- 
tion of pure science to industrial purposes. It is also a post-graduate 
school, and in this respect should rank with schools of law and medicine. 
Professor Owens at that time advocated the employment of a number 
of specialists in order that each student might have the opportunity to 
choose the work for which he is best fitted. While it is expensive to 
supply such specialists, and the equipment to enable them to carry on 
their work is costly, on the score of economy no more profitable ex- 
penditure of money is possible than for the support of technical schools. 
Education is not a money-making business, and can never be made to 
pay for itself. 

Professor Owens outlines the elements of a course in technology, 
basing his recommendations upon the existence of three kinds of elec- 
trical engineers—‘‘ installing engineers, designing engineers, and engi- 
neering scientists ’’. 

ugald C. Jackson. The technical education of the electrical engi- 
neer is one that should continue through life. Professor Jackson con- 


1908} SCOTT; ENGINEERING EDUCATION 71 


fines himself to a small part of this education, namely, the college edu- 
cation, and in order to be perfectly definite, he first outlines the course 
at the University of Wisconsin. The underiying principle is to depend 
on fundamental theories. with a common-sense view to their particular 
applications, in such a way as to aid in diagnosis, not by the application 
of a mathematical formula, but by comparing the accumulated experi- 
ence of the practical world. It is comparatively easy to teach the 
fundamental theories, hence it is frequently overdone It is not so 
easy to educate the judgment of a student in electrical engineering, 
whose entire knowledge of his future profession is acquired from the 
electric bells in his father’s house, and who may never have examined 
a dynamo, or storage-battery until he visited the college laboratory. 
Professor Jackson deplores the effect of the rigid specialization required 
in the technical school, and recommends a preparatory arts course 
when such is possible, and outlines the elements of the technical part 
of the course. It is interesting to note that in the paper delivered by 
him 11 years later he has not materially changed his views. 

“The discussion upon these two papers indicates the real interest 
taken in the subject at that early date. 


1902. ANNUAL CONVENTION, GREAT BARRINGTON 


Between the years 1892 and 1902 practically no attention was paid 
to the subject of technical education.* In the latter year, a session of 
the annual convention was devoted to this subject. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz, in his presidential address, called attention to the 
fact that all future progress in science and engineering depends upon 
the young generation, and to insure an unbroken advance it is of pre- 
eminent importance for the coming generation to enter the field prop- 
erly fitted for the work. Here the outlook appears to him by no means 
entirely encouraging. The proper function of the educational institu- 
tion is to give the student a thorough understanding of the fundamental 
principles of electrical engineering and allied sciences, and a good knowl- 
edge of the methods of dealing with engineering problems. At present 
the average college course does not do this. One of the reasons for the 
inefficiency of the college course is the competition between colleges, 
quantity having been increased at the expense of quality. Memory is 
developed at the expense of the reasoning faculty, and the college courses 
would be improved if one-half or more of the material taught should be 
dropped from their curricula, and the rest taught so as to be fully under- 
stood with reference to general principles and methods. 

One objectionable feature of the instruction at most colleges is the 
“step-by-step”? method. One subject is taken up, by application of 
sufficient time and energy pushed through, and then after the examina- 
tion it is dropped and another subject is taken up. To understand a 
subject thoroughly requires several years’ familiarity with it, so that 


* A. A. Hammerschlag prepared a paper in December 1898 on the subject of the edu- 
cation of electrical apprentices and foremen. This presented in an excellent matiner the 
importance of properly training a class of men who could never be electrical engineers 
in the sense of their being technically trained. This paper is not abstracted here, as it 
is not in line with the general purpose of the resumé, 


72 SCOTT: ENGINEERING EDUCATION jJan. 24 


the study of any subject which is not kept up during the whole college 
course might just as well be dropped altogether. 

The present method of examination, which consists in expecting a 
student to answer ten questions or so in a few hours, is faulty. It shows 
what the student has memorized, but not how far he understands the 
subject. In electrical engineering, nothing beyond the general prin- 
ciples is needed for success; time spent in memorizing things to be for- 
gotten afterwards is entirely wasted. 

Dr. Steinmetz outlines the ideal course in electrical engineering, ad- 
vising a good foundation in elementary mathematics, with no mem- 
orizing of integral formulas which can be looked up in a reference book 
when required. A thorough knowledge of science, including physics 
and chemistry, both theoretical and applied, is strongly urged. Elec- 
trical laboratory work should be taken up from the start, even before 
the theory is understood. Design of electrical apparatus is of secondary 
utility, and rather objectionable, with the exception of some very simple 
apparatus. Far better is the reverse operation, the analytical investiga- 
tion of existing apparatus. 

Samuel Sheldon called attention to the necessity for uniformity in 
electrical engineering courses, pointing out the wide difference in prac- 
tice in various institutions; for example, engineering students at Cornell 
University spend ten times as much time on shopwork as those in the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The range in the various 
subjects in terms of hour units* are in mathematics from 5 to 11; drawing, 
83 to 10; physics and chemistry, 7 to 25; English, 0 to 11.3; French and 
German, 0 to 10; shopwork, 0 to 21; electrical engineering, 9.5 to 23.8; 
other engineering, 7.7 to 23.2, thesis and elective, 0 to 7.1. He points 
out that the aims of a liberal education are as follows: 

1. To discipline the mind so as to create a power for codrdinate thought. 

2. To impart a knowledge of facts. 

3. To develop a power of expression in language or in action. 

4. To discipline emotional sympathy so as to develop an esthetic taste. 

5. To discipline the moral faculty. 

The curriculum has a twofold purpose. First to assist the student in 
choosing a calling which will be congenial and suited to his ability, and 
secondly to develop equally all his faculties. While radically different 
in purpose from the arts course, the technical course should produce 
something of the same results. On the other hand, the legitimate 
ultimate purposes of a technical institution are so utilitarian and dif- 
ferent from those of the liberal] institutions, that the extensive use of 
electives on the part of professors, which is so admirably adapted to 
ordinary college requirements. is detrimental to the best interests of 
the technical student and is wasteful of his time. 

William Esty. At the same convention Professor Esty outlined sev- 
eral ways in which instruction can be made practical as well as scien- 
tific. The ideal education for the engineer is a literary and scientific 
course of a general nature, covering three or four years, followed by a 


I a A ee a RRS Bete 
* An hour in this sense is one hour per week per academic year. This equals about 
36 actual hours of lecture recitations, or quiz, or 72 actual hours in the draw'ng room 
, 

jatoratory or shop. 


1908) SCOTT: ENGINEERING EDUCATION 73 


special technical course extending from two to three additional years. 
The tendency to regard an engineering course as post-graduate pro- 
fessional work is increasing, as is evidenced by the increased number 
of graduates of humanistic colleges taking engineering studies. Pro- 
fessor Esty’s rules for planning a course in electrical engineering are: 

1 To teach thoroughly those things in college which are fundamental. 

2. To devote little time to highly specialized subjects. 

3. To introduce the student to those branches of knowledge which 
in his later life he can acquire only with increasing difficulty, if at all. 

4. To endeavor to cultivate in him the hunger and thirst for more 
and deeper knowledge. so that he may remain a student throughout life. 

H. W. Buck presented his views of the education of the electrical 
engineer from the standpoint of a technically trained practising engi- 
neer. In its present state, electrical engineering is the most scientific 
of all engineering professions. A man must be to a great extent a phy- 
sicist, a chemist, and a mathematician, as well as being familiar with 
machinery and its design, in order to be a worker in the broadest field. 
The best course of training for an electrical engineer would seem to be 
a broad course of education in general subjects at the preparatory school, 
then a college course with general subjects during the first year, followed 
by those general and theoretical subjects that have a direct bearing 
upon the practice of the electrical profession. This includes such studies 
as mathematics, mechanics, physics, chemistry, theoretical electri- 
city and magnetism, and thermodynamics. This study should be sup- 
plemented by actual daily practical work with machinery operated by 
the principles covered by the theory studied, and demonstrating all the. 
phenomena incident to the theory. Mr. Buck advocates practical ap- 
prenticeship work subsequent to the completion of the college course. 
In addition to the theory and practice involved in this training, other 
elements are necessary for the successful engineer. There are many 
qualities required in common with other professions; executive ability, 
business knowledge, presence of mind, ability to handle men, nerve, re- 
sourcefulness in handling machinery in times of emergency—all these are 
necessary for the successful engineer. These elements cannot be ac- 
quired in the study of theory and practice alone, for many men who 
have stood high in their college courses have afterward failed in the 
practice of their profession because of a lack of some or all of these qual- 
ities. 

E. B. Raymond. In another paper at the Great Barrington conven- 
tion Mr. Raymond proposed the dropping from technical courses of all 
subjects not of a technical nature, such as language, history, literature, 
and political economy. The time should be spent entirely upon a theo- 
retical and practical course, which will produce broadminded men with 
intellect, strength, training, and purpose. To this end the professors 
should be men of force of character, as well as men of intellectual at- 
tainment, and the courses at college should be so arranged that recitation 
rooms and laboratories could be regarded by the students as we look 
upon our offices. One of the most essential qualifications of the suc- 
cessful engineer is that he shall be filled with the desire for continual 


study. After graduation is the time for him to get his knowledge of real 


74 SCOTT: ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


detail, amplifying the general knowledge obtained in college by prac- 
tical investigation. 

The discussion on the above papers was even more extensive and inter- 
esting than that at Chicago, and indicated an increased interest on the 
part of practising engineers. 


1903. ANNUAL CONVENTION, NIAGARA FALLS 


At tais convention a joint session with the Society for the Promotion 
of Engineering Education was held. Messrs. J. G. White, Bancroft 
Gherardi, L. A. Osborne, representing employers of technical graduates, 
and Professor Dugald C. Jackson presented papers The consensus of 
opinion expressed in these papers is that the personality of the technical 
graduate is of more importance than any information which he may 
have acquired. 

J. G. White. The results of a successful education may be sum- 
marized as (a) the satisfaction which results from possession; (b) the 
ability to enjoy good society; (c) the practical use which may be made 
of the training; (d) the ability properly to know any subject, and (e) 
the higher rank which will be taken as a result of this training. 

Technical education should produce engineers, not students. It should 
develop not dreamers, but workers, thoroughly competent in their 
spheres whether great or small. It is better for the world and for the 
man that he should be a high-class mechanic or artisan, with a good 
common-school education, than that he should be nominally an “ engi- 
neer’’, having a smattering of many subjects. The importance of thor- 
oughness is supreme. 

The telephone engineer’s work is an example of the severe requirements 
of engineering practice. A few years ago many of us would have sup- 
posed that the problems of the telephone engineer were those of a high- 
class artisan, but a modern telephone engineer must even know some- 
thing of architecture, the strength of materials, and other factors entering 
into modern steel building construction, and be familiar with many 
other subjects not ordinarily supposed to come within the province of 
a telephone engineer. Other engineers should likewise have a general 
knowledge of the sciences and of the broad underlying principles of en- 
gineering, based upon a thorough mastery of elementary mathematics 
and supplemented by some study of languages, history, civics, and other 
studies of general educational value. 

Bancroft Gherardi. Treating the subject from the standpoint of the 
telephone engineer, Mr. Gherardi lays down the general proposition that 
an engineer’s qualifications are made up of two factors, personality 
and training. The training of a telephone engineer should not be es- 
sentially different from that of other electrical engineers, the training 
of any engineer properly consisting of such studies as will convince him 
of the necessity of getting facts, and teaching him the best method of 
doing so. Further, these studies should train in the interpretation of 
engineering data and in reasoning from them. Throughout his paper 
Mr. Gherardi emphasizes the necessity for relating theory and practice, 
suggesting that while fundamentals should be the most prominent, ex- 
amples should be drawn from each branch of electrical engineering to 


ee >. 


1908) SCOTT: ENGINEERING EDUCATION 75 


which the fundamental principle may apply. In this way the value of 
the principle will be borne in upon the mind of the student. He will 
be helped to see theory and practice in the proper perspective, and will 
be aided in deciding upon the particular branch of engineering for which 
he is being fitted. The examples will also not be without some practical 
value in his early professional work. In regard to his experience with 
technical graduates, Mr. Gherardi states that the training they receive, 
notwithstanding its imperfections, is of great value to them and to those 
for whom they work. . 

L. A. Gsborne impresses the facts that the large majority of young 
technical graduates are not fitted by temperament or training for pure 
engineering work, and that they regard it only as a stepping stone to 
business. At the same time the teachers of these men have proceeded 
on the assumption that they would be ultimately engaged in engineering. 
He therefore advocates the broadening of courses to the end that the 
whole body of engineers will enter upon their work with a fuller com- 
prehension of its duties and opportunities. Mr. Osborne contends that 
shopwork should be taught with a view to training the student in the 
principles which underlie the tool organism of a shop. He should know 
more about the functions of tools, the principles of their design, and 
their relations to each other. While it is true that familiarity in these 
lines comes largely from experience, the author infers that the schools 
can have a share in providing it. Works-accounting, the problems of 
capital and labor, the law of contracts, and other such apparently non- 
engineering subjects should not be neglected in the engineering curri- 
culum. 

Dugald C. Jackson. Professor Jackson calls attention to the fact that 
since he brought up the subject in 1892, the sentiment-regarding college 
men has entirely changed. These men have become influential in engi- 
neering practice. The business of the engineering colleges is to produce, 
not finished engineers, but young men with a great capacity for be- 
coming engineers. The names attached to the subjects taught are not 
very important as the results produced by the teaching, namely, the 
effect produced upon the students, show. The ideal engineer is com- 
petent to conceive, organize, and direct extended industrial enterprises 
of broadly varied character. He must be a keen thinker with an ex- 
tended knowledge of natural laws, and an instinctive capacity for rea- 
soning from cause to effect. He must also know men and their affairs, 
business methods, and the affairs of the business world. The ideal 
course in electrical engineering should include the following underlying 
training. 

1. That fuller training in the construction of the English language 
which is requisite to clear thinking and clear writing, preferably accom- 
panied by an additional language for added strength. 

2. The collateral art of expression in drawing. 

3. Mathematics through an appropriate amount of calculus, including 
the integration and solution of equations involving derivatives, and 
instruction in the use of co-planar vectors, and perhaps quaternion 
quantities—all of which should be taught as applied logic with special 
emphasis laid on interpretating the meaning of equations, 


76 SCOTT: ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


4. The science of chemistry, soundly taught. 

5. The science of physics soundly taught, with particular emphasis 
taid on the elementary mechanics. 

6. Applied mechanics. 

Mechanics—the philosophy of matter, force, and energy—is the back- 
bone of the electrical engineer’s college training. 

He also outlined laboratory and practical courses, which should ac- 
company the fundamentals. He deprecated the use of descriptive 
courses as having a tendency to neutralize the advantage resulting from 
instruction in fundamentals. 

The work in electrical engineering should be divided into: applied 
electromagnetism, the theory and practice of alternating variable cur- 
rents, applied electrochemistry, electrometallurgy, and electrical in- 
stallations. 

In analyzing the courses advertised in college catalogues Professor 
Jackson finds three varieties of instruction. In the first of these, elec- 
trical engineering is taught as an illustration of the beauties of nature, 
rather than of its great underlying laws. The instructors in these courses 
are out of touch with the industrial world. The second class of instruc- 
tion is apparently intended to train inexperienced students to assume 
positions of responsibility and large remuneration. The third variety 
of instruction approximates the ideals laid out in the paper. In closing, 
Professor Jackson states that many of the greatest weaknesses in engi- 
neering courses are that the heads of colleges or universities do not 
understand what engineering truly stands for, and they often have no 
fair conception of the soundness of training that is required for its prac- 
tice. 

1903. SEPTEMBER MEETING 


Chas. F. Scott, in his inaugural address as president proposed that 
universities and technical schools with educational engineering depart- 
ments should hold local meetings of the Institute for benefiting both 
instructors and students by keeping them in touch with recent develop- 
ments and practice. It is argued that theoretical training in fundamental 
principles should predominate and that such Institute meetings will 
enable the student to keep in touch with actual things and give him a 
more adequate idea of the career for which he is preparing. It will 
supplement his theoretical training, making it definite and certain, so 
that he may properly assimilate the instruction he receives. It will 
show him that the electrical enginec: needs much more than mere tech- 
nical training, and it will tend to make his college work less abstract and 
more concrete and efficient. 


1907. ANNUAL CoNVENTION, NraGARA FALts 


Henry H. Norris. At this convention education was the subject of 
two papers; one by Professor H. H. Norris, the other by Professor V. 
Karapetoff. In Professor Norris’ paper emphasis was laid upon the 
elements of personality in the technical students. The elements of 
success in technical training are: 

1. The attraction and retention of desirable students and the exclusion 
of those not qualified for technical work, 


~] 
~1 


1908] SCOTT: ENGINEERING EDUCATION 


2. The selection of such studies as will stimulate and direct mental 
activity. 

3. The conducting of all courses in such ways as will tend to bring out 
the desirable personal qualities in the students. 

4. The recommendation to the students of those lines of engineerin 
practice for which they are bect suited. 

In developing the subject the author made use of a magnetic analogy 
of a technical training. The mind of the student was compared to a 
piece of magnetic material which possesses the ability to be magnetized 
on account of the inherent magnetism of its molecules. A piece of 
iron or steel is magnetized when its intrinsic qualities are subjected to 
a direct magnetomotive force. In a similar manner the young men 
entering the technical school possess certain elements of personality. 
The function of the instruction is to supply the directive force necessary 
to bring out the student’s latent qualities. The student gets little that 


MIM TTT 


AMALIA YT 
SCIENCES | 
ao 
LT 
FRESHMAN - SOPHOMORE JUNIOR SENIORJ 
> : 


is new from his college course, and if the attempt is made to impart to 
him more information than is necessary to stimulate him to his best 
endeavors, mental saturation results. The writer traces the history of 
the technical school, and refers in some detail to that of Sibley College, 
which with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology was a pioneer 
in electrical engineering instruction. The present curriculum of Sibley 
College was outlined in order to permit it to be compared with the ideals 
laid down. In order to indicate the lines of work taken up by tech- 
nical graduates an analysis of the present occupations of the numbers 
of graduates of Sibley College was given. 
. Vladimir Karapetoff. In his paper ‘“‘On the Concentric Method of 
Teaching Electrical Engineering ’’ Professor Karapetoff outlines a four- 
year college course different from the usual courses in two respects: 

‘1. The course begins with the practical descriptive side of engineer- 
ing and gradually leads into the theory, contrary to the present system, 
which begins -with the theory. 


78 SCOTT: ENGINEERING EDUCATION (Jan. 24 


2. Each year is made as far as possible self-contained, so that the 
student’s horizon is gradually ‘‘ concentrically ’’ widened, and he is pre- 
pared for lower practical positions after the very first year in the college. 

Moreover, according to this method, the student does not need to 
select a particular branch of engineering the first, or even the second 
year. In the first year he gets a ‘‘ cyclopedia ”’ of electrical, mechanical, 
civil, and mining engineering, and is given a chance to judge for himself 
which branch he likes the best. In the second year he is again given an 
opportunity to select between the mechanical and the electrical engineer- 
ing. In the third year he gets straight electrical engineering; and in 
the tourth year specializes in the mathematical and physical theory of 
his profession. He also chooses a few elective branches, such as electric 
railways, telephony, power transmission, design, etc. 

The advantages claimed for the above arrangement of the courses - 
we as follows: 


GENERAL CULTURE 


SPECIAL 
ELECTIVE 
STUDIES 


FRESHMAN . =: SOPHOMORE JUNIOR SENIOR 
I —— 


1. The student selects his profession after having had an outline 
course in it, in parallel with a few other allied specialties. 

2. The method of beginning with the practical side, in other words 
with the ultimate results, is more psychological than beginning with 
abstract auxiliary sciences. 

3. The interest and the professional feelings in the student are early 
aroused. 

4. He can spend his vacations more profitably, having had engi- 
neering courses from the start; he can also be interested in technical 
literature and societies earlier than is possible with the present method. 

5. A possibility is created for producing ‘learned artizans’’ who 
have taken one or two of the early years, and may then be useful in 
practice as assistants, or can do independent work in newly opened parts 
of the country, etc. 

6. The theory, being built on the known facts of experience, will be 
less abstract, and more in unity with the requirements of practice. 


A paper presented at a special meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, New York, January 24, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I.E.E. 


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING EDUCATION 


BY CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 


When in the following I dwell more on those features of our 
electrical engineering education which appear to me unsatis- 
factory, it is not that I overlook the many good points, but 
rather that a criticism of the few defects appears to me more 
important, for the purpose of urging their elimination. 

In general, the conditions for a good electrical engineering 
education in the United States are far more favorable than any- 
where else; for an electrical engineering industry developed to 
a higher degree and to a greater magnitude than in any other 
country offers a very large field of application to the graduate 
engineer, thus supplying an incentive to enter this profession. 
Unlike other countries, where some opposition to the college- 
trained man, as unpractical, still lingers, the electrical industries 
here prefer, and in many instances demand, a technical college 
training for their engineering staffs. There is a tendency now 
to demand this training even for administrative and commercial 
positions. This leads to a close codperation between the elec- 
trical industry and the engineering college. The leaders of the 
industry take a close and active interest in technical educational 
work, while teachers of engineering consider it as their foremost 
duty closely to follow and keep informed of the advances of the 
electrical industries, sometimes even are actively engaged in 
industrial work; and as early as possible the students are intro- 
duced to the industry, by visits to factories, inspection trips etc., 
which become more and more an important part of the college 
education. This is as it should be, and probably constitutes the 
strongest features of American engineering education. 

While many, especially smaller colleges, are not financially 

79 


80 STEINMETZ: ENGINEERING EDUCATION _ [Jan. 24 


strong, in general the means available to the American college 
of engineering are far superior to those abroad, and especially 
in erecting engineering buildings, laboratories, etc., much has 
been done. 

The great defect of the engineering college is the insufficient 
remuneration of the teaching staff: the salaries paid are far below 
those which the same class of men command in industrial work, 
and as a result the college cannot compete with the industry for 
its men, but most of the very best men are out of reach for the 
colleges. The teaching forces of the colleges therefore consist 
of: 1. A few of the very best men, who are specially interested 
in educational work to such an extent that they are willing to 
sacrifice financial returns for it. These men have made the 
engineering college what it is, but even many of these men are 
ultimately forced by considerations of family, etc., to leave 
college work and enter industrialemployment. 2. Many younger 
men interested in teaching, enter college work to give it a trial. 
Some of these remain, but many return to industrial work, 
when they are forced to realize the small prospect of financial 
return offered by the college. 3. First-class men who devote 
a part of their time to the college and a part to industrial work, 
usually consulting engineering. This arrangement is probably 
the best for the college, handicapped as it is by the policy of 
salaries which may have appeared sufficient in branches in 
which no industry competes, but which are suicidal in the en- 
gineering department. Still it would be far preferable if the 
colleges could get the benefit of the whole time and the un- 
divided interest of these men. 

It appears to me, therefore, that a vast improvement could 
be made in electrical engineering education if a large part of 
the sums which now are devoted to marble engineering buildings 
and fancy laboratory equipments could be devoted to offer 
such salaries as to make available to the colleges the undivided 
time and interest of the best men in the field. The name of 
the donor may just as well be perpetuated by the professorship 
which he endows, as by the pile of marble which he erects for 
the college. After all, engineering buildings and college labor- 
atories are of very secondarv importance compared with the 
qualifications of the teacher and his assistants. 

To the subjects taught and the methods of teaching very 
grave objections may be made. The glaring fault of the college 
curriculum is that quantity and not quality seems to be the 


1908] STEINMETZ: ENGINEERING EDUCATION Si 


object sought: the amount of instruction crowded into a four 
years’ course is far beyond that which even the better kind of 
student can possibly digest. Memorizing details largely takes 
the place of understanding principles, with the result that a 
year after graduation much of the matter which had been 
taught has passed out of the memory of the student, and even 
examinations given to the senior class on subjects taught 
during the freshman and sophomore years, reveal conditions 
which are startling and rather condemnatory to the present 
methods of teaching. 

It stands to reason that with the limited time at his disposal, 
it is inadvisable for a student to waste time on anything which 
he forgets in a year or two; only that which it is necessary to 
know should be taught, and then it should be taught so that 
at least the better student understands it so thoroughly as never 
to forget it. That is to say, far better results would be obtained 
if half or more of the mass of details which the college now at- 
tempts to teach, were dropped; if there were taught only the 
most important subjects—the fundamental principles and their 
applications—in short, all that is vitally necessary to an intelli- 
gent understanding of engineering, but this taught thoroughly, 
so as not to be forgotten. This, however, requires a far 
higher grade of teachers than are needed for the mere mem- 
orizing of text-book matters, reciting them, at the end of the 
term passing an examination on the subject and then dropping 
it. The salaries offered by the colleges are not such as to at- 
tract such men. When the student enters college he is not 
receptive to an intelligent understanding, for after a four years’ 
dose in the high school of the same vicious method of memorizing 
a large mass of half and even less understood matters, the 
student finds it far easier to memorize the contents of his text- 
books than to use his intelligence to understand the subject- 
matter. After graduation, years of practice do for the better 
class of students what the college should have done—teach 
them to understand things. It is, however, significant that 
even now young graduates of foreign universities, in spite of 
the inferior facilities afforded abroad, do some of the most 
important electrical development work of this country. Men 
who never had a college education rise ahead of college gradu- 
ates. This would be impossible if our college training gave 
what it should, an intelligent understanding of electrical Spa 


neering subjects. 


82 STEINMETZ: ENGINEERING EDUCATION _ [Jan. 24 


The cause of the fault is perhaps the same that leads to the 
erection of engineering buildings and laboratories while under- 
paying the teaching staff: the competition among the colleges. 
To the father who looks up a college for his boy, marble engi- 
neering buildings and fancy laboratories are impressive, and 
so is an extensive curriculum; the result is a rapid increase in 
the number of students; but it is not to the benefit of the stu- 
dent, since the faster a subject is learned the faster also it is 
forgotten, and to become and remain thoroughly familiar with 
a subject, it is necessary to keep up the study of it for some 
years. While it is a good feature to insure application of the 
student by term examinations, etc., this becomes harmful if 
it leads to dropping the subject at the end of the term. The least 
that can be expected from the college is that at the time of 
graduation the student still knows all that he has been taught 
during his college years. To accomplish this it is necessary to 
keep up the study of every subject to the end of the college 
course. This is not the case at present. 

The different colleges vary between the school teaching the 
trade of electrician, and that attempting to give an intelligent 
electrical engineering education. At the one extreme is the col- 
lege which dropped from its curriculum everything not required 
in electrical engineering. Such a school covers a large ground 
in electrical engineering, may even consider shortening the 
course to three years. The graduate of such a course is a full- 
fledged electrical engineer, capable to ply his trade, just as a 
plumber or brick layer when graduating from his apprentice 
years, and just as helpless and useless when any occasion arises 
requiring general knowledge to enable him to understand 
matters beyond his trade. The unavoidable result -of such 
training is, that when with the development of the industry 
subjects become of importance which were not considered as 
pertaining to the trade of electrical engineering during his 
college years, his usefulness is impaired, younger men rise 
above him, and he cannot hope to rise beyond a subor- 
dinate position. Fortunately, the better technical colleges 
realize that the first requirement of an electrical engineer 
is a thorough general education, and begin to realize that for 
this purpcse it is not sufficient to require general subjects for 
college entrance and relegate their study to the high school: 
for even if the average high school were what it should be and 
not what it actually is, much of the general knowledge required 


1908} STEINMETZ: ENGINEERING EDUCATION 83 


by an educated man cannot be taught in the high school, since 
during the high-school years the intelligence of the boy is not 
sufficiently ripened for its grasp, and a review in the college 
is necessary. 

However, even if an attempt is made to teach or to review 
general subjects, the work is not carried sufficiently far. Me- 
chanical engineering, physics, chemistry, and some civil engineer- 
ing subjects are recognized as legitimate subjects of teachingin 
the electrical engineering course in many colleges, together 
with literature, some history etc.; but physiography, physical 
geography, meteorology, mineralogy, astronomy etc., are also 
of importance in a general engineering education. The failure 
to recognize this may sometime be a severe handicap to the 
electrical engineer, and that in the not very far future, judging 
from the present trend of development. In this direction the 
student, as well as his parents, are frequently antagonistic, 
and cannot see why subjects should be studied, which to their 
limited horizon appear unnecessary. 

The instruction given in those branches of science, a knowl- 
edge of which is required by the electrical engineer, but to which 
only a limited time can be devoted, as chemistry, civil en- 
gineering etc., frequently is very unsatisfactory, being unsuited 
to the requirements of the electrical engineer, and, as a result, 
of very little if any value to him. A general knowledge of these 
branches is required, so as to familiarize the electrical engineer 
with the general problems, methods, and purposes of the science; 
to enable him to understand subjects dealing with these sciences. 
The ability actively to practise the science is not required. To 
illustrate in the case of chemistry: the electrical engineer should 
have a knowledge of the laws of chemistry, a familiarity with 
the elements and their compounds, and a general knowledge of 
the methods of analysis and synthesis. Such a course must, 
therefore, necessarily be largely descriptive, and the experi- 
mental work largely illustrative. The same course is frequently 
given to the electrical engineer as to the first few terms of the 
chemistry student: general inorganic chemistry of the most 
important elements, and qualitative analysis. While a first- 
class beginning of a course of chemistry, such a course leaves 
the engineer with a knowledge altogether too fragmentary to 
be of benefit to him, and the time spent in mastering the mechan- 
ism and the details of qualitative analysis is largely wasted, 
since the electrical engineer will probably never be called upon 


84 STEINMETZ: ENGINEERING EDUCATION  [Jan. 24 


to make an analysis. If he attempted to do so he wou. d prob- 
ably fail. The beginning of a chemist’s training is not suited 
to the chemical training of the electrical engineer, and the same 
applies to all other sciences to which a limited time is devoted 
in the electrical engineering curriculum. To give a general 
view and working knowledge to the electrical engineer of such 
an allied branch of science, theoretical discussions, especially 
mathematical, are usually very little needed and therefore un- 
desirable. A characteristic case of spoiling a science to the 
student by mathematics is that of astronomy. Astronomy is 
one of the most interesting and fascinating of subjects. But 
where taught as a part of the general educational program, it 
frequently is all mathematics, and so hopelessly dry and re- 
pellent. It should be given descriptively, for in a short course 
on astronomy it is just as ridiculous to delve deeply into math- 
ematics as it would be to start the teaching of geography with 
a course in spherical trigonometry. I believe that in the 
teaching of allied sciences our colleges and schools are still 
greatly inferior to those abroad; the result is very marked in 
the product of the colleges, in the inferiority of the general 
education possessed by our graduates. 

It goes without saying that in all teaching the strongest en- 
deavor should be made to correlate the different subjects, -to 
show the students the close relations which exist between all 
the branches of science, no matter how different they appear 
at first sight; and to interest him by bringing home to him-the 
practical importance of what otherwise would appear -dry 
theory. [Tor instance, by using in the teaching of mathematics, 
problems taken from engineering; to have him handle and 
operate machines before proceeding to their theoretical inves- 
tigation; then to derive the constants of the theoretical investi- 
gation from experimental tests of the apparatus; and from 
these predetermine the performance of the apparatus under 
different normal and abnormal conditions and experimentally 
verify it. 

In conclusion, the main defects in the present electrical en- 
gineering training in some of our colleges appear to me as 
follows: 

1. The insufficient remuneration of the teachers, which makes 
most of the best men unavailable for educational purposes and 
is, therefore, largely responsible for the other defects. 

2. The competition between colleges, which leads to a curri- 


1908] STEINMETZ: ENGINEERING EDUCATION 85 
culum marked more by the quantity of the subj:cts taught than 
by the thoroughness of the teaching. The graduates are sent 
out with a mass of half understood and undigested subjects, 
quickly forgotten, and deficient in understanding of the funda- 
mental principles and in the ability to think. 

3. The tendency of some colleges to teach the trade of elec- 
trical engineering rather than educate intelligent and resource. 
ful electrical engineers. 

4. The unsatisfactory state of the teaching of allied sciences, 
which gives instead of general view and understanding of the 
science, a fragmentary knowledge of some details. 


86 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


DiscussIon oN ‘(THE EpUCATION OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGI- 
NEER.”” New York, JANUARY 24, 1908. 


Charles F. Scott: Since preparing this short paper which I 
intend to present this evening, I have taken part in asympositum 
on “The Teaching of Mathematics to Engineeers’’ at a joint 
meeting of the Chicago Section of the American Mathematical 
Society and the Mechanical Section of the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science. My contribution seems to me 
so pertinent to the educational questions now under consideration 
that I shall present it here. 

Mathematics, from the standpoint of the engineer, is a 
means, not an end. It is an instrument or tool by which 
he may determine the value and relations of forces and 
materials. The usefulness of tools depends upon the sort 
of work which is to be done, upon the kinds of tools which are 
available, and upon the skill of the man who usesthem. We 
may inquire, therefore, what are the uses to which the engineer 
may apply mathematics? What kind of mathematics does he 
need? And what skill should he possess in their use? 

First, then, what work is to be done by the young men who 
are now taking engineering courses? A few—and only a few— 
will be original investigators or designers who will need math- 
ematics as an instrument of research. A considerable number 
will regularly employ elementary mathematics in more or less 
routine calculations. Many will have little use for mathemat- 
ics, aS engineering courses are recognized as affording excellent 
training for various business, executive, and other non-technical 
positions, particularly in connection with manufacturing and 
operating companies. It has been said by the vice-president 
of a large electric manufacturing company that not over 10 
per cent. of the technical graduates employed by that company 
are fitted by temperament or by education to take up with 
success the work of pure engineering. A recent classification 
of the giaduates of Sibley College, Cornell University, shows 
that about 50 per cent. are in occupations which require no 
advanced mathematics, and it is probable that many of the 
36 per cent. classed as mechanical and electrical engineers sel- 
dom go beyond the rules of arithmetic. Hence a goodly pro- 
portion of engineering graduates do not need to be mathemat- 
ical experts. Their mathematical studies should not aim to 
produce experts, but should have as a principal object the math- 
ematical training which is a most efficient kind of training in 
an engineering course. On the other hand, the engineers who 
will have practical use for the higher mathematics will find 
their ability as engineers is in a large measure determined by 
their ability as niathematicians. 

Secondiy, what kinds of mathematics does the engineer 
need? This is closely related to the class of work he is to do. 
In general, a great deal of engineering work is done with much 
less use of higher mathematics than most professors probably 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 87 


imagine, and furthermore, it may be remarked, with much less 
than could profitably be employed. Engineers are apt to use 
ordinarily the mathematical methods with which they are most 
familiar and which will bring the result with the least effort. 
One man employs calculus, another draws a diagram, another 
writes out formulas, while still another gets his results by 
mental arithmetic. The object is to get the result. The funda- 
mental idea that mathematics is something for the engineer to 
use finds many illustrative analogies in ordinary tools. 

Adaption is the first requisite; tools should be suited to the 
work to be done. An expensive machine-tool with its refined 
adjustments is quite unnecessary for executing a piece of work 
which can be done with sufficient accuracy by a few minutes’ 
application of a file. In every-day work an ordinary calculating 
slide-rule is infinitely better than a table of seven-place logar- 
ithms. On the other hand, it is particularly wasteful to at- 
tempt to execute a difficult and intricate piece of work with 
inadequate tools. -But more important than the tool is the 
skill of the man who uses it. A skilful workman can accom- 
plish results with a few simple tools which another cannot get 
with the most elaborate special equipment. 

Thirdly, therefore, skill in the use of mathematics is the really 
essential thing. A judicious use of arithmetic with a little 
algebra or a simple diagram often leads to more satisfactory 
results than others obtain through elaborate processes in- 
volving lengthy equations and complicated operations. In the 
latter, errors are liable to occur: the common-sense import of 
the problem is apt to be overlooked; assumptions may be made 
to facilitate calculations which are physically unwarranted, as 
one loses sight of the physical problem in the intricacy of the 
mathematical solution. Abstract mathematical studies, if pur- 
sued as a kind of intellectual callisthenics, may produce a pure 
mathematician, but they may unfit a man for practical engi- 
neering. A mathematician is not necessarily an engineer, nor 
is an elocutionist necessarily a good lecturer, nor a tool expert 
a successful manufacturer. 

Mathematics is used in engineering to express the quantitative 
relations of natural phenomena. The mathematician delights 
in the relations; he divorces them from the phenomena and 
gives them abstract expression. But the engineer is concerned 
with the natural phenomena: he demands the physical concep- 
tion; the medium of expressing these relations is of secondary 
consequence. 

The mathematician evolves the equation for a parabola and 
finds a convenient illustration in the law of projectiles. The 
engineer finds that a physical result follows from the applica- 
tion of certain forces, and uses the formula merely as a.con- 
venient method of expressing the law. The analogue in the 
case of mechanical tools is found by regarding a set of drawing 
instruments or a transit or a lathe, as something intelligently 


88 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


designed, properly proportioned, accurately made, and finely 
finished, the merit of which lies in their own inherent excellence, 
or, on the other hand, by considering them as tools adapted 
for doing a certain range and character of work with a sufficient 
degree of accuracy and at low cost. 

A manual training school gives familiarity with mechanical 
tools, and mathematical study gives familiarity with intellectual 
tools. in working with the manual tool, the boy uses it for 
making something; by making something, he learns the prin- 
ciple on which it operates and the way to use it. If the thing 
made is something useful, it awakens a keener interest than 
perhaps would some fancy device. Likewise training of engi- 
neers in mathematics should be by doing something, by the 
solving of problems, by dealing with real rather than abstract 
conditions. Let this training be obtained while applying math- 
ematics to its normal and legitimate purpose as an auxiliary 
to the study of other branches. 

In the teaching of mathematics for its own gake stress is apt to 
be laid upon the processes of deriving results rather than the 
real meaning of the results themselves. An engineer who uses 
logarithms has no more concern regarding their derivation than 
the ordinary user of the dictionary for finding the pronunciation 
of words has in their etymological derivation. The ability to 
reproduce demonstrations in higher mathematics from memory 
with the book shut is often not as important as it is to under- 
stand them with the book open. In general, an engineer who 
has occasion to use higher mathematics, will not be interested 
in evolving difficult equaticas, nor will he appeal to his 
memory; but with text-book or reference before him he will 
seek the things he wants to use. He should know where to find 
them and how to use them. 

In emphasizing what a skilled mechanic can make with 
very ordinary tools, or the true engineer can accomplish with the 
parallelogram of forces and the rule of three, there is no inten- 
tion of discrediting the value of fine equipments both mechan- 
ical and mathematical if there be the ability to use them. 

Possibly the practical utility of mathematics may appear to 
be urged too strongly, particularly as the writer really believes 
in thorough mathematical training; but he has seen so many 
cases in which mathematical instruction has never been di- 
gested and assimilated, so many simple mental processes con- 
fused by unnecessary mathematical complications, so many 
men satisfied with results which are absurd because of some 
mathematical equations, sometimes quite unnecessary—that 
a common-sense perspective view of ordinary things seems to 
need emphasizing. He recalls the new insight into math- 
ematics which came through the study of analytic mechanics 
under Professor S. W. Robinson at the Ohio State University, 
and problems in mechanics under Dr. Fabian Franklin at Johns 
Hopkins University, that he feels there is little danger in overs 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 89 


emphasizing the importance of concrete training in mathemat- 
ical study. 

The practical questions which the discussion of this subject 
presents are these: 

1. What mathematical subject-matter should be covered? 

2. How should it be taught? 

The first difficulty is that there is not, and cannot be, a 
differentiation in technical education which is at all compar- 
able with the wide range of occupations into which graduates 
will enter. We may assume, therefore, that we are considering 
the case of the average engineering student, taking for granted 
that options may be used by the best students to enable them 
to take up the more advanced and difficult mathematics. Ob- 
viously, the student should have enough mathematics to enable 
him to demonstrate the important engineering laws and _ for- 
mulas, and to read intelligently mathematically written engineer- 
ing literature. While only the relatively simple mathematics 
is commonly used by engineers, yet the ability to handle new 
problems with confidence requires a thorough understanding, 
and appreciation of the significance of the mathematical and 
physical basis of the laws and phenomena he is to use. A man 
who is a thorough mathematician and knows how to apply his 
knowledge has a great advantage over the pure mathematician 
or the man without mathematical training. The better knowl- 
edge one has of the complex, the more certainty he has in 
applying the simple. A student should understand something 
of the power of the advanced mathematics and the field of 
their efficient application. Although he may not be expert 
in using them himself, he will know when to call for a math- 
ematical expert. 

An engineer of fairly wide experience remarked a short time 
ago: 
The ordinary engineer does not use higher mathematics because he 
doesn’t know how. He does not have the proper conception of the funda- 
mental principles of the calculus because the subject has been taught by 
men whose ideals are those of pure mathematics. 

‘If mathematics is something for engineers to use, let their 
use be taught to engineering students. After the fundamentals 
are learned, the students should attack the engineering problem 
at once and bring in mathematics as a means of solving it. 
Mathematics is often advocated for developing the reasoning 
powers and the ability to reason from cause to effect; there is 
danger, however, that mathematical machinery may make the 
mere process obscure the cause and the effect. Let cause and 
effect be foremost, with the progess secondary or auxiliary to 
them. The way mathematics is brought to bear on some en- 
gineering problems reminds one of the story of the old lady who 
greatly admired her preacher because he could take a simple 
text and make it so very complicated. 

Old traditions have not wholly disappeared; the fear of de- 


90 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


grading the pure science of mathematics by applying it to useful 
things still lingers—in influence, if not in precept. We must 
go further and adapt mathematics to engineering, not only 
in subject-matter, but in method. A mathematical teacher 
with no patience for anything except mathematics will probably 
teach a kind of mathematics which has no connection with any- 
thing except mathematics. Engineering mathematics may be 
better taught as a part of engineering by an engineer, than as 
a part of mathematics by a pure mathematician. The maker 
of levels and transits who is expert in the construction of the 
instruments and an enthusiast over the accuracy of the surfaces, 
the excellence of the bearings, the near approach to perfection 
in the graduation, and the general refinement and beauty of 
workmanship, may make a good instructor on instruments, 
but a poor teacher of civil engineering. 

After all, it is not so much abstract courses as it is men with 
which we have to do; it is not mere knowledge of facts or facility 
in mathematical manipulation, but it is training. The young 
man is to be developed; his native individuality is to be the 
basis; he is to increase not only his knowledge but his powers 
and the ability to use them. It is not mathematical skill so 
much as a mathematical sense, or mathematical common-scnse, 
which is wanted. With pure mathematics as a science we have 
no quarrel—and little affiliation. 

We are concerned with applied mathematics. The ability 
to state a problem; to recognize the elements which enter into 
it; to see the whole problem without overlooking some important 
factor; to use good judgment as to the reliability or accuracy 
of the data or measurements which are involved; and, on the 
other hand, the ability to interpret the result; to recognize its 
physical significance; to get a common-sense perspective view 
of its meaning and the consequences which may follow; to note 
the bearing of the various data upon the final result; to deter- 
mine what changes in original conditions may change a bad 
result into one which is practical and efficient—such abilities 
as these are of a higher order than the ability to take a stated 
problem and work out the answer. It may be urged that all 
this is not strictly mathematics. But it is just this sort of 
judgment and insight which makes mathematics really useful, 
and without them there is danger that they may be neither safe 
nor sane. 

If you ask men who use engineering graduates what qualities 
they should possess, you will find that special prominence is 
‘“common-sense’”’ and ‘‘the ability to do things.’? In mathe- 
matical training it is quality rather than quantity which is of 
first consequence. Mathematical training should develop a 
faculty for systematic and logical reasoning, thus furnishing a 
general method as well as a specific means of getting results. 

The trend in education is to a closer relation to the affairs 
of life. Science and applied science, scientific and engineering 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 91 


laboratories are overcoming old ideas and prejudices. Modern 
engineering development brings its transforming influence to 
bear upon education as well as the utilities of modern life. The 
engineering school has had a phenomenal growth within the 
lifetime of the recent graduate—a growth in ideals and methods 
as well as in students and equipment. It has raised and agi- 
tated broad questions as to what constitutes efficient education 
for producing effective men. It has aimed to combine not only 
the abstract with the concrete, the lecture room with the lab- 
oratory and the scientific experiment with the practical test; 
but it has sought by various means to bring the work of the 
school into close relation with active professional and com- 
mercial practice. It has a definiteness of aim and purpose 
which other educational courses are apt to lack. It sets out 
to produce men who can deal with forces and materials accord- 
ing to scientific principles. It develops men whose contact 
with physical facts and natural laws at first hand and whose 
ability to reason logically fit them for dealing with new prob- 
lems. The training which fits men for handling engineering 
problems is the kind that is needed for dealing with the organ- 
izing and directing of men. The sphere of the engineer is one 
the scope of which will continue to increase as engineering 
education and training produce men whose contact with natural 
phenomena gives them an inherent respect for facts as their 
premises, who are able to think straight to logical and common- 
sense conclusions, who have an equipment of technical knowl- 
edge and who can produce results. 

In discussing the teaching of mathematics to engineers, we 
should emphasize not the mathematics nor the engineers, but 
the teaching. Aside from the imparting of knowledge and 
technical ability, the teaching of mathematics gives opportunity 
for training in the use of logical methods and in the drawing 
of intelligent conclusions from unorganized data which will 
make efficient men, whether they follow pure engineering or 
semi-technical or business pursuits. Such teaching does not 
come from the text-book; it must be personal—it comes from 
the teacher. He must be in sympathy with engineering work 
and have a just appreciation of its problems and its methods. 
He must be imbued with the spirit and the ideas of the engineer. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: I agree with Mr. Scott in the relation 
of mathematics to engineering. I agree with him also that 
mathematics is a tool, the most important and useful tool of 
the engineer; but it is useful and valuable only as long as itis 
a tool, and ceases to be useful as soon as it goes beyond a tool 
and becomes a purpose. Mathematics becomes not only use- 
less but positively dangerous as soon as the user does not fully 
and clearly see the physical meaning of every mathematical 
step he takes, or fully appreciates the physical meaning of every 
step when reading through a mathematical derivation of a 
result, As soon as one understands the physical meaning of 


92 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


every step, one can, as a rule, greatly simplify the mathematics 
by skipping complex mathematical reasonings by a short cut 
based on common-sense. For instance, instead of carrying 
the calculations through with the positive and negative signs 
of a square root, one can frequently say: for physical reasons, 
the sign must be positive, and drop the negative, or inversely. 
Mathematics is merely a shorthand method of recording phy- 
sical intuition and physical reasoning, but it should not be a 
formalism leading from nowhere to nowhere, as it is likely to 
be made by one who does not realize its purpose as a tool. 

L. A. Osborne: One may very easily assume a dogmatic 
attitude in giving expression to opinions upon the subjects 
treated of in to-night’s papers. That is a state into which we 
are very prone to fall, and in the interest of real progress it is 
important that we should avoid it. 

As engineers we are quite content to accept criticism from 
the layman of the structures which we build and plan, but when 
he attempts to tell us how to fashion our productions to accom- 
plish the result which he requires, then we rise up and object. 
I feel this way about commenting on engineering education. 

Some years ago I was persuaded to express my views upon 
this subject, which I did before this body, and I made up my 
mind never to venture upon such slippery ground again. The 
cries which went up from some of my academic friends led me 
to this renunciation, although there was an occasional friendly 
word which relieved the situation of utter hopelessness. That 
was several years ago. Now there is some satisfaction in know- 
ing that some of the views expressed in my paper have since 
been adopted, and in a number of cases I have been accorded 
more credit than I deserved as the originator of some of the 
ideas there advanced. 

I do not believe in telling the teachers how to do their work; 
I think we should better state what the finished work lacks. 
I am a product of the engineering educational methods in 
vogue fifteen or twenty years ago, and have long been what 
might be termed a purchasing agent for the consumer of the 
products which the schools turn out. I have thus been able 
to note certain tendencies, the resultant effects of which have 
left on my mind a sort of composite picture of the technical 
graduate as he has passed before my vision for the last ten 
years. While individuals may have qualities which set them 
apart from the crowd, still the average impress of the whole is 
that which produces the composite effect, the one which remains 
with me. Without presuming to point out how the quality 
can be improved, I recount here certain impressions which re- 
main from my experience: 

First, that 50 per cent. of the technical graduates that pre- 
sent themselves to be employed might better never have under- 
taken their profession; that at least that proportion of those 
with whom I have come in contact have apparently chosen an 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 93 


engineering profession more in the hope of the emoluments and 
not from any real interest in or love for the work. 

How the real engineers can be detected in the first instance 
is a matter beyond me; but it is quite certain that a process of 
elimination which will put into the engineering classes men 
earnestly loving their chosen work, would not only make those 
men better fitted but would be a greater inspiration to the pro- 
fession and a greater credit to their colleges. 

Secondly, that of all those who remain, who may be termed 
good promising timber, the chief fault that I have to find with 
them, is that they are generally unable to grasp abstractions, 
that they are unable to generalize. Inasmuch as engineering 
per se is a profession dealing with specific problems, the ten- 
dency which follows application to its studies leaves the individ- 
ual less able to treat with generalities. This is a question, 
therefore, of injecting into the courses something which will 
stimulate the powers of generalization which, broadly speaking, 
is more general culture. 

Professor James has written very entertainingly in a recent 
magazine issue on the subject, ‘‘ Of what use is a college educa- 
tion’, and the answer there given is the answer to apply here, 
but perhaps in a more restricted sense. Professor James con- 
tends that a person having the advantage of a collegiate training 
is better able to discriminate between the good and the bad 
in mankind. To the engineer, his training should give him 
that fine degree of discrimination which enables him to know 
what is good and bad in engineering, and inasmuch as engineer- 
ing has become so important an adjunct to our everyday lives, 
the engineer should likewise have the discrimination to enable 
him to judge between the good and bad in mankind itself. We 
want men who know good jobs when they see them, whether 
the job is man-made or made by nature in the form of man 
himself. Engineers to-day are too self-centered; too bound 
up in the details of their profession. They are not as a rule 
men of the world but are men in the world with a too narrow 
perspective, largely due to the fact that their early training 
did not stimulate them in the right direction. 

H. E. Clifford: There is at this time a very general agree- 
ment as to the advantages of a broad training for electrical 
engineering students, a training involving both breadth and 
depth. We do not want a training that is so broad as to be 
superficial. We want a training which is well proportioned as 
to breadth and depth. It is interesting, I think, to note that 
a basis of science and cultural studies for engineering education 
was specifically stated by President Rogers, the founder of the 
Institute of Technology, in his application for the charter for that 
institution, and I distinctly recall the very strong emphasis 
which General Walker, during his presidential career with us, 
laid on these particular foundation stones of engineering train- 
ing. There is, however, one danger, as it appears to me in 


94 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


this general agreement as to breadth of training, and that is 
the danger of the tendency to standardize education. It seems 
to me it would be a most serious drawback should this Institute 
or any body of men attempt to standardize educational methods. 
Education is not as yet more than an art, it is not an exact 
science; and standardization, while it may do for apparatus, 
certainly should not be applied to education. 

The personal element has been emphasized in Dr. Steinmetz’s 
paper. 1 think that is one of the highly important points to 
consider. A poor system may be made effective by a good 
teacher, and a good system can be ruined by a poor teacher. 
It is, after all, the personality of the teacher that accomplishes 
results. J may mention in this connection what has always 
appealed to me as a branch of research, as truly important 
as the research on inanimate things, namely, the research 
which the teacher certainly carries on in his investigation 
of a problem in teaching, as distinguished from a problem, 
it may be, in chemicai or engineering investigation. There 
are many teachers, as there are many so-called research 
men, who are inadequately prepared for their work, who can 
carry out their teaching as research only under direction; in 
other words, they merely work along suggested lines but are 
not properly research teachers; but I do believe that research 
in teaching is an important branch of scientific investigation. 
After all, education has for its primary object the training of 
men to think straight, to think logically; and the particular type 
of education, whether it be civil engineering, or electrical engi- 
neering, or chemical engineering, is merely a medium for bring- 
ing that thing about. Teaching of men to think logically 
can be frequently, and is undoubtedly frequently accomplished 
by training which is absolutely non-engineering in character. 
I think that is the reason why very often college men without 
any technical training whatsoever handle the larger problems 
of engineering more successfully and satisfactorily than some 
of our men highly trained from a technical point of view. 
This teaching of men to think straight, to think from cause 
to effect, must be carried out both in the class room and in 
the laboratory. No amount of training will help some men. 
Genius is not developed in a technical school unless there be 
some spark to begin with, and men without capacity, I believe, 
should be eliminated early. 

I believe that many of our educational institutions are in- 
clined to be too lenient in cutting out men who have no place 
whatever in engineering education, and I believe that a distinct 
step forward would be made if we should attempt to eliminate 
from the student body early in the course those men who con- 
vince us absolutely of their inability for the line of work which 
they have chosen. . By eliminating these men, we should then 
have a class made up of men of exceptional ability and men 
of average ability, I would go further and suggest the 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 95 


segregation of the men of exceptional ability and the men of 
merely ordinary ability. I do not mean by this that T would 
put in the exceptional class the so-called—if I may use the col- 
lege term—“ greasy grind” type of man; but I mean the man 
who shows he has a broad outlook, keen intellect, real power— 
not the man who has intellectual facility which is quite apart 
from intellectual power. You may say, how are you going to 
tell such men? I believe that a good teacher can, to a great 
degree, discriminate between a man of merely ordinary ability, 
and a man of exceptional power; and I believe if this Sys- 
tem were adopted that the results in producing men of the 
higher class of engineers would be very much superior to what 
exists to-day where men of moderate ability and men of superior 
ability are kept together and carried along in precisely the same 
way through a particular system of training. This would lead, 
also, I believe, to graduate work, a most important influence, 
and one which the technical schools have not begun to build up 
to the extent the importance of the subject demands. 

Dr. Steinmetz also speaks of the importance of securing teachers 
from the open market. I believe that is also a very important 
point. The personal element is, after all, of paramount impor- 
tance in teaching; and it seems to me absolutely essential that 
men should be secured and remuneration given which will enable 
these men to devote their time wholly to the problems of educa- 
tion. I do not mean that they are not to keep in contact with 
engineering progress; but there is great danger that a man who 
is trying to ride two horses will fall between the two. Teachers 
should keep in contact with engineering progress, but they 
should also devote their main interests to the educational side. 

In regard to the matter of contact with engineering, some 
three or four years ago I gave considerable thought to this par- 
ticular point, and it seemed to me it would be a very helpful 
thing if the interest, the knowledge, the breadth of view of con- 
sulting engineers could be brought into contact with the in- 
structing staff of an engineering department. I suggested 
at that time to the authorities of the Institute of Technology 
the appointment of a committee of consulting engineers, and 
after due deliberation that committee was appointed. I be- 
lieve that is going to be extremely helpful to us in bringing 
into the department the ability of men—just such men as Dr. 
Steinmetz refers to, men of force, men of standing in the engineer- 
ing world, but who have the interest of the industrial rather 
than the teaching side of the subject first at heart. 

In regard to thinking straight, I believe, as applied to the 
laboratory system, that every laboratory experiment should 
be made so far as possible a distinct engineering problem. 
It seems to me that the satisfaction which the students of to-day 
show in the mere performance of laboratory experiments is a 
very serious menace to the success of our laboratory system. 

Along these lines I suggested some three or four years 


96 ENGINEERING EDUCATION Jan. 24 


ago a scheme of having every student in his laboratory work 
present a formal preliminary report of the scope of his 
investigation, the instruments needed, the particular scheme of 
operations, the results to be accomplished and their significance 
in the performance of the piece of apparatus being studied. 
This report is examined by some member of the instructing staff 
in consultation with the student before the work in the labora- 
tory is performed, thus giving the opportunity for emphasizing 
fundamental principles and the advantage of personal contact 
of student with instructor. That is the system we are using 
at the Institute of Technology to-day and we find that it 
works infinitely better than the ordinary system of the mere 
perfunctory performance of laboratory experiments. There is 
one other point, and that is we must do something, I believe, 
to prevent undue collaboration in the student body. It is 
now very difficult to have a question concerning laboratory 
work take on even a semblance of newness after the work has 
been gone through with by a few sets of men. 

A most important thing is to reduce the number of subjects 
taught in the curriculum. I heartily second what Dr. Steinmetz 
suggests on this point; and he has also suggested the diifculty 
in the institutions learning to do it themselves. Each insti- 
tution fears if it reduces its curriculum it will be thought 
to be narrowing its training, instead of which it is broadening 
its training. There is too much fear that we may graduate a 
student who will meet something in his career outside of the in- 
stitution, of which he has not heard or which will seem new 
to him. We must eliminate that feeling. Then too there is 
too much of the picture-book course. There are too many 
problems which involve merely the substitution of definite con- 
stants in definite formulas and do not require thought on the 
part of the students solving them. 

If the function of this Institute is to advance engineering, 
and I believe it is, I think there is no better thing it can do 
than to study the engineering training in our colleges. I do 
not mean to study the engineering situation as ordinary men 
would study it, a mere cursory examination, the interviewing 
of a few instructors—they have as limited view points oftentimes 
as other people—but I believe this American Institute of Elec- 
trical Engineers might very well make a thoroughgoing inves- 
tigation of our present methods of education, and I believe if 
they do that and then will make recommendations for the 
benefit of the technical schools, that will be something of even 
greater benefit than the standardizing of apparatus, or the 
preparing of a code of ethics or a code of engineering honor, 
and the influence of such an investigation will start on a more 
fundamental plane in the improving of engineering in this 
country. 

F. B. Crocker: I agree with many of the remarks that have 
been made, including those of Professor Clifford and the points 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 97 


in Dr. Steinmetz’s paper, also many of those in the paper by 
Mr. Scott. I must, however, take exception to one statement 
Mr. Scott makes in regard to the so-called concentric method. 
He says: 

This system clashes with time-honored educational ideas, but it pre- 
sents arguments which are so rational that the existing method must 
assume the defensive. 

I think that any radically new idea must always assume 
the defensive, and personally I think the older method could 
defend itself if necessary. 

The proposed method in which the descriptive, the general, 
and the pictorial, precede the analytical, has several objection- 
able features. Even assuming. that it is ideal as an abstract 
proposition, it has certainly practical educational difficulties 
which are fatal. It appeals to the mind, I think, because it is 
attractive to the student, and therefore to one who is consider- 
ing the case of the student; but the result would be to make 
every one an electrical engineer. Mr. Osborne tells us that 50 
per cent. of those who graduate should never have entered the 
institution. How many more enter the institution and fail to 
graduate? If 50 per cent. of those who graduated should never 
have done so, it is fair to say that 75 per cent. of those who 
enter the institution should never have entered. The proposed 
method would graduate almost all who entered, 75 per cent. of 
whom should not do so. Another practical objection that no 
one but an educator would see is this: when a man gets to the 
fourth year and has had no exacting subjects—in fact, I think 
the plan proposes that he shall not have any very serious sub- 
jects until the fourth year, which is reserved for them—the result 
would be that all would reach the fourth year, and what is to 
be done with them then? It is a serious matter as it is now, 
and would be much worse with the proposed plan. We cannot 
exert sufficient sifting upon them in one year to make sure 
that we eliminate those who should not graduate and enter 
the profession at all. I think that these are at least two serious 
if not fatal objections to any such plan. 

In the first, second, and third years there should be some 
subjects so severe, so analytical, so eliminating as not to allow 
men to reach the fourth year who should not, and it is still more 
important not to allow men to graduate to the extent of 50 
per cent., or even 10 per cent. who should not do so. This 
seems to me an important matter, about which any one having 
experience should give his views, so I state what I think quite 
frankly, but without any personal application. 

H. W. Buck: The two essential elements of any form of 
technical education are the study of the theory and the study 
of the practice; in other words, of the mathematical side and 
the physical side. The study of the mathematical element 
brings forth the quantitative relation existing between the 
various forces, movements, and dimensions in a physical phe- 


98 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


nomenon. Under the department of “ practice”’ is developed 
a general conception of the physical actions and also of their 
commercial relations. 

It is frequently argued that a student should be carefully 
grounded in the theory before he undertakes any practical op- 
eration or handling of apparatus involving that theory. I 
believe that this is not in accordance with the workings of the 
majority of human minds. The study of thermodynamics, 
for instance, takes little hold of the mind of a man who has 
never personally handled a steam engine. The mathematical 
theory of an alternating-current transformer is merely a sym- 
bolic puzzle to one who has never had personal association 
with the current and voltage reactions in a transformer under 
practical working conditions. The theory of molecular com- 
binations in chemistry is far clearer after a man has actually 
made such combinations experimentally himself, and so on 
through many instances. 

The same point is illustrated in the history of the develop- 
ment of science and engineering. The experimental discovery 
of electromagnetic phenomena by Faraday came ahead of Max- 
well’s theoretical co-ordination thereof. The work of Watt 
came ahead of that of Carnot. Newton’s famous apple was 
obliged to fall before Newton wove his mathematical theory of 
gravitation around the physical phenomenon so illustrated, and 
so on. It all goes to show that naturally in the development 
of engineering science, as well as in that of the individual mind, 
the physical action must be clearly pictured before the theo- 
retical treatment can be intelligently pursued. 

This sequence is not usually followed in technical education. 
It is considered orthodox to give a student a thorough theo- 
retical groundwork before allowing him to handle machinery 
in which the theory is applied, and I am inclined to think that 
this sequence should be reversed. A clear mental picture should 
be first created in the mind of the student as a foundation for 
the theory. The criticism applies especially in the study of 
pure mathematics where equations, differentiations, integrations, 
and other operations are studied progressively, sometimes 
for four or five years purely per se without once introducing 
any practical applications of the performances. As a conse- 
quence the mind of the student becomes a maze of symbolic 
relations and a proper conception of what mathematics is for 
is lost. 

The highly trained theorist who is apt to hold himself aloof 
from the purely practical man as belonging to a superior class, 
should not lose sight of the fact that theory is, after all, only 
a means to an end, the end being the practical application of 
natural laws for the benefit of man. The practical man who 
can apply the laws of nature usefully without knowledge of 
pure theory, is a more useful citizen than the theorist who can 
not apply his knowledge practically. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 99 


In order to obtain the best results in technical education, it 
would seem advisable for the student of engineering first to 
- become thoroughly familiar through practical laboratory work 
with the tangible and visible workings of all the principal laws 
of nature involved in engineering, next to co-ordinate them by 
quantitative theoretical study of their relations, and finally 
to take up their commercial application in the study of the 
design of practical apparatus. 

W.S. Franklin: Sir Philip Magnus, in a recent address before 
the British Association, said that in his opinion education can 
not be called a science until we begin to study the relations 
between methods of teaching and the final results accomplished 
thereby. It seems to me that teachers are, as a body, 
unable to approach the questions of education scientifically 
according to this idea, because the results of their work are 
to a great extent outside of the field of their observation. 
It is a consequence of this fact, I think, that teachers are es- 
pecially prone to the elaboration of artificial and formal criteria 
for judging the results of what they are attempting to do in 
the class-room. The tendency of teachers to become increasingly 
formal in their methods-.and in the materials of their teaching 
is almost beyond control by the conditions of actual life. 

Calling to mind Professor Clifford’s statement that education 
is not an exact science, I wish to affirm the point of view of Sir 
Philip Magnus to the effect that at present education is not 
even an inexact science, and I believe that this movement on 
the part of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, in 
which practising engineers and teachers join in the discussion 
of electrical engineering education, signalizes the beginning 
of a scientific study of the subject. I think it is out of the ques- 
tion to expect the instructors in our technical schools to weigh 
the results of their work and to decide whether these results 
are what they are intended to be. In the institution with 
which I am connected, for example, we have some fifty or sixty 
teachers, and among that number there are four or five who 
have had engineering experience and who have a first hand 
knowledge of the demands which engineering education is in- 
tended to meet. Such a situation, which is common in all our 
technical schools, makes it impossible, it seems to me, to lift 
technical education to the plane of a science without the co- 
operation of engineers and teachers. 

I agree entirely with Dr. Steinmetz in thinking that the hope 
of our technical education is in the narrowing down of our 
work so as to bring it within the reach of the student. I think 
that a great deal more stress should be laid upon the elementary 
sciences, physics and chemistry, and I believe that advanced 
technical subjects should be taught in such a way as to involve, 
again and again, a survey of the elementary mathematical and 
physical sciences which have gone before. 

Tt would be a mistake, however, to curtail the time to be de- 


100 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


voted to the first study of elementary physics and chemistry 
with the expectation that elementary knowledge could be sup- 
plied in the development of technical subjects later. The 
difficulty is that a technical subject, like steam engines, for 
example, is overloaded with detail; and a technical subject is 
never given with that accompaniment of simple illustrative 
lectures and simple laboratory work which is so necessary in 
the clearing up of the student’s fundamental ideas. 

Mr. Buck has expressed himself as to the importance of 
practical knowledge as a basis for theoretical study. I think I 
agree with Mr. Buck, although I prefer to use the expression 
‘intimate knowledge” rather than ‘ practical knowledge ”’. 
I believe that the teaching of the physical sciences, reduced to 
its simplest terms, is the transformation of intimate knowledge 
into general ideas. If this be true, it is necessary to sec that 
a young man has the intimate knowledge to begin with. For 
many years I have found that young men who come from the 
farm, or who have had experience in the shop, are very much 
better prepared for my work in elementary physics than young 
men who have been through a high school. If this kind of in- 
timate knowledge is what Mr. Buck means by practice, I cer- 
tainly agree with him, but I would hardly call it practice. The 
word practice, it seems to me, applies to the functions of an en- 
gineer, and what I call intimate knowledge is the knowledge a 
boy gets by connecting up an electric bell and playing with it 
until he is familiar with everything about it; or the knowledge 
a boy gets of hydraulics by building dams in brooks and by swim- 
ming and boating; or the knowledge a boy gets of mechanics by 
riding bicycles and jumping on rapidly moving cars and being 
nearly jerked in two. This is simple intimate knowledge of the 
kind that must exist before you can build up the theoretical 
structure which is called modern physics. 

As to what Professor Crocker has said concerning the exact- 
ing character of the work in a technical school, I believe that 
we are now confronting a new situation in technical education. 
Twenty-five years ago, a man who wished to teach almost any 
branch of engineering had to reach up into the scientific world, 
as it were, and take hold of something from Rankine, or Weis- 
bach, or Kelvin or Clausius, and drag it down into the view 
of his students. How otherwise could a man teach hydraulics 
twenty-five years ago? or dynamo theory? or the strength of 
materials? or the theory of the steam engine? Now, however, 
there is a great mass of simple technical literature exacting and 
precise. In the old days, mathematics was the only scientific 
study which could be made definite and exacting. Nowadays 
nearly every subject which is taught in the technical school 
can be made as exacting as mathematics, and, above all, the 
elementary sciences of physics and chemistry have been reduced 
to a basis which enables these sciences to be handled with an 
effectiveness which must soon entirely revolutionize technical 
education. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 101 


I believe that pure mathematics is tremendously over-em- 
phasized at the present time in our technical schools. - Every 
one, I think, admits that there is a very large percentage of 
useless developments in all of our mathematical text-books. 
A friend of mine, who knows his mathematics thoroughly and 
has no fear of it (for it is a kind of fear that holds most men 
in awe of mathematics), and who knows what mathematics 
means to the physical sciences, said to me several months ago 
that he believed that at least 30 per cent. of the subject-matter 
now included in our mathematical courses could be omitted with- 
out depriving the subject of a single element of utility for scien- 
tific and technical purposes. A mathematical friend of mine, 
one of the best teachers of’ mathematics of my acquaintance, 
has admitted the same in conversation with me. For my part, 
I believe that 30 per cent. of redundancy is a low estimate. 

I think that over-emphasis on pure mathematics is to be 
found in nearly all of our technical schools, and I think that 
this over-emphasis involves not only the inclusion of a great 
many topics which are not useful in physical science, but I 
believe that it has resulted in a state of affairs which I may 
describe as follows: of all impersonal ideas the one most strongly 
imbedded in the human mind is the idea of number. Until 
the very recent developments of pure mathematics came about, 
a number always stood for some physical thing or things, beads 
or fish or dollars or cows, and the result is that 7t 7s extremely 
easy to hoodwink a young man into the belief that he 1s studying 
about real things 1f his study involves arithmetic. 

I think that one of the most serious faults of our modern 
technical education is that it is overweighted with a great mass 
of numerical problems, the data of which are either entirely 
beyond the student’s experience or with respect to the deter- 
mination of which he is entirely ignorant. Such problems are, 
to my mind, utterly useless. They mislead young men, and 
also the teacher, into the belief that something is being accom- 
plished, whereas nothing is being accomplished at all. 

To my mind, nothing is more important than to associate 
physical ideas with mathematical operations and formulas in 
the work of teaching. In my class-room I have often used the 
following illustration: consider a wage of $2.00 per day; if you 
multiply this wage by 10 days you get $20.00. Now I ask 
my class, “ how do you multiply $2.00 per day by 10 days?” 
but they never seem to have any notion beyond the writing 
of a simple tabular arrangement on the blackboard. I say, 
‘No; you have got to work 10 days at $2.00 per day in order 
to multiply $2.00 per day by 10 days and get $20.00 oo The 
10 days of labor is the physical operation that lies behind the 
mathematical operation, and there is scarcely a single mathemat- 
ical operation in the whole range of physical science which 
does not have as definite a physical significance as this opera- 
tion of multiplying $2.00 per day by 10 days 


102 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


L. B. Stillwell: The answer to the question, ‘To what ex- 
tent should the technical school devote attention to purely 
professional subjects?’ depends upon the relative value to the 
graduate of professional information as contrasted with educa- 
.tion. Undoubtedly professional information may be imparted 
in such a manner as to educate, but for the purpose of expressing 
an opinion it is, perhaps, sufficiently exact to speak of “* educa- 
tion’’ and ‘information ’”’ not as they are inter-related but 
as they are contrasted. Before the question can be answered, 
however, it is necessary, as Mr. Scott has suggested, to define 
one’s idea of the part which the engineer should be prepared 
to take in modern life. 

As regards this, the conception which apparently is widely 
accepted, not only by preparatory and undergraduate technical 
students but also by many “ over-practical’’ parents is narrow 
and short-sighted. The enormous advances in physical science, 
and in the application of physical science to modern life, are 
glibly asserted and reiterated, and the effects of utilization of 
natural laws and forces upon the economic and social structure 
of society are more or less appreciated. But in educating a 
boy for the special purpose of taking an active part in this 
gigantic movement, the tendency too often is to start him at 
the earliest possiL.e moment in a narrow channel of thought, 
to narrow his intellectual horizon and make him a mere mental 
mechanic. This, in my opinion, is all wrong. 

If graduates in engineering courses are to become generals, 
or even colonels, in the army of engineers it is obvious that 
the breadth of their training should bear some relation to the 
fundamental possibilities and demands of the field in which they 
are to labor. The engineer who desires to rise, therefore, 
should start, if possible, with a broad education. Truth is 
truth, fallacy is fallacy, and logic is logic, in any field of thought. 
In nine cases out of ten, mere professional information acquired 
in the technical school is of comparatively little value to the 
graduate. This is particularly true in the case of a rapidly 
advancing art such as electrical engineering, for the reason that 
a considerable part of the professional information acquired in 
school is out of date by the time the graduate attains a position 
where he has opportunity to utilize it. Practical information 
which he can really utilize is acquired rapidly in factory or office, 
in mine, mill, or laboratory. Following graduation, the work 
which young engineers in almost all cases are called upon to 
do for a number of years is highly specialized and professional 
information comes to him in the most effective manner. Dur- 
ing these years, if he is working earnestly for advancement, his 
field of observation and thought, so far as his professional 
work is concerned, is necessarily limited and comparatively 
narrow. The opportunity for fundamental education rarely 
presents itself after completion of the course in the technical 


school, and unless prior to that time a broad foundation has 
been laid it never can be laid. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 103 


The ideal education of the engineer who hopes to be more 
than a private in the ranks is a broad one. It. cannot very 
well be too broad. In my judgment, whenever possible, a 
technical course leading to a degree in engineering should follow 
a four years’ course leading to the degree of bachelor of arts 
or bachelor of science. In other words, engineering courses 
should be regarded as professional courses and should perform 
the same function in the education of the engineer that the law 
school fulfils in equipping a graduate in the course of arts for 
the practice of the law. 

In those cases where this is not possible, and the student 
finds himself necessarily limited to a course of four years in a 
technical school, the aim should be decidedly to educate him 
rather than to train him. 

In my experience the following facts of observation have im- 
pressed themselves upon me: 

1. American engineers to-day do not hold positions of leader- 
ship in the community to an extent commensurate with the 
part which engineering plays in modern life. 

2. The graduates of our technical schools, while averaging 
well in respect to mental ability and earnestness, often lack 
mental perspective and are .arely capable of expressing them- 
selves with accuracy and force. 

3. The men who rise highest in the engineering profession, 
generally speaking, are the men of broader education. 

4. Chief engineers and managers have little trouble in finding 
draftsmen, and less in finding competent calculators, but the 
demand for ‘‘all around men” always exceeds the supply. 

5. The higher executive positions in administration of our 
great railway and industrial corporations are rarely held by 
engineers. In recent years undoubtedly the engineer has been 
making substantial progress in this direction, but usually he 
fails to occupy his share of the higher places in administration. 

So much for personal impressions based upon observation of 
results. As to methods, I cannot presume to offer advice to 
the teaching profession. It would appear obvious, as Mr. Scott 
says: 

details of method are to be determined, by varying conditions and 
are to be adapted to the varying personal qualities of the young men. 

I would particularly endorse what Mr. Steinmetz has so ably 
said in regard to that fault of teaching which aims at quantity 
and not quality. There is no good reason to believe that the 
ability of the human race to acquire and digest knowledge has 
increased abnormally during the last decade or two, but com- 
parison of requirements in colleges and preparatory schools 
to-day compared with the curricula of 20 years ago, indicates 
that our educators are proceeding upon the theory that the 
average student of given age to-day is endowed with mental 
capacity greatly exceeding that of his father, not to mention 
his grandfather. The result in a great majority of cases is 


104 ENGINEERING EDUCATION (Jan. 24 


mental indigestion from which the student sometimes, but not 
always recovers, after graduation. 

The cause underlying this unfortunate and very serious state 
of affairs is to be found probably in the ill-advised competition 
of schools and colleges. The school of the future is the school 
which will have the courage to cut out of its curriculum 25 per 
cent. of the studies now required for graduation and will em- 
phasize not quantity, but quality. 

Albert F. Ganz: Dr. Steinmetz says that: 

The least that can be expected from the college is that at the time of 
graduation, the student still knows all that he has been taught during 
his college years. To accomplish this, it is necessary to keep up the study 
of every subject to the end of the college course. 

This seems impracticable. How are we to cut out some sub- 
jects and have less quantity, but yet to keep up every subject 
throughout the whole college course? I expect Dr. Steinmetz 
does not mean this to be taken literally. For instance, I do 
not suppose he thinks that the subject of chemistry should be 
taught to the end of the college course. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: I do. 

Albert F. Ganz: Then I should very much like to know how 
we can cut down the course and yet keep up the study of every 
subject throughout the four years? 

I have read Professor Karapetoff’s paper carefully, and while 
the method has many good points, I feel very strongly that 
the college is the place where theory must primarily be taught; 
and that this theory must be supplemented by illustrations 
ees practice by means of descriptive lectures and laboratory 
work. 

I believe that there are four objects to be accomplished by 
a technical education: first, training of the mind so that it be- 
comes an efficient machine; secondly, storing in the mind fun- 
damental principles and facts to give to the student an under- 
standing and a perspective of his profession; thirdly, an acquaint- 
ance with the sources of information so that the student may 
know where to find information; and fourthly, general culture. 
It seems to me that in the college we should aim to teach those 
things which the engineer must know, and which he cannot 
readily obtain in practice, nor from. general reading. As an 
example, the mathematical theory of alternating currents 
should be taught in the school, because in practice the engineer 
would not learn that theory nor would he readily be able to 
get this from his own reading. I also believe that the laboratory 
experiments should be designed primarily so as to impress upon 
the students the main fundamental principles, not designed to 
imitate the tests that have to be performed on the test floor 
of a large manufacturing establishment. I do not believe that 
the latter is possible in a college laboratory. That is an ex- 
ample of the kind of information which the engineer can get 
from practice. I always advise our graduating students to 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 105 


spend one or two years after graduation in the shops of one of 
the manufacturing companies. Fortunately for the technical 
schools, the large electrical companies have established appren- 
ticeship courses where it is possible for the student, after grad- 
uation, to become familiar with large machines under com- 
mercial conditions. 

I should like to have the Educational Committee suggest 
what cultural subjects should be included in the curriculum, 
and how much time should be devoted to them. At the Ste- 
vens Institute we include in our curriculum courses in business 
engineering, English, German, and some lectures on patent law 
and on contract law, and we hope to include more cultural 
subjects. 

Mr. Buck speaks of teaching the design of practical apparatus. 
I question whether in a technical school it is possible to teach 
practical design to any considerable extent. I rather agree 
with Dr. Steinmetz, that it is better to analyze existing appar- 
atus than to attempt to make actual designs. 

J. G. White: There seems to be a virtual unanimity of opin- 
ion, that the aim of the college education for engineers should 
be to build up a foundation or groundwork based on the funda- 
mental subjects of which the engineer should have knowledge, 
tather than to give him specific information. I fully agree as 
to the thorough wisdom of this. Specific information can be 
readily acquired after leaving college, whether it be with one of 
the large electrical companies, or in a consulting engineer’s 
office, or out in the field in erecting machinery, or elsewhere. 
The fundamentals, such as a good general knowledge of math- 
ematics, and a thorough knowledge of physics and chemistry, 
both of which I consider extremely important, cannot readily 
be acquired in the field; that is one of the reasons why they 
should be acquired during the college courses. The subjects 
that are useful primarily because they are a benefit to one’s 
general culture are less readily acquired in practice, partly 
because the facilities are not so conveniently at hand and partly 
because one is likely to be absorbed in the performance of daily 
routine duties, so that it is difficult to find opportunity to put 
thorough study on subjects not requiring attention by reason 
of such routine duty. 

So far as the general usefulness of different subjects is con- 
cerned, it seems to me that, as intimated in the previous state- 
ment, there should be a thorough and broad training in math- 
ematics, in chemistry, and in physics, and I believe with Mr. 
Steinmetz that all three of these can be carried through the 
college course. No one should specifically study calculus during 
the entire course, nor specifically study elementary chemistry 
during the entire course; but in the later studies, dynamo 
design, for example, enough calculus can be used advantageously 
to keep one from forgetting the general principles of calculus, 
and so one can, in the study of electrochemistry, in connection 


106 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


with experiments with storage batteries, or in other like ways, 
have enough use for chemistry to prevent one forgetting the 
elementary chemistry learned in the freshman year. In similar 
ways, if a course is laid out correctly, one can be kept from 
forgetting other subjects which have gone before. In addition 
to English, which I am glad to see is being followed up more con- 
sistently and persistently, one of the subjects which I perhaps 
am inclined unduly to value is the study of Spanish as com- 
pared with other language studies. It seems to me that Spanish 
has practically as much educational value, and almost as much 
value as a culture subject, though perhaps not quite so much 
as French or German; but it is so much more likely to be of 
use in practical life after graduation, that I strongly favor the 
average engineering student studying Spanish, if he possibly 
has the opportunity of doing so. If he can study one other 
language, Spanish as a second is distinctly desirable. It is a 
comparatively easy language to learn. 

Another suggestion which perhaps our friend from Stevens 
may like to hear in plain English is that ordinarily I believe 
the college professor is too much inclined to rely on lectures 
and too little inclined to depend on well-worked out, well- 
planned text-books which some other professors, or groups of 
professors, have written. The lecture room is of great value in 
physics, chemistry, and in electrical engineering, for illumina- 
ting and illustrating fundamental principles, but these funda- 
mental principles should be put before the student in such 
shape that he has something to study and restudy, can have 
impressed on his memory. His time should not be wasted 
by making a lot of notes and going through the mechanical 
operation of copying them, when, after he has them copied, he 
probably has no adequate understanding of the subject. Another 
beneficial trend of many general educational courses is toward 
doing away with too great freedom inelective studies. About 
the time I left college there seemed to be a great tendency toward 
putting all students entirely on the elective system, leaving 
nothing on the required curriculum. There seems to be a drifting 
back to the good old-fashioned days of mapping out a set course for 
young men, and I think that practice can be advantageously 
followed further than it has been. It seems to me that a group 
of professors in consultation with other officers of an educational 
institution, and with the advice of graduates and trustees, can 
decide to better advantage what the ordinary engineering 
student of 17 or 18 years of age should study, than can the 
young man himself. That is surely true of technical courses, 
and I should be glad to see more text-books, fewer elective 
studies, arid the required studies more confined to general princi- 
ples and foundation work and less given to doling out general 
information. 

W.E.S. Temple: There is a noticeable tendency on the part 
of those who have been out of school for ten or twenty years 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 107 


to overestimate the amount of preparation which the technical 
graduate should have. In considering the subject, it is neces- 
sary to try to state what the object of an engineering education 
1s; we can then see better what it should consist of. It is ad- 
mittedly impossible for a man still in school to know just what 
line of work he may be best suited for, yet this is. the age of 
specialists in electrical engineering, as well as in other professions 
_ and on this account the object of the technical training should 
be to provide the man with the means to receive the best de. 
velopment in that special kind of work into which he may be 
placed after graduation. 

The education must therefor consist in grounding the man in 
principles and general applications. This will give him the 
tools with which to develop himself when he becomes enrolled 
in the school of experience. A great many rules and formulas 
have been suggested, indicating how best to accomplish the 
laying of this general foundation for development, but rules 
and formulas cannot be applied here any more than they can 
be to regulating the politics of New York or of Philadelphia. 
We must set before ourselves a certain aim, and keep exam- 
ining ourselves as to methods, taking account of stock as it 
were, and make sure that we are getting the best results possible. 

Another thing that should be accomplished in addition to 
getting a thorough foundation in technical principles, is lifting 
the man’s ideals high as to his future position as a man of 
affairs. There is no reason in the world why the engineer, who 
is responsible for so large a proportion of the wealth and re- 
sources of this country, should not have more control over 
them, and more profit from them. 

The quality of the work done by a student actually depends 
upon himself as much as it does upon his teachers, and there- 
fore the entrance requirements deserve as much attention as 
does the laying out of the work after he begins his technical 
training. To outline the actual subjects which should be 
taught is not difficult. There are a number of lists which are in 
use, some preferable to others, but all of them good, for they 
are producing favorable results. It seems to me there should 
be more of those subjects which develop the man’s power to 
reason along lines related to engineering, and less of those 
which fill his mind with a useless store of technical data that 
can be found in handbooks. As to the suggestion in Dr. Stein- 
metz’ paper that physiography, metereology etc., be taught; 
why not a course in architecture and perhaps: practical politics 
too? These are really as much related to the subject of engineer- 
ing, and are as broadening, as the subjects he refers to, perhaps 
more broadening. It seems to me that specializing is not pre- 
paring the student for the best development, and a too great 
indulgence in it prevents the college from doing the greatest 
good for its men. I am referring, of course, to the under. 
graduate students. - 


108 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


One of the vital features in the education of the engineering 
student, it seems to me, is the method followed in taking up 
the work. Mr. White referred to the matter of lectures; I do 
not think that any hard and fast rule can be laid down for this. 
The rapid progress now being made in electrical engineering 
demands that some of the subjects relating to the applications 
of electricity be taken up in lectures. I know of no text-books 
in existence at present which are suitable for this part of the 
work. The elementary subjects, and the general applications 
of electricity should, in my opinion, be invariably taught by 
the use of carefully selected text-books concurrent with the 
solution, by the student, of various kinds of engineering problems. 
These problems should involve not only the new ideas and 
principles as they are taken up, but they should also depend 
upon subjects already gone over in earlier parts of the course. 

The classes should be subdivided in sections of about ten 
men each for all recitation work, thereby insuring more nearly 
individual instruction, and making it possible for each man’s 
needs to receive attention. The greatest stress should be laid 
upon promptness and accuracy and general attention to work. 
The student should be penalized for absence from classes, or 
for tardiness in doing the work assigned to him, even though he 
may do that work in a most satisfactory manner from every 
other standpoint. 

Laboratory work should be individual as far as possible. 
If the men work in groups of two or three or more, upon one 
test, it is not possible to make sure that all of them get all the 
benefit which they should have from the work. The inferior 
man will allow the better man to do it ail, nearly every time. 
The only sure cure for this is to make each man work alone. 
This method is, no doubt, more expensive, but if the thing is 
worth doing at all, it is worth doing well. Furthermore, the 
best results will be obtained if each man is obliged to set up 
his own apparatus, and wire up his own test. If he is a particu- 
larly good man, it is not a bad idea, occasionally, to put the 
machine in trouble in some way or other; this method will re- 
quire more time for each test, but quantity is not what we are 
aiming at; it is quality we are after, and this method is bound 
to produce a far higher grade of work, and to develop in a much 
greater degree, the man’s thinking, and reasoning powers. 

The method of concentric instruction has been very adversely 
criticised, and it seems scarcely necessary to speak of it any 
further. The idea, if applied to one subdivision of one of the 
subjects of electrical engineering, might be good. It is however 
utterly impossible, as has already been pointed out, to go into 
details of construction and operation of machinery, particularly 
electrical machinery, without having the theory to resort to 
for explaining the why and wherefore. As I understand it, 
this method proposes to complete all the practical considerations 
first, leaving the theoretical features until last. The result of 


1908] DISCUSSION. AT NEW YORK 109 


this would be that in going over the practical parts with no 
theoretical preparation the man would perforce become a con- 
firmed empiricist, and when he came to the theory later on, he 
would be perfectly satisfied to omit it entirely, or at least he 
would fail to give it the proper attention. The summary of 
the paper shows a great many things which this concentric 
method will accomplish; it will produce a somewhat finished 
artisan at the end of the first year, a little better artisan at the end 
of the second year, etc. It reminds me of a machine that will 
do a dozen different things, but none of them properly. 

Louis A. Ferguson: The great value of an engineering educa- 
tion to a young man about to start in his life’s work lies not so 
much in the actual knowledge he may bring with him, but in the 
training which he has received. The accumulation of a mass 
of data is not the important thing, but the reasoning power 
which he has acquired is what will serve him in good stead in 
after life. The technical training of our engineering schools 
develops an analytical turn of mind and teaches the young 
man to differentiate between right and wrong, promotes sound 
judgment, which, after all, with initiative and optimism, is one 
of the great factors in producing the successful man in any 
walk of life. 

It is a mistake, as Dr. Steinmetz has clearly pointed out, 
to try to jam the maximum amount of information into the 
student in one year, only to be forgotten the next. Premium 
should be placed upon the development of reasoning power 
rather than the mere memory of the student, and any subjects 
that he must know in his practice after graduation should be 
kept constantly before him throughout the entire course, so 
that he may carry his knowledge, once acquired, with him into 
the world. 

There is a tendency in some educational institutions to a 
practice which I think is not conducive to the best results. 
I refer to what might be called “inbreeding”, that is, the 
general employment of graduates of a given technical college 
as teachers and professors in that college. This promotes 
narrowness of view among the students, mental fatigue among 
the teachers, resulting in the decline of the educative ability 
of the institution. The faculty of an engineering college should 
be made up of men graduated from as wide a range of colleges 
as possible. Eastern colleges should have some professors who 
have been trained in the West and South, and western colleges 
should have professors who have been trained in eastern institu- 
tions, so as to give as broad a character to the education as possible, 
and to keep alive in the faculty itself real interest in its work. 

We find in the management of industrial corporations that the 
best results are obtained by following this principle in the em- 
ployment of engineers. The very college patriotism which exists 
in the heart of every true American will prompt him to try to 
equal in efficiency his fellow engineer from another institution, 


110 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


and this rivalry, which must be friendly to accomplish the 
desired result, is bound to make finally for the interest of the 
corporation. 

Professors and teachers are not as a rule sufficiently en- 
couraged by their college management to come in contact with 
the practical side of engineering, or the work accomplished in 
other similar institutions, as they might be were they given the 
opportunity to mingle more with practising engineers and in- 
dustrial managers and by travel in this and other countries. 
They are, as a rule, forced to gather their information by read- 
ing and study which is less satisfactory than actual contact and 
observation. 

Why, if the industrial corporations find it profitable to send 
their engineers and managers to other parts of this country and 
Europe to study conditions and make comparisons, should not 
the technical colleges and institutions find it equally so to do 
the same with their teaching staff? 

The scope of the course of electrical engineering in some in- 
stitutions, it seems to me, is too narrow. The graduate elec- 
trical engineer, for some reason, is considered by some em- 
ployers to be devoid of ability to discuss anything but electricity, 
and his opinion on other matters is discounted and oftentimes 
very unfairly to him. This is unfortunate, as there is probably 
no branch of engineering which requires so general a knowledge 
to be successful as that of electrical engineering. 

The course in electrical engineering should include the funda- 
mental principles of mechanical engineering and civil engineer- 
ing, chemistry and hydraulics, building construction and gen- 
eral business law, as well as theoretical and applied electricity. 
The student should be impressed with the fact that a general 
fundamental knowledge of the branches of engineering other than 
pure electrical is paramount to ultimate success in electrical 
engineering, if by that we mean obtaining a position whereby 
one is given the responsibility of conducting large engineering 
undertakings, or the management of large industrial operations. 

Samuel Sheldon: That educational institutions are unable to 
obtain the best type of instructors because of the low com- 
pensation which they offer is recognized by professors, by those 
who wish to be professors, by engineers, and by the presidents 
and trustees of these institutions. The mere announcement of 
the fact will not better the conditions. Much could be accom- 
plished by a co-ordinated movement on the part of all technical 
institutions to increase the tuitions from students who are able 
to pay, leaving the funds which are derived from philanthropists 
to be distributed, so far as they last, in defraying the expenses 
of worthy and selected students. In reference to quality, as 
distinguished from quantity, the Educational Committee of 
the Institute would perform a useful service if it should bring 
about a curtailment of the matter which is at present presented 
in connection with the instruction in each and every subject 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK ilak 


in existing courses. Such curtailment, in view of the fact that 
courses will doubtless be limited to four years for some time to 
come, would result in a saving of time which could be utilized 
for needed culture subjects, and for the amelioration of existing 
conditions towards which the so-called concentric method of 
education is directed. 

In reference to Mr. Scott’s paper, the extracts from the 
Institute papers are on the whole so general as to be of little 
value to one engaged in laying out acurriculum. One, however, 
and that is from the paper presented by Professor Karapetoff, 
is very definite, and the original is accompanied by a specific 
schedule for each year. The advantages which it is claimed 
would result from the use of this concentric method should be 
obtained, if possible, but it does not seem necessary to make 
use of such radical means as are outlined in that schedule. 
Associated with it are two marked disadvantages: first, the 
hiatus in the pursuit of mathematical studies must inevitably 
result in educational inefficiency; secondly, training in physics, 
which is an absolutely essential prerequisite for any serious 
engineering study, is deferred to too late a period. 

Tests of the absorption power of an average freshman indicate 
that a cyclopedic view of all engineering could be frofitably 
given during the freshman year without consuming more time 
than could be obtained from a judicious curtailment of the 
freshman schedule, as at present existing in most institutions. 
Experimental electrical engineering is also required early in 
the concentric schedule. Physical laboratory work could readily 
be so laid out as to constitute a course in experimental electrical 
engineering. 

P. H. Thomas: In its broadest sense, engineering is a method, 
not a profession, By this view, ‘‘ engineering ”’ is the applica- 
tion to new problems, through the methods of logic, such as 
mathematics, the knowledge of experiment, and experience. 
‘This method is applicable to many branches of activity not in- 
cluded in a narrow definition of engineering. There is every 
reason why the banking, trading, and selling work of the country 
should be carried on by men trained as are mechanical, elec- 
trical, or civil engineers, but in a different subject-matter. In 
fact, this state of affairs seems to be rapidly approaching. 

Although the object of technical education must be, strictly 
speaking, to perfect a man as an engineer, expediency requires 
that at the same time he must receive such culture training as 
he is to get at all during the same period. The man should by 
no means be sacrificed to the engineer. Fortunately, such cul- 
ture training as is appropriate will usually benefit the engineer. 
The factors of greatest importance underlying successful engi- 
neering are perhaps the following: 

1. A thorough appreciative knowledge of the laws of nature 
and of the properties of materials. These laws and properties, 
as used in engineering, are simple and relatively few. 


112 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


2. Familiarity with the mathematical and other logical pro- 
cesses by which the fundamental laws are to be applied to special 
cases and results numerically computed. Here self-confidence 
and the power of applying knowledge are of the greatest im- 
portance. It is here that many graduates are lacking. This 
section must be construed very broadly to include the under- 
lying principles of all types of machines. 

3. Familiarity with the results of experience; what has actu- 
ally been accomplished in the past and just how. This is of 
the greatest importance and is, further, the basis of thegreat 
mass of actual engineering work done. The results of past 
work are found partly in the general practices of the com- 
munity, partly in books and periodicals, and partly in the 
records of individuals of experience. Here should be included, 
at least for the more ambitious engineers, a knowledge of the 
more important experimental work done and the new methods 
and apparatus proposed by inventors. 

4, Acquaintance with the actual methods, standards, prac- 
tices and engineering terms in vogue in any particular com- 
munity. These may be different in different places; but one 
engineer can not work with another without this acquaintance. 

Over and above these four conditions the effectiveness of an 
engineer depends, of course, on his personality, but this is not 
properly a matter of education. 

The actual period of an engineer’s development in which he 
may be said to be receiving his education is perhaps ten to 
fifteen years, beginning with his technical school work. Of 
this period, four years are usually devoted to school work, a 
good proportion. Here comes the practical question to be con- 
sidered: to what shall these four years be devoted? In my 
opinion to the first and second and to the more fundamental 
facts in the third division of engineering knowledge just given, 
and as well to some culture studies. 

The study of natural laws, of the characteristics of materials 
and all mathematical work is best done in class work. Here 
should be included the laws of force and motion, of heat and 
sound and electricity; such subjects as mechanism and mech- 
anics and thermodynamics. Also, for electrical engineers, such 
information as the laws of parallel circuits, induction, reson- 
ance, wave motion, the natural characteristics of different types 
of electrical apparatus intrinsically, as transformers, series and 
shunt motors; also principles of compounding, field distortion, 
etc., induction motors, synchronous machines, etc. But not 
such subjects as commercial designs or designing of apparatus, 
constants of design, the relative merits of different makes, 
physical description, compilations of actual costs, efficiencies, 
and other data of actual plants, nor much study of actual in- 
stallations. These all tend to distract and to lessen interest 
in the more fundamental things that cannot be learned later. 

The subject-matter here assigned to the school years is in 


: 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 113 


the long run of the greatest importance and cannot be well 
gotten later. The other subject-matter covered in the four 
divisions of engineering knowledge is readily acquired in actual 
practical work, but only with the greatest difficulty in the class 
room, and then imperfectly. 

The engineer must specialize, even within the divisions of 

civil, mechanical, electrical, etc. The specialization should 
not however prevent an appreciative knowledge of all other 
important branches. As Dr. Steinmetz has said a good descrip- 
tive short course can give a group of fundamental phenomena, 
and the essential or individual character of such a branch in a 
way, that will permit a real appreciation of its significance. 
The influence of these related branch studies is tremendously 
broadening. 
It is not for the practising engineer to specify in detail the 
course of the technical school, this is for the specialist in edu- 
cation, the professor; but the engineer may suggest a measure, 
by which a course may be judged. The following is an example. 
Does the course give: 

1. A clear, thorough, appreciative knowledge of the natural 
laws used in engineering work. Also, a good knowledge of the 
properties of materials. 

2. A clear, working knowledge of the mathematical methods, 
formulas and other logical processes by which the fundamental 
laws can be applied to individual cases and numerical com- 
putation made. Also, a familiarity with the characteristics 
of the sorts of apparatus commonly used (not commercial 
types) in electrical work—transformers, motors, generators. Is 
the student’s knowledge and training of such a character that 
he can personally use his data and formulas and have confidence 
that he is right? 

3. Has the graduate enough general culture to feel the equal 
of and at home with the other men (not necessarily engineers) 
that he meets? 

4, Has the matter been so presented as to be grasped in the 
easiest and most permanent manner? Has the interest been 
kept up and the meaning of the work made clear by some view 
of the practical field into which the student is to pass? 

W. L. Robb: A matter that has an important bearing on 
the curriculum of engineering schools, but not mentioned this 
evening, is the relative lack of preparation of men who enter 
these schools. It is a notorious fact that the great majority 
of men who enter technical schools have not completed a high- 
school course. Men generally enter the technical schools at 
least a year before graduation from the high schools. Virtually 
all the technical schools have lower entrance requirements than 
the colleges. Where the requirements are nominally high, the 
examination in the non-mathematical subjects is relatively 
easy, the examination in mathematics being the real basis of 
entrance. The majority of men entering medical and law 


114 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


schools at the present time are college graduates, much more 
highly trained than the men who enter the technical schools. 
As a result, a large part of the first two years in the technical 
schools has to be ,given, not strictly to engineering subjects 
but to general mental training. Under the present condition 
of things, culture subjects have a place in a technical school, 
but I believe they only have a transient place. I do not think 
that a course in English or history or political economy has 
any more place in a technical school than in a medical or a 
law school. We should see that the entrance requirements of 
the technical schools are brought up at least to the entrance 
requirements of the colleges. 

With entrance conditions as they are at present, the first 
two years of a course should be mainly given up to the study 
of mathematics, chemistry, physics, English, and one other 
language, preferably a language that is inflected. I do not 
think it makes much difference whether the language is Spanish, 
French, German, Latin, or Greek. As far as the commercial 
usefulness of the language is concerned, I believe thirty days 
spent in a foreign country will prove more valuable than two 
years’ study of the language in a school. 

The third year of the course should be devoted to mechanics 
and the fundamental principles of civil, electrical, and mechan- 
ical (including steam) engineering. There should not be much, 
if any, difference in the way these subjects are taught in the 
various engineering courses. 

The fourth year I would devote mainly to highly specialized 
subjects in that branch of engineering in which the student 
elected to take his degree. The student should have the privi- 
lege of specializing along some desired line before graduation. 

I do not think we should have in engineering schools courses 
specially devoted to business methods, depreciation, operating 
costs, and similar subjects; but I think any man capable of 
being at the head of an engineering department should infuse 
these subjects into the minds of his students in connection 
with the regular work, : 

C. O. Mailloux: I have, presumably, at the present time, all 
of the qualifications for speaking on this subject, since I am a 
practising engineer, and, at the same time, happen to be an ‘‘ am- 
ateur’’ teacher in one university, and an “ amateur” student 
in another. The complete period of instruction of an engineer, 
which Mr. Thomas speaks of as being fifteen years, is too short 
for the man who believes in progress. I find that it can be 
profitably extended to at least twice that time. 

I agree fully with Mr. Stillwell. Gis discussion states the 
facts, from the standpoint of the enlightened progressive en- 
gineer, very well indeed. I endorse his plea for broader educa- 
tion, now, just as I did at the Great Barrington meeting. Like 
him, I have found, and I so stated at Great Barrington, that, 
oftentimes, the man of broad general culture is of greater utility, 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 115 


and makes more rapid progress, than the man who specializes 
too soon. I also agree, with him, that there is an abundant 
supply of the mediocre man, but a scarcity of the man able 
to do original work. In looking for the causes, we find that 
there are many, and in looking for the remedies, we find that 
they are diverse. Yet, after all, we find that the general prin- 
ciples have already been reviewed in previous discussions; and 
I noted, with some interest, as the discussion progressed, and 
as I classified the points covered, that most of the formulated 
statements regarding the requirements of technical education 
have been given already, in previous discussions before the In- 
stitute, particularly in the papers of Professor Esty and of Dr. 
Sheldon. Professor Esty gave, in his paper, a resume of the 
requirements, so well, that, even after the discussion here to- 
night, we do. not find that we can improve much upon them. 
Dr. Sheldon’s discussion differs from Professor Esty’s only in so 
far as it goes further, or attempts more. It aims to build a 
“pyramid of knowledge” of greater height, and therefore 
postulates a broader base. I have already spoken of that 
pyramid fully, in my discussion, at the Great Barrington meet- 
ing; and I need only add now that my views have not changed 
in regard to it. In that discussion, you wiil also find a refer- 
ence to the subject of ‘‘ mathematical dyspepsia ’”’ which, I 
think, is still pertinent. There is nothing which causes so 
much contention and dissatisfaction among teachers, students, 
and engineers, as the teaching of mathematics. A great deal 
of effort has been devoted to finding better methods of teaching 
mathematics. I am often questioned by both teachers and 
students of engineering about that subject. I expressed my 
views fully on that subject at the Great Barrington meeting. 
I also made some reference to the views of Dr. John Perry, 
who has some perhaps radical, but very good, ideas on the 
subject. I am glad to say now, that the ideas of Dr. Perry 
have actually led, since then, to wholesome reforms in methods 
of teaching mathematics in England. 

My own view about engineering education is that we should 
attempt much less, and yet, attempt much more. We should 
attempt less in not trying to cover so much ground and so many 
details, but we should attempt more in trying to cover funda- 
mental ideas and principles more thoroughly. I often find 
that students are bewildered and discouraged by the size of the 
text-books given them. If the text-books were smaller, or 
less terse or rigorous, if they covered fewer points and covered 
them more thoroughly, they might, perhaps, be less imposing, 
but they would be more “‘effective’”’ as repertoires of knowl- 
edge for engineering students who do not expect to become 
teachers. abe 

On the subject of lectures, as distinguished from text-books, 
I may say that my experience, both as a teacher and as.a stu- 
dent, leads me to believe that the ideal method is to combine 


116 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


the best features of both. I believe in a method in which the 
student receives guidance and instruction primarily, and when- 
ever possible, from lectures, but works in connection with text- 
books, or, in the absence of text-books, (and, preferably, in all 
cases, when it can be done), with a carefully prepared up-to- 
date, and not too much condensed, syllabus. My own method 
in teaching, is to ask the student to take as few notes as pos- 
sible. I try to give them ample ready-made notes of all the 
principal points and all the main details of the discussion; and 
I also refer them to all books which can be of assistance to 
them by throwing more light on the subject. 1 know, by per- 
sonal experience, how often one makes errors in taking down 
notes and how difficult it is to correct notes taken down 
wrongly. 

In regard to the teaching of mathematics, pure and applied, 
there is danger that, while trying to cover the moderate wants 
of one class of men, we may neglect to cover the higher wants 
and aspirations of another class. We must consider the kind 
of material that we work with, and the kind of men that we 
expect to turn out. It all depends on how high the pyramid 
of knowledge is to be built. If we seek merely to turn out 
mediocre or average men, we can get along with relatively little 
training; but if we wish to turn out men who are to be colonels 
or brigadier generals in the profession, then we must place 
at their disposal the facilities whereby they may acquire that 
higher training which they should have. It may be that we 
cannot do both of these things in the same class, or even in the 
same school. At this point let us say a word about the dis- 
tinction between theory and practice. I think that too much 
emphasis is laid upon the importance of the student being 
brought into physical contact with those facts which he can 
gather with his eyes and hands. Any person who has given 
the slightest thought to education knows that it is not so much 
the facts which are discovered by the eyes and hands that are 
important, as it is those which are discovered by the mind. 
There are certain ‘‘ facts ’’ which are more important than even 
the individual, oftentimes detached, physical facts, gathered 
by the hand or the eye; and those higher facts are called prin- 
ciples. These are usually the facts which furnish the key to 
whole treasures of facts. Thus, while it is true, as Mr. Buck 
said, that Watt came before Carnot, yet, it is also true, that 
Carnot came before Corliss. We also know that Hertz came 
before Marconi, just as Maxwell and Faraday came before Hertz. 
There is an important distinction to be made between the use 
of mathematics as a means of technical training and as a means 
of technical research. There is a legitimate use for both. We 
may possibly have done too much in the way of using mathemat- 
ics purely as a means of training for engineering students. 
We should, in the training of engineers, perhaps, use more ap- 
plied mathematics and less pure mathematics. But here, 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 117 


again, we should bear in mind the needs of the higher technical 
science and look to the great engineers to see what they have 
done as the result of specializing and higher training. The 
distinction of a school is due partly to the distinction attained 
by the great men who received their training at that school, 
and partly to the distinction of its teachers. It is worth while 
and is inspiring to look at some of the great achievements in 
our profession, and to see the means whereby they have been 
attained. Some of these things are of the greatest significance, 
and they point to a moral in regard to methods of teaching 
and the way it should be directed. Two of the greatest achieve- 
ments in electrical engineering, in my opinion, have resulted 
from the solution of differential equations. They are feats of 
applied mathematics. The first of these achievements was 
made when that great electrical engineer, Lord Kelvin, solved 
the differential equation since known as the “ telegrapher’s 
equation ”’, and, in doing so, predicted all that it was essential 
for us to know, and foretold the facts and the practical essential 
conditions that were afterwards observed, in regard to sub- 
marine telegraphy. That solution was the key to submarine 
.telegraphy. The second achievement was another solution, a 
far more complete solution, of that same differential equation, 
by Dr. Pupin; and this latter solution, which turned out to 
be the first general solution, has done almost as much for tele- 
phony, as the solution of Lord Kelvin had done previously for 
telegraphy. These two cases show that, when the greatest re- 
sults in electrical engineering are the goal, even the most com- 
plete equipment, intellectual or technical, is not too great. As 
to what constitutes the modicum of requirements which a stu- 
dent of engineering should satisfy, my opinion is that these 
requirements include three or four principal branches. I might 
say that, of physics—the fundamental physics of energy in all 
its forms and manifestations—the student cannot have too 
much. He might have too much physics if he is led into the 
by-paths of physical research too early, but of fundamental 
physics he cannot have too much. If we include mechanics 
and chemistry in physics, then we may say that the principal 
part of the engineer’s education should be physics. Let us 
say, then, physics, mechanics, and chemistry; and let us not 
forget mathematics; but there should not be so much pure 
mathematics as applied mathematics; there should be just 
enough pure mathematics to enable the student to get along 
in applied mathematics. I believe strongly in analytical me- 
chanics and even in some mathematical physics, both of whichare 
applied mathematics, with physics. In a word, I believe in 
plenty of fundamental physics, taught both ways, experi- 
mentally, and also by mathematical methods. Too much time 
is spent in teaching mathematical abstractions which the stu- 
dents cannot possibly remember. The pure mathematics should 
include the essentials and fundamentals of algebra, geometry, 


118 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


trigonometry, and the calculus, leaving the refinements thereof 
for later attention on the part of the student, after he has 
learned to appreciate their value. I cannot quite agree with 
Professor Robb as to the transient features of culture in the 
curriculum. He contradicts that opinion himself, to some ex- 
tent, when he says that facilities should be given to students 
for specializing, since specializing is a means of broadening the 
student’s culture. One of the sad facts which should be realized 
more than it is, is the want of general culture in the engineering 
profession. Mr. Stillwell has brought that out clearly. I be- 
lieve, with Professor Robb, that one of the most important diffi- 
culties lies in the fact that the students are placed in contact 
with the engineering part of their education too early, before 
they have had the necessary amount of preparation, or even, 
I might say, of intellectual growth and development. Perhaps 
the solution of the entire problem will be to increase the require- 
ments in regard to the preparatory studies pursued and to apply 
an inferior limit to the age at which students are allowed to 
enter the polytechnical courses. We should not expect to 
make children engineers, any more than to make them doctors 
or lawyers. One remark of practical importance is that made 
by Professor Clifford, in reference to a committee of engineers 
acting in consultation with the faculty or the heads of the de- 
partments. There may be a great deal of good there; but there 
is also a possibility of harm. I know, from having seen men 
teach, that there is as much difference in teachers as there is 
in pupils and I know also, from having attended lectures by 
“outside”? men, so-called, that some of these lectures are apt 
to be quite as bad as they are apt to be good. I mean that the 
practical man is “fit? as a teacher only when he has retained 
such contact with the theoretical side of his profession that he 
can still be able to lead instead of mislead the student, when he 
presents his subject to them. I have seen cases of that ‘‘ mis- 
leading” kind which brought home to me the lesson that he 
who undertakes to teach practice, must know thoroughiy the 
theoretical part as well as the practical part. The man who 
undertakes to teach theory alone may get along with little, if 
any, knowledge of practice at all: but the man who undertakes 
to teach practice must know both the practice and the theory. 

The idea of segregation, which was referred to, seems an ex- 
cellent one, and it may be that the future will lead to it by a 
natural process of evolution. There has been some suggestion 
made, in fact, of technical schools which would be devoted to 
advanced technical teaching, either by taking men who meet 
higher entrance requirements, or by lengthening the course, 
In that way, by having the high grade men in a different class 
or school, we would be able to train high grade men so as to 
make them attain the highest efficiency. 

Philip Torchio: Neglecting the all-important questions of 
individual talent, commercial acumen, and executive ability, 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 119 


which are mainly acquisitions by birth and surroundings, we 
may classify the students of engineering into two classes: one 
pursuing a college course to master the technical engineering 
knowledge, aiming to apply it directly in the conception, design, 
and carrying out of original engineering works; the other ac- 
quiring that knowledge as a means of securing a better class of 
employment or as a stepping-stone to commercial, industrial, 
or financial pursuits. Theoretically, the education of these 
two classes of students should be essentially different; the first 
requiring for his career a greater equipment of mathematical 
and theoretical training than the latter, for whom the practical 
side is of much greater importance. The measure of professional 
success in their respective fields of activity is in one case the 
amount of retainer and consultation fees, and, incidentally, 
social prominence; in the other it is the salary received or the in- 
crement profit secured by the commercial exploitation of any 
specific independent industry. If the two classes of students 
must be put through the same courses, I think that we would 
come to the conclusions reached by Professor Karapetoff, as 
a matter of expediency if not as a matter of choice. Professor 
Karapetofi’s method will appeal most to the managers of indus- 
trial corporations and the majority of employers of engineering 
skill. It is a striking fact that most of the leading positions in 
industrial enterprises are to-day not filled by technical grad- 
uates. A few years ago about forty high officials of a large 
manufacturing corporation were seated at a dinner, and among 
all of them none was found to be a college graduate. As this 
corporation is considered here and abroad a model organization, 
such condition of affairs should command the earnest considera 
tion of educators. 

Conditions will change, I might say are changing now, but 
the progress is slow. We must, therefore, place our aims 
high, but not forget the local and present conditions, demanding 
highly specialized and practical knowledge. Our great central- 
ization of industrial interests makes still more necessary a 
greater refinement of specialization than exists abroad. We 
may all deeply regret this narrow-gauge education, but we are 
leading the world into this condition. The great number of 
young electrical engineers are affected by these conditions. On 
the other hand, this very high degree of progress and specializa- 
tion. combined with the importance and magnitude of the en- 
gineering work done in this country. creates a demand for ex- 
ceptionally high engineering standards on the part of the rela- 
tively few leading men who pilot the heavy engineering and 
scientific work of the country. These different requirements 
make the problem of technical education more difficult. Now, 
if we must specialize, and we have the resources for doing it, 
why should not the colleges for electrical engineers also special- 
ize, and equip themselves, some to turn out practical engineers 


120 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


fitted to fulfil the positions in industrial enterprises, and some 
to turn out electrical engineers with a much broader theoretical 
and scientific education, befitting the requirements of the broad 
engineering profession. The only obstacle that I can see would 
be an ill-placed jealousy among the different colleges. 

I have no doubt that eventually we shall come to such re- 
sults, as present indications point clearly that way. The 
majority of colleges will continue to bring into greater prominence 
the immediate practical applications of each engineering branch. 
On the other hand, a few other colleges more favorably situated 
will develop along more scientific lines, aiming to give a broad 
engineering education, possibly branching out into specialized 
electrical studies only in the last one or two years of the course. 

I have the privilege of giving the experience of the Royal 
Polytechnic of Milan, Italy, which was started forty years ago 
along the lines of broad engineering education I have just re- 
ferred to. About twenty years ago a course of electrical en- 
gineering was established through the private endowment of 
Carlo Erba, as an adjunct to the Polytechnic. The Polytechnic 
is a government institution but created mainly through the 
efforts of the late Professor Brioschi, a man of rare talent and 
ability, who imparted to the organization a good deal of his 
strong personality. The essential requisites for admission are 
the government certificate either of an eight-year preparatory 
course in a lyceum, in which classical studies prevail, or a 
seven-year preparatory course in a technical institute, where 
physical and mathematical studies and modern languages pre- 
dominate. The average age of a freshman class at admission 
to college is about nineteen years. 

The engineering course consists of five years, the first two 
being preparatory to all engineering courses, and the last three 
being sectionalized in three classes of civil, mechanical, and 
electrical engineers. The first two years cover a thorough 
study of the calculus and higher algebra, analytic, descriptive, 
and projective geometry, general chemistry, mineralogy, phy- 
sics, drawing, etc. In the next two years the mechanical and 
electrical engineers jointly follow, theoretically and experimen- 
tally, the studies of mathematical mechanics and applied me- 
chanics, theory and design of steam, gas, and water power 
prime movers; design and calculations of parts of machines, 
resistances of materials and general construction, hydraulics, 
orgamic and inorganic chemistry, surveying, descriptive study 
of industrial plants, such as foundry and working of metals 
cotton, silk and flour mills, etc.; technology of electricity, heat- 
ing and ventilating, construction and operation of steam rail- 
ways, etc. 

In the last year the electrical engineers in common with the 
mechanical engineers complete the last courses in mechanics, 
hydraulics, mining, technologies, etc, and make two. theses 


Oe 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW VORK 124 


consisting of comprehensive detail drawings of a prime mover 
and plans of an industrial plant, and follow separately the 
course of dynamo and transformer design and operation, indus- 
trial applications of electricity, theory of electrical measure- 
ments and laboratory work. 

The total lecture, laboratory, and draughting room work 
consists of 48 hours a week, 8 hours per day, approximately 
evenly divided, half for lectures and half for laboratory, draught- 
ing, etc. During the last years of instruction, the students 
under the direction of the professors carry out comprehensive 
efficiency tests of power plants and other industrial tests, 
measurements, and surveys, and make frequent visits to in- 
dustrial plants throughout the country and to expositions, 
whenever feasible. The school discipline is very strict, and 
willingness and ability to do intense and sustained work is a 
requisite for remaining in the Institute. The teaching per- 
sonnel for the theoretical subjects is made up of regular pro- 
fessors, while for almost all the engineering subjects the per- 
sonnel consists of engineers, who, besides the educational 
work, have a large consulting engineering practice. This ar- 
rangement has worked out successfully in Milan, the main 
reason perhaps being the fact that Milan is the largest indus- 
trial center of the kingdom. 

From his long experience with the polytechnic, Professor 
Brioschi has found that by an overwhelming majority the most 
successful careers are made by engineers whose early training 
and mind discipline had been along lines of broad classical and 
liberal education rather than those who in their early training 
had had a preponderance of practical studies like physics, 
mathematics, and modern languages. These results are rather 
striking, and, one would almost say, unexpected. 

While realizing the difficulties of establishing comparisons and 
drawing conclusions for conditions vastly different, I do, how- 
ever, believe that in this moment, when people under the pres- 
sure of a strenuous life are clamoring for simplified spelling, 
practical education, and other short-cut schemes, we owe it to 
our profession to place our aims at a high level; it is due to 
the intellectual standards of our leaders and the importance of 
our work in the community, and we should back up our posi- 
tion with doing all that is in our power to promote and advocate 
for this country, alongside but distinct from the highly spe- 
cialized engineering schools, the evolution of a few centers of 
learning where the most liberal engineering education can be 
secured by those who by intellect, aspirations, and other favor- 
able circumstances can afford to undergo a broader preparatory 
work and possibly a longer term at the college. 

These centers, by attracting the best talent of the country 
to their educational staff, would indirectly benefit the other 
colleges by raising the standard of the whole profession, and 
would be a nucleus for that free intellectual and scientific ac- 
tivity which is the guiding spirit of the progress of this country. 


122 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


President Stott: Thinking over this subject and listening to 
the discussion impels me to emphasize one or two points. The 
professors have asked us to be specific in criticism. The dis- 
cussion to-night might be summed up by saying that there is 
a lack of general education of the freshman entering college. 
What is that caused by? The smattering of everything he gets 
in primary and high schools, a little of this and that, nothing 
taught thoroughly. The remedy for that is for our technical 
schools to raise the standard of their entrance examinations. 
If that be done, the other schools will be forced to raise their 
standards to meet it. The discussion seems to lean distinctly 
toward the point that engineering schools should teach funda- 
mental principles and not engineering practice. I do not be- 
lieve degrees should be granted until a man has been out of 
college for at least five years. In Great Britain doctors do not 
get their M.D. degree until they have been out of college and 
practicing for a number of years. I believe no one should re- 
ceive a degree of mechanical or electrical engineer until he has 
had the practical training to make him worthy of such a de- 
gree. The weeding out process, which is inevitable at some 
stage, is a very hard problem; there are many reasons, financial 
and otherwise, why it should be almost impossible for a technical 
school to weed out students who, whilst qualified as students, 
are not likely to become engineers. If the degree in engineering 
were to be conferred only upon proof of work done, say five 
years after graduation, the stigma of the weeding out process 
would be taken away from the college; and when a man received 
his final degree in engineering, it would really mean that he 
was qualified to state that not only had he the necessary theo- 
retical knowledge, but that he had also survived the refining 
process which sifts out 50 per cent. of our graduates in the 
first five years, leaving only those who are likely to become 
successful engineers. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: It appears to me that the question, 
how to get a thorough understanding of the fundamental 
principles, is answered in my paper. Drop out a sufficiently 
large part of the matter which the college now attempts 
to teach, so as to find time to improve the quality of the rest 
by thoroughly teaching it; that is, going over the subject over 
and over again, approaching it from different view points. 
After all, a clear and thorough understanding of a subject is 
gained only by looking at it from every possible point of view. 
For instance, the induction motor is not understood properly 
by considering it as a short-circuited armature revolving in a 
rotating field; it is not understood by considering it as an arma- 
ture acted upon by a system of quadrature magnetic fields; 
it is not understood as a derivation of the direct-current shunt 
motor, combined with the transformer action transferring power 
to the rotor instead of leading it in by commutator and brushes; 
nor is it understood by considering it as an electric circuit re- 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 123 


volving in an alternating magnetic field. It has to be looked 
at from all these view points before it can be understood. There 
is no time for this in the present college course. From my 
experience with very many college graduates, Americans as 
well as the product of foreign colleges, from far Russia in the 
West to Japan and India in the East, I am led to believe that 
any instruction is useless if it is not kept up to the end of the 
college course; that whatever the student has studied in one 
year and then drops, is of little benefit to him. To prove this, 
last year we gave our electrical engineering students shortly 
before graduation an examination in mathematics, in those 
branches which they had concluded in the sophomore year. 
The results were startling. This year the assistant professor of 
electrical engineering is giving one hour a week in mathematical 
subjects, to the junior as well as to the senior classes, with home 
work in applied mathematics. This has resulted in great im- 
provement in the attitude of the students regarding the value 
of mathematics to the engineer. 

I do not believe in text-books. I agree that a good text-book 
is better than a poor instructor. To me, a good text-book is 
merely a way of ameliorating a little the objectionable effect 
of a poor instructor, but a good instuctor is vastly superior to 
the best text-book. 

It is gratifying to see the almost universal consensus of 
opinion, that practical familiarity should precede the math- 
ematical theory of engineering, that the instruction should be 
built up in gradually widening circles through a study of the 
appearance, the action, the behavior, and the running of ap- 
paratus, and then gradually building up to an understanding 
of its operation, a study of the theory—ultimately culminating 
the structure with the most general, the mathematical equation 
and the most specific, the numerical calculation. A further 
development of this idea, carrying out this principle, is Professor 
Karapetoff’s concentric method. I thoroughly believe in it. 
But there are difficulties in the way: experience proves that an 
intelligent and ambitious workman who has become familiar 
with electrical apparatus by operating it, or working in electrical 
factories, is anxious to find out the why and wherefore of a 
machine. Frequently the student is liable to be listless in this 
respect. When he has gone over the subject in a practical way 
first, and then goes over the same subject theoretically and mote 
thoroughly, he is liable to neglect it because he thinks he knows 
enough about it. This means, to introduce better and more 
modern methods, we must start farther back, with the high 
school, and beyond the high school. A large part of the defects 
of the college education are really defects inherited by the 
college from the high school and the primary school and there 
is where the lever must be applied to improve conditions. The 
second serious difficulty is that before we can modernize and 
improve the education of the college boy we are obliged first to 


124 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


educate the college staff to the realization that conditions are 
not satisfactory. We are liable there to be met with statements 
as to what proper pedagogic principles and correct pedagogic 
methods are, and then we can hardly look for very much co-opera- 
tion, from men who are satisfied that their way is the only 
right and proper method. 

A. E. Kennelly (by letter): The questions under considera- 
tion are in’one sense of great antiquity, although from another 
viewpoint they are of very recent origin. They are of great 
antiquity in the sense that electrical engineering is only a par- 
ticular kind of engineering, and engineering is coeval with 
civilization itself. We have only to examine the pyramids of 
Ghizeh or a Roman aqueduct to realize that engineers existed 
thousands of years ago, and that such engineers must have 
received training for their work in some manner. On the other 
hand, the subject before us is of very modern growth in the 
sense that electrical engineering has made such recent develop- 
ment. Modern methods of instruction in electrical engineering 
are therefore the latest evolutions of educational training of- 
fered to meet the joint demands of the public, the engineering 
profession, and the engineering student body. 

The Educational Committee can, no doubt, render to the 
Institute valuable service by collecting and collating informa- 
tion concerning the various systems and details of engineering 
educational methods adopted in different institutions of this 
country or abroad. It is, however, earnestly to be hoped that 
the Educational Committee will not seek to standardize engi- 
neering education, in the sense of pressing all institutions to 
follow as nearly as possible one and the same path, term, and 
system of engineering training. It is perhaps desirable that 
one and the same college degree in engineering should represent 
substantially the same amount of training or attainment on the 
part of the average student, so that it may be proper to at- 
tempt standardization in regard to the grading of one and the 
same degree. It seems undesirable, however, that all colleges 
or institutions training youths in engineering should grant pre- 
cisely the same degree, or should offer identically the same 
training, should receive the same material, or should attempt 
to turn out the same finished product. It is here contended 
that what is more desirable is a wholesome diversity of aims,. 
conditions, and training. 

We know that in the world of mental activity as well as in 
the world of physical activity, achievement does not depend 
wholly upon training; it depends upon inheritance as modified 
by training. No great athlete, great singer, great engineer, 
or great worker of any kind was ever produced by training 
alone. We have the experience of mankind in all historical 
time to attest this fact. Men are born with an infinite range 
of capability for achievement in any given division of human 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 125 


affairs ; some become eminent without any school or college train- 
ing; while a great number can never become capable, no matter 
how much training they receive. All that we know is that train- 
ing and education will increase each individual’s power and 
capability, whatever that may be. An education is, therefore, 
an investment on the part of a student in time, money, vitality, 
and effort, for training to assist his inherited capabilities in his 
chosen life’s work. It seems to be a biological law that the 
greater the inherent power of an organism, the longer the time 
and training required to bring this power to its greatest devel- 
opment. The highest types of mankind take the longest train- 
ing with advantage. It does not pay to train the moderately 
gifted lengthily and extensively; it does pay to train the highly 
gifted long and thoroughly. The great bulk of the world’s 
work must be done, and should be done by average men, and 
where there is room for one leader or colonel of a regiment, 
there is room and opportunity for creditable work to be per- 
formed by hundreds of average men. What is needed, there- 
fore, is not that all institutions should attempt to turn out 
exactly the same type of graduates in engineering; they cannot, 
even though they try. Education should be graded to suit the 
needs of different individuals. We need many more privates 
and non-commissioned officers in engineering and industrial 
work than superior officers; and the country can be better served 
as a whole by offering a greater diversity of periods and types 
of engineering training. In addition to correspondence schools 
and evening schools, there is need of the training which can be 
offered by schools with schedules lasting from three months to 
six years. Such diverse trainings should be co-operative, in 
such a manner that a student entering upon a short course and 
showing ability to receive a longer and more thorough training 
should be aided in effecting a transfer; and, conversely, a stu- 
dent attempting too long a training should be aided in saving 
his time and energy by transferring to a shorter course. None 
of these different schedules would necessarily be superior or 
more worthy than another; they would all be equally important 
to the community as a whole. 

H. B. Coho (by letter) : We all know that fully 50 per cent. of 
the graduates from our technical schools and colleges receive 
their degree, not by any very brilliant actions or effort on their 
own part, but by the grace of their alma mater. These de- 
grees are, therefore, heavily discounted, and their value is prob- 
lematical. The average boy goes to college because it is an 
eminently respectable thing to do; he acquires a social standing, 
and an acquaintance, the value of which is well known. He 
enters the institution often on a diploma from a high school or 
preparatory school, which certifies that he has had a certain 
amount of opportunity to study a given quantity of subjects, 
and ought to know something of them. 

To my mind the degree of a technical school ought to mean 


126 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


something absolutely, or else it should not be given; and Iam 
firmly convinced that the degree of electrical engineer should 
be conferred by the American Institute on such of their mem- 
bers as can pass a given examination, and show at least three 
years’ practical experience in the line of their chosen profession; 
this degree should be open to the artisan as well as to the college- 
bred man that can qualify. 

My opinion is that the remuneration of college professors 
has comparatively little to do with the results, as 1 doubt very 
much whether our captains of industry would make good 
teachers, and, vice versa, whether our teachers would make 
satisfactory captains of industry. To make a success of any- 
thing, a man must devote his time and thought to the subject 
in hand, without heeding the money recompense. The mere 
lust for money is easily satisfied, but the lust for power and 
achievement cease only at death. 

Before a piece of steel can be sharpened it must be tem- 
pered; so with the human mind, the mind must be trained before 
it is ready to receive the finer impressions. 

As Dr. Steinmetz has said, then, the improving of the lower 
grades must be carefully attended to, The boy is the father 
to the man, and we all know that it is impossible to obliterate 
entirely impressions received during the first ten years of life, 
therefore, the importance of giving care and attention to the 
primary and secondary grades in our public schools is apparent. 

To my mind, our school system should be so devised as to 
give a pupil from the beginning individual attention, treating 
him as a unit, and not as a class, and keeping a careful record 
of his work throughout his whole school life, so that when he 
reaches the age where a selection of occupation is to be made 
he can be advised and guided. By making his entrance to 
college or technical school dependent not only upon his ability 
to answer a certain list of questions, but also on his record, we 
shall greatly improve upon the material which our teachers 
will have to deal with; the product of our educational institu- 
tions will then be men, capable of taking up life’s problems in 
an intelligent manner. 

A. 8. McAllister (by letter): The fact that a large percentage 
of the graduates from engineering colleges prove unsuited for 
engineering work, as stated by a speaker who is exceptionally 
well qualified to make observations, is one that has as yet 
not received the proper amount of consideration from those 
interested in the education of our boys. The present writer 
believes that the college courses and methods of instruction 
furnish only a small part of the cause for the result. During 
my short teaching experience, I became thoroughly convinced 
that many of the students that came under my observation 
were much better qualified for some line of study different from 
engineering rather than for engineering itself. The fact that a 
student makes indifferent progress in engineering does not prove 


‘ 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 127 


af 


either that he is lacking in brain matter or that the method of 
engineering instruction is incorrect; in many cases his parents 
or the advisers of the student during his high-school days are 
at fault. It is absolute folly to attempt to make an engineer 
out of a student who during his high-school days shows not 
only no taste for physics and mathematics but is innately 
averse to all studies that appeal to the reason rather than to 
the memory. There are students who display no marked in- 
clinations along any certain line of study, while there are others 
who seem to enjoy all lines. The latter, however, are the ex- 
ception rather than the rule. A fact that should always be 
kept in mind by those in position to decide whether certain 
-boys shall attempt engineering college work or take up other 
duties immediately after leaving high school is that a college 
can develop latent talents but that it cannot put brains into an 
empty skull; it cannot make an engineer out of a boy whom 
nature has deprived of well arranged reasoning faculties. It 
would obviously be very improper for anyone to claim that an 
engineer, like a poet, is born and not made. However, it can 
be truly stated that the chances for success are infinitely greater 
for that boy who selects a career in conformity with his natural 
talents, than for one who adopts a profession merely because 
his parents consider it one in which the average compensation 
is comparatively high. Many of the third-rate lawyers and 
doctors of the present day could have made excellent engineers; 
many of the present day inefficient engineers could have become 
first-class doctors or lawyers. It is an absolute injustice to the 
student to allow him to undertake one line of work for which 
he has no talents, and thereby permit his natural talents which 
lie along other lines to remain dormant. The entrance require- 
ments should be arranged in such a way as to determine for 
what line of work a boy is best suited, in order that he may 
secure the maximum good from the time spent in college, and 
the instructors may obtain the best results from their labors. 

W. S. Franklin (by letter): My hobby is mental arithmetic. 
The ability of a student to follow a simple physical argument 
depends vitally upon his power to hold numerical relations in 
mind, and the greatest difficulty that I encounter in my work 
of teaching elementary physics arises from lack of this kind of 
arithmetical sense on the part of the student. For many years 
I have tested my junior students with the question: “ When does 
a growing thing reach its greatest size?” [ have found but one 
student in all my experience who was ready with the simple 
arithmetical answer: ““ When it stops growing”. And yet nearly 
every man in every class could have filled a blackboard with 
algebraic formulas in response to a formal question concerning 
the maxima and minima of an algebraic function. 

In discussing the ballistic galvanometer, one arrives at the 
proposition that the rate at which the suspended needle gains 
angular velocity is proportional to the rate at which charge 


128 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


flows through the coils, from which one argues that the total 
angular velocity gained is proportional to the total discharge. 
I always illustrate this point by asking the class to consider 
one man who saves money ten times as fast as another, whence 
it may be argued that the one man must always have ten times 
as much money as the other, if they get an even start, and 
then I ask the class what this argument is called, but never 
yet have I found a single student who had a sufficiently simple 
idea of calculus to know that this arithmetical argument is 
called integration. 

I have always had a desire to use the algebraic forms of cal- 
culus in my teaching of elementary physics, but the weakness 
of most students in the simpler branches of mathematics and the 
almost universal lack of arithmetical sense (the holding of nu- 
merical relations in mind) has forced me to the conclusion that 
it is ridiculous at the present time for any teacher to attempt 
to use calculus in the handling of any subject in the class-room. 
I think it is no exaggeration to say that ninety-nine per cent. 
of the technical graduates with whom I have conversed have 
admitted their total lack of understanding of the subject of 
calculus when they took it in the technical school. If most of 
us did not stand in awe of mathematics, such a state of affairs 
would lead us instantly to the conclusion that something was 
radically wrong, but it seems that most men are still imbued 
with the idea expressed many years ago by the great English 
mathematician, Sylvester. Sylvester showed an unusual ap- 
titude for mathematics while still an undergraduate, and he 
said that he was pointed out by his mates as a man who, like 
Dante, had seen Hell, the idea being that mathematics was not 
supposed to be understood by the great mass of students who 
were required to study it. Now I contend that calculus must 
be understood by the great majority of men who study it, or 
it must cease to be taught; and I believe that the reduction of 
calculus teaching to the plane of old-fashioned mental arith- 
metic would go a great way towards meeting this situation. 

O. J. Ferguson (by letter): A man goes to collere to save 
time by concentration. All that he acquires there can be ob- 
tained elsewhere and by other methods, but the operation of 
these other methods is subject to so many interruptions and 
eae that the efficiency rate at which the work is done is 
ow. 

No college training of a few years can fit a man to occupy 
positions of great engineering responsibilities. It must be 
augmented by experience. During college life he is considering 
the available results of experience of others, but man is so con- 
stituted that he must learn ultimately by his own personal con- 
tact with facts. 

Of these two components of his training we are discussing the 
one which comes under the direction of instructors. The 
most important things to be considered therewith are, in the 
broadest sense: 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 129 


1. Methods of thought. 

2. Fundamental truths. 

3. Allied subjects. 

4. Average data. 

5. Experience—enough to serve as illustrations and as ‘‘la- 
bels ”’ for theory. 

No engineer who comes into contact with men recently grad- 
uated from colleges can fail to note the general inability of their 
minds to grasp important details, sift, summarize, reason log- 
ically, and analyze keenly. All minds are not equally endowed 
in these respects, but training should bring out whatever exists 
of these all-important requisites to the engineer. 

Mathematics is the purest of logical and analytical reasoning, 
and, considered even wholly aside from its utility, should be 
placed in the first years of college work and never wholly omitted 
later in the course. Its value lies in the fact that it permits 
clear, concise, definite statements, and demands proof of every 
step from its “ Given” to its “Q. E. D.” It should progress 
from the pure to the applied, and to broad engineering practice 
which is richer in problems than is the mind of any author of 
mathematical text-books. 

Facts are of several kinds: Truths, facts of to-day, facts of 
yesterday, and things that never were so. Fundamental truths 
should be distinguished from current practice. Keep up with 
the times but do not lead students to accept offhand the things 
of to-day as the standards of to-morrow. One can devote too 
much time to practice to obtain breadth of view. 

Allied subjects should be taught, not from the electrical en- 
gineer’s view, but broadly and carefully though not in detail 
from the point of view of the specialist. For, no matter what 
we are using or are not using now, the future will demand more 
from us. 

Average data of existing normal practice should be analyzed 
for fundamentals. Machine shop and laboratory work are 
beneficial so far as they serve to clarify ideas of machinery, 
circuits, and power development, transformation and measure- 
ment, and to illustrate methods of reasoning in the study of 
problems. As before indicated, they are the pictured labels 
attached to carefully stored bits of information and are to be 
used as identification marks in selecting such data for compari- 
son with subsequent experience. A great deal of the time 
spent in manual training, etc., is of little value compared with 
what might be accomplished by a better use of the same time. 
Personal experience should not be allowed to intrude itself into 
any curriculum at the expense of concentration upon the main 
line of thought. 

As for the order in which certain studies are met, I believe 
it is better to prepare the broad foundation first with its ten- 
dencies toward habits of scientific reasoning and research— 
painstaking and deliberate. Theory can at first be stripped of 


130 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


‘ ? 


its ‘‘ negligible quantities ” and is still intricate enough for the 
beginner. Practice can never eliminate these minor influences 
which serve to hide to a greater or lesser degree the principles 
sought, although they may not seriously influence the problem 
at hand. 

C. O. Mailloux (by letter): The lecture system is objection- 
able, in my opinion, so far as, and to the extent that, it robs a 
student of the time and the energy requisite to study his 
notes properly, because too much time and energy have to be 
consumed in taking the notes and, especially, in correcting, 
rearranging, completing or rewriting them; in a word, in making 
them ‘‘ fit”? to study. A certain amount of “ going over”’ the 
notes, on the part of the student, is, in my opinion, desirable; 
but much of its beneficial effect is lost when the notes are in- 
complete and incorrect because the student was not able to 
follow the lecturer. Unfortunately, this occurs much more 
often than ought to be the case. It is for this reason that the 
syllabus and book of reference becomes valuable, if not indis- 
pensable, as a means for filling the gaps and voids, and of 
mending lame notes containing incomplete or incorrect diagrams, 
formulas, etc. It does seem as if much of the student’s time 
and energy, that now has to be devoted to correcting and am- 
plifying his notes, might be devoted to studying them. After 
observing and studying carefully the methods of some forty 
or more lecturers on technical subjects, from the dual standpoint 
of student and teacher, I am of the opinion that the short- 
comings of the lecture-system of instruction are more often due 
to the lecturer than to the lecture-system; and that it would 
be only necessary, in many cases, to improve the method of 
the lecturer, in order to improve the results of the system. The 
ideal system, in my opinion, is a lecture-system, in which the 
lecturer, either by dictation or by writing out in sufficient detail 
on the blackboa1d, or by means of a good syllabus, simplifies 
the student’s task of getting accurate notes, and, at the same 
time, allows him time to follow the reasoning, demonstrations, 
and discussions presented. It is too often the case that the 
student is so busy with the mechanical work of taking down 
notes, that he is totally unable to follow, much less to absorb 
and digest, the subject-matter presented. In such cases, it is 
obvious that the method of teaching by lectures is much in- 
ferior to that of teaching by the text-book system. As already 
stated, however, the fault lies more with the particular method 
of the lecturer than with the lecture-system. 

H. W. Blake (by letter): On one point all engineers are 
agreed, namely, that it is impossible to crowd into a four-years’ 
course all of the instruction which the young electrical engineer 
will find useful after graduation. If this is true at the present 
time, it is evident that as the art advances year by year it will 
be necessary still further to circumscribe the number of sub- 
jects included in the required courses. This will involve yearly 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 131 


additional sacrifice of instruction in those branches, which are 
classed by one speaker as ‘‘ cultural and scientific ” rather than 
purely technical. 

The engineering schools are now attracting many men whose 
fields of activity after graduation are almost as varied as those 
of the graduates in the academic or arts department. These 
men would formerly have matriculated in the older college course, 
but the inclusion into so many lines of industry now of engi- 
neering principles makes an engineering education a desideratum. 
At the same time, a knowledge of the purely technical branches 
of the subject is not so important for many of these students 
as a good acquaintance with such topics as business-law, rhet- 
oric, and modern languages, and the ability to meet the political 
and economic questions which are apt to arise in the admin- 
istration of engineering undertakings. 

The technical educator is, then, face to face with a serious 
dilemma. Should he confine his curriculum to the purely tech- 
nical studies which experience has shown require the entire 
time of the undergraduate to master, or should he subordinate 
some of them to those cultural and scientific branches desired 
by a large number of men entering the technical schools yearly? 
The answer to this question is really dependent upon a decision 
whether it is possible to introduce electives in an engineering 
school to the same or nearly the same extent as in the arts 
course. One reason advanced for not following this plan is 
the expense of supplying the varied instruction, but this hardly 
applies in universities, where these outside courses are taught 
in other departments. Another objection has been the ques- 
tion of degree, because the title of engineer, civil, mechanical, 
or electrical, awarded at the end of the course, is generally con- 
sidered to imply familiarity with certain prescribed studies. 
This objection may-be valid and may not. Certainly, however, 
the tradition is not as venerable as that which limited the degree 
of B.A. to a college course which should include at least two 
years of study in Latin and Greek. This requirement is no longer 
in force in many leading universities. If necessary, the engi- 
neer’s degree could be reserved for a post-graduate course along 
certain well-defined lines. The chief point is that the electrical 
engineering industry is now calling for many men whose train- 
ing should primarily be along engineering lines, but who also 
require certain instruction which the technical schools cannot 
give unless they incorporate into their curricula a liberal system 
of electives. 

Dugald C. Jackson (by letter): Many excellent words are 
said in the two brief papers which have been presented by Mr. 
Scott and Dr. Steinmetz, but I am compelled to take the view 
that neither of the papers makes any constructive suggestions 
which may lead to an advance in engineering education. Per- 
haps the nearest suggestion that comes to that point is to be 
found on the first page of Dr. Steinmetz’s paper, where he refers 


132 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


to the importance of close codperation between the electrical 
industries and the engineering colleges. That codperation is 
growing up rapidly as a matter of necessity, but it has hereto- 
fore been more or less undirected, and I had hoped that the 
papers of this evening would give us some suggestions for mak- 
ing more out of that effort. This is surely an important question 
for the Educational Committee carefully to consider and digest 
with a view of bringing up concrete and constructive proposals. 
Dr. Steinmetz makes the interesting statement that the existing 
cooperation probably constitutes the strongest feature of Am- 
erican engineering education. I amin partial agreement with 
him, but I am by no means in agreement with what I under- 
stand to be his implication that the present codperation is as 
effective or intimate as it should be. I will not here undertake 
to enter into the enumeration of the reasons for my views, but 
will perhaps undertake to do so at some later date. 

In this connection I wish to call attention to Mr. Scott’s 
statement that a fairly intimate intermingling of college work 
with practical work will be found to conduce to the efficiency 
of each, and I wish to express my hearty sympathy with that 
statement. I believe that much can be done in the way of im- 
proving our present electrical engineering education by increas- 
ing and strengthening the kind of coéperation which is sug- 
gested in this sentence of Mr. Scott’s. 

Mr. Scott’s paper seems to indicate that he stands for Pro- 
fessor Karapetoff’s plan, which has been dubbed the ‘“ con- 
centric method ’’, but I am sure that Mr. Scott could not be the 
unqualified supporter of that plan had he submitted Professor 
Karapetoff’s proposals to a detailed analysis. The plan which 
has been presented under the name of the ‘‘ concentric method ”’ 
is one which naturally catches the attention of a busy indus- 
trialist, and it may hold his attention until the conditions of his 
industrial work will give him leisure to analyze carefully the 
processes described. Then he will find that the details proposed 
by Professor Karapatoff are subject to serious criticism as being 
in opposition to the basal tenets of pedagogy; though the general 
plan does not differ very much from the plan which is in opera- 
tion, with marked success, in several of the best engineering 
schools. Given time on my part and leisure on the part of Mr. 
Scott, I will undertake to convert him to my view on this matter, 
with the understanding that that conversion will be permanent 
because it will be based upon sound reasoning. 

The defects which Dr. Steinmetz points out in the second page 
of his paper will be admitted by thoughtful and experienced 
teachers of engineering, but it is happily a fact that these de- 
fects are being slowly cleared away. The rate of improvement 
is so slow as to be exceedingly discouraging when considered 
year by year, but the aggregate improvement which has been 
made in the past decade is so marked as to give good ground for 
optimism in respect to this part of engineering education, 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 133 


In this connection I wish to point out that Dr. Steinmetz 
seems to possess a misapprehension in respect to the ideals of 
some of the better engineering schools. It cannot be properly 
said that the students in all of the engineering schools are allowed 
the opportunity to take up the important basal subjects and 
are then intentionally allowed to drop them without succeeding 
drill in their applications. The fact is that the mathematics, 
the chemistry, the physics, the applied mechanics, and the 
more distinctly professional studies following thereafter should 
be closely correlated and dovetailed into each other, the order of 
the work being planned with due consideration of the coérdina- 
tion of the subjects; and care is taken to effect this codérdination 
in certain of the engineering schools. Dr. Steinmetz is probably 
right in criticizing the arrangement of most electrical engineering 
courses from this point of view; but, unquestionably, the ideals 
lying behind the teaching in several of the electrical engineering 
courses give due and full consideration to these factors; and, 
indeed, no course can be carried on with fair consideration of 
the best known principles of pedagogy without including pro- 
visions for these factors. The worst features of many of our 
engineering courses have arisen from the fact that so much of 
their work has been introduced without consideration of the 
pedagozical sequence of the parts or the relation of each part 
to the whole. ; 

Mr. Scott ventures the prediction that the solution (which 
will find the most general acceptance) of the problem of what 
is the best engineering education, will be that which gives to 
each student the training that fits him for his best individual 
development. In these words Mr. Scott has stated an important 
principle in education, and he is to be heartily thanked for 
putting the matter so plainly. To get a fundamental principle 
clearly in mind is often half the battle. But Mr. Scott leaves 
us still groping, because he gives no adequate indication of the 
direction in which engineering courses may be improved for the 
purpose of gaining the goal which the principle lays down. The 
same may be substantially said of Dr. Steinmetz’s paper. Dr. 
Steinmetz remarks that the present condition in the industries, 
wherein men who have never had a college education may rise 
ahead of college graduates, would be impossible if our engineering 
courses gave what they should, namely, an intelligent under- 
standing of electrical engineering subjects. But the difficulty 
under which we now labor is to lay our finger on the specific 
improvements which can be and should be effected for the 
purpose of affording this intelligent understanding of electrical 
engineering subjects that Dr. Steinmetz asks for. What the 
engineering schools need now is careful analytical scrutiny of 
their processes of work, and constructive suggestions for changes 
which will bring about improved results. 

I believe that the better engineering schools have a lively 
understanding of their defects, and a well-developed desire to 


134 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [Jan. 24 


overcome them, but a difficulty resides in determining what 
improvements will bring the wished for results. Experiments 
in education generally require years of trial before their effects 
can be clearly discerned, and experiments must therefore be 
made with caution to prevent taking any backward step. 

I wish to say a word in regard to the remarks of two or three 
other members who entered into this discussion. In respect to 
Mr. Ferguson’s remarks, I believe that I can say that I heartily 
agree with the whole of his presentation; and I also want to 
express my appreciation of Professor Clifford’s admirable presen- 
tation of the requirements in engineering education. I would 
like to emphasize, more than Professor Clifford’s remarks em- 
phasized, the necessity of adding those things which lead to the 
education of judgment; and my acquaintance with Professor - 
Clifford assures me that he probably agrees with me on this 

oint. 
; Mr. Stillwell directs attention to the proposal that the ideal 
education for engineers is going to be brought about by the plan 
which is now being shouted as a shibboleth from the housetops— 
an arts course first and an engineering course afterward. I do 
not believe that this is a solution of the difficulties which are 
outlined in the papers of the evening, and I believe the plan was 
originally conceived by men who are unacquainted with the 
necessities of engineering education: These men may have a 
profound knowledge of the great results that come from a proper 
pursuance of the old-time arts course, but this does not give 
them the experience or the power which makes them sound 
leaders. in the problem of engineering education. I believe 
it is a misfortune that such admirable engineers as Mr. Stillwell 
are willing to lend themselves to the promulgation of this plan 
without a full and complete analysis of its results. I heartily 
agree that an engineer needs to be a broadly and completely 
educated man; but where two horses are to be driven it is better 
to drive them side by side (in parallel) rather than in tandem, 
if.one aims at effective power and not merely at showy results. 
It seems to me that the engineering course, to be fully effective, 
should include the physics and the chemistry and the mathe- 
matics and much of the general studies in the engineering school, 
and subjects such as political economy, history, and the languages 
may be appropriately carried out to the end of the course. This, 
indeed, is a factor which I understand Dr. Steinmetz approves, 
and it is this suggestion contained within the so-called ‘ con- 
centric method ”’ which I presume attracts Mr. Scott’s friendly 
attention. The failure of the concentric method lies distinctly 
in the repetitions of work which it recommends. There may be 
a real utility in the modified proposition which is now beginning 
to gain vogue amongst the best thinking men of the engineering 
schools, and also of the literary and classical colleges, which 
proposes that students shall spend perhaps two years under the 
influences of the arts course and shall then spend four years 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 135 


under the conditions of the engineering school. This would 
make the engineering school base its entrance requirements 
upon attainments gained by the students frcm two years of 
the arts course in college or university, and the plan comprises 
many factors which indicate its utility as an educational plan. 
The plan urged by Mr. Stillwell calls for three or four years in 
the arts course and then for two or three years in the engineering 
school; but this abbreviates the engineering course to a degree 
which makes the joint work relatively ineffective, besides giv- 
ing the students a misapprehension of the relative importance of 
their historical and literary studies compared with their technical 
studies (by substantially dismissing the former from their 
attention for several years while the technical studies are being 
pursued) and leading them to the erroneous belief that the 
humanistic studies de not belong to their lives as engineers. 


A paper presented at a meeting of the 
Philadelphia Section of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, Phila 
delphia Pa., February 10, 1°08. 


Copyright 1908. By A. I. E. E. 


THE SINGLE-PHASE COMMUTATOR-TYPE MOTOR 


BY B. G. LAMME 

The broad statement may be made that it is no more difficult 
to commutate an alternating current than an equal direct current. 
Such a statement would appear to be entirely contrary to the 
usual experience, but a little study of the matter will show where 
the apparent discrepancy lies. In commutator type alternating- 
current motors, as usually built, a relatively large number of 
commutator bars pass off under the brush during one alternation 
of the supply current. While the current supplied is varying 
from zero to maximum value and back to zero, possibly 50 bars 
have been passed under the brush, and therefore 50 coils in 
the armature have been reversed or commutated. Some of 
these reversals occur at the top of the current wave which has 
a value of about 40% higher than the mean or effective value 
which is read by the ammeter. The motor is therefore at times 
commutating 40% higher current than that indicated by the 
instruments. It is thus evident that in comparing the com- 
mutation of 100 amperes direct-current with 100 amperes 
alternating-current we should actually compare the direct- 
current with 141 amperes alternating. In other words, for com- 
mutating equal currents alternating-current or direct-current, 
the alternating-current ammeter should register only 71% as 
much current as the direct-current. Another way of expressing 
it is that we have to commutate the top or maximum of the 
alternating-current wave, while our instruments only record 
the mean value. 

If the above represented the only difference between the 
alternating current and direct current the problem to be solved 
in commutation of alternating current would not be serious. 

137 


138 LAMME; THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [Feb. 10 


However, the current to be commutated by an alternating- 
current motor is not merely the working current supplied to 
the motor and measured by the ammeter, but there is, in addi- 
tion, a current which is generated in the motor itself, both at 
standstill and during rotation, which has to be reversed or com- 
mutated along with the working current. It is this latter cur- 
rent, usually called the local or short-circuit current, which has 
been the source of greatest trouble in commutating alternating 
current; for this short-circuit current may have a value any- 
where from three to ten times the working current, depending 
on the design of the machine. Therefore in comparing the com- 
mutation of an alternating current, as indicated by an ammeter, 


with an equal direct current, we should, in reality, consider 
that the alternating-current motor is commutating a maximum 
current from five to ten times the value of the indicated current. 
Furthermore, it would not do to reduce the ammeter current to 
one-fifth or one-tenth value in order to compare commutation 
with direct current, because by so doing we would simply be 
reducing the small applied component of the total current 
commutated by the brushes, the local or short-circuit current 
still retaining a rather high value. In order to compare with 
direct-current commutation, it would be necessary for the 
total maximum of the combined supply and the short-circuit 
current to be reduced to the same value as direct current. 


1908] LAMME; THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 139 


It is the local current in the armature turn short-circuited 
by the brush which is the source of practically all the trouble in 
commutating alternating currents. Fig. 1 illustrates a portion 
of the field and armature structure of a commutator type 
alternating-current motor. It will be noted that the armature 
conductor, which is in the neutral position between poles, sur- 
rounds the magnetic flux from the field pole, just as the field 
turns themselves surround it. The field flux being alternating, 
this armature turn will have set up in it an electromotive force 
of the same value as one of the field turns. Short-circuiting 
the two ends of this armature turn should have the same effect 
as short-circuiting one of the field turns, which is the same 
thing as short-circuiting a turn on a transformer. Such a short- 
circuited turn, if of sufficiently low resistance, should have as 
many ampere-turns set up in it as there are field ampere-turns. 
In single-phase motors of good design the field ampere-turns 
per pole are about twelve to fifteen times the normal ampere- 
turns in any one armature coil. Therefore, if the armature coil 
in the position shown in this Fig. 1 should have its ends closed 
on themselves the current in this coil would rise to a value of 
twelve to fifteen times normal. In reality, it would not rise 
quite this much, because this armature turn is placed on a 
separate core from the field or magnetizing turns with an air- 
gap between, so that the magnetic leakage between the primary 
(or field winding) and this armature (or secondary winding) 
would tend to protect this coil somewhat, just as leakage between 
the primary and secondary windings of a transformer tends to 
reduce the secondary electromotive force and current. Also, 
this armature coil is embedded in slots, thus adding somewhat 
to its self-induction, and tending further to reduce the short- 
circuit current. In consequence, with its ends closed together 
the current in this armature coil would probably not rise more 
than ten to twelve times above normal value under any con- 
dition. It is evident, therefore, that if the brush shown in 
Fig. 1 as bridging across two commutator bars to which the 
ends of this coil are connected is of copper or other low-resistance 
material, then there could be an enormous local current set up 
in the coil when thus short-circuited by the brush. This local 
current of about ten times the normal working current would 
have to be commutated as the brush moves from bar to bar, 
and therefore the operation of the machine would be simuar to 
that of a direct-current motor if overloaded about ten times 
in current. In other words, there would be vicious sparking. 


140 LAMME: THE SINGLE.PHASE MOTOR (Feb 10 


Even if the low-resistance brush were replaced by one of 
ordinary carbon, the short-circuiting current would still be rela- 
tively high, due to the fact that it is not possible to make the 
brush contact of very high resistance by reducing the size or 
number of the brushes, because these same brushes must carry 
the working current supplied to the motor, and there must be 
brush capacity sufficient to handle this current. This brush 
capacity will, in practice, be of such amount that the resistance 
in bridging from one bar to the next is still rather low, although 
much higher than if a copper brush were used. Experience 
shows that with not more than four or five volts generated in 
this short-circuited coil by the field flux, the resistance ot the 
carbons at the contact with the commutator would be such that 
a short-circuit current of three to four times the normal working 
current in the coil can still flow. Therefore, if the motor were 
equipped with carbon brushes and had but four or five volts 
generated in the short-circuit coil, the motor would have to 
commutate the main or working current and also a short-circuit 
current of possibly three times the amount. This short-circuit 
current would also have a maximum or top of its current wave. 
Assuming 100 amperes as the current supplied to the motor, 
the machine therefore actually commutates a supply current of 
141 amperes and an additional short-circuit current of possibly 
three times this value, or from 400 to 500 amperes, therefore, 
the motor actually commutates the equivalent ot about 600 
amperes direct current when the alternating-current ammeter 
is reading 100. It is evident from this that any one who tries 
to commutate alternating current with an ordinary type of 
commutating machine would at once draw the conclusion that 
alternating current in itself is very difficult to commutate, 
naturally overlooking the fact that it is the excessive current 
handled by the brush that is back of the trouble, and not the 
current indicated by the ammeter. 

From what has been stated, it is evident that the excessive 
local current is back of the difficulty in commutating alternating 
current. All efforts of designers of alternating-current com- 
mutator motors have been in the direction of reducing or elimina- 
ting this local current. The present success of the motor, in 
the various forms brought out, is largely due to the fact that 
this current has been successfully reduced to so low a value that 
it does not materially add to the difficulties of commutating the 
main current. No successful method has yet been practically 


1908] LAMME: THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 141 


developed for entirely overcoming the effects of this short-circuit 
current under all conditions from standstill to highest speed. 
Some of the corrective methods developed almost eliminate this 
current at a certain speed or speeds, but have little or no cor- 
rective effect under other conditions; other methods do not effect 
a complete correction at any speed, but have a relatively good 
effect at all speeds and under all conditions. The former 
methods would appear to be applicable to motors which run at, 
or near, a certain speed for a large part of the time; the latter 
method would be more applicable to those cases where the motor 
is liable to be operated for considerable periods with practically 
any speed from standstill to the highest. While several methods 
have been brought forward for correcting local current when 
the motor has obtained speed, yet up to the present time but 
one successful method has been developed for materially re- 
ducing this current at standstill or very low speeds. It may 
be suggested that the short-circuit voltage per coil be reduced 
to so low a value, say four or five volts, that the local current 
is not excessive and does not produce undue sparking. This 
would certainly reduce the sparking difficulty, but is open to the 
very great objection that the capacity of the motor is directly 
affected by a reduction in the short-circuit voltage. This voltage 
per turn in the armature coil is a direct function of the value of 
the alternating field-flux and its frequency. Assuming a given 
frequency, then the short-circuit voltage is a direct function of 
the induction per field pole, and the lower the short-circuit volt- 
age the lower must be the field flux. But the output of the 
machine, or the torque with a given speed, is proportional to 
the product of the field flux per pole by the armature ampere- 
turns. In a given size of armature the maximum permissible 
number of ampere-turns is pretty well fixed by mechanical and 
heating considerations, and therefore with a given armature 
the torque of the motor is a direct function of the field flux. 
Using the maximum permissible armature ampere-turns, the 
output of a given motor would be very low if the field flux were 
so low that the short-circuit voltage would not be more than 
three or four volts. Increasing the field induction, and there- 
fore increasing the short-circuit voltage, increases the output. 

Experience shows that on large motors, such as required for 
railway work, the induction per pole must necessarily be so high 
that the electromotive force in the short-circuit coil must be 
about double the figure just given; therefore, with such heavy 


142 LAMME:; THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [Feb. 10 


flux the short-circuited current will necessarily be excessive 
unless some corrective means is used for reducing it. 

I will consider the standstill or low-speed conditions first. 
For this condition only one practical arrangement has so far 
been suggested for reducing the local current to a reasonably 
low value compared with the working current. This method 
involves the use of preventive leads, or, as they are sometimes 
called, resistance leads. These consist of resistances connected 
between the commutator bars and the armature conductors. 
Fig. 2 illustrates the arrangement. The armature is wound 
like a direct-current machine, except that the end of one arma- 
ture coil is connected directly to the beginning of the next 


Preventive 
Lead, 


without being placed in the commutator. Between these con- 
nections separate leads are carried to the commutator bars, and 
in these leads sufficient resistance is placed to cut down the 
short-circuit current. The arrangement is very similar in effect 
to the preventive coils used in connection with step-by-step 
voltage regulators which have been in use for many years. In 
passing from one step to the next on such regulators, it is common 
practice to introduce a preventive coil or resistance in such a 
way that the two contact bars are bridged only through this 
preventive device. 

In an armature winding arranged in this way, the working 
current is introduced through the brushes and the leads to the 
armature winding proper. After entering the winding, the 


1908] LAMME; THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 143 


current does not pass through the resistance leads because the 
connections between coils are made beyond these leads. In 
consequence, only a very small number of these leads are in 
circuit at any one time; when the armature is in motion all the 
leads carry current in turn so that the average loss in any one 
lead is very small. As the brush generally bridges across two 
or more commutator bars, there is usually more than one lead 
in circuit, but generally not more than three. When the brush 
is bridging across two bars, there is not only the working cur- 
rent passing into the two leads connected to these two bars, 
but there is the local current, before described, which passes in 
through one lead, through an armature turn, then back through 
the next lead to the brush. There are losses in these two leads 
due to these two currents. By increasing the resistance, the loss 
due to the working current is increased, but at the same time 
the short-circuit current is decreased. As the loss due to this 
latter is equal to the square of the current multiplied by the 
resistance, it is evident that increasing this resistance will cut 
down the loss due to the local current in direct proportion as the 
resistance is increased. When the working current is much 
smaller in value than the short-circuit current, an increase in 
the resistance of the leads does not increase the loss due to the 
working current as much as it decreases the loss due to the 
short-circuit current. Both theory and practice show that 
when the resistance in the leads is so proportioned that the 
short-circuit current in the coil is equal to the normal working 
current, the total losses are a minimum. Calculation, as well 
as experience, indicates that a variation of 20% to 30% at either 
side of this theoretically best resistance gives but a very slight 
increase in loss, so there is considerable flexibility in the adjust- 
ment of this resistance. The resistance of the brush contacts 
and of the coil itself must be included with the resistance of the 
leads in determining the best value. In practice it is found that 
with ordinary medium-resistance brushes, the resistance in the 
leads themselves should be about four or five times as great as 
the resistance in the brush contact and the coil; that is, we 
usually calculate the total necessary resistance required and 
then place about 70% or 80% of it in the leads themselves. 
When leads of the proper proportion are added to the motor, it 
is found that practically twice as high field flux can be used as 
before with the same sparking and burning tendency as when 
the lower flux is used without such leads. But even with six 


144 LAMME; THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [Feb. 10 


to eight volts per commutator bar as a limit, we are greatly 
handicapped in the design of the motors, especially wheh the 
frequency is taken into account. This limited voltage between 
bars also indicates at once why single-phase railway motors are 
wound for such relatively low armature voltages. Direct- 
current railway motors commonly use from 12 to 20 volts per 
commutator bar, or from 2 to 2.5 times the usual practice on 
alternating-current motors. With this low voltage between 
bars in alternating-current machines, with the largest practic-. 
able number of bars, the armature voltages become 200 to 250, 
or about 40% of the usual direct voltages. The choice of low 
voltage should, therefore, not be considered as simply a whim 
of the designers; it is a necessity which they would gladly 
avoid if possible. 

Assuming preventive leads of the best proportions, let us 
again compare the current to be commutated in an alternating- 
current motor with that of the direct-current. Considering 
the ammeter reading as 100, the working alternating current 
has a maximum value of 140 and in addition there is a short- 
circuit current of same value. Even under this best condition, 
the alternating-current motor must commutate a current several 
times as large as in the corresponding direct-current motor. 
The design of such a motor, therefore, is a rather difficult prob- 
lem, even under the best conditions. 

While resistance leads theoretically appear to give the most 
satisfactory method for obtaining good starting and slow- 
speed running conditions, yet other methods have been pro- 
posed. The only one of any practical importance is that in 
which the short-circuit voltage is reduced at start and at slow 
speed by sufficiently reducing the field induction. As this 
reduced field induction would give a proportionately reduced 
torque, it is necessary at the same time to increase the armature 
ampere-turns a corresponding amount above normal. This is 
only a part solution of the problem, however, for the decrease 
in short-circuit current by this means is partly offset by the 
increase in the working current, so that the total current to be 
commutated is not reduced in proportion to the field flux, 
Where the period of starting and slow running is very short, 
this method is fairly successful in practice. However, with this 
arrangement it is rather dangerous to hold the motor at stand- 
still for any appreciable length of time, for in such a case the 
large short-circuit current is confined to a single coil and the 


1908] LAMME; THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 145 


effect is liable to be disastrous if continued for more than a very 
short period. With this method of starting, the total current 
handled by the brushes will usually be at least two to three 
times as great as when preventive leads are used. 

The preceding statements refer mainly to starting or slow- 
speed conditions. When it comes to full-speed conditions, 
however, there are various ways of taking care of the commuta- 
tion. One of these methods is based on the use of preventive 
leads, as described; the other methods depend upon the use of 
commutating poles or commutating fields in one form or another. 

It is evident, from what has been said, that at start the pre- 
ventive leads which reduce the short-circuit current to low 
values will also be effective in a similar manner when running 
at normal speed. Such a motor with proper proportion of 
leads will, in general, commutate very well at full speed when 
the starting conditions have been suitably taken care of. Nothing 
further need be said of this method except that the tests show 
that the short-circuit current has considerably less value at 
high speed than at start. 

The other methods of commutation at speed, involving com- 
mutating poles and commutating fields, necessarily depend upon 
the armature rotation for setting up a suitable electromotive 
force in the short-circuit coil to oppose the flow of the short- 
circuit current. As the electromotive force in the short-cir- 
cuited coil is a direct function of the field flux, and is inde- 
pendent of speed, while the correcting electromotive force is a 
function of the armature speed, it is evident that either the 
commutating pole can produce the proper correction only at 
one particular speed, or the strength of this commutating pole 
must be varied as some function of the speed. Usually the 
strength of these poles is made adjustable with a limited number 
of adjustments and approximate compensation only is obtained 
on the average. In the Siemens-Schuckert motor the com- 
mutating poles are of small size and placed between the main 
poles. These are for the purpose of obtaining commutation 
when running. In addition the armature is provided with pre- 
ventive leads for improving the operation at start and at slow 
speed. In the Alexanderson motor, according to published 
description, no separate commutating poles are provided, but 
the edges of the main poles are used as commutating poles, 
’ the armature coil having its throw shortened until its two sides 
come under the edges of the main poles. In this motor the field 


146 LAMME: THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [Feb. 10 


is weakened and the armature ampere-turns are increased 
while starting. The commutating-pole scheme in this motor is, 
in some ways, not as economical as in the Siemens-Schuckert 
arrangement, as the motor requires a somewhat higher mag- 
netization with a consequent reduction in power-factor. The 
Winter-Eichberg motor is quite different in arrangement from 
any of those which I have mentioned. I will not attempt to 
describe this motor in full, but will say that it has two sets of 
brushes in the armature, one of which is short-circuited on 
itself, and carries the equivalent of the working current in the 
types I have described, while the other carries the magnetizing 
or exciting current which is supplied to the armature winding 
instead of the field. The arrangement is such as to give prac- 
tically the same effect as a commutating pole or commutating 
field. When starting, the field flux is decreased and the arma- 
ture ampere-turns increased. 

All of the above motors are nominally of low armature voltage 
and all of them appear to commutate reasonably well at speed. 
Two of them use the full-speed induction at start, while the 
other two use reduced induction and increased armature ampere- 
turns at start. 

There has been considerable discussion during the last year 
or two regarding the most suitable frequency for single-phase 
commutator type motors. It may therefore be of interest to 
consider what effect reduction in frequency would have on the 
commutation, output, and other characteristics of the motor. 

The short-circuit voltage, as I have stated before, is a function 
of the amount of field flux and of the frequency. For a given 
short-circuit voltage the induction per pole can be increased 
directly as the frequency is decreased. If a certain maximum 
induction per pole is permissible at 25 cycles, then with 12.5 
cycles, for example, the induction per pole may be double, with 


the same short-circuit voltage. This would at once permit 


double output if the saturation of the magnetic circuit would 
permit the doubling of the induction. But on 25-cycle motors, 
as usually built, we work the magnetic flux up to a point just 
on the verge of saturation, so to speak, as indicated in Fig. 3. 
It is evident that double induction, under such conditions, 
would not be practicable unless the 25-cycle motor had been 
worked at an uneconomically low point. However, an increase 
of 30% to 40% in the induction would appear to be obtainable, 
but a large increase in excitation is required, With but 30% 


1908] LAMME; THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 147 


to 40% higher induction, and with the frequency halved, the 
short-circuit voltage would be but 65% to 70% of that with 
25 cycles or, in other words, the voltage per turn in the field 
coil is but 65% to 70%. As the higher induction raises the 
armature counter electromotive force the field electromotive 
force can be increased in proportion for the same power-factor, 
or can be 30% to 40% higher than with 25 cycles. As the total 
field voltage, therefore, can be 30% to 40% higher, and the 
voltage per field turn is but 65% to 70%, it is evident that the 
number of field turns can be doubled without changing the 


ee ae 


induction per Pole. 


' Field Amperezturns. 
Fic. 3 


ratio of the field inductive volts to the armature electromotive 
force. In other words, the field turns can be doubled if the 
frequency is halved. With the double field turns the field 
excitation can therefore be doubled, which is the requirement 
for the increased induction shown in Fig. 3. It is thus evideni 
that halving the frequency will permit higher pole inductions, 
and therefore higher torque and output, with lower short-circuit 
voltage and better commutating conditions throughout. Also, 
this higher field induction is not necessarily accompanied by an 
increased iron loss, for the lower frequency of the alternating 


148 LAMME: THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [Feb. 10 


flux compensates for this. On the above basis it may be asked 
why a reduction to 15 cycles is proposed instead of to 12.5, or 
even to 10 cycles. There are several reasons for the choice of 
15 cycles. 

1. The motor can be worked up to so high a saturation at 15 
cycles that there is relatively small gain with a reduction to 
12.5 cycles, which would be about the lowest frequency to con- 
sider when the transformers and other apparatus is taken into 
account. 

2. As the torque of the single-phase motor is pulsating in- 
stead of being constant, as in a direct-current machine, there 
is liability of vibration as the frequency of the pulsation is de- 
creased. This effect becomes more pronounced the larger the 
torque of the motor, and is, therefore, of most importance in the 
case of a large locomotive. Experience shows that this ten- 
dency to vibrate can be damped out effectively in very large 
motors with a frequency of 15 cycles, but becomes more difficult 
to suppress as the frequency is further reduced. This is, in 
reality, one of the fundamental reasons for keeping up to 15 
cycles instead of reducing to 12.5 or lower. 

3. The lower the frequency the heavier the transforming 
apparatus on the car or locomotive. It is probable that with 
123 cycles instead of 15 cycles, the increase in weight and cost 
of the transforming apparatus would about counter-balance 
the decrease in the same items in the motors themselves, al- 
though the efficiency and power factor of the equipment would 
be slightly better with the lower frequency. 

4. As synchronous converters will be used to some extent in 
connection with the generating plants for single-phase systems 
in order to feed existing direct current railways, the frequency 
of 15 cycles will be slightly more favorable than 12.5 as regards 
cost of the converters and the step-down transformers. The 
same will be true if motor-generators are used for transforming 
to direct current, also for induction motors. 

Against the choice of 15 cycles may be cited the fact that 
there are other frequencies which represent a better ratio to 
25 cycles when frequency-changers are to be taken into account. 
A low-frequency railway generating plant may require to tie 
up with some existing 25-cycle or 60-cycle plant; this can be 
done by interposing frequency-changers. Or it may be desired 
to obtain a lower frequency with a single-phase current from 
some existing higher frequency polyphase plant. By inter- 


1908] LAMME: THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 149 


posing the frequency-changer the single-phase railway load will 
not exert any unbalancing effect on the polyphase supply 
circuit, and at the same time the railway circuit can be regulated 
up or down independently of the three-phase generator circuit. 
In case the three-phase plant is operated at 25 cycles, then a 
two-to-one ratio of frequencies; that is, 12.5 cycles on the rail- 
way circuit, would give the best conditions as regards choice 
of poles and speeds in the frequency-changer sets. A five-to- 
three relation is given by 15 cycles, which is not nearly as good 
as the two-to-one ratio. A frequency of 162 cycles would give 
a three-to-two ratio, which represents considerable improve- 
ment over the five-to-three ratio. Therefore, this shightly 
higher frequency may prove of advantage in some cases. The 
choice of this frequency, however, does not mean a new line 
of apparatus; for a well designed line of 15-cycle motor trans- 
formers, etc., should operate very well on a 163-cycle circuit 
without any change whatever. 

When transforming from 60 cycles, however, the 15 cycle 
gives a four-to-one ratio which is very good, and neither 12.5 
nor 163 cycles is very satisfactory. Therefore this 15-cycle 
frequency represents the best condition in transforming from 
60 cycles, and fairly good conditions for transforming from 25 
cycles; and by operation of 15-cycle apparatus at 163 cycles a 
very good transformation ratio is obtained from 25 cycles. It 
may be of interest to recall that the old Washington, Baltimore 
and Annapolis Railway, which was the first road contracting 
for single-phase commutator motors, was laid out for 1632 
cycles. There was considerable criticism at that time of the 
use of this frequency, but the statement which I have just made 
shows one very good reason for this frequency. A second rea- 
son is that 162 cycles per second is 2000 alternations per minute, 
which permits a steam turbine driving a two-pole generator to 
use a speed of 1000 rev. per min., which is a very good one for 
large-turbo generators. 

I have gone into the question of induction and frequency 
as affecting the commutation and torque. I will now take up 
the question of power-factor in the single-phase commutator 
motor. In a direct-current motor we have two electromotive 
forces which add up equal to the applied electromotive force; 
namely, the counter electromotive force due to rotation of the 
armature winding in the magnetic field, and the electromotive 
force absorbed in the resistance of the windings and rheostat 


150 LAMME;: THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [Feb. 10 


In the alternating-current motor there are these two electro- 
motive forces, and there is also another one not found in the 
direct-current machine; namely, the electromotive force of self- 
induction of the armature and field windings due to the alter- 
nating magnetic flux in the motor. This inductive electro- 
motive force exerts a far greater influence than the ohmic 
electromotive force for it has much higher values. 

The inductive electromotive force lies principally in the main 
field or exciting winding of the alternating-current motor. 
There is a certain voltage per turn generated in the field coils, 
depending upon the amount of the field flux and its frequency, 
as stated before. This electromotive force per field turn is 
practically of the same value as the short-circuit electromotive 
force generated in the armature coil, as already referred to. I 
have stated that a short-circuit voltage of three or four volts 
per armature turn gave prohibitive designs and that it was 
necessary practically to double this. This means that the field 
coils also have six to eight volts per turn generated in them. 
The total number of field turns must, therefore, be very small 
in order to keep down the field electromotive force, for this 
represents simply a choke-coil in series with the armature. If 
the armature counter electromotive force should be 200 volts, 
for instance, which is rather high in practice with 25-cycle 
motors, then a field self-induction of half this value would allow 
about 14 turns total in the field winding. Compare this with 
direct-current motors with 150 to 200 field turns for 550 volts, 
or 60 to 80 turns for 220 volts. The alternating-current 25-cycle 
motor, therefore, can have only about 20% to 25% as many 
field turns as the ordinary direct-current motor. This fact 
makes it particularly hard to design large motors where there 
must be many poles. In the single-phase motor the induction 
per pole being limited by the permissible short-circuit voltage, 
it is necessary to use a large number of poles for heavy torques; 
but the total number of field turns must remain practically 
constant on account of the self induction, while in reality the 
number of turns should be increased as the number of poles is 
increased. With a given number of poles we may have just 
sufficient field turns to magnetize the motor up to the required 
point; but if a large number of poles should be required, then we 
at once lack field turns and must either reduce the field induc- 
tion, and thus reduce the output, or must add more field turns 
and thus get a higher self-induction or choking action in the 


1908] LAMME: THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 151 


field, with a corfsequent reduction in power-factor. Here is 
where a lower frequency comes in to advantage, for, as I showed 
before, with the same relative inductive effect, the field turns 
can be increased directly as the frequency is decreased. The 
usc of 15 cycles thus permits 67% more field turns than 25 
cycles and raises our permissible magnetizing limits enormously. 
This problem is encountered particularly in gearless locomotive 
motors of large capacity. For increased capacity the driving 
wheels are made larger, thus permitting a larger diameter of 
motor, the length, axlewise, being fixed. But with increased 
diameter of drivers, the number of revolutions is decreased fora 
given number of miles per hour. With 25-cycle motors we 
soon encounter the above mentioned limiting condition in field 
turns; beyond this point the characteristics of the motor must 
be sacrificed, and even doing this we soon reach prohibitive 
limits. By dropping the frequency to 15 cycles, for instance, 
we change the whole situation. The induction per pole can be 
increased and the number of poles, if desired, can also be in- 
creased. The practical result is that, in the case of a high-speed 
passenger locomotive with gearless motors, a 700-h.p. 15-cycle 
motor can be got in on the same diameter of drivers as required 
for a 500-h.p. 25-cycle motor. Also a 500-h.p. 15-cycle motor 
goes in on the same drivers as a 360-h.p., 25-cycle motor, At 
the same time these 15-cycle motors have better all round 
characteristics than the 25-cycle machines as regards efficiency, 
power-factor, starting, over-load commutation, etc. 

Returning to the design of the motor, there is one other 
electromotive force of self induction which may be considered; 
namely, that generated in the armature winding and in the 
opposing winding in the pole face, usually called the neutralizing 
or compensating winding. 

Fig. 4 shows a section of the field and armature corresponding 
to the usual direct-current motor, or an alternating-current 
motor without compensating winding. In the direct-current 
motor the armature ampere-turns lying under the pole face 
tend to set up a local field around themselves, producing what 
is known as cross-induction. This produces no harmful effect 
except in crowding the field induction to one edge of the pole, 
thus shifting the magnetic field slightly and possibly affecting 
the commutation in a small degree. But if the armature is 
carrying alternating current this cross flux will generate an 
electromotive force in the armature winding, and this will be 


152 LAMME; THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [Feb. 10 


added to the field self-induction, thus increasing the self-induc- 
tion or choking action of the machine. As the armature turns 
on such motors are much greater, in proportion, than the field 
turns, it is evident that the ampere-turns under the pole face 
can exert a relatively great cross-magnetizing effect. This high 
cross-magnetization generates a high armature self-induction 
which may be almost as much as the field self-induction. Further, 
this great cross-induction would tend to shift the magnetic 
field quite appreciably, thus affecting the commutation to some 
extent. 

To overcome this serious objection, the neutralizing winding 
is added. This is a winding embedded in the pole face and so 


arranged that it opposes the armature cross-magnetizing action. 
The arrangement is shown in Fig. 5. As it opposes and thus 
neutralizes the cross-induction set up by the armature winding, 
it eliminates the self-induction due to the cross-magnetization. 
It also prevents shifting of the magnetic field and thus eliminates 
its injurious effect on commutation. As the cross-flux is 
practically cut out the armature winding becomes relatively 
non-inductive. There is, however, a small self-induction in 
the armature and neutralizing windings, due to the small flux 
which can be set up in the space between the two windings, 
they being on separate cores with an air-gap between. 

I have stated that the field turns of the alternating-current 
motor can be only 20% to 25% as many as in ordinary direct- 


1908] LAMME:; THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 153 


current practice. It may be questioned how the field can be 
magnetized with so few field turns. This has been one of the 
most difficult problems in the motor. Obviously, one solution 
would be the use of a very small air-gap, but in railway practice 
there are objections to making the air-gap unduly small. Furth- 
ermore, if the armature has large open slots, as shown in Fig. 6, 
experience shows that a reduction in the clearance between the 
armature and field iron does not represent a corresponding de- 
crease in the effective length of the air-gap, due to the fact that 
the fringing of the magnetic flux from the tooth tip of the pole 
face changes as the air-gap is varied. The most effective con- 
struction yet used consists in making the armature slots of the 
partially closed type as in the secondary of an induction motor. 
This is shown in Fig: 7. 


With this construction practically the whole armature surface 
under the pole becomes effective, and the true length of air-gap 
is practically the same as the distance from iron to iron. With 
the increased effective surface, due to this construction, the 
length of air-gap need not be unduly decreased, which is of con- 
siderable importance in railway work. 

A further assistance in reducing the required field turns is 
the field construction used in the single-phase motor. The 
magnetic circuit consists of laminations of high permeability 
and usually without joints across the magnetic path. The iron 
is also worked either below the bend in the saturation curve or, 
at most, only slightly up on the bend, except in the case of very 
low frequency motors where more field turns are permissible. 


154 LAMME: THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [Feb. 10 


Taking the whole magnetic circuit into account, on 25-cycle 
motors about 80% of the whole field excitation is expended in 
the air-gap, while in direct-current motors, even with a much 
larger air-gap, as much as 40% to 50% of the magnetization 
may be expended in the iron and in the joints. 

This armature construction with the partly closed slots has 
been found very effective in large, slow-speed, single-phase 
motors in which a relatively large number of poles is required. 
This construction is used on the New Haven 250-h.p., 25-cycle 


Fic. 6 


motors; also on the 500 h.p., 15-cycle motor on the Pennsylvania 
locomotive exhibited at Altantic City at the Street Railway 
convention, last October. Geared motors for interurban service 
can be constructed with ordinary open slots with bands, and 
many have been built that way. The semi-closed slot, however, 
allows more economical field excitation. 

it may be asked what the objection is to low power-factors 
on single-phase railway motors, aside from the increased Wwatt- 
less load on the generating station and transmission circuits, 
There is an objection to the low power-factor in such motors, 


1908] LAMME;: THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 155 


a very serious one. This lies in the greatly reduced margin for 
overload torque in case the supply voltage is lowered. In 
railway work it is generally the requirement. of abnormal loads 
or torques which causes a reduction in the line voltage; that is, 
the overload pulls down the trolley voltage just when a good 
voltage condition is most necessary. This is true of direct cur- 
rent as well as alternating current. In the direct current 
motor, however, such reduction in voltage simply means reduced 
speed but in the alternating current motor the effect may be 
more serious. 

To illustrate, assume a motor with a power-factor of 90% at 
full load. The energy component of the input being 90%, 


the inductive component is about 44% or, putting it in terms of 
electromotive force the inductive volts of the motor are 44% 
of the terminal voltage. Neglecting the resistance of the motor, 
a supplied electromotive force of 44% of the rated voltage 
would just drive full-load current through it and develop full- 
load torque. With full voltage applied the motor could develop 
from five to six times full-load torque. Under abnormal con- 
ditions a drop of 30% in the line voltage would still give suffi- 
cient voltage at the motor terminals to develop two and one half 
to three times full-load torque. Let us next take a motor of 
80% power-factor at full load. The inductive voltage would 
then become 60% of the terminal voltage, and therefore 60% 
of the rated voltage must be applied to send full-load current 


156 LAMME: THE SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [Feb. 10 


through the motor. This neglects the resistance of the motor, 
which, if included, means that slightly more than 60% of the 
voltage is required. With full voltage applied, this motor 
would develop about three or four times the rated torque. 
With 30% drop in the line voltage the motor could develop 
from one and one half to two times rated torque, which is hardly 
enough for an emergency condition. 

Taking, next, a motor with 70% power-factor at full load it 
would require 70% of the rated voltage to send full-load current 
through the motor; with 30% drop in line voltage the motor 
could just develop full-load torque, and even with 15% drop it 
would develop only about one and one half times torque. As 
15% drop is liable to occur on any ordinary system, this latter 
motor would be a very unsafe one. 

It is evident from the above that it would be bad practice in 
railway work to install motors with very low full-load power- 
factors. In general, the higher the power-factor the more 
satisfactory will be the service, other things being equal. 

I have endeavored to explain some of the problems which have 
been encountered in the design of single-phase commutator 
railway motors of sizes suitable for all classes of railway service. 
Here is a type of machine which has been known for a great 
many years, but which, until the last few years, has been con- 
sidered utterly bad. In a comparatively short time it has been 
changed from what was considered an unworkable machine to 
a highly satisfactory one and this has been accomplished, not 
by any radically new discoveries, but by the common-sense 
application of well known principles to overcome the apparently 
inherent defects of the type. As an indication that the motor 
is making progress in the railway field, I will mention that the 
first commercial single-phase railway motors have not been in 
use more than four or five years, and yet at the present time 
there have been sold by the various manufacturers in this 
country and Europe, a total capacity of approximately 200,000 
to 250,000 h.p., a very considerable part of which has been put 
in operation. Considering that the motor was a newcomer in a 
well established field, the above record is astonishing. How- 
ever, it may be safely predicted that what has been done in the 
last five years will hardly make a showing compared with what 
will be done during the next five years, for the real field for such 
motors, namely, heavy railway work, has hardly been touched. 


A paper presented at the 225th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, February 14, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.1.E,E, 


THE NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR IN CENTRAL 
STATION AND OTHER WORK 


BY W. L. WATERS 


- That an induction motor could act as a generator and return 
power to the line when driven at a speed above that of synchro- 
nism, has been known for many years. It has, however, always 
been regarded as more or less of a scientific curiosity, and except 
in the case of the Swiss three-phase mountain roads, where the 
motors are sometimes allowed to run as generators to brake the 
train on descending heavy grades, the non-synchronous 
generator has had but few commercial applications. The 
fact that the characteristics of this generator are such that it 
must receive a lagging current from the system, the magnitude 
of which is for a given machine definitely decided by the slip 
of the generator above synchronism, combined with the fact 
that when connected to a circuit is has no definite voltage and 
frequency of its own, make it lack the flexibility of the synchro- 
nous generator. In 1895, Mr. B. G. Lamme proposed running 
a non-synchronous generator with an unloaded synchronous 
motor, the generator to supply the watt component and the 
motor the wattless component of the current in the system. 
But though this suggestion rendered the non-syncironous genera- 
tor a practical machine, it is easily understood that on ac- 
count of the lesser flexibility when compared with the synchron- 
ous generator, it has not appealed to the central station engineer 
as a desirable addition to his equipment. 

The question as to the advisability of adopting the non-syn- 
chronous generator for power station work, was decided ad- 
versely by engineers at the time when steam engines and water 
turbines were the only practical prime-movers. But to-day we 


157 


158 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


have to deal with steam turbines and gas engines, and the com- 
ing of these two new types of prime-movers has altogether changed 
the situation in regard to the use of this generator for power 
station work. It often happens in such cases that the real mean- 
ing and possibilities of the introduction of types of machinery 
with such fundamentally new characteristics as the steam tur- 
bine and gas engine, are not recognized until they are accidentally 
forced upon us. This has been the case in the present instance; 
the question of the use of non-synchronous generator with steam 
turbines was not seriously considered until it was brought up indi- 
rectly. In 1904 a copper smelting and rolling company was 
installing a 1200-kw., 200-volt, direct-current generator for 


Fic. 1—Non-Synchronous generator installed at 
a copper-smelting and rolling mill. 


electrolytic work. It was desirable to continue the good steam 
economy on variable loads, the small floor space and reduced main- 
tenance of the steam turbine, and at the same time to generate 
200-volt direct current. A 1°00-kw., €000-ampere, 200-volt, 
1800-rev. per. min., direct-current turbine generator was not con- 
sidered practical, and a non-synchronous generator together with 
a synchronous converter was suggested asan alternative. It was 
finally decided to adopt this type of equipment, and a 1£00-kw., 
six-phase, 140-volt, 30-cycle, 1800-rev. per min. generator to- 
gether with a 1200-kw., six-phase, 150-rev. per min. converter 
was installed to supply the required 6000 amperes direct 
current at 200 volts. A direct-current exciter for the con- 


1908] WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR 159 


verter was provided, so that the direct voltage could be varied 
from 100 to 230 volts without any danger of instability. The 
exciter is compound-wound to give constant voltage on the 
direct-current side of the converter, and the power-factor grad- 
ually rises from about 25% at no load to about 96% at full load. 
When starting up the set, the converter is run up to speed from 
ap auxiliary source of direct current, and the generator by its 
turbine. They are then thrown together, the generator driving 
the converter as a synchronous motor, and the converter supply- 
ing the magnetizing current of the generator. The governor 
of the turbine decides the frequency of the set, and the slip of 
the converter behind the generator is proportional to the load, 
being about 1% at full load. This equipment has been running 
now for about three years and operates perfectly. The generator 
is similar in arrangement to the old open-type turbo-generator, 
and in consequence is rather noisy, but with the modern enclosed 
type of generator it is possible to arrange the air circulation bet- 
ter, and to obtain as a result a much quieter running machine. 

This installation is given in detail, as it is one instance where 
the adoption of this apparently inflexible type of generator 
resulted in an installation, which combines the flexibility of the 
standard direct- or alternating-current generator with the capacity 
for heavy overloads of the synchronous converter, and the 
reliability and robustness of construction of the non-synchro- 
‘nous generator. No other electrical equipment which could have 
been installed would have given the good results that were 
obtained. And though the existing conditions rather forced the 
choice of the equipment in this case, the results so thoroughly 
met expectations, that engineers began to consider whether 
the development of the last few years in regard to prime-movers 
had not changed the non-synchronous generator from a scientific 
curiosity, to a generator possessing great advantages for certain 
conditions of power station work. 


General characteristics of the non-synchronous generator. As 
th the characteristics and per- 


than they are with those of 
it will be well to 


most engineers are more familiar wi 
formance of the induction motor 


the commercial non-synchronous generator, 
show how the characteristics of the two machines are allied. 


An induction motor of given characteristics carrying a certain 
definite load, runs at a fixed speed relatively to that of synehro- 
nism, and it takes a current the magnitude and phase of which 
are definite. The torque exerted by the motor is proportional 


166 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


to the product of the current induced in the short-circuited 
secondary, and the magnetic flux. The electromotive force 
and the current induced in the secondary, and hence the torque, 
are proportional to the rate at which the secondary conductors 
cut the primary magnetic field, that is, to the slip of the rotor 
above or below the speed of synchronism. As the speed of 
the motor gradually rises to that of synchronism, the cur- 
rent in the secondary, and the torque gradually fall, till 
at the speed of synchronism they both become zero. If 
the speed of the machine still continues to increase, the 
secondary conductors cut the primary flux in the reverse 
direction, and the induced electromotive force, the secondary 
current, and the torque become negative; that is, the machine 
requires mechanical power to drive it above the speed of syn- 
chronism. The machine now returns electrical power to the 
circuit, and has become a generator. When running as a motor, 
the current is never in phase with the impressed voltage, for two 
reasons: (1), the motor requires a certain wattless magneti- 
zing current; and (2), the motor windings, both primary and sec- 
ondary have a certain amount of self-induction. This makes 
the current lag behind the impressed voltage by an angle ¢, 
depending on the characteristics of the machine, and on the load 
it is carrying. When the machine runs above synchronism as 
a generator, it still takes from the circuit the wattless magneti- 
zing current, and the circuits still possess their self-induction. 
And as the watt component has reversed in direction, this will 
mean that the primary current lags less than 180° behind the 
voltage impressed by the circuit on the generator, hence the 
current leads the electromotive force supplied by the generator 
to the circuit. Thus we have as a fundamental characteristic 
of the non-synchronous generator, that for a given load it runs 
at a certain definite speed above that of synchronism, and that, 
(a) it supplies a. watt current which represents the power de- 
livered by the generator to the circuit, and (b) it takes a wattless 
magnetizing current from the system, the magnitude of which’ 
depends on the voltage and on the watt component of the current. 
Hence this type of generator cannot supply a lagging current 
to the outside circuit, and can only deliver power to a circuit 
which can provide the lagging magnetizing current required 
by a non-synchronous generator: for any given speed, the mag- 
nitude and phase of the current which the generator will supply 
is definitely fixed. Also as the wattless component of the cur- 


oo % Ph, he 


1908] § WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR 161 


rent varies in magnitude when the load of the machine changes, 
we must have in circuit some apparatus which can supply a 
variable amount of lagging current, and which will keep the volt- 
age of the circuit constant. It is these apparently rigid and 
inflexible conditions which have prevented any extensive use 
of the non-synchronous generator, and it is only because under 
certain modern conditions these limitations do not mean serious 
disadvantages, that this generator is now put forward as an im- 
portant part of a power station equipment. 

Usually the load on a power station is either non-inductive 
or has a lagging power-factor, so that if this type of generator 
is used, the lagging current required by the generator, and per- 
haps also by the outside circuit, must be artificially supplied. 
There are two ways of obtaining the lagging current required 
by the non-synchronous generator: (1), from a condenser; 
(2), from a synchronous generator or an over-excited synchro- 
nous motor. It would not be desirable commercially, to install a 
condenser specially to supply the required lagging current, as 
the cost would be prohibitive; but a large cable system has 
quite a considerable electrostatic capacity, and the lagging 
current supplied by this system will usually help greatly in re- 
ducing the size of the necessary synchronous machine. In any 
case, however, it is necessary to have a synchronous machine, 
either a motor or a generator, in the circuit, in order to set the 
frequency and the voltage. If we have the non-synchronous 
generator running together with a synchronous generator, the 
latter machine supplies all the lagging wattless current required 
by the non-synchronous generator and the outside circuit, while 
the voltage of the circuit is decided by the excitation of the syn- 
chronous generator. The distribution of the watt component 
of the current between the two machines, is decided by the 
governors of the prime-movers. The load which the non-syn- 
chronous generator takes, depends on the percentage slip by 
which it leads the synchronous generator, and the remainder 
of the load is taken by the synchronous generator. When ad- 
ditional load comes on the station, it first comes on the syn- 
chronous generator, and then, as this machine slows down and 
allows the slip of the non-synchronous generator to increase, 
part of the load is transferred to this latter machine. In any 
case, the voltage regulation of the system is that of the synchron- 
ous generator, and the voltage of the circuit under any condition 
of load is decided by the excitation of this machine. If we have 


162 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


the non-synchronous generator running together with a syn- 
chronous motor or synchronous converter, then the same re- 
marks apply. The voltage regulation is that of the synchronous 
machine, and the voltage of the circuit is decided by the magni- 
tude of its excitation. When the load increases, the additional 
load comes first on the synchronous machine, energy being sup- 
plied to the system from the momentum of its rotating part, 
and then as the machine slows down a little, the load is trans- 
ferred to the non-synchronous generator, the synchronous ma- 
chine supplying simply the additional lagging current required 
by the generator when carrying the additional load. The syn- 
chronous machine supplies at all times all the lagging wattless 
current in the circuit, and the governor of the prime-mover 
driving the non-synchronous generator, decides the frequency 
of the circuit, the synchronous machine slipping behind the 
generator an amount just sufficient to allow this latter machine 
to supply all the power required by the circuit. 

Non-synchronous generators in power station work. Obviously 
the disadvantage of the non-synchronous generator for power 
station work is, that it cannot carry a lagging wattless current, 
-that it requires an additional lagging wattless current to excite 
it. The power-factor of the current supplied by such a generator 
is a direct measure of the amount of wattless current required 
to excite it under that particular load. The power-factor which 
can be obtained in designing any non-synchronous generator, 
depends on the size, speed, voltage, and frequency of the machine. 
Low speed, high voltage, and high frequency, all tend to lower 
the power-factor which can be obtained. 

Table 1 gives the characteristics of steam-turbine and gas- 
engine-driven non-synchronous generators of from 1000 kw. 
to 10,000 kw. for 2200 and 13,200 volts, and for 25 and 60 
cycles. The table shows that on high-speed 2200-volt genera- 
tors, the power-factor rises as high as 98.25 per cent. and that we 
can obtain on such machines a power-factor which averages 97% 
to 98% from one-half to one and one-quarter load, while the 
no-load magnetizing current is less than 10% of the full-load cur- 
rent of the machine. This being the case, the fact that these 
generators require a wattless current to excite them, ceases to 
be a serious objection, and it is seen that the one important 
limitation of this type of machine is, that it cannot supply lagging 
wattless current to the outside circuit. Of course the low-speed, 
60-cycle machines, are relatively poor as regards power-factor 


1908] WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR 163 


and exciting current, so that the use of non-synchronous genera- 
tors would not be advocated under these conditions, unless their 
other characteristics made them particularly advantageous for 
the conditions under which they were to be used. It will also 
be seen from Table 1 that another advantage of this type of 


TABLE I 


25 CycLE—T URBO-ALTERNATORS 


LOAD 
Kilo- | Rev. per | No-load 
watts min. Volts : | Ee | 0.50 et o> 0.50 current Slip 
Efficiency Power-factor 
1000 1500 2200 | 97.6 | 97.7 | 97.5 | 97.0 | 97.5 | 97.0 8.3% 0.75% 
13000 95.0 | 95.9 | 96.5 
2500 1500 2200 | 98.2 | 98.2 | 97.9 | 97.9 | 97.3 | 96.4 8.3 0.48 
13000 96.5 | 96.9 | 96.0 
5000 1500 2200 | 98.3 | 98.2 | 98.0 | 98.0 | 97.7 | 97.4 8.5 0.46 
13000 96.5 | 97.0 | 96.5 
10000 750 2200 | 98.5 | 98.4 | 98.2 | 98.2 | 98.0 | 97.5 8.1 0.40 
= 13000 96.8 | 97.3 | 97.1 
60 CycLE—TuRBO-ALTERNATORS 
1000 1800 2200 | 97.6 | 97.7 | 97.5 | 96.4 | 96.9 | 96.4 9.5 0.75 
13000 94.0 | 95.0 | 94.5 | 11.5 
2500 1800 2200 | 98.2,| 98.2 | 97.9 | 97.2 | 96.8 | 96.2 9.5 0.43 
13000 94.5 | 95.3 | 94.8 
5000 1200 2200 | 98.3 | 98.2 | 98.0 | 96.0 | 97.2 | 97.0 9.5 0.45 
13000 94.5 | 95.6 | 95.5 
10000 720 2200 | 98.5 | 98.4 | 98.2 | 97.6 | 97.6 | 97.1 9.5 0.40 
13000 5.3 | 95.6 | 95.5 
25 CycLE—GaAs-ENGINE-DRIVEN ALTERNATORS 
1000 94 2200 | 96.7 | 97.1 | 97.2 | 94.0 | 94.2 | 92.0 1645 1.5 
13000 89.3 | 90.9 | 88.7 18.0 
2000 83 2200 | 97.0 | 97.4 | 97.6 | 95.5 | 95.1 | 94.0 16.5 1.4 
13000 92.4 | 938.2 Zh 
3500 75 2200 | 97.1 | 97.5 | 97.7 | 95.7 | 95.2 | 94.2 16.5 1.4 
13000 2.6 | 93.4 
60 CycLE—Gas-ENGINE-DRIVEN ALTERNATORS 
1000 | 3 2200 | 95.5 | 95.7 | 96.0 | 88.8 | 88.5 | 84.6 25.0 1.8 
13000 83.0 |] 81. 73.3 40.0 
2000 82 2200 | 96.0 | 96.3 | 96.5 | 89.5 | 89.2 | 85.6 24.0 Weds 
13000 8325 >| 81-87 75.0) 38.0 
3500 75 2200 | 96.3 | 96.5 | 96.7 | 90.8 | 89.5 | 87.0 22.5 1.6 
13000 85.0 | 83.3 | 77.0 35.0 


generator, is the extremely high efficiency at all loads that is 
obtained in high-speed machines. This means that these gener- 
ators have a very low temperature rise at normal rated load, 
and that they have a very large overload capacity. The normal 
ratings of the individual machines given in the table were chosen 
so that their characteristics would be best at from one-half to one 


164 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


and one-quarter rated load. All the machines given, can generate 
from two and one-half to five times their rated output, and as far 
as general characteristics are concerned could be rated up 50%. 
It was stated above, that the slip of the non-synchronous genera- 
tor relatively to the synchronous generator, must increase from 
no load to full load, in order that the former may carry its due 
share of the load. So if we wish the load always to be automatic- 
ally divided between the two machines, we must adjust the 
governor of the synchronous prime-mover so that its drop in 
speed from no load to full load, equals the drop in speed of the 
non-synchronous prime-mover plus the full-load slip of the non- 
synchronous generator. This means that the speed and frequency 
of the synchronous generator must change with the load, but we 
_ see from the slip given in the table that this change is unimport- 

ant. The slip varies from 0.4 per cent. to 0.75 per cent. in high- 
speed machines and from 1.4 per cent. to 1.8 per cent. in low- 
speed machines, and this is about as close as the governors will 
regulate in any prime-mover. 

The greatest commercial field for the non-synchronous genera- 
tor, is undoubtedly in connection with turbine-driven genera- 
tors. This type of generator is more suitable both mechanically 
and electrically for high-speed work than any other type of elec- 
trical machine. The squirrel-cage secondary with heavy copper 
bars, each bar held in a separate closed slot, and practically 
requiring no insulation, is an ideal construction mechanically, 
and is one which can be operated at very high temperature 
without damage. Comparing this with the rotating magnets 
of the standard synchronous turbo-alternator, the difference is 
very great. The magnet winding of a synchronous turbo-alter- 
nator consists of a number of turns of thin strap separated by 
insulation. The windings often reach high temperatures due 
to overload at low-power-factors, and are subject to heavy 
centrifugal stresses and a potential difference of 125 volts to ground. 
We can see that such a construction does not compare with that 
of the squirrel-cage rotating secondary of a non-synchronous 
generator. And as a breakdown on the field of a synchronous 
turbo-generator usually puts the machine out of commission 
for a couple of weeks, we can see the mechanical advantages 
possessed by the non-synchronous generator. The simplicity 
in construction and insulation of the rotating parts, the ease 
with which the centrifugal stresses necessarily present can be 
taken care of, and the absence of a complicated winding and brush 


fied Al 


1908] WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR 165 


gear, necessarily tend to reduce the cost of the non-synchronous 
generator compared with that of the standard synchronous gen- 
erator. Of course the actual cost of any machine depends on the 
performance specification to which it is designed, and on how 
closely the machine is rated, but it can readily be seen that the 
non-synchronous generator offers facilities for cheaper design and 
manufacture which are not presented by the synchronous 
generator. 

The excitation of the non-synchronous generator. A synchro- 
nous generator requires direct-current excitation, while a non- 
synchronous generator requires alternating excitation. The non- 
synchronous generator is excited by a lagging current taken usu- 
ally from a synchronous machine, and as thissynchronous machine 
requires direct-current excitation to produce this lagging current, 
it can be said that indirectly the non-synchronous generator 
does require a direct-current exciter. But on account of the 
small air-gap of this type of generator, it requires much less exci- 
tation than a synchronous generator. The actual capacity of 
the exciters which are required by a power station consisting 
of non-synchronous generators, depends on the power-factor of 
the load on the system. The capacity required will usually 
vary from one-quarter to one-half of that which would be re- 
quired for the corresponding synchronous generators. Of 
course if we have a cable system with high electrostatic capacity, 
this will supply part of the required lagging excited current and 
will reduce the size of the required exciter. The charging current 
of the New York Interborough system is given as about 105 
amperes at 11,000 volts; that is, about 2000 kilovolt-amperes, 
and that of the New York Edison system is about 40 amperes 
at 6600 volts; that is, about 450 kilovolt-amperes. We see 
from Table I that the capacity-charging current of the New 
York Edison system is sufficient to supply full-load magneti- 
zing and wattless current required by a 2000-kw. 6600-volt, 
25-cycle turbo-driven non-synchronous generator when running 
on a non-inductive external load. In the same way the capacity- 
charging current of the Interborough system would be sufficient 
to supply the wattless current of a 10,000-kw. 11,000-volt, 25- 
cycle turbo-driven generator. If we had a cable system such 
as the Interborough distributing at 20,000 volts, we would have 
a charging current of 190 amperes at 20,000 volts, which would 
be sufficient to supply the wattless component for 40,000 kw. 
in 22,000-volt, 25-cycle turbo-driven non-synchronous generators. 


166 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


So we can see that the electrostatic capacity of a large cable 
system will play an important part when we come to consider 
the introduction of such generators into some of the large New 
York power stations. 

In asystem consisting of non-synchronous generators supplying 
power to synchronous converters, it is unnecessary to have any 
exciters or synchronous machines in the power station. The 
first converter put in circuit, must be run up to speed from the 
direct-current side, and then thrown on the generator circuit, 
when it will excite the latter, and the voltage will be decided 
by the excitation of the converter. We can see from Table I 
that the power-factor of a non-synchronous generator can be 
made to remain practically constant from one-half to one and one 
quarter load. This means that the amount of wattless lagging 
current taken by the generator throughout its normal working 
range, will be practically proportional to the watt current. 
Hence assuming that we can neglect the capacity-charging 
current of the cable system, if we have a number of converters 
running on the circuit, we can adjust the shunt excitation of 
each converter so as to give the correct voltage at no load, and 
the series excitation can be adjusted to obtain any desired 
voltage-characteristic as the load comes on the system, the 
converters compounding the generators by their series winding. 
This compounding of the generators as the load comes on any 
sub-station, affects of course all the other sub-stations fed from 
those generators ; so if we are not regulating for constant voltage, 
it may be advisable in some cases to introduce artificial self- 
induction into the converter feeder circuits so as to over-com- 
pound these circuits rather than the generators, and avoid 
disturbing the voltage on other unloaded sub-stations. In a 
large system, the capacity current of the cables can not be 
neglected, so the wattless current to be supplied by the converters 
will not be directly proportional to the load. Such a system 
usually requires constant voltage at the direct-current terminals, 
and in such cases it may be found advantageous to install com- 
pound-wound converters with automatic voltage regulators to 
control the shunt excitation. The voltage regulators would 
then serve to control the voltage of the generators, and to keep 
that constant, while the series winding would serve to com- 
pound each individual feeder in order to compensate for the 
voltage-drop in that feeder. In sucha system, all the regulators 
controlling the voltage on a given group of generators would 


1908] WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR 167 


be tied together, so that any one regulator could not act before, 
or act against the others, and make the shunt excitation of the 
individual converters different. 

If there is no electrostatic capacity in the system, the power- 
factor of the converters is practically the same as the power- 
factor of the generators; but if there is capacity in circuit which 
helps to supply the lagging current, then the power-factor of 
the converters will be higher than that of the generators. Taking 
once more the Interborough system, and assuming there are 
75,000 kw. of 11,000-volts turbo-driven non-synchronous gen- 
erators in the power station, and 75,000 kw. in synchronous 
converters in the sub-station, then the capacity current supplies 
13 per cent. of the wattless current taken by the generator on 
full load, and we have a full-load power-factor for the converters 
of 98 per cent. Such a power station of non-synchronous genera- 
tors, having no direct-current exciters and exciting circuits, is 
much simpler as regards cables and switchboard connections 
than a similar station with synchronous generators, and is much 
simpler to operate. There is no necessity for synchronizing the 
generators; they are simply run up to speed and are then thrown 
on the line in series with a reactive-coil, (to limit the rush of cur- 
rent). The reactive coil is then short-circuited, and the genera- 
tors are automatically excited from the converters and take 
care of themselves. The governors of the prime-movers are 
controlled by pilot motors from the switchboard, and the 
load can be distributed at will among the different generators 
without adjusting the excitation to keep the power-factor con- 
stant, as would be necessary with the synchronous generator. 
This gives an ideally simple station, as there are no auxiliary 
circuits, and the switchboard is practically limited to the main 
generator and feeder switches and instruments. 

Short-circuits and resonance. During the last few years 
we have heard a great deal regarding resonance and high power 
surges in large installations with distributing cable systems 
of high electrostatic capacity. We can investigate these phenom- 
ena mathematically in detail, if we choose to make a number of 
more or less arbitrary assumptions, but it is the author’s opinion 
that at present we are only justified in describing these phenomena 
in general terms. By a high-power surge is meant the oscilla- 
tion sometimes set up in a system by a sudden rush of current, 
such as a short-circuit, and which has usually the fundamental 
frequency of the circuit. The power represented by the surge, 


168 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


is proportional to the square of the value reached by the current 
in the first sudden rush, and the rise in voltage is directly pro- 
portional to the surge of the current. Resonance effects, cover 
the extremely high rises of potential which take place in a 
circuit containing self-induction and capacity, when the fre- 
quency of the circuit has a certain value depending on the amount 
of induction and capacity in circuit. In ordinary power systems, 
resonance cannot generally take place at the normal frequency 
of the circuit, but there are usually higher harmonics of this 
normal frequency introduced by distortion of the fundamental 


EEE 
5 ss rr Ko 


400 


300 


200 


WATT CURRENT-AMPERES 


ae at Sa 
cf al SL a 
[esse 1% | a 


0 100 200 300 400 500 
WATTLESS CURRENT-AMPERES 
Eireuge 


100 


wave-form, and there may be resonance and high voltage due 
to one of these high harmonics. 

This short analysis shows at once why a power station of syn- 
chronous generators, is so liable to suffer from surges and reso- 
nance, Synchronous generators and motors will give a greater 
sudden rush of current, or surge, in the case of short-circuit than 
almost any other class of machine. And though they have 
wave-forms which approximate closely to sine waves on no load, 
these wave-forms become so distorted by armature reaction on 
load, and change so with the magnitude and phase of the current, 
that there is an excellent chance of introducing such harmonics 
as will produce resonance. If we were deliberately to try to 


1908] WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR “169 


choose conditions which would be most liable to give trouble 
from high-power surges and resonance, we could not well choose 
anything that would be worse than synchronous generators 
feeding synchronous motors through a cable system of high 
capacity. The non-synchronous generator is a great contrast 
to the synchronous generator in this respect, as it tends rather 
to eliminate disturbances from the line than to originate them. 
A short-circuit on a system means that the voltage falls to zero, 
consequently any non-synchronous generator on the circuit 
becomes dead, and does not tend to supply either power, current, 
or voltage to the short-circuit. Further, the wave-form of the 
electromotive force of a non-synchronous generator is virtually 
a sine wave for all loads, and it has no tendency at all to introduce 
higher harmonics which might produce resonance. If the syn- 
chronous machines supplying the wattless current in the circuit 
have a badly distorted wave-form, the magnetizing current of 
the non-synchronous generator will also be distorted, but there 
will be a strong tendency to damp out all harmonics in the elec- 
tromotive force wave-form of the system. And we can say that, 
generally speaking, the non-synchronous generator acts as a 
strong damper to remove all harmonics in the electromotive 
force wave-form of the system, introduced by distortion of the 
wave-form of the synchronous machines. This distortion in 
a synchronous machine, is due to the armature reaction of the 
watt component of the current, rather than the wattless, so we 
see that the best conditions as regards freedom from distortion 
and harmonics are obtained by the use of a synchronous con- 
verter or unloaded synchronous machine, rather than a loaded 
synchronous generator or motor to supply the wattless current 
required to excite a non-synchronous generator. 

Fig. 2 shows approximately the relation of the watt component 
to the wattless component of the current supplied by a 2000-kw. 
non-synchronous generator, the curve being for its normal rated 
voltage of 11,000 volts; for a different voltage the values of cur- 
rent, both watt and wattless, should be multiplied by the direct 
ratio of the new voltage to 11,000 volts. We can see from this, that 
the magnitude of the watt current bears a definite relation to that 
of the wattless, and that the watt current, and consequently the 
load on the machine, cannot change without the wattless current 
also changing. Further, for each point on the curve, the slip 
of the non-synchronous generator ahead of the synchronous 
machine has a certain definite value. This shows that when 


170 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


a short-circuit comes on a system consisting of a non-synchronous 
generator and synchronous generator or motor, the short-circuit 
will come on the synchronous machine. If the voltage drops 
to zero, the non-synchronous generator will be dead; but if 
the short-circuit is not severe enough to reduce the voltage of 
the system to zero, then it may still supply current to the circuit. 
The amount which it supplies will depend on the way in which 
the excitation of the synchronous machines is changed by the 
automatic voltage regulators. But a change in load which can 
be taken care of by the voltage regulators, hardly comes under 
the class of short-circuits, and as these latter effects are the only 
serious ones, we will consider them alone. We see from the above 
that the non-synchronous generator takes no part in the sudden 
surge of current which occurs on a short-circuit, so that this 
surge cannot be greater than that which is supplied by the syn- 
chronous machines in circuit. 

The sudden surge which takes place when any synchronous 
machine, whether generator, motor, or converter, is short- 
circuited is equal to: 


Electromotive force of synchronous machine 
self-induction in circuit 


After the current has flowed for an appreciable time, so that 
the magnetism of the synchronous machine has had time to 
change, the armature reaction cuts down the electromotive 
force generated, and the current falls to the value commonly 
known as the short-circuited value, this being the value of the 
current on a continuous short-circuit. The 5000-kw. 11,000- 
volt Manhattan generators will give a continuous short-circuit 
current about three times full-load current, but the instantaneous 
value of the current on a sudden short-circuit is about five times 
this; that is about fifteen times normal full-load current. If 
these generators are supplying synchronous converters, these 
converters will also supply power to the short-circuit. The 
1500-kw. Manhattan converters give about full-load current 
on a continuous short-circuit on the alternating-current side, with 
the self-induction of the transformers and reactive-coi's in circuit, 
and the instantaneous value on sudden short-circuit is about 
three times this value. So a short-circuit ona system consisting 
of the Manhattan generators supplying power to synchronous 
converters will give, on sudden short-circuit, a rush of current 


1908] WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR 171 


equal to eighteen times the total full-load current of the genera 
tors in circuit, while after a short period the value of the short- 
circuit current will fall to about one-fifth of this value. Assum- 
ing now that we had non-synchronous instead of synchronous 
generators in the power station, the short-circuit current would 
be limited to that from the converters, and the sudden surge 
would be equal to three times full-load current. The voltage 
of the system would fall to zero, and the converters would supply 
a gradually decreasing current to the short-circuit until their 
rotational energy was: all expended, and they had come to rest. 
We see then that with non-synchronous generators in the power 
station, the magnitude of the sudden surge on a short-circuit 
would be reduced to one-fifth eof that which would take place 
with the present synchronous generators. This means that 
the voltage-rise would be only one-fifth, and the power of the 
surge would be only one twenty-fifth. These figures do not 
need any comment. 

There is one point, however, that must be considered when 
operating non-synchronous generators on the system containing 
considerable electrostatic capacity, and that is that the indi- 
vidual generator units are not too small. A non-synchronous 
generator can be excited by the lagging current from a condenser, 
and the voltage to which it will be excited depends on the size 
of the condenser. In a system consisting of non-synchronous 
generators and synchronous machines we might, as the result 
of opening circuit-breakers by line disturbances, have just one 
generator and one small synchronous unit left running on the 
line. The capacity current of the cable system would then 
tend to build up the voltage of the machines until the saturation 
of the magnetic circuit prevented any further rise. Taking 
the 2000-kw. 11,000-volt non-synchronous generator, the cur- 
rent curves of which are shown in Fig. 2, the magnetizing current 
at 11,000 volts is 9 amperes. If the capacity-charging current 
of the cables is 100 amperes at 11,000 volts, and the synchronous 
machine is so small as to take a negligible lagging magnetizing 
current, it would probably mean that the voltage of the machines 
would build up to double the normal. If, however, the smallest 
machine on the circuit were a 10,000-kw. generator, a 1500-kw. 
synchronous motor or synchronous converter, the rise in voltage 
wouid not be more than 10 per cent.; if the minimum size genera- 
tor unit had been 20,000 kw. there would be no rise in voltage; 
so that this is a condition which can be taken care of when lay- 


ing out the station. 


172 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


Distortion of the wave-form introduces higher harmonics, 
and may cause resonance or cross-currents. In a synchronous 
generator or motor, the wave-form of the magnetism is usually 
badly distorted as the load comes on the machine, this distortion 
being greater the higher the power-factor, and the greater the 
load. This distortion of the magnetic wave, introduces higher 
harmonics into the wave-form of the electromotive force gener- 
ated in the armature conductors. The most important har- 
monic introduced is the third; but the fifth, seventh, ninth, 
and higher harmonics are also usually presented. In a three- 
phase winding, the third harmonic, and also harmonics of this 
third harmonic, appear in the electromotive force between the 
neutral and outer terminals, but not in the electromotive force 
between the outer terminals. They therefore appear in a three- 
phase, four-wire system, or in a three-phase system with grounded 
neutral. The other harmonics appear, no matter what the con- 
nections are. Though the presence of these harmonics may 
not cause harm in any individual case, it is always possible 
that there may, under certain conditions of circuit and load, 
be harmonics of a frequency sufficiently close to that of reso- 
nance to cause serious rise of potential. And if generators of 
different characteristics run together, or if there are loads of 
different magnitude and phase, or diflerent excitation on the 
synchronous generators or motors, cross-currents are liable to be 
produced between the machines; this is especially the case in 
running with a grounded neutral. Synchronous converters 
are very much better than any other class of synchronous ma- 
chines as regards distortion of wave-form when operating with 
unity power-factor; they have practically no armature reaction, 
and the electromotive force wave generated under such condi- 
tions is approximately a sine. So the above remarks on syn- 
chronous generators and motors, only apply to synchronous 
converters to a limite] extent. 

Non-synchronous generators have no distortion of field due to 
armature reaction, and so long as the iron in the magnetic 
circuit is not saturated, the electromotive force wave-form of 
these generators is virtually a sine wave for all conditions 
ofload. This means that there can be no cross-current be- 
tween non-synchronous generators, due to difference in wave- 
form, and that they have no tendency to produce resonance 
in the circuit. Furthermore a non-synchronous generator 
acts as the strongest possible damper in a circuit; and if 


1908] WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR Wags 


there is any surge, unbalancing of phases, distortion of wave- 
form or hunting present, the non-synchronous generator will 
tend to damp it out, and to restore the original condition of 
steady sine-wave operation. If we then have a system con- 
sisting of non-synchronous generators supplying power to syn- 
chronous converters, it would be as nearly perfect as possible 
in its freedom from surges and resonance. The synchronous 
converter would give the minimum distortion of any synchro- 
nous machine, and the non-synchronous generator would tend 
to damp out any disturbance that occurred onthe line. Such a 
system would certainly be very much superior to the synchro- 
nous generators and synchronous motors in regard to liability to 
disturbances from resonance and surges, and in all probability 
the engineers of such a system operating with grounded neutral 
would hardly know that such phenomena existed. 

_I have endeavored to show that the non-synchronous genera- 
tor is very much superior to the synchronous generator from 
almost every point of view, for the purpose of supplying power to 
motor-generators and synchronous converters through an under- 
ground cable system; and that synchronous converters are less 
liable to introduce line disturbances than synchronous motors. 
In some cases it might be considered advisable to install both syn- 
chronous and non-synchronous generators, or the station might be 
one in which the units first installed were synchronous generators, 
and the later extensions were non-synchronous generators In 
such cases it is readily seen that the advantages as outlined above, 
are obtained to a degree which depends on the ratio of the num- 
ber of non-synchronous to the synchronous generators. It should 
be remembered that the non-synchronous generator and synchron- 
ous converter, give the best combination to ensure freedom 
from line disturbances, and that the synchronous generator 
and synchronous motor give the worst; combinations of the 
two systems lie between these two. 

Small power stations. There have now been considered in de- 
tail, large systems which can easily provide the necessary lagging 
exciting current for the non-synchronous generator, either from 
the charging current of the cable system or from the synchro- 
nous motors or synchronous converters in the system. 

With smaller power stations which supply power direct 
to motor and lighting circuits, the conditions are not so favor- 
able to the non-synchronous generator, as this generator 1s pri- 
marily one for high power-factor loads, and it is at a distinct dis- 


174 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


advantage in a station in which the load is of low power-factor. 
The advantages of the non-synchronous generator as outlined 
above are, however, so great that each particular case should 
be considered to see whether it will allow of its use. Usu- 
ally the load on sucha station having low power-factor, consists 
mainly of motors during the day time, whereas the heavy peak 
load is the lighting load at night. We can therefore install 
synchronous generators sufficient to carry the day motor load, 
and non-synchronous generators to assist in carrying the light- 
ing load at night. Let us take a 60-cycle station with a day 
load of 2500 kilovolt-amperes which will probably have a power- 
factor of 70 per cent. and a night load of 4000 kilovolt-amperes 
with a power-factor of 98 per cent. And assume further that 
we have two 1250-kilovolt-amperes synchronous turbo-generators 
to carry the day load, and two 1000-kilovolt-ampere non-synchro- 
nous generators to assist in carrying the night load. This night 
load consists of 3850 watt kilovolt-amperes and 800 wattless 
kilovolt-amperes, and the two non-synchronous generators 
require in addition 980 wattless kilovolt-amperes to excite them. 
We shall then have the two synchronous generators carrying 
a load of 2500 kilovolt-amperes at 70 per cent. power-factor 
and the non-synchronous generator carrying a load of 2250 
kilovolt-amperes at power-factor 0.98. 

It is nearly always more economical to supply wattless cur- 
rent in a power station from unloaed high-speed synchronous 
motors, than from the main synchronous generators. This is 
more especially the case with steam-turbine or very slow-speed 
units, as such machines cannot be economically designed with 
the good regulation and the margin on the fields necessary to 
handle properly a low power-factor load. Such a machine 
to carry satisfactorily a certain kilowatt load at power-factor 70 per 
cent. will be about double the size of a unit to carry the same 
kilowatt rating at unity power-factor. In the station con- 
sidered, we have assumed that the synchronous generators supply 
all the wattless current required for the non-synchronous genera- 
tors and outside circuit. It would be better, however, to make 
the synchronous generators 1000 kilovolt-ampere units with 
poor regulation, and install also a 1500-kilovolt-ampere high- 
speed synchronous motor to supply all the wattless current. 
This should give a cheaper and more flexible installation, as 
we would be able to run the non-synchronous generators with- 
out the synchronous generators at any time, using the synchro- 


1908] WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR 175 


nous motor to excite them. The non-synchronous generators 
would require no direct-current exciters, exciting circuits, or 
switch panels: they would probably be cheaper than the syn- 
chronous generators, and would be simpler to handle, and less 
liable to break down. So we can see they have such important 
advantages that they should be carefully considered in each 
individual case before deciding to adopt synchronous genera- 
tors alone. 

Other applications of non-synchronous generators. In the 
above remarks, the non-synchronous generator has been dealt 
with more especially as a steam-turbine-driven unit for genera- 
ting alternating current. This type of generator, however, often 
presents important advantages for other and more especial 
conditions. Two of the most important of such cases are gas- 
engine-driven alternators, and steam-turbine-driven  direct- 
current units. The advantage of the non-synchronous genera- 
tor for gas-engine-driven units, is of course that it does not re- 
quire the extreme uniformity of speed required by a synchronous 
generator, and the advantage of its application for direct- 
current generation by turbine units is, that by the use of a non- 
synchronous generator and synchronous converter we can avoid 
the use of a direct-current turbo-generator. 

Gas-engine-driven units. With modern tandem and twin- 
tandem gas engines designed along certain well-established 
lines, giving respectively two and four impulses per revolution, 
-gas-engine-driven alternators can be and undoubtedly are run in 
parallel. But te obtain satisfactory operation, heavy fly-wheels 
and heavy dampers on the pole-faces of the alternators are 
necessary. Considered apart from the engine itself, however, 
such fly-wheels mean a considerable increase in cost, and 
sometimes in the floor space taken up by the engine, and also 
a loss in efficiency due to the increased bearing friction and 
windage. And there is necessarily a loss in the dampers on 
the pole-faces of such gas-engine-driven alternators, on account 
of the irregularity in speed of the gas engine, though this loss 
would not be detected except in a gas-consumption test, 
when running in parallel with other units. Instead of syn- 
chronous units, we can install non-synchronous generators 
and have high-speed synchronous motors running light, to pro- 
vide the necessary lagging current for the outside circuit and for 
exciting the generators. In this case any change in load comes 
first on the synchronous motors, causing a change in their 


176 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


speed, and in consequence a transferring of the change in load 
to the generator. And as the voltage of the generator would 
be decided by the excitation of the synchronous motors, the 
voltage regulation of the station is that of the synchronous 
motors. Hence for constant potential it may be advisable in 
some cases to control the excitation of all the synchronous motors 
by one automatic voltage regulator. The size of the direct- 
current exciter necessary for the synchronous motors would 
depend on the power factor of the load on the station, and would 
be greater, the greater the lagging current required by the ex- 
ternal circuit. Generally speaking, the size of the exciter re- 
quired, would be from one-quarter to one-half of that necessary 
for the corresponding synchronous generators. The probable 
arrangements would be, a direct-connected exciter on each syn- 
chronous motor, which could also be used as a starting motor; 
and one gas-engine-driven exciter would also have to be installed 
for starting up the first synchronous motor. 

Taking as the load on such a 2200-volt, 25-cycle power station, 
20,000 kilovolt-amperes at 70 per cent. power-factor, we would 
have four 5000 kilovolt-ampere,.75 rev. per min. synchronous 
generators, each requiring a 125-kw. exciter; or four 3500-kw. 
75 rev. per min. non-synchronous generators, together with four 
4500 kilovolt-ampere 500-rev. per min. synchronous motors 
with 60-kw. direct-coupled starting motor-exciters. Each syn- 
chronous motor would supply the 1000-kilovolt-amperes exciting 
current. required by one non-synchronous generator, together 
with 3500-kilovolt-amperes wattless current for the external 
circuit. The relative efficiencies on the load of 70 per cent. 
power-factor are as follows: 


Non-synchronous 


Synchronous generator and 

generator synchronous 
motor 
all LOGO vices brat oye eis si aita's tie lale aisieti ns sve Seale Gane Gin liane erect) 94.0 
QUID vie. enin ath oh a elo onale Gatti iat amnemie Weaatineecl ae Oyo CO) 93.6 
0.50 “ ec 94.0—(a) 92.5 


These efficiencies do not take into account the allowance (a) 
to be made for additional losses due to the increased friction 
of the larger fly-wheels, and the losses in the dampers or solid 


1908] WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR 177 


pole-faces which occur with the gas-engine-driven synchronous 
generator. These additional losses will reduce the efficiency 
of the synchronous generator below that of the non-synchronous 
generators set. The cost of the electrical equipment would 
not be very different in the two cases, and as the larger fly-wheel. 
shaft, and bearings, required for the synchroftous generator 
would increase the cost considerably, it is probable that the 
non-synchronous generator equipment would be found a good 
deal the cheaper. It must be remembered that this is an extreme 
case, because the low power-factor of 70 per-cent. taken for the 
outside load is very much against the non-synchronous generator. 
If the power-factor were higher, the result would be much better. 

It might be supposed that unless we had very heavy fly-wheels 
on the gas engine we would have the same trouble with hunting 
of the non-synchronous generator and synchronous motor that 
we would have with the synchronous generator. But such is 
not the case. There will undoubtedly be cross-currents between 
the machines, the magnitude of which will depend on the varia- 
tion in the speed of the gas engine, but it will be practically im- 
possible to break them out of step. The worst effects of this 
interchange of current between the machines, will be the heating 
and losses in the armature conductors, and the pulsation in volt- 
age due to the interchange of wattless current. This pulsation 
of voltage will be diminished by dampers on the pole-faces of 
the synchronous motor, but it will usually be perceptible when 
only one generator is running. As these gas-engine-driven units 
will be used mainly for power work in mills, the slight pulsation 
of voltage will be unimportant. 

Non-synchronous generators are not put forward as the only 
possible solution of the gas-engine-driven alternator question; 
but as the most practical, and that which will recommend itself 
most highly to the conservative power station engineer and 
manufacturer. It is by no means settled that heavy fly-wheels 
and powerful dampers are a practical, and advisable solution of 
the parallel running difficulties. 

Steam-turbine-driven direct-current units. The other special 
case for the use of the non-synchronous generator above referred 
to—the use of such a generator, together with a synchronous 
converter for the production of direct current—is to meet the 
special case in which a steam turbine is desired as a prime-mover. 
Reasons which might compel the choice of the steam turbine 
are numerous: small overhead space, small floor space, poor 


178 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


foundations, objection to the vibration of reciprocating engines, 
high steam economy required over a wide range of loads, reduced 
maintenance and supervision—all these might influence the choice 
of prime-mover. And as the direct-current turbo-generator, 
particularly for 250 and 125 volts, has as yet hardly established 
its position as a conservative and reliable machine, some kind 
of alternating- -current generator would be used in combination 
with a motor-generator or synchronous converter. Two years 
ago an electric railway and light company, wished to install 
an auxiliary 3000-kw. 300-volt direct-current steam-driven 
generating equipment in the basement of their new public service 
building. As the head-room was limited to about 12 feet, and 
as the vibration would be objectionable, reciprocating engines 
were out of the question. They installed two 1500-kw. horizon- 
tal steam-turbine-driven synchronous alternators, and two 
synchronous motor-generator sets. This would have been an 
ideal case for a non-synchronous generator and synchronous 
converter.’ The converters could be started from the direct- 
current system, and when up to speed would have excited the non- 
synchronous generators; no exciters nor exciting circuits would be 
necessary, the voltage being controlled by the excitation of the 
converters. The equipment which was installed has a combined 
full-load efficiency of about 86 per cent. while the combined 
efficiency of a non-synchronous generator and synchronous con- 
verter to do the same work, would have a full-load efficiency of 
about 95 per cent. In addition it would probably have cost 
about one-third less. 


1000 kw. | 2000 kw. | 3000 kw. 


1. ‘Non-synchronous generator... 6... ee ees ces 97.5 98 .0 98.25 
2. Synchronous converter. See Mu riceretnoue 97.0 97.5 97.75 
3. Combined efficiency of non- snags baie ice 

and synchronous converter, 94.5 95.5 96.0 
4: Engine-ty pe’ genératoriac. J cseg o wos warleeene 93.5 94.25 94.5 


In comparing a turbine-driven non-synchronous generator and 
synchronous converter, with a steam-engine-driven direct-current 
generator, the former is found to be a more flexible equipment, 
one which will carry heavier overloads, and is usually cheaper. 
We can obtain any compounding desired by means of a 
compound winding on the converter, and by use of transformers 
we can have converters of different voltages to supply different 


1908] WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR 179 


direct-current systems. We can place the converter at a dis- 
tance and transmit the power to it at a high voltage, or we can 
split up or arrange the equipment as we please. The efficiency 
is slightly higher on the non-synchronous generator equipment 
than on the engine-type, as can be seen from the following table 
of full-load efficiencies for 270-volt generators, 

There are many indications that the day of the large engine- 
type direct-current generators is past. The inaccessibility of 
the brushes, the difficulty of building and maintaining a commu- 
tator of large diameter, and the numerous other drawbacks of 


ErGe2 


this type of machine, have caused it to be regarded as an un- 
desirable addition to a power station. It is a question whether 
the non-synchronous generator and the synchronous converter 
are not superior to the engine-type direct-current generator in 
almost every case, and it should always be carefully considered 
when a new direct-current station is laid out, or when any ex- 
tensions are added to existing plants. 

I have endeavored to show that the one great disadvantage 
_ of the non-synchronous generator—its inability to carry a leg- 
ging wattless current load—should not always prevent its success- 
ful adoption, and that the important advantages it possesses in 


180 WATERS: NON-SYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR [Feb. 14 


its excellent mechanical construction, high efficiency, good 
characteristics in regard to short-circuits and resonance, strong 
balancing and damping action, absence of rotating windings 
or collector rings, absence of direct-current excitation and ex- 
citing circuits, ease of parallel running facility for control of 
load by governor, and general simplicity and flexibility of opera- 
tion—all these make it in many cases by far the most advis- 
able machine to adopt. The non-synchronous generator suffers 
from the fact that it was judged and condemned in the early 
days of electric power generating stations. At that time there 
was no real field for this generator, but the introduction of steam 
turbines and gas engines, and the modern development of large 
power stations have so fundamentally altered conditions, that 
the non-synchronous generator is no longer an interesting curios- 
ity, but one of the most promising types of generator for power 
station equipment. The record of three years in service, places 
this machine on a demonstrated commercial basis, and while 
it may have limitations, it possesses so many advantages and 
its sphere of usefulness is so large, that in the opinion of the 
author it must be acknowledged to offer greater future possibili- 
ties than almost any other type of power station equipment. 


APPENDIX. 


The following data on the steam consumption obtained from 
tests in the copper smelting and rolling plant referred to earlierin 
the paper, are of interest in comparing the efficiencies of the two 

types of direct-current generating equipment. The first column 
gives the actual steam consumption of the 1200-kw. steam-tur- 
bine-driven non-synchronous generator and synchronous con- 
verter, the turbine being run with 140 lb. steam pressure, 28 in. 
vacuum and 135 degrees superheat. The second column gives 
the corresponding figures on a Corliss engine and direct-connected 
generator, the steam consumption being based on a minimum 
consumption of 12.5 lb. per indicated horse power at 80 per 
cent. of full load. 


Pounds of steam per kilowatt-hour at direct-current terminals 


Load pene tlt rh a 
0.5 load 21.21b. | 235 Ib, 
0:75 “ 18.2 19.8 
Us i 17.5 20.3 
1:25. “ y bdaw 23.2 


—_—--OrOoo 


A paper presented at the 225th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, February 14, 1908. 

se ae Ee ee EL 

Copyright 1908. By A.I.E.E. 


SOME DEVELOPMENTS IN SYNCHRONOUS CON- 
VERTERS 


BY CHARLES W. STONE 


It is not the intention to make this paper a history of the 
development of the synchronous converter, but rather to point 
out some of the more important improvements which have been 
made in the last few years. 

In this country the synchronous converter has become prac- 
tically an indispensable piece of apparatus, some of the largest 
lighting and railroad companies being entirely dependent upon 
it. Abroad the conditions are different, asthe motor-generator 
has been used almost exclusively until within the last few years, 
when the motor-converter was introduced. The motor-con- 
verter is a compromise between the synchronous converter and 
‘the motor-generator. 

It may be of interest to give at this time some idea of the in- 
crease in capacity of these machines in the last ten years on 
one of the large lighting systems, as this will give some idea of 
the tremendous development in machines of this type. In 1897, 
on the particular system in question, there was installed less 
than 1000 kw. total capacity, and the largest machine was 500 
kw.; on the same system in 1907, considerably over 100,000 kw. 
were in operation, the largest units being 2000 kw. 

Most of the larger systems using synchronous converters 
operate at 25 cycles, but during the last four or five yearsmany 
systems using 60 cycles have adopted synchronous converters 
and have found them very reliable. 

I think it can be safely said that 60-cycle synchronous con- 
verters, even when used for 600-volt railway work where the de- 

181 


182 STONE: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


mands of the service are most severe, can be considered thor- 
oughly reliable and successful, machines as large as 1000 kw. 
being in successful operation. 

The general tendency in the design of synchronous convert- 
ers has been toward higher speeds, which naturally means 
reduction in the space occupied by them, lower first cost, less 
weight etc. All these changes result in smaller buildings, 
cheaper foundations, and consequently lower fixed charges. 


C— og 


EZZZZZZ Le, 


saphcey al 


As an illustration of the changes that have been made, I shall 
cite one example. The 2000-kw., 25-cycle, 250-volt synchro- 
nous converter as originally designed operated at 115 revolutions 
and had 26 poles. It occupied a floor space 190 in. by 204 in. 
and the total weight was approximately 186,000 lb. The 
newer vertical machine is circular in form, has 18 poles, and 
operates at 167 revolutions. The diameter is 182 in. and the 
total weight about 130,000 Ib. 


1908} STONE; SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS 183 


Vertical synchronous converters. The vertical synchronous 
converter is so new that it seems advisable to point out some of 
its essential characteristics. The most novel features are in 
the shaft and bearings. The shaft, unlike that of the horizontal 
machine, is stationary; in fact it is nothing but a pedestal sup- 
ported by and fastened solidly to the foundations. There is only 
one bearing, which carries the entire weight of the revolving 
structure. In the first machine built this bearing consisted 
simply of two cast-iron plates, one of which was fastened to the 
_ top of the pedestal and the other being bolted to the spider of 
_ the armature. Fig. 1, a cross-sectional view of the machine, 
shows more clearly this construction. Oil is pumped up through 


Fie, 2. 


a central hole in the pedestal and forced out between the 
cast-iron plates, forming an oil-film on which the machine 
revolves, making virtually a frictionless bearing. 

In addition to the main bearing, use is made of the entire length 
of the interior of the spider for a guide bearing. A cast-iron sleeve 
lined with babbitt is fitted into the spider to form the bearing 
surface. As the only weight on this bearing is that due to the 
unbalancing of the rotating structure, the bearing should last 
indefinitely. The oil, after leaving the top or supporting bearing, 
passes along the pedestal, (thus oiling the guide bearing) down 
to the pocket at the base of the machine were it is drained off 
and used over again. Since the first machine was built, a new 
type of bearing has been tried which gives promise of success, 


184 STONE: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


although only a few months’ experience has been obtained as 
yet. 

Fig. 2 shows in general the parts which are used to make 
up this bearing. The cup-shaped cast-iron piece shown 
is fastened to the top of the pedestal and forms a seat for 
the hardened steel bearing plate and carrier, the steel plate being 
simply doweled in place. Both sides of this plate are accurately 
ground so that it can be reversed in case of any damage to one 
surface. It can readily be seen that this construction of the 
two lower members of the bearing makes it self-aligning. 

The top part of the bearing is bolted to the armature spider 
and is similar to the top of the oil-pressure bearing, except that 
another hardened steel plate is doweled in place on the under 
part of this casting to form the wearing surface. Between these 
steel plates is a bronze carrier with a number of hardened steel 
rollers placed radially, thus forming the roller bearing. Oil 
is pumped by a small low-pressure pump to this roller bearing 
and is drained off after passing through the guide bearing in ex- 
actly the same manner as with the oil step. 

The stationary part carries the field spools and is split verti- 
cally so that the two halves can be drawn apart, making the arma- 
ture accessible for inspection or repairs. This frame is supported 
on a number of cast-iron pedestals. 

By the above construction it will be noted that the field frame 
is entirely independent of the rotating structure, making it 
easier to assemble the machine. 

The armature being revolved around the pedestal, it is not 
possible to obtain any end-play, as in a horizontal machine. 
Some means must be provided to make the wear on the collector 
rings equal; this is accomplished by designing the brush 
rigging in such a manner as to make it possible to stagger the 
brushes and thus cover the entire width of the collector rings. 
In addition there are placed on each ring some graphite 
brushes which act as lubricators. 

Fig. 3 is an elevation of the first 2000-kw. machine of the verti- 
cal type which has been constructed in this country. By ref- 
erence to this Fig. it is readily seen how accessible the machine 
is. It is possible to walk around the machine and see and adjust 
all the brushes on both the commutator and the collector rings 
without climbing up on a bearing pedestal or going dawn into 
a pit, as would be necessary in a large horizontal-shaft machine. 
The bearings in the 2000-kw. vertical machine can be taken 


1908) STONE: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS 185 


out, inspected, and replaced in a little over two hours, which 
would hardly be possible in a horizcntal machine of the same 
size. 

The construction above outlined makes it possible to build 
machines occupying minimum floor space; in fact it has been 
found possible in stations which have been laid out for 1000 kw., 
machines, horizontal shaft of the old type, to place a similar 
number of vertical machines of double the capacity. 

Voltage regulation. The next matter is that of voltage regula- 
tion. With a synchronous converter, as is well known, it is not 


Ie Be 


possible to regulate the voltage on the direct-current side of the 
machine by means of the field rheostat, as is done with a direct- 
current generator, without changing the power-factor; for the 
ratio between the impressed alternating voltage and the direct 
voltage is fixed by the design of the machine. Hence where 
voltage regulation is necessary, as for lighting work, charging 
storage-batteries etc., some means of changing the impressed 
alternating voltage is necessary. 

A number of different methods have been used to accomplish 
this result, which I shall describe briefly: 


186 STONE: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


1. On the step-down transformers used with the converter, 
taps can be placed either on the primary or the secondary side 
and switches used to transfer from one tap to another. This — 
scheme has many objections and is seldom used now. If the 
tapsare on the primary, oil-switches would have to be used if the 
voltage were at all high. Such switches would be practically out 
of the question. If the taps are on the secondary, a dial-switch 
can be used, but only with the smaller size machines, as it is diffi- 
cult to build a dial-switch to handle large currents satisfactorily, 
except at prohibitive expense. This method is also objection- 
able as it means fluctuation in the lights whenever the switch 
is moved to a different tap. 

2. The common way of obtaining control of the voltage in 
railway work is to insert in the leads from the secondary of the 
transformer a reactance, thus furnishing a means of changing the 
impressed alternating voltage. This method, while simple and 
effective with the limited ranges in voltage required for such 
work, would not be applicable for large ranges fn voltage. Too 
much reactance may cause pulsation troubles and it also hasa 
bad effect on the entire system. 

3. The arrangement in most general use to-day is to connect 
an induction regulator between the secondary leads of the trans- 
former and the synchronous converter, by which it is possible 
to obtain almost any range of voltage within the capacity of 
the machine. This scheme of operation is in such general use 
that it is not necessary to describe it in detail. The principal 
objection to this arrangement is that another piece of operating 
machinery is used with each synchronous converter outfit, in- 
creasing the cost, requiring valuable floor space, and making 
it necessary to open the secondary leads from the transformer, 
a serious complication with large low-voltage machines. 

4. The next development in this line took place abroad, 
where an entirely different scheme was used. A few ma- 
chines of this type have also been built by one of the 
large manufacturing companies in this country. This 
method makes use of an alternating-current booster or 
bucker, mounted on the same base with the synchronous con- 
verter. The field has the same number of poles as the con- 
verter, and the armature is mounted on the same shaft as the 
synchronous converter armature. Alternating current is gener- 
ated in this armature, and can be made to add its voltage to or be 
subtracted from the impressed voltage, according to the direction 


1908] STONE: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS 187 


of the excitation. This booster is usually placed between the 
collector rings and the main armature of the converter, and the 
taps from the collector rings are connected to equidistant 
points of the booster armature; similar points on the booster 
armature are connected to the synchronous converter armature, 
thus placing the two in series, separate and distinct windings 
for each phase being used. : 

The principal objections to such an arrangement are that here 
again we have an additional operating machine, as in the case 
of an induction regulator. Extra weight is added to the shaft 
between its points of support. The ventilation of the converter 
armature and its accessibility are impaired. Any serious trouble 
with this smaller machine results in the dismantling of the main 
synchronous converter in order to repair the small booster. 

Another way to construct such a machine is to make it a 
revolving-field machine, mounting the field on an extension of 
the shaft beyond the bearing of the collector-ring end ofthe 
synchronous converter. 

As the armature is stationary, the leads from the secondary 
of the transformer are led directly to this winding, and from 
this winding to the collector rings of the synchronous converter. 
This arrangement has the twofold advantage of being acces- 
sible, and not interfering with the ventilation or accessibility 
of the synchronous converter. This booster can be applied to 
any standard converter; and being overhung, it is possible to 
carry a spare machine which can be placed in position quickly 
and without interfering with the body of the main synchronous 
converter. 

5. The next development is very radical and is unlike any 
of the other schemes used. It was first proposed by J. L. Wood- 
bridge some time ago. It has been known for some time that 
the ratio of conversion between the alternating-current and 
direct-current sides of a synchronous converter could be changed 
by varying the width of the pole-face. The Woodbridge method 
makes use of this idea in a very simple and yet effective way. 

Fig. 4 shows a two-pole synchronous converter equipped in 
accordance with this idea. Each field pole is divided into three 
sections, on each of which are two windings. One of the 
windings on each section is the main shunt winding, and the 
other is the regulating winding. All the main windings are 
connected in series and excited in the ordinary manner. The 


regulating windings, however, are connected differently. The 


188 STONE: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


windings on the two outer sections of all poles are connected in 
series with one another, and the windings of all the central sec- 
tions are connected in series with one another, and these two 
groups are connected in series. 

The voltage of the direct-current side of the converter is 
increased by exciting all the outer sections in a direction to 
assist the main shunt field, and the middle section an equal 
amount in opposition to the main field. This condition is shown 
in Fig. 5. If both these windings are excited in the opposite 
direction the direct voltage will be lowered. Fig. 6 shows this 
condition. All that is needed in this arrangement is a field 
rheostat in the regulating field circuit in addition to the main 
field rheostat ordinarily’ used. 

The first question that comes up with this scheme is its 


i) 


~ Sa De 
Se 


Fress455.6: 


effect on the power-factor. A number of machines arranged 
this way have been designed and placed in operation. With 
these machines the power-factor can be held constant at all 
loads, yet all the range in voltage desired can be obtained. 

6. Since this method was proposed, another and still simpler 
method has been brought out. This scheme was proposed by 
Mr. J. L. Burnham. Instead of making each pole with three 
sections and with two windings on each, only two sections are 
used. On each section only one winding is used. The large 
section corresponds to the main shunt winding on an ordinary 
synchronous converter, while the regulation is obtained entirely 
by changing the excitation of the smaller section, exciting it in 
one direction to boost the voltage, and in the other to lower 
the voltage. 

Anti-hunting devices of many types have been designed and 
put in operation, most of which have been reasonably success- 
ful. The latest, and in many ways the most efficient form of 


1908] STONE: SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS 189 


bridge, is formed by placing some copper rods directly through 
the face of the pole tips, although completely surrounded by 
the magnetic material. These copper rods are all joined together 
by heavy copper rings, thus forming a complete squirrel-cage 
winding similar to that used on the rotor of an induction motor. 
These rods being placed directly through the pole face are 
naturally in the main flux, and consequently form very efficient 
dampers. 

Nothing has been said as yet about transformer connections 
to be used with synchronous converters. There are many con- 
ditions existing in different parts of the country which have 
made it advisable to use some special form of connection for the 
transformers, but the general practice is to use the diametrical 
connection with all six-phase machines. This connection is 
particularly useful in lighting work, as it provides a ready means 
for obtaining a neutral. With three-phase converters the trans- 
formers are usually connected in delta. In many cases they are 
connected in Y to obtain a neutral, which can be done if special 
provision is made in distributing the windings in the transformers. 


A ‘paper presented at the 225th meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, February 14, 1908. 


Copyright 1908, By A,I.E,E, 


SOME FEATURES OF RAILWAY CONVERTER DESIGN, 
AND OPERATION 


BY J. E. WOODBRIDGE 


There are now in service in this country in railway work 
alone, synchronous converters with an aggregate capacity of 
nearly 1,000,000 kw. In spite of the wide use of this machine, 
some features of its design and operation are not generally 
clearly understood, or are quite generally misunderstood. It 
is the purpose of the following paper to take up three of these 
features as follows. 

Six-phase versus three-phase converters. Of the above aggre- 
gate capacity, something like one-third consists of machines with 
six collector rings tapped into the armature winding at six 
points per pair of poles and termed six-phase converters, al- 
though the electromotive forces delivered to them are as truly 
three-phase as are those delivered to, machines with three col- 
lector rings. Although it is generally known that the addition 
of three collector rings to a given three-phase converter reduces 
the armature I’ R losses considerably on unity power-factor, it 
has been heretofore assumed that wattless currents increase 
these losses of both types of converters by about the same 
quantity, but not in the same proportion, so that the gain of 
the six-phase machine is slight on low power-factors. 

It has heretofore been shown mathematically, and noted in 
actual practice, that the armature conductors of a converter 
nearest the collector ring taps, run warmer than those midway 
between the collector ring taps. The distribution of the arma- 
ture J? R losses (assuming a winding of uniform cross-section, 
which is the invariable construction) is shown in the upper part 

191 


i92 WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS  [Feb. 14 


of the accompanying diagram, Fig. 1, the two curves of which 
represent the theoretical J? RK loss of a six-ring machine run 
with the same load, in one case with six-phase, and in the other 
case with three-phase supply, both at unity power-factor. These 
curves assume theoretical voltage ratios which are closely ap- 
proached in practice, but neglect the losses due to unconverted 
power such as unbalancing, core-loss, incipient hunting, harmon- 
ics set up by differences in wave-form, etc., These losses are small, 
and affect both curves by about the same amount. The vertical 
scale is given in terms of the heat developed in the same winding 


JERRBRERSRMERS EMER RRS aoe”. 
JAP RSERREBESS ff 
GRRE RRR SRE RO RRR 
Oe Neen 
N@aNe BRBBYG\VESREREBEY ST 
ST | | NMpeaedipraset27] 1 | NN Peper meet WN | 
REL TN EE A EUW ETAL LWW 


DNS TON ANS 7 NKWSS 


NOI Y.\\\\\“" 
RL peptides ops toe fost pesca >| | 
LO ded Bd at eee 
Eel ol sbsleh late Wal elaaleA cel oleae shin se) a eababagt dia 
ak ag 
an 
Ae 


OO 


Ah 


C4 


EEC E 


anaes 
SS Se 


arpa ae soy Nats vata at \\ 
SEA L~ TTR KRW) 


eat gigs — HEN DBR?R#RaT K\NS NNG@ 
cece eat 


YIN 
ON pase LOSS CYOSS MatChed —r\«—]/1 28; 


Fic. 1—Distribution of copper losses in armature conductors of converter 


when generating the same power in direct current mechanically 
driven. It will be noted that in this case the operation of the 
machine as a three-phase converter as compared with its opera- 
tion as a six-phase converter, increases the average J? R loss 
slightly over 100 per cent. and increases the J’ R loss in the 
unfavorably situated bars adjacent to the collector rings almost 
200 per cent. 

It has been generally assumed that this considerable advantage 
of the six-phase over the three-phase machine is reduced in 
case of lower power-factors. It can be shown mathematically 


1908] WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS 193 


(see appendix 1) that the distribution in case of a phase dis- 
placement of 15 degrees giving a power-factor of 96.6 per cent. : 
that is, a wattless current equal to about 27 per cent. of the 
energy current, is as indicated in the lower half of Fig. 1. In 
this case it will be noted that the average heating of the whole 
winding for the same load is in the case of the six-phase opera- 
tion increased from 0.27 to 0.33 of the reference figure, which 
is the heat developed by the same direct current load mechan- 
ically derived. In the case of the three-phase operation, the 
average I’ R loss rises by a lesser proportion from 0.57 to 0.65, 
but the addition of the wattless current has also the peculiar 
effect of shifting the heat distribution from one side to the 
other of the collector ring tap, considerably reducing the heating 
of the bars to one side of the tap and greatly increasing that 
of the bars on the other side. A lagging component shifts the 
heating to one side of the taps, and a leading current to the 
other side. It will be noted that the bar to one side of the 
collector ring tap is heated in the case of the six-phase opera- 
tion to the extent of 0.71 of the reference figure, or about twice 
the average and three and a half times the minimum, whereas 
the corresponding bar of the three-phase machine is heated to 
the extent of 1.75 times the reference figure, or three times 
the average and seven times the minimum, and two and a half 
times the maximum with the same machine worked six-phase. 
While the distribution of the heating between slots is not as bad 
as that between conductors in the three-phase case, since con- 
ductors adjacent to the taps lie in the same slots with others 
midway between taps, a considerable difference of temperature 
will exist between the two conductors in one slot in case of a 
heavy overload at low power-factor. It will be shown later that 
practically all overloads on compound-wound machines are at a 
low power-factor. Lower power-factors increase this heating and 
further crowd it into a few bars. 

Even if the maximum heating were the same for the two 
methods of operation, the addition of three collector rings 
might be warranted by the better distribution of six-phase 
operation, but with the maximum heat generation two and a half 
times as great (even with a good power-factor) with only three 
collector rings the argument is that much stronger. 

Of course, a three-phase converter for a given output may 
by increasing its size be built with more armature copper than 
a six-phase converter of the same rating; but in any event 


194 WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS [Feb 14 


the three-phase machine may be safely increased in rating some 
40 or 50 per cent. with no increased losses, and with a corre- 
spondingly higher efficiency by the addition of three more 
collector rings and, if necessary, a corresponding extension of 
the commutator. This results in a corresponding reduction 
of core-loss per kilowatt capacity, which is a great aid to effi- 
ciency in railway work of low load-factor. 

The arguments against the six-phase form of converter are 
three in number: first, the increased number of parts of the 
machine; secondly, the additional number of cables; thirdly, 
the alleged relative complication of the transformer circuits. 

Unless extreme care is taken in the construction of a con- 
verter, to get the magnetic reluctance of all poles exactly the 
same, it is found that the commutation of any three-phase 
machine is improved by the addition of equalizing rings over 
and above those constituting the three collector rings. Six 
or more equalizing rings being advisable for this reason, the 
increased complication of the machine for six-phase operation 
is reduced to the addition of three collector rings, the necessary 
brush rigging and terminals. These additions are negligible 
in the case of large machines where each of three rings must 
be considerably broader than each of six in order to carry double 
the current, and where also the use of six rings allows the brush 
rigging to be divided into two equal parts, one each side of the 
shaft, where with three-phase converters two-thirds of the 
brush rigging must be on one side of the shaft. Further, the 
six narrow rings are better ventilated than three broad ones, 
and run cooler. 

In the matter of cables, the objection to six-phase machines 
applies only to small units where the whole current of one of the 
three phases can be carried inone cable. In machines of 500 kw. 
or more, even at railway voltage, it is convenient to use 
six alternating current cables, two in parallel on each phase, 
for the supply of a three-phase converter, and in larger machines 
it is necessary to do so. The six-phase machine has an alterna- 
ting current input per ring practically equal to one-half the direct 
current output, so that wherever two cables or a multiple of two 
are used for one pole of the direct-current output, cables of the 
same size may be used for the alternating-current leads, the 
machine being as convenient in this respect as the three-phase 
converter. . 

In the matter of transformer connections, the so-called dia- 


1908] WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS 195 


metrical connection is almost invariably used, each transformer 
having one secondary winding, the ends of which are connected 
respectively to two collector rings, the connection being even 
simpler than that of three-phase converters, in that no ‘‘ Y”’ 
or delta need be made. If reactive-coils or other devices are 
serially connected in the low-tension alternating-current circuits, 
these need be, and commonly are, only three phase; one phase 
being connected in series with each diameter of the converter, 
and so to speak, boosting or lowering the voltage of both ends 
of the diameter. (Fig. 2). This is a positive advantage for 
the six-phase equipment, in that the winding of the serially 
connected devices need carry only one-half of the current of the 
winding of a similar device for a three-phase converter. 

For the above reasons all converters of 500 kw. capacity and 


hae Ty ahd BRONTE 


Fic. 2—Six-phase diametrical connection with 
three-phase reactance. Rings shown in order of 
connection to armature winding 


over; made by one manufacturing company in this country are 
built for six-phase operation. 

The alternating-current starting of synchronous converters. 
Some 50 per cent. of the above mentioned total of railway con- 
verters in service in this country, are equipped with switches 
and connections for starting the machines from rest by means 
of the direct application of alternating electromotive forces 
to their armature windings through the collector rings, these 
electromotive forces being a fraction of those subsequently 
switched on for operation. In spite of the extensive use and 
general success of this method of starting, advocates and users 
of other methods attribute great disadvantages toit. Following 
is a more complete statement of the case than has heretofore 


been set forth. 


196 WOODBRIDGE; RAILWAY CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


A line of 25-cycle converters with pole-arcs equal to 75 or 80 
per cent. of the pole-pitch, with air-gaps of one-quarter to three- 
eighths of an inch, and with full load armature ampere-turns 
per pole approximately equal to the shunt field ampere-turns per 
pole (at rated voltage normal speed unity power-factor no load) 
and with short-circuiting squirrel-cage, anti-hunting winding em- 
bedded in the pole faces, will in general start from rest with some 
20 to 25 per cent. of rated alternating voltage impressed across 
their collector-rings, and will take at this voltage at rest approxi- 
mately twice full load current; that is, 40 to 50 per cent. of full- 
load volt-amperes, this current having a low power-factor, as the 
machine is acting under this condition as an induction motor with 
a variable and rather wide air-gap, the pole-face windings serv- 
ing as a short-circuited secondary. When started in this way 
such a machine will run up to synchronism without increase of 
voltage, and may be locked in step by excitation of the field wind- 
ings. 

The air-gaps and other characteristics above mentioned, are 
those most desirable for operation in railway work, and have 
been chosen as giving the best conversion and commutation. 
The good qualities in alternating current starting which result 
from them are merely incidental. The high armature reaction 
relatively to that of generators is highly advisable in compound- 
wound converters. High armature reaction, resulting in field 
distortion in generators, which is disastrous to commutation, 
has no such effect in synchronous converters since the field 
distortion of the direct-current output is always balanced by 
the field distortion of the alternating-current input. Increase 
of armature reaction causes a reduction of the lagging or leading 
currents set up by a given percentage difference of the field 
strength from the proper value for unity power-factor. Machines 
of these characteristics will stand a most surprising departure 
from proper field excitation when the increased heating pointed 
out above is considered. This feature is advisable for machines 
left in the charge of suburban railway station agents or other 
unskilled engineers in out-of-the-way sub-stations. In extreme 
cases, machines of these characteristics will operate on the usual 
low load-factor of interurban service with no shunt-field exci- 
tation whatever, as has been proved in several cases by mistakes 
in connecting up the field windings, mistakes not discovered until 
after a considerable period of operation. Other things, includ- 
ing full-load efficiency, being the same, a machine of high arma- 


1908] WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS 197 


ture reaction will have a lower core-loss than a machine of 
low armature reaction, and will show a higher all-day efficiency 
on a low load-factor such as that of railway work. 

Advocates of converters with a lower armature reaction assert 
that machines with high armature reaction have low synchroniz- 
ing power, whatever that term may mean. It is certain that 
machines with the characteristics above outlined, will follow 
without falling out of step the most violent fluctuations of speed 
that prime-movers can set up. One such 600-volt converter 
has been run with full-current output down to 50 volts. They 
will carry, when operating single-phase, a railway load of the 
usual fluctuating character of interurban service, without signs 
of distress. In the rough and ready service that railway con- 
verters often have to stand, it is certain that a machine with 
stiff fields and low armature reaction will kick out its automatic 
alternating current switch and go out of service more readily 
in case of an outside disturbance, such as a single-phase short- 
circuit on the alternating current lines, than will a machine 
with higher armature reaction. The machines outlined above 
do not drop out of step with direct current short-circuits when 
protected by the usual breakers, and the writer has never heard 
of a well authenticated case of one of these machines slipping 
a pole and continuing to run with direct-current polarity reversed, 
either from a direct current or an alternating current short- 
circuit, although this action has in one or two cases been sus- 
pected. In the matter of hunting, opinion is divided between 
the advisability of high or low armature reaction, but there 
are converters aggregating several tens of thousands of kw. ca- 
pacity in service with high armature reaction even without the 
usual short-circuiting pole face windings. 

It is interesting to compare the above minimum limit of 
alternating self-starting current with the minimum limit 
of current required for a starting induction motor before passing 
to the more practical field of service conditions. The torque 
required to start a converter from rest after a few days’ shut- 
down may be expressed as 12 to 15 per cent. of full-load torque, 
the latter term representing the torque which would be set up by 
full-load current generated. In other words, when started as 
a direct-current motor, 12 to 15 per cent, of full-load current 
may be required, if the field strength is normal. The induction 
motor designed to start a six-pole converter must have four 
poles in order to bring the machine up to synchronism. Since 


198 WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


an induction motor requires at least as great a current to develop 
a given torque at standstill as at full speed, the development 
of the above torque corresponds to 20 to 25 per cent. of converter 
full-load current input, or about one-half that required for self- 
starting from the alternating-current side. In other words, 
the advantage that the induction motor gains from design for 
one purpose only, is partly offset by its higher synchronous speed. 
With the same margin, the self-starting method should take in 
service about twice the volt-amperes of the other. In practice 
a large factor of safety in the form of a margin of voltage over 
that required must, of course, be allowed with either method, 
to cover low impressed voltage, extra friction, etc. 

In actual service using this method, 25-cycle converters 
under 500 kw. in size, are usually started from mid-taps in the 


ee 


Fic. 8—Partial voltage starting connections of three- 
phase converter with series reactance 


transformer windings, giving the converter one-half rated vol- 
tage, since it is expedient to locate a tap at the middle of the 
winding rather than at any other point more exactly suited to 
the purpose. Where reactive coils are used, these are connected 
in the starting circuit as shown in the accompanying diagram of 
connections, Fig. 3, since it is found that one-half voltage is suf- 
ficient to start such a converter through the usual 15 per cent. 
reactance. Early practice used a mid-tap in each of the three sides 
of the delta, but the change of phase when throwing from half 
to full voltage was found to give a greater swing, and the apparent 
unbalancing of the load with the connection shown was found 
to be negligible. The converter starting current under this con- 
dition, amounts to about one and three-quarters to twice full- 
load current, this being, by virtue of the compensator action 
of the half-voltage tap, equal to or less than full-load primary 


1908] WOODBRIDGE; RAILWAY CONVERTERS 199 


volt-amperes. A converter started in this way, runs up to syn- 
chronous speed in from 15 to 25seconds with negligible sparking 
at the direct-current brushes. 

It may lock in step with either positive or negative polarity 
to line, wrong polarity being customarily taken care of by a 
field reversing-switch, which closes the field for self-excitation 
without field rheostat in circuit, with a reversed connection for 
building up the machine when rotating in the direction set 
up by the alternating currents. The current sent by the 
armature through the field winding, acts against the flux 
induced by the alternating magnetizing current, driving this 
flux out in the form of magnetic leakage beween the poles. 
Friction under this condition drags the armature back until 
the electromotive force delivered to the brushes just reverses, 
when the field again reverses and holds the armature from falling 
back any further. The field reversing switch may then be safely 
thrown over into the normal connection, when the machine 
will build up with proper polarity to line. This action at start- 
ing voltage, calls for a volt-ampere input less than one-half full- 
load watts. When other compound-wound machines are 
carrying load in a railway sub-station, the polarity may be in- 
stantly corrected by closing the switch or switches which parallel 
the series field of the newly started machine with those already 
in operation. The division of direct current between the 
several series fields, serves as separate excitation to slip 
a pole of the newly started converter at starting voltage. With 
correct polarity and field excited, the machine may be thrown 
instantly from half voltage to full voltage with a momentary 
volt-ampere input not exceeding three-quarters rated watts, 
this input settling down to usual no-load value as soon as the 
field has time to build up. 

Twenty-five cycle converters of 500 kw. and over, when fitted 
for alternating-current starting, are commonly equipped with 
tandem switches designed to connect them first to taps which 
will deliver to the windings one-third normal voltage. With 
this low voltage the reactive coils are cut out, the volt-amperes 
expended in the reactive coil during starting being thus saved. 
Two steps are necessary to pass from one-third to full voltage, 
since one jump would give too great a swing of current. These 
are commonly made by two double-throw switches connected tan- 
dem, to prevent the possibility of short-circuits. The arrangement 
isshown withcomplete connections for asix-phase converter with 


200 WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS _ [Feb. 14 


a three-phase reactance in the accompanying diagram, Fig. 4. 
With this arrangement, 25-cycle converters commonly take 
about two-thirds to three-quarters of rated full load volt-am- 
peres in starting, and get up to speed in 20 to 25 seconds. 

The advantages of this self-synchronizing method of starting in 
times of emergency, and at all times in small outlying sub- 
stations, are obvious. 

In that the same power is used for starting as for running 
without auxiliary apparatus other than switches, no reserve 
or duplicate method of starting is required, there being no more 
need of such a duplicate than (for example) for the starting of 
a steam engine. This results in simplifying the equipment and 
opeiation. When starting is accomplished by means of an in- 
duction motor, means of starting from the direct-current side 


Fic. 4—One-third and two-thirds voltage starting 
connections of six-phase converter with diametrically 
connected transformers and three-phase reactance 


are warranted by the helplessness of the converter in case the 
motor fails. The induction motor secondary has necessarily 
a high resistance in order to give good torque at standstill, and 
this resistance is usually made internal. As the motor is only 
intended to run for a short time starting cold, its design is cut 
fine, giving high densities. In cases of trouble giving several 
shutdowns in quick succession, it may become impossible to 
start the converters without waiting for their induction motors 
to cool down. Instances of this kind have occurred. Self-start- 
ing converters may be run up repeatedly as quickly as they will 
slow down for an indefinite period without overheating. 

A six-phase machine will start with two diameters and will 
operate with reduced capacity on two diameters, just as a three- 
phase machine will operate on open delta. Incidentally, this 


1908] WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS 201 


isa slight advantage of the six-phase machine over the three-phase, 
in that when a transformer fails, it can be readily cut out of 
service in the case of a six-phase machine, whereas, in two 
cases out of three, with a three-phase machine, it is necessary 
to make several cable alterations to preserve the alternating cur- 
rent starting features. 

When starting with alternating currents directly applied, it 


Positive Bus Alorrr Belt 


Crrowt Breeker 
¢ 


Crrewt Crosing iz 


Aexiliary Snitch fresistorice 


Low lostoge Cov 


1, Soceed Limiting 
Wit= =< levice 


Fic. 5—Direct-current connections of railway converter 
arranged for self-starting; showing four-pole, double-throw 
field-reversing break-up switch and series-shunt switch 


is advisable to open the field circuits, as if these are left closed, 
considerably greater currents are required, and the starting 
torque is reduced. The shunt field circuits should be opened 
at several places, otherwise the induced voltage may be too 
high. The shunt-field reversing switch above mentioned, and 
field break-up switch being combined, no other means of opening 
the field should be provided, so that if this switch is left closed, 


202 WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


the shunt field will be short-circuited through the armature, 
and no high voltage can result. The equalizing connections 
of the series field must of course, be opened during starting, and 
the shunt for the series field is also provided with a switch to be 
opened at this time to cut down the draught of current. This 
shunt, as customarily supplied, following the established pre- 
cedent of the days of engine-driven generators, seems with its 


Fic. 6—1500-kw., 25-cycle, six-phase railway converter of high armature 
reaction, showing field-reversing, equalizer, and series-shunt switches 


switch to be a rather useless appendage, since it is rarely, if ever, 
used to adjust the compounding; and it is useless for adjusting 
the division of load fluctuations, in that its usefulness for this 
purpose depends altogether on bad equalizing, which does not 
usually exist in compact sub-stations. 

When a number of converters on one system are started sim- 
ultaneously, as after a shutdown, the starting currents are 
sufficient to lower the voltage considerably, especially if but one 


1908] WOODBRIDGE; RAILWAY CONVERTERS 203 


generator is in service. The lowering of voltage at this time is, 
of course, immaterial, unless sufficient to prevent the converters 
from starting, no instance of which has ever come to the writer’s 
knowledge It is customary on many railroads to connect up 
all alternating-current feeders at once after a shutdown, allowing 
the sub-station attendants to run up the converters as rapidly 
as possible. The lack of perfect synchronism between the at- 


Fic. 7—Series reactance and one-third and two-thirds 
voltage starting switches for 1000-kw. converter 


tendants’ movements and the rapid acceleration of the con- 
verters coming up to speed in a few seconds, is sufficient to avoid 
an overdraught of current, even in extreme cases. At other 
times, that is, when the system is carrying load, the starting of 
a converter does not cause any disturbance which it is possible 
to distinguish on any part of the system, from those set up by 
the ordinary fluctuations of railway load, 

A synchronous converter is a better self-starting machine 


204 WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS _ [Feb. 14 


than is a constant-speed induction motor of high efficiency and 
the same frequency, size, and speed. Such a motor with short- 
circuited secondary, takes in service for starting a volt-ampere 
input equal to an overload of 25 to 50 per cent. Some engineers 
who would not hesitate to arrange for the self-starting of such an 
induction motor, do not favor the self-starting of the correspond- 
ing synchronous converter, so great has been the misunderstand- 
ing of this subject. 

In several cities of this country converters of the largest sizes 
are regularly started from the alternating current side, their 
supply of power coming from lighting systems supplying lights 
through other converters from the same alternating current 
network. In one city, converters of 1000 and 1500 kw. capacity 
are supplied from a system carrying a lighting load, and although 
these converters are equipped with induction motors for starting 
purposes, the starting is usually accomplished by the above 
described self-starting means. 

Compounding of converters Although it is generally known 
that converters cannot be compounded without reactance in 
the circuit, and that the smaller the reactance the greater must 
be the strength of the series field for the same regulation, few 
engineers have any idea of the best values of reactance and 
series field strength, or the shape of the compounding curve 
with different values of resistance and reactance; or, what is 
more important, the best transformer ratio and best setting of 
shunt field rheostats. 

Before taking up the rather complex reactions with both 
resistance and reactance in circuit, a mental picture of the effect 
of reactance alone, in the simplest case, can be obtained from the 
vector diagram Fig. 8, where the large triangle represents a three- 
phase voltage, as delivered to a three-phase reactance and through 
this to a converter, the voltage of which is shown as a circle. 
At no load, and neglecting losses, assuming a shunt-field excita- 
tion for unity power factor; that is, no leading or lagging current, 
there is no drop in the reactance owing to the absence of any 
current, and the impressed voltage is delivered without change, 
the inside circle representing the converter voltage under 
this condition. At full load the energy current flowing through 
the reactance gives a reactive drop at right angles with the 
electromotive force delivered to the converter, which for one 
phase may be represented by the line A B,. The impressed 
voltage of one phase may be represented by the line O A, the 


1908] WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS 205 


Voltage delivered to the converter (if the converter is shunt 
wound) by the line O B,, with which A B,, the reactance drop, 
makes aright angle, since the current is assumed to be in phase 
with the converter o- delivered electromotive force, and the 
reactance drop is normal to the current. If now the converter 
is compound wound, the leading current drawn by the increased 


Fic. 8—Illustrating effect of reactance on voltage 
of compound-wound converter 


field strength at full load gives a reactive drop B,C, which in- 
creases the delivered electromotive force from the value O B, 
to O C,, the reactive drop (which is really a rise) of the resultant 
current being A C,. The middle circle drawn through the point 
C, and corresponding points of the other phases then represents 
the converter electromotive force at full load, the collector ring 
represented by the point C, lagging behind the impressed electro- 


206 WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


motive force by the angle A OC, and being pushed out (so to 
speak) by the reactive drop of the leading current from B, to 
Gi 

With greater reactance, thelines A B, and B,C, both become 
longer, always retaining the same proportion, since one is caused 
by the energy current and the other by the magnetizing or leading 
current, both of which are unaffected by the reactance in circuit, 
neglecting variation of shunt field. Thus with twice the react- 
ance, the resultant reactive dropincreases to A C, and with three 
times the reactance to A C,, the triangles A B,C, and A B,C, 
being exactly similar to A B,C. 

It may be seen that increasing reactance enlarges the delivered 
voltage up to a certain limit, after which it diminishes, since the 
increasing drop of the energy current A B, diminishes the other 
side O B, of the right angle triangle O A D, with fixed hypothe- 
nuse O A so rapidly that the effect of the compounding B,C; can 
not increase rapidly enough to make up for it. 

With greater series field strength and fixed reactance the 
component B,C, increases at the expense of reduced power 
factor, A B, remaining constant. Since the resultant drop 
A C, is at right angles with the current it may readily be seen 
that the more this drop departs from a right angle with the 
delivered electromotive force OC, the worse the power-factor 
becomes. ; 

If we assume that with changing load the leading current in- 
creases in Cirect ratio with the energy current giving a constant 
power-factor and constant angle between the reactive drop 
and the delivered electromotive force, the effect of overloads 
becomes in this simple case the same as that of increased react- 
ance, an overload of 100 per cent. with the initial reactance 
doubling the reactive drop of the energy current from the full 
load value A B, to A B, and that of the leading current from B, C, 
to B,C, giving again a resultant drop of AC,. In general, with 
any value of reactance and series field, the compounding curve 
is not straight, but droops on the higher loads. This can be 
shown by reference to the same figure, taking an extreme over- 
load to make the drop obvious. Three times full-load current 
gives a reactive drop A C, and a delivered electromotive force 
OC, which is less than the full load or 100 per cent overload values 
OC, and OC, owing again to the shortening of O B, as A B, 
lengthens. For the same reason it will be noted that the rise of 
voltage from no load to full load is greater than that from full 


1908] WOODBRIDGE; RAILWAY CONVERTERS 207 


load to 100 per cent. overload. In practice, other things, such 
as magnetic leakage and weakening shunt field, increase the 
droop. It may be mentioned that O A C, represents fairly well 
ordinary service conditions at full load, the effect of resistance 
being to bring C, back to the inside circle. The saturation of 
reactances cuts down the overload triangles to smaller figures 
than here shown. 

Over-compounding has gone out of fashion, partly thanks 
to the low power-factors accompanying over-compounding with 
converters supplied from a system with considerable alternating 
current drop, and partly due to the connection of converter 
sub-stations directly to trolley lines, without feeder drop at 


G00 bolts 
res! SCANICE\ OT GS. 


reactance OToos 


Fic. 9—Diagram showing relations of impressed and delivered electro- 
motive forces for various loads with 10% resistance, 25% reactance, and 
50% series field. Arc of circle 600 volts. Irregular curve delivered 
volts. Note reactance drops from half load to twice full load at right 
angles approximately with impressed electromotive force showing 
approximate unity power-factor of input 


their nearest points, both of which factors have led to a more 
rational consideration of direct current feeder drop. It is now 
considered advisable to have the maximum voltage applied to 
the car equipments when near the sub-stations fixed, and not 
dependent on over-compounding caused by their own or other 
loads. 

In accordance with the established custom of assuming a 
drop of 10 per cent. at full load, which custom has prevailed 
in all constant potential work since the earliest days of the in- 
candescent lamp, converter equipments are commonly assumed 
to be called upon to give flat compounding at the direct-current 
side. with a total resistance in the alternating current circuits 


208 WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS {Feb. 14 


of 10 per cent.,including transformer and converter resistance, 
constant potential being assumed back of this 10 per cent. 
resistance, usually at the power house. 

To reduce the average heating, compound converters should 
have their shunt fields so adjusted as to draw a considerable 
lagging current at no load. This does not materially change 
the compounding. For best operation under fluctuations from 
no load to 100 per cent. overload, the best shunt field setting 
would be such as to give unity power-factor at some point well 
above average load such as about full rated load. This would 
give about one-half to three-quarters full-load current lagging 
at no load, according to the series field strength of the convert- 
ers, which is impracticable in service, as substation attendants 
would not operate in this way, but would increase the direct 
current voltage. A more practical assumption is unity power- 
factor at one-half rated load, that is the same amount of lagging 
current at no load as leading current at full load. It can be 
shown mathematically (see Appencix 2) that for flat compounding 
between no load and full load, with unity power-factor midway, 
minimum wattless current at no load and full load, 7.e. best 
power-factors, are obtained with a reactance equal to the resist- 
ance multiplied by the square root of one plus two divided by 
the percentage resistance drop. With 10 per cent. resistance 
this calls for 46 per ccnt. reactance, and a wattless current at 
no load and full load equal to 23 per cent. of full-load energy 
current. 

This compares with existing established practice as follows: 
A large number of railway converters in this country are equipped 
with series fields of such strength (when shunted) as to balance 
one-half full-load armature ampere-turns at full load. In 
other words, such a converter with shunt field rheostat set for 
unity power-factor at zero load, will (over and above energy 
current) draw a leacing current at full load equal to one-half 
full-load current. In line with the above argument it will be as- 
sumed that these converters have their rheostats so set as to 
draw a lagging input equal to one-fourth full load current at no 
load, which will give unity power-factor at approximately one- 
half load, and a leading component equal to one-fourth full- 
load current at full load. 

Many of these converters are equipped with 15 per cent. 
reactive coils; that is, reactive coils which, with full-load current, 
will show across the terminals of the winding in each phase 


1908] WOODBRIDGE; RAILWAY CONVERTERS 209 


15 per cent. of the voltage of the circuit in which they are con- 
nected. Assuming about 5 per cent. reactance in the converter 
(high armature reaction) 3 to 3.5 percent. in the transformers, 
and 1.5 to 2 percent. in line and cables, the total reactance in 
circuit to the direct current brushes amounts to 25 per cent. 
This represents about the maximum reactance in commercial 
use in this country. It will also be assumed that constant 
potential is delivered to this circuit with a total resistance drop 
including that of transformers and converter to the direct 
current brushes of 10 per cent. at full load. 

Assuming 600 volts as the no-load pressure, the compounding 
for both the best value of reactance and this representative case is 
givenin the following table, the figures being calculated by the 
method of complex quantities, due allowance being made for 
magnetic leakage and saturation of reactances from test records, 
also for variation of shunt fields with voltage. 


Power-Factors AT CONVERTERS AND DirecT CURRENT 


VOLTS. 
10% resistance Unity power-factor at half load 
46% reactance 25% reactance 12.5% reactance 
46% series field + 50% series field 80% series field 
ate Power r, Power Volt Power 
toad . Vols factor % Mere factor % Sa factor % 
0 600 19 600 16 600 10 
0.25 614 93 605 90 601 82 
0.5 619 100 605 100 599 100 
0.75 615 99 602 99 597 97 
1.00 600 98 596 97 593 93 
155: 540 97 567 95 576 89 
2.0 475 97 533 94 550 88 
| 


All power-factors below one-half load represent lagging cur- 
rent, while those above represent leading current. 

The power factors at the converter are also given for the various 
loads, these being independent of the reactance in circuit, and 
dependent only on the relation of the wattless and energy inputs 
drawn respectively by the field excitation and the load. While 
the power-factor of the input of the 46 per cent. reactance case 
varies with the load, that of the input tothe 25 per cent. reactance 
and 50% series field combination is above 99% from one-half 
load to one-hundred per cent overload, the leading effect of the 


210 WOODBRIDGE; RAILWAY CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


series field almost exactly balancing the lagging effect of the 
reactance between these limits. 
The drop in pressure of the theoretical case on overloads puts 


100, 


OX TT |r 
SSCL NSS 
8 LOY CNC ee 
07) So 
27 lat [otaket sl eel tealanl sham 
OBE Cs 
FPF coca ea a an a 
[Teen ae ea 
BN a el sk 
Pn A sh Ld did 
eerie Co Perel Ds eae 
x pe aa Es PS Een 
Ra Ce eo 
ede 
S eer 
Sader CC 
(iene ee Cee 
a aap ws ea 
HUB SOB URW Gu. 
see |e es a ee 
poi oA me ea oe RI a LI 3d 
Ec in a a YE 
CE LIne Lees a 
= EN BP OS DEP AHA SOL 2s 
Soe Petal cia Sle 
OS NIE SE 


Fic. 10—Compounding curves, wattless component curves in terms of 
full-load current and power-factor curves of converters with 10% resist- 
ance and, A, 46% reactance, 46% series field; B, 25% reactance, 50% series 
field; C, 12.5% reactance, 80% series field 


it out of consideration for practical service, but that of the 25 
per cent. reactance case is, in the writer’s opinion not objection- 
able, as it enables a converter to shirk its work rather than trip 


1908] WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS ell 


its breaker when overloaded, and tends in a properly designed 
network to throw excessive overloads to neighboring sub-stations. 
It also eases the blow of a short-circuit. 

When separate reactive-coils are not used, dependence being 
placed on the internal reactance of converter, transformers and 
line, the total reactance of the circuit may be assumed to be as 
low as one-half that given above, or about 12.5 per cent., especi- 
ally where converters of low armature reaction and consequently 
of low internal reactance are used. This represents about the 
minimum reactance in commercial use. To get the same regu- 
lation between no load and full load with this smaller reactance, 
the series field of the converter must balance an armature re- 
action of over 80 percent. instead of 50 per cent; that is, a leading 
component equal to more than 80 per cent. of full load current 
must flow in the armature to balance the effect of the series 
field at full load. Assuming again that the shunt field is so 

~adjusted as to give unity power-factor at half load; thatis, 40 per 
cent. of full-load current lagging at no load, the table gives the 
power-factors for this case at various loads. It will be noted that 
while the 25 per cent. reactance gives much better regulation 
and only slightly lower power-factors than the best theoretical 
reactance, the 12.5 per cent. reactance gives much lower power- 
factors, the effects of which can be imagined from the heat distri- 
bution curves given in the first part of this paper. 

It will be noted also that the small reactance and more power- | 
ful series field give a somewhat better regulation on heavy 
overloads, but it is doubtful whether this regulation can be act- 
ually reached, as it calls for heavy leading currents which it is 
difficult to obtain even with a machine of low armature reaction; 
for example, at twice full load, over full-load leacing current is 
required. Under this condition the armature reaction is opposed 
to the field flux, tending to cause magnetic leakage. In this case 
the power-factor of the system varices with the load, as the series 
field greatly outweighs the influence of the reactance. 

The above discussion disregards the reactance and resistance 
of the generators on the score that the fluctuations of load onone 
sub-station will not disturb the main station voltage of a large 
system, and will be compensated by hand adjustments of the 
field rheostats on a moderate size system and by automatic 
means on a small system, so that constant potential at the main 
station bus-bars may be assumed. 

Records of compounding tests under similar conditions check 


Bie WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


these results as closely as might be expected, consistent results 
from tests under service conditions being unobtainable owing 
to fluctuations of other loads, voltage, etc. 

Such a high reactance as the maximum above calculated might 
give instability, but no such case has ever been noticed with 
25 per cent. reactance, even with high resistance drops and con- 
verters of high armature reaction without pole-face windings. 
In one case of extreme hunting due to excessive line drop, the 
writer inserted in circuit a reactance of 20 per cent., the result 
being a slight increase of the angle of oscillation of the armatures 


00 T 
SiS : 
nx = 
N 

ee 
. £ 
: 
IX : Ps +—1—1 

peel 

re | 

8 
Ph 

NN ; 7 

S 

BSILN 
FOS 
JOS 
25k 

Gia | 

4, AS’ 
BLS 
OS 
5 

iN 

FG ELT et LY ou OD a) CRN SPE DO 60 65 70 


% REACLAICE 7? CCL 


Fic. 11—Curves of wattless components and power-factors for flat 
compounding no load to full load with varying reactance 


as noted by a stroboscopic method; but there was a great reduc- 
tion of the periodicity of the oscillation, and of the effect on 
the voltage, due to the variable input of energy to the convert- 
ers and consequent variation of line drop. 

In actual practice such good results in power-factors are not 
obtained owing to lack of instructions concerning the setting of 
field rheostats. Transformers for compound converters are 
almost invariably designed to give a secondary voltage adapted 
to the ratio of conversion at no-load unity power-factor; in other 
words, if the ratio of conversion is 0.62, calling for 370 volts 


1908} WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS 213 


to give 600 direct voltage, the transformers are designed to give 
370 volts instead of 390 volts or more, as they should do to 
deliver normal direct voltage with proper lagging current at no 
load. Even where transformers of proper ratio are in use, or the 
alternating voltage is sufficiently high, the tendency of human 
nature to push up the direct voltage tends to cut out the no- 
load lagging component and lower the power-factor on load. 

This is particularly the case where power-factor indicators 
are installed in the circuits of the converters. Even where these 
instruments are properly connected, which frequently is not 
the case, the natural tendency of the attendants is to bring up 
the excitation on starting a converter until the power-factor 
indicator shows approximately unity power-factor. These 
instruments are frequently so connected as to show the power- 
factor at a point with considerable reactance between it and 
the converter. In this case their readings are absolutely mis- 
leading, an indicated power-factor of 97 per cent. leading (for 
example) often meaning a power-factor at the converter of 90 
per cent. or less. While it may be possible to get attendants 
to set their rheostats for proper voltage, if this does not call for 
more than 25 per cent. of full-load current at no load, which does 
not make much of a showing on an alternating current ammeter 
capable of reading twice full load, 40 per cent. is much more diffi- 
cult. 

In city work with comparatively small fluctuations, convert- 
ers of the above series field characteristics, have been installed, 
but without series reactive coils, the argument being that these 
are unnecessary on comparatively steady loads. It would 
be much more satisfactory to omit the series winding and install 
the reactance, in order to give the attendants an opportunity 
to adjust their voltage by hand with smaller wattless currents. 

In general, the writer contends that best practice, with systems 
approximating 10 per cent. resistance, is the increase of the 
natural reactance of the circuits to approximately 25 per cent., 
and the use of a series field of such strength as to balance about 
one-half full-load armature ampere-turns, with transformer ratios 
such as togive normal direct voltage with at least one-quarter 
full-load current. lagging at no load; converter field rheostats 
to be set for normal direct voltage regardless of power-factor, 
and main station voltage to be kept constant at such a figure 
as will give unity power-factor at and above such a load as gives 
an average of one-half load or more to the converters, ~ 


214 WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


The result of existing practice is low power-factors on heavy 
loads, particularly with converters of low armature reaction, 
and more particularly in circuits of small reactance, which would 
probably give trouble in many cases, especially with three-phase 
converters, but for the low load-factors of interurban railway 
work and the heavy overloads for which the converters are de- 
signed. 

APPENDIX I. 


If I 


and « = angle in electrical degrees between middle of one 
section (between collector taps) and plane of 
commutation, assumed neutral 


direct current per path in armature of converter 


and ¢ = angle of lag between current and counter electro- 
motive force, alternating current 


and £ = angle between middle of section and any bar of 
resistance, r. 


Then alternating current per path in winding of three-phase 


ip Eur) 
machine a 3 V3 cos ¢ 
S sin (« + ¢) 
Resultant current = ] E maa ee eee d | 
8 si oe 2 
Heating of bar = [’, [3 ie ye 


Ratio of heating to that of same load mechanically gener- 


8sin (« + )72 
eats [1 3V 3 cos ¢ 
Average ratio = — ee sehen ecm 2 d« 
3/3 cos ¢ cos d 
_ 59 _ 32 cos B is ely 1 32 tan ¢ sin B 
ar 8/38 27 382V3 


similarly the alternating current per path in winding of six- 


4sin (x + ¢) 


phase machine = a bos 


1908] WOODBRIDGE: RAILWAY CONVERTERS 2] 


z+B 
Average ratio = 2) [3 _ 4sin(% oe ee 
7 


n 


3 Cos 


ii 16 8 16 : 
St Spa cos 8 + 9 tan’ p+ a tan $ sin B 


These two expressions are plotted in Fig. 1. ¢ being O in the 
upper curves and 15° in the lower. 


Average heating of whole winding of three-phase machine 


3a2cos@ 32, , 32 
ab E Noreen o7 ea as aes ee tan p sing] dB 


se Oc lbe 82 eels 
= 7 een 2 + a7 tan’ > 


wiA 


Similarly the loss in the six-phase winding integrated 


between 8 = = and ~ = — a gives average 
TierlGess i 
SC eT Riad 


AppENDrx II. 
If E = impressed electromotive force 
and e, = delivered electromotive force at no load 
and ce, = delivered electromotive force at full load 
and 1, = lagging current at no load 
and 1, = energy current at full load 
and r, x and 7 have their usual values. 


Then leading current at full load= — 72, since the wattless cur- 
rent is assumed same at zero as at full load. 


At no load E =@, +24,% + ju, 7 
At full load E 


6, +47 — tye + 5 (gr + 1,4) 


216 WOODBRIDGE; RAILWAY CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


Expanding these two quantities to get absolute values (when 
€) = e, since the delivered voltage is assumed to be the same at 
full load as at no load) gives 


This expression is plotted in Fig. 11. 
Differentiating this expression with respect to x to obtain the 
value of x which give the lowest value of 7, gives 


i 242 "2 
di, Bp ee oie ee ee, 
dx 20 4e,x 4e, 


1908} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 217 


Discussion on ‘“‘ Toe Non-syYNCHRONOUS GENERATOR IN CEN- 
TRAL STATION AND OTHER Work,” ‘“‘SomE DEVELOPMENTS IN 
SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTERS,” AND ‘‘SoME FEATURES OF RAILWAY 
CONVERTER DESIGN AND OPERATION.” New York, 
FEBRUARY 14, 1908. 


C. F. Scott: The three papers presented to-night deal with 
alternating-current apparatus and show the wide variations in 
methods which are practicable with alternating current but not 
with direct current. 

When a new machine or method is proposed, it frequently 
happens that it may accomplish the specific purpose for which it 
is intended, but it may involve some incidental feature that 
renders the whole inoperative or inadmissible. Mr. Waters not 
only describes the induction generator but points out its various 
advantages over synchronous generators in construction and 
also its marked advantages in operation. Instead of introducing 
objectionable characteristics, it presents many points of ad- 
vantage—reduced current on short-circuit, a smooth wave- 
form, and damping action due to the short-circuited element, 
which exerts a steadying and soothing effect throughout the 
whole system, tha‘ tends, in turn, to prevent hunting and surges. 
The paper indicates that there should be a considerable com- 
mercial field in which this type of generator will have an im- 
portant application. 

Mr. Stone presents six methods of voltage regulation of syn- 
chronous converters. It may be noted that the alternating- 
current booster may be provided with either a shunt field wind- 
ing cr a series field winding, or both. Ifa series field winding 
carry the current from the synchronous converter, then the 
compounding may be effected automatically by a practically 
straight-line law over a considerable range. 

A comparison of the relative characteristics of the several 
methods of voltage regulation is of interest. In several a me- 
chanical adjustment of the apparatus is necessary. In the 
case of the transformer with loops, the connection must be 
shifted from one loop to another. In the induction regulator 
mechanical rotation must take place. The reactance involves 
no such adjustment. In the methods in which field current is 
adjusted, the windings may be either shunt windings for hand 
control or series windings for automatic control. Auxiliary 
automatic control apparatus can, of course, be applied for opera- 
ting rheostats, regulators, and the like. The power-factor ; that 
is, the ratio between true and apparent watts, varies when 
reactance is used, or the methods in which the field poles are 
divided into parts which are unequally excited. The power- 
factor is practically unaffected when transformer loops, induc- 
tion regulators, or boosters are employed. The wave-form is 
not affected unless it be in those cases where the field poles are 
divided into two or more parts. The range of voltage variation 


918 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


is relatively small with reactance. It is probably small with 
the methods in which the field poles are divided into parts, 
unless considerable variations in power-factor or wave-form 
are admissible. The range may be very large when other 
methods are employed. These characteristics are brought to- 
gether in the following table: 


Inherently Hand Power- Wave- 
Method automatic adjustment factor form Range 
1. Transformer loops....... _ Yes O.K. OK Large 
2.) REACLANCE apace gt eters Yes Yes Variable O.K. Small 
3. Induction Regulator..... — Yes OLR: O.K. Large 
4, Booster.s: .:s.<iew meantes Yes Yes O.K. O.K. Large 
5. Woodbridge............ Yes Yes Variable?| Variable?| Small? 
G2 Burnham siecle = Yes Yes Variable?| Variable?| Small? 


Paul M. Lincoln: The scheme proposed by Mr. Woodbridge 
for changing the direct voltage of a synchronous con- 
verter, as well as the modification proposed by Mr. Burnham, 
is ingenious, but I believe that Mr. Stone’s descriptions are alto- 
gether too brief to be satisfying to the engineer who contem- 
plates making use of them. At the time Mr. Woodbridge’s 
device was originally proposed, considerably over a year ago, I 
became familiar with an analysis of the scheme; this analysis 
seemed to show that the objections to the use of such a scheme 
outweigh the advantages. <A repetition of this analysis within 
the last month leads to the same conclusion. Some of the steps 
in this analysis may be of sufficient interest to reproduce in this 
discussion. 

Wave-form. The first question that arises when contemplating 
the use of this split-pole converter is its effect upon wave-form. 
These questions might naturally be put as follows: will the wave 
form of the split-pole converter depart materially from a sine 
wave? If so, how much will be the departure? Will such 
deformation, if it occur, have any bad effect upon the converter 
itself or upon any part of the system to which the converter is 
connected ? 

The first two questions are probably best answered by a 
series of curves which were prepared in the course of 
the above mentioned analysis. It is well known that with a 
given field form, the distributed winding of a converter gives 
rise to an electromotive force wave-form which is subject to quite 
exact determination. The division of the converter field into 
sections, and the provision of means to excite these sections 
independently of each other, gives control over the field form 
and therefore over the alternating-to-direct voltage ratio. 
As the field form changes, however, the electromotive 
force wave-form of the converter also changes. To what extent 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 219 


this takes place for certain assumed field forms is indicated in 
Figs. 1 to 7. Figs. 1,2, and 3 show what may be expected of a 
converter with its pole divided into three sections, and Fig. 4, 
5, 6,and 7 what may be expected with a pole of two parts. 

Fig. 1 shows, first, six possible field forms; secondly, the electro- 
motive force wave-forms that these field forms give rise to; and 
thirdly, the sine wave equivalent to the determined wave-form. 
The wave-forms in this series, as well as all the others, are those 
across an electrical diameter, in other words, they are the wave- 
forms that would be taken across opposite rings of a six-phase 
or a two-phase converter. With a field form other than a sine, 
the wave-form across an electrical diameter deviates from sine 
form less than that across any chord. It gives, therefore, the 
most favorable condition so far as deviation from sine form is 
concerned. The narrower the band of conductors the more 
closely will the electromotive force wave-form approach the 
field form. A single conductor, for instance, will give rise to an 
electromotive force wave-form exactly similar to the field form. 

The figures at the right indicate, first, the per cent. variation 
in direct voltage over that which would be obtained with 
an electromotive force wave of sine form; secondly, the devia- 
tion in the resultant electromotive force wave from its equiva- 
lent sine wave. The sine deviations are calculated according 
to Institute rules. 

Fig. 1 assumes a three-part pole with all three parts equal, 
and shows the variations through which the converter field 
must be carried to vary the direct voltage from +13 
per cent. in the lowermost figure to —15.3 per cent. in the 
uppermost. The first condition entails a deviation from the 
equivalent sine of 74 per cent. and the second of over 23 per 
cent. The direct-current variation can be carried still further 
by further deforming the field, but at the limits given in this 
series the field strength at maximum direct-current variation is 
more than double that at minimum direct-current variation. 
Probably no converter designer would wish to consider a fur- 
ther field deformation. 

Fig. 2 shows what may be expected if the outside sections 
of the field pole are reduced from about 33 per cent. to about to 20 
per cent. each of the total pole area. The direct-current varia- 
tion in this series is carried from 12.8 per cent. plus to 50.8 per 
cent. The first condition entails a sine deviation of about 32 
per cent. and the last 50 per cent. Here again the field deforma- 
tion and relative field strength are carried to an extreme at the 
limiting conditions. 

Fig. 3 shows what may be expected if the middle section of 
the pole is made considerably narrower than the outside sections, 
a condition the reverse of that in Fig. 2. In this third series 
the middle section is about 20 per cent. of the total pole width. 
The limiting direct voltage values in this series are 8.2 per cent. 
plus, entailing 39 per cent. sine deviation, to 6.5 per cent, minus, 
entailing 12 per cent. sine deviation. 


220 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


CBee 
CAL nee 
SSS 
SRE AeA 
inp oa Lak aroha 
LTRS 


naee7-=<a8 


| 
ca 
a 
= 
= 
| 
sl 

rhe Hes] 

acy 

ieee 


Mel bed 
! 
ioaae 
oka 
| VRE 


na 
(_| 
/ 
bs | 
Hwy: 
4 


aneees 
saa 
cee 
Ate 
iD A7n 
=. 


Nasi Hop ce he | 


i 


Bie hh ama 
MERU O MMMM), (SRT Smee 
BEBEGBUEEEnG) SCSmb ooo 


Fic. 1 Fic. 2 


1908] 


DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 


ed 
aes 


mt | 


Zale 
Sss|ire te 
mae 
eis 
ee 


im ean AIST eo 
Be ee eee as 
een mee ie eet | ol 
eon oles eS 
a 
CUES Geld ee 
pa Ss shies || 


‘ 


Pa 
HERES 


\ 
\ 


Na 
aah | 
Evoke Ue 


222 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


Considering the three-part pole proposition as a whole, we 
find that to obtain a given direct voltage variation there is 
entailed a deviation from the equivalent sine wave of at least 
as great a per cent. as the direct-current variation, and for most 
conditions a deviation of two or three times as great. 

Fig. 4 shows what may be expected with a two-part pole, 
the two parts being of equal area. In this series the direct- 
current variation is carried from 0.2 per cent. plus, to 68 per 
cent. minus, the former condition having a wave-form fairly 
close to a sine while the latter deviates over 30%. It will be 
seen in this series, as well as in all others dealing with two-part 
poles, that a good wave-form is obtained only at the upper 
range of direct voltage. The mid-voltage position has a sine 
deviation of at least 25 per cent. and the minimum voltage 
is not much worse. This is a characteristic difference be- 
tween the three-part pole and the two-part pole. In the 
three-part arrangement the mid-voltage position can be made 
to have a wave fairly close to a sine form, while in the two-part 
pole arrangement the mid-voltage position has a deviation much 
greater than half that for minimum voltage. However, this is 
about the only advantage the three-part pole has over the two- 
part pole. 

It will readily be seen from an inspection of curves in No. 4, 
that the minimum direct voltages are obtained by an arrange- 
ment of field which corresponds closely to shifting the brushes 
of an ordinary converter forward or backward until the direct 
voltage between them is reduced the required amount. Instead 
of moving the brushes, the same effect is obtained by reversing 
a part of the field. In this series the direct voltage might very 
easily be carried down to zero with not very much additional 
deviation from a sine wave. 

Fig. 5 shows a series with the pole face divided in 70 per cent. 
and 30 per cent. sections instead of equal sections. The field 
deformation in this series is carried to such a point as to give a 
direct-voltage variation of about 20 per cent. each way from the 
mid position. The maximum deviation from sine form occurs, 
as pointed out above, at the minimum direct-current position 
and is about 25 per cent. The mid direct-current position en- 
tails a sine deviation of between 15 and 20 per cent. 

Fig. 6 is worked out for a condition of approximately 15 per 
cent. direct-voltage'variation each way. The maximum sine 
deviation is 20 per cent., and at the mid-voltage position 
a little less than 15 per cent. The small section of field is 
about 20 per cent. of the total in this case. 

Fig. 7 is worked out for a direct-current variation of about 10 
per cent. each way and shows a maximum sine deviation of 15 
percent. anda little less than 10 percent. at mid direct voltage. The 
small pole horn is about 15 per cent. of the total pole in this case. 

It is probable that the proper shaping of pole pieces may be 
made to give deviations from sine form somewhat less than I 
have worked out in this series of curves, but the very nature of 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 223, 


the case will prevent results that are materially better. They 
may be worse. 

It is patent from the foregoing that the user of a split-pole 
converter can expect very considerable departures of the con- 
verter wave from the generator wave. The percentage devia- 
tion from sine form will be considerably greater than the per- 
centage variation in direct voltage each way from mid direct- 
current position when considering a two-part-pole converter. 
For reasons that will appear later, this form is the only feasible 
one. The next question is: will this deviation from sine wave 
have any bad effect on the converter or on the system to which 
it is connected? 

When the wave-form of a synchronous machine is at variance 
with that of the system upon which it is operating, currents will 
flow, due to these differences in the electromotive force wave. Or- 
dinarily there are two actions taking place to limit these circula- 
ting currents; first, the impedance of the circuit through which 
they flow; secondly, and by far the more important, the fact 
that these circulating currents tend to modify the electromotive 
force waves of both the generating system and the receiving 
apparatus. If any specific piece of receiving apparatus be of 
relatively small capacity, as is usual, the greater part of the 
modification takes place in that receiving machine. In the case 
of split-pole converters, this field modification due to the cir- 
culating-current action is entirely absent. In order to obtain 
the desired direct-voltage variation, the deformation of field 
and consequently of wave-form must be carried to the required 
point. The efforts of the circulating currents to bring back the 
field form tonormal must be neutralized and overcome by the 
exciting force tending to deform the field. The only impedi- 
ment in the way of these circulating currents, therefore, is simply 
the impedance of the circuit. On a very large system the im- 
pedance outside the converter becomes reduced very close to 
zero and practically the only impedance offered is, therefore, 
that of the converter armature itself. 

Commercial considerations usually call for a direct-current 
variation of 10 to 15 per cent. each way from normal. The 
analysis already given shows that with such a direct-current 
range a third harmonic under maximum deviation conditions 
of 15 per cent. is quite possible. Mr. J. E. Woodbridge has assigned 
5 per cent as the value of the reactance of the armature of a con- 
verter. For third-harmonic frequency this value will become 
15 percent. Assuming such a converter to be direct connected 
to a very large alternating-current system, a triple-harmonic 
current will result, of a volume equal to the full-load current of 
the converter. Still higher harmonic currents will flow, and 
the maximum deviation of the current wave will be still greater 
than that represented by the full-load third harmonic. 

While not at all outside the range of possibilitv, the above 
conditions will be unusual, because on a very large system the 


GENERA TORS AND CONVERTERS 


Fel Bis (AAR PWN Ua TO) 
Ar AS Aete lalaeiea SA 


[Feb. 14 


1908] 


DISCUSSION AT NEW VoRK 


pe BH ION= "Sif + 
Si ar sorts 13.7. 
Dy Bi a 


“ify 
WA 


= 
E 


& 


Ma 
Hee 


alae 
tL 
iE 


So 
x 
abs 


; 

g 

| | 
vo 


i 
Lass 


Nags 
. 
FE 
— 
Pe 
PRESS 


5 

<a 

oe 
HL 
aa 
id 
a0 


Laeal ae 


Fic. 5 


226 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


converter will undoubtedly have transformers in series with it. 
The reactance of these transformers will assist in keeping back 
the circulating currents of higher harmonics. However, con- 
sidering that the third-harmonic current reduces to a possible 
50 per cent., it still remains a volume too large for the operating 
engineer to tolerate. 

The above figures apply only to the behavior of one of these 
converters when connected to a relatively large system, where 
the electromotive force wave-form of the system is not per- 
ceptibly affected by the circulating currents of higher frequencies. 
Where the system wave-form is so affected, the circulating cur- 
rents will be reduced in proportion to the modification of the 
generated wave-form. At the same time, however, other 
difficulties will be introduced, because in this latter case the 
wave-form of the system is largely at the mercy of the operator 
in charge of the split-pole converters in question. Assume a 
case, for instance, where one-half the load of a generating sys- 
tem consists of a bank of these split-pole converters, and the 
other half a bank of ordinary converters. The acjustments of 
direct voltage on the split-pole converters will, as indicated 
in the foregoing analysis, change the wave-form of the system. 
This, in turn, will cause circulating currents in the ordinary con- 
verters that will change their wave-form and, as a result, their 
alternating-current—direct-current ratio. We find, consequently, 
that the alternating-current—direct-current ratio not only of 
the split-pole converters on such a system is subject to modifica- 
tion, but also all the other converters as well. Usually such a 
condition of affairs would be found to be intolerable. 

Power-factor. Mr. Stone says that the power-factor of these 
split-pole converters can be held at unity throughout the entire 
range of direct voltage. Before we can accept Mr. Stone’s 
statement, a further explanation of exactly what he means is 
necessary. If Mr. Stone intends to convey the idea that the 
field of the converter can be so adujsted that the current of 
fundamental frequency is in phase with the electromotive force 
of fundamental frequency, the statement can be accepted. If, 
however, he means to convey the impression that the ratio of 
kilowatts input to kilovolt-ampere input can be held at unity, 
then the statement is debatable. A power-factor meter indi- 
cates the phase relation of the current of fundamental frequency 
to the voltage of fundamental frequency; if currents of higher 
frequencies and large volume are flowing, a power-factor of unity, 
as indicated by a power-factor meter, does not at all mean that 
the volt-amperes are equal to the watts. It seems probable 
that Mr. Stone is basing his statements upon observations of 
power-factor meters when used in connection with split-pole 
converters. The above analysis shows that it is impossible to 
keep the volt-amperes and the watts equal in any case where 
currents of more than one frequency are flowing. When a 
given alternating-current-—direct-current ratio is t> be obtained 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 227 


it is impossible to adjust the field strengths of one of these con- 
verters so as to eliminate these currents of higher frequencies. 
It is, therefore, manifestly impossible to adjust the fields so as 
to make unity power-factor throughout the entire range. 

Capacities and costs. When considering the capacity that 
can be obtained from a given amount of material made up into 
one of these split-pole synchronous converters, we find that for 
equaloutputs the amount of material for the split-pole is largely 
increased over what it would be ordinarily. Reference to the 
various series of curves that have been shown indicates that 
the field strengths in these converters at the maximum point 
vary all the way from 10 per cent. to 15 per cent. above that at the 
minimum point. to more than double that at the minimum point. 
Since the iron of the armature of the converter is capable 
of being worked only to a certain maximum magnetic density, it 
follows that the amount of iron in the armature must be in- 
creased with a split-pole converter in approximately the ratio 
of. the minimum field to the maximum field. Reference to the 
series of curves shows that the ratios of minimum to maximum 
field in the three-part pole converters is very large, so large in fact 
that a converter built on this principle will require so much 
additional material as to make it an uncommercial machine. 
The same criticism does not apply to the two-part pole; in that 
case the ratio of minimum field to maximum field.is roughly 
the ratio of normal direct voltage to maximum or minimum; 
in other words, if 10 per cent. machine range is required, the 
amount of material in the armature need be increased approx- 
imately only 10 per cent. over what it would be with an ordin- 
ary converter. This comparison is pointed out in order to 
show that a commercial machine can be made only when the 
two-part pole converter is considered. 

The original Woodbridge scheme of using three parts makes 
so great an increase in size and cost of the resulting machine 
as to put it practically out of the question. , 

Efficiency. Considering the relative efficiencies of the split- 
pole converter and the ordinary type, we find that the split- 
pole converter increases considerably every item of loss that 
enters into efficiency. The field loss evidently must be con- 
siderably increased because: first, there are two parts to every 
pole to be excited; secondly, because the exciting tendencies 
of the higher harmonic frequency currents must be overcome 
by exciting energy put into the fields. 

The iron-loss is also materially increased, particularly at the 
lower direct-current limits when considering the two-part-pole 
converter. Reference to the curves indicates that the frequency 
of reversals in magnetism are twice as great when obtaining 
a minimum direct voltage as they are with a converter of nor- 
mal type. This means, naturally, an iron-loss increase in about 


the same proportion, 


228 


GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS 


Piel aks 
HL 


atleast med a 
apes 
bedbedhediny acs 
SERVE e EES 
ttt tL pei . 


[Feb. 14 


1908] 


N 


EZid 2 A nS 
PAS Le Tape he 
ee me hated ctl Pk 

OC Sa ez 
Poe Newer 


230 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


On account of circulating currents of higher frequencies, the 
armature copper-loss is also increased above what it would be 
with a converter of normal type. The amount of increase of 
this armature copper-loss depends, as pointed out in previous 
paregraphs, upon the relative size of the converter, and the 
system to which it is connected, as well as upon the amount of 
deviation of converter wave from the generator wave. A num- 
ber of calculations of actual cases have determined that the 
efficiency of these split-pole converters is as low as—in most 
cases lower than—the efficiency of the combined converter and 
separate booster which Mr. Stone describes in another para- 
graph. 

Commutation. As mentioned in a previous paragraph, the 
operation of the two-part-pole converter at the lower range of 
direct voltages gives a result somewhat similar to shifting the 
brushes backward or forward into the active field. The main 
difference is that a notch of any desired width can be made in 
the pole opposite the point where the brush rests upon the com- 
mutator. When the smaller pole-horn is excited in the same 
direction as the main pole, the field at the point where the brush 
rests upon the commutator will be very close to zero. When, 
however, the small pole-horn is excited in a direction the reverse 
of the main pole-horn, the excitation of the small horn is then 
in the same direction as the pole just the other side of the ad- 
jacent direct-current brush. Necessarily the field at the point 
where the brush rests upon the commutator will change ma- 
terially, depending upon whether this small pole-horn is excited 
in the one direction or in the other. There is no question but 
that commutation can be properly carried out, even with this 
variation of field strength at the point where the brush rests 
upon the commutator. ~ It will, however, require a machine 
which has considerably better inherent commutating charac- 
teristics than would be the case were a converter of the ordinary 
type used. 

Resonance. In the ordinary system, circulating currents of 
the higher harmonics tend to efface themselves. With the split- 
pole converter, however, under minimum direct-voltage con- 
ditions these higher harmonics are apt to be pushed to a point 
where the currents resulting from them become a very consider- 
able portion of the total current flowing. A system which con- 
tains cables always has present the possibility of there being 
set up a condition in which resonance will take place. In the 
past, very little trouble has been experienced with resonance, for 
the reason, as stated above, that the higher harmonics rapidly 
tend to eliminate themselves. If, however, split-pole con- 
verters are used upon systems where underground cables are 
used to any great extent, | would not be at all surprised to find 
the resonance becoming of very considerable importance. In 
changing one of these split-pole converters from its minimum 
direct voltage to its maximum, harmonics of almost limitless 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 231 


frequencies will be set up, and their amplitudes will be con- 
stantly caused to decrease and diminish. If, therefore, there is 
any tendency for resonance to occur anywhere in the system, the 
presence of one of these converters would undoubtedly search 
it out and supply the proper frequency of electromotive force 
to make it become active. Systems, therefore, which have any 
great amount of underground cable should carefully investigate 
the possibility of such a condition arising, before deciding to 
adopt machines of this character. 

The alternative which Mr. Stone describes; namely, a con- 
verter upon which a separate machine is mounted, having the 
same number of poles as the converter, has, in my opinion de’ 
cided advantages over this split-pole converter, for the follow- 
ing reasons: 

1. Its wave-form remains constant and fixed, since the added 
voltage is of fundamental frequency, whereas the split-pole con- 
verter is apt to set up harmonics of almost any possible fre- 
quency and of amplitudes which may easily circulate currents up 
to full-load values. 

2. The power-factor of the booster converter can be held at 
unity throughout its entire range of direct voltage, whereas the 
split-pole converter cannot. 

3. The efficiency of the booster converter is not less, but in 
most cases considerably more than the split-pole converter. 

4. The commutating conditions of the booster converter 
remain fixed throughout its entire range of direct voltage, whereas 
in the split-pole converter, careful attention must be given to 
the point of commutation on account of the changeableness of 
the field at the point where the brush rests upon the commutator. 

5. The cost of the split-pole converter are greater than an 
equivalent capacity of simple converter, and probably as great 
as the combined cost of simple converter and booster. 

6. The booster converter introduces no higher harmonic 
voltages into the system and consequently the danger of 
resonance is no greater than it has been in the past. The 
same cannot be said of the split-pole converter. 

7. All parts entering into its construction are standard. It 
is simply an assembly of well-known and thoroughly tried out 
machines of standard design. 

F. G. Clark: The paper presented by Mr. Waters advances 
the conclusion that certain advantages possessed by non-syn- 
chronous generators are sufficient to warrant their installation 
in new plants in place of synchronous generators; in present 
plants where new units are required; in 25-cycle gas-engine in- 
stallations, and for use with synchronous converters in place of 
large slow-speed, direct-current generators. This proposition 
is sufficiently radical to call for careful consideration by any 
one interested in power plant work. 

Speaking from the standpoint of an operating engineer, I 
must confess to the belief that the author in his enthusiasm over 


239 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


advantages, some of which must be admitted as important, 
neglects to consider certain disadvantages which preclude the 
use of the non-synchronous generator in large power stations 
where synchronous generators are now installed. The ad- 
vantages appear to be. 

1. Excellent mechanical construction. This probably relates 
to the generator, and as the stator differs but little we must pass 
to the rotor which is described as advantage No. 2. 

2. Absence of direct-current rotating fieids. ‘There can be no 
question but that this is a distinct advantage. The only reserva- 
tion is the possibility of trouble due to a small air-gap on a large 
machine. 

3. Absence of direct-current excitation. As we have already 
discussed the rotor, this can apply only to a comparison of the 
exciting apparatus required in each case. The claim that the 
excitation of a non-synchronous generator can be controlled 
from a distant sub-station does not appeal to me as practical. 
There are a few possible happenings between a sub-station and 
a power station which would cause either voltage-rises or in- 
terruptions chargeable to such operation. I believe it safe to 
say that the synchronous converter with its starting direct- 
current, engine-driven generator must be located at the power 
station. 

4. Facility for control of load by motor control of steam governor. 
The synchronous generator can be similarly controlled and no 
advantage obtains. 

5. Unequal distribution of load between generators does not 
produce cross-current. The unequal distribution of load between 
synchronous turbo-generators produces a flow of magnetizing 
current where there is a difference in excitation, and a division 
of current where there is a common neutral bus-bar. There is 
no hunting and no-undue heating, therefore no practical ad- 
vantage obtains. 

6. General simplicity and flexibility of operation. The sim- 
plicity of the rotor has been acknowledged and cannot be in- 
cluded here. The field rheostat and the synchronizing arrange- 
ments of the synchronous generator are not required, but a 
reactive coil and a governor control are requisites. No practical 
advantage obtains. 

7. Requires less excitation than synchronous generators. Under 
certain favorable conditions on a large system the total power 
for excitation will be considerably less for non-synchronous 
generators. When, however, the difference in economy due to 
the compensating requirements, and the operation of very large 
units on very light loads is taken account of, the advantage of 
the non-synchronous generator will not be great, or will disap- 
pear. 

8. High efficiency. This is not an advantage unless it be 
relatively to a lower efficiency in other types of generators. 
The author admits that there must be high speed, low fre- 


—-- 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 233 


quency, and low voltage or the non-synchronous will not com- 
pare favorably with the synchronous generator. This limits the 
comparison and eliminates the advantage of efficiency except 
in certain particular cases. 

9. Beneficial characteristics relatively to resonance, and. short- 
crcuits. It is claimed that the non-synchronous generator 
possesses the proper characteristics to prevent, or rather lacks 
those characteristics of the synchronous generator which pro- 
mote, high-power surges, resonance, and other electrostatic 
phenomena. The author assumes that resonance and other 
electrostatic effects are produced either by short-circuits or 
faulty sine waves, and that the non-synchronous generator 
avoids these effects by depriving short-circuits of their. high 
power, and by giving forth only sine waves. 

While admitting that these are decided advantages when 
compared with a majority of large installations, I do not believe 
that generators are ever the primary cause of electrostatic 
troubles outside of the station. Good line and cable construction, 
effective lightning protection, the grounded neutral, and auto- 
matic relays tend to lessen the primary causes and curtail the 
disastrous effects of insulation breakdowns. High-power short- 
circuits require a time-element to produce disastrous results. 
If the excitation of the alternator can be cut down propor- 
tionately to the speed with which the load approaches short- 
circuit conditions, and also if this action can be accelerated so 
that a short-circuit will develop in less than a second, we have 
accomplished just what Mr. Waters claims for the non-syn- 
chronous generator. This is accomplished at the Pennsylvania 
power station by using an induction motor-generator for excita- 
tion, and a Tirrill regulator for holding up the voltage. The 
characteristics of a combination including an induction-motor- 
driven exciter with series and shunt field, the latter controlled 
by the main generator voltage, are suitable for maintaining 
operation under all conditions except those due to short-circuits. 
When a short-circuit occurs, the field of the exciter is ‘‘ boosted ”’ 
in an endeavor to hold up the generator voltage. This accel- 
erates the approach to short-circuit conditions, and produces a 
practically instantaneous interruption, by automatically “ kill- 
ing ’’ the excitation. This scheme was adopted upon the assump- 
tion that the interruptions in railway service were of less moment 
than the troubles consequent upon an endeavor to hold up the 
excitation at all hazards. In this particular case, therefore. 
the non-synchronous generator does not possess an advantage. 

10. Overload capacity. The overload capacity of five times 
normal full load is an advantage if we have: first, the turbine to 
carry this load; and, secondly, sufficient steam to drive the tur- 
bine at the higher load and higher water rate. The average 
synchronous turbo-generator is good for two-and-one-half to 
three times full load on swings. I cannot recall in my experience 
any case where the overload capacity of the non-synchronous 


234 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


generator would have any advantage over synchronous turbo- 
generators. 

11. Strong balancing and damping action. These character- 
istics are supposedly of berefit in parallel operation, and probably 
are intended for comparison with slow-speed synchronous 
generators. The parallel operation of synchronous turbo- 
alternators is sufficiently satisfactory for any advantages to be 
of little value. The damping action has a tendency to correct 
any irregularities of the sine waves of the system, thus pre- 
venting harmonics. This may or may not be an important ad- 
vantage; it requires more thought for a decided opinion than I 
have been able to give to the subject. 

12. Adaptability to parallel operation, particularly when the 
prime movers are gas engines. ‘This is answered, so far as syn- 
chronous turbo-alternators are concerned, in the previous state- 
ment. I have never had occasion to become sufliciently familiar 
with gas-engine practice to venture an opinion. I hope to hear 
this point discussed by others. 

13. When used with synchronous converters is superior to en- 
gine-driven, direct-current generators. This point appears to be 
well taken, and I believe here is the field of the non-synchronous 
generator. Turbine-driven direct-current generators have not 
proved very satisfactory, and it is doubtful if they will ever be 
used to any great extent. The slow-speed engine-driven sets 
are efficient for one point of load, and very uneconomical when 
the load varies through wide ranges. The non-synchronous 
generator and synchronous converter combination may show 
sufficient economy to displace engine-driven generators in some 
stations, and should generally be able to merit adoption when 
additional power is required. 

The disadvantages are: . 

1. Inability to furnish a lagging power-factor. This involves 
the use of compensating arrangements to neutralize leading 
currents. 

2. Requires a lagging current for magnetization. This involves 
a power-factor less than unity and may generally be considered 
an unimportant objection. 

3. Requires that the magnetization current be under excellent 
control. This is important where there are large overhead or 
underground distributing systems, as the electrostatic change 
due to the grounding of one leg will have an immediate effect 
upon the power-factor. 

In systems having long aerial transmission lines and rather 
high induction the synchronous converter would have to be 
considerably over-excited to produce the necessary lagging 
current for the generator. If an overload should occur, the 
supply of lagging current would increase; if the overload caused 
several circuits to open automatically, the induction would 
instantly fall to a very low value, and unless the power-factor 
control of the exciting converter were not equally active there 


A 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 235 


would be a rise in potential in the system. This rise would be 
aggravated if the exciting converter were situated at a sub- 
station. 

_In systems having large capacity in underground cables, 
either artificial induction would have to be provided or the 
generators and turbines must be very large. It is shown that 
the capacity current of the Interborough system would excite a 
10,000-kw., 11,000-volt, 25-cycle generator. This would not 
be a disadvantage if there were not periods of time when the 
load would be less than half this rate. 

I should be pleased to learn if Mr. Waters has considered the 
possibilities of single-phase non-synchronous generators, par- 
ticularly the 15-cycle type. 

The matter of installation costs has rot been gone into very 
deeply and would be one of the first things to be considered by 
a designing engineer. 

Mr. Stone describes a vertical synchronous converter which 
appears to possess a number of improvements over the older 
types. The use of a step-bearing requiring oil pressure lubrica- 
tion has been so thoroughly proved practical that we cannot 
consider it an objection. It appears to me that the greatest 
objection to this type of machine is the possibility of mechanical 
damage due to the magnetic pull of heavy armature short- 
circuits. 

The arrangements for changing the pole relations for voltage 
adjustment are valuable in railway operation where the load 
conditions change from time to time. The device would not be 
so important if the generators were non-synchronous. 

Mr. Woodbridge dwells at length on the following matters— 
six- versus three-phase converters, high versus low armature 
reaction, and compounding. 

If the efficiency and maintenance of the two types of con- 
verters are equal, or nearly so, the operating engineer cares but 
little about the fine points of phase relations. 

The value of compounding is generally a hard matter to decide. 
Mr. Woodbridge has discussed this point with commendable 
clearness. 

High armature reaction imparts to a synchronous converter 
some of the characteristics of the induction motor, and enables 
alternating-current starting; it also means lower synchronizing 
power. By lower synchronizing power I mean the inability to 
stay in synchronism with the generator when the power-factor 
is low. My experience with a system where both types of con- 
verters were used, indicates that an overload condition giving 
a drop in voltage and sufficiently low power-factor to cause 
the high armature reaction converters to drop out, would have 
no effect on the low armature reaction converters. 

I was opposed to the induction motor type of starting con- 
verters until experience proved that it was sufficient for the 
service requirements. I haveseen asmall motor start 1,500-kw 


236 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


eonverter four times in succession without trouble, and on 
the Long Island Railroad system, where the interruptions have 
at times been rather numerous owing to lightning, there has been 
absolutely no trouble with the starting motors. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: I fully agree with Mr. Woodbridge. I 
should, however, consider it still better engineering not to choose 
the unity power-factor point at half load, but at a still higher 
load, somewhere between three-quarters and full load. ‘This 
gives a condition of operation where the wattless lagging current 
at no load and light load is somewhat greater, though still 
moderate, but the power-factor at full load and overload is 
better, and the overload capacity, stability, and reliability greater. 

When this type of “ split-pole’’ converter was first brought 
to my attention, I was not very favorably impressed with it; I 
rather feared, as result of a preliminary investigation, that this 
machine would give considerable wave-shape distortions, a 
poor power-factor and poor commutation, for the same reasons 
that have been clearly explained by Mr. Lincoln. When the 
machine was built and tested I was surprised that the bad wave- 
shape distortion did not materialize. The machine gave a 
good sine wave, the power-factor was high, and the commuta- 
tion good. When machine after machine, of various sizes, 
passed through test into commercial service without showing 
any wave-shape distortion, or poor power-factor, or poor com- 
mutation, I was consoled by hearing that another engineer 
well known to you all, had also come to the same mistaken 
unfavorable conclusion regarding this type of converter, and 
from the same point of view. There is, however, no reason 
why the machine should not give a perfect sine wave, unity 
power-factor, and good commutation. 

The conclusion from this incident is, that even now it is oc- 
casionally desirable to check theoretical reasoning by experi- 
mental test, because these two do not always agree; not that 
the theoretical reasoning is wrong, but because in the premises 
on which the theoretical reasoning is based, some elements which 
are essential may not have been given the proper weight. 

I am very much interested in the induction generator, for I 
once believed I had invented it. That was about fifteen years 
ago; but I found out afterward that long before me, the prominent 
French engineer, M. Leblanc, had gone over the field thoroughly, 
experimentally as well as mathematically, and that I was some- 
what too late. Considerable work was done afterward by other 
investigators in developing this type of generator—Bradley, 
Lamme, and especially by Stanley and Kelly.. It has found 
entrance into technical literature, and performance curves of 
synchronous motors or converters operated from induction 

generators are to be found in text-books. In the Standardiza- 
tion Rules of the Institute, this machine and the methods of 
testing it have been described for ten years. There it is given 
under its usual name of induction generator. I am sorry to 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 237 


see that Mr. Waters chooses to introduce a new name for this 
well-known type of apparatus, as this practice only leads to 
confusion. In the Standardization Rules, the name “ induction 
generator” is analogous to the name “induction motor ’”’, and 
implies the excitation of the machine by induction; the name 
non-synchronous machine is rather a misnomer, since the non- 
synchronous machine is the alternating-current commutator 
motor, in which the speed has no relation to the frequency. 
This non-synchronous machine is dependent on the speed for 
its frequency; it is ‘‘near synchronous”, but should no more 
be called a non-synchronous machine, than a direct-current 
shunt motor should be called an ‘“ inconstant speed motor ”’, 
because the speed varies slightly with the load. I do not think 
it is a good idea either, to name an apparatus by what it is not. 

This induction generator has not been used to any great ex- 
tent in engineering practice, due to the limitations imposed by 
its character. It cannot operate on every kind of load, but 
requires a load of leading current, or consumes wattless lagging 
current. The proper field for its use is to supply power to syn- 
chronous apparatus, motors as well as converters. I do not 
need to go into this, because it has been so well discussed by 
Mr. Waters. 

The excitation of the induction generator is supplied by the 
wattless. current delivered by the synchronous apparatus, or 
by the cables. There are a great many advantages in the use 
of an induction generator, as discussed in the paper: its greater 
stability and lesser liability to all those ailments incident to the 
flow of practically unlimited power in the system, as may occur 
in the synchronous machine; but it must be realized thatnaturally 
there is another side to it. If the disadvantages due to the 
possibility of unlimited power are eliminated, there are also 
eliminated the advantages resulting from an unlimited power 
supply. That means the voltage regulation of a system with 
“induction generators cannot be so good as that of asynchronous 
generator system; for in the last analysis the voltage regulation 
of a system depends on the excitation of the system, on the 
direct-current supply to the fields. In the synchronous-gen- 
erator-synchronous-converter system there are, as fixed voltage 
points, the generators as well as the receiving converters. In 
the induction-generator system the only fixed voltage points are 
the receiving converters, not the generators, and this cuts down 
the power of voltage regulation to one-half. The trouble of 
excessive currents is eliminated, but the regulation is some- 
what impaired. The use of the wattless charging current of 
underground cables to help out excitation is an assistance, but 
at the same time is connected with some serious dangers, because 
the cables are of constant capacity, and the current taken by 
them, therefore, is proportional to the voltage. In an induction 
generator the voltage is proportional to the wattless current 
received by it, so the machine is liable to build up on its own 


238 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


voltage, just as a direct-current shunt generator below satura- 
tion is liable to do. That is, the more excitation is derived from 
constant capacity, as in underground cables, and the less from 
synchronous machines, the more fluctuating and unsatisfactory 
is the voltage regulation of the system. In developing such a 
system of induction generator operation, there are undoubtedly 
a number of features and problems which will have to be solved, 
and which are not always anticipated. For instance, since the 
voltage depends on the amount of leading current fed into the 
system, any connecting or disconnecting of synchronous or induc- 
tion generators, changes the voltage of the system by eliminating 
the need for so much exciting current, and any converter change, 
disconnection or connection, changes the voltage of the system. 
The voltage regulation of the system is taken away from the 
generating station and located in the converter sub-stations. 
The latter may be, as pointed out by Mr. Waters, a rather 
serious feature with a generating station designed for complete 
voltage control. Such difficulties would be reduced where in- 
duction generators are used together with synchronous gen- 
erators in the generating station. 

As to the use of induction generators in a general system of 
distribution for light and power, probably at 60 cycles, the 
case stands very much less favorably for the induction gen- 
erator, due to the large size of its synchronous exciters, for, 
after all, the synchronous machine must be considered as the 
exciter of the induction generator, and not the small commu- 
tating machine which excites the synchronous machine. There- 
fore, if the excitation is not given by the load, in using synchron- 
ous receiving apparatus, the exciter is rather a big synchronous 
machine. With high-speed generators of low frequency the 
exciting current required may be as low as 10 per cent. At 
lower speeds and higher frequencies it is probably nearer 30 
per cent. Even if it is only 10 per cent., in addition thereto 
the synchronous exciting machine must also supply all the lagging 
currents consumed by the system of distribution. A system of 
distribution for light and power at 90 per cent. power-factor, 
is possibly above the average. 90 per cent. power factor means 
44 per cent. inductance factor, and adding thereto 10 per cent. 
magnetizing current of the induction generator brings the total 
amount of exciting current up to 54 per cent.; that is, a syn- 
chronous machine used as an exciter of the induction generator 
would be more than half the size of it, rather a large size. This 
precludes the use of induction machines of the type as described 
by Mr. Waters for most cases of operating a general system. 

In this direction, a very great advance has been made by 
Messrs. Stanley and Kelly, and was reported and fully discussed 
in a paper presented by them a few years ago before the Institute. 
The induction generator has two circuits, the high-frequency 
circuit supplying power to the outside, and the low-frequency 
circuit. Instead of applying the magnetizing current to the 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 239 


Stator, as the high-frequency member, Stanley applies the 
magnetizing current to the low-frequency member of the in- 
duction generator; and as the volt-amperes required for excita- 
tion of the alternating field are proportional to the frequency, 
by exciting the induction generator, not from the high-fre- 
quency stator, but from the low-frequency rotor, Stanley cuts 
down the exciting volt-amperes from 50 per cent. of the generator 
capacity to one or two per cent. This requires, then, an alter- 
nating-current low-frequency exciter operating at one or two 
per cent. of the induction generator capacity, a practical ma- 
chine. In this way, the great objection to the induction gen- 
erator, of requiring a large synchronous exciter, can be elimi- 
nated. The exciter may be a synchronous machine or an alter- 
nating current-commutating machine—at such a low frequency 
as one cycle, or a fraction of a cycle per second, a commutating 
machine operates very satisfactorily with an alternating field— 
or an effective capacity as the electrolytic cell, may be used to 
supply the leading exciting current to the rotor. The interest- 
ing self-compounding features of this Stanley induction gen- 
erator are discussed in that paper.* This method of excitation 
naturally also imposes certain limitations; it means that the 
rotor is less simple because currents have to be fed into it from 
outside sources; it means probably collector rings or direct con- 
nection to a generator of low frequency. 

There are some very interesting features of the induction 
generator which have not been mentioned in Mr. Waters’ paper; 
one is that the induction generator does not require a syn- 
chronous machine for excitation, but can also be excited by 
capacity, as the capacity of a cable or an electrolytic cell. The 
induction generator, then, assumes a characteristic very closely 
similar to that of the direct-current shunt generator; that is, 
as the amperes consumed by a constant capacity are propor- 
tional to the voltage, and the voltage of the induction generator 
is proportional to the amperes excitation—if the capacity is 
too low, the induction generator does not excite, does not ener- 
gize; if the capacity is sufficiently high, it energizes and the 
voltage builds up until it passes beyond the bend of the satura- 
tion curve and there the machine becomes stable and is a self- 
exciting alternating-current generator having the same charac- 
teristics as the direct current-shunt generator. It shows indeed 
a very close analogy thereto. The farther beyond the bend of 
the saturation curve, the more stable the machine becomes. On 
heavy overloads, especially of lagging current, the induction 
generator is always liable to lose its excitation; that is, to lose 
its voltage, just like a direct-current shunt machine, while the 
synchronous machine will hold up. This may be an advantage, 


or it may be a disadvantage. 
There is, however, one field to which I believe the induction 


* Alternating Current Machinery—Induction Alternators, Transac- 
tions, A. I. E. E., 1905, Vol. XXIV, p. 851. 


240 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS jFeb. 14 


generator is preeminently suited, and that is where water 
powers are operated in farallel with steam power. In those 
numerous cases where a water power of limited size is available, 
and the balance of power beyond that given by the water wheels 
is supplied by a steam plant, the problem is to take all the load 
possible from the water power and supply the only deficiency 
by the steam power. In this case a synchronous machine would 
be used on the steam engine operating at constant speed, while 
the induction generator connected to the water wheel would 
operate without governor on the water wheel—except an excess- 
speed cut-out. In that case the induction generator speeds up 
above synchronism until it consumes all the power given by 
the water, little or much, depending on the conditions. All 
the power which the water can give is thus supplied to the sys- 
tem; the steam engine supplies the rest. This is a case of parallel 
operation where a division of load is not desired, but it is desired 
to take all the available power from one plant, and the rest from 
the other. To this case the induction generator is eminently 
suited. 

There is still another field, far broader than anything touched 
so far, in which the induction generator only can be used and 
the synchronous generator is out of competition—n the use of an 
aggregation of small water powers. 

There is an enormous amount of power now going to waste; 
scattered in small creeks and rivers and brooks. There will 
come a time when the large water powers are developed and used 
and the problem of gathering the power of all these small streams 
and creeks will have to be approached and mastered. Only the © 
induction generator can solve the problem. Consider, for in- 
stance, one of the numerous little creeks of the New England 
states, with a limited amount of water, a fall probably of from 
200 to 2000 ft. within 5 to 20 miles. Hydraulic development 
on present lines there would be out of the question; to bank up 
the creeks, to gather considerable head, and to carry the whole 
pressure in a pipe-line several miles long would be so expensive 
as to be impracticable. But there would be a considerable 
amount of power, if, instead of one of these creeks, there could 
be combined the power of dozens or hundreds of them. While 
it would not be economical to develop a single small power, yet 
where numerous small water powers can be combined it is a 
practical problem which will have to be solved. The way to 
solve it, I think, is by building small stone dams across the 
creeks, just high enough to get a supply head of a few feet, to 
feed into a pipe of a few hundred feet long—ordinary water 
pipe—and thereby gather a head of some 50 or 100 ft. The 
water discharges from the pipe against some simple form of 
hydraulic turbine, and the induction generator is directly con- 
nected mechanically to the turbine, and directly connected elec- 
trically to the low-tension side of a step-up transformer. The 
high-tension side of the step-up transformer. connects to a 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 241 


transmission line leading along the creek. A number of such 
small generating stations, which would be simple and cost but 
little, could be strung along the creek or river, all feeding into 
the same collecting line. A number of such collecting lines from 
different creeks could join together in a center of collection. 
In this manner the total power of all of these streams and crecks 
could be carried into one central collecting station. The power 
thus generated and gathered could be distributed to the con- 
sumers. 

In this field the induction generator is the only feasible type 
of apparatus. In such a system each station must require no 
attention whatever beyond a systematic inspection, and must 
be of the simplest possible character. This excludes synchron- 
ous machines with their exciters, switchboards, turbine gov- 
ernors, etc. With a direct-connected low-voltage induction 
generator, the turbine would run without governor, ‘absorbing 
whatever power is available, and speeding up until the induction 
generator slips above synchronism sufficiently to transfer the 
power to the collecting line as electric current, or, if the line 
should be idle, broken or so, speeding up to the free running 
speed, 60 to 70 per cent. above normal. Even the lubrication 
of the bearings may be by water. The only safety devices 
would be fuses to cut off the station in case of an accident, which 
is rather improbable with low-voltage induction machines. 

Comfort A. Adams: Although Mr. Waters’ enthusiasm. has 
induced a somewhat optimistic point of view, there are certainly 
many instances where the induction generator is decidedly 
superior to the synchronous generator. One argument made 
in this connection by Mr. Steinmetz may leave a somewhat 
erroneous impression. He cited the case of a lagging lcad with 
a 90 per cent. power-factor, where the synchronous exciter 
would be obliged to supply not only the 10 per cent. exciting 
current for the induction generator, but also the 43.6 per cent. 
lagging quadrature current of the load, making necessary an 
exciter capacity of 53.6 per cent. This sounds like a very bad 
case for the induction generator; but Mr. Steinmetz failed to 
state that in the case of this same 90 per cent. power-factor load 
supplied by a synchronous alternator, the latter would be 
obliged to supply the 43.6 per cent. quadrature current, and 
that therefore the combined capacity of the induction generator 
and its synchronous exciter would exceed that of the synchronous 
alternator by only 10.per cent., the amouut of the exciting cur- 
rent of the induction generator. 

_ Concerning that. very interesting and puzzling machine, the 
split-pole converter, I cannot but believe that when we 
know all the facts as to its construction and operation, the 
apparent gap between the results of theoretical analysis and 
those of experiment will be reduced to inconsiderable dimensions. 
Two or three factors which play some part in this explanation 
have already presented themselves, and will be expanded at a 


242 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


later date, when more information regarding the details of the 
machine in question is at hand. 

One suggestion, however, may be made now, namely, that 
with a delta connection for the three-phase, or a double delta fot 
the six-phase converter, the third and ninth harmonics disappear, 
which would considerably reduce the sine deviations found by 
Mr. Lincoln for the diametral connection. 

J. R. Bibbins: Aside from the purely scientific interest sur- 
rounding the theory and application of the non-synchronous 
generator, Mr. Waters’ paper is most interesting, embodying 
as it does the design and experience of a concrete case, which 
many of us have followed with interest since its installation 
several years ago. Personally, I am particularly interested in 
this type of generator from the standpoint of prime-mover 
design, and Mr. Waters has presented two developments which 
involved a number of important points. His treatment of the 
subject makes it reasonably clear that the flexible speed-charac- 
teristics of the non-synchronous generator, renders it particularly 
well adapted to direct connection to prime movers in which 
cyclic or angular variation of speed is permissible within un- 
usually wide ranges, as in present synchronous generator prac- 
tice. This feature would, of course, have no bearing upon tur- 
bine practice, in which angular variation is absent, but might 
be taken advantage of in utilizing simple forms of reciprocating 
engines, such as single-cyclinder steam or gas engines. 

But in his remarks concerning the modern double-acting gas 
engine, I believe Mr. Waters’ enthusiasm has led him to give 
an erroneous impression in regard to the possibilities of this 
type. To obtain the same degree of satisfaction, there does 
not exist such an ernomous difference between gas and steam 
practice, either in the matter of flywheels or dampers, as his 
remarks would indicate. Even if so, the matter of fly-wheels 
would not seem to be such a serious one, inasmuch as the cost- 
factor of the iron that enters into fly-wheel construction is 
barely 30 per cent. of the cost of the finished product in the 
other parts of the engine. And inasmuch as windage loss is 
largely occasioned by fly-wheel arms, the increase in loss due to 
an increased weight of rim would scarcely be noticeable, nor the 
increase in bearing friction due to the increased weight of rim. 
It seems probable, therefore, that the 3 to 5 per cent. loss due 
to friction and damper work ascribed to the gas-engine-driven 
unit would not apply to a properly designed machine of the 
tandem or twin-tandem type. 

Philip Torchio: Three years ago a New York lighting com- 
pany was short of 60-cycle generating capacity, and contracted 
with a manufacturer for the purchase of a 2000-h.p. non-syn- 
chronous generator to be coupled to a 25-cycle motor, for 
use as a frequency-changer. The reason of this departure 
was on account of the manufacturer having the frames of the 
machines, and the company requiring quick delivery. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 243 


On account, however, of the impracticability of making the 
necessary changes in the short space of time available, the pro- 
position was dropped and I am _ therefore unable to give 
to-night the actual experience with a non-synchronous gen- 
erator in connection with a large system. 

I endorse what has been said regarding the use of non-syn- 
chronous machines in large power stations where the field 
does not seem to be very promising. I want to call special 
attention to the figures given by Mr. Waters, where he states 
that the whole system of 200 miles of high-tension feeders 
of the New York Edison Company, capable of supplying 150,000 
kw., would only supply magnetizing current for a 2000-kw. 
generator, or less than two per cent. of the station generating 
capacity. 

Regarding the point Mr. Waters makes about the non-syn- 
chronous generator reducing surges, I would qualify its prac- 
tical importance. On an underground system, as of course 
in any system there are surges whenever the load suddenly 
changes, while the circuit is closed these surges are not so large 
as in the case when the circuit is abruptly opened. If the cir- 
cuit is opened at the instant large currents are flowing, then all 
the energy stored in the inductance of the circuit oscillates at 
the period of the circuit between electrostatic energy and 
electromagnetic energy, and one can figure out that if there were 
no damping effects due to the resistance of the copper, disas- 
trous voltages might result. As a matter of fact we do not 
get them, because the oil circuit-breakers open the current at 
zero or near zero value. I do not see how the conditions would 
be bettered with induction generators. 

Mr. Stone says that to prevent hunting the squirrel-cage 
coil in the pole tips is the proper thing to use, in which I agree. 
However, from experience with large systems as operated in 
New York, it has been found that the ordinary copper grid on 
the pole pieces has given exactly the same results as the short- 
circuited coils buried in the iron of the pole tips. 

I think it might be well to put on record the whole year effi- 
ciency of a large system operating over 100,000 kw. of syn- 
chronous converters. Including all the losses from the gen- 
erating station to the low-tension bus-bars of the sub-stations; 
namely, the losses in transmission lines, static: transformers, 
induction regulators, converters, and all connections—the 
whole-year efficiency ranges between 90 and 91 per cent. That 
efficiency has been obtained for several years. 

J. B. Taylor: Mr. Clark has well expressed my ideas of Mr. 
Waters’ paper on the induction generator. I concede to this 
generator two advantages: better mechanical construction, and 
less destructive effects on short-circuits. The other points men- 
tioned seem to be rather in the nature of disadvantages than 
advantages. The matter of excitation has been already well 
taken up, and a point I want to dwell on is the fact that the 


244 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


claimed simplicity in the generating station has been obtained 
entirely at the expense of the sub-station. The sub-station 
must be ready to start up converters and excite the generators 
whenever necessary. Just how they would tell when it 1s 
necessary, I do not know. It would probably be a matter 
of establishing telephone communication, and getting the con- 
verters under way from storage-batteries, which, if available. 
have been installed in order to carry the load in times of emer- 
gency. These would, therefore, not be in the best condition 
for carrying the extra load of inverted converters. Then the 
generating station would have to determine, and bring the 
generators to, the speed of the converter. If the converters 
are thrown on to a lagging load, everything may speed up 
to a dangerous point, since lagging load, as we all know, weakens 
the field. In other words, there would be a great range between 
the low speed when connected to cables with leading currents, 
and high speed when connected to generators with lagging 
currents. 

As more converters are brought to the speed of the system 
and connected in, more generators can also be connected in. 
After a time, depending on intercommunication between sta- 
tions with attendant delays and misunderstandings, all will be 
in service. 

Another point I wish to dwell on is the reference made in 
the papers and discussion to the disastrous effects of harmon- 
ics and departure from sine waves on operating systems. This 
is an old story, but at the present time I do not know of any 
case where the wave-form has been shown to be responsible 
for any case of resonance and where it has been necessary to 
take steps to change the wave shape or in any way to modify 
the constants of the system to eliminate this resonance. 

There is a story that an old fiddler was playing a violin near 
a bridge in course of erection. Resenting some personal re- 
marks made about his performance, he started to play, and, 
finding the note that resonated with some natural period of 
the bridge, he finally had the bridge shaking so that it would 
have fallen down if due apology had not been made to him. 
None of us ever saw such a performance, and never will, for 
the reason that a violin could not carry sufficient energy to 
supply the losses incidental to vibration of a bridge structure. 
Similarly, harmonics on an alternating-current system do not 
cause destructive resonance, mainly because there is insufficient 
supply of energy at the harmonic frequency to supply the ac- 
companying losses in copper and iron. If any one knows of a 
case where an irregularity in the wave-shape of a system, call 
it the third harmonic or any other harmonic, something due to 
the wave shape, of the generator, has caused trouble by res- 
onance, I shall be glad: to hear of it. 

W. L. Waters: Mr. Stone apparently advocates the use -of 
vertical shaft converters, for a number of reasons, but taking 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 245 
the data on these machines as given by him, the reasons do 
not appear to be sufficiently important for engineers to change 
their standard type. Taking the 2000-kw., 250-volt converter, 
which he describes, the horizontal type converter operates at 115 
rev. per min., while the vertical operates at 166 rev. per min. 
The weight given for the horizontal shaft machine is 186,000 lb. 
The speed has been increased about 45 per cent., while the 
weight has decreased about 30 per cent. Then again this in- 
crease in speed has only resulted in a reduction of about 15 
per cent. in the floor space. I would point out that these re- 
ductions are obtained just as easily in a more recently de- 
signed horizontal-shaft machine. This vertical type of machine 
introduces new uncertainties into the design and operation, 
this uncertainty being specially the case in regard to the ver- 
tical footstep bearing. Roller and ball bearings have been 
tried for a number of years, but have never been successful for 
heavy work; and the alternative of an oil pressure bearing 
depends on maintaining a high-pressure oil circulation. The 
standard horizontal shaft machine with oil-ring bearings has 
been in service now for a number of years and there is no doubt 
about its operation. By the adoption of the vertical type of 
converter, we are merely introducing extra complication and risks 
and are gaining practically nothing. 
Referring to Mr. Stone’s remark on voltage regulation, he de- 
scribes the method which makes use of a rotating armature 
alternating-current booster mounted on the shaft between the 
main armature and the collector rings, and permanently con- 
nected in series with the converter collector ring leads. In 
‘reference to this, Mr. Stone says that this development “ took 
place abroad,” and further that “‘ a few machines of this type 
have been built by one of the large manufacturing companies 
in this country.”’ In reference to these statements, I would 
like to point out that this method of voltage regulation was 
developed and patented by Mr. C. F. Scott fifteen years ago. 
and that at the present time there are 10,000 kw. of this type 
of converter running in New York City alone. The only reason 
why this method of regulation had not been adopted earlier, 
is that until recently it was considered preferable by operating 
engineers to insert induction regulators in the feeder circuits 
rather than to vary the converter voltage itself. The objections 
against this type of machine which are put forward by Mr. 
Stone are: the extra weight on the shaft, decreased ventilation, 
lesser accessibility, and increased liability to break down. 
The extra weight on the shaft is about 15 per cent. and can 
easily be taken care of. The decreased ventilation is evidently 
unimportant, as the temperature rise on most of these ma- 
chines as actually built is about 20 degrees on full load. 
The question of accessibility is unimportant except in the case 
of repairs 07 cleaning out the machine. 
“In regard to repairs, Mr, Stone states that “ any serious 


246 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


trouble with this smaller machine results in the dismantling of 
the main synchronous converter in order to repair the small 
booster’. If Mr. Stone expects ‘‘.serious trouble’ with this 
booster wound for 15 volts, it would be interesting to know 
what he expects to happen to the converter itself which is 
wound for twenty times this voltage. He proposes as a prefer- 
able arrangement that an overhung revolving field booster be 
supplied. This would mean extra collector rings and extra 
complication in regard to cables and increased floor space, and 
in addition we would have a revolving field wound for 125 and 
240 volts instead of a revolving armature wound for 15 volts. 
Referring again to the question of floor space, I would point 
out that as the distance between bearing centers in a hori- 
zontal shaft converter is to a great extent decided by questions 
of mechanical stability, there is practically always space enough 
between the armature and collector rings to insert a revolving 
armature booster. In any case, the extra length along the 
shaft necessary to take care of such a booster would not ex- 
ceed 10 in. or 12 in., while the extra length required for a re- 
volving field booster would probably be 2 ft. to 2 ft. 6 in. 

The question of six-phase versus three-phase is. en- 
tirely a manufacturing rather than an operating engineer’s 
question. It is to be decided by which is the cheaper machine 
in any individual case. The great advantage of a six-phase 
converter is, as Mr. Woodbridge has pointed out, that it saves 
armature copper. There has been a tendency on the part of 
some manufacturers to pay more attention to theoretical 
considerations than to operating conditions when deciding the 
amount of copper to be put on the armature of the converter. 
It was often decided because the total armature copper loss in 
the six-phase converter was only one-quarter of that of the corre- 
sponding direct-current generator, that it was advisable to 
reduce considerably the section of copper in order to reduce 
the cost. This method of designing was finally stopped by the 
operating engineers themselves, who refused to take converters 
with such small sections of copper, having found by experience 
that theoretical considerations were not always verified in 
practice. At the present time it has been shown that the only 
way to design converters for heavy service is to allow ample 
copper on the armature, and that it is advisable to design the 
machine irrespective of whether it is to operate three-phase or 
six-phase. Further, the question of using the extra three col- 
lector rings as balancing rings for the armature is again a manu- 
facturer’s question. If we want more balancing rings on a 
converter, they can be put on without regard to the collector 
rings. And in a large number of cases the extra three col- 
lector rings and cables are merely an unnecessary complication, 
this being especially the case in 60-cycle converters where the 
section of armature copper is decided by mechanical reasonss 
and where the current density is very low. Mr. Woodbridge’, 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 247 


statement, “ but in any event a three-phase machine may be 
safely increased in rating some 40 or 50 per cent. . . . by 
the addition of three more collector rings” hardly needs criti- 
cism, aS any engineer who has designed or operated modern 
converters knows that it is not the heating of the armature 
but the sparking or flashing at the commutator that decides the 
rating of a converter, and these are not influenced by change 
from three-phase to six-phase. 

Taking the question of starting converters, the method ad- 
vocated by Mr. Woodbridge which is direct application of alter- 
nating current to the armature windings through the collector 
rings, can only be applied satisfactorily on machines with 
either no dampers on the pole faces or else with only 
very light dampers. The reason for this being that with heavy 
dampers there is flashing at the commutator when starting. 
If we are willing to endure hunting of the converter on light 
loads or on certain conditions of the circuit, then we can run 
with light dampers and start up in this way. In any case, 
however, this method is not a good one from the operating 
engineer’s point of view. Taking Mr. Woodbridge’s own fig- 
ures, it takes from two-thirds to three-fourths the normal 
rated kilovolt-amperes to start the converter in this way. The 
power-factor of this current will be about 20 per cent. If we 
have an induction motor for starting the converter, this motor 
will take about 30 per cent. of the full rated kilovolt-amperes 
of the converter when starting, and this current will have a 
power-factor of about 80 per cent. Thus with a starting motor 
we take wattless kilovolt-amperes equal to 18 per cent. of the 
normal rated kilovolt-amperes of the converter, while starting 
directly from the alternating-current side of the converter 
armature we take wattless kilovolt-amperes equal to -70 per 
cent. of the normal kilovolt-amperes; that is, starting as advo- 
cated by Mr. Woodbridge takes four times the wattless kilo- 
volt-amperes which would be required with a starting motor. 
The watt kilovolt-amperes taken from the system is unimpor- 
tant in either case, because it is always the wattless amperes 
which upset the regulation of a system. These figures show 
us at once, why, if a large converter system is shut down, it 
takes so long to get the system started again when we try to 
start the converters from the alternating-current side. Mr. 
Woodbridge states that the converters would not start up 
simultaneously so that the power station could carry the watt- 
less load satisfactorily. We might add to this that in certain 
cases where they have tried to start up simultaneously the 
power station has been unable to keep the voltage high enough 
to start the converters. 

The two most reliable methods of starting converters are: 

1. An induction motor wound for slightly higher synchronous 
speed than the converter and with a high resistance secondary. 
The induction motor is thrown directly on the full alternating 


248 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


voltage, and as the machines come up to speed the main alter- 
nating-current switches are closed through a resistance. This 
resistance limits the synchronizing current and enables the 
machines to get in step quietly. ‘The resistance is then short- 
circuited and the induction-motor circuit is opened. 

2. A small induction motor-generator starting set installed 
in the sub-station, this being used to start the converters from 
the direct-current side. 

These two methods, one for starting from the alternating- 
current side and the other starting from the direct-current side, 
are undoubtedly the most reliable methods of starting a con- 
verter. The method advocated by Mr. Woodbridge requires 
extra complication of cables and switches, and extra taps on 
the transformers. It will, however, usually work out that Mr. 
Woodbridge’s method is cheaper; and it is a question for the 
operating engineer to decide as to whether he prefers cheapness 
in first cost or reliability of operation. 

I think that it is pretty evident that there must be some 
distortion of wave-form when the voltage ratio of alternating 
current to direct current in a converter is varied by the split- 
pole method; the only question is to what degree the wave-form 
is distorted. Mr. Steinmetz says that a sine wave is obtained 
under all conditions of voltage ratio. I think, however, he must 
be speaking in a general way, because it is evident that a pure 
sine wave can only be obtained when the distribution of mag- 
netism also follows a sine wave which cannot possibly be the 
case under all conditions of voltage ratio in a split-pole conver- 
verter. I wouid point out that the power-factor as obtained 
on a power-factor meter would give no indication of such dis- 
tortion, as a power-factor meter does not take into account 
the higher harmonics. Possibly Mr. Steinmetz forms his opin- 
ion from oscillograph records taken from such converters, 
I would like to point out that the average commercial oscillo- 
graph is, comparatively speaking, an incorrect instrument, and 
that its record depends to a great extent on the various adjust- 
ments of the instrument. So that unless extreme precautions 
are taken by an experienced and skilful operator, I would 
rather take the calculated wave-forms than those obtained by 
an oscillograph. A very simple way to show that distortion is 
present is to measure the power-factor of the converter running 
light from the direct-current side and under different condi- 
tions of voltage ratio, such power-factor being measured by 
taking readings of volts, amperes, and watts. I think such a 
power-factor reading will show at once that very considerable 
distortion has taken piace. 

Mr. Clark’s criticisms are conservative and well taken, and 
are generally such as we would expect from experienced 
operating engineers when such a comparatively new proposition 
is put before them. He refers to the size of the air-gap on 
this type of machine, The clearance between the rotating 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 349 


and stationary part varies from } in. to + in. He refers 
to the use of non-synchronous generators for 15-cycle single- 
phase traction power generation. The non-synchronous gen- 
erator would be an especially good machine for such work, so 
long as the power-factor was not too low. Usually the power- 
factor in such a station can be kept about 85 per cent., and in 
such a case the non-synchronous generator would compare 
very well with a synchronous machine. It would behave 
considerably better than a synchronous generator on short-cir- 
cuits, and would be less liable to damage, and for such a low 
frequency could probably be designed to be quite a little cheaper. 
The wattless current would, of course, in this case have to be 
supplied by high-speed synchronous motors running light in 
the power station. Mr. Steinmetz objects to the size of the 
synchronous motor necessary to employ in order to supply the 
wattless current in a system of non-synchronous generators. 
I would point out that each case must be considered in itself, 
and in the case of the gas-engine-driven station described 
there are 3500 kw. non-synchronous generators each requiring 
a 4500-kw. synchronous motor, and yet this station proves to 
be a commercial proposition. The size of the synchronous 
motor is immaterial so long as the first cost, maintenance and 
efficiency do not prove unfavorable. 

Referring to the other non-synchronous motors mentioned by 
Mr. Steinmetz; namely, those of Stanley and Heyland, these 
were not mentioned in the paper as they were hardly consid- 
ered commercial machines. The necessity for a coil winding 
and collector rings, on the rotating part, takes away practically 
all the advantage of simplicity in construction which the non- 
synchronous generator possesses. Such machines would hardly 
be considered for American power station work. 

J. E. Woodbridge: Mr. Clark made a statement to the effect 
that as long as converters operate satisfactorily, a difference of 
a few per cent. more or less in power-factor is immaterial. This 
is true if the machines do operate satisfactorily, but a few 
per cent. difference in power-factor occasionally makes the op- 
eration quite unsatisfactory. A case has recently been reported 
where a converter smoked badly on a guaranteed overload. 
When this converter was run at unity power-factor it carried 
the same overload for a greater length of time with a tem- 
perature rise of only 30° cent. As I stated in my paper, rail- 
way converters work, as a rule, under such low load-factors, 
and are designed for such heavy overloads, that a few per cent, 
more or less in power-factor gives no trouble, but when con- 
verters are worked near their guaranteed loads the power- 
factor is relatively important. oe 

Mr. Clark also referred to the low ‘“‘synchronizing power ”’ of 
converters with a high ratio of armature to field ampere-turns 
as compared with those of a lower ratio, and spoke of machines 
with the former characteristics dropping out of step on loads 


250 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


which the other machines would carry. My experience has been 
limited to railway work where machines are normally protected 
by circuit-breakers, and I have never heard of a case of a ma- 
chine being pulled out of step by load. If the circuit-breakers 
are blocked, the alternating-current automatic protection, 
whatever it may be, unless also blocked, will operate on suff- 
cient overload, and it is impossible to state whether this auto- 
matic protection is due to the load or to falling out of step on 
the part of the converters. I believe no case of this kind can 
be substantiated, with the exception of loads so great as to 
drop the voltage to zero, that is, short-circuits. 

Mr. Waters gave a figure that I wish to dispute, namely, the 
power-factor of the starting currents of converters. With con- 
verters with narrow air-gaps, high armature reaction, low field 
densities, and with short-circuiting pole-face windings, I am 
positive that the power-factor of the starting currents is much 
higher than the 20 per cent, which he gave, although I have 
not made any direct tests on this point. For one reason, 20 
per cent. would not, as a rule, give sufficient torque to start 
the converter in all cases, allowing for no losses or any kind 
whatever. A test which I do remember, showed a starting 
current of roughly 1500 amperes in the secondary connections 
which went down to 300 amperes magnetizing current when 
the machine reached full speed and before the field was excited. 
This indicates a power-factor at the converter approaching 98 
per cent., but the magnetizing component was undoubtedly 
somewhat greater, due to the influence of the currents in the 
pole-face windings at lower speeds. I think that the power- 
factor can safely be stated to be somewhere between 70 and 80 
per cent., which compares favorably with the power-factors of 
starting induction motors. 

The input of a starting induction motor is not so greatly 
different from that of a self-starting converter with the char- 
acteristics described in the paper; for example, a 1500-kw. con- 
verter which I was watching this afternoon required 400-kw. 
for starting by means of an induction motor. 

With regard to the recommendation of Dr. Steinmetz, that 
transformer and converter voltages should be so proportioned 
that compound converters would reach unity power-factor at 
about full load, such a radical departure from existing practice 
was more than I dared to suggest. Experience indicates that 
when transformers give such a high secondary voltage as to 
meet this condition, thereby giving an abnormally high direct 
voltage at no-load unity power-factor, either the operators 
run at that voltage and are glad to get it, or run at that voltage 
and grumble at it, either of which condition is rather unsatis- 
factory. With transformer ratios designed to give unity power- 
factor at full load, with a representative amount of resistance 
and reactance in circuit, unity power-factor at no load gives 
about 10 per cent. over voltage; that is to say, a 600-volt con- 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 251 


verter would run at no-load unity power-factor at 650 to 660 
volts. To force it down to rated voltage at no load would 
require an alternating-current lagging input at no load amount- 
ing to 50 to 80 per cent. of the rated full-load current of the 
converter, according to the strength of the series field. I 
believe few operators would properly handle an equipment of 
this kind. They would simply run 5 or 10 per cent. above 
voltage. 

C. W. Stone: If all the statements just made by Mr. Lincoln 
and apparently supported by Mr. Scott were borne out by the 
facts as demonstrated by the machines which have actually 
keen built and tested, I should feel that I had made a grave 
mistake in coming before you and calling to your attention this 
new type of machine. 

It is possible to calculate results which will approximate those 
that Mr. Lincoln has also reached. However, consideration 
must be given to other conditions which are apparently over- 
looked by Mr. Lincoln. The curves shown by Mr. Lincoln are 
evidently only calculated curves, and not oscillograph curves 
taken from actual machines. I am sorry that I did not have 
time to prepare some oscillograph curves which were taken 
across the collector rings of one of these converters, working 
through an extreme range in voltage. These curves approxi- 
mate a sine wave. The higher harmonics mentioned by Mr. 
Lincoln are not apparent. 

Some question was raised about the change in excitation of 
the main fields in order to maintain minimum current input to 
the converter. As a matter of fact, the main field excitation, 
when the load is constant, varies less than 5 per cent. for the ex- 
treme ranges in voltage; that is, from the full bucking to the full 
boosting voltage obtained by exciting the auxiliary field—this 
on a machine on which was obtained a range in voltage ofap- 
proximately 175 to 350 volts, the normal being 250 volts. 

Some long-continued test-runs were made on machines of 
various sizes, and it was found that they were all within the 
heating limits usually specified, and considerably below the guar- 
antees made. 

In reference to the cost of the converter built according to 
the Woodbridge design. In designing a 2000-kw. machine, I had 
a number of different designs made up to get a comparison of 
the cost of this type of converter with a converter using an in- 
duction regulator; I was unable to find that the converter 
would cost any more than a converter with an induction regu- 
lator built for the same range in direct voltage, the range in 
voltage being from 200 to 300 volts with normal voltage of 
250 volts. 

Mr. Lincoln thinks that on account of the wave distortion 
the converter might have a serious effect on the other appar- 
atus operating on the system, and that in all probability the re- 
sults obtained in test would not be reproduced when the machines 


252 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


were connected to the operating systems. In order to verify 
my opinion, I had the machines operated from small machines, 
from large machines, and in fact from all types of machines, 
including motor-generators, engine-driven generators, turbine- 
driven generators, alone and in parallel. With the same excita- 
tions the same voltages were obtained, the curves agreeing 
exactly, irrespective of the type of apparatus or the size of the 
system on which the converter was operated. 

The first machine built for investigating the Woodbridge 
method of voltage control was made by taking a standard con- 
verter, the field spools of which were removed and replaced 
by some field spools made up of three sections each, on each 
section of which were placed the two windings in accordance 
with the Woodbridge scheme. The wisdom of the idea was 
demonstrated by the operation of this machine. The machine 
has been in commercial operation considerably for more than 
a year, and no trouble has been experienced although it has 
been operated under very adverse conditions. 

It is true that in order to obtain the necessary space for the 
extra field spools, it is necessary to increase somewhat the diam- 
eter, and consequently the weight, of the whole machine; brt 
the increase in cost of the converter due to this extra material 
will just about offset the cost of the induction regulator. I 
think I am safe in predicting that, after the idea is a little better 
known, and a little more experience has been had in the manu- 
facture of these machines, there will be stil! further reductions 
in the cost. 

Referring to the converters using the booster control system, 
I would say that I have had machines designed both with the 
revolving armatures and revolving fields. I have compared 
the cost of these machines with the cost of standard converters 
using induction regulators and converters made in accordance 
with the Woodbridge idea, and also converters made in accord- 
ance with the Burnham idea. I think that without question 
the converters built in accordance with the Burnham scheme 
will be as inexpensive as any. 

The question of which type of machine, the revolving 
armature type of booster or the revolving field type of booster, 
is the better, I shall not discuss. I think that the revolving field 
type is the better, but this is a point upon which engineers 
will necessarily disagree; and in view of the new developments 
with the Woodbridge or Burnham type of converter, I think 
this whole question will be eliminated. 

Mr. Waters says that roller bearing, used with the vertical 
type of converter is an oldidea, but nobody has been able to 
make them work satisfactorily. I might say that the type of 
bearing used in this machine has been in use at Niagara Falls for 
several years on the Niagara Falls generators, having approx- 
imately 30 per cent. more weight and operating at 50 per 
cent. higher speed. No trouble whatever has been experienced 
with them. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 253 


J. B. Taylor (by letter): The proposed system using induction 

generators relies largely on converters for excitation, which 
means that these latter machines must run at power-factors 
other than unity. These machines as ordinarily designed are 
not well adapted to run at low power-factor, the increased 
and localized heating under these low-power factors being 
ably explained in Mr. Woodbridge’s paper. 
_ Too great advantages are claimed for the ease of paralleling 
induction generators. While exact synchronism and phase 
relations are not essential for paralleling induction generators, 
it is essential to have the speed nearly correct. For example, 
if the slip to give full load is one per cent., a difference in speed 
of two per cent. when paralleling will immediately subject the 
machine to twice full load, either as a motor or as a generator, 
and devices must be provided to indicate the proper speed. 
Tachometers on the machines cannot, in general, be depended 
on to a fraction of one per cent.; even with suitable tachometers, 
these are not readily seen by the switchboard attendant, who 
is the person most interested in knowing when speed is correct. 
Devices to show synchronous speed on induction motors have 
already been devised and placed in service, but these devices 
cannot be regarded as any simpler than the usual form of syn- 
chronism indicator used with synchronous generators. The 
proposal to connect generators to line, first, through a reactive 
coil, and then cut out the reactive coil, calls for additional ap- 
paratus and switches with additional complication in manipu- 
lation; means for adjusting load by pilot motors is already a 
well worked out device for synchronous machines. 

In discussing the split-pole converter, Mr. Lincoln has shown 
a number of curves of calculated flux distribution and accom- 
panying waves of electromotive force. His general objections 
to this type of machine on the score of power-factor, wave- 
shape, and efficiency have been satisfactorily answered by 
others who have shown that ‘“‘ the best proof of the pudding 
is in the eating thereof ’’, since the terrible distortions and losses 
anticipated have not been found in actual test. Mr. Lincoln’s 
curves, I believe, were all based on a diametrical voltage, and 
do not hold for the three-phase converter or six-phase con- 
verter connected double-delta. The final effect of possible 
third-harmonic voltages or third-harmonic currents in the sys- 
tem will depend largely on combination of converter and trans- 
former connections. 

Mr. Lincoln properly points out the distinction between true 
power-factor and power-factor as indicated by certain types 
of instruments which show merely the cosine of the angle of 
lag rather than ratio of true watts to volt-ampere product. 
The case commonly referred to in bringing out this point is 
that of the alternating-current carbon arc, where current and 
voltage at the arc are in practically the same phase relation, 
with no angle of lag, and true power-factor is far from unity, 


254 GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS [Feb. 14 


on account of the fact that the two wave-shapes are not alike 
and maximum value of current does not coincide with maximum 
value of potential. It seems proper to point out here that the 
principal objection to low power-factor is the demagnetizing 
action on generators. For low power-factor due to wave- 
shapes rather than to angular displacement between current 


and electromotive force, the demagnetizing objection does not 
hold. 


A paper presented at a meeting of the Toronto 
Section of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Toronto Ont., February 20, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I. E. EB. 


ALTERNATING-CURRENT FEEDER REGULATORS 


BY W. S. MOODY 

The sensitiveness of. the incandescent lamp to changes in 
voltage, both with reference to candle-power and life of the 
lamp, demanded very early in the history of electric lighting 
a close control of the voltage on constant-potential circuits. 
With the small direct-current generators that were first used 
this was easily accomplished by the simple field adjustment 
of the generator, but when the size of the generators increased 
and several were operated in multiple, several circuits were 
usually operated from one station bus-bar. With the low voltage 
used in direct-current distribution, the feeders could not have 
a negligible drop; therefore an adjustable artificial loss, in the 
form of a rheostat, had to be inserted in each feeder and ad- 
justed according to the load. We all remember the early 
direct-current stations in which these rheostats took up almost 
as much space as the generators, and consumed enough energy 
to increase materially the cost of operating the plant. In these 
rheostats is found the first elementary feeder regulator. 

In direct-current practice, boosters, storage-batteries, and 
- other devices have long since replaced this wasteful and unsatis- 
factory method of control. I refer to such historic methods of 
feeder control only to show how early in the art there arose 
the necessity of devising some means of maintaining the desired 
potential at the center of distribution of each feeder. 

When incandescent lamps were first operated by alternating 
current supplied by high-voltage generators and transformers, 
the need of feeder regulation did not become apparent, because 
it was several years before generators of more than 100-kw. 
capacity were developed; and because attempts at multiple 

255 


256 MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS [Feb. 20 


operation of such generators were few and generally unsuccess- 
ful. For several years then it was the practice to operate only 
one feeder from each generator, the desired control of potential 
being obtained by the field of each generator. With the de- 
velopment of large alternating-current generators, and with 
improvements in their design and the design of the governors 
of their prime movers that admitted of multiple operation, there 
developed the same necessity for the control of individual 
feeders, operated from high-voltage bus-bars, as had years 
before been experienced in direct-current distributions. 

Given an approximately constant potential on the bus-bars, 
a feeder may be controlled: first, by a variable resistance in 
circuit with the feeder; secondly, by a variable reactance in 
series with the feeder; thirdly, by a variable capacity in mul- 
tiple with the feeder; fourthly, by a transformer whose primary 
is in multiple with the circuit, and whose secondary is in sev- 
eral sections, any number of which may be thrown in series 
with the feeder; and fifthly, by a transformer whose primary 
is in multiple with the feeder, and whose secondary is in series 
therewith, and which is so built as to admit of shunting the 
magnetic flux of the primary. 

The first two methods; that is, variable resistance and vari- 
able reactance, have been used to only a limited extent. The 
resistance is objectionable because of the loss of energy, and 
both forms fail in accomplishing the desired result, because 
they must make the inherent regulation of the feeder worse; 
that is, the total drop in the feeder is greater than if no such 
resistance or reactance were in series, and consequently every 
time there is a change in load, the change in voltage will be 
greater than if there were no such regulating resistance or 
reactance in circuit. While therefore with careful attention 
the desired voltage may, on the average, be more closely ob- 
tained by the use of such means of regulation, the variations 
in voltage will be increased rather than decreased. 

Regulation by the use of variable capacity, obtained either 
from condensers or the leading current of synchronous motors, 
is possible only on systems having a large inherent reactance. 
Remarks about this method of control will be deferred until 
later. 

Control by means of a transformer whose secondary is di- 
vided into sections, any number of which may, at the will of 
the operator, be placed in series with the feeder, was one of 


1908} MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS 257 


the first methods successfully worked out for the control of 
alternating voltage, and has proved one of the most satisfac- 
tory. Such a transformer may be readily designed to have as 
good regulation of its own voltage under varying load as any 
other transformer, and consequently its introduction into the 
feeder does not materially affect the inherent regulation of the 
system. The only engineering problem of consequence involved 
in the making of this form of regulator, other than the usual 
transformer problems, lies in the design of a switch that will 
allow an easy and safe cutting in and out of the various sections 
of the secondary. 

The remaining method; namely, a transformer in which the 
primary flux may be shunted, ordinarily known as an induction 
type of regulator, can be built to have substantially as good 
regulation as an ordinary transformer. It does not have a 
detrimental effect on the inherent regulation of the system, and 
is particularly adapted for use on circuits carrying heavy cur- 
rents, circuits that would require expensive and cumbrous 
switches if controlled by variation of the turns in the secondary 
rather than by the flux passing through the secondary. 

Resistances have been used to such a limited extent that no 
special form has been developed, and there is nothing, there- 
fore, to describe, even historically. Various forms of react- 
ances, such as simple solenoids with a moving coil or core, or 
a moving keeper to a U-shaped core, were used to a consider- 
able extent in some of the earlier alternating stations. As the 
voltage of a series reactance is so far out of phase with the 
voltage of a high power-factor circuit, the volt-ampere capacity 
of the reactance must be very large compared with the results 
obtained, and the inherent regulation of the system is very 
much interfered with by their use. Compared with their use- 
ful work their size is also greatly increased by the fact that the 
greatest effect is wanted when the current in the feeder is 
least, so that there must be turns enough to produce the max- 
imum absorption of voltage when the minimum current is 
flowing. These objections to reactance control are mentioned 
because even engineers are sometimes surprised at the size of 
a reactance necessary to accomplish a given amount of control, 
and also because it is sometimes thought that the transformer 
with variable flux; that is, the induction regulator, controls 
by means of its reactance. This, as I shall show later on, is 


quite an erroneous idea. 


258 MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS [Feb. 20 


Transformer type of regulator. The transformer part of 
this type of regulator need not differ in any essential par- 
ticular from any constant potential transformer of the same 
size and voltage. But some attention must be given to tke 
location of the various portions of the secondary, so that when 
all the secondary is in circuit, and also when only fractional 
portions are in circuit, these portions may be located with 
reference to all of the primary windings so as to have little 
magnetic leakage, and therefore good regulation. With mod- 
erate currents this form of regulator is the most efficient 
and cheapest, as its construction is that of a simple transformer 
and only the needed amount of secondary is in circuit at any 
time. The switch introduces the only complication and limita- 
tion in its use. 

The difficulty of making a switch that will be durable has 
been well solved for a current that does not exceed 250 amperes, 
voltages not above 5,000 or 6,000, and the voltage per step not 
above 30 to 50. 

It is evident that the switch must pass from one contact to 
the next without directly bridging the intervening space; other- 
wise one section of the secondary will be short-circuited and so 
heavy a current will flow as to cause a vicious arc when it is 
broken, even if the short-circuit is not on for sufficient duration 
to overheat the windings. When the current does not exceed 
150 amperes, or the voltage between steps does not exceed 30, 
this short-circuit can be avoided in a very simple manner by 
making the moving blade just a little narrower than that neces- 
sary to bridge between contacts, and by providing any form of 
automatic trip that will quickly snap the blade from one con- 
tact to the next. Under these conditions the continuity of the 
current will be maintained through the are that bridges the 
slight break, and the counter electromotive force of this arc 
will prevent any considerable current circulating in the section 
of the winding short-circuited by it. 

With larger currents, or higher voltages between steps, the 
arc cannot be depended upon as a preventive against short- 
circuiting adjacent sections; the moving contact arm must be 
made in two parts, insulated from each other but joined through 
a resistance or reactance and connected to the feeder from this 
preventive resistance or reactance through its middle point. 
Such reactance or resistance suitably proportioned and con- 
nected in this manner will avoid the necessity of breaking any 


1908] MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS 259 


current at a given output of the regulator; that is, the potential 
generated across the reactance by the flow of the current through 
it can be made, with a given current, to equal the voltage be- 
tween steps. Consequently when the blade leaves one of the 
contacts there will be no difference of potential between it and 
the terminal that it has left, and therefore no arc. The switch 
must, however, operate under all conditions of load, and therefore 
it is not possible to adjust for no arcing except for one definite 
current. With the best possible proportioning there will be 
arcing enough gradually to destroy contacts capable of carrying 
heavy currents when an attempt is made to use this form of 
switch for heavy duty. When it is desirable to use the switch 
type of voltage control for these larger currents, therefore, it 
becomes necessary to use separate contacts for carrying and 
breaking the current. One excellent way of accomplishing this 
is to have two electrically operated switches or contactors in 
series with each half of the rotating switch whose operating 
circuits are so connected to a small contact device on the main 
switch as to open the auxiliary contactor and interrupt the 
current to either half of the rotating switch just before it breaks 
contact, and again to close the circuit just after it has made 
contact with any of the various stationary contacts. With 
this arrangement all the arcing will be removed to the auxiliary 
contactor switches which may be made very heavy and with 
easily replaceable contact surfaces. Regulating switches so de- 
signed have successfully manipulated 320 amperes with 120 
volts per step. 

It is evident that the range of control of a feeder regulator 
can be doubled if the mean of the desired voltages on the feeder 
or feeders be maintained on the bus bar, and the regulator used 
both to increase and decrease this voltage. The transformer 
type of regulator can be made to operate in this manner by 
adding to the rotating switch, which enables any portion of 
the secondary to be thrown in circuit, an auxiliary switch that 
will reverse the polarity of the primary winding after the switch 
has been once over its range. The switch required for this 
reversal is not a difficult one to design, even for quite high pri- 
mary voltage, since the reversal is made only when the second- 
ary switch is on the zero point of the dial, and when, therefore, 
there is no current flowing in any portion of the secondary 
winding. Under these conditions the primary carries only » 
magnetizing current, which, on a regulator of 50 kw, or smaller, 


260 MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS [Feb. 20 


is a current easily handled. A typical form of this type of regu- 
lator is shown in Fig. 1. 

Induction regulators. The induction or magnetic shunt type 
of regulator differs from the transformer type of regulator in 
that all the primary and secondary windings are constantly in use. 
Different types vary the secondary voltage either by moving part 


Fic, 1—Switch type of feeder regulator with reverser. 


of the iron core or one of the windings, or one of the windings and 
part of the core; the whole or any part of the flux generated by 
the primary threading the secondary according to the position of 
the moving part. One of the forms is interesting because of its 
simplicity, and because of its early development. It consisted of a 
U-shaped core with a primary winding around the center leg of the 
core, the length of the primary coil being only about one-third the 


1908] MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS 261 


length of the core. The wire space was long and narrow, so 
that the portion on the core which projected beyond the primary 
winding formed an air-gap of moderate reluctance even when 
an inch or more in width. Concentric with the primary coil 
was a secondary coil, having the same length of layer, to which 
the circuit was connected by flexible cables. By means of long 
screws engaging with nuts on the ends of the secondary coil, 
‘ the secondary was moved along in the direction of the axis of 
the core from the position where it entirely covered the primary 
to a position at the open end of the core. When the secondary 
covered the primary there was little magnetic leakage, and 
the full secondary voltage was obtained. As the secondary 


Fic. 2.—Induction regulator with movable coil. 


was withdrawn from the primary, a larger and larger percentage 
of the flux crossed the air-gap rather than thread the secondary 
coil, until, when the secondary coil was fully withdrawn, prac- 
tically all the primary flux was driven across the ait-gap in the 
space between the primary and secondary. A reversing switch 
in the primary gave the secondary a double range of control. 
This form of regulator was developed in 1891. It is shown 
diagrammatically in Fig. 2. A considerable number of these 
are installed in that historic early transmission of power from 
Willamette Falls into Portland, Oregon, and are in service 
to-day. I mention these as being, as far as I know, the earliest 
successful attempt to build feeder regulators of the induction 


262 MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS [Feb. 20 


type. This form was somewhat objectionable in that a recti- 
linear motion of coils or core is always more difficult to arrange 
for mechanically than a rotating motion; and, secondly, because 
the air-gap must be large to allow the secondary coils to move 
through it, consequently the magnetizing current tends to be 
greater than in other types where the air-gap may be very 
much less because the moving coils do not pass through the 
air-gap. 

The second type of induction regulator developed had sta- 
tionary primary and secondary coils located at right angles to 
each other, and a cylindrical core through which these coils 


bic. 3.—Induction regulator with movable core. 


passed. The center portion of the core could be rotated in 
such a way that any desired part of the flux of the primary coil 
would pass through the secondary coil. 

This form of regulator, see Fig. 3, is due to Dr. Steinmetz, 
and was really the forerunner of all the forms of induction 
regulators that have become so successful and useful. The air- 
gap in such a construction can be made very small, even less 
than in an induction motor, because there is no rapid rotation 
or wear of bearings to provide for, and consequently the mag- 
netizing current need not be greatly in excess of that taken 
by a transformer with no air-gap. The particular form ‘irst 
developed was limited in its capacity, due'to the fact that the 


1908) MOODY; FEEDER REGULATORS 268 


primary and secondary were so far from each other that the 
mutual reactance was high, and inherent regulation conse- 
quently poor. 

The third form of induction regulator to be developed his- 
torically resembles an induction motor in its general construc- 
tion; the primary corresponds to the field and the secondary 
to the armature winding of an induction motor, not of the 
squirrel-cage type, but one with windings that are insulated, 
the terminals of which are brought out for purposes of control. 
This form of winding, with its many slots per pole and with 
only a very slight air-gap, forms a transformer having low 
mutual reactance between primary and secondary when the 
moving core and coils are in such position that the axes of the 
primary and secondary coils coincide. As the core is moved 
so that these axes are out of line, not all of the primary flux 
cuts the secondary winding, and the induced voltage in the sec- 
ondary gradually falls, until, when each secondary coil is mid- 
way between adjacent primary coils, there is no voltage induced 
in the secondary. When the secondary winding is midway 
between the primary winding, however, it will, if it is carrying 
current, set up a heavy flux of self-induction which will close 
itself through the adjacent core between the adjacent primary 
coils. The result is a poor regulating device except at or near 
the full load position. This objection was nicely overcome by 
Dr. Steinmetz, who placed between each primary coil a dis- 
tributed winding short-circuited on itself, so located that it is 
cut not by the primary flux but by the secondary self-induction 
flux just in proportion as the secondary moves away from the 
influence of the primary flux. Both the regulator with the 
single coil windings and that with the distributed windings can 
evidently be used to either raise or lower the voltage by simply 
rotating the moving core and coil through the angular distance 
corresponding to the polar pitch. 

All forms of regulators so far described have been for use 
on single-phase circuits only. The distributed winding just 
described lends itself perfectly, however, to three-phase wind- 
ing, and is much more efficient in three-phase than in single- 
phase circuit, because with the three-phase connection the short- 
circuited winding may be dispensed with, since the winding of 
the other phases naturally falls in the same location as the 
short-circuited winding, and acts with equal effectiveness in 
eliminating the flux of self-induction in the adjacent secondary. 


264 MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS (Feb. 20 


With a multiphase winding, a secondary coil in one phase, as 
it passes out of influence of a given primary coil, passes into the 
field of a primary coil in the next phase. The result is a con- 
stant voltage generated in each of the secondary coils regard- 
less of their position with reference to the primaries. The 
phase relation between this secondary voltage and the phase of 
the feeder circuit, with which it is in series, however, varies 
directly as the secondary coil is displaced with reference to 
the primary coils of the same phase. The result is that while 
the voltage measured across the secondary remains constant, 
its effect on the circuit, due to the phase displacement, varies 
from zero to maximum, and exactly as if the voltage and not 
the phase relation varied. 

Feeder regulators of the induction type have for several years 
been built in all sizes from 3 kw. to 1000 kw. The larger sizes 
are seldom used for what could be properly called feeder regula- 
tion although some having several hundred kilowatt capacity 
have been built for the control of high-voltage feeder lines de- 
livering current to sub-stations of several thousand kilowatt 
capacity. Most of the larger capacity, however, especially those 
having three-phase windings, are used to control the voltage de- 
livered to synchronous converters, so that the voltage on the 
direct-current side may vary in accordance with the require- 
ments for bus-bar potential, or for the charging of the storage- 
batteries used for feeder control and storage purposes. 

It is rather interesting to note, in view of the fact that in- 
duction regulators larger than 300 or 400 kw. are still quite 
infrequently called for, that the first induction regulator which 
was attempted, was built fifteen years ago, and had 450 kw. 
single-phase capacity. 

Automatic control of feeder regulators. A feeder regulator may 
have ample capacity to compensate for any changes in bus-bar 
potential or any varying drop in the feeder, and yet the voltage 
at centers of distributions may be far from satisfactory in its 
steadiness, due to the inattention of the station attendant or 
to his inability to change the regulator as rapidly as the varia- 
tions in bus-bar voltage or feeder losses may require. More- 
over, if an attempt is made to overcome this weakness by ad- 
ditional attendants, the increase in operating expenses occa- 
sioned thereby may be very considerable. 

Many plants now receive current from large power systems, a 
large part of whose output is absorbed by railway and other 


1908] MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS 265; 


motors, whose demands for current vary so rapidly that even if an 
attendant were constantly watching the voltmeter, in the attempt 
to adjust the feeder regulator to compensate for the changes 
in bus-bar potential, he would find it entirely impossible to 
control the voltage as rapidly as is necessary for good life or 
good service with incandescent lamps. 

It was not, therefore, until about two years ago, when the 
first successful devices were developed for automatically oper- 
ating various forms of feeder regulators, that feeder regulators 
assumed their proper and important sphere in electrical distri- 
bution of power. 

It will be recalled that various more or less successful at- 
tempts have been made in the past to control automatically 
the potential of generators. The first really successful of these 
was perhaps the Edison regulator for direct-current generators. 
The device consisted simply of a rheostat with a special form of 
rotating arm and contact device moving through a range of 
only 45 degrees or so, and controlled by solenoids in shunt with 
the commutator of the machine. It was reasonably successful 
in isolated plants, put did not admit of satisfactory operation 
on large plants where the generators had to be operated in mul- 
tiple. 

Various forms of mechanism for automatically controlling 
the field rheostats of generators have been developed and are 
used with moderate success, but they are all too slow in their 
mechanical operation, and many of them too complicated to be 
extensively used. 

In 1891 or 1892 Elihu Thomson made the first attempt to 
use the only principle of automatic control of generators that 
has ever proved itself entirely equal to meet all requirements. 
He met the problem with characteristic boldness of method. 
Instead of working on a rheostat which must of necessity be 
slow in operating, he used a series-wound exciter, and brought 
out two taps from the field winding of this exciter so located 
that when these taps were joined together a sufficient number 
of the series turns of the field were short-circuited to give the 
minimum voltage required to excite the generator under no 
load. When this short-circuit was removed and the full wind- 
ing was in circuit, them aximum voltage necessary for the ex- 
citation of the generator under its greatest designed overload 
would be generated. He then designed a special form of con- 
tact-making voltmeter capable of very rapid response to changes 


206 MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS [Feb. 20 


in voltage, and connected the two taps from the field of the ex- 
citer to two contacts of the voltmeter. When the voltage was 
too high on the generator, the voltmeter’s contacts would 
short-circuit this portion of the exciter’s field; when it was too 
low it would remove this short-circuit. Except at no load 
and full load, of course, there was no position of equilibrium 
for the voltmeter. It therefore vibrated rapidly, making and 
breaking the shunt-circuit on the exciter’s field, and gave an 
~ average voltage dependent on the percentage of time that the 
contacts were closed or open. The device would undoubtedly 
have been immediately successful if it had been first tried on a 
moderate size of generator requiring so small an exciter that an 
ordinary silver or platinum contact on the voltmeter would have 
stood up under the constant making and breaking of the cir- 
cuit. Unfortunately, however, it was tried on an 80-pole, 
400-kw. slow-speed single-phase generator. This was a very 
large machine for those days, and 30 kw. or so were required 
for excitation. It was found necessary therefore in order to 
protect the contacts, to have an exciter for the exciter, and to 
operate the voltmeter on the small exciter. 

With these three magnetic systems operating in succession 
there was just enough lag between the operation of the volt- 
meter and the response in the voltage of the alternating-current 
generator to make the operation a failure; that is, the voltage 
of the generator surged over a range of three or four per cent. 
at a frequency of six to eight cycles per minute. It was not until 
Mr. Tirrill took up the problem along the same lines several 
years later that this ideal method of controlling the voltage of 
a generator was successfully perfected. 

The Tirrill method differs from the Thomson method only 
in that the vibrating contact short-circuits a resistance in 
series with a shunt field exciter, and that the voltmeter is pro- 
vided with a special alloy of iridium for the contact points; 
this makes it possible to handle current and voltage quite im- 
possible to handle with any other metal when the circuit is so 
rapidly made and broken. The wonderful success of the Tirrill 
regulator in controlling all forms and sizes of generators is doubt- 
less well known to us all. 

A slightly modified form of the Tirrill regulator has been 
developed and applied to the control apparatus of feeder regu- 
lators, and as a result their value and field of usefulness were 
immediately increased many fold. 


1908] MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS 267 


Of all the various forms, the induction type of regulator, 
free as it is from all moving contacts, lends itself most readily 
to automatic control. A small motor is readily attached to 
the same mechanism that is used for hand operation. A switch 
capable of starting, stopping, or reversing this motor can be 
easily operated magnetically, and this in turn be controlled by 
a modified Tirrill contact-making voltmeter. Fig. 4 shows an 
automatically operated regulator of this type. 


Fic, 4.—Induction regulator with distributed windings, movable core and 
coils, automatically operated. 


When the changes of the voltage of the feeder, due either to 
varying load or to varying bus-bar potential, are fairly slow, 
this method of automatic control leaves little to be desired. 
When somewhat greater rapidity of control is needed, this can 
be accomplished by keeping the motor in constant rotation and 
using magnetic clutches whose excitation is controlled by the 
contact-making voltmeter, thereby saving the time for the 


motor to come up to speed. 


268 MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS [Feb. 20 


Many feeders have such rapidly varying loads, furnishing 
current to elevators or hoisting machinery, for instance, or 
they are operated from bus-bars whose potential changes so 
rapidly, that some form of regulator, in which it is not neces- 
sary to move so great a mass as must be moved in the induction 
type regulator, becomes necessary. Under these conditions one 
naturally turns to the transformer type of regulator, where the 
only moving part is the rotating arm of the switch. But the 


Va 
Piao: ynnwune Jo Feeder 


Jecoraa 


Dial Switch 
Leveloped 


Preventive 
Fesistonce. 


Fic. 5.—Connections of switch type of automatically operated regulator. 


forms of these switching devices which have been previously 
used offer an almost unsurmountable mechanical difficulty to 
rapid rotation in the step-by-step automatic snap motion that 
is required in passing from each step to the next. 

A new form of such switch, however, has been successfully 
worked out in the solving of this problem. The details of this 
switch will be best understood by referring to Fig. 5, but can 
perhaps be generally understood from the following description : 


{908] MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS 269 


The moving element consists of a series of fingers, the majority 
of which are always in contact with two of the stationary con- 
tacts. Each finger is connected to a corresponding stationary 
collector ring by means of a suitable brush, and each collector 
ring is connected to the line through a preventive resistance. 
The individual fingers do not span the spaces between the ad- 
jacent contacts, but the arrangement of the combination is 
such that when the center of the top finger is on the center of 
one contact, the center of the bottom finger will be on the 
center of the next contact, the intermediate fingers being 
spaced so that the centers of all are on a straight line, joining 
the upper and lower fingers. The resistances which connect 
the several fingers to the line not only prevent excessive ex- 
change currents as the fingers pass from contact to contact, but 
cause the change in the secondary voltage to be gradual rather 
than in steps. The moving member may therefore be left in any 
position whatever, and a much closer adjustment of voltage 
is obtained than by the switch which passes in one movement 
from each step to the next. 

The moving parts of this form of switch can be made so light 
and compact that a very small motor, acting through suitable 
gearing, will move it from rest round the entire circumference 
of the contact points, covering the entire range of control of 
the regulator in from two to three seconds. Such a device, 
operated from a constantly revolving motor by means of the 
magnetic clutch and the rapidly vibrating contact-making volt- 
meter, cannot, of course, forestall needed changes in voltage, 
but it comes about as near doing so as can be imagined when 
parts having any appreciable mass are to be moved. Fig. 6 
shows two simultaneous charts, the first showing the line po- 
tential and the second the feeder potential after having been 
regulated by this type of regulator. We find that with such a 
device, a source of varying potential which no one would think 
of using for any other purpose than the operation of motors, 
becomes available to give entirely satisfactory incandescent 
lighting service. 

So far no attempt has been made to develop this form of 
regulator for handling much more than 150 amperes. The 
slight wear that must take place on the rapidly moving parts, 
and the generally increased complexity of the mechanical parts, 
makes it desirable to use the induction type of regulator for 
automatic work whenever it will fill the requirements as to 


270 MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS [Feb. 20 


speed; where it will not fill these requirements there need be 
no hesitancy in making use of the more sensitive rotating 
switch type, provided the work comes within the range of its 
capacity. Fig. 7 shows a regulator of this type. 

Just a few words as to how the automatic regulator may be 
adjusted to give constant potential at the center of distribution 


Fic. 6.—Charts showing the operation of the automatic switch type of 
regulator. 


rather than at the station. The first method that would prob- 
ably occur to any one would be to bring back from the center 
of distribution potential wires which would be connected to 
the terminals of the contact-making voltmeter. This is not so 
simple or satisfactory as it might seem, for the expense of run- 
ning the wires is by no means negligible, and unless they are 
carefully crossed to avoid induction, current in the feeders might 


1908] MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS 271 


induce sufficient voltage to make the voltmeter’s operation 
quite inaccurate. A simple means of accomplishing the result, 
which is often all that is necessary, is to have on the winding 
of the contact-making voltmeter an auxiliary winding connected 
to the secondary of a suitable current transformer, whose primary 
is in series with the feeder. If the windings of current trans- 
former and voltmeter are properly proportioned and connected 
so that the current from the current transformer opposes the 


Fic. 7.—Automatically operated switch type of regulator. 


current in the shunt coil, the voltmeter will become differential 
in its action to any desired extent and will cause the feeder 
regulator to give a voltage which will increase the voltage across 
the feeder in proportion to the drop in the feeder. This simple 
method will, however, only increase the voltage in proportion 
to the current in the feeder. But this is not all that is neces- 
sary, as the drop in the alternating-current feeder is not only 
proportional to the current it is carrying, but is also roughly 
inversely proportional to the power-factor of this current. -To 


272 MOODY: FEEDER REGULATORS [Feb. 20 


obtain constant potential at the center of distribution under 
all conditions of load, therefore, it becomes necessary to feed 
the differential winding of the voltmeter from a source of voltage 
that will be proportional to the voltage lost in the feeder under 
all conditions. This is nicely accomplished by a device com- 
monly known as a line drop compensator, which consists simply 
of adjustable reactance and resistance placed in series with the 
secondary of a current transformer placed in the feeder. By 
adjusting the reactance and resistance in this device so that 
they bear the same relation to each other as do the reactance 
and resistance of the feeder to be controlled, a source of voltage 
which will give the desired effect on the differential winding 
of the contact-making voltmeter will be obtained, and absolutely 
constant potential will be maintained at the center of distribution 
under all conditions of current and power-factor. 

The improved quality of the service which can be given when 
suitable automatic potential regulators are made use of, and 
the increase in the life of the incandescent lamps which results 
therefrom, should be sufficient inducement to make the installa- 
tion of automatic control well-nigh universal. There is perhaps 
a more direct effect accomplished by their use which would 
appeal more strongly to many station managers, simply because 
the economies resulting are more evident. I refer to decreased 
station attendance. 

The time is fast coming when nearly all service feeders will 
emanate from sub-stations rather than generating stations, these 
sub-stations being supplied from either distant water powers or 
great steam generating stations. In fact. a large proportion 
of electrical power is so distributed already. Such stations 
frequently have no rotating machinery, and if they do it is 
usually of so simple a character that it needs very little attention. 
Watching the voltmeter on the various feeders, and adjusting 
the feeder regulators, therefore, becomes almost the sole work 
of the attendants in such a sub-station. 

One attendant can satisfactorily watch only one voltmeter, 
and adjust one feeder regulator at a time, and therefore if reason- 
ably good service under varying load or varying potential re- 
ceived at the sub-station is to be accomplished, it is necessary 
to have an attendant for almost every feeder, and even then 
the service may be very poor. It is in eliminating the necessity 
of these attendants, therefore, that the greatest direct economy 
can be accomplished by automatic regulators. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT TORONTO 273; 


Discussion oN ‘‘ ALTERNATING-CURRENT FEEDER REGULA- 
TORS.” Toronto SEcTION, FEBRUARY 20, 1908. 


R. G. Black: We have used regulators of all the types de- 
scribed and have found them to give good results in practical 
operation. The automatic regulator is particularly interesting 
inasmuch as it keeps the voltage at the centre of distribution 
constant and takes a great deal of work off the station operator. 

I am sorry that Mr. Moody did not discuss the relative merits 
and disadvantages of several other types of regulators; for 
instance, a type consisting of a transformer, the low-tension 
side of which is in series with the line, and the high-tension side 
energized from an auto-transformer placed across the line. By 
means of taps brought out from the autotransformer, the 
voltage on the primary of the series transformer is raised or 
lowered and the regulation thereby effected without breaking 
the heavy current which is flowing in the circuit. In this way 
a gradual raising or lowering of the voltage may be effected, 
and it is the writer’s opinion that there will be very much less 
wear at the shifting contacts. However, there may be other 
disadvantages which more than counterbalance this feature. 

The ease with which a feeder regulator makes it possible to 
regulate a numbe~ of alternating-current circuits, from one 
bus-bar, stands out in great contrast with the low-tension, direct- 
current system, which necessitates having two or more sets of 
bus-bars each energized by separate generators and then switch- 
ing devices to transfer the feeder from one bus-bar to another. 

J. Kynoch: A large number of lights and some motors were 
required in a large building, and the only available source of 
supply was feeder to a suburban railway. It was found that 
the voltage at the end of this feeder varied from 350 to 575. It 
was proposed to use a direct-current motor-generator set, the 
motor being wound for 500 volts normal, and the generator for 
220 volts. In order to keep the speed of motor and voltage of 
generator constant, a Tirrill regulator was arranged to be 
placed on the fields of each machine, the relays on the motor 
fields being so connected that as the voltage of the railway 
feeder changed, the field strength of the motor would be varied, 
and in this way the speed kept constant. The only other re- 
quirement was, that the design of the motor should be such that 
the motor should be capable of giving the required output at 
the minimum voltage for such length of time as such low voltage 
may exist. Leal 

- The regulator on the generator was applied in the usual manner, 
and was arranged to give either constant terminal voltage at 
the generator or a constant voltage at the end of main lighting 
feeder. In this way an eminently satisfactory control of 
voltage was obtained from a source which under ordinary cir- 
cumstances would be quite impracticable for incandescent 


lighting. 


274 FEEDER REGULATORS [Feb. 20 


Another way to meet the above conditions would be to apply 
a Tirrill regulator to the generator fields only, and allow the 
motor speed to vary with changes in feeder voltage. This, 
of course, needs a specially designed generator to give the nor- 
mal voltage at minimum speed, and also means using a field 
rheostat of very high resistance, in order to reduce to normal, 
the high voltage at maximum speed. 

Mr. Moody refers to the possibility of voltage regulation by 
using capacity, such as the leading current from synchronous 
motors. I should like to enlarge upon this as follows: The 
voltage regulation of alternating-current power feeders having 
considerable reactance can be accomplished by applying a 
Tirrill regulator to the exciter of a synchronous motor connected 
to the ends of such feeder. In this way not only practically 
constant potential can be maintained, but also high power-factor 
due to the regulator varying the excitation of the synchronous 
motor and thus causing the same to supply leading or lagging 
current as the voltage of the circuit drops or increases, re- 
spectively. 

This scheme is especially valuable on 60-cycle transmission 
lines as the inductive losses on such lines are usually considerable, 
and consequently the line regulation is very much worse than 
on a 25-cycle circuit carrying the same class of load. Of course, 
in order for a motor successfully to regulate a transmission line, 
it would be necessa1y for the motor to carry a reasonable pro- 
portion of the load, probably in the neighborhood of 30 per cent., 
but a larger proportion would be better. It is, of course, assumed 
that Tirrill regulators would be connected to the generators at 
the power station, so that the motor would not have to do an 
abnormal amount of regulation. 

R. S. Kelsch (by letter): One Canadian company has a 
number of induction regulators in service, some of which have 
been in operation almost ten years. These regulators vary in 
size from 40 kw. to 800 kw. capacity each. There are a num- 
ber of 40-kw. oil-cooled regulators used in connection with 
synchronous converters, and several 40 kw. air-cooled regulators 
used in connection with three-phase feeders. The company 
also has two 350-kw. air-cooled and one 800-kw. three-phase 
regulators used in connection with sub-station work. 

In the sub-station, the power is received at a voltage which 
varies according to the demand made by the different sub-sta- 
tions on the line. In one instance the power is received at 
approximately 11,000 volts stepped down to 2300 volts. This 
pressure is used for power service. For the lighting load, the 
same power is delivered to a second bus-bar through a 350-kw. 
regulator, which automatically maintains the voltage required, 
depending upon the load on the lines. 

The 40-kw. regulators are used for individual feeders, where 
the load varies considerably. For example: the company has 
a feeder three miles long, which, during the day time delivers 


1908S] DISCUSSION AT TORONTO 


NO 
Ce: 
a 


power to a large induction motor for pumping purposes. The 
load on this line varies during the 24 hr. from 10 to 100 per cent. 
and the power-factor changes from 80 to 95 per cent. It would 
be impossible to handle this business without induction regu- 
lators. 

In one of the sub-stations, 14,000 h.p. is received, and a large 
portion of the power distributed locally, the balance distributed 
to a considerable distance. The same pressure would not suit 
both purposes, but the 800-kw. induction regulator makes it 
possible to receive a pressure suitable for local distribution, and, 
at the same time, transmit the balance of the power a con- 
siderable distance, delivering it at the required pressure. 

During the ten years these regulators have been in service, 
there has not been one accident, failure to work, or interruption 
of any kind due to the regulator, notwithstanding the fact that 
most of the regulators are exposed direct to the line, 


A paper presented at the bth Meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers New York, March 13, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I. E.E. 


NOTES ON ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS* 


BY LEWIS B. STILLWELL AND H. ST. CLAIR PUTNAM 


The following notes are based upon the results of tests con- 
ducted by the authors during the autumn months of 1907 on 
a section of the Lehigh Canal near Mauch Chunk, Pennsylvania. 
The object of the tests was to determine: 

a. Pull required to propel canal boats at various speeds and 
with varying numbers of boats in tow. 

b. The relative merits, for the purpose contemplated, of 
locomotives supplied by trolley and operating upon a track 
of 42-in. gauge, and a monorail system. 

c. The best speed and length of tow as fixed by physical 
conditions. 

d. The power required to operate the canal between Coalport 
and Bristol. 

e. The equipment required for such operation. 

The data presented in this paper are included under the 
headings “a’’, ‘b-’, and “c’’ ofthe feregoing summary. 

The upper section of the canal from Lock No. 2 to Coalport, 
‘a distance of 10,095 ft., is equipped with the ‘ Locomotive 
System ’’. The plan and profile of this section of the canal 
are shown in Fig. 2. On this section an ordinary mining loco- 
motive is used. Two locomotives were tested, each weighing 
under test conditions 16,000 Ib. without testing instrument 
equipment and crew. Each locomotive is equipped with two 


* By the courtesy of Mr. W. A. Lathrop, President of the Lehigh Coal 
& Navigation Company, for whom the tests were made, we are permitted 
to present to the Institute such results of our investigation as are not 
purely local in their significance but comprise data more or less applicable 
to the general problem of electric operation of canals. 

277 


278 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: {March 13 


direct-current motors of 28 h-p., operating on 500-volt trolley 
circuits. The locomotive wieels are 28 in. in diameter and 
gear-ratio of 69/15. The wheel-base is 44 in. The outline 
drawing of this locomotive is shown in Fig. 6. 

The locomotives were operated on a track of 42-in. gauge 
and ballasted on the river section with broken stone, elsewhere 
with gravel. Forty-pound rails were used. The track was 
uneven and comparatively rough. 

On this section, two levels of the canal, aggregating 5600 ft. 
in length, were in the open river exposed to the river currents. 
The voltage of the trolley circuits was varied to obtain various 
towage speeds; an experimental generating plant, connected 
as shown in diagram No. 9, being used as a source of power 
supply. 

The section of the canal from Lock No. 3 to Lock No. 7, a 
distance of 10,555 ft., was equipped with the ‘“‘ Monorail System ” 
illustrated in Fig. 3. On this section three traction machines 
were used. These machines are hereinafter designated ‘ Trac- 
tors.’’ Two of these tractors (Nos. 1 and 2) were manufactured 
in this country. The electric equipment of each comprised one 
direct-current 40-h.p. motor. The gear-ratio was 5.78 to 1; 
diameter of wheels 12 in., and length of wheel-base 42 in. The 
construction is illustrated in Fig. 7. The ratio of leverage on 
lever wheels was 4.7 to 1; that is to say, the lower wheels are 
pressed upward against the lower face of the rail with a force 
4.7 times the drag on the tow line. The adhesion of the ma- 
chine, therefore, is a function not only of its weight but also 
of the pull which it exerts. Each tractor weighs 6,450 lb., 
and, under test conditions with instruments and crew, 7,350 lb. 
Tractor No. 3 was manufactured in Paris, and equipped with 
’ one 25-h.p. mining motor. Its wheels are 11.25 in. in diameter, 
gear-ratio is 3.4 to 1, and wheel-base 42 in. The general design 
is the same as that of Tractor No. 1 and is shown in Fig. 7. 

Owing to the fact that the frame of this tractor had not been 
designed to receive a motor of the exact dimensions of that 
with which it was equipped, it was impossible to locate the 
motor in its proper position; it was necessary, therefore, to use 
500 lb. counterweight to secure equilibrium of the machine. 
The weight of the tractor complete was 5,093 lb.; including 
counterweight, test apparatus, and crew, 6,493 Ib. 

The mechanical construction and workmanship of Tractor 3 
made it superior to Tractors Nos. 1 and 2, as was evidenced 


hs te he ee ek 


= 


{914 


Va | 


PHILADELPHIA” las 4 
p 


12 “EAD AA RWAAIEA AHA HOIH3U 
to}?04 & WOIT232 sAMAD Hy 
MOITIZe A3ZviIAF Sessevess 


tof — | vee nae “i 
ABB stress: 5 
- y 
c 7 : 
12 
; Rs ra : 
my : 
; 


2TCAR 


(A4MOD Modine, yr 


y 


\ 


EE nee 


AUAUHI/S HIUAM 


(Stillwell) nate 


~ a, 


*—, ar 
ns 7 
. 
‘ 
/ 
’ _ J); 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 279 


not only by inspection but also very conclusively by the re- 
sults of tests. In our comparative calculations of power re- 
quired respectively by the locomotive and monorail systems, 
therefore, we have used the results obtained in using Tractor 
No. 3. 

The tractors were operated upon a monorail supported at a 
height of 4 ft. above the ground bv steel posts placed at inter- 
vals of 18 ft. The rail, as used in the installation at Mauch 
Chunk, is an ordinary 10-in. I-beam weighing 75 lb. to the 


Qwroek Ne} UPFER 
N 


Lock Nos 


POWER HOUSE 


MAUCH CHUNK 


Lock ner 


Locw wet 
UPPER 


Lock Not 
GUARD LocK 


n 4 — 
4000 5000 6000 Jooo 8000 2000 ‘ecco FT 


DISTANCE Ow RAIL.” 


FiG. 2. | 


RiGac 


yard. The monorail with supports and braces complete weigh 
120 lb. per yard and is erected along the canal outside the 
tow-path. The construction is illustrated in Fig. 4. 

A fourth tractor, No. 4, built in Paris, was also subjected 
to certain tests. This machine, without testing crew and in- 
struments, weighed 3,465 lb. It was equipped with one direct- 
current. 500-volt motor of 15 h.p. The diameter of wheels was 
12.75 in. and the wheel base 24 in. This machine is illustrated 
in Fig. 8. 

For this smaller machine a section of monorail tract 1,200 ft. 


280 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


Leocn ng? 
tock Nes 


Le 


Lock No 6 


Lock NO? 


Lock nas 


MONO RAIL 


urr er 


16000. 1000 18000 
DISTANCE ON RAIL. 


Fic. 3 


Sipe View 


FRONT ELEVATION 


Fie.4. 
Assenaix oF MonoRa, SveTem 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 281 


long was erected on wooden posts between Locks Nos. 2 and 3. 
The rail in this case was a 7-in. I-beam, weighing 45 lb. per 
yard, and was erected at a height of 4 ft. from the ground. 
It was not deemed necessary to undertake complete tests of Trac- 


Glo i 4! ° 
AIG. wiotH~ 34. 
he 


| 
AREA 488 |SQ rt. 


eee ae 


ie | 
aa 
ie} 


i 
\ 


BETWEEN LocK 


4 C 
ARES \ 
Bo alae 


ieee 


PEM: 
S/S Gee 


<I 


NE 


27 | 
AVG. WIDTHS |60.7 F 


Janent 222 [sarr| FY. 


I\ 


: 


tor 4, as certain preliminary tests showed that the machine 
was not adequate in mechanical strength and power equipment 
for the service. Volt and ampere readings were made, how- 
ever, in connection with dynamometer readings and from these 
the approximate performance of the machine was determined. 


Fic. 5 


282 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


The following instruments were used in making the tests: 

Direct-current graphic recording wattmeter with time attach- 
ment. This wattmeter was also equipped with a signal pen used 
to record distances and special points by means of a push button. 
Weston ammeter. Westor voltmeter. Three spring dynamo- 
meters. Two integrating wattmeters used to measure respec- 
tively the energy delivered to the monorail and locomotive 
sections. 

Distance marks were located at distances of 52.8 ft. along 


rr) 


ry 
o MininG Locomonve 
Gaver 42° 
WEIGHT 8 TONS, 266 “S® mov. 26 KP. 
S@EAR RATIO-4.6, wHhEEL 28% 


Fie. 6. 


the track. As each point was passed by the machine undergoing 
test, a push-button record was made by the signal pen in the 
graphic recording wattmeter and at the same instant the volt- 
meter and dynamometer were read by the test crew. In ad- 
dition, during one complete run, the angle formed by the tow- 
rope and the center line of the track was determined at each 
distance point by measuring the distance from the center of 
the track to a fixed length cf tow-line. All test results are 
corrected for this angle, and the tow-line pulls stated are the 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 283 


ES 
aaa 


SHH 


er ae ee Poet 
WEIGHT 5093 LBS. ~ WEST 65 MINING MoToR ~ 28 H.P> 
No. 8.4 SooVorts-3.4 GEAR Ramio=- N1%" WHEEL 
LeveRAcE 4.7 


Fic. 7 


Tractor No.4. 
ws — 


ae: mae af 
WEIGHY 3465 LBe.- Wear’ 6 MoroR~ 15 » @ 
BOO VOLTS ~12 4" WHEEL -LEVERAGE 3.7 


Fre. 8 


284 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


effective pulls in the direction of motion. In the tests the 
tow-line was approximately 200 ft. long. Typical records such 
as were made in each test, are shown in Fig. 11. 

Four canal boats were loaded and used in all comparative 
tests made. The weight in net tons, dimensions, and draft 
were as follows: 


TABLE I 
Boat Loaded Empty Length Width Draft 
1 137 tons 23.5 tons 87 ft. 6 in. 10 ft. 5 in. 5 ft. 1.875 in. 
2 139° 23.0 ee 87.6, = 1th 65 S:ft.2.5 as 
3 eye 24.2 “ 87 ft. 6: = 10:f6:/'555 6 ££.,2:625-— 
4 135 “ 24.2 “ S7-ft:. 6°" 4050. 5 it. .1.75. 


These boats in the order named were used in all four-boat 
tests. 

Boats 3 and 4 were used in one-boat tests. 

Boats 1 and 2 were used in two-boat tests. In the later 
tests boats 1 and 2 were equipped with the ‘‘ Erie Steering Gear ”’ 
hereinafter described. 

In addition to tests of the four boats above referred to, the 
regular canal traftic was handled by the test machines on their 
respective sections during the months of October and Novem- 
ber and a part of September. Complete tests were made from 
time to time as opportunity offered, until it was thought that 
sufficient data had been collected. We have found it necessary 
to make use of these miscellaneous tests to a limited extent 
only. : 

The velocity of the current of water flowing in each section 
of the canal was determined at the time the tests were made, 
but to obtain an average value for towing resistance, including 
the effect of this current and also of track grade, all tests were 
made in both directions over each section of the canal. The 
average results are used in our calculations. 

Effective tow-rope pulls required. The effective tow-rope pulls 
as determined by dynamometer tests and corrected for the 
rope-angle for four-, two-, and one-boat tests, both light and 
loaded, are given in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13. 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 285 


The following table shows the average results obtained at 
the average towage speeds attained in tests: 


TABLE II 
Weight Average Effective 

Boats tons speed in pull Constant 

(2000 1b.) mi. per hr. pounds (C V2 T) 

Hea boats: loadedastc. 05 ssc 2 548 2.98 2200 0.452 
myo: boats loaded......<.4+.5+ 274 3.62 1500 0.418 
One: boat) loaded). d.0ese6e 137 4.00 1000 0.456 
Bour boats empty.......o-. «> 95 4.00 1010 0.664 
‘hwo! boats €mDty.. dca 0. 0s 47.5 4.20 560 0.668 


One! boatiempty.. .. dec os a 7 ss 23.8 5.00 400 0.673 


In the majority of the two-boat tests, the boats were equipped 
with the so-called Erie steering gear. With this gear the 
second boat is used as a rudder for the first boat, to which it 
is tightly lashed. The arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 10. 

The effect, so far as resistance of the water is concerned, is a 
reduction of approximately eight per cent. in the pull required; 
in addition to which saving the boats are kept in better align- 
ment and are under better control. In the majority of the 
four-boat-tests, the first two boats were equipped with the 
Erie steering gear, but this beneficial efiect as regards reduc- 
tion of pull required, was apparently lost, owing probably to 
the effect of the drag of the last two boats, which tended to alter 
the position of the first two with reference to the line of motion. 

From Table II it appears that for boats, such as are used 
on the Lehigh and Delaware canals, the effective tow-rope pull 
in pounds, required for any number of loaded boats, is ex- 
pressed approximately by the formula 0.45 V?T, and for 
empty boats by 0.67 V? T, where V is the speed in miles per 
hour and T the total tons (2000 lb.). A brief discussion of 
required tow rope pull as related to draught and the depth and 
width of canal will be-found in appendix. 


ACCELERATION AND MAximuM Rope Putts 


Compared with electric railway operation, the rate of accel- 
eration practicable of attainment in towing canal boats is low, 


286 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


Acceleration, however, is relatively unimportant, as the time 
of run is long compared with the time consumed in accelera- 
tion. The greatest pull is exerted when the last control-point 


pa 
FLD. Sw. 
e) | 3 FLD. RWEO. 


50 Kw. 
250 v. 
+ 


FIG. 9. 


DIAGRAM FoR SwiTctHeoARD. 


Fic. 9 


is reached, but this does not greatly exceed the pull required 
at full running speeds. 

Table III gives the maximum and average results obtained 
in four-, two-, and one-boat tests, both loaded and empty. 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 287 


TABLE III.—Accereration anp Rorr Puti 


(Pulls not corrected for rope angle.) 


a eg 


Acceleration Pull Ib. Average 
miles per hr, at end of pull lb. 
per sec. acceleration running 


Be ipoats: loaded senna .ciei aemietenieehs ete} (00243006045 2370 | 3100 | 1990 | 2300 
E-poatsiem pty serie iemiem iets scr 4-6 a-| 020975: (10.142 1220 | 2100 | 1040 } 1250 
2 boats loaded..... ‘ele wsisis wie sien +) 0.0694 | (0.101 2240 | 3100 | 1500 | 1700 
SEBDOATSLEMIDLY uc cm etieieiiestet we sich e>| 020995: | OL4Sd. 850 | 1150 680 | 1100 
aeboatwoaded eeci anit yet |) 0.0667, | 0.103 1190 | 1800 650 | 1000 
boat empty pari se siecle oo cis aw «= 210. 1090) 0.173 730 | 1100 625 900 


Towine MacuHIneEs TESTED. 


In most of our tests Mining Locomotive 15 and Tractors 1 and 
3 were used. Comparison was made at speeds and effective pulls 
as nearly identical as was found practicable. 

As to meet these conditions the various machines tested re- 
quired different operating energy, and as change in the energy 


TABLE IV 


EFFICIENCY oF Tow1nc MACHINES 


Effective’ pull Effective pull Effective pull 
1000 Ib. 2000 1b. 3000 1b. 


Mining Locomotive..........-. 80% 83.5% 84% 
SE COLT iericielolvisierceles sisiexeekeal 68 73.3 74.8 
rector Becie ov bielaie satsale tiela = > 73 77.2 77.5 


affected the motor efficiency, the electric losses in the motors 
in all cases have been deducted from the kilowatt input in de- 
termining the mechanical efficiency of the machines. The 
mechanical loss of the motors and gears in each case is charged 
against the respective machines. The tow-line pull in all 
cases has been corrected to the effective pull in pounds in the 
direction of motion. Results are given in Table IV. 

Expressed in another way the results are summarized in 


Table V. 


2388 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


The results of these tests are perhaps more clearly illustrated 
in Fig. 14, in which the inputs to the towing machines are re- 
duced to equivalent draw-bar pulls. 

The performance of the three towing machines, running light 
without load, is shown in Table VI. For convenience, the input to 


First BARGE 


SECOND BARGE 


Erie Steering Sean 


DIAMETER OF HANOWHEERL 3-6" Disacram oF ATTACHMENT 
“ Drums Gh’ 


GEAR Ratio - 6.25 


Fic. 10 


the machines is expressed both in kilowatts and equivalent 
draw-bar pull in pounds. The values stated include all mie- 
chanical friction of motors, gears, and track, but do not include 
the electrical losses in the motors. 


Y3 14987 TAL: er. ov. 


2 
ys ed Ry 14U9 ahiawor 


(Sa 
° 
se Ga a 28600 i se o 3 Zon + ; SORT : TA os lee 
, >. z >: : : i 
So. eS n20e ores 12e@ 7OSHCPSGCO ‘28 rer Bia wor 
een - ii a lel leet sacra aoa ape 


34'mM 10.0 =.TeId 


S 250028 202s 0880 
TBISScCCo0Ss 1S BGESs 08. ‘a 
a 


SHORT OTR 2T4aVv 
4+sUT a gg 


i) 10.0 = reid. 


(aN Me Sedat A. 
ay, 


S 
th 


poet €1 .T20 .6a on nuUAR 


STANCE | 
; a 
“es x | 
- +é osu AOTIAAT 
« 5 -Mweoa @¢-— 2n20t HAW . 
- % —— - BetoT_ 692 THdIgWw,woT TAOS 
- TT? 00S AtisuwoTt 30 HTOn: eS 
i en — 224 3ntsuwot 20 370MA.2) ) 
. -O© AATAW Ao YTIDOUSV.a¥ 
@ g 5 \ SS TOES We itt Yast 
tee : 
“o. 7 MIN. pumereR 
RELATIVE FOS) TIONS 
OF RECOCROING PEHS 
68..." 
z -L@U AOTIAAT Te3aT ) 
OS. - — a 
z wea ¢--f 2n204 WwsaawrTaa H 
2; % ’ +2MoT SPE THOI|aW oT TAOS + 
a -TYOOS 3BuIsworT 30 HTOMW3_I 
og El _ Butiwor.30 3430nA .aVA 
: 9 AAITAW AO YTIDO0U3V .3AVA 
2 g THO IW OW YR IAA 


) 
I 2H .D04U OMIMIM TeAT . 


“AYU I-S Br20u Maawr3aa 


THOIAW woT TRO Ss 


3Ani4awoT Wo HTOMaL 


aniw. -YAGQ ithAa 
SS .T20 ,S@ Qn MUA 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 289 


TABLE V 
EguivaLENnT Putt 1n Pounps Lost in MACHINE AND TRACK FRICTION WHEN DELIVERING 


Effective pull Effective pull Effective pull 
1000 1b. 2000 1b. 3000 Ib. 


Mining Locomotive...........+ 250 * 400 590 

SRT CEO? Lictrtera.cas101eiave¥s icles 6 ave 8s,» 450 700 1000 

Pe ACEOTLS seisieeraieldalece sins areve 6 aioe 375 600 890 
TABLE VI 


Mechanical Friction Running Light 


Speed Equivalent drawbar pull 
miles Kilowatts pounds 
_per PO eat esos 
hour 
Mining Loco. | Tractor 3 | Tractor 1 | Mining Loco. | Tractor 3 | Tractor 1 
3 0.88 98 1.44 148 164 242 
4 1.28 1.40 2.16 161 176 272 
5 1.70 1.82 2.90 L7d 183 292 
6 Wh 2.32 3.68 182 195 308 
8 3.20 3.41 PLctoke 201 214 
10 4.40 221. 


The results of these tests are illustrated in Fig. 13. 

It will be noted that in running without load the machines 
preserve relatively the same relationship as they do when 
operating under load conditions, though the relative magnitude 
of the values are changed. When developing large draw-bar 
pulls, the mechanical losses in Tractor 3 are 50 per cent. in 
excess of those of the Mining Locomotive. Mechanical losses 
in Tractor 1 exceed those of the Mining Locomotive by from 
70 to 80 per cent. Under light running conditions these excess 
losses are reduced to about 7 per cent. in the case of Tractor 3, 
though the excess remains approximately 70 per cent. for 
Tractor 1. 

The running light losses are, in themselves, relatively unim- 
portant, as the amount of power required is small and the 
amount of idle running relatively very small; but, as showing 
errors in design and workmanship, which extend their influ- 
ence to conditions of heavy load, they are important. We 
shall not here enter into a theoretical discussion of the design 


290 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


of these Tractor machines. It is apparent that their mechanical 
design can be improved materially. When running light, it 
would be reasonable to expect that these machines, if properly 
designed, should effect a saving in power consumed almost 


Fic.12 
Towine RESISTANCE TESTS 
1 | 
CORRECTED FGR“AVERAGE ROPE ANOLE 


a 
oO 
3 
4 
4 
a 
t 
w 
o 
° 
4 
3 
9 
F 
w 
> 
r 
) 
uw 
. 
rr 
w 


LDS-EFFECTIVE TOW ROPE PULL 


SPEED Mm. PER HR. 


PrGuaL 2 


proportional to their less weight as compared with the Mining 
Locomotive. 

Under load conditions, especially as the draw-bar pull ap- 
proaches the maximum of which the locomotive is capable, the 
latter machine, theoretically, should show the higher mechanical 
efficiency. This is due to the fact that when the Mininz Loco- 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 291 


motive utilizes its entire weight for traction; to obtain a similar 
draw-bar pull with the Tractor, the two driving wheels on top 
must have a pressure upon them equal to the weight of the 
Mining Locomotive. As the weight of the Tractor is 10,000 Ib. 
less than that of the Mining Locomotive, a pressure of at least 


FIG.13 
TOWING RESISTANCE TESTS 
CORRECTED FOR AVERAGE ROPE ANGLE 


ou 
o 
od 
’ 
J 
J 
2 
o 
wl 
a 
=6 
-* 
3 
0 
r 
wv 
> 
r 
0 
uw 
bh 
u 
uw 


KiLqwatTs INPUT 
(ELECTRICAL LoSses DEDUCTED) 


SPEEO- mi. PER HR. 


Fic. 13 


10,060 lb. must be exerted on the lower or pressure wheels. 
It is evident, therefore, that the track and rolling friction of 
the Tractor must be greater than that of the Mining Locomotive 
by the amount of this excess pressure on the track. Consider- 
ing track friction only, this excess should amount to about 60 


292 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: (March 13 


per cent. at maximum pull. The tests of Tractor 3 show an 
excess of about 50 per cent. at 5,000 lb. rope pull, though the 
test results are not exactly comparable, as motor and gear 
frictions are included and are different in the two machines. 
Assuming that the Tractor may be so designed that its ag- 


" 


2 

a 
Bis 

Mad 


= 
ee 
Ea 
LA 


a 

| eed 
= 
is 
kid 

xe |_| 
ie 
nae 
Sie 
ili 
Fa 
Pel 
fie] 
Ril 


DRAW BAR INPUT-LBS 


4000 2000 . 


3000 , 1000 . 


DRAW BAR INPUT-LBS, 
y NJ 
x NS N 
\ 
ae 
2? 


2000 3000 4000 
EFFECTIVE DRAWBAR PULL-LBS. 


Fic. 14 


gregate mechanical friction per ton of weight does not exceed 
that of the Mining Locomotive, it is obvious that when running 
light less power should be required to move the former at a 
given speed than is required by the latter. Assuming good 
mechanical design, it follows that the Tractor under light loads 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 293 | 


should be more efficient than the Mining Locomotive, and that 
at some load between the limits of very light load and full load, 
the efficiency curves of the two machines should cross. So far 
as comparative efficiency is concerned, therefore, great care 
must be taken in designing the Tractor, to minimize friction 
losses if it is expected to make a good showing as compared 
with the Mining Locomotive. 

In order to assist in determining the cause of the apparently 
excessive friction of these Tractors, at low rope-pulls and when 
running light, tests were made on a wet rail to determine the 
relative amount of reduction in friction due to a bad rail, and 
other tests made pulling the Tractors with the gears and motor 
disconnected. The results of these tests are illustrated in Fig} 
and show that at a speed of six miles an hour the wet rail effects 
a saving of about 16 per cent. in total friction, running light, 
and at the same speed the gear and motor friction amounted 
to 28 per cent. of the total. It is apparent from the tests that 
frictions at light loads are relatively small and at large pulls 
the difference is to a large extent lost as the mechanical fric- 
tion approximates the theoretical amount to be expected from 
the pull exerted. 

It would seem that the mechanical efficiency of tractors of 
this type might be improved by giving attention. to the fol- 
lowing facts: 

1. An increase in the size of wheels would tend to decrease 
losses. 

2. The wheel-base should be long and the “‘ flange clearance ”’ 
small, 

3. The mechanical construction must be such that alignment 
of all bearings is preserved under all conditions of operation. 

4. The point of rope attachment should be carefully selected 
in order to redtce flange friction to a minimum. 

5. The rail surface should be as good as on ordinary railway 
tracks, and the construction should be such as to minimize 
vibration. 

6. The use of guides for the pressure wheels should be avoided 
if practicable. If used, the vertical motion in the guides for 
the pressure wheels should be free. 

7. The pressure wheels should have no flange. 

8. Arrangements for oiling the bearings of tractors as well 
as of locomotives should follow railroad practice. 

Speed limitations and length of tow. In hauling canal boats 


294 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: (March 13 


by mules, the speeds attained vary from 1.25 to 2 miles an hour, 
When the current assists, the speed exceeds these amounts; 
when the tow is against the current, the speed sometimes drops 
very low. Dynamometer tests were made, and it was deter- 


Fic. 15. 


FRICTION TesTs OF TRACTORS, 
wWivrHour GEARS, 
ON WET RAIL. 


TRACT-“3_ DRY RAIL. 


“3. WET) RAIL. 


xX 
{ 
r 
2 
¢ 
£ 
a 
« 
¥ 
Z 
r3 
x 
Uv 
uv 
i 


SPEED, MeOH, 


Fic. 15 


mined that in starting a tow, a team of good mules could exert 
momentary pull approximating 800 lbs. Thisis maintained but 
momentarily. 

The average speed at which a team of mules draws a one-boat 
tow approximates 1.75 miles an hour and does not exceed 2 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 295 


miles an hour in still water. The pull required at 2 miles an 
hour, as determined by the tests in which the Mining Loco- 
motive and Tractors were used, is 250 lb.; at 1.75 miles an 
hour it is 190 1b., and at 1.5 miles an hour it approximates 
140 Ib. The curves expressing the relation of pull and speed 
for tows of various length are shown in Fig. 16. 

Tests were made to determine the practicable limits of speed 
when towing is done with towing machines. These limits 
depend upon the following: 

a. Ability to steer the boats. 


30 


E 
2 
a 
a 
3 
re 
sz 
520 
a 
5 
a 


aim 
4° an 
35u 


ii 


"y Goons 

Cae ie 

om ax 

j Wig Gaz 

4 = tuo z 
5tS 

| Suzie 

. Seis 
a =_ may 

: ty z 

re q : 

ic mae oois 

K 2 ny 

a a3 S 


TOWING RESISTANCE 
k o 
° 


b. Wash of canal banks. 

c. Time required for locking. 

d. Tonnage capacity and length of tow. 

The selection of a best speed depends also upon the number 
of boats which must pass through the canal in a given time to 
handle its business. This will be referred to further under the 
heading “‘ Tonnage Capacity and Length of Tow”’. 

Ability to steer boats. Single boats, both loaded and empty, 
were tested at speeds slightly exceeding 5 miles an hour and 
no difficulty was experienced in steering them. 


296 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


Two-boat tows loaded were operated at speeds up to 4.5 
miles an hour. With the Erie steering gear the boats handled 
well at this speed, but care had to be exercised by the helmsman 
to keep his course true. Two-boat tows (light) were operated 
successfully at a speed of 5.3 miles an hour. 

Four-boat tows (loaded), the first two boats being equipped 
with the Erie steering gear, were operated at a speed of 3.5 
miles an hour. At this speed, however, it was necessary for 
the helmsman to exercise great care to prevent the boats yawing. 
Four-boat tows, empty, were operated at speeds up to 5 miles 
an hour, but great difficulty was experienced in steering; the 
drag of the rear boat’s pulling the head boats against the bank 
in spite of anything the helmsman could do. This was espe- 
cially noticeable in going around curves convex with reference 
to the bank upon which the tow-path was located. It was 
found quite impossible to start four-boat tows on such a curve. 

The relations of speed and pull for tows of various lengths, 
loaded and unloaded, are illustrated in Fig. 16. 

Our conclusions in regard to limits of speed, as fixed by con- 
ditions of practicable steering, are: 

a. Single boats, loaded or empty, can be operated satisfac- 
torily on tangents at speeds exceeding 5 miles an hour, but on 
the canal for satisfactory working 5 miles an hour is probably 
about the limit of average speed for such tows. 

b. Two-boat tows are handled satisfactorily at speeds of 
from 3.5 to 4 miles an hour. 

c. Four-boat tows loaded can be operated with a fair degree 
of success at speeds up to 3 miles an hour except on very sharp 
convex curves, 

d. Four-boat tows, light, were found impracticable as tested. 
It is possible that improved steering gear might remedy the- 
difficulties encountered, except that no conceivable steering- 
gear would make it possible to handle four-boat tows, light, in 
a heavy wind. 

Wash of canal banks. At the higher speeds covered by the 
tests a tendency to cause wash of the canal banks was noted. 
The tests were not of sufficient duration to justify an attempt 
at estimating the relation of wash and speed. 

At a given speed the wash is greatest in shallow and narrow 
sections of the canal. To acertain extent in these sections the 
speed is automatically regulated; the resistance to the passage 
of the boat being increased and this resistance immediately 
reacting upon the series motor used in our tests. 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 297 


The speed of towing should be under the control of the op- 
erator, and to obtain best results the motor used should be 
capable of operating at any desired speed within the predeter- 
mined maximum limits. With equipment of this character, 
the speed can be regulated on those sections where the wash 
might otherwise be injurious. 

Time required for locking. Tests were made to determine 
the time required in locking one, two and four boats and to see 
if the time could be reduced in any way. The following is a 
typical locking for two- or four-boat tows under test conditions. 


TABLE VII 
Locxinc TEsTs 
Lift. 8 ft. Lift 8 ft. 
Lock No. 4 Lock No. 5 
4 boats 2 boats 


First 2 boats | Second 2 boats| First 2 boats 


Erie steering- No gear Erie gear, 
gear, minutes minutes minutes 
ee ieiiel got hens. ue deal,e. | 00200 00.00 00 .00 
First boat entered block.............--- 1.75 
First boat tied in lock..............-. 1.25 3.00 2.00 
Second boat tied in bock............-. 1.75 3.75 3.50 
Upper gate closed (lock emptied)...... 0.75 +25 1.00 
lower gate opened..../.......2-.s--- 2.00 3.50 3.00 
First boat started out................ -00 25 -00 
Second boat started out.:............ 1.75 .25 0.75 
LETS Ga LIOd GLOUE pelers efoi< = otoiplol elm = /olereletel hs» 0.25 1.25 0.25 
Steering-gear Yah (okt <1 De em An ONE 2.00 1.00* 1.50 
Started pulling both boats...........- .00 1.25 
Both boats out of lock............... 0.50 0.50 0.25 
12.00 15.00 12.25 
Lower gate shut.......--sseccsneees- .50 eres 1.00 
Upper gate opened........0202eeeese- 2 ? 00 Bccane 1.75 
2.50 2.75 


SUMMARY 
Pe SUEE ORDO CS Hah a ete cai os © Sa. 8-6 oye 12.00 minutes 
Ue Fe 93 (ol for or cod ae 2.50 Z 
SACTICMENVTOLDOALG eats ss gi kia sale ce ees aah 15.00 
otal fOur-DOAt TOW: ve a coca e sem 29.50 


The foregoing figures represent average results obtained in 
tests. During these tests the men handling the boats were 


298 -¢ eSTILLWELEL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


working at a speed which they could ‘not be expected to attain 
in normal service and, therefore, we have based upon the test 
results estimates of the average time of locking to be expected 
in ordinary working. 

The actual time, as determined by test and our estimate for 
average conditions, (the latter of which is used in subsequent 
calculations) is given below: 


TABLE VIII 
Observed Estimated 
Time locking two-boat locks test time average time 
Tine iockine dour. bouts. oto ect a ee 29.5 min. 35 min. 
‘Timeliooking two: boats. .« «setae oe cece e eat acy eee 15 9< 
Time lockingone sboataajoadt avai eral onan wickets cas as 8.0 “ IG.ge: 


In four-boat Jocks, with the first two boats and the last two 
boats equipped with Erie steering-gear, it would not be neces- 
sary to disconnect the steering-gear and the time of locking 
would not greatly exceed that for two boats. An estimate of 
20 minutes we think is conservative. 

No actual tests of the single-boat locks on the Delaware canal 
were made using canal boats, but during a trip of inspection the 
time of all lockings of the launch used were taken, and from these 
observations the time of locking for canal boats was estimated 
as follows: 


TABLE IX 
Coasting into lock, tests 4and 6 ccc. cons 1 cae oo eiies ee on niet evo TR tes, 
Upper gate jup: (averane on; SID) iivine. +20 ee « bavicse cs aenene sea eDU % 
Lower gate opened (average on trip). ...cs sanvceasier os sncescaee Iv €D - 
Boatsout, averaca or Lestat. <ceu cauuess acces cham ecten ence atten eee le Der z; 
ae 
Time refilling. lock and opening gate...sesenk hie sisle aoe SEREEe TO 5 
Add fon ‘second: Doat.ccs.cass comes dimlenimenniai atx cei eciete mate OL OU a 
Adjust steering geat.... 0.00 sees ssce es ee cecdes saab esc secs 2.00 - 
Two boat tow, dete kines sin. Be care cc oe ee = 
Estimated avérape’ time; ....ssieslsupscoloe nal uecdn cs wantin oem e LO) Me 


The following table gives the estimated average time for lock- 
ing with tows of different lengths and with locks of different 
size as used in our calculations. 


1908} ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 299 
‘TABLE X 
ee 


1 boat lock 2 boat lock 4 boat lock 


Time locking four boats...-.......... 45 j 35 20 
fime-tocking two boats......0.....«..- 21 15 12 
peame:lockingvone’ boat). .c.so+ «ek ace 8 10 11 


* 


The following table gives the estimated time spent in locking 
from Coalport to Bristol for tows of different lengths based upon 
the above estimates of time required per lock. (There are 1 
four-boat locks and 47 two-boat locks on the Lehigh Canal 
and 10 two-boat locks and 12 one-boat locks on the Delaware 
Canal.) 


TABLE XI 
Four-hoat tows, Ours ONE WaY.j..06 0% 0606 sets ae donne 42.6 hours 
Dwo-boat-tows, NOUTS ONE WaYin.a.cfoc esse c0ecnnee ves 1Sizee 
One-boatHtows, BOUTS OMe Ways tis iosiwlels «1 0 oe)6 v bye iea HWE He 


Conclusions. The following is a tabulation of the speeds 
recommended for tows varying from one to four boats, loaded 
and empty, assuming, (a), that direct-current series motors are 
employed, and, (b), that single-phase alternating-current motors 
of the compensated type be used. 


TABLE XII 
MaximuM SPEED BETWEEN Locks 


Direct current Alternating current 


‘ i 


Roun hoats Inaded 2 o.cc.00 «cnc ace ss ew ese 3.00 2.88 
Pod Oats UID tacks eve s\ameisene recite weit + 4.00 4.20 
BErorboatetloa dace meeiaas meena eeiea 3.45 3.45 
MEV OmbORESTEEMP bY). daave sila" seta\ellele laleues0) ¢i2 +12 #6 4.60 5.00 
b SRB Bio Omen 4.00 4.20 
One boat loaded.......... eon a 


One|) Oa been Dey ace «bela cietie ols <\o!wrstlesel'ofes al olive: loins 


Our conclusions in respect to speeds are based upon the ob- 
served facts as regards ability to steer boats, the wash of canal 
banks, the relative time required in locking, and between locks 
and the tonnage capacity of the canal as affected by the length 


of ‘tow. 
“ The speeds recommended for direct-current and alternating- 


300 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


current motor equipment respectively, differ by reason of the 
different speed characteristics of the motors of these respective 
types. The speed characteristic of the direct-current motor 
used is that of the series motor on Tractor 1 as used during the 
tests. The speed characteristics of the alternating-current 


° 
Ss 
oO 
o2 
° 
] 
ol 
s 


a 9 Kw. INPUT 
* 


z 
> 
° 
‘ 

2 
£ 
+e 
Ss 


O SPEFD MPH. 


i 


¢ 
] 


i 
my 
ral 


ALdW3 Sioa O 


posi s| Ole] fe) 


s 


Pee rss) | 


SONO23S-3NLL 
st 


Seale Voss ae Cs a ats Por det 
=a 
eer 1 fred 
Jae ale 
SMO. ivog-2 


$BANMD ADUBNZ - BWI - O33dS 


“SSW 267 Suny 40 H19NI7 


Fic. 17 


motor are those of a typical series, compensated, 25-cycle motor. 
In Fig. 16 the speed curves of these two motors are plotted upon 
the assumption that the gear-ratios selected are such as will 
give the same speed for the two contrasted equipments in pulling 
a tow of two loaded boats, the length of tow being that which, 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 301 


from a purely physical consideration of the problem, appears 
best. 

We have assumed the same speed characteristics of electrical 
equipment in comparing the mining locomotive with the tractors. 
The motors with which these respective machines were equipped 
during tests did not have identical speed characteristics; but 
there is no reason why they could not be so designed, and the 
assumption simplifies the general comparison with two types 
of towing machines. 

Tonnage capacity and length of tow. As the length of tow limits 
the practicable running speed and determines the time consumed 
in locking, the length of the tow directly affects the tonange 
capacity of the canal. The maximum running speeds described 
above, and shown graphically in Fig. 16, give average running 
speeds which were determined from speed-time curves as shown 
in Fig. 17. The following table gives the average time required 
for four-, two-, and one-boat tows to make the round trip from 
Coalport to Bristol loaded and return empty. 


TABLE XIII 
TIME IN TRANSIT OveR EntTIRE CanaLt—106.2 MiLeEs, witH Existinc Locks 


Direct current Alternating current 

System of Operations 

eid teen pose poeta Mole lessee | boats™| boats. | boat 
Time locking, down...........| 42.6 1S 11.3 42.6 Sey 113 
Time between locks, down..... 34.8 30.2 25.8 36.3 30.2 24.6 
Time locking, up....-..-......| 42.6 18.7 1L.3 42.6 18.7 LS 
Time between locks, up......-| 25.8 22.5 19.4 | 24.9 20.6 17.1 
Add 10% contingencies........ 14.2 8.9 7.2 } 14.6 8.8 . 6.7 


Total in transit, round trip..} 160.0 99.0 75.0 161.0 97.0 71.0 


In order to handle a definite amount of freight, it is evident 
that a definite number of boats will have to pass through the 
canal, whether they are operated in four-, two-, or one-boat 
tows. The number of boats required for this service, however, 
will be proportional to the time required for around trip. With 
a fixed amount of freight to be handled, therefore, it is evident 
that fewer boats will be required with one-boat tows on account 
of the higher average speed. The number of towing machines 
required for the service is proportional to the round trips required 
and the time for the round trip. 


302 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


Table XIV shows the ratio of boats required and towing 
machines required for a definite traffic with tows of different 
lengths and locks as now existing on the canal: 


TABLE XIV 
Ratio Boats anD Tow1nc MacHINEsS REQUIRED 


Lirect current Alternating current 


Four-boat | Two-boat | One-boat | Four-boat | Two-boat | One-boat 


tows tows tows tows tows tows 
Boats required... 2.25 1.39 1.05 2.27 1.36 1.00 
Machines required 0.56 0.70 1.05 0.57 0.68 1.00 


The ultimate capacity of the canal is limited by the time re- 
quired in locking. Table XV expresses the ratio of the ultimate 
capacities with four-, two-, and one-boat tows. Since boats are 
moving in both directions, the interval between tows is Couble 
the maximum time required in passing through that lock on 
the canal which requires the maximum time for the towing 
unit employed. We have prepared this table 

a. On the basis of locks as now existing, 

b. All one-boat locks changed to two-boat locks. 

c. All locks changed to four-boat locks. 


TABLE XV 
MaximuM TRAFFIC CAPACITY 


Four-boat Two-boat One-boat 
tows tows tows 


Existing locks. : 


Minimum interval between tows........ 90 min. 42 min. 22 min 
Ratio maximum capacity. ..0..065 00 ns 0.98 1.05 1.00 
One, changed to two-boat locks. 

Minimum interval between tows........ 70 min. 30 min. 22 min 
Ratio maximum capacity... can wees ees 1.25 1.47 1.00 
All four-boat locks. 

Minimum interval between tows........ 40 min. 24 min. 22 min 
Ratio maximum Capacity...c..0 sci wees 2.20 1.83 1.00 


On the Delaware Canal, where there are now 12 single locks, 
there is practically no gain in capacity by increasing the length 
of the tow. On the Lehigh Canal the capacity is increased nearly 
50 per cent. by using two-boat tows, but only 25 per cent. with 
four-boat tows. The conversion of all the locks on both canals 
to four-boat locks would approximately double the capacity. 

Power required. Speed-time curves have been constructed 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 303 


for both the mining locomotive and the tractor for the towing 
speeds selected as most practicable and described under the 
caption ‘‘ Conclusions ”’ for both single-phase alternating-current 
motors and direct-current motors. The general character of 
these curves is illustrated in Fig. 17 for a two-boat tow over an 


ELECTRICAL EFFICIENCIES oF Motrors 


USED Im CALCULATIONS! 


Wee “ii. 40 WAC, 
GE"58, 287, vc) 


ASSYMED 
FOR £ow, Ac 


Par | GE "61,40 R00. 


oh 190 1@ 
EL.OUTPUT IM PERCENT OF. | HOUR 
RATING. 


s 


Fic 18 


average run of 1.516 miles. The towing machines as tested were 
not equipped with motors suitably geared for the speeds desired. 
We have therefore, assumed these towing machines to be equip- 
ped with motors of suitable size and speed and possessing the 
same efficiencies at their rated loads as the motors furnished by 


304 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


the manufacturers. The motor efficiencies are shown in Fig. 18. 
These efficiencies have been applied to the mechanical efficien- 
cies of the towing machines, as shown in Fig. 14. We have so 
applied these efficiencies that the input for a four-boat tow 


DiR ECT CURRENT 
EFFICIENCIES AND CHARACTERISTICS 


MINING LOCOMOTIVE 
---~— ADHESION TRACTOR 


EFFicienty 


© sPeeo-mAH.’ 
KILOWATT 


b 
0 
y 
co) 


Peat 


Sie ae Sis 
(aca aS 
aS a Si ail 


topo 2000 3900 
OS -EFFECTIVE ORAW OAR PULL 


Fic, 19 


(loaded) at the speed selected, will be 75 per cent. of the one-hour 
rating of the motor. The speed selected for both direct-current 
and alternating-current also corresponds to the speed recom- 
mended for two-boat tows. As already pointed out, this gives 
approximately the desired speeds for other tows. 


1908] ELECTRI€ HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 305 


Direct-current motors. The total efficiencies, kilowatt input 
at trolley, and speeds for the mining locomotive and tractor 
are given below. ‘The efficiencies and inputs include all mechani- 
cal and electrical losses: 


TABLE XVI 
Mining Locomotive Tractor 
Speed Per cent. Input Per cent. Input 
mi. per hr, efficiencies | kilowatts | efficiencies | kilowatts 
Effective pull, 
NE OOO LT Deereiveres/.k- 4.0 70.2 11.3 67.2 11.8 
te 2000 bea cs eer c Ssuill 71.6 17.3 70.0 Teste 
At SOOO) TDS 2. scr. 2.7 69.5 23.3 69.0 23.5 


It will be noticed that there is comparatively little difference 
in the efficiencies of the two machines tested, notwithstanding 
the fact that, as previously stated, the mechanical losses of the 
tractor materially exceed those of the mining locomotive. 
This is due to the fact that the electrical losses of the two small 
motors used on the mining locomotive exceed the electrical losses 
in the single large motor used on the tractor; assuming in both 
cases that the motors are geared to obtain the speed which we 
have selected. 

Improvements in design would make it possible for the mining 
locomotive to retain a larger part of its advantage, due to its 
less mechanical friction. 

The relative efficiencies and characteristics of the two machines 
are illustrated in Fig. 19. 

Alternating-current motor. By a similar process, the charac- 
teristic curves for single-phase, alternating-current operation 
have been deduced. In providing motors for the mining locomo- 
tive, we have assumed the same ratios between the efficiencies 
of two- and one-motor equipments as existed in case of direct- 
current. The following table shows the comparison of the two 
machines, including all mechanical and electrical losses: 


TABLE XVII 
Mining Locomotive Tractor 
Speed Per cent. Input Per cent. Input 


mi. per hr. efficiencies | kilowatts | efficiencies | kilowatts 


Effective pull, 


At 1000 lb..... ae 4.3 66.8 13.0 64.5 13.4 
At 2000 Ib......--- 220 68.4 17.0 67.0 17.3 
At 3000 Ib......--. 2.3 67.2 21.2 66.5 21.5 


———————— 


306 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


The respective characteristics of the two machines are also 
shown in Fig. 20. 

The average efficiency of the mining locomotive is about 1.5 
per cent. higher than that of the tractor both with alternating- 


ALTERNATING CURRENT 
EFFICIENCIES AND CHARACTERISTICS 
MINING LOCOMOTIVE 

——-— ADHESION TRACTOR 


: 
: 
4 
: 
x 


ee 
z 
Ips 
IE 
lta 
a 
BS 
IK 


= EFFICIENCY. 


Tilt aes 


=~ 
Re 
Bae 


EPFECTIVE DRAW BAR PULL POUNDS. 


Fic. 20 


current and direct-current equipment and the average efficiency 
at the trolley is about 2.8 per cent. higher with direct-current 
than with alternating-current. 

In this case, as in the case of direct-current equipment, it is 
evident that the difference in efficiency of the mining locomotive. 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 0 


ey) 
N 


and the tractor, and of alternating-current and direct-current 
equipment, are relatively unimportant as compared with other 
factors upon which the choice of one or the other as a system 
of electrical haulage must depend. 


DIRECT CURRENT, 500 VOLT, OPERATION 


INCLUDING 10LE RUNNING AT LocKS. 


WEIGHT B45 TONS 


MINING LOCOMOTIVE , 


Equrementr 2-15 ne mor 


u 
a 
2 
(2 
) 
F 
v 
v 
° 
« 
| 9 
a 
8 20 4 Ee Bi ' LOADEO 
ia . 
z 2 LoAeeD 
10 + . f =n = 4 LoRoto 
fo} 
LoADED 
Fveclem sy 
a v LOROED 
o 2 
ae LoADED 
r ia 10 LIGHT 
Ee LGM 
eae Lion 
Rh 
) 
4 
a 
ae 
> 
« ° 
= \ bour 
2 Liat 
if 1 LOADEO 
. ~ LIGHT 
Pa) 
Oe 2S: 2 LOANED 
by + LOADED 
a 6 
YO 4 a 
“ ever TOT LOADED 
eee ast $48 7 
= 
Gees A756 274 « 
Be PIERS Useany dete 
a ne er 
Bort LENGTHB7° "6" wiotn 10°75”. oRarT LOADED $°°22'% 
° 5 


3 a 5 6 P 3 9 10 


LENGTH OF RUN, MILES 


2 


{Piel PA 


Characteristic curves showing the average speed including 
locking for runs of different length, the average power required 
at the trolley, and the watt-hour per ton-mile for four-, two-, and 
one-boat tows for the mining locomotive and the tractcr and 


308 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


for both alternating current and direct current are shown in 
Fign21,22).23,<and, 24. 

The average length of run for the entire canal is 1.52 miles, 
and from calculations we have made it appears entirely practic- 


Direct CURRENT, SOO VOLT, OPERATION 


INCLUDING IDLE RUNNING AT LOCKS, 


LOMASED 
LOADED 
LOADED 


WHR. P GROSS TONMILE 
AY TROLLEY, 


LOADED 


LOADED 


LOADED 
LronT 
RIGHT 
LIGHT 


INCL. LOCKING, 


r 
u 
4 
J 
é 
« 
t 
b 
« 
3 
¥ 
ui 
> 
s 


LIGHT 


LIGNnT 

i Loaded 
LIGHT 
LOADED 


sr. mer. 


LOADED 


INCkL. LOCKING. 


ScHED. 


FT LIN 


par Lenotn 87°7%6' wibrH 107 5'™ 


LENGTH OF RUN, MILES. 


Fic. 22 


able to use a run of this length as typical for the entire canal. 
Table XVIII shows the more important points brought out by 
these curves, on the basis that the locks are enlarged as necessary 
to accommodate two-boat tows. 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 309 


TABLE XVIII 


SPEED, Kitowart Input, anD Wart-Hours PER TON-MILE. AvERAGE RUN 1.52 MILES 
—Two-Boat Locks. Time Lockinc: 4 Boats 35 MIN.; 2 Boats 15 MIN., 1 Boat 
10 MIN, 


a ———SSSSSSSSSeSSeSeSeSeSeSeSe 


Speed Mining Locomotive Tractor 


Average Average Watt- Average Watt- 


Maxi- speed input hours input hours 

mum including at per at per 

speed locking trolley ton- trolley ton- 

mi. per hr, mi. per hr. | kilowatts mile kilowatts mile 
Direct current. 
4 boats loaded.... 3.00 1.40 8.7 Ges 8.8 12.0 
4 boatsempty.... 4.00 1.60 an 29.2 4.6 30.3 
2 boats loaded.... BES: Zeeo 9.1 14.8 9.3 15.15 
2 boats empty.... 4.57 2.65 5.2 41.9 5.4 44.0 
1 boat loaded..... 4.00 2.81 ats 20.0 8.0 21.0 
1 boatempty..... 5.30 3.42 4.9 61.0 5.2 64.5 
Alternating current 
4 boats loaded.... 2.88 now 8.1 NOL) 8.2 tea) 
4boatsempty.... 4.13 1.59 520 33.5 5.3 34.8 
2 boats loaded.... 3.45 2.22 9.6 15.5 9.9 16.0 
2 boatsempty.... 4.98 2.78 6.6 50.8 6.8 53.0 
1 boat loaded..... 4.19 2.90 9.0 22.6 9.4 23.3 
1 boat empty..... 6.00 3.67 ere 77.0 6.9 80.8 
TABLE XIX 


Watt Hours per Ton MILE at Power House 
(AVERAGE FREIGHT Haut 55.6 MILzs) 


Direct Current Alternating Current 
Ton—2000 Ib. reseeereien Tractor pete Tractor 
Watt-hours per total ton-mile 
Pouraboat tOwS, cme aateletereas/cls si 24.6 24.8 22.6 23.0 
ARWO-DOAE EOWSs « Vielels rts ta/onelo els ajey> 30.9 32.5 32.5 33.8 
@ne=hoat tows. s.cnee oes lal elc 42.8 45.3 48.3 50.2 
Watt-hours per freight ton-mile 
Four-boat tows... ccs sas oe vss > 33.9 37.2 32.5 33.1 
TwWoZhOatstOWSs. 6% fiedoe west wers 44.5 49.7 46.7 43.6 


One-boat tOWS...00. cr tet eee 61.5 69.0 69.5 (22 


310 _. STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: {March 13 


For the conditions existing on the Lehigh and Delaware 
Canals, it is estimated that the efficiency of a system of electric 
power transmission and conversion supplying direct current 
to moiors will approximate 70 per cent. from bus-bars at power 


RENT,25 CYCLES S50V., OPERATION 
induvaine {OLE RUNNING AT LOCKS. 
Minune Locomotive, WweisnTt 8.45 Tons, 
Equipment 2-15 HP. mor. 


> 
Te 


oo 
° 


AT TROLLEY. 


LOADED 


LOADED 


WHR. GROSS TONMILE 


LoaDED 


LoAoRnOD 
LOARCEO 


LOAOCETD 
LIGHT 
LIGHT 
LIGHT 


INCL. LocrKiING. 


x 
uw 
4 
| 
° 
4 
r 
F 
c 
3 
he 
wu 
> 
< 


LIGHT 
LORDEO 


LIGHT 
LOADED 


} 


| 
| 
fey un 


LOAPED 


Lion? 
957. 
475" 
23.8" 

Boat Lenotn a1"e'" Wie TH Tal tas ORAFT Loncen 5°°2.2'% 


SCHED. SP. MPH. 
INCL. LOcKING. 
nv 


LENGTH OF RUN, miLEeS. 


Fic. 28 


house to motor terminals. If alternating-current motors be 
used the calculated corresponding efficiency is 75 per cent. 
Based upon these efficiencies and the traffic conditions as exist- 
ing on the Lehigh and Delaware canals, the watt-hours required 


1908] 


ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 31L 


at the power house per total ton-mile and per ton-mile of freight 
handled are given in Table XIX. 

It should be noted that the calculated power for canal trans- 
portation, as set forth in the above table, applies only to the 


AVE. Kw. AT TROLLEY. WHR. GROSS TONNMILE 


SCHED. SP MPH. 


AT TROLLEY. 


INCL. LOCKING. 


LocKINe. 


INncL. 


7° 


60 


50 


1 UGHT 


INCLUOING IDLE RUNNING AT LOCKS, 
TRACTOR 3.85 TONS, (NCL. COUNTER WEIGHT 0.25 Tons.) 
Equipm - 30 HP. mo 


Sea eee Be 


LOADED 


LOADED 


Loapeo 


LOADED 
LoRDED 
Lornvpto 
Lic wT 
LIGHT 
bIGHT 


LicnT 


LIGHT 


LORDED 


LIGHT 
LOADED 


LOADED 


274 
137. 
rr 
Boar LenctH 87°76'™, ) DRAFT LORDED 572.2 
2 3 4 s e 7 8 9 10 " 12 
LENGTH OF RUN, MILES. Fie. 24 
Fic. 24 


especial conditions imposed by the physical limitations of these 
particular canals and by the speeds for loaded and for light boats 
which we have selected as most suitable for their operation. 


312 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 18 


APPENDIX. 


The tests conducted on the Lehigh Canal were for the purpose 
of determining the practicable towing speeds and the power re- 


MAX, Ve... WIOTH ORAFT GROSS CANAL DEPTH 
LENGTH LENGTH. LORDED WEIGHT secuon CANAL 
eT Lam oy fy. rT TONS. rr 


190 267 6.6 1040 “650 


‘82 \ 6.6 


Y ORAFY 7.43 ©T. 
CANAL BORT | 2 6.60 ° 
EMDEN. 5.78 CANAL Boat RESISTANCE- 
4.98 RHINE-WESER TESTS - 1906. 
TAB t 
6.60 
$.78 + 


SEA a 
No 8S 


L.C.R NLC, 
TEST BOAT. 


ea a 
Bidtiseeee 
SV AA ee 


5.1% 


| 
oO 
4 
4 
J 
> 
oO 
w 
> 
F 
) 
w 
4 
u 
wu 


SPEED MPH. 


Fic. 25 


quired to pull a boat of the type used on that canal. <A general 
investigation of canal-boat resistance was not attempted. It is 


1908] ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 318 


of interest, however, to compare the results with those 
obtained in the very complete tests made by Sympher, 
Thiele, and Block on the Rhine-Weser Canal in 1906. In Fig. 
25 we have reproduced the results of these tests, as well as the 
results obtained on the Lehigh Canal. 

The Rhine-Weser curves indicate that the clearance between 
the bottom of the boat and the bottom of the canal is most 
important as affecting canal boat resistance. In Fig. 26 we 
have plotted the results of one of the series of Rhine-Weser 


! \ 
on 
$3 
a+ 2 aN 
oy 
4 fe ‘ if 
32 fn, yi 
ith Soy, <ot 
20 Seco is es = 
3 “Sts P_choss |wavopy = [i — 
ze 4 
8 ye Pore br pirferenr Losod Sek ie 2 eee! (oy 
g i | REFERRED To DRAFT. 
= we Ruwe-Weser Tesrs 
165 4000_ 
ar) \ ’ 
& 
oO z= 
Ta 
fs J a + e3 
z ! 4) J 6 | 
128 s0a0 4) |_ SX ¥ i 
° 3 . 4 @ | 
is a €. & 4 a 
AS $ v oc. ”, 
z 5 a 4 J i if r 
« ke 
Sue: ate Z| of 
B,)- oou 
a] | aS 
a 
@ u Ce 
ef wi RE 
cs 
a 
4 _la00 
= y 
> = = 
I 
° : ; ' tz 
DRAFT FEET LU e 
pa 
«o 
08 
eee Fig 26. 
Fic. 26 


tests in terms of draft and have deduced the skin friction from 
the Lehigh tests. This gives a point which permits the exten- 
sion of the curve to zero draft with approximate accuracy. 
It will be noted that with a constant speed the resistance bears 
but slight relationship to the ratio of canal to boat cross-section, 
but is affected to a much greater extent by the clearance be- 
tween the boat and the bottom of the canal. 

In Fig. 27 we have plotted the difference between the total 
friction and the skin friction in terms of resistance per square 
foot of bottom surface as related to the clearance below the 


314 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


bottom of the boat. The points shown are from two tests, the 
boats in each case having the same cross section but different 
lengths and differently shaped bow and stern. The results show 
a fairly close agreement in the unit of resistance as referred to 
the bottom clearance. It is unfortunate that the tests did not 
include boats of the same draft but with different bottom clear- 
ances, but the data obtained indicates the importance of the 
clearance below the bottom of the boat, a point that until 
recently has been generally overlooked in canal work. 


5 RENCE BETWEEN Toral eserance 
> SN FRI ic nets REFERRED To 


ae aio i ‘a eae 


Fic. 27 


An interesting point brought out by this method of plotting 
the test results is that the sea barge No. 85, with the same cross- 
section as the canal boat Emden, but with a length of 182 ft. 
instead of 217 ft., shows the smaller unit resistance as referred 
to the bottom clearance. The increase in unit resistance in 
case of the longer boat is probably due to the reduction in bottom 
clearance on account of the settling of the boat and the angle 
assumed by it relative to the general surface of the water under 
speed conditions. If the angle is the same in both cases, the 


1908] - ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS 315 


stern of the longer boat will be brought closer to the bottom 
than will that of the shorter boat, with the result that the effec- 
tive bottom clearance will be reduced. It will be noted that 
this effect is most marked at higher speeds, as we should expect 
to be the case. 

As a matter of interest, the unit values in Fig. 27 have been 
applied to the boat as tested on the Lehigh Canal, the average 
bottom clearance being estimated at°1.57 feet, and the ratio of 
canal section 8 to 1 as compared with 3.6 to 1 as existed with 
this clearance in the Rhine-Weser tests. The resulting points 
are shown in Fig. 25 and closely agree with the test results. 

In Fig. 28 we have plotted the total pull per ton required 


FROM TESTS OF CANALBOAT EMDEN. 
PULL PER TON AS APFECTED By 
CRAFT ANO SPEED. 

FIG. 28. 


POUNDS PULL PER TON, 


PRAFT— IFT. 


Fic. 28, 


at vatious uniform speeds and with different drafts. These 
curves show that for a given speed there is a load at which 
the pull required per ton is a minimum, and that the pull re- 
quired per ton increases rapidly as the clearance beneath the 
boat is diminished beyond a certain point. A relatively small 
clearance is permissible at low speeds but at the higher speeds 
which can be attained in mechanica! towing the bottom clear- 
ance must be carefully considered. 

The important fact brought out by the curves plotted in 
Fig. 28, is that the power required to tow a canal boat at a given 
speed is a minimum per ton of gross weight when the draft is 
approximately one-half the depth of the canal. The curve of 


316 STILLWELL AND PUTNAM: [March 13 


resistance at a given speed with different drafts closely approxi- 
mates a hyperbola; and a hyperbola, representing the resistance, 
divided by a straight line, representing the tonnage as referred 
to draft, gives a minimum at one-half the depth of the canal. 
The same law probably applies to the width of the boat as com- 
pared with the width of the canal. With data of similar char- 
acter and with known cost of power, crews, and canal-boat 
maintenance, the most economical type of boat and speed for a 
given canal can be determined. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 317 


Discussion on “Notes on Evectrirc HavuLaGe oF CANAL 
Boats.”” New York, Marcu 13, 1908. 


Richard Lamb: This seems an opportune time to discuss 
this subject, for the public at large seems to be giving con- 
siderable attention to the subject of the waterways. The 
government officials at Washington are suggesting that there 
be legislative enactments in the matter of the water powers, 
so that these powers can be conserved for future use. Un- 
doubtedly, in many cases these water powers will be used to 
propel boats, especially if such work as has been illustrated here 
to-night is carried to completion. 

I do not agree that efficiency can, to a great extent, be disre- 
garded. As engineer for the company that contracted to tow 
canal boats on the New York State canals, I had occasion to 
investigate, in a practical way, the subject of canal-boat towing. 
The results of the tests made on the Erie canal at Tonawanda, 
N. Y., showed that the cost for towing a boat from Albany to 
Buffalo by mules, steam propellers, and by electric motor were, 
respectively, $42.24, $17.60, and $15.32, with relative speeds of 
1.3 miles, 3 miles, and 3.6 miles per hour. In order to compete 
with the principal motive power now in use, the mule, great care 
should, therefore, be taken to obtain the most efticient motor, 
from both mechanical and electrical standpoints. 

In this country attempts have been made to utilize the tow- 
path for a railroad bed, and to tow the boats by standard loco- 
motives. These tests proved unsatisfactory, because of the 
necessary slow speed at which the boats had to be towed. 
The dead load and the fuel consumption of a locomotive going 
only three miles an hour made the standard locomotive very 
inefficient for this purpose. A low rate of speed is the govern- 
ing factor in canal-boat towing. This attribute is inherent, 
because of the limited distance between the bottom of the boat 
and the bottom of the canal. 

It sounds like a paradox to say that when a canal boat is 
pulled at its maximum speed, it stands still, The bottom of 
an Erie canal-boat is nearly flat and is 17.5 ft. wide. The 
distance from the bottom of a loaded boat to the bottom of the 
canal is one foot. Conceive of an area equal to the width of 
boat and the distance from the bottom of the boat to the bottom 
of the canal as being an orifice through which water must flow. 
The area is 17.5 sq. ft. When the boat is standing still there are 
12,827 gallons of water under her. At 6 miles per hour, 1166 
gallons per second would have to pass through 17.5 sq. ft. of 
sectional area, if the boat remained as it was; but as a matter 
of fact the boat settles as the speed increases, and therefore 
the sectional area under the boat decreases, making it im- 
possible for so large a quantity of water to pass under the boat 
in so limited a time. Hence the water passes to easier channels, 
to both sides of the boat, until there is no water under the boat 


318 ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS [March 13 


and it stops. Therefore, as soon as the maximum speed is 
reached, the boat stops. 

An intumescence of the water at least one-foot high forms 
about a loaded Erie canal-boat when going three miles an hour. 
This water, not being able to pass under the boat, passes to either 
side, making a wave. At four miles an hour, a loaded canal 
boat on the Erie canal generates dead water under the stern so 
that it is practically impossible to steer her, and the curves on 
the canal make navigation at this speed difficult and dangerous. 
I consider that after equating for first cost and maintenance of 
canal and electric towing plant, and the maximum carrying 
capacity of boats, that a speed of three miles an hour is the 
greatest that should be sought. The wash of the canal bank, 
caused by the waves generated by a boat going more than three 
miles an hour is no inconsiderable factor in maintaining the 
canal. 

In the paper under discussion all the records of the draw- 
bar pulls are referred to the components of the parallelogram of 
forces, the resultant of which would be the tow-line. I do not 
see the object of doing this. I think that a comparison of the 
actual tow-line pulls would be more satisfactory, especially as 
the angle made by the tow-line with reference to the course of 
the towing motor would vary but little. 

The tests recorded, show that a tractor weighing 6493 lb., and 
getting its tractional friction from the pull on the tow line, is 
not so efficient as a mining electric locomotive weighing 16,000 
Ib. The tractor exercised a greater resistance to its own pro- 
pulsion than a mining electric locomotive of over twice its 
weight. The experiments demonstrated that a ‘‘ tractor must 
have a pressure made upon the wheels equal to the weight of a 
locomotive that will give similar traction’”’. It is evident that 
a tractor that gets its tractional friction independent of its 
weight, or independent of a friction that would impede its 
progress to the same extent as that of a locomotive of sufficient 
weight to give a similar traction, would be much more efficient 
than either of the types of motors tested. In designing the 
motors for the tests on the Erie canal, and the Finow canal in 
Germany, I succeeded in producing an efticient motor, working 
independently of its weight. The lighter it can be built, the 
more efficient it becomes. These motors are described and 
illustrated in the New York State Engineer’s reports, also in the 
Transactions of this Institute and those of the American 
Society of Civil Engineers. 

The motor tested on the Finow canal in Germany weighed 
1984 lb. It carried a5-h.p. motor. It pulled the loaded boat 
with ease at the speed for which it was geared to run, namely, 
2.5 miles per hour, The tow-line pull was 575 lb. The electric 
motor did not consume its full quota of watts. This was done 
on a cableway track. If a low I-beam track were used, the 
efficiency would have been greatly increased, as the motor 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 319 


would not have had grades to climb on approaching the supports. 
With such a track, this towing system would be ideal, especially 
if single-phase current were used for the electrical transmission. 

C. P. Steinmetz: During the rapid expansion of our railway 
system, the canals had to take a rather secondary position, but 
it is gratifying to know that general interest in canals and in 
water transportation is reviving, and that the government is 
considering the improvement of the Mississippi waterway, and 
that the state of New York is rehabilitating the Erie canal. 

What would be still more interesting than the paper is, not 
merely a comparative test of two rival systems, but a compre- 
hensive paper covering the subject of canal haulage; that is, a 
comparison of the relative advantages, efficiencies, financial 
economies, etc., of the different systems of electric haulage, of 
steam propulsion, and of other methods, which have not been 
mentioned. Other methods are the chain drive, where a chain 
is laid at the bottom of the canal or river, and raised up to 
propel a boat, carried over a drum, and dropped again. I 
understand that this system gives good service abroad. And 
let us not overlook the mule. Mule propulsion of a canal boat 
appears to be a rather antiquated method, but we may find, 
nevertheless, that mule power, is, after all, under some con- 
ditions, the most economical form of drive. Comparing the 
cost of electric power per ton-mile as given in the paper with 
the cost of maintaining the same mule power, I should not be 
astonished to find that under the average conditions of canal haul- 
age, the mule is the cheaper power. I am told that mules are 
cheap to buy and maintain, and are long-lived. 

In systems of canal haulage a condition essentially different 
from that of the railroads has to be met, in that most of the 
canals are public highways; that is, any boat has a right on them 
just as a cart has on a public street. A railroad company has 
exclusive control of its right-of-way. Electric propulsion, then, 
must not interfere with mule or steam propulsion, or any other 
established method of propulsion on the state or national canals. 
Financially, the most serious feature is that canal traffic, in very 
many cases, is extremely light and intermittent. It exists only 
for part of the year, and the traffic varies considerably from 
year to year. Any equipment installed to take care of the maxi- 
mum traffic would lie idle a part of the year, and might be very 
uneconomically used during some years. Under such conditions 
an electric system may be rather uneconomical. One of the 
chief advantages of the canals is the greater independence of 
the railroad which they confer. 

It appears to me, therefore, that to show a superior efficiency 
to other forms of haulage, the field which electric haulage would 
cover, the traffic which it would take care of, would not be the 
traffic which exists now on waterways like the Erie canal, but 
a new form of traffic which would probably be created. The 
trolley lines have not taken the traffic of the steam railroads, 


320 ELECTRIC HAULAGE OF CANAL BOATS [March 13 


but built up a new traffic; and I can well see that it might be 
possible to establish a profitable system of electric haulage on 
the numerous waterways of the country. A further careful 
investigation of the subject would be of considerable interest 
and of great benefit to the engineering profession, 

L. B. Stillwell: The comparison of the two traction engines 
that we have made has resulted in certain determinations of com- 
parative energy required and of actual energy required which have 
an application wider than we have attempted here to give them. 

As regards efficiency of the contrasted machines, while the 
difference in favor of the locomotive is not controlling, it should 
not be minimized too far. Table 5 evidences clearly that from 
the mechanical standpoint the tractor is materially less efficient 
than the mining locomotive. While the difference in losses is 
small in comparison with the total energy utilized, it is large 
when expressed in terms of losses. For an effective pull of 
2000 lb., for example, the mining locomotive loses an equiva- 
lent pull in the machine equivalent to 400 lb., while the best of 
the tractors loses 600 lb. The lesson to be drawn is that the 
tractor needs mechanical improvement. 

With reference to Dr. Steinmetz’ remarks in regard to a broader 
treatment of the subject than is attempted in this paper, I 
would say that in the course of the same investigation upon 
which our paper is based we studied the economy of the electric 
haulage system as compared with haulage by mules and estab-_ 
lished, to our own satisfaction at least, that if a canal is worked 
at anything approximating its full traffic capacity, electrification 
will pay handsomely. 

In the case of the canals of the Lehigh Coal and Navigation 
Company, assuming some improvements in certain locks and 
an increase of traffic to a point approximating the full capacity 
of the canal, we estimated that the cost of operation, includ- 
ing all capital charges, could be reduced below one-half a cent 
a ton-mile. The grand average cost of freight transportation 
in the United States by railroads slightly exceeds 4 mills per ton- 
mile without any capital charges, locomotive repairs and re- 
newals, being charged generally against cost of operation. It 
is safe to say, therefore, that if these canals were worked to 
their full capacity, even with the small barges now employed, 
the cost of transporting freight per ton-mile will closely ap- 
proximate the average result attained in steam railroad prac- 
tice to-day. With larger barges and larger locks, the cost of 
transportation would be further reduced; but everything de- 
pends, as Dr. Steinmetz suggests, upon the amount of traffic. 
The occasional mule is a proper engine when the traffic is very 
light, but if the traffic can be worked up to a reasonable extent 
it will pay to electrify. The capital costs when divided by a 
very large number of ton-miles per annum are reduced to so 
small an amount that they are absorbed by the general economies 
resulting from electrification. 


A paper presented at a meeting of the Pittsburgh 
Section of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Pittsburgh, Pa., April 1, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A. I. E. E, 


CHARACTERISTICS OF MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS 


BY BRENT WILEY 


_ The function of a fly-wheel in a system with a rapidly fluctua- 
ting load is to equalize the power requirements, thus reducing 
the sudden shocks to the moving parts and thereby the strains 
on the machine frame and both the mechanical and electrical 
strains on the driving motor. For the fly-wheel to be effective 
the speed characteristic of the motor should be such that the 
motor will slow down as the load increases and will increase in 
speed as the load decreases. In the case of large shears the full 
working load is applied suddenly and the fly wheel is called upon 
to deliver energy through a very short space of time, varying 
from one-half a second to two seconds, according to the size of 
the machine and the size and condition of the material cut. 
Thus it is evident that the speed characteristics of the driving 
motor must be inherent, as the time is too short to depend upon 
a practical control means for changing the motor characteristics. 

The ideal working condition for motor-driven shears would 
be one in which the fly-wheel does all of the cutting work, 
leaving for the motor only the friction load and the work of 
accelerating the fly-wheel after the cutting and subsequent 
slowing down period. The results of a test made on a large 
bloom shears, which is referred to later, show that this ideal 
condition can be approximated very closely when the speed 
characteristics of the motor are properly chosen. 

Before outlining the exact conditions which the motor speed 
characteristics should meet, it would be well to analyze the 
speed curves of a shunt, a standard compound, a 50 per cent 
compound, and a series direct current motor. These curves 
as shown in Fig. 1 are designated by the letters A, B, C and D, 

321 


322 WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS [April 1 


respectively, and are given for a 50 h.p., 220-volt, direct-current 
motor. 

For shears requiring a motor of 25 h.p., or of larger capacity, 

the friction load will approximate 25 per cent of the motor 
rating; for smaller shears the friction load varies from 15 per 
cent to 20 per cent of the full load. 

The speed variation for a given change in load and the per- 
centage of energy given up by the fly-wheel for the respective 
changes in speed are as follows: 

Curve A. 
Shunt motor, speed variation from light to full load. 5 per cent. 


The energy of a fly-wheel varies as the square of the 
speed and the amount given up for 5 per cent 


speed ‘variation 1S% 7.6 fo riaers- eee eee 10 per cent. 
Curve B. 
Standard compound motor, speed variation from 
light load to full load . Be SABE .15 per cent. 
Standard compound mbioe eed arcs rah 
friction or 25 per cent load to full load....... 10 per cent. 
Energy given up by fly-wheel for 10 per cent speed 
VATIATION st cizhecs Ras eane Piecale tye Iie ae ee 19 per cent. 
Curve C. 
50 per cent compound motor, speed variation from 
hehtto fulMoad see te See eee 50 per cent. 
50 per cent compound motor, speed variation from 
friction or 25 per cent load to full load....... 30 per cent. 
Energy given up by fly-wheel for 30 per cent speed 
VATIATION kus Acre siigekn grails one aie etna eerie 51 per cent. 
Curve D. 
Series motor, speed variation from 25 per cent load 
to full oad iiirn. tye tal eile iets oe one koe nee 66 per cent. 
Speedat.25 percent load. sc)... ciao. wee 1500 rev. per min. 
Speed iat full load tein tas’ cit cisitonee nana 525 rev. per min. 


With but few exceptions the electric motor drive is now used 
in all machine shops, and the replacing of worn-out engines 
with motors for individual and group drive is completing this 
evolution. Where such a change is to be considered in regard 
to engine-driven shears, it is comparatively a simple matter 
for an engineer to determine the size of the motor and the 
proper speed characteristics to give the best results. For 
example, in the case of a large hot bloom shear 


The fly-wheel capacity of the machine.........A h.p. seconds. 
Brictiomload of machine. nau. acca ee ee B amperes. 

(obtained by test)...................(at a given voltage) 
Cutting period... J. eumns.enisc. oui nee 2 seconds. 
Périod *between Cuts 3.2: s.r aie ere etna 6 seconds, 


(This cycle is to be considered continuous.) 


1908] WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS 323 


If the power is cut off when the machine is running light: 
at full speed, the number of consecutive cuts that can be made 
before the machine comes to rest is four. For the ideal case, 
where the fly-wheel does all of the work, it should give up 25 
per cent of its energy per cut and must slow down 13 per cent. 

Let the light load of the motor = C rev. per min. 

During the cutting period the speed must fall to C rev. per 
min. 100 per cent — 13 per cent = 87 per cent C rev. per min. 

Energy delivered by the fly-wheel during two seconds’ cutting 


igiges ah 


period and energy stored in the fly-wheel during the six seconds 
interval = 25 per cent A h.p. seconds. 

Let the average current required to store 25 per cent A h.p. 
seconds energy in the 6 seconds interval = D amperes. 

The current curve which corresponds to the power curve 

with constant voltage will vary through an economical range 
when the motor speed-characteristic governs the variation as 
follows: 

The minimum value of the current should be equal to a fric- 
tion load at the end of the interval between the cuts. The 


324 WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS [April 1 


maximum value of the current should be equal to the friction 
load plus twice the value of the average current required to 
store the fly-wheel energy expended during one cut. The curve 
in Fig. 2 illustrates this. 

During the cutting period the current rises to a maximum 
value as shown at point X, and falls to a frictional load value 
as shown at Y at the end of the 6-sec. interval. Thus, at the 
point Y, B amperes corresponds to C rev. per min., and estab- 
lishes one point on the motor speed curve. This shows that it 


HE ssuieressiaizisns seueeee 
| -— -f an! 


ymca eae Sbsasczesnsseast 
ssanidcuaeaaeee 


TPT TT 
ATI 


2 ra Rane 
pyRy Ey) rH HHH 


requires D amperes as an average to store the 25 per cent A h.p. 
seconds energy in the fly-wheel. Thus the maximum value of 
the current at point XY equals 2 D amperes, which must corres- 
pond to 87 per cent C rev. per min., and a second point on the 
motor curve is established. By this means a speed curve for 
the working range required can be plotted. As an illustration, 
these points are designated on curve C, Fig. 1. 

The heating effect of the motor load varies as the square of 
the current and is represented by the square root of the mean 
square current. This value of current can be closely ap- 


1908] WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS 325 


proximated by dividing the current curve into a number of parts 
along the time ordinate, squaring each sectional current value 
and multiplying by the time-increment. These several values 
are then added and the sum divided by the total time period. 
The square root of this dividend is the square root of the mean 
Square current. For example, refer to Fig. 2. 


Square root mean square current 


. a (@ x 0.2) + (% X0.2) + (2 X0.2) ete. 
8 


and this is the value of a continuous current which would pro- 
duce the same heating effect as the varying load shown. The 
capacity of the motor required for the above condition can thus 
be calculated. 

With the principal portion of the speed curve constructed and 
the capacity of the motor known, the next point for considera- 
tion is the type of motor winding and consequently the speed 
characteristic which is best suited for the given conditions. 

As has been explained before, the speed variation of a series 
motor covers too great a range between the friction load, or 
25 per cent full load, and the working of full load of the motor. 
This value is approximately 66 per cent, and therefore the 
series motor can be eliminated from the list. 

The next motor to be considered is one with a 50 per cent 
compound winding, in which case the full-load speed is 50 per 
cent of the light-load speed. 

Fig. 3 is a recorded current curve of a 50 per cent compound 
motor operating a large bloom shears which has the following 
characteristics: 


Styler oben chive mera pee etnes Wel. bce bln cPysahe: hana Vertical, bloom. 
Maximum section the machine will cut........ 10 in. by 10 in. 
Wieirlatrottilvavheclewesetaann lier. ices io o.c0s pms aun tierein « 20,000 Ib. 
Diameter otily-wheeleerrscctiya ays cis vis ovstonaes 9 ft. 10.5 in. 
Sechioneol tly=wiheel Gira oc cas f+ a ses de boone 12 in. by 13 in. 
Ieiys (OS? GaabEDlS Gl VANE!) «Wh ooo Ape mole be 9 obKab'o omnes 110 
Energy of fly-wheel at friction load........ 2500 h.p. for 1 sec. 
Sizerohmototeer eres. 00 b.p..antenmittent rating. 
WOltteeiol BOLOSE nner chao slaka cess «ig “poe Gomnaoinp es ace carl 220 
Type of motor winding................ 50 per cent compound. 
MMIQLOLME RE Rea cet Rog east Nee direct-current, geared 
Motor speed... ; aa! .500 rev. per min. full load. 
Friction load. 50 geapeeoes 935 volts, 800 rev. per min. 


Cutting Rodin: Naat: lpabsalbbes aaneiee er raOeM Ore 110 amperes, 235 volts, 


[April 1 


WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS 


326 


Sa 


ey: Naa tia 


a s e 


25 


ana 


He 


ff 
i 


SsocSscaam 


e 


=e a EERE ie 


i Se Se Se eee ee aes | ee 


Sa 


Sos Se 
ph 


1908] WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS 3276 


Sectionronmaterialictit ani. ieee oe oe ae 7.5in. by 7.5in. 
Keinidpotemaberialecwtemea mes tie Merten pole r ite ne «Be hot. steel 
When the machine is running light at full speed and the power is cut 
off the number of consecutive cuts that can be made before machine comes 
to rest is four. 


Motors used for intermittent duty, such as street car and 
crane service, are given an intermittent rating and will operate 
at full load for one hour without injurious heating; this heating 
is generally stated as 75 degrees cent. rise above the surrounding 
atmosphere. The above motor is rated on this basis, and the 
continuous load which it will carry with the same temperature 
rise is equal to practically one-half of the 1-hr. rating. 

As shown on the curve, the motor is working between an 
average minimum load of 95 amperes and a maximum of 110 
amperes. Estimating on the square root of the mean square 
basis, the equivalent heating current is approximately 100 
amperes at 225 volts; this requires a 25-h.p. motor, continuous 
rating, or a 50-h.p. motor of intermittent rating. 

The starting conditions as shown in Fig. 4 require a maximum 
of 100 h.p. which falls gradually to the friction load of 125 h.p. 
in 40 sec. 

The curve in Fig. 3 shows virtually a uniform load .on the 
motor, a much greater load than that given for the theoretical 
case in Fig. 1. An analysis of the condition shows, however, 
that the motor is working in a very steep portion of its speed 
curve; and the speed change for this working portion of the 
50 h.p., 50 per cent compound-wound motor of intermittent 
rating is equal to 75 per cent of the speed change of a 25 h.p. 
series motor of continuous rating. 


50 per cent compound motor 95 ampere 670 rev. per min. 


geo 4 Y 110 “ 640 rev. per min. 

Reduction in speed........¢.-.....- 30 rev. per min. = 4.5 per cent. 
Serieswmotonrerna emia arn 95 ampere 580 

# ee een LOatnpere 040 

Reductiom in speed..-).4----+--«-> 35 rev. per min. = 6.0 per cent. 


The steeper the speed curve the more gradual is the fall of the 
current curve from the peak to the minimum value. Referring to 
the theoretical curve in Fig. 2, a motor with a certain percentage 
of compounding will require a maximum current, as a 
at point X, to give the required speed change of 13 per cent; 
motor with less compounding will require a maximum Ze 
rising to point Z for the same speed reduction. The shaded 


328 WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS [April 1 


portion of the curve from point X to point Y represents the 
work done in restoring energy to the fly-wheel. It is obvious 
that an increase in the peak load or vertical component causes 
a corresponding decrease in the horizontal or time ordinate, as 
the area described by the curve beyond the peak remains con- 
stant. Therefore the steeper the motor speed-curve the more 
gradual the decrease of current value between the cutting periods. 
On account of this sluggish characteristic, it requires quite an 
appreciable time, virtually 14 seconds, Fig. 4, for the motor 
described above to increase the speed of the fly-wheel from the 
speed corresponding to 110 amperes to that corresponding to 
50 amperes, or friction load. As a cut is made in about every 
9 sec. the minimum value of the current does not reach the 
friction load. This is the principal reason why the obtained 
load curve is so much smoother than the theoretical curve of 
Fig. 2: 

For the particular application given above, the 50 per cent 
compound motor proves to be a fairly good series motor re- 
garding speed characteristics; it requires only a slight increase 
in load to give the speed reduction required by the fly-wheel 
in order that it may do the greater portion of the work. Com- 
pared with its continuous electrical capacity, this type of 
motor has great mechanical strength, and it is capable of stand- 
ing heavy overloads for a short period of time. Thus it is 
apparent that both mechanically and electrically this motor 
has better characteristics than the motor of continuous rating 
for a heavier kind of work. 

The curve of Fig. 5 shows the working load of a hot bloom 
shears driven by a direct-current, 220-volt motor of 25 per cent 
compounding. The general characteristics of the machine and 
motor are as follows: 


Style of machine ss. ..90 ox +r GR eke horizontal bloom. 
Maximum section the machine will cut........ 10 in. by 10 in. 
Length of blade. teavel -; .2PegeGeaeek con 1 eee 15 in, 
Rey. per min. of cam or crank- 

shaft operating blade...... 17 at 850 rey. per min. of motor. 
Weighs, of fly-wheels.': ..'in.geter ta eee ene 12,700 Ib. 
Diameter of fly-wheelsi 5.4: 0,47Ry oo eee a 8 ft 
Section of fly-wheel rim 25.3.0...) yan che eee Oe byi2 ane 
Rev. per min. of fly-wheel at friction load............... 350 
Energy of fly-wheel at 350 rev. per min... .5900 h.p. for 1 sec. 
SIZE OL TMOGGE, . «.. . +04 + ssn, 2 aay ere 125 hp. 
Dypevor winding. i 7k see eee 25 per cent compound. 


Motors: in maieoend os aa direct-current, geared. 


329 


9g 
e 


MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS 


WILEY 


1908] 


ay, 
ek 


Ef [s 


N 


ith 
Gal 


iil t T 


= 
= 


[April 1 


MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS 


. 
. 


WILEY 


330 


EP 


1908] WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS 


Motor speed... 6645 .660 rev. per min. full load. 
Friction load. 100 oepere ae 225 volts, 850 rev. per min. 
Cutting fonds “ Bae. hoky a bcs .200 amperes, at 225 volts. 
Section of wiateial CUT RSs Se aR Tee 8.5in. by 7.25in. 
Teinidi ON materia licatee te. heiress Ao Lage ak My ac. hot steel. 


When the machine is running at full speed and the power is shut off, 
the number of consecutive cuts that can be made before machine comes 
to rest is four. 


The curve was plotted from readings taken at 3-sec. intervals 
The current reaches a maximum value of 300 amperes and is 
much more fluctuating than that indicated by the curve of 
Fig. 3, although the fly-wheel effect is more than double. With 
a motor of increased compounding the load fluctuation could be 
materially decreased. 

The current would have excessive peak values with either a 
standard compound or shunt motor, although it has been found 
in-some cases that for the same work done the heating effect on 
the standard compound motor was 25 per cent less than that 
on a shunt motor. 

Increasing the fly-wheel capacity of the system has the same 
effect on the load curve as increasing the compounding of the 
motor, and it will consequently tend to flatten the load curve. 
If the fly-wheel capacity is decreased the load becomes very 
fluctuating, which is the same as’ decreasing the compounding 
of the motor, giving it a flatter speed curve. Fig. 6 shows the 
starting current and Fig. 7 the running current of a hot bloom 
shear driven by a motor of standard, or 15 per cent, compound- 
ing. If the fly-wheel capacity of this machine or the com- 
pounding of the motor were increased, a flatter Current curve 


would be obtained. 


Horizontal billet. 


Maximum section the machine will cut......... 5 in. by 5 in. 
Rev. per min. of cam or crank operating blade............ 28 
Weight of fly-wheels.. 26.66 fe dees a Met chs 3000 Ib. 
DicrmeteEOmiy ow Heel eric asniets olece « le<sierey 8iAeyeiels mutt 5 ft. 6 in. 
Section of Hy-wheel Titu)see nls... Ses ie eels aie 14 in. by 3in. 
Rev. per min. of fly-wheel.-............. 556.0065 ete es 190 
Size of fly-wheel 1.72.25. ooo ss site wise eee e ale ol ts 60 h.p. 
WH Voltage Of Motor yes. week ed eee Te eee See e e me 220 
Type of winding.............-.eeerseeee standard compound. 
IVicxtOLaleue NER reve sish 00) che aaa yebele ines direct current, belted. 
Speed of motor...........-.+5-2+..050...+.-640 full load: 


Cutting load,.,:....++...% (2.0. eew, 45 amperes at. 230 volts. 


332 WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS [April 1 


Section’ of material cttta.. sii. 1. sen neers 4 in. by 4 in. 
Kind: of material icut/s....a.4% ne sere ee er ee hot steel. 
When the machine is running light at full speed and the power is cut 
off, the number of consecutive cuts that can be made before machine 
comes to rest is three. 


ALTERNATING-CURRENT Motors FOR SHEARS 


The motors considered are designed for either 25-cycle or 60- 
cycle, three-phase circuits and are of the induction type. When 
it is necessary to start a fly-wheel type machine frequently, the 
motor should have a wound rotor provided with slip rings and 
external resistance for control. This type of motor gives very 
good starting conditions, as full-load torque is obtained at 
approximately 1.25 times full-load current as compared with 
3 to 3.5 times full-load current for full-load torque with a 
squirrel-cage rotor. 

Shears are usually operated continuously, so the starting 
current required is not of particular importance. It is de- 
sirable to have a motor of simple construction for continuous 
duty, and although some sacrifice is necessary regarding start- 
ing conditions, an induction motor with a cage secondary should 
generally be used for operating shears. The motor should be 
provided with high-resistance end-rings, as this form of con- 
struction gives very good starting conditions. As amaximum a 
50 per cent increase in torque with a 30 per cent decrease in cur- 
rent and a 6 per cent decrease in efficiency at full load may be 
obtained. A second advantage in using high-resistance rings 
is that the motor has a speed characteristic very similar to 
that of a direct-current compound-wound motor, thus allow- 
ing the fly-wheel to be effective during the cutting period. 

The amount of resistance that can be included in the end-rings 
without undue heating is limited, as this heat energy must be 
dissipated in the motor. Where the motor operates continu- 
ously under virtually full load the maximum slip that can be 
obtained with high-resistance rings is approximately 10 per cent; 
but for intermittent service the slip can be increased to 15 per 
cent without undue heating. The efficiency and power curves 
of the motor will be similar to those of a standard direct-current 
shunt-wound motor having sufficient resistance in its armature 
circuit to give 15 per cent drop in speed from light to full load; 
in other words, the slip of the motor varies according to the 
resistance in the end-rings. As the fly-wheel effect obtained 
from the system varies as the square of the speed at the high 


1908] WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS 333 


and low points during the cutting period, a slight increase in 
the resistance will produce a material reduction of the maximum 
load on the motor. 

In shearing plates, the load is applied gradually and a motor 
with 15 per cent slip will have a fairly smooth load curve, the 
fly-wheel being of liberal proportions. In the cases of hot 
bloom and scrap shears, where the section to be cut is quite 
large and practically square, the nature of the work becomes 
more severe. The actual cutting period is short and the power 
required large, which makes it necessary to include large fly- 
wheel capacity; and in order to prevent excessive loads motor 
should have a steep speed-curve. In the case of direct-current 
work it has been shown that increasing the compounding of the 
motor to 50 per cent has materially improved conditions, giving 
_in the case shown almost a uniform load curve. For induction 

motors, however, 15 per cent slip is a practical limit, therefore 
to reduce the peak load for the heavier classes of machines fly- 
wheel capacity must be added. 

In any class of machines where the load is intermittent, 
especially when cast tooth gears are used in the reduction, the 
driving motor will be subject to considerable vibration. In 
many cases it is necessary to mount the motor on a frame or 
bracket support, although it is difficult to provide sufficient 
rigidity with this construction. This vibration causes undue 
wearing of the motor-bearings and tends to deteriorate the 
rotor-windings. The most effective way to prevent this vibra- 
tion where gearing is to be used is to mount flexible coupling 
between the rotor and the driving pinion, which is keyed to a 
short length of shaft supported by two bearings. This form of 
construction has been adopted for a number of different drives 
where the work is very severe. It gives excellent results with 
little wear of the coupling parts and shows a decided decrease 
in motor maintenance. 

The starting conditions are rather severe when the machine 
has large fly-wheel capacity and for shears as described above. 
The motor-starting apparatus should be of liberal capacity and 
should be provided with protective means to insure a gradual 
starting of the motor, thus preventing excessive starting currents. 
An autostarter is used for this work. 

The starter consists of a double-throw, oil-immersed switch 
with the autotransformers mounted in the same case. Several 
extra taps are provided so that the most suitable starting con- 


334 WILEY: MOTORS FOR LARGE SHEARS [April 1 


dition can be obtained. Instarting, the handle of the autostarter 
is first thrown to the right which closes the switch on the starting 
side. A lock is provided to prevent the handle from being 
thrown in the wrong direction, and unless held in position by 
hand on the starting side it will return automatically to the off 
position. After the motor has attained a nearly constant speed 
the handle is thrown quickly to the left and is locked auto- 
matically. 

Fuses or a circuit-breaker may be employed to protect the 
motor against overloads while running, and these can be so con- 
nected that the starting current may exceed the running current 
without blowing the fuse or tripping the circuit-breaker. 

Where there are a number of motors to be started, as in a 
steel mill, it is a practical arrangement to provide a single 
transformer centrally located for each group of motors. The 
transformers should be supplied with an extra tap to give 
approximately 65 per cent line voltage; for three-phase motors 
five line wires would be required for the motor feeder circuit. 
Thus instead of a number of individual transformers, one 
transformer of large capacity is used and the starting apparatus 
is limited to a double-throw switch. 


A paper presented at the With meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engi. 
neers, New York, April 10, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.1I. E. E. 


THE ENGINEER’S ACTIVITY IN PUBLIC AFFAIRS— 
PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSIONS AND FRANCHISE 
VALUATIONS 


BY HENRY FLOY 


Americans are, in a mild way, extremists. They start for the 
goal with such impetuosity and zeal that they often overrun 
the mark and then have to return to it. This is what is now 
happening to public opinion with reference to the corporations. 
No language is strong enough to express the public con- 
demnation of corporate mismanagement, usurpation of power, 
and larceny of funds, which have recently been committed. On 
the other hand, all public utility corporations are not bad; 
and the engineer, knowing this, should be among the first to 
oppose the illogical, unreasonable condemnation of our present 
commercial system which causes a loss of the confidence on 
which our business relations are founded, and results in weak- 
ening the foundations of our whole economic structure. 

As President Woodrow Wilson has truly said: 

Scathing indictments of our present industrial and political conditions 
are what we are suffering from at the present moment and they are to 
be offset, not by other scathing indictments, but by a very calm and 
self-possessed examination of actual conditions of things. What we need 
at present is not heat but light. 

As a matter of fact, public sentiment is now undergoing a 
reaction; the American sense of right and fair-play is winning. 
The pendulum has reached its extreme position and is starting 
to swing back. The excesses in which the public mind has been 
indulging, indicated by the cry for indiscriminate municipal 
ownership, governmental and_ socialistic rule, are. being 
replaced by a more sane demand for control and regulation. 


9 
335 


336 FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


It is beginning to be recognized that a corporation must not 
only serve the public but also the stockholders; that the public 
cannot be served by corporations unless the stockholders re- 
ceive a return on their investment concomitant with the risk; 
that capital cannot be compelled to invest on terms unac- 
ceptable to it. This change of sentiment, however, does not 
mean, as is clearly evident to the well-informed engineer, that 
the public will ever again return to its former laissez jaire policy 
toward corporations. 

Just at this time, during this important readjustment of rela- 
tions between the public and the corporations, it is proper, yes 
necessary, that the engineer should pause to consider the lessons 
to be learned from recent experience, formulate his opinions for 
the future, and thus be the better prepared to codperate in ending 
the present feeling of unrest and antagonism and share in the 
successes of the new advance which is sure to begin soon. Al- 
though by education, training and experience the engineer is 
presumably well-balanced and not excitable, he may nevertheless 
be influenced by popular sentiment or the demands of the corpora- 
tions or financiers. During this transition stage especially, 
when the demands upon his time are restricted, he should take 
the opportunity to verify his opinions, reestablish his conclu- 
sions, and calmly determine his future line of action. 

With these thoughts in mind, this paper has been prepared 
to serve as an introduction to a discussion which it is hoped will 
help to a crystallization and unification of the ideas of the mem- 
bers of the Institute on but three, of many similar important non- 
technical questions now demanding the serious consideration of 
broad-gauge engineers; namely, activity of engineers in public 
affairs, public utility commissions, and franchise valuations. 
The author’s comments must not be taken as an attempt 
wholly to cover the subjects touched upon, or to reach conclu- 
sions which may not require modification, as the questions 
considered could very properly occupy the attention of the In- 
stitute at more than one session and they present viewpoints 
almost as diverse as is its membership. 

Activity of Engineers. Considering the importance of the 
real work done by the engineer in the recent commercial de- 
velopment of this country, the comparatively unimportant pub- 
lic part taken by him is rather striking. His inconspicuous- 
ness can probably be accounted for by 

(a) His keen interest in the purely scientific aspect of the 


1908] FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY 337 


enterprises with which he is connected; with him a “ blundet 
is a crime ’’. The engineer, like the teacher or the ecclesiastic, 
has a certain love for his profession which absorbs and recom- 
penses him, in a degree, independently of monetary reward or 
fame. 

(b) His natural hesitancy in pressing his own claims to 
recognition. Most lawyers or politicians are ready speakers, 
used to argument, and therefore, by profession trained to make 
their own case a strong one. 

(c) His lack, in the past, of a broad, general education, 
especially along the lines of history, political economy, and what 
Dr. Humphreys, of Stevens Institute, in a recent address, 
called “ business engineering’’. A narrow, purely technical 
training does not conduce to a broad, liberal consideration of 
any subject. 

(d) His too frequent inability tc speak fluently in public. 
The engineer does much of his work individually, quietly, on 
paper, so that he often becomes embarrassed when called to 
express his opinion from the platform. 

As a result of these limitations the engineer has hardly re- 
ceived the public recognition which would be expected. Per- 
haps the most striking recent illustration of this was in the 
appointments made to the two Public Utilities Commissions 
of the State of New York, which included fourteen high-class, 
well-paid officials. Of this number only one has had a tech- 
nical training, although in the hands of these commissioners 
are placed, with almost despotic power, the affairs of large 
engineering enterprises in the State of New York, estimated 
to be valued at about $3,500,000,000. This exception is the 
more noticeable when it is considered that the same governor, in 
naming the Hepburn Commission to inquire into and report 
with recommendations as to the condition of banks, financial 
affairs, and their improvement, selected bankers; and, when a 
commission was named to consider and make recommendations 
with regard to the Torrens system of registration of land titles, 
the commission was almost entirely made up of men prominent 
in real estate matters. Mr. George W. Perkins, in a recent 
address, referring to a commission to have national supervision 


of railroads, said: 

It should be in the hands of experts. A railroad commission, for in- 
stance, should be compused of railroad men who can deal with the questions 
arising in a practical way. This kind of expert, high-minded super- 


338 FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


vision would not be opposed by the business interests of the country. 
What they dread is unintelligent, inexperienced administration. 

Mr. Perkins but expresses the accepted opinion that experts are 
the proper parties to have supervision of matters in which they 
are specialists. Even the New York State Court of Appeals, in 
a recent decision relating to the constitutionality of the statute 
creating a commission to determine rates, says : 

That the most appropriate method (speaking from a p:actical, not 
necessarily constitutional point of view) is the creation of a commission 
or body of experts to determine the particular rates has been said sev- 
eral times in the opinions rendered by the Supreme Court of the United 
States in the various railroad commission cases and in those of State 
courts. 

It is well known that the House of Lords in England, when it 
sits as a Court of Appeals, has the cases submitted to its law 
members, which would seem to be the only rational practice. 
Contrary to such general belief, the opinion prevailing in 
selecting the New York State commissioners, as indicated by 
their appointment, was that if they possessed unquestioned 
integrity there existed no special reason for naming men ex- 
perienced in handling engineering or transportation questions. 
This has resulted in the necessity of hiring engineering subordi- 
nates, which increases expenses and decreases direct responsi- 
bility, because the advice of more or less independent experts 
reporting on matters of detail is quite different in value from 
the advice given by a technical member of a board identified 
with its policy and responsible to the public for the discharge 
of his obligations. Hired experts can never be made to shoulder 
the responsibility for a decision rendered by a commission com- 
posed wholly of men untrained in public utility affairs and per- 
haps unable fully to appreciate the technical effect of their orders. 

It is noteworthy that much of the work of the commissions 
is divided, one member investigating one question and a different 
member another. With two or three commissioners as engineers, 
the engineering questions would naturally devolve upon these 
members, and they could solve them much more quickly and 
unequivocally than could politicians, lawyers, or business men 
unacquainted with even the terms involved, to say nothing of 
understanding the practical conditions under which a lighting 
corporation, or steam or electric railway company, must 
operate. A perusal of the minutes of the hearings held 
before state commissions will convince’ any unprejudiced: 
person that a disproportionately large amount of evidence 


1908] FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY 339 


and testimony is submitted, with consequent unnecessary 
financial expense and consumption of time for the purpose 
of explaining terms, apparatus, and methods of operation 
and expenditure to commissioners who, in general, should be 
acquainted with the matters being considered. This and similar 
evidence surely indicates that the efficiency of the commissions 
is largely reduced by lack of propermake-up. For thiscondition 
of affairs the engineers themselves are partly to blame. 

The antiquated notion that every engineering expert is 
unable to appreciate any question outside of its purely technical 
significance is disproved by the fact that the success of the 
engineer is often based on a liberal education with wide ex- 
perience, giving him a capacity for proper consideration not 
only of technical but also of commercial and political factors 
that enter engineering undertakings, and also by the fact that the 
administrative and executive staffs of many of our largest and 
most progressive organizations are being constantly recruited from 
the engineering profession. To become president of the Pennsyl- 
vania Railroad, judging from precedent, one must have, in 
addition to other qualifications, both a technical education 
and practical experience in engineering work. 

By reason of the work and position of the engineer in the 
business and technical world, is it not reasonable to expect that 
at least one-half of the membership of the public utility com- 
missions, being named from time to time throughout the country, 
- should be composed of experienced, broad-gauge engineers. 
I venture to prophesy that as public service commissions become 
more common, they will be constituted more and more of men 
drawn from the ranks of those having practical experience with the 
work to be undertaken. In fact, I can conceive of no more in- 
dependent, dignified, influential or beneficent occupation in 
which an engineer can be engaged, and I believe the honor of 
the position will ultimately attract to it our most capable men 
whom now the monetary inducement will not interest. The 
present inertness of the profession in these matters is noticeable. 
Last spring the writer personally sought to have the officials 
of some of our engineering clubs and societies develop sentiment 
looking to action on the part of these respective organizations 
toward obtaining the appointment of some men of engineering 
experience on the New York State commissions, but only one 
organization acted. The public utility corporations them- 
selves, represented by a number of executive officers in conference, 


340 FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


showed some interest in securing commissions capably con- 
stituted, but no definite results came from the conference. Even 
the labor unions have actively urged they be represented on the 
commissions, simply on grounds of self-interest, while the 
engineer, with especial qualifications for the work, has too 
much pride to ask recognition, even with semi-altruistic motives. 
It is a hopeful sign that for the first time in its history the 
American Society of Civil Engineers recently memoralized 
Congress, urging legislation for the preservation of our forests, a 
precedent which might well be followed by the Institute. 

The importance of the engineer in commercial transactions is 
steadily growing, and he should recognize the claims upon him 
to take part in public affairs and assume the responsibility 
more and more laid upon him, of leadership. His increasingly 
closer business relations with public matters and his reputation 
for integrity give his opinion and influence steadily greater weight 
in large affairs, which he should appreciate, accept, and respond 
to. While the engineer’s work must always be professional, in a 
way judicial, and should always be accompanied by high moral 
sense, the successful engineer must nevertheless combine practi- 
cal business qualifications with his scientific work. There can 
be no good engineer—in a broad sense—unless combined with 
his technical conclusions there is included such recognition of 
commercial conditions, as will thereby permit him to attain the 
worthy objects of his chosen profession with maximum efficiency. 

Public utility commissions. The aggressive, almost insolent, 
and oftimes unfair attitude of some utility corporations has 
created an insistent demand for further and more direct control 
of operations than has been possible through the more usual 
form of legislative enactments. The American people are not, 
as a rule, over inquisitive as to somebody else’s business, but 
when imposed upon, they do not hesitate to ascertain the why 
and wherefore. The result has been a publicity of corporation 
finances and affairs that now implies an obligation to afford 
the corporations legitimate protection in their business. 

The necessity for regulation by the public arises, in the first 
place, because the exercise of franchise rights by certain corpora- 
tions, while academically not exclusive, is nevertheless practi- 
cally non-competitive; therefore, one of the ordinary checks 
arising through competition does not in such cases apply. 
Unlike the individual or ordinary business corporation, a public 
utilities corporation frequently cannot begin business without 


1908] FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY 341 


being organized under special and specific laws. Such corpora- 
tions may be granted unusual franchises; for example, the right 
of eminent domain, and are recognized as existing for service to 
the public in a manner, and with privileges entirely unique and 
distinct from those of ordinary business undertakings, and are 
therefore acknowledgedly subject to special regulation and con- 
trol. Even ordinary business corporations which have no special 
privileges granted, if uncontrolled, may, as the result of unusual 
commercial acumen linked with a large aggregation of capital— 
illustrated for example, in the case of the so-called ‘‘ trusts ’’— 
create a wrong which organized society will very properly step 
in and limit, control, or prohibit. Business trusts are in effect 
monopolies, because competition as a practical matter is out 
of the question, and hence regulation in their cases is also 
essentially necessary. The underlying principle of monopolies, 
cooperation, is a legitimate product of our present civilization; 
it may be controlled but not prohibited. 

In the second place, regulation of utility corporations com- 
peting for the same business is required from the very nature 
of the business itself. If they are allowed to compete fully and 
freely, experience indicates that they will ultimately engage in 
a war of annihilation, the expense of which is in the end borne 
by the security holder or the public. Up to a few years ago, 
political economists believed and argued that the only regula- 
tion required for all commercial operations was free and unre- 
stricted competition: 

Because the experience of mankind had not developed essential monop- 
olies, and it was believed that every problem which would arise would be 
solved by giving full play to the spirit of competition. * * * 

Whether that system of dealing with railroad corporations will 
succeed or not can be ascertained by viewing their history in the State 
of New York, and the experience which was had inthis State, demonstrated 
that it did not work to the advantage of the public and that the evils 


connected with the system were simply enormous and unendurable. 
Competition could not exist upon railroads.* 


Some years ago the state of Massachusetts appointed a Com- 
mittee of Gas and Electricity. empowered to inquire intc and 
revise rates charged, operating costs, capitalization, and to 
limit competition. Although this commission was looked upon 
as something of an experiment, the high quality of work accom- 
plished by it has commanded the respect and approval not only 


*F, W. Stevens address, A. I. E. E. dinner, 1908, 


342 FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


of the public at large, but also of the corporations themselves 
which, through its protection, have been guarded against unfair 
and unnecessary competition. 

Encouraged by the good work accomplished through this 
commission, and other commissions having to do with railroads, 
etc., and supported by those who were opposed to municipal owner- 
ship but believed that the conduct of corporations should be regu- 
lated and controlled, there has developed within the last year or 
two a popular demand for othe1 state commissions with large 
powers that could compel, particularly railroads and gas and elec- 
tric corporations, to comply with their obligations and furnish 
reasonable service at fair prices. Without attempting to discuss 
whether regulation should properly be undertaken by the state 
or federal government, it would appear that if intelligent regula- 
tion of such corporations as railroads is to be obtained, it must 
be done at least in part by the nation rather than through each 
state attempting to pass its own laws, perhaps contradictory 
to those of an adjoining state in which the same railroad must 
operate. On the other hanc, state or even municipal control 
of gas and electric corporations might seem both logical and legit- 
imate, provided the personnel of the board of control is capable, 
honest and unprejudiced. In fact, the corporations themselves, 
as a rule, welcome such regulation, as it will protect their proper- 
ties from hostile and wasteful attacks, vicious competition, and 
unfair manipulation of its securities. Their objections are 
almost always based on either a fear of corrupt or dread of well- 
meaning, incompetent, and inexperienced men, as commis- 
sioners, or else that questions under consideration would 
be decided from the stancpoint of the past rather than the 
present. For example, it would, of course, be unfair, to take 
advantage of the present investment of a corporation, of which 
the stockholders cannot unburden themselves, to make an 
unduly low price for its commodity. In each case the rate of 
return allowed a going corporation should be the same as that to 
a new corporation rendering the same service. 

New York started in a mild way with several commissions 
for different purposes; but last year, under the leadership of 
Governor Hughes, the legislature passed laws substituting for the 
other commissions, two state commissions, one to have charge 
ot all public utility corporations in Greater New York, and the 
other in the remainder of the state. To these two commissions 
were delegated almost unlimited authority, they having power 


1908) : FLOY: THE ENGINEER’S ACTIVITY 343 


to examine corporation affairs as completely as any board of 
directors, and to require changes in methods of operation and 
even reduction in prices charged for service. 

Other states are following the precedent established by 
Massachusetts and New York. Wisconsin already has such a 
commission appointed under an act of the legislature, which is 
well worth perusal by any one desirous of learning the present- 
day radical trend of opinion. There is little doubt but that 
before long, nolens volens, most or all the states in the union 
will have commissions appointed to control and regulate at 
least the so-called public utility corporations. That such com- 
missions have the right and power to determine rates, has been 
established in New York state by the courts, in the Saratoga 
case. 

How, then, are these commissions to deal with the corpora- 
tions in protecting the public, and at the same time give the 
investor every encouragement for profit, and the business no 
lack of opportunity’? In this connection it is important that 
the engineer inform himself just what is the difference between 
operation, regulation, and confiscation. 

With regard to operation, public utility commissions should 
restrict their action to general principles; they should not interfere 
with details, otherwise they will remove the present responsibilities 
from the shoulders of the directors to their own shoulders, re- 
strict and hamper the efficiency of the organizations, still the 
incentive to work, and destroy the reasons for promotion of the 
employees—all of which will result in depreciating the service 
rendered the public and the financial standing of the corpor- 
ations themselves. As has been well said: 

Regulation should stop where operation begins. Matters of business 
discretion should be left to the decision of those who are responsible for 
business results. * 

If state regulation is to determine rates and limit the earnings 
upon investment, it may logically be asked, should the state 
not also include a guarantee of reasonable returns on the in- 
vestment? If a corporation takes all the risks, it is logically 
entitled to all the profits. If the state prohibits anything more 
than a definite profit, may it not be morally bound to assure that 
profit? In fact, municipalities have been known to go a long 
way in this very direction by granting an exclusive franchice, 
which affords a monopoly and prevents competition. 

“* Report, Committee Public Policy, N. E. L. A., 1907, 


344 FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


The principle of state control is not new, although its applica- 
tion has recently been greatly broadened. We have become 
so accustomed to considering liberty as unrestricted license for 
all, that the statement of Chairman Stevens of the New York 
State Commission, at the dinner of the American Institute of 
Electrical Engineers in February, that the public can demand 
and take from the individual, much less the corporation, any- 
thing ‘‘ from his pocket book to his life inclusive ’’, was as startling 
as true. The only precedent to the taking, is the public necessity 
and the proper manner and remuneration. In theory, then, 
regulation is correct, if only the practical application to the 
concrete case were not so difficult. 

Confiscation means the taking of property without allowing 
“fair return’”’ thereon. Fair return is a smooth legal term 
which neither the courts nor anyone else has yet been able pre- 
cisely to interpret. In the decision of the United States Cir- 
cuit Court in the Columbus case, an unallowed demand for a 
reduction in electrical rates, a decision with which every engi- 
neer interested in public utilities should be acquainted, it was 
stated that, over and above legitimate operating expenses and 
depreciation charges; 

The owner of the property should be at least permitted to receive as 


his compensation for its use the legal amount of interest allowed by the 
state of Ohio. 


The court then goes on to say: 


It may well be doubted whether the legal rate of interest is reasonable 
and just compensation to the owner of the property devoted to public 
use, etc. * * * It may well be doubted whether capital would at 
any time for this legal rate alone be willing to enter upon the rendition 
of public service of the kind performed by the complainant under these 
circumstances and conditions., etc. 


Again in the famous case against the Consolidated Gas Com- 
pany of New York, in which a reduction was sought from $1.00 
to $0.80 per thousand feet of gas. The court has held that the 
owner is entitled to “a fair return upon the reasonable value 
of his property ’’, which is guaranteed to him by the famous 
fourteenth amendment to the Constitution. 

Apparently, the existing state commissions realize the impor- 
tance of a comprehensive, thoroughly considered, and reasonable 
line of action based on ‘‘ well settled principles of public policy’; 
and they feel the necessity of proceeding cautiously in order to 
establish correct rulings and avoid the charge of confiscation. 


1908] FLOY: THE ENGINEER’S ACTIVITY 345 


But the radical feeling of the time, as well as some unexpected 
conclusions, are indicated by certain rulings of the several state 
commissions with regard to public utility corporations. These 
are worth considering as illustrating general conditions which 
the engineer must bear in mind when advising his client as to 
investments and earnings. 

The commission of the second district of New York states 
that they have: 

Refused to consider the application of foreign (other than those in- 

corporated under the laws of the state of New York) gas and electrical 
corporations to do business in this state, and have announced it asa rule 
that no application will be entertained. 
The Wisconsin statutes provide that only corporations organized 
under the laws of that state shall receive franchises therein. 
It seems to me that this is a somewhat narrow policy which can 
not be long continued without modification. 

The same New York State Commission has decided to accept 
as satisfactory, unsealed electric meters having not more than 
4 per cent. of error, although requiring gas meters to be within 
2 per cent. of correct, and sealed by a representative of the com- 
mission. It is doubtful whether the leniency of the commission 
toward electrical operating companies will compensate the 
manufacturing concerns for the odious comparison made of the 
electric meter with the much slandered gas meter. 

The same commission announces unequivocally that it will 
require each corporation to maintain a depreciation fund which 
must be provided out of earnings. This is a very wise conclu- 
sion required by the statutes of some states, and a step which 
many corporations have failed to take, as they should have done 
for the protection of their security holders. 

In the Lockport decision the New York State Commission 
established an important precedent; they allowed the consolida- 
tion of two competing companies, but prohibited, as prescribed 
by statute, the issuing of securities to an amount exceeding the 
total capitalization of the two old companies. Thus it appears, 
losses resulting from a war of extermination and the increased cost 
of consolidation cannot be met by the issuance of new securities, 
as formerly, which is from one standpoint radical and far-reaching. 
Again, the commission ruled that the low prices reached through 
competition should not be increased after consolidation, the con- 
solidated company agreeing in writing not to raise rates except 
with the consent of the commission, after further rehearing, 


346 FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


which precedent, if uniformly followed, while protecting the 
public, possibly might tend towards bankruptcy for some con- 
solidated companies. 

As the result of its experience, the Massachusetts Gas and 
Electric Light Commission has recently reported that it finds 
the benefits of the consolidation of gas and electric companies 
in cities of considerable size do not compensate for the disad- 
vantages to the public arising from such consolidations. 

The engineer, of course, well knows that it costs more per unit 
to deliver gas or electricity to the small consumer than to the 
large consumer, yet the New York Commission of Gas and 
Electricity that went out of existence last July fixed a max- 
imum kilowatt-hour charge to be made by the Rockland 
Light and Power Company in Orangetown. It has been shown 
that out of 112 customers served at a loss under the rate formerly 
charged, 75 would receive service under the new rate at a greater 
loss to the company; while out of 26 served at a profit, 19 must 
be served at an increased profit to the company in order to make 
good the losses increased by reduction of price to the 75 men- 
tioned above. It is hardly necessary to say that the courts 
would not sustain this ruling, as was proved in the well-known 
Columbus case. The present commission has, by petition, 
taken under consideration an order to restore the old rates. 

A consideration of the rulings of state commissions shows a 
tendency to place all corporations on the same footing as re- 
gards the returns to investors; that is, regardless of whether 
capital has been invested in a judicious and intelligent manner 
or in an inefficient way, the precedents established indicate that 
about the same profit will be allowed in either case. This, of course, 
does away with all incentive to improve the earnings by cutting 
down operating expenses, or to decrease the price, or introduce new 
apparatus or modern methods. It removes the stimulus heretofore 
existing with the individual, to make the very best showing possi- 
ble, and hence is a reasonable, valid, and practical objection to 
control by commissions. One method of offsetting this very de- 
cided disadvantage has been evolved by the application of the 
London sliding scale, so-called because originating in London, 
England, and now in use in Boston. The principle is a profit- 
sharing one, in which the investors are entitled to a definite rate 
on their investment with a fixed price for their product to the 
consumer. Every decrease in price, as for example 5 cents per 
unit in the case of gas at Boston, entitles the investors to an 
increase of one per cent. in their rate of dividend. An 


1908] FLOY. THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY 347 


objection to this plan is that while it may be perfectly 
fair for a term of years, improvements in methods of manu- 
facturing may so largely reduce the manufacturing costs 
as to entitle the investors to abnormally large dividends, at 
which time a readjustment of the base for price of product and 
rate of dividend would result in seriously depreciating the 
securities held by the owner at the time of such adjustment. 
This London scale, however, is at present the best practical 
method evolved for automatically adjusting profits as between 
the public and the corporation. 

Franchise valuations. In considering the expenses and profits 
of a public-service plant, the engineer must determine the pro- 
portion of earnings to be applied to taxes and dividends, the 
amount of both of which will usually be affected by the value of 
the company’s franchise. At present the franchises of different 
corporations are variously valued at from less than nothing, or a 
liability, up to a $20,000,000 asset. Therefore, the competent 
public corporation engineer must understand what a franchise 
is, its dollars and cents value and its distinction from the good- 
will of a going organization, favorable contracts, or physical 
property. 

A franchise is a license, granted by a state or municipality. 
recognizing the right of a public utility corporation to do cer- 
tain business along prescribed lines. As the privileges and 
earning power of franchises vary, so their values vary. On one 
extreme it has been argued that because a franchise costs nothing, 
or is supposed to cost nothing, it should not be valued or capi- 
talized by a corporation—the present New York statutes pro- 
hibit capitalization of franchises by new corporations—because 
then the public is forced to pay, by increased cost of service, 
the fixed charges on what they have themselves once owned and 
gratuitously bestowed. The corporation replies that its fran- 
chise is regularly and heavily taxed. Ifit has no value, it can- 
not fairly or logically be a subject for taxation; if it has value, it 
-ean and should be capitalized. The answer made to this is that 
the franchise tax is included among the items which go to make 
up the proper selling price of the corporation’s product, and 
therefore is indirectly paid by the customer without in any way 
affecting the stockholders’ investment or profit. 

On the other hand, as the engineer well knows, franchises are 
frequently granted as a sort of bonus to induce capital to under- 
take, perhaps at a loss at the start, certain operations for the 


348 FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


benefit of itself and the public. One purpose in accepting such 
obligations has been, not immediate return, but the profits to be 
gained in the future by the growth of the town or state and the 
consequent increase in revenue. As time goes on, the value of 
the franchise increases the same as real estate, or a desirable 
business location, and it would seem might be just as logically 
recognized as of value and capitalized. 

Granted that certain franchises have becom enormo sly 
valuable, corporations should not be disparaged on that account. 
If the public gave away something for nothing, they did so be- 
cause they were unable to secure any price for it, or they failed 
to recognize its value and made a poor bargain, or their officers 
betrayed their trust. Under any of these suppositions the 
corporations may stand blameless, and are perfectly entitled to 
their franchises and the value of them. It is but a few years 
since it was impossible to interest capital in the construction of 
the New York City Subway; finally, privileges were offered as 
an inducement and the construction completed, which has 
proved a notable financial success. Should any one now claim that 
because the investors have profited largely the contract should 
be annulled? Yet a few weeks ago the startling doctrine was 
advanced by a public service commissioner that we of to-day 
are not bound by an agreement of yesterday, that: 


A common council or a legislature may barter away any present 
rights, yours or mine, for to-day. But the future is not theirs to give. 
They may not dispose of rights which belong to our children as much as 
to us, and to their children and their children’s children after them. 
They may allow private development and management for the sake of 
immediate public advantage, any such investment must be scrupulously 
protected; but the franchise itself is something which may not be given 
away because it is not within the province of the Legislature to give away 
that which does not belong to the existing community. 

A franchise granted by the legislature of fifty years ago belonged then 
to us of to-day quite as much, if not more, than to our grandfathers, who 
handed it over to some railroad in perpetuity. It belongs to us now, as 
it will belong to our grandchildren in their turn. The action of the legis- 
lature of two generations ago in giving away our birthright is not morally 
a binding contract upon us to-day when it comes in conflict with present 
or future public interests, and the vested rights of the private inheritors 
of that franchise will not stand when they come in conflict with the 
vested rights of the whole people of the State of New York. 

This may not be ‘ good law’ now, but I believe it will be in a very 
short time, for the public perception has grown very swiftly of late. 
And the courts of law are never very far behind public opinion. Some 
legal way will always be found sooner or later to do what is morally right. 


1908] FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY . 349 


If the commissioner is correct the engineer must know it, 
and figure a large annual depreciation on the value of franchises; 
he must ask when does the last generation’s rights end and to- 
day’s begin; on what day after granting does the legislature’s 
perpetual grant cease, is it to-morrow or day-after-to-morrow, 
or next week, or when? Doubtless the commissioner is influ- 
enced by the trend of both public opinion and some recent court 
decisions emphasizing the right of public necessity as against 
individual or corporate welfare. Perhaps he is overwrought 
by intimate contact with the oppression resulting from 
certain grants; but, however rapidly we may have grown in 
socialistic doctrine, the engineer cannot agree that obligations can 
be broken simply because they are onerous. He recognizes that 
the franchise granted 50 years ago had neither the opportunities 
nor responsibilities of that same franchise to-day. New condi- 
tions beget new obligations, which the corporation must meet 
or the franchise may become valueless on its hands. 

Aside from feeling or argument in the matter, the courts have 
held, and will doubtless always hold, unless it is expressly 
excepted, that a franchise is property and amore or less valuable 
asset. If, then, the franchise is property, what may be the 
value of the property? The present secretive, uncertain, 
inequitable, unscientific method of arriving at the value of 
each corporation’s franchise, as practised by the State of New 
York, for example, is, to use the language of the courts 
themselves, ‘‘ little more than a guess’ and should be replaced 
by something simple, logical, uniform, and publicly determinable. 

It may be right to prohibit the capitalization of future fran- 
chises beyond what they have legitimately cost, but the engineer 
interested in seeing a ‘‘ square deal ”’ should oppose any attempt 
to destroy by fiat legislation the value of franchises already 
established. In many cases there can be no objection to letting 
the corporations evaluate their own franchises, because the 
necessity of offering their product at a reasonable selling price 
on one hand, and, on the other hand, meeting the taxes that 
may be imposed by the public, will, in the end, generally estab- 
lish a fai value for a given franchise. Where state commissions 
have been appointed with large powers to control and regulate 
public utility corporations, it will be necessary for them to 
determine a value for the franchises of the various companies 
under their supervision. Thus far, no logical or uniform method 
of evaluating franchises has been determined upon by tax 


350 _ FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


assessors, the corporations themselves, the public utility com- 
missions, or the courts. 


The more common method of evaluating a franchise that has 


prevailed, especially among those interested in owning and 
selling corporation securities; namely, considering the franchise 
as worth the difference between the value of the physical property 
of a corporation, and the market value of its stock and bonds, 
can hardly be considered tenable, for the following reasons: 

1. Because in such valuations is included not only the fran- 
chise value but also the worth of good-will, favorable contracts, 
business organization, etc. 

2. Because the daily fluctuating price of stock and bonds due 
to general business conditions, market manipulations, or stock 
jobbery, make it, as a practical matter, extremely difficult to 
determine the fair market value of a corporation’s outstanding 
stock and bonds. 

3. Because the market value, even if correctly determined, 
does not indicate, in many cases, the real value of a corpora- 
tion’s stock and bonds. The market value of said securities 
often depends upon the success with which printer’s ink and 
promoters’ efforts have succeeded in impressing the mind of the 
public, which is generally ignorant, intentionally or carelessly, 
of actual operating and financial conditions. 

The wide difference of opinion among the courts, and the 
general uncertainty as to the proper method of setting about 
fixing franchise valuations, is illustrated by the contradictory 
conclusions reached by the two different officers of the courts who 
have attempted to place a value on the franchises of the gas 
companies operating in New York City. The Master who con- 
ducted an exhaustive hearing in the matter decided that the 
franchises were worth $20,000,000. Judge Hough, of the 
United States Circuit Court, who reviewed the Master’s report, 
concluded that the same franchises were worth $12,000,000. 
Certainly there should be some fair method evolved for more 
closely approximating the real value of a given franchise than 
the wide divergence indicated by these figures. The rule of 
law under which this country operates is not based on an opinion, 
guess, or the discretionary rule of an individual, even though 
clothed with governmental authority. The action of courts, as- 
sessors, OF commissioners, must be restricted as far as possible to 
forming conclusions based on definite and fixed laws. It would 
seem as if the engineering profession, as a disinterested party, 


1908] FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY 35] 


appreciating the necessity for and relation of a franchise to a 
corporation’s business, might assist in evolving some method 
of fairly and logically fixing franchise valuations. The following 
is suggested with that thought in mind. 

Starting with the premise that on one hand the investor in 
electric and gas utility securities has been demanding a return 
of from 9 per cent. to 15 per cent. on the actual investment, as 
shown by the testimony in the Consolidated Gas case from such 
witnesses as Messrs. Emerson McMillin, N. W. Halsey, Samuel 
R. Bertron, Allan B. Forbes, ‘‘ bankers having much experience 
with gas properties in their investments”’, and on the other 
hand that the courts, as indicated for example in the Consolidated 
Gas case and the Columbus decision, are inclined to base their 
decision of “ fair return ’’’ upon the investment, upon the legal 
rate, which varies from 5 per cent. to 8 per cent. in different 
states, we have the extremes of earnings considered fair; namely, 
from 5 per cent. to 15 per cent. on the actual investment, de- 
pending upon location. 

For purposes of discussion herein, consider a corporation 
operating in the state of New York, where the legal rate which, at 
least, will be allowed by the courts as a “‘fair return”’ is 6 per cent. 
In view of the fact that the capitalist has indicated that he will not 
be interested at 6 per cent., but that perhaps 9 per cent. would be 
attractive, are we not safe in assuming that with a New York 
corporation he would be content with 8 per cent. when he 
knows that his property will be defended from unfair taxes 
and competition through protection afforded by a state com- 
mission? The nature of the business, compared with other 
enterprises, is such that the return of 8 per cent. upon the in- 
vestment actually made by a public utility corporation would 
not seem unreasonable. Now if the capitalist will accept 8 
per cent., and the court will stand by the legal rate of 6 per cent., 
we have only to prove that the value of the franchise—which 
the courts have uniformly admitted should be considered as of 
value—is worth one-third the amount of the actual investment 
- to secure an allowance of 6 per cent. on the whole, or 8 per cent. 
on the actual cash investment. 

An examination of the values placed on many franchises in the 
past for purposes of taxation, capitalization, condemnation, or 
court decision, will indicate that perhaps an average valuation of 
the franchise in each case is not far from one-third of the actual 
replacement value of the corporations assets. This ratio, though 


352 FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


somewhat arbitrarily assumed, would seem under present cir- 
cumstances to be both a fair and reasonable one for existing fran- 
chises. If it is amiddle ground on which the various conflicting 
interests could meet, we will have an automatic, easily determina- 
ble, open and above-board method of evaluating franchises. As 
will be recognized, the proposed method gives a different value to 
the franchises of different companies, but is equally fair to all be- 
cause based on their tangible value: it will also be seen that the 
value of the franchise of a given company may vary from year 
to year, depending upon the value of their property. Both of 
these variables are essential in a franchise valuation. 


Example illustrating ‘‘ fair return ’’ for New York corporation. 


Life of franchise 20 years Perpetual 
Cash investment or replacement value.................-+-.--| $300,000 $600,000 
Capitalization. of franchise:at'33 Yincc..aaciecss cobeies oer euene 100,000 200,000 
rotabcapitalization we con ones coer eee $400,000 $800,000 
All operating expenses, 40%-50% gross............-.--00- 36,000 96,000 
Maintenance and repairs, 7% on 66% investment.......... 14,000 28,000 
Depreciation fund, 5% on 66% investment................. 10,000 20,000 
Amortization on franchise value, 5%.....-...0-c+seecccues 5,000 
Interest on total capitalization, 6% .........-..eecseceeeue 24,000 48,000 
Grose in comed er ti raieaistel ccacene ecihaitonerat ere eee $89.000 $192,000 


es a Ser Sm SE a Mr 

In making up the annual operating and fixed charges of a 
corporation, it is proposed that the state commission should 
consider the value of the franchise, as determined above, allow- 
ing the legal rate thereon and also a further amount for deprecia- 
tion or amortization, depending upon the life of the franchise. , 
This latter figure, in the case of a perpetual franchise, would be 
nothing; but in the case of a short-time franchise would be a 
very appreciable amount, which of course must be paid by the 
public. The economy of a perpetual franchise, which the com- 
panies desire, will be appreciated, and there is no great objection 
to it, provided its owner is properly restricted so as to safe- 
guard the public interest. To illustrate the foregoing, let us 
consider a concrete example of a New York corporation which 
has been granted a liberal franchise for a period of twenty years, 


1908] FLOY: THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY 353 


and has invested $300,000 in order to establish a going business, 
compared with a similar corporation having a perpetual fran- 
chise and an investment of $600,000 For more fully illustrating 
conditions as found, we will assume that the general operating ex- 
penses, in the first case are 40 per cent. of the gross income, and 
in the second case, 50 per cent. due to differences in apparatus 
installed and efficiency of management. Repairs and main- 
tenance will be taken at 7 per cent. and depreciation at 5 per cent. 

If the gross income exceeded the above figures, the price of 
the corporation’s product should be reduced proportionately 
to a prearranged increase in dividends, in accordance with the 
London. scale or a modification thereof. If the gross income 
were less than the above, it would be proper to increase the price 
of the commodity, as was authorized, for example, by the Wis- 
consin Public Utilities Commission in the case of the LaCrosse 
Gas and Electric Company. 

It will be noticed from the above example, that in a different 
state with a different legal rate the returns allowed on the in- 
vestment, and consequently the gross income allowed, would be 
different. This is as it should be, because the rate of return 
varies in different parts of the country, as is recognized by the 
various legal rates in the different states. 

The plan suggested for regulating corporations does not place 
all the corporations on exactly the same basis at the start, as 
indicated by the example given, due to difference in efficiency 
of apparatus or management; but these differences are probably 
not greater than those which arise by reason of location, business 
opportunity, or public sentiment, and will doubtless about offset 
one another independently of the fact that the effect of the 
London scale properly applied has a tendency to bring all 
companies to the same earning basis. 

If some definite plan for determining “ fair return ’”’ in con- 
nection with franchise valuation, could be agreed upon and urged 
by any considerable proportion of disinterested people con- 
versant with the facts, or even the corporations themselves, 
would not the commissions and the courts be inclined to accept 
and adopt such precedent thus established? The result would 
be a definite knowledge of what returns from public utility 
corporation investments could be counted upon, and what valua- 
tions would be accorded their tangible and intangible property, 
ignorance of which facts is the principal reason for the present 
unsettling of their business, undervaluating of their securities, 
and to some extent the discrediting of the work of the engineer. 


354 THE ENGINEER’S ACTIVITY [April 10 


Discussion on ‘“ THE ENGINEER’S ACTIVITY IN PuBLic AFFAIRS 
—Pusiic Uritiry COMMISSIONS AND FRANCHISE VALUA- 
tions.”” New York, Apri 10, 1908 


George S. Coleman: In one respect I agree with Mr. Floy, 
engineers as a class are, perhaps, a little too modest; but 
I do not quite agree that engineers ought to be considered in 
any wise responsible for matters which are hard enough for 
other men to handle, men who are devoting all their time to 
it. I do think, however, that the time has come when groups of 
engineers, different kinds of engineers, should give the benefit 
of their concerted thought and action to any public question 
on which they are supposed to be especially well informed. 
In the case of a new bridge across any of our rivers, or a new 
subway, or a new elevated railroad, in fact any kind of engi- 
neering work likely to affect the public, this Institute, and every 
body of engineers who in any way might be related to that 
enterprise, should be heard officially. If Mr. Floy’s suggestion 
this evening shall encourage among engineers the habit of not 
merely quiet, independent thought in their work, but con- 
certed action after discussion, he will have accomplished a 
notable result. 

I do not quite agree with Mr. Floy as to the constitution of 
public service commissions. In a country like this, where we 
are dealing, or called upon to deal, with a body brought into 
existence through the legislature, and representing the legis- 
lature as a sort of permanent committee, what is wanted is 
men who are intelligent, who are open-minded, who have had 
some experience in affairs, who are patient, who are thorough, 
who are industrious, and who have good judgment. Now, I 
would just as lief commit the affairs of the public service to a 
body of engineers as to any other body of men whose profession 
compels them to think, and whose training and experience tends 
to make them impartial. About three-fifths of the average 
legislative body are lawyers: that happens to be the present 
proportion on the public service commission for this district. 
It has been said that the difference between the common law 
and the statute law is that the common law is the perfection 
of reason and the statute law is made by the legislature; this 
is a legislative enactment and legislative enactments will have 
to be submitted to until a better law can be framed But I 
do not agree with Mr. Floy as to the necessity of having experts 
as members of the commission. To follow that line consistently 
there would be needed as commissioners not only railroad men, 
gas and electrical experts, but expert accountants, expert 
financiers, experts on labor, and on every other subject that 
necessarily comes before the commission. Depend upon it, if 
there are three lawyers, or any number of lawyers on any 
commission, no agreement will be reached without discussion. 
With three engineers the same might be true, but I do not know 
from experience. I am willing to leave the composition of the 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 355 


commission to any body of intelligent men who have the neces- 
sary qualifications. 

On the subject of what a commission should do, I must again 
differ from Mr. Floy. He cites with approval a quotation to 
the effect that where operation begins regulation should stop. 
If that were taken literally, after the commission has given an 
order to one of the transit companies to-do certain things, like 
vestibuling cars, keeping cars in better condition, running 
more cars, or making more stops, regulation would be ineffective 
if it ceased where operation began. The commission for the 
first district employs a large body of competent engineers, the 
eyes, you might say, of the commission, a body of engineers 
of whom all engineers should be justly proud—men doing their 
duty well and faithfully, and without prejudice. These men 
report to the commission what they find and suggest what in 
their judgment would improve the operation of any public 
utility corporation. Their reports are submitted in condensed 
and accurate form, and if the commission may act of its own 
motion it will, after due consideration, act promptly. If any 
matter requires regulation, an order will be issued accordingly; 
if it does not, the matter will be dismissed. Although these 
things do not always appear in the newspapers, there are many 
improvements made by many public service commissions which 
are the direct result of suggestions of citizens or of the inspectors 
of the board of engineers connected with the commission itself. 
If the regulation is to be at all effective, details must be care- 
fully considered. 

As to the value of franchises, that is still an unsettled ques- 
tion. I sometimes think that the mechanism in the heads of 
the judges and lawyers and experts has stopped on a dead 
centre: it is going to require some little pushing one way 
or the other to bring to an end the question as to the proper 
way of valuing franchises. We have had some recent experi- 
ences in trying to value franchises for the purpose of taxation, 
and it is not an easy matter. Reputable men will be found 
who differ honestly as to the proper way of valuing fran- 
chises. In three different cases, tried one after another, 
involving different points, a practically different result was 
reached in each instance. We have as yet no final decision 
by our courts. It does not follow because a corporation 
has invested many millions in plants which have been super- 
seded or duplicated or thrown aside and new plants substituted, 
that it should earn necessarily a fair return on all its invest- 
ments. Even the Supreme Court of the United States does not 
approve of that theory. There is a vast amount of what is 
known as “lost capital” that cannot be recovered. If Mr. 
Floy’s proposition, with which I agree, is sound, that a corpora- 
tion already in existence should be treated the same as a new | 
corporation entering the same field, then, of course, as an in- 
evitable result, all the capital expended and taken out has been 


356 THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


lost, unless possibly it has produced a good will, which, with 
respect either to a gas company or to some railroad companies, 
is almost a contradiction in terms. In this city, for instance, 
there is a railroad company having an excellent franchise. 
Originally, it was constructed as a horse railroad and operated 
as such for many years, and then turned into a cable road, and 
then, not long after, all the cable apparatus was removed and 
it was turned into an electric road. In 1900, when the Special 
Franchise Act came into effect here, there had been $26,000,000 
represented by capital stock, $35,000,000 represented by bonds, 
and some floating indebtedness outstanding, and yet according 
to the appraisements made by the company itself, the total 
plant—tracks. roadbed, power house, and electrical apparatus— 
could be duplicated for about $10,000,000. There was a 
frightful waste, apparently and actually, of good money 
which never could be made up, unless that company should be 
treated differently from a new company starting with $10,000,000 
capital and a similar franchise. Let us be thankful that we 
do not have to decide that question to-night. 

The other suggestion in connection with the subject of the 
franchise was, that if a corporation should be restricted to 
earning what is called a fair return on its capital, and every cor- 
poration is treated on the same basis, improvements may be dis- 
couraged. But the modern theory seems to be that where 
there is state regulation a monopoly is not dangerous. It 
might well happen that one great gas company, one great 
electric company, one great transportation company, in the 
Borough of Manhattan, would be sufficient and would not be 
objectionable if it were wisely regulated. That would do away 
with one objection of Mr. Floy’s resulting from competition, or 
lack of competition, if all corporations were to be treated alike. 

A friend of mine, a lawyer, said to-day: ‘‘ I] sometimes wish 
very much that I could go out and deal with things, instead 
of with ideas.”” The more one deals with ideas, except as 
those ideas are related to practical things, the more at sea one 
becomes. I agree with Mr. Floy that engineers have been too 
modest, but in other respects I have to differ with him. 

Chas. F. Lacombe: In discussing Mr. Floy’s paper possibly 
more value will attach to these remarks if it is stated that my 
past experience has been largely in the line of building, operating, 
and managing lighting and power plants, and that in entering 
the city’s service it was entirely from a non-political stand- 
point, my work being purely of a professional character. Dur- 
ing the last five years in the city’s service a number of im- 
portant discussions have come up, in which my particular work 
was involved, and, in consequence, I have been in close touch 
in these matters as they have occurred. 

In discussing this paper, one may assume probably that 
public supervision of public utilities corporations by commis- 
sions or other bodies is necessary and has come to stay, not 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 357 


on the theory that all corporations are bad or that even a ma- 
jority are bad, but on the theory as shown by experience in 
late years, that wise and far-seeing regulation of public service 
is necessary to prevent the sacrifice of the service later on to 
the demands of that portion of the financial world which ap- 
parently requires great profits from stock speculation to the 
detriment of everything else. The present New York street ~ 
railway situation is a shining example of this, as well as of a 
law as to transfers that is almost disastrous. 

It has been said that the public gets no better service where 
there is public supervision, than it does where there is no super- 
vision: that is a question that depends largely on the kind of 
control exercised. We will also need time to improve and 
perfect a method we have only just begun to use. This criticism 
may be true in a limited sense where the companies are working 
on a high plane, not only for the benefit of their stockholders, 
but for good service to the public. But the idea that there 
should be no public supervision because there are many of these 
companies, if carried to the limit, could be compared with the 
fact that we pass laws against crimes, not because the great 
majority are criminals, but to protect that majority against the 
very few who are. 

It is also the duty of a public service commission to stand 
between the company and the public when the public demands 
are unfair or impossible. Some of the most difficult work the 
engineer has to do in public service is to prevent demands being 
made, mainly from ignorance, which are impossible to fulfil. It 
is our duty at times to protect the public against itself. This 
may sound odd, but a very good example is the present police 
traffic regulations. 

From personal experience, I thoroughly approve Mr. Floy’s 
contention that there should be some engineering representation 
on these commissions. Their work certainly comprises super- 
vision of the most important engineering enterprises in the 
district which they controi, and even one well equipped engineer 
of what we might call ‘general administrative engineering 
experience,’ would be a great aid to the commission in ren- 
dering unnecessary, if the term may be used, the conduction of 
the entire commission through matters of technique, which the 
engineer could settle at once, thus saving much time for the 
whole commission and giving them a clearer view of the main 
point at issue. Rar 

In reply to this, in discussing it with attorneys on a friendly 
basis, they are very apt to say: ‘‘Well, assuming that the board 
is made up with no engineering representation, they can hire 
engineers.” The reverse of this proposition would be equally 
true, that if it were made up largely of engineers, it could hire 
representatives of other professions. Ina way, business men 
and other professions seem to regard the engineer in the light 
of an expert only, in a limited field, and that beyond this he 


358 THE ENGINEER’S ACTIVITY [April 10 


has had little experience and has little knowledge of the affairs 
of the world at large with which they think they are more closely 
in touch. It is hardly necessary here to point out the large 
number of what might be termed “‘ administrative ’’ engineers, 
actively engaged in managing, at least in part, not only the 
engineering side but the business side of a great number of the 
enterprises. 

The engineer advising a commission of non-engineers not 
being a member of the body, would certainly be compelled to 
exercise the greatest care and conservatism in expressing opin- 
ions, which might be misconstrued in discussion among men 
who were not engineers. Nor would such an engineer take the 
responsibility which he might take as a member of the com- 
mission. This fact, in my experience, has been noted a number 
of times. The salaries offered by the State for engineers serving 
the commission, but not members, would not attract the men 
that could be secured as commissioners by the honor and dignity 
of the position. A commission dealing largely with engineering 
subjects, therefore, made with a proper representation of law- 
yers, engineers, and business men would, I think, be of more 
value than one in which either element was left out. 

From lack of careful engineering consideration due to hurry 
and rush caused by public clamor, regulations have been passed 
by commissions and by the legislature itself, which could well 
be termed “‘ inexpert legislation,’ and which the courts have 
rejected. This appears entirely unnecessary, and involves a 
waste of large sums of money. Much time and trouble would 
be saved in long and expensive lawsuits which have come from 
just this form of error. If an experienced, conservative engi- 
neer, with the power he would have as a member of such a 
commission, had been in touch with the matter he could prob- 
ably have prevented a number of such cases in the past, for 
public clamor and government by newspapers would naturally 
not appeal to him as against his knowledge of the laws of nature. 
In support of this, I would call attention to an example of in- 
expert legislation, of which we have heard a good deal. 

This is the suit of the Consolidated Gas Company against 
the attorney general, the district attorney, and the New York 
State Commission of Gas and so on, and also the City of New 
York, as contesting the constitutionality of Chapter 736 of the 
Laws of 1905, and Chapter 125 of the Laws of 1906, this latter 
law being known as ‘‘ The 80-Cent Gas Act.” 

The Gas Commission set the price of gas to the private con- 
sumer at 80 cents in the city of New York, and the price of gas 
to the city for its own purposes, at 75 cents per 1000 cu. ft. 
A decision has now been rendered against the city by the United 
States Circuit Court, Southern District of New York, which 
will be appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States 
for the settlement of certain points as to constitutionality. A 
great deal of pressure, as voiced by the newspapers, was brought 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 359 


to bear on the commission. If the commission had had an 
engineering representative of high standing it is probable that, 
taking into consideration the success of the sliding scale for 
gas companies in England, some such sliding scale would have 
been adopted here, instead of making a direct cut from $1.00 
to 80 cents, and to 75 cents in the case of the city itself. This 
reduction might have been extended over a period of years, so 
that the increased consumption of gas, which seems inevitably 
to result from a decrease in price, would have convinced the 
companies that they would not be taking the risk of having 
to operate at a loss. 

There is also in this law the requirement that gas shall be 
supplied at a pressure of not less than one inch, and not more 
than two and one-half inches in any service main at any distance 
from the place of manufacture. As a matter of fact, to-day 
modern gas appliances require really a higher pressure than the 
minimum set, and the city itself in requiring the operation of 
gas lamps is put in a peculiar position, in that it is forced to 
require a minimum pressure of one and one-half inches in order 
to operate the mantle lamps at reasonable efficiency, whereas 
the legislative act allows the company to fall to one inch 
pressure before the company is penalized. In Manhattan, 
with the very considerable rise in grade between the lowest 
point and the highest point, the rise in pressure due to 
the height of the column of gas will alone force the gas pres- 
sure beyond the legal limits. The Consolidated Gas Company 
tried to operate within the legal limit, and they found that when 
they did they received a large number of complaints from 
people who could not operate their gas stoves and cook their 
meals on account of low pressure. The penalty for any viola- 
tion of this.condition was $1,000 for each offense. It has es- 
caped my mind now as to how many times the companies were 
found above or below the pressure required, but the last time 
it was looked up, and that was a year ago, the penalties would 
have amounted to a very large sum. 

The candle-power of the gas was also raised from 20 to 22, 
which seems unnecessary, and if the gas fell below this candle- 
power, the company was to be penalized by a fine of $1,000 
for each offense. This also added materially to the cost of 
making gas. 

Further than this, in the same law—Chapter 736 of the Laws. 
of 1905—the companies were also penalized $1000 per offense 
in case they even sent a bill to the City of New York for over 
75 cents per 1000 cu. ft. I cannot tell you the figure to which 
these fines would reach in case they had all been enforced 
rigidly and an attempt made to collect them. 

The United States Circuit Court in its final order declares 
that all these penalites are unconstitutional and void, and are 
not to be enforced. More than two years’ very hard work 
was put in by both sides in this case, and the joint expenses 


360 THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


of the city and the company will amount to alargesum. Mean- 
while the people of the city of New York have received little 
if any benefit. I think I can say safely that if it had been left 
to a board having one or more competent gas engineers as 
members, these errors might have been avoided, and the price 
to the consumer gradually reduced. 

In addition to these matters, caused by inexpert legislation, 
the Supreme Court of the United States has recently rendered 
a decision in what is known as ‘‘ The Minnesota Case,’’ in which 
they state that the laws as passed by the legislature in the 
State of Minnesota affecting railroads and warehouses, contain 
certain penalty clauses which would act to prevent the rail- 
roads and warehouses from going into court at all, and, in 
consequence, these penalites are unconstitutional and void. 
Beyond that they refer the matter back to some other court as 
to the propriety of the rates involved, in the following language: 

It cannot be to the real interest of any one to injure or cripple the 
resources of the railroads of the country, because the prosperity of both 
the railroads and the country is most intimately connected. The question 
of sufficiency of rates is important and controlling, being of a judicial 
nature it ought to be settled at the earliest moment by some court, and 
when a Federal Court first obtains jurisdiction, it ought, on general 
principles of jurisprudence, be permitted to finish the inquiry and make 
a conclusive judgment, to the exclusion of all other courts. This is all 
that is claimed, and this, we think, must be admitted. 

It is apparent, therefore, that penalties which are not legal 
and reasonable will be considered very carefully by the courts 
in these matters. While the Consolidated Gas case does not 
show any clauses preventing the company from having its day 
in court, it does show penalties imposed on the disobedience of 
conditions which are impossible or unreasonable. One, if not 
two, of these conditions would have been condemned by en- 
gineers. 

Decisions of this character certainly point out that legisla- 
tion affecting public service corporations must be fair and rea- 
sonable, and should be made by men who know something of 
the engineering and operating conditions. They point out 
forcibly the necessity and propriety of having a skilled and 
experienced engineering member in a public service commission. 

Mr. Floy also takes up the interesting question of franchises, 
what they are and what their valuation should be. To bring 
this matter up to date, I have procured and will read to you 
some definitions given of a franchise in the last decisions of the 
United States Circuit Court in the Consolidated Gas Case, as 
rendered by Judge Hough, and also as to the valuation of the 
Consolidated Gas Company’s franchise. 

It appears that, apparently, the question as to whether a 
public service corporation is entitled to add the value of its 
franchise to the tangible assets on which a fair return would be 
lawfully demanded, is to be submitted to the Supreme Court 
of the United States for the first time. The United States 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW VORK 561 


Circuit Court points out that the investment of property in a 
manufacturing plant was made, not in the franchise, but wnder 
the franchise, and on the faith thereof, In speaking of the 
ways in which the value of a franchise can be stated, the court 
Says, speaking probably of the usual methods of obtaining 
franchises: 


On every private sale of franchise property, the price paid is so much 
money lost to the public by official incompetence or worse, and such sale 
can confer on the vendee no right to compel the consumer to tepay him 
a price which should have been paid to the State. For these reasons I 
believe that, on principle, the franchise should be held to have no valae 
except that arising from its use as a shield to protect those investing their 
property upon the faith thereof, and that considered alone and apart 
from the property which it renders fruitful, it possesses no more economi- 
cal value for the investor than does the actual shield possess practical 
value apart from the soldier who bears it. 


The court then states that many decisions have been rendered, 
the trend of which is against his own views, but that for good 
reasons he must follow the weight of authority. He says: 


I conclude, therefore, that I am compelled to consider franchises not 
only as property, but as productive and inherently valuable property, 
and to add their value, if ascertainable, to the complainant’s capital 
account, before declaring the rate of return permitted complainant by 
the statute complained of. 

In a later decision, after the re-opening of the case for certain 
reasons, speaking of his valuation of the franchise, the court 
BAYS: 

It is not difficult to detect flaws in findings opposed to the settled 
opinions of the judge who happens to constitute the court. 


The court in its first decision then goes on to the question of 
valuing franchises, and says that, for the purpose of condemna- 


tion or regulation: 

The value of the franchise depends wholly upon what is earned under 
it, and I believe the best way of finding out how much a franchise separ- 
ately considered is worth, is to ascertain what those persons desirous of 
continuing operations under it consider it to be worth. Ina corporation 
whose stock is freely bought and sold, such value is measured by the suc- 
cess attending the sale of stock based entirely upon capitalization of 
franchise, yet the value of stock issued only in consideration of the 
franchise is obviously dependent on earnings after the stock based on 
tangible property has received a satisfactory dividend. 

This is really the same measure of value that the New York Franchise 
Tax Commissions are using, except that instead of that reasonable return 
upon the tangible assets deemed by the commission as sufficient, there is 
substituted the opinion of the investing or speculative public as to what 
constitutes a satisfactory rate or return upon all stock. Thus, if the 
investment of a hundred thousand dollars in a franchise protected busi- 
ness authorized, in the opinion of the promoters, the issue of two hundred 
thousand dollars’ worth of stock, and such stock for a number of years 
maintains itself at par, paying satisfactory dividends, it would be obvi- 
ously fair to assert that in the opinion of the share-holders that franchise 
is worth one hundred thousand dollars, assuming no depreciation of 
tangible assets. Yet it will always be true that unless the whole net 
return, compared with the value of tangible property, is above a satis- 
factory return on the tangible investment alone, the addition of stock 
issued for franchise will be regarded as “ water”, and detract from the 
value of the entire issue, and I think this is conclusive proof that value in 
a franchise depends wholly on what the actual investment can earn, 


362 THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


I consider the real reason which compels me to consider the value of . 
franchises to be that for generations it has been the universal practice 
of American Corporations, supported by the opinions of courts and counsel 
to capitalize their franchises for all it was thought traffic or business 
would bear, until the country is full of share-holders whose certificates 
of stock are based upon the belief that in some way or other such certifi- 
cates were legally created pieces of property and would, like other property 
be protected by Federal and State constitutions. 

The court then goes on to value the franchise at this date 
on the basis of the valuation in 1884, when the Consolidated 
Gas Company was started, proportioned to the value of per- 
-sonality and realty of thirty million dollars, the investment at 
that time in tangible assets. He finds the investment in tan- 
gible assets in 1905 is forty-seven million dollars, and the fran- 
chise valuation proportioned thereto would be twelve millions, 
which he allows. The court explains this in his later opinion, 
in which he states that the franchises of 1884: 

Might as well have been valued at twice the amount of stock then 


issued. It was nothing but an attempt to capitalize expected profits; 
but the attempt now has twenty years’ success to justify it. 


Further on he defines franchises as follows: 


The so-called franchises may be denominated ‘“‘ licenses, or tenancies 
at will’ or “‘ continuing trespasses ’’, yet what is being done under them 
is a fact, a profitable thing, a taxable property by the law of this state, 
The State of New York, therefore, is estopped from continuing to tax 
that property by one set of representatives and denying it all. value 


through the instrumentality of another. 

The contention of the city of New York in this matter was 
that the franchise had value as regards condemnation or sale, 
but that it should not have value when it capitalized that value 
and charged a return upon it against the: public that gave 
them the franchise. 

It will be very interesting to note the decision when it is given 
by the Supreme Court of the United States, and it is to be 
hoped that it will go into the question of what is the proper 
way to value a franchise, particularly when, as stated, this has 
come before the court practically for the first time, strange 
as that may appear. 

I trust that I have not quoted too much law, but I thought 
that it would be of service to bring in some of the decisions 
which have been rendered since Mr. Floy wrote his paper, and 
I also thought that it might be of value to a number of engi- 
neers who are at times confronted with similar problems. 

H. M. Brinckerhoff: This question of the necessity of co- 
operation between corporation officials and the public service 
commission was made a prominent part of the speech of Com- 
missioner James E. Sague, of the Second District of the State 
of New York, at the annual banquet of the Stevens Alumni 
Association. He said: 


Satisfactory results can only be obtained by cordial co-operation be- 
tween the corporation officers and the commissioners in the same spirit 
which was exercised in the conference between the Interstate Commerce 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 363 


Commission and the corporation accountants in the preparation of the 
uniform system of railway accounts recently adopted. . . . 

In all departments of the commission’s work the same necessity for 
co-operation is apparent. We all need to be educated in this field. 
We can probably learn much from Europe, and especially from England, 
where the Board of Trade has functions similar to those of our commis- 
sions. The commissions need all of the intelligent advice that they can 
get, and all criticisms if kindly made, will be received in an humble 
spirit. We want to know where to begin in our work. We want to learn 
what is most important to be done now, and what ought to be left for 
the future, and we need especially perhaps to learn where to stop. 

This is the carefully considered, positive statement of the 
only technical member of the New York State Public Service 
Commission, and when it is considered that Mr. Sague has had 
long experience in railroad operation as well as large corpora- 
tion affairs, it forms a very striking argument for exactly the 
idea we are advocating. 

Our public utility boards and railroad commissions to attain 
full usefulness should have upon them some experienced men, 
men who have been through the mill and who will not ask the 
impossible. No man, no matter how sincere and devoted, can 
grasp in a few minutes, operating questions with which he has 
never had actual personal experience. 

The great variety and complexity of questions coming before 
public regulating boards require for proper balance a member- 
ship representing legal, financial, and commercial experience, 
but equally important is it that some experienced operating 
members should sit upon these boards in order that a proper 
appreciation of the effect of proposed orders and regulations 
may be considered and clearly appreciated by the board during 
its deliberations. 

At this point I part company with the author in that I do 
not agree with his contention that commissioners should be 
primarily and exclusively engineers, and I doubt whether this 
was in the mind of Mr. Perkins when he made the remark: 

A Railroad Commission should be composed of railroad men who can 
deal with the questions arising in a practical way. 

The questions which come before boards of public control 
are 90 per cent. operating questions in the sense that they 
affect directly or indirectly the methods of, quality of, or re- 
muneration for, operation. I have no fear that legislation or 
the rulings of utility boards will reverse the laws of gravity, 
strength of materials, or even the design of rail-sections; but 
I do fear that their action in certain instances will have an 
unexpected detrimental effect upon the very service which 
they were hoping to improve, a result which experienced op- 
erating men would clearly foresee. 

Purely engineering questions should be handled by engineer- 
ing experts who are making a specialty of the particular line 
momentarily under consideration. Mr. Floy’s remark in re- 
gard to hired experts seems to be a condemnation of all con- 
sulting engineering work, as there should be no difference in 


364 THE ENGINEER’S ACTIVITY [April 10 


vo 


the amount of responsibility assumed or service rendered when 
acting for a public commission, a corporation, or a private 
individual. No one engineer-member of a commission could 
expect to keep up with the vast intricacies of all the engineering 
questions which might come before the board, whereas a prac- 
tical, experienced operating man who had had the daily, monthly, 
and yearly running of a plant or system under his charge, 
would have sufficiently good judgment and experience in engi- 
neering matters to know when he must call upon an expert 
engineer and properly to select such an expert. 

There can be no question that in many instances where public 
service commissions make rulings adverse to the company, 
which afterwards prove unwise, it is quite as much the fault 
of the company as of the commission, the company not having 
fully laid before the commission the actual facts in the case. 
In this connection the attitude taken necessarily, or perhaps 
we might say customarily, of presenting matters to a commis- 
sion in public meeting as they would be presented before a 
criminal court, brings about an unfortunate result. 

It is probably impracticable at the present time to expect 
matters of this kind to be considered openly in a fair, 
candid discussion, but if such a course could be pursued 
I am satisfied much better results would be obtained than by 
the formal, legal methods now pursued. Our commissions 
would very seldom go radically wrong if they had the real 
facts placed clearly before them. Two conflicting, cleverly 
concocted, partisan statements, on the contrary, befog rather 
than clarify the issue. 

Every operating man knows that to make the worst appear 
the better reason, while it may be a triumph of legal skill, is 
not a satisfactory method of deciding operating questions. 
There may be differences of judgment, but an accurate basis of 
facts is necessary for the protection of both parties to a con- 
troversy. A short cut to a correct result would in many cases 
often be made by the presence on the board, as has been sug- 
gested, of experienced operating men, and I am greatly in hopes 
that we will see before long the appointive power fearlessly 
used to place upon these commissions carefully selected men 
of this class to codéperate with and assist the otherwise ex- 
cellent personnel of which the commissions are composed, 
Such appointments would not only be just to the railroads but 
beneficial in the long run to the public. 

Louis A. Ferguson: I heartily concur with Mr. Floy’s views 
as to the desirability of having thoroughly trained and well 
equipped men of technical knowledge and broad experience 
upon the various commissions entrusted with the duty of regu- 
lating rates or the conduct of business by public utility corpo- 
rations. It appears to be the trend of modern legislation to 
take from the various legislative bodies, city councils, etc., the 
power of regulation of public service corporations, and place 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 365 


it in the hands of commissions. This is extremely desirable, 
not only from the viewpoint of the corporations, but of the 
public as well. Attempted regulation of public utility corpora- 
tions by large, unwieldy governing bodies such as the board of 
aldermen of large cities like New York, Chicago, Philadelphia, 
or Boston, is seldom satisfactory either to the corporation or 
the public. Such bodies rarely number among their members 
men of sufficient technical knowledge and training to enable 
them to pass upon the questions involved with any degree of 
satisfaction. For instance, when the regulation of the rates 
to be charged by a telephone company, a gas company, or an 
electric lighting company comes before a body of men number- 
ing from fifty to seventy, it is almost impossible sufficiently to 
educate so great a number of men in any reasonable period of time 
so as to enable them to pass intelligently upon the questions 
involved. Usually many months, and often years, are spent 
in hearings before such bodies, and finally a rate is established 
which is not infrequently but a compromise between the rates 
proposed by corporation and the board of aldermen; it is not a 
rate based upon a thorough, scientific basis of reasoning. Dur- 
ing all this time the affairs of the corporation are in a disturbed 
condition, its directors cannot plan any extension of business, 
the proper financing is made much more difficult, and stock- 
holders become alarmed at the various reports as to the prob- 
able action in regard to the fixing of rates. How much more 
satisfactory and how much fairer is a hearing for such a purpose 
when conducted before a properly equipped commission ap- 
pointed either by a legislature or by a governor, a commission 
numbering say three, five, or seven, all of whom, or at least a 
majority of whom, are thoroughly trained engineers, pos- 
sessed of a scientific knowledge of the subject under discussion, 
and able, of their own knowledge, to arrive at an absolutely fair 
result, fair both to the corporation and to the public. 
Practically everyone will concede that a public utility cor- 
poration is entitled to a fair return upon its investment. The 
chief difficulty encountered is the varying views of different 
people as to what is meant by “‘ fair return”’. Some extremists 
contend that the legal rate of interest fixed in any state is a 
fair return for public service corporations doing business in that 
state, while others contend for as high a rate of interest as cap- 
ital can secure by engaging in any mercantile or other legitimate 
enterprise. In my opinion neither of these views is correct. 
There are but few capitalists that would care to engage in any 
industrial enterprise, such as manufacturing, where the re- 
turns upon the investment would be less than twelve per cent, 
A review of the returns made upon capital invested in banking 
enterprises throughout the country shows a very high return 
of interest upon the capital invested, in many cases running as 
high as twenty, thirty, fifty, and in one case at least as high 
as one hundred and twenty per cent. No one will seriously 


366 THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


contend that a public service corporation is entitled to so high 
a return upon its investment as is referred to in the case of 
banks; nor, on the other hand, should anyone seriously contend 
that such a corporation is entitled to, say, only five per cent. 
return upon its investment, five per cent. being the legal rate 
of interest in the State of Illinois. It is axiomatic that the 
return upon capital invested in public service corporations should 
be sufficient to entice capital. There is no magic about a public 
service corporation or about the business in which such cor- 
porations engage which will serve to attract and interest cap- 
ital, unless the return upon the money invested be approximately 
that which might be earned upon the money if invested in other 
legitimate enterprises. It is my opinion that public service 
corporations would be and should be satisfied with a lower 
rate of interest upon their investment where their rates and 
other business dealings with the community are controlled by 
a commission, small in number and composed of, say, trained 
engineers, than they would deem satisfactory if their rates and 
other business dealings were controlled, as they are now, by 
state legislatures or boards of aldermen. In the first case the 
corporations may be reasonably sure that no radical measures 
will be advocated by a commission which would serve to throw 
unnecessary burdens upon the corporation, or which would 
prevent the corporation from earning a fair return upon its 
investment. In the second case the corporation is compelled 
to exist in a constant state of uncertainty, never knowing what 
wave of radicalism may strike the community and be re- 
flected in its lawmaking body, whereby public clamor may 
result in the fixing of rates so low as practically to amount to 
confiscation, or in the surrounding of the business with such so- 
called safeguards or other provisions relating to methods of 
bookkeeping, etc., as to make it, if not extremely difficult, at 
least extremely expensive to operate its business in a satis- 
factory way and in compliance with the law. 

Too much stress cannot be laid, however, upon the absolute 
necessity of appointing as members of state commissicns en- 
trusted with the regulation of the affairs of public service cor- 
porations, men of undoubted integrity, the highest order of abil- 
ity, and possessing the confidence of the community. In fact, 
the members of such a commission should be the same class of 
men, so far as their standing and ability are concerned, as we 
expect to find in the Supreme Court of the United States. 
If these commissions are to be made fat berths for politicians, 
public service corporations have only jumped from the frying- 
pan into the fire. The temptations and possibilities for wrong- 
doing in such a position are enormous, and weak or unscru- 
pulous men occupying such positions would have it in their 
power either greatly to oppress the corporation or so greatly to 
favor it as to create much dissatisfaction in the community, a 
state of affairs which would eventually result disastrously 
to the corporation, 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 367 


There is no doubt that the sentiment of the public is now 
undergoing a marked change in its views toward public service 
corporations. We have passed through an era of radicalism 
during which the public regarded large public service corpora- 
tions in the light of public enemies, and believed that no measures 
were too severe to be directed against the corporation and no 
restrictions too rigid to be thrown around them. It was for- 
merly thought that competition was the thing, and that by 
granting a license to several gas companies, several electric 
lighting companies, or several telephone companies, much better 
service and much lower rates might be secured. It has been 
discovered that this theory is entirely wrong, and it is now 
rapidly becoming the sentiment of the public that the best in- 
terest of the public is served by a properly regulated monopoly. 
It has been discovered that whenever two or more public ser- 
vice corporations engaged in the same line of business are serving 
the same. community, they are not likely to remain separate 

_very long. Duplication of plants is a waste of capital which is 
not economic, and, if persisted in, necessitates a much greater 
outlay for cost of operation. If there is bona fide competition 
between two such corporations, it means a war of annihilation 
until the weaker of the companies is forced out of the field. 
This militates against good service and also prevents con- 
servative capitalists from investing money in public service 
corporations doing business in a community where such a state 
of affairs exists. Where a public service corporation may be 
assured of a mcnopoly, or a practical monopoly, of the field, 
it may very well ccnsent to do business at a much lower rate of 
interest upon its investment, because the fear of irresponsible 
competition is removed and the business may be conducted 
with an exact knowledge of all the factors entering into the cost 
of conducting and maintaining the corporation and prosecuting 
its business. 

The remarks of Mr. Floy upon the desirability of engineering 
experts equipping themselves for service upon state commis- 
sions and the advisability of the various societies and similar 
bodies of engineers taking an interest in public affairs with a view 
to having their members placed upon such commissions, commend 
themselves to me, and I am a firm believer in the advisability 
of adopting such a policy on the part of our engineering bodies. 

Henry L. Doherty: There is so much to be said both for 
and against public control of public service corporations that 
nothing short of a large volume would cover all of the im- 
portant things which might be considered. Therefore, I shall 
touch briefly on only one or two points of first importance. 

Public opinion is such that perhaps public control of public 
service corporations is inevitable. It would seem self-evident 
that the scope of this.control should be the least possible to 
insure protection to the public. The recent tendency of some 
of the public utility bills, however, seems to anticipate public 
general managership rather than public control, 


. 


368. THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


The broader the scope of control attempted, the less efficient 
will be the work of public control; and an attempt at too much 
breadth will defeat the whole scheme of public control. If 
public control is inevitable, this control must be shaped so as 
to make its disadvantages the least burdensome and its ad- 
vantages the most beneficial. To insure impartial decisions 
the executors charged with public control should be as far re- 
moved as possible from the influence of public opinion. 

Public control, however, is apt to convince the owners and 
managers of a quasi-public corporation that only the minimum 
returns may be earned and distributed. And this interpretation 
of public control removes all incentive on the part of the owners 
and operators of quasi-public corporations to make proper effort : 
for economies and improvements. The so-called ‘‘ London 
Sliding Scale ’’—which is a very incomprehensive name to a 
very comprehensive subject—is an attempt at a reasonable 
division between the public and the owners of the property 
forimproved results. For public control to be a success, it must 
be automatic as far as possible, and the company must be re- 
warded by higher returns for improved results. The best plan 
for the accomplishment of this end can, I believe, be secured 
by, and demands, engineering consideration. 

The men charged with this work must have an extraordinary 
degree of intelligence, or else a combination of experience in 
the business which they are expected to control coupled with a 
high degree of intelligence. 

These executors are generally constituted as commissions, 
and they in turn must have a competent staff of accountants, 
statisticians, and experts. The success of the plan must rest 
primarily with the fairness and intelligence, not only of the 
commission itself, but of all their various assistants. Under 
modern conditions a public service commission cannot do either 
intelligent or effective work without competent engineering 
advice or assistance. This I think is generally recognized, and 
the commissions accordingly have their engineering staffs. 
But in selecting the commissioners themselves the engineering 
profession should not be overlooked as a very likely source of 
the best available timber. 

W. W. Freeman: With respect to the question as to what 
would be the best make-up of the public service commission, I 
have no suggestions to offer. I have found no difficulty in 
agreeing with some things that have been said by each of the 
speakers. As one who does not claim to be an engineer, I enter- 
tain no tear whatever from the standpoint of having the engi- 
neers represented on the commission. At the same time, I 
should be equally anxious to have a thorough representation of 
broad gauge business men who would view the situations pre- 
sented from the executive and business standpoints, entirely 
aside from engineering or technical ideas. 

I agree with Mr, Floy that the matter of determining the 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 369 


value of a franchise is likely to adjust itself when it has been 
definitively decided that the valuation admitted for the purpose 
of taxation is equally available as an asset upon which a fair 
return can be earned. 

In the matter of a fair return, Mr. Floy apparently thinks 
that six per cent. is admitted from the legal standpoint, that 
nine per cent. or more is asked for by the investing public, and 
that eight per cent. would probably be acceptable, and that 
the franchise should be fixed at a valuation that will make up 
the difference. If the franchise has a legal valuation the com- 
panies are entitled to the return on that valuation, whether 
it be for property that is intangible or tangible; and it would 
seem that if we are claiming eight per cent. or any higher per 
cent., we must of necessity in justice to our own interests ask 
and demand that return upon the fixed valuation of the fran- 
chise the same as on the tangible property. 

It seems to me that the plan of fixing the gross income which 
a company shall be entitled to earn, after its expenses, plus 
depreciation and plus six per cent. of eight per cent. return, 
leaves altogether out of consideration the fundamentals on which 
the business is based. The first consideration in public service 
regulation doubtless ought to be a demand for good service. 
I think we will all agree to that. Then of course comes 
the demand for a reasonable charge, which is admitted; and then 
the question of a fair distribution to the stockholders, which is 
also admitted. But equally important with these three is 
what amount over these items must of necessity be assured to 
the company for permanent and successful operation. There 
are years when the revenue will be less than in other years, and. 
any company that disburses all of its earnings in its good years 
will have no earnings to disburse in the poor years. The main- 
tenance of a permanent investment requires of necessity some 
reserve, and in addition there are the expenditures attaching 
to extension work and improvements. These vary with the 
company, and the idea of the company earning only the amount 
which it needs for distribution to its stockholders seems to me 
to be ill considered. I believe that public control should be 
exercised over, not so much what the company earns but the 
amount disbursed, and what it does with the balance. For 
instance, a company that has a capitalization of $1,000,000 
and earns and distributes, say, over and above expenses, eight 
per cent. on $1,000,000, distributes $80,000 a year, and that 
company requires $50,000 or $100,000 a year for the extension 
of its business in new work. Now, whether that company 
issues additional capital during each year to take care of these 
extensions, and pays the same rate of dividends upon the total 
capitalization, or whether it earns a sufficient amount to enable 
it to pay a fair rate of return to its stockholders, and also a 
sum beyond that which will enable it to take care of its exten- 
sions and additional capital, is the same thing to the public, 


370 THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


but it means a great deal of difference to the company. I feel 
that it would be very much more conservative management, very 
much more in the interest of both the corporation and the public, 
if the company should be able to manage its business so that it 
could take care of reasonable expansion independently of its 
ability to raise further capital from year to year, so long as it 
is supervised in respect to its charges and its disbursements, 
and what it does with the surplus. If that plan were followed, 
it would be very much in the public interest as well as in the 
interest of the company. 

George S. Coleman (by letter): I should like to add a com- 
ment on that part of Mr. Floy’s paper in which he says: 

A perusal of the minutes of the hearings held before state commissions 
will convince any unprejudiced person that a disproportionately large 
amount of evidence and testimony is submitted, in the consequent 
unnecessary financial expense and consumption of time for the purpose 
of explaining terms, apparatus, and methods of operation and expendi- 
ture to commissioners who, in general, should be acquainted with the 
matters being considered. 

In justice to commissioners generally it should, perhaps, be 
said that their official duties require them not only to decide 
questions but to preserve a record of the testimony submitted, 
and to make the record intelligible to those who are not experts. 
In an ordinary suit at law technical terms have to be explained 
for the benefit of court and jury. The commissioners must 
fortify their findings by a proper record, so that if their decisions 
are challenged they may properly defend them. While this 
involves tedious inquiry it seems almost essential to orderly pro- 
cedure. 

Henry Floy (by letter): It is a pleasant surprise to find so 
much agreement among the engineers, if not among the lawyers, 
with the views expressed in my paper. Even Mr. Coleman 
agrees with my opinions more fully than perhaps he seems to 
admit, when he says: 

I would just as lief commit the affairs of the public service to a body 
of engineers as to any other body of men whose profession compels them 


to think, and whose training and experience tend to make them im- 
partial. 


I do not for a moment wish to convey the idea that various 
engineering specialists, experts in particular departments, 
should make up a commission. I do not argue that an elec- 
trical expert, a specialist, should properly be a member of the 
commission, or as Mr. Brinckerhoff seems to understand, that 
‘“commissioners should be primarily and exclusively engineers.” 
I would consider a mechanical engineer, if he knows something 
of electrical work, hydraulic work, gas work, and has had ex- 
perience in the operating and commercial departments of a 
public utility corporation, much better qualified to make a 
good commissioner. The same way with the railroad man. 
What is wanted is not an expert designer of cars or locomotives, 
but an engineer experienced in railroad organization and opera- 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 371 


tion. Mr. Coleman makes the too common mistake, which I 
referred to, of considering a man with a technical training 
capable of passing on technical questions only, whereas such 
training is, frequently, merely the basis for success in commer- 
cial and economic affairs. I do not argue that a commission 
should be made up, entirely, even of widely experienced engi- 
neers; that would be as erroneous as constituting it of lawyers 
or business men. Neither can I see any necessity for three out 
of five members of a commission being lawyers; for a large 
amount of the work of a commission has nothing to do with 
law, as such, while much of it has to do with engineering ques- 
tions. From my experience before commissions, I believe more 
helpful and practical results would often be accomplished in a 
simple and expeditious way by following procedure which 
might possibly be termed engineering rather than legal. Why 
questions involving matters of an engineering nature cannot 
_be best answered by a commission constituted partly of men 
who are conversant with engineering affairs, I cannot under- 
stand. My plea is for a balanced commission consisting of 
engineers, business men, and lawyers. 

With regard to operation versus regulation, Mr. Doherty’s 
discussion very completely expresses my view. 

Mr. Brinckerhoff’s ideas and my own, as to the value and 
propriety of retaining consulting engineers, are, I believe, 
identical. My thought was that the responsibility for a decision 
must rest upon the commissioners; it should not on any plea 
be shifted by them to “ hired experts’, however competent, 
either as consultants or as direct employees. 

As I understand Mr. Freeman, it does not seem to me he 
quite appreciates some of the points I have tried to bring out. 
There is no getting away from the fact that commissions are 
being appointed and franchised valuations are being determined. 
One need not agree that one-third is the correct valuation of a 
franchise, but some valuation must be fixed; and it seems to me 
. we need to study this question and try to determine the figure 
that will be reasonable and fair to both sides. -Purely as an 
illustration, I have suggested a franchise valuation of one-third 
and a rate of six per cent. because in some cases that is a fair 
valuation and rate; and we may be able in some instances to 
get the opposing sides to compromise on these figures. Of course, 
as an Institute we do not want to stand committed to six per 
cent. or any other per cent., but as a practical proposition it is 
comparatively easy to get money to invest at eight per cent. if 
the investing public is assured that it will be protected in an eight 
per cent. net return. In the past the New York public service 
corporations may not have been able to get investors interested 
on aneight per cent. basis, but they will be able to do so in the 
future if their interests are protected by a commission. 

I agree with Mr. Freeman as to the necessity of a reserve 
account, which, however, together with other similar items, 


372 THE ENGINEER'S ACTIVITY [April 10 


was covered, in my thought, by the percentages allowed for 
‘““maintenance ’’ and “‘ depreciation.”” The amount and item- 
izing of these several details is, of course, immaterial for the 
purpose of here illustrating a method of determining franchise 
valuation. I differ with Mr. Freeman as to his suggestion that 
a public service corporation should provide for its expansions 
from earnings; I had supposed it was now pretty generally 
agreed that extensions should be charged against the capital 
account instead of being made a part of the charges for service. 


A paper presented at a meeting of the Pittsburgh 
Section of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Pittsburgh, Pa,, May 6, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A. I. E. BE. 


CALCULATION OF THE STARTING TORQUE OF SINGLE- 
PHASE INDUCTION MOTORS WITH PHASE- 
SPLITTING STARTING DEVICES 


BY I. E, HANSSEN 


The starting torque of any induction motor is proportional 
to the product of the main field by the quadrature field, hence 
to the product of the main electromotive force by the quadrature 
electromotive force. The starting torque of a single-phase in- 
duction motor with a phase-splitting starting device can, there- 
fore, be predetermined if the electromotive forces at the 
terminals are known. 

If we have a Y-connected motor, we first calculate the starting 
torque which the motor would develop on a three-phase circuit; 


g and the area of the 


in this case the above product is e?— 


: Sees 3 ’ 
electromotive force triangle is e” ara where e is the terminal 


voltage. 
The actual torque of the motor on a three-phase circuit is 


sa} ie 
e727 46 


T, 
where a 
e, = Impressed electromotive force per phase. 
r; = Secondary resistance per phase reduced to primary terms. 
Z = Total impedance per phase. 
If the same motor is now connected with a resistance reactance 
starter as shown in Fig. 1, the electromotive forces at the ter- 


minals can be found as follows: 
cof 


374 HANSSEN: STARTING TORQUE [May 6 


Referring to Fig. 2, lay of OA and O B representing the im- 
pedances Z+Z, and Z+Z,, respectively. Draw a line in the 
direction O D, the angle B O D being equal to A OC and angle 


STARTING }Z = 7" 5" 1 
WINDING e 
MAIN WINDING 
5 5 
rg 
no . 
oe 
Fig.3 


e=line e.m.f.; rp=primary resistance per motor phase; r;= secondary 
resistance per motor phase reduced to primary; r=total resistance per 
motor phase reduced to primary; xp, xs and” x corresponding values of 
leakage reactance; Z =r — jx =impedance per motor phase; Z, =7,— jx, = 
impedance of one leg of starter; Z,=r,- jx, =impedance 4 other leg 
of starter, 


E BO to the angle BOC, OC being in the direction of the re-. 
sultant of OA and OB. OE is then the Jon a of 
2+Z and 24+ 2Z,. 


1908] HANSSEN: STARTING TORQUE 3795 


Draw OF representing the impedance Z. EF is then the 
resultant impedance of the motor and starter. 

Divide this into the line voltage; this gives the total current, 
which is to be laid off along OD to some convenient scale, 
giving OG; resolve OG into OH and OJ, the currents in Z Z, 
and 2Z,. 

Lay off OK =OHxXxZ and OL = OIXzZ, representing the 
drop in the two motor phases connected to the starter. Lay off 
OM = OGXZ, the drop in the third motor phase. 

The triangle K L M now gives the values and the relative 
phase relations of the terminal electromotive force. 

The starting torque on a single-phase circuit is 


area of triangle K L M 


Teel = 
| 3 e /3 
4 


If the motor is delta-connected use equivalent star values and 
proceed as above. 

In case we have a motor wound as shown diagrammatically 
in Fig. 3, Z being the main winding and Z, the high resistance 
starting winding, we first find the starting torque of a two- 
phase motor having two windings like the main winding. 

This is 


OF a? ipa 
', =F 746 


Then referring to Fig. 4, lay off O A to represent the ampere- 
surns of the main phase, the direction being such that 
r 
tangent d Ping 


Draw OB = ampere-turns of starting winding, 


x 
tangent a amt 
1 


Then the starting torque is 


OA X OBsing 
ch ule & eemaer(oW, by 


5. f » ah 
D 3 iz nid | , | 
| . 
4 tine , 
a es 


Pa “S) lg 
rer, ee 
eas 

Pit: “ 


Presented at the C onjerence on the Conservation of 
Natural Resources, White House, Washington, D.C, 
May 13-15, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I. E. E, 


CONSERVATION OF POWER RESOURCES 


BY H. ST. CLAIR PUTNAM 


Without disparaging other aspects of our progress, it is not 
too much to say that our time is preeminently the age of power. 
This applies to the world at large, but especially to the United 
States. Our population is increasing with unprecedented 
rapidity, but our mineral production is increasing so much more 
rapidly that some have called this the age of metal. Steel, 
copper, and wood are combined in mechanical devices at a rate 
increasing more rapidly than ore production, so that others have 
characterized this as the age of the machine; yet that aspect of 
modern life which most impresses the student of progress is the 
increasing use of mechanical power through the development of 
prime movers and the utilization of new power sources. Rapidly 
as our population advances, it is outrun by metal production, 
and that in turn by machine building; yet our most rapid progress 
—the feature in which our advancement exceeds all others— 
is in the development and use of power. 

Historical division. Historically considered, the utilization 
of our power resources has undergone three characteristic phases 
of development. 

In the first, power was produced directly by natural forces such 
as falling water and wind and its use necessarily was limited to 
those places where these natural forces were found. This led 
to the early manufacturing establishments of New England 
grouped about easily available water powers. This might be 
called the period of water powers, and in this country it heid 
ascendency in the manufacturing industries until about 1870. 

The second phase was characterized by the development of 
the steam engine which rendered practicable the utilization of 

377 


378 PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES [May 13 


the stored energy in fuel as a source of power. During this 
period the development of coal mines and rapid growth of 
our railway systems imparted a tremendous stimulus to com- 
mercial enterprise. Proximity of water powers was no longer 
controlling, and factories were established at points selected by 
reason of the availability of raw material, labor, transportation 
facilities and markets, as well as power supply. As in the first 
period, however, the power necessarily was used where developed, 
and the size of the plant was limited to the requirements of the 
individual user. 

Electric power.* Electrical transmission of power is the new 
art which now is resulting in another and radical change in 
methods of utilizing our power resources, permiting, as it does, 
development whether by water power or by steam at points 
most convenient and economical, and transmission to the con- 
sumer in form adapted to great variety and convenience and 
use. This new development in applied science calls for reap- 
praisement of the sources from which our power is derived. 
The size of the power plant is no longer limited to the require- 
ments of the individual user, but the power for entire com- 
munities can be supplied from a single station. The enlarge- 
ment of this field of work newly opened by the electric trans- 
mission of power from great distances is now in active and 
practical development. As a result rapid changes are taking 
place in the methods of using power. New economies are 
possible of accomplishment and the resulting effect upon the 
conservation and utilization of our power resources is of the 
greatest importance. 

Fuel supply. Where power is developed from the combustion 
of coal, wood, oil or gas, our natural resources as such are de- 
stroyed and they cannot be replaced, excepting to a limited 
extent in the case of wood and similar products. The supply 


* Electricity, of course, is not a source of power—it is simply the agent 
by which energy developed from fuel and water is transmitted to the 
mechanism which utilizes it. In speaking of electric power, therefore, 
it must be borne in mind that such power is always produced primarily 
by water wheels, turbines, steam engines, or gas engines. With reference 
to their source, therefore, we have only water power and fuel power to 
consider, but with reference to application it is convenient and instruc- 
tive to compare water power, steam power and electric power; the two 
former being applied directly through mechanical means to the work, 
while the last named has its origin in one or the other of the former and is 
applied through motors. 


1908] PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES 379 


of natural oil and gas is limited and uncertain and the amount 
available is required for special industries. The coal production 
of the United States for the year 1906 was 414,157,278 tons; 
for 1907, about 450,000,000 tons. If the production of an- 
thracite coal is continued at only its present annual rate the 
supply will be exhausted in 60 or 70 years. Since the beginning 
of our coal industry the total production has doubled approxi- 
mately every ten years. Assuming that this rate of increase 
cannot be maintained, but will become constant in about 150 
years, it is estimated that the supply of bituminous coal will be 
exhausted in approximately 700 years.* But that the coal 
production should become constant even 150 years hence, im- 
plies that our industries must become stationary, unless other 
power resources are found. We cannot look forward to such a 

~condition with equanimity. Without coal our domestic and 
industrial life is inconceivable, and our existence in great 
cities and crowded communities is impossible unless a substitute 
is devised. The future welfare of the nation requires that all 
practicable means be employed for the conservation of the 
supply of coal. 

Available water powers. Where power is derived from water, 
winds, and tides, only energy otherwise wasted is used. The 
energy thus extracted is added to our assets instead of being a 
permanent loss as is the case with the combustion of coal. It 
is now feasible and practicable to develop water powers, where- 
ever located, for electric power. In the aggregate the available 
water powers of the nation greatly exceed the present power 
requirements, but unless there is some curtailment in the rate 
of our development, our water power resources, while being of 
great magnitude, will not of themselves solve the problem of 
our future supply of power. The amount of water power 
available in the United States is not known. Some partial 
estimates have been made, but these are necessarily approxi- 
mate, as exact figures can be obtained only after careful survey 
and study not only of the existing physical conditions, water 
flow, and available reservoir capacity, but of the practicable 
auxiliary steam power that can be profitably installed. The 
power of Niagara has been estimated, by Professor W. C. Unwin, 
at 7,000,000 h.p. A partial estimate of the water powers of 


*“ How long will our coal supplies meet the increasing demand of 
commerce?” by Edward W. Parker, U. S. Geological Survey. Presented 
before the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 1907. 


380 PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES [May 13 


the upper Mississippi river and tributaries places the available 
water power at about 2,000,000 h.p. The southern Appalachian 
regions can furnish a minimum of nearly [3,000,000 h.p.* Both 
of these estimates can be greatly increased by including the 
use of regulation reservoirs and auxiliary steam plants. The 
water powers of New England are more fully developed than 
elsewhere in the country, though much remains yet to be done. 
In the Rocky mountains and the far west there are immense 
water power possibilities; in the state of Washington alone there 
are 3,000,000 h.p. available;t and Governor Pardee estimates 
that the streams of northern California are capable of producing 
5,000,000 h.p. Even approximate data upon which to base an 
estimate of the total amount of available water power in the 
country are lacking, though a good start toward collecting them 
has been made by the Geological Survey, with the limited means 
at its disposal. It is probable that the water power in the 
United States exceeds 30,000,000 h.p., and under certain as- 
sumptions as to storage reservoirs this amount can be increased 
to 150,000,000 h.p. or possibly more. Much depends upon 
whether regulation reservoirs and reserve steam plants are in- 
cluded in the estimate. Both have been demonstrated to be 
practicable, and undoubtedly should be considered in any esti- 
mate made of the available water power resources of the country. 

Using the smaller figure of 30,000,000 h.p. as an illustration, 
to develop an equal amount of energy in our most modern steam- 
electric plants would require the burning of nearly 225,000,000 
tons of coal per annum, and in the average steam engine plant, 
as now existing, more than 650,000,000 tons of coal, or 50%, 
in excess of the total coal production of the country in 1906. 
At an average price of $3.00 per ton it would require the con- 
sumption of coal costing $2,000,000,000 to produce an equiva- 
lent power in steam plants of the present general type. 

The supply of water power is limited, however, when the rapid 
rate of increase in our power requirements is considered, and 
great care, therefore, must be exercised to insure the preserva- 
tion of our water power resources and to secure the maximum 
practicable development. 


pS Se aS Re eee ne 

* “Water Powers of the Upper Mississippi and Tributaries,” and ‘‘ Water 
Powers of the Southern Appalachian System,” by M. O. Leighton, Chief 
Hydrographer, U. 8. Geological Survey. 


+ Computed by F, G, Moorhead, in The World’s Work, April 1908, p. 
10091, 


1908] PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES 381 


Total power used in United States. Using the data furnished 
by the census returns of 1900, 1902, and 1905 as a basis and apply- 
ing the prevailing rate of increase in the industries included in 
these reports, and adding an equiwalent amount for the steam 
railroads, it is estimated that the total installed capacity of 
prime movers in all our land industries for the year 1908 ap- 
proximates 30,000,000 h.p.4 (Fig. 1.) 

The average load on steam and other engines is much less than 
their rated capacity, and, owing to the overlapping of loads, 
it is probable that. the total average load does not exceed one- 
third or one-quarter of this amount. 

Rate of increase. During the last thirty years the total 
amount of power used in our manufactories and other industries, 
as recorded by the census, has doubled approximately every 

_ten years. The fact that substantially the same rate of in- 


4 The following table compiled from the latest census returns gives the 
installed capacity of prime movers in the United States in the industries 
named at the dates mentioned: 


Installed 

horse power. 

MamiitacturesCensusnr G0 OM amare eic.c ie clsdles slene mies cso sce 12,765,594 

MinestanGuOuarries Census) LOOZcrcratersie sta cus elfone.s) 6) #.c1e na 0.18 2 0i6 2,753,555 

StrecheR ail waAySs CCNSUSeLIO2 raise tctea cielo slofsteracisve srodett «so Gye 1,359,289 

‘Electric Light and Power Stations, census 1902............ 1,845,048 

Telephones, Telegraph and Fire Alarm Systems, census 1902.. 3,148 
Custom Flour, Grist and Saw Mills, census 1900 (omitted from 

CETSUISHL O05) Meee ee amet ncecr er Mer en Mae clo lele ot o.© sceleseileethons 883,685 
Steam Railroads, data from Statistics of Railways, 1905, 

QGMNGlenth OKs oon 6 e508 on ooo oO B ooo toe od be 3,750,000 


These figures include prime movers only. Duplications in the way of 
electric, water and air motors and rented power have been omitted. 
The equivalent power used by the steam railroads is based upon the result 
of calculations made by Lewis B. Stillwell and H. St. Clair Putnam in a 
paper presented by them to the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, January, 1907, ‘‘ On the Substitution of the Electric Motor for the 
Steam Locomotive,’ and represents the installed power house capacity 
required for their electric operation in the year 1905. Based upon 
maximum draw-bar pull, the power of the 46,743 steam locomotives in 
the United States (1904) averages 600 horse power (census 1905) but the 
power developed when averaged over the entire year approximates only 
40 horse power. In order, therefore, that the estimate of total power 
in the United States should not be misleading, the power used by our 
steam railways has been taken at a figure that is comparable with the 
installed power in other industries as, for example, in electric railways 
where the installed capacity in the power houses has been taken rather 
than the rated power of the motor equipment, which is many times greater 
than the power house capacity required for their operation, 


382 PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES [May 13 


crease has existed in coal production, railroad gross earnings, 
freight ton-mileage, passenger mileage, and the value of agri- 
cultural products, as well as in total power consumption, is a 
striking demonstration of the close interrelation and mutual 
dependence of these great factors which, in the aggregate, 
measure the industrial progress of the nation. 

We cannot foretell how long the present rate of increase in 
our industrial enterprises will continue. This will be deter- 
mined by the general laws which govern industrial development 


TOTAL MOTIVE POWER IN 


UNITED STATES, 
\NCLUDES PRIME MOVERS ONLY. 


HORSE 
POWER 
INSTALLED 
50,000,000 


ea 


© POINTS FROM CENSUS REPORTS. 
40,000,000 BROKEN LINE, ESTIMATED INCREASE. 
FOR RAILROADS SEE FOOTNOTE A 


: TOTAL HORSE POWER. 
30,000,000 


-20;000,000 


10,000,000 
STEAM RAILROADS. 
MINES AND QUARRIES. 
ELECTR, LIGHT AND POWER, 
ELECTRIC RAILWAYS. 
5 CUSTOM MILLS. 
So i=) 8 o oO 
o Led 
g 2 3 E 5 
r r = - rc $e 
Fic. 1 


and by the increase in wealth. It is clear, however, that if our 
power resources are exhausted or wasted the result will be 
disastrous. 

Relative use of steam, water power, etc. Of the total estimated 
power at present produced by prime movers, about 26,000,000 
h.p. is produced by steam engines, (Fig. 2) 3,000,000 h.p. by 
water motors, (Fig. 3) and 800,000 h.p. by gas and oil engines, 
(Fig. 4). These figures emphasize the present position of the 
steam engine in our industrial development and the relatively 
much less important place now occupied by water power, (Fig. 5). 


1908] PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES 383. 


Growth of electrically applied power. Of the total 30,000,000 
h.p., including the railroads, used in the country, it is estimated 
that 9,000,000 h.p., (Fig. 6) or 30 per cent., is now utilized 
electrically (Fig. 7).* This highly remarkable growth has been 
accomplished in 25 years. The use of electric power at the 
present time is being doubled approximately every five years, 
as contrasted with the phenomenal doubling of the total power 


TOTAL STEAM POWER IN 
UNITED STATES, 


HORSE 

POWER © POINTS FROM CENSUS REPORTS 
INSTALLED @SEE FOOTNOTE A FOR RAILROADS 
30,000,000 


TOTAL STEAM POWER 


20,000,000 [ 


y, MANUFACTURES 
7 
— 7 
7 
10,000,000 
STEAM RAILROADS 
a“ 
| MINES AND QUARRIES 
=) ELECTRIC RAILWAYS 
- ZS4 ELECTRIC LIGHT 
=—" | AND POWER 
——+——- CUSTOM MILLS 
(0) 
o [o} Oo 
3 5 3 8 3 5 
hig! = - r cr = 


Bre. 2 


every 10 years. If the present rate of increase is maintained, 
electrically applied power will equal or exceed the power me- 
chanically applied in 1920. This great growth is due to the 
convenience, earning capacity, and economy resulting from 


* This does not include the electric power generated in isolated plants 
and used for other purposes than manufacturing. These plants are not 
included in the census reports, and while they are individually small the 
aggregate electric power developed is large. 


894 PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES (May 13 


the use of electrically applied power. The significance of this 
remarkable increase in the use of electric power in manufactures 
and other industries lies in the market thus provided for the 
utilization of our water powers wherever located and whatever 
their magnitude. 

Economies due to electric power—steam power. Where coal 
is the source of power, electric transmission and distribution 


TOTAL WATER POWER IN 


HORSE 
POWER UNITED STATES. 
INSTALLED 
TOTAL WATER POWER 
| POINTS FROM CENSUS rerpars| | / 
07 [uo eal el 
2,000,000 
MANUFACTURES. 
1,000,000 ELECTRIC LIGHT 
AND POWER. 
CUSTOM MILLS. 
ELECTRIC RAILWAYS 
0 MINES AND QUARRIES 
2 < 8 8 8 2 
@o @ roe) i) a a 
=. bed = b ig | om ve 
Fic. 3 


greatly reduce the amount burned to perform given mechanical 
work. This results from the substitution of a few large and 
highly efficient boilers and engines for a larger number of rela- 
tively small and uneconomical ones and from the introduction 
of plant economies and skill in operation not attainable in the 
smaller plants. A material saving is effected also in the applica- 
tion of the power directly to the work through motors instead of 
indirectly through inefficient countershafting and belting. 


1908] PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES 385 


A further material gain also results from the fact that a large 
plant carrying the load formerly carried, for example, by one 
hundred small plants is operated under conditions more nearly 
approximating uniformity of load and therefore at higher 
economy. 

Greater economy can be obtained, even in our large plants, 
through the more general use of so-called fuel economizers, 
superheated steam, higher vacuum, and better combustion under 
the boilers. We may expect still higher efficiency from the 


TOTAL INSTALLED CAPACITY OIL AND GAS ENGINES 
IN UNITED STATES 


OPOINTS FROM CENSUS REPORTS. 


HORSE 
POWER 
INSTALLED. 
800.000 TOTAL POWER 
’ OIL AND GAS ENGINES. 
600,000 
; MANUFACTURES. 
400,000 7 
if 
4 MINES AND QUARRIES 
200,000 
ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER. 
/CUSTOM MILLS. 
ELECTRIC RAILWAYS. 
mg e g 3 g E 
é 2 : : 2 e 
Fic. 4 


development of larger boiler and engine units. These economiz- 
ing appliances, which are relatively unimportant in small plants, 
become of great importance in large plants, and will have still 
greater influence on steam practice as the price of fuel increases 
and the cost of capital decreases. 

Fuel economy of gas engines. This discussion would be in- 
complete without mention of the great possible fuel economy 
that may result from the use of gas and other similar engines. 
Though engines of this character antedate the use of the electric 
motor, their development has been slow, and they occupy a 


386 PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES [May 13 


relatively unimportant place as power producers. The ordinary 
steam engine utilizes not more than four or five per cent. of the 
heat energy in coal, and our best modern steam electric plants 
show a heat efficiency not exceeding 10 or 12 per cent.* With 
the gas engine and producer gas the heat efficiency can be more 
than doubled, and still higher efficiency seems probable with 
higher compression or through the use of other possible im- 
provements.t This is a most promising field for development 


TOTAL MOTIVE POWER IN 
UNITED STATES, 
DIVIDED WITH REFERENCE TO 
SOURCE OF POWER, 


HORSE INCLUDES PRIME MOVERS ONLY, 
POWER 
INSTALLED 
50,000,000 
40,000,000 
TOTAL HORSE POWER. 
30,000,000 
STEAM POWER. 
20,000,000 
10,000,000 
WATER POWER. 
OIL AND GAS ENGINES. 


1900 
1910 


and it is entirely possible that the gas engine may revolutionize 
our methods of using fuel for the production of power. 

Beyond these gains, which may be considered well within 
the limits of possible attainment by present knowledge, there 
stands the theoretical prospect of still greater economies, the 


*“* Power Plant Economics,’”’ by Henry G. Stott, presented before 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, January, 1906. 

t+ Report of F. W. Burstall to the Gas Engine Research Committee 
of the (British) Institution of Mechanical Engineers. 


1908] PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES 387 


possibility of which cannot be denied so long as methods em- 
ployed in developing energy from coal results in a waste of from 
75 to 95 per cent. of the potential energy which nature has stored 
in the coal. But the science of the present time does not permit 
us to assume any radical increase in efficiency of fuel engines 
beyond the limits which I have indicated, and our only safe 
course is to base our estimate upon the progress of the present 


TOTAL ELECTRIC POWER IN 
UNITED STATES 


HORSE 
POWER 
INSTALLED 
12,000,000 r a = 
| 18 
© POINTS FROM CENSUS REPORTS, | TOTAL ELECTRIC 
| INCLUDES SOME DUPLICATION. POWER 

40,000,000 


iim Ar =| 


8,000,000 


6,000,000 


pce | MANUFACTURES 
/\ ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER 


Ly ELECTRIC RAILWAYS 
7 


7 


2,000,000 


MINES AND QUARRIES 
STEAM RAILROADS 


i=) oO S °o 

g 5 8 B 8 & 

2 ce - - me = 
Fic. 6 


time with such reasonable allowance for improved economy 
as is dictated by recognition of progress of the art along lines 
now within the horizon of possible science. 

Water power economies. Where water power is the source of 
supply, electricity promotes economy for reasons identical with 
the foregoing, except that absence of fluctuation of load is rela- 
tively less important, but the great gain which results from 
electric transmission is the utilization of water powers remote 


388 PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES [May 13 


from power markets. Where several water powers along a 
stream are developed, it becomes possible to utilize, in conjunc- 
tion with the larger and more cheaply developed powers, others 
which, considered independently, could not be utilized to 
advantage. 

Applications of electric power—manufactures. Prior to 
1870 the use of water power in manufactures exceeded 


TOTAL POWER ELECTRICALLY APPLIED 
AND 
PERCENT OF TOTAL POWER APPLIED 
MECHANICALLY AND ELECTRICALLY 


HORSE | CENT 

POWER 
iNSTALLED 
50,000,000 | 100 


~._PERCENT | MECHANICALLY 
~1._APPLIED POWER. 


OTAL HORSE POWER 


} 


INSTALLED. 


20,000,000 


ae 
™~ 
40,000,000 | 8° ls aa a ee 
: NS 
| | ENG 
30,000,000} 60 [ | ale ah 
es 
ode 


PERCENT ELECTRICALLY 
APPLIED POWER. 


HORSE POWER 
ELECTRICALLY 
APPLIED 


10,000,000 


that of steam power. Water power expressed in percentage 
of the total power employed has since steadily declined, falling 
from 48.3 per cent. in 1870 to 11.2 per cent. in 1905. (Fig. 8.) 
During the corresponding period steam power increased from 
51.8 per cent. in 1870 to 78.2 per cent. in 1900. The census of 
1900 showed a marked falling off in the rate of increase in the 
percentage of steam power used as compared with the rate 
prior to 1890, and this was accentuated in the census of 1905, 


1908] PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES 389 


when the percentage of steam power fell to 73.6 per cent. of the 
total. This check to the ascendancy of directly applied steam 
power was due to the introduction of electric power. In 1890 
electric power was negligible. In 1900 it constituted 4.8 per 
cent. of the total. In 1905 this had increased to 11.8 per cent.— 
a marvelously rapid growth when the aggregate increase of 
over 1,000,000 h.p. in five years is considered. If the present 
rate of increase prevails until 1910, electric power will have 


PERCENTAGE OF POWER 
AS APPLIED IN 
MANUFACTURES, 
TOTAL POWER REPORTED, INCLUDES SOME DUPLICATION. 


© POINTS FROM CENSUS 1905. 
~ PERCENT BROKEN LINES, ESTIMATED EXTENSIONS. 


100 = 
90 
80 = 
ate | 
0 Z ee =s 
i “STEAM POWER. 
60 LZ ——t | 
50 ve 
: Las | 
30 oS oe 
20 | 4 ELECTRIC POWER., 
10 WATER POWER. 
“OTHER” POWER. 
8 oO lo} 
oO fo} fo} 
3 5 : z 3 3 
- r r —_ r 
Fic. 8 


reached 18 per cent. of the total and steam power will have 
dropped to 68 per cent. If the same rate of increase is main- 
tained until 1930, electric power as applied to the manufacturing 
industries will exceed the amount of steam power applied 
direct. 

Other industries. The tendencies illustrated by the changes 
that have taken place in the methods of utilizing power in 
manufacturing, apply generally to other industries. The in- 
creasing use of power is phenomenal; the steam engine as a 


390 PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES [May 18 


source of power is thus far paramount in them all, but the per- 
centage of electrically applied power is increasing at nearly 
double the rate of increase of the total power used. 

Electric lighting. The extraordinary growth of the electric 
lighting industry is familiar to all. Unfortunately the results 
of the special census of 1907 are not yet available, but the indi- 
cations are that the five years which have elapsed since the 
previous census will show phenomenal growth. During these 
five years the gross sales of the great electric manufacturing 
companies have doubled, and the proportion of the output 
consisting of electric power apparatus and generating units of 
large size has greatly increased. An influential factor in the 
growth during this period has been the rapid development of 
long-distance hydroelectric power transmission plants. 

Electric railways. Since the displacement of horse and cable 
cars in the cities a few years ago, electric railways have been 
extended to suburban and interurban districts and are rapidly 
forming a network over the entire thickly settled portions of 
the country. In the nature of their traffic, many of these roads 
are scarcely distinguishable from steam railroads, and many 
railroads are using them as feeders. In a few cases railroads 
have converted steam operated branches into electric lines. 

Electrification of steam railroads. A beginning is being made 
in the electrification of our steam railroads. The New York 
Central, the Pennsylvania, the Long Island, the New York, 
New Haven & Hartford, the Grand Trunk, the Great Northern, 
the Erie, the Southern Pacific and others have electrified por- 
tions of their lines, and most of these are now in successful 
operation. Many of these roads are extending their electric 
zones. Thus far most of this work has been induced by terminal 
requirements, tunnels, heavy grades or other special conditions 
which emphasize the advantages to be derived from electric 
operation. The increase in capacity, convenience, and greater 
earning power as well as the economies resulting from electric 
operation will stimulate the electrification of steam railroads, 
just as these factors have stimulated the use of electric power 
in other industries. The problem presented is larger because of 
the necessity of interchangeability of equipment, and the de- 
velopment must necessarily be gradual on account of the magni- 
tude of the interests and the large capital expenditures involved. 
The railroads are among the largest consumers of fuel, and elec- 
tric operation, exclusive of the use of water powers, would 


1908] “ PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES 391 


reduce the coal consumption to less than one-half of that re- 
quired for similar operation with steam locomotives.* 

Tendency toward greater use of water powers. During the past 
few years, there has been renewed interest in water powers on 
account of the practicability of their use for the generation of 
power and the electrical transmission of this power to distant 
markets. The great hydroelectric development at Niagara 
was the first large enterprise of this character and has demon- 
strated its practicability. The census of 1905 gives a partial 
list of long-distance hydroelectric plants developing power 
aggregating 600,000 h.p. and this list can now be largely in- 
creased. Our most desirable water powers are being absorbed 
rapidly, and it becomes important, therefore, for us to take 
stock of our water resources and formulate plans for their con- 
trol and proper utilization. 

Inland waterways. In the improvements that have been 
made on navigable rivers, too little attention has been given to 
the development of the incidental water powers. On some 
waterways, as in several instances on the Mississippi, immense 
sums of money have been appropriated and expended on es- 
pecially difficult portions of the river. If this money could 
have been made available in large amounts, instead of by 
driblets over periods of many years, water powers of great value 
could have been developed and the navigation effectively and 
permanently improved. Unfortunately this has not been our 
policy. Too often the appropriations have been inadequate 
for carrying out the work as it should be done, and frequently 
the work has not followed any well-digested plan. 

With the data at hand, it is impossible to make an accurate 
estimate of the amount of power that can be developed inci- 
dentally to river navigation. A partial estimate of the power 
developed at existing government locks and dams places the 
amount at 1,600,000 h.p.t This is based on the mean low- 
water discharge for three months. This subject should receive 
careful consideration. Improvements in navigation should 
be made only after thorough study of the possibilities of power 
development. On the other hand, many water powers are on 


*‘*On the Substitution of the Electric Motor for the Steam Loco- 
“motive,” by Lewis B. Stillwell and H. St. Clair Putnam, presented before 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, January, 1907. 

+ ‘‘ Available Water Powers of United States Government Locks and 
Dams,” collected by M. O. Leighton, United States Geological Survey. 


392 PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES ~ [May 13 


streams that are navigable, or are capable of canalization, and 
these streams should be developed for power purposes only after 
careful examination has been made of the possibilities of the 
stream forming a link in the system of inland waterways. 

Canalized rivers. There are many streams that are not now 
navigable, or are navigable for only a portion of the seasons, 
that can be canalized and converted into streams of great com- 
mercial value. The use of our waterways for both power de- 
velopment and navigation causes no conflict; these uses are in 
fact correlated and their interests harmonious. Where it is 
necessary to place a dam across a stream to develop power, the 
slack water so produced, with the addition of locks, renders 
otherwise impassable stretches of river available for navigation. 
Every water power development is vitally interested in obtaining 
a uniform flow of water. This exactly meets the requirements 
of navigation. The approximate realization of regularity of 
flow can be attained only by the construction of headwater 
regulating reservoirs and the preservation of our forests. Every 
water course that is improved for the production of power and 
for navigation produces, therefore, vigorous self-interested allies 
in the cause of forest preservation, headwater regulation, and 
the maintenance of conditions which are favorable to both 
interests. 

Canals. Considerations which affect the use of our rivers 
and streams, as sources of power and for navigation, apply also 
to canals. Heretofore, canals built for transportation pur- 
poses have not been used, to any great extent, for the develop- 
ment of power. In some cases this has been on account of the 
limited supply of water, but more frequently it has been due to 
the great difficulty experienced by the animals in towing boats 
against the rapid current produced in the canal by the flow of 
water to the water wheels. In recent tests it has been demon- 
strated that canal boats can be towed by electric towing machines 
at a much lower operating cost than is possible with animals, 
and that operated in this manner the speed can be greatly in- 
creased.* The first cost of electric equipment is relatively, 
large, but the change to electric towing will pay handsomely 
when the volume of traffic is sufficiently large. The traffic 
required is well within the ultimate capacity of the canal. With 


*“ Notes on Electric Haulage of Canal Boats,” by Lewis B. Stillwell 
and H. St. Clair Putnam, presented before the American Institute of 
Electrical Engineers, March 1908. 


1908] PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES 393 


electric towing, the increase in the rate of current flow introduced 
by the development of water power on the canal is not a serious 
impediment to navigation. 

Irrigation. There are large areas in the Western states where 
the soil is of wonderful fertility, but irrigation is essential to the 
successful growing of crops. The cultivated lands usually lic 
in valleys and water is carried to them through long and oft- 
times wasteful irrigation ditches. In many cases the water 
could be utilized for developing power on the headwaters of 
the streams without injury to the irrigation interests, as is 
illustrated by the excellent work now being done by the Re- 
clamation Service. The development of water power will 
introduce another party whose self-interest dictates the use of 
every available method of preserving the volume of water supply, 
its continuity, and regularity of flow. 

In some cases irrigation channels can be converted into canals 
suitable for at least limited navigation, and where practicable 
this should be done. Some types of apparatus as now developed 
for towing canal boats by electricity require but little space along 
the side of the ditch and can be installed, usually, without 
additional grading wherever an irrigation ditch can be con- 
structed. Tlectric towing cannot be economically practicable, 
however, unless the traffic reaches a considerable volume. 
With animal power the additional capital investment is small 
and is proportional to the amount of business handled. With 
electric towing the first cost is large and manifestly sufficient 
traffic must be secured to meet the capital charges before profits 
can be realized. 

Water supply. What has been said-upon the subject of irri- 
gation canals applies to the development of the water supply 
for our cities. This work, like irrigation, should be carried out 
so as to develop the maximum water power possible without 
injury to the water supply. - 

The preservation of the purity of water for domestic use is 
of great importance to the welfare of the nation. A considera- 
tion of this subject, as well as of navigable water-ways, canals, 
irrigation and water powers, emphasizes the absolute necessity 
of competent supervision of the natural water resources of the 
country. 

Regulation of stream flow. The flow of water in many streams 
annually fluctuates between wide limits. The low-water periods 
limit the profitable water power development and the high 


394 PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES [May 13 


periods often cause disastrous floods. On most streams the aver- 
age rate of flow for the year is many times the minimum flow. 
It is possible in some cases to utilize a flow approximating the 
average by constructing controlling reservoirs on the headwaters 
of the stream. Our Great Lakes form a natural reservoir of this 
character for the Niagara River. The Upper Mississippi has 
great natural reservoirs which assist in regulating its flow and which 
easily can be made very effective in its control. The notable 
floods of the Ohio River can be greatly reduced by the con- 
struction of controlling reservoirs on its headwaters which will 
result in the saving of millions of dollars now annually destroyed. 
On a stream which I recently investigated the minimum flow 
furnishes but 200 h.p. The construction of a storage reservoir 
increases the continuous 24 hr. power that can be utilized to 8000 
horse power. If storage reservoirs could be constructed on the 
Susquehanna River, upon which a great water power develop- 
ment is now in course of construction, so as to obtain a uniform 
flow throughout the year, the available power at this site would 
be increased from a minimum of 30,000 h.p. to 200,000 h.p. 
While it is impracticable to construct reservoirs capable of hold- 
ing back all flood waters, it is nevertheless certain that material 
gain would result from well-directed efforts along the lines sug- 
gested. 

Auxiliary steam plants. On account of the great annual 
fluctuations now existing in stream flow, it has been found 
profitable to install steam plants supplementing the water 
power during seasons of low water. This method on account 
of its expense greatly handicaps the full development of our 
water powers and increases the amount that must be charged 
for the power. Under given conditions the most profitable 
amount of water power to develop and the best size of steam 
plant to install can be determined with great accuracy. The 
reserve steam station need not be located at the water power; 
in fact, it preferably should be located at or near the market 
for the power when that is distant, as greater reliability and 
continuity of power supply is thus secured. Headwater regu- 
lation would greatly reduce the necessity for such auxiliary 
steam plants. 

Similarly the water power which can be purchased economi- 
cally by a prospective customer who already has a steam plant 
in operation can be accurately determined. This amount de- 
pends upon the relative cost of generating different portions of 


1903] PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES 395 


the load by steam as compared with the amount charged for 
the water power supplied. In its economical application this 
method of operation works out so that the water power plant 
carries the steady portion of the load where the coal consump- 
tion per horse power capacity is greatest, and the steam plant is 
called upon to carry the peaks only where the coal consumption 
per horse power is least. 

Interconnected plants. In addition to their reserve function 
in time of low water or flood, auxiliary steam plants and inter- 
connected plants are valuable as insuring the continuity of power 
supply. If the lines are run overhead, as they must be for 
long-distance transmission in the present development of the 
art, all electric transmission plants are subject to occasional 
short interruptions due to storm, lightning, or malicious mis- 
chief. It is economical and desirable to tie together two or 
more plants, thus greatly increasing the reliability of service. 
If one plant or transmission line fails the others can be pushed 
to take the load. From an engineering standpoint, and from 
the standpoint of the customer as well as the power producer, this 
method of operation has great advantages. 

Importance of power resources. In 1905 the value of the pro- 
duct of our manufactures amounted to $16,866 ,706,985; the totai 
receipts of the steam railroads were $2,325,765, 167. 

In manufacturing, the value of the product was $1,152 for 
each horse power installed, and the yearly wages amounted to 
$248 per horse power. 

In the railroad industry the gross receipts amounted to $555 
and the yearly wages to $224 per horse power, rated on a basis 
comparable to that used in the census report covering manu- 
factures. 

I have selected these two classes of industry for the reason 
that they use the bulk of the power and illustrate its tremendous 
productiveness in increasing our wealth. 

On the basis of the lower estimate of water power already 
mentioned, namely, 30,000,000 h.p., and applying the ratio 
which now exists between wages paid and power utilized in 
manufacturing and railroad industries, the development of this 
amount of water power implies an increase in wages paid amount- 
ng to about $15,000,000,000 per annum, an amount more than 
double the total value of our agricultural products at the present 
time. 

Collection of data necessary. These figures emphasize the vast 


396 PUTNAM: POWER RESOURCES [May 18 


financial importance of our power resources and the necessity 
of their conservation and their intelligent development. Much 
can be accomplished by the national government in connection 
with irrigation of national lands and the improvement and pre- 
servation of navigable waters. The state governments can 
greatly assist in this work, within their respective territories. 

Census of water resources. A reliable census of water resources 
is greatly needed. The Geological Survey has accomplished 
much in measuring and recording the flow of streams, but the 
work done is small as compared with that which remains to be 
done. Obviously, in order that records of this character shall 
constitute a uniform and safe basis for the very large capital 
investment which must be made in the future in order that our 
water power resources shall be properly utilized and our fuel 
supplies conserved, they should be made under the immediate 
direction of the national government. 

Research work. The national government can render great 
assistance also in the research work which it has undertaken 
into the better utilization of our fuels. Excellent results have 
been obtained by the able body of engineers engaged on this 
work, but when we consider that we are now utilizing but five 
or ten per cent. of the heat value in fuels it is evident that much 
remains to be done. 

Necessity of government regulation. Power and transporta- 
tion are the two great physical bases upon which modern in- 
dustrial development rests. Without power our methods of 
transportation must revert to a level with those existing in 
China. Up to the present time while nation and states have 
regulated and in some degree aided in the development in trans- 
portation, the power resources of the country have been utilized 
or wasted by the private individual and the corporation with 
little hindrance and still less regulation by the constituted au- 
thorities. Next to individual enterprise the most essential 
factor in the development of our national resources is wise 
governmental guidance, so applied as to insure the vigorous work- 
ing of individual initiative and at the same time prevent the 
waste by individuals of that which is vital to our national wel- 
fare and to secure in the utilization of our natural resources the 


highest practicable degree of economy which scientific knowledge 
and engineering skill can attain. 


A paper presented at the annual meeting of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, New York, May 19, 1908. 


Copyright, 1908. By A. I. E. BE. 


COMPARATIVE TESTS OF LIGHTNING PROTECTION 
DEVICES ON THE TAYLOR’S FALLS TRANSMISSION 
SYSTEM 


BY J. F. VAUGHAN 

Recent Institute discussions have brought out a decided 
difference of opinion on the value of certain lightning protective 
devices and have expressed a demand for positive data on line 
protection especially. This paper furnishes data obtained last 
summer on an operating line experimentally equipped with 
various protective devices. The results are of especial interest 
in being actual records made by means of tell-tale papers applied 
not only to the station protective devices but also to those on 
the line, and even to the line insulators themselves throughout 
the system. 

When the transmission from Taylor’s Falls to Minneapolis 
Minnesota, was built in 1905, local conditions demanded the 
best lightning protection available. The line ran southwest 
from the power house a distance of about 40 miles through a 
rolling country, partly wooded and full of lakes and swamps. 
It lay in the natural path of thunderstorms forming to the north- 
west of Minneapolis. Investigation indicated a zone about 9 
miles long near the middle of the line that was especially sub- 
ject to severe lightning, and the splintering of six poles in different 
parts of this zone before any wire was strung suggested the 
necessity for special protection at exposed points against direct 
stroke. 

On account of the wide divergence of opinion on the subject 
of lightning protection, and the impossibility of reconciling 
the conflicting results of practice, it was decided to try out on 
the Taylor’s Falls System all existing devices of promise and 


397 


398 VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


such others as might be devised, in order, by comparing them in 
actual service, to work out some effective scheme for future 
protection. 

Description of system. Current is generated by four 2500- 
kw., 2300-volt, 60-cycle, three-phase water-wheel driven ma- 


Jes (4/8 Srtca 6 Tata 
Yo - 6°. Sr TANDAKO 


Fic, 1 


chines, each operated as a unit, with a bank of three 900 kw. 
transformers connected delta-delta and stepping up to 50,000 
volts. The pressure is stepped down at the main sub-station 
on the outskirts of Minneapolis to 13,800 volts for local distribu- 
tion and transmission to a steam and water power local plant 


1908] VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 399 


in the city. Automatic time-limit relay oil switches control the 
lines and transformers at all three plants. 

The transmission consists of a single line built on private 
right-of-way using Idaho cedar poles of 45 ft. standard length, 


E1Gee2 


carrying three 0000 semi-hard-drawn copper cables supported 
on 14 in. four-part porcelain insulators arranged on a 6-ft. 
equilateral triangle with the apex at the pole-top (Fig. 1). The 
insulators (Figs. 2 and 3) were originally selected from a num- 
ber of samples, including five others of the writer's design, 


i} 


VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


Fic. 3--Photograph of insulator fiash-over, under artificial rain test 


1908] VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 401 


as the only insulator obtainable which, under driving rain test, 
showed properly distributed electrostatic stress without con- 
centration on any one part. These had already proved unusually 
tugged, as shown by two years’ use, without any electrical 
failures on 75 miles of 57,000-volt transmission on the Puyallup 
system in the state of Washington. The insulators are supported 
on iron-pipe pins cemented into them and bolted to the pole- 
tops or set into the cross-arms. The line also carries a pair of 
telephone wires on an arm 7.5 ft. below the transmission arm. 

The telephone system consists of a metallic circuit of No. 10 
copper wire mounted on porcelain insulators of the same design 
as the ordinary double petticoat glass type. Instruments are 
permanently connected at the power house, sub-station, and 
inspector’s cottage at the middle of the line, and booths provided 
at various points for tapping in inspectors’ portable instruments. 
_ Station protection. For protection of the power house and 
sub-station low-equivalent multigap arresters and oil-insulated 
choke-coils were installed, supplemented at the sub-station by 
a set of experimental aluminum cell-type arresters connected 
to the entering line through a small number of arrester gaps in 
zigzag arrangement, set so as to be normally active. 

The transformers at all stations were further protected on 
their low-tension sides by static discharge gaps. 


LINE PROTECTION. 


Horn-type arrester. Three types were installed, one at each 
end and one in the middle of the line, primarily to pass off dis- 
turbances of unusual magnitude, and also to experiment with 
the different forms. 

The sub-station arrester consisted of a single gap on each 
phase, arranged with a sheaf of water jets forming series re- 
sistance to ground. This required too much water and was Te- 
placed by tanks of water with terminals of carbon rods in fiber 
tubes (Fig. 4). : ; 

The power house arrester had two gaps in series between each 
phase and ground, with the second gap shunted by carbon 
terminals placed in the river (Fig. 5). 

The Hugo arrester, at the middle of the line, was built on the 
selective resistance principle, with three gaps in series on each 
leg, the second and third gaps being shunted by water-box 
resistances (Fig. 6). 

Overheaded grounded wires. Four types were erected in the 


402 VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


nine-mile zone in 0.5 mile lengths, alternating with 0.5 mile 
lengths of unprotected line as follows: 
Type A. Two wires mounted on a cross-arm 5 ft. apart on 
either side of the top line wire and about 18 in. below it (Fig. 12). 
Type B. Two wires supported on standards of 1.25 in. iron 
pipe 6 ft. apart and 18 in. above the top line wire (Fig. 7). 


ieee Tokine 


I 


form abondoned or account of 


shorlage 17 waler supply 


ae ae Jo lire 
re 
Te 


1 role Gap. 


Form usea 


r set for 6s5000VO0//s 


Fic. 4 


Type C. One wire on knobs attached to the pole near the 
center of the delta (Fig. 12). 

Type D. Two wires in the same position as in Type B, but 
supported on pipe pins set in the ends of a cross-arm attached 
near the top of the pole. 

In the above constructions the grounded wires were of No. 6 


1908] VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 403 


hard-drawn copper. The ground connections were of 0.5 in. 
by 0.0625 in. galvanized iron ribbon wire at every fourth pole 
and the ground made by 0.75 in. galvanized iron pipe driven to 
moist ground. 

Lightning-rods. Four types were used, erected in the nine- 
mile zone in sections from one to two miles long, separated by 


Fiber Candas 
whiver 


fleset Sune. 30,07 Before Sue. 30,09 


1 Xa fo Ya = 668 Ohms S23 
axbnwYhs-s7a « $23 
aXcfYe +578 « $23 
+ YaroYh = 966 « $92: 
SYbbYe 1570 « ass 
6YanyYe : 666 « 1254 
% Ya PoGround +578 « S98 
aYbfo = +269" 546 
QYcfo “ »+28608- 540 


I = 6§000 Vo/7s 67, 506 Vo/f3 
HZ = 32500 - 90,009 « 


Final setting -Gops os originally seh 
aNd £83/3781CES_03 14307 


Fic. 5 


unprotected sections as in the case of the grounded wire con- 
structions as follows: 

Type A. Rods of 1.25 in. galvanized iron pipe attached to 
the poles and extended by tridents of copper wire reaching 6 


ft. above the top line wire (Fig. 7). 
Type B. Rods of 1.5 in. galvanized iron pipe mounted on 


404 VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


separate poles 20 ft. to one side of the transmission line and 
topped by tridents of copper wire extending 25 ft. above the 
top line wire. Rod poles were spaced at the centers of alternate 
spans (Fig. 7). 

Type C. Same as Type B, but spaced three rods to four spans. 

Type D. Same as Type B, but spaced 1000 ft. apart. 

Ground connections were made as on grounded wire construc- 


a4 
Tell tore 
ar 2 
Te 


Borns 3 Jolsae 
i 


Te// tole qo Tell tate Qap 


Gap sertings 
Set uly 7-07 Frese? Aug 7-07 
I 75000 volts 65000 vo/?s 


I <37500 * 32500 
@ 37500 °* 32500 


Fic. 6 


tion, but with two grounds for each rod pole, one at the base of 
the pole and the other 20 ft. or more away, to insure especially 
wet ground and to increase the discharge area. 

Telephone protection. Each permanent and temporary tele- 
phone connection was made through a one-to-one repeating coil 
and discharge gaps to ground set to break down at about 900 
volts.* 


_* (American Tel. & Tel. Co. Protection 74-A.) 


VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 405 


1908] 


«aW,, 0¢44-——por-surayysry 


291g 
« @,, 9d44—por-sarazysrT 


“e a ” ad Ay 
——dlIM pepunoIs proyioAQ 


406 VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


Recording devices. All station arresters were provided with 
tell-tale papers. To determine the character of disturbances 
their extent, magnitude, and effect on line and apparatus, ground 
connections of all protective devices were provided with gaps 
for the insertion of tell-tale papers. 

To study the stresses on the line insulation throughout its 
length and the behavior of the insulators, each insulator pin at 
every third pole was grounded through a separate ground wire 
and tell-tale box (Fig. 7), supplemented by choke-coils shunted 
with tell-tale gaps cut into the line wires at various points. 

After a number of insulators on grounded pins had been 
damaged, the pin grounds were removed from four sections of 
about one mile long each, separated by one-mile sections left 
grounded, to prove whether the grounding was in any way re- 
sponsible for insulator failures. 

Records. The following records were kept: 

A. Weather conditions shown by United States Weather 
Bureau reports, and reports of observers along the line. 

B. Storm occurrences and data furnished by local men in 
charge. 

C. Operating and special reports of interruptions to service 
and damage to system. 

D. Tell-tale papers collected after each storm. 

E. Graphic analysis of tell-tale papers for each storm. 

Operation and results of first season. The transmission system 
was started up in December, 1906, and lightning protection 
records carried through the following summer. The lightning 
season opened late in March and lasted. into October. Thirty- 
two storms occurred during this season within reach of the line. 

The following tabulation gives data on the storms and damage 
to system, or interruptions to service. 

The tabulation (Table B_ shows that in 17 out of the 32 storms 
the service was interrupted and 8 of these storms caused damage 
to insulators, while only one storm affected the station apparatus; 
this was due probably to a defect in a transformer bushing, 
but was not sufficient to interrupt the service. Out of 42 
insulators damaged, only 3 were punctured, the rest being 
shattered. 

The plan and profile of the line (Fig. 8) show the distribution 
of damaged insulators on the line and indicate their phases, loca- 
tion on pole or tower, etc. 

The following tabulation (Table A) further analyzes insulator 
damage. 


1908] VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 407 


TABLE A. 
ANALYSIS oF INSULATOR FAILURES 
Total number of storms. Pe nme 32 
Number damaging easton oes 8 
Total number of insulators. on fine 
approximately. 1006s iio eeGne, «15,500 
Number ots So ee coisas 42; 0.8% of total damaged 
S SHatteted vio. serene ia oocyte hq 09.90% # « a 
| DEDUVON BERS Gh Seas aco ba ee 3 (Ake 0% a 
topansulators,, tse ss.1 ate: + 23) 04.57% ~ 3 
ti OMEWESime sient ae en oe GL ae cs 
e ‘“ east te G5 a cee a iP mbt, i 
# pea OL ACC ue marl hy ta, 3 ete I Aes eae ag 
“ opposite side. Oi TnL ags, Ye € 
Total number insulators on neciae ee 
pins, approx. is SPLOT FOMGA 2S & 
Total number ietictoees on merdanded 
_ pins, approx. ae B13, SOO | On OSG et 
Number cea on Pecoindeds Bue “ 
BUGRLOW EUS tor derarnen ete its cre ee. 35, 83.3% “ “ damaged 
Number damaged on towers.......... 3 Let PIE @ 
v2 on ungrounded pins. Oy Meee ¢ 
as a in sections where 
grounds had been 
RENTONOEO oon cy aglow, Ame OOo waa 4 
i. a on more or less ex- 
posed heights.... 2S OOM a a if 
@ i in wet bottoms..... SiOz Oat 3% a 
a 6 SCAU COLIN Ome seed: 6) .14:-3¢,- * —* cs 
-|Number damaged under overhead 
grounded wires. 
(At or near ends only) .. | 2 AES OG ues Ne 
Number damaged under Eaten ce 
on poles.........| 3S SPR EE ae a 
i under lenenine mee 
on separate poles. Cine ee Oars ie 
Poles split. 
Number with pin grounds............ 0 
Number without pin grounds......... 1 
Poles burned. 
Number with pin grounds........... 2 
Number without pin grovinds........ 0 | 


The chief operating troubles were interruptions due to short- 
circuits and grounds from spilling over of insulators, generally 
accompanied by permanent damage to a part of such insulators 
(Figs. 9 and 10). Another serious cause of interruption during 
the latter part of the season was due to too low a setting of the 
horn arrester at the power house; this did not appear with the 
higher setting earlier in the season, 


[May 19 


VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 


408 


1G) 70°50 eas “Ure 9/8 
4Z 68'1 ‘ysiqg| ‘urd 0g L-08:¢ ¥/8 
9F %c'0 “M 94 “381 “ure Z-0E'T V/s 
0g 98°0 “a 07 “3S “Ue T 6I/L] - 
*“peqiny x* = ” ” » [GL : 
‘SIp jou euoydejay ‘SIY ZT * = » | GOL | & 109 06 9L'c - ‘yd sean] ure [urd 0g:8/SI-FI/Z] 
£¢ 9€'0| Aavey “urd TI-Ogi6} = 1/2 
“Bury yar] * as! ” » “Gd! » {1&6 
4q peuing 816 0d * SuON n” |PPB-M) D {8I6 
* an ” ” » |S16 
% = ” ” » 616 
* = ” ” a |606 
* <a » » » 12486 ; 
‘Aep Sulinp *% —- . doy » IPe6 ‘osny 
aulT Uo jou IJeMO”g * ” ” » ~a| ¥ {816 SE 9T'O} AaevozT [| OF “MIJO ysve “rus Z/"ura Og:ZI—0F: O01 t/L 
x ” ” » ~n] on» [BOS FL 
* ” " » “~»] » 1806 - 
* ies 3 ” eps- Al OD. {oLT 
“sured * re n |?PB-M) @ {&6I 
“er Oy simnoy * a ” ” » (886 41 “88 
0€ No usy} ‘ase * > ” ” ” 196 —ZLI sajod 
-urep Jozye INoY %* = ” ” » |PGS FL eq «yd 
T 40} pyey oury) = auoN ” dol | Vv | S6r &@ £0°0 4 wioiy ‘tur ¢ ‘ure g-Zi] 08/9 
*siredai 10] UuMOp 
inys oul] ueYyM 
‘T Amnf  Aepung * ‘Tq ” » “dl! wv &LPl 
paovjdel s1ozye[nsuy S34 auoN 35) Jepis-M!] FLEL LI O'O| Aarvey “ure 9 62/9} . 
ie OL 050 “J 07 “3SIQ “urd-¢G] = $9} - 
auoN 0°0 PIA “urd [-ZT £¢/9 
*gqqno14 
BUIMO][OF BUIYO IIMS 
Aq peqdnitezur oury 
“10ze[NSuI uUsyoIq 
two1j Sutddoip ‘aim 
Aq peuing TLST 70d ‘sIq 81 * ta “XD JPM) VW f° TZST os OF 0 ” ure T—urd 08:6] §-zz/9 
Zo S¢°O) AaeaH 1A OFM urd 0€:8-0€:¢ 12/9 
” Ceaer MN 03 “3SIG ‘urd cg} = 91/9 
” Fr O€' 0] JUenberT “ure QI-8 ¢1/9 
” p+ 06. T ysep-T ‘urd ¢ 6/9 
“peqing i OF O10 V-qns 1e9N ‘ure gg] 6/9 
“stp you duoydayay 
peinjound Zurysnq 
JouLIojsuely = =Y-qNs SuON, * = “ID doy Oo | Gest cE OOT O| «=AAPaH - “ure g—ur'd 6|/€1-ZI/E 
to £00 saa T “481d ure OG: TI—-02:1T &2/£ 
suordnisezut asevulep ‘ON ‘yd wurer uoly 
SHIPUWIDY jo uoly a0el g uld 207 | Ud] 70g ‘xeyy jo suruyysry ~da11q u01}e907T oury a3eq 
uoneindg -e]nsuy purm ‘uy 
‘oseUIeq 


SULIO}G JO SOI4SIIOJORILYD 


WALSAS OL ADVNVA UNV SWYOLS NO VLVG 
“a WTEVL 


*psinjound toye[nsuy = +K ‘you Jo pepunois uld 107ze[NSU,T = JON JO ‘I5) ‘osnoy IaMOg = ‘Ud ‘gjod uo uoMNeo0T = 29077 
*poie}yeys 1oye[Nsuy = 7% ‘opis eoeIq JON = 9UON ‘apis sovlg = 1g “9 10 'g ‘y aseyg = “Ud 
*‘sjoquIAG pue SUOT}eIAZIqqy 
a ; cer 
2 fs S1°0 eae Loran, €/01 
=H | 6 €9°0 FT FIC wet 1/01 
*pepunois 
{foo «= eyouDd = OUT ‘SIU ZL » oon ‘Ure Gh). 2/6 
‘ustoy Aq peuado 
toy <q pouado Py oe Bea) NS 
a ad 8Z ¢0°0 ‘urd 0§:2-08:9] 36/6 
> {q 901M} pouedo 
S Layeelq Wd SE 867% qy4stu Te curds! = 6 1/6 
a “928 YypSIp 9€ 10°0 “urd-0g:¢-F| 81/6 
S u1oy ou {pauedo 
rcs} rayeeiq “yg BEMIGGEO ‘Ure O€:F-OE'E| LI/6 
m4 “yutod 
f asIeyostp B MOT O04’ 
im ye ae ios yorym 
SIojselie WIOY 
1G) ‘yd jo uoryeredo Aq 
z= sa.ut} 6 pouedo ‘yd ; 
4 ye siayxeveiq ¢z pue cs =8s'"0 > ‘ure Z-08'T 91/6 
Se GT ‘ydeg usemyag/susoy Aq peuedo ‘urd Q-) 
ay Jeyesiq “yd 61 GE" 0 ” pue ‘urd ¢-0g'F ST/6 
S auoN GZ 9TO| AaeeH ‘uur JO “| ‘urd 6-08: 2 9/6 
; ast or en8) » »| » [488T 
L 7 SoON ” »  »! » ESET 
a) % Gl » {oP al OD JOSE 
7 BRON » » wl » [29ST 
eS *% wei » |®PIS-M) @& {TST 
z= “4yds afog is = » ” » 29ST 
= * =) | FON eon. Seen 
aay - ” ” mon} » ree : _ 
” ” ” » 1S aul] OF RES 
S 2406 76 t¢ AS) |SPR ra) Vo lGcsh 39 96'S} “SAg Aton | jorreseg| stodeouurpy ‘urd ZI-08:2 81/8 
=) 
‘sooue aul] 0} ‘yd 0} 
~ -qinjsip aul, AAvozy - OF 92:0) AAeaH TeTereq| stodeeuuryy “urd 8-08:9] ST/8 
‘ auoN vs 91°0 ‘qStq| “Ure O08: 1-081 8/8 
* Sas7. ” ” ” PPI 
6 iF n ” » |LPIT 
% a ” ” » |S88IT 
as =a : : SeIT 
*% es “7 ITIL 
g | 3 m0 
& eS ee es x | — 2901 
4 ajoduopoiszuruyYysry] . =e g90T 
i: "SI aac Wnal be os 8d0T FOO] 9 AAveqy “urd §-08:T 9/8 
uondniteyur osewuep ‘Yau urer wor} 
‘SHIVULAY jo uo joowrg| utg | ‘ooT |*qq| 0g | “xeu jo | sutuyysry | -oe11q uolzeB007T aut} ayeq 
uoryeing -e[nsu] PULM “UT 


[May 19 


VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 


410 


S10} e[NsUL peseuUleqd—-6§ “Oly 


1908] VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 411 


Graphic records of tell-tale papers. The graphic records of tell- 
tale papers show in the form of curves (Figs. 11 and 12 and 
Appendix) the relative stresses on and discharges over insu- 
lators, or through arresters throughout the system, for the 
full storm series of the season comparing the action of various 
protective devices storm by storm. 

The ordinates of the curves represent the relative size of punc- 
ture of tell-tale papers, the scale being so selected as to show 
as nearly as practicable the relative activity at each point on 
the line. Curves A, B, and C (Fig. 11)-refer to the tell-tale 
papers placed in the grounds of the insulator pins on the corres- 
ponding phases and the fourth curve “Sp.” to the papers in 
the grounds of the protective devices. The relation of phases 
and transposition points, locations of special protective devices, 
choke-coils, pole numbers, etc., are shown at the top of the 
sheet. The columns to the right refer to the papers in the 
various types of arresters and give data for each storm. The 
curves on enlarged chart (Fig. 12) show the sum of the diameters 
of punctures for the three phases, and the corresponding punc- 
tures for the protective device grounds. In the preparation of 
these charts the tell-tale papers have been interpreted as follows: 

Puncture, honeycombing, or discoloration of tell-tale papers, 
without blistering indicates quiet static discharge or static stress, 
as from the condenser action of the line and insulators, shown 
on chart by light line in curves A, B, and C (Fig. 11) and by 
'"ss), on the arrester records. 

Blistering, that is, bursting apart of laminations of tell-tale 
papers or tearing of papers, without burning, indicates a dis- 
ruptive static discharge, shown by heavy line in curves and 
eOaer (hig. tl). 

Burning of puncture indicates dynamic current, shown by 
solid curve and ‘“‘O” (Fig. 11). 


DATA FROM OPERATING Reports oF 1907. 

Storm, May 12-13, 9 p.m. to 6 a.m. Sub-station transformer 
bushing grounded. Telephone wires at sub-station burned off, 
Top insulator pole 1532 Ph. “C”, 4.5 miles from sub-station 
shattered, one side of all petticoats being broken. Current 
teaking to grounded pin slowly burning pole. No interruption 
until current off for repairs 19 hours later. 

Storm, June 22-23, 9:30 p.m. to 1 am. Pole 1571 reported 
burning at 11 p.m. 11:30 to 12 p.m. surges on power house in- 


412 VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


struments and heavy discharges over static dischargers on low- 
tension side of transformers, burning out one set of dischargers. 
Breakers thrown out, then line cleared up. Pole 1571 reported 


Shattered 8/18/07, pole 1341 Punctured 8/7/07, pole 1028 
Punctured 6/29/07, pole 1474 Same insulator (pole 1028) 
Fic. 10 showing fused puncture 


still burning at 12:30, grounded line. Double arms burned 
off by wire dropping from broken insulator. Pin ground wire 
across line and telephone wires, making the telephone alive, 


1908] VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 413 


Pole badly burned, necessitating renewal. Telephone in order 
after clearing wires. When spillover at pole 1571 Ph. “A” 
pin ground fused off. Sub-station cell-type arrester active on 
Ph. “B” and “C”. Low-equivalent arrester inactive. Ser- 
vice interrupted by switching operations after trouble only. 
Line out for repairs 18 hours. 

Storm, June 29, 12 to6 a.m. Side insulators poles 1474 and 
1478 ““B” punctured and broken. No interruption until 
repairs June 30. Telephone out. Station arresters inactive. 

Storm, June 30, 12 to 8 a.m. Top insulators shattered on 
towers 224, 288, and poles 193 and 267 Ph. ‘A’; pole 193 
Ph. “B’”’; and tower 224 and poles 172 and 208 Ph. a aes 
P.H. horn arrester discharged on Ph. “B’”’, arc breaking in 
two to three seconds without any disturbance to synchronous 
apparatus. Short-circuit one hour later. 

Siorm, July 4, 10:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Current not on line 
after 4.a.m. Insulators shattered on poles 918, 934, 937, Ph. 
eo O12 915 Pho ~B”; and 918, 931 Ph. “'C’’. Pole 
918 burned off two feet below cross-arm. Pole set on fire by 
lightning as no line current was on. Line tested and found 
short-circuited at 1 pm. Line put in operation 7:25 a.m. 
July 5. Most of damage on unprotected section between over- 
head ground wires types “‘ A” and “B”’. 

Storm, July 14-15, 8:30 p.m. to 1 a.m. Near power house. 
Insulators shattered on poles 60 and 72 Ph. “ B” shutting down 
station for 12 hrs. Power house static dischargers burned some- 
what. Power house horn arrester operated once. Telephone 
not affected. 

Storm, Aug. 6, 1:30 to 3 p.m. Nine insulators shattered on 
poles 1065, 1067, 1070 Ph. “ A’; 1150, Ph. “B”, 1111, 1135, 
1138, 1141, 1144, Ph. ““C”. Insulator punctured pole 1028, 
Ph. ‘A’. Fused through all four parts and several minor 
punctures. Hugo horn arrester slightly active Ph. “ A’; others 
inactive. Cell-type arrester discharged Ph. “‘A” and “B”’: 
Sub-station low-equivalent arresters sae i PheoCin ge Line 

out 25 hours. 

Storm, August 18, 7:30 to 12 p.m. Most severe storm for 
several years. Lightning practically incessant. Heavy short- 
circuit on line at 8 p.m.; recovered for few minutes, then perma- 
nently out. Pole 1357, from which ground wires had been 
removed, split from top to below cross-arm where guy was 
attached. Top insulator shattered. Nine other insulators 


414 VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


shattered on poles 1332, 1335, 1341, 1355, 1357;. Pee Ae 
1350, 1351, 1357, Ph. ““B”; and 1351) 13877,Phaw Ca eee 
of these were in sections where pin grounds had been removed. 
No evidence of short-circuits on any poles. Papers in line 
choke-coils on pole 1356 burned up and cylinders burned. Choke- 
coil on 1615 Ph. ‘‘ A” paper blistered. Beside spillovers be- 
tween 1500 and 1400, several between 800 and 950, but 
without damage. Other spillovers on 300, 353, 408, 563, 1034, 
and 1254 without damage. 

Storms, September 15-42. Several of these were severe. 
Transmission line put out of service 9 times in 9 days. Six of 
these caused by power house horn arrester discharging, opening 
breakers. Arc held on horn tips, and in one case followed up 
lead toward tower, drawing an arc 20 to 30 ft. long. Probable 
cause, wind. Action of horns much more severe than with 
wider setting during earlier part of season. No damage from 
lightning. 


ANALYSIS OF RECORDS 


Examination of the plan and profile (Fig. 8) indicates that: 

Points where the line was especially liable to damage are, first, 
exposed heights and, next, wet bottom lands. 

Damage was usually concentrated within a distance of a 
mile or two, with the exception of the two storms of June 30 
and August 6, in the latter of which the storm crossed the line 
at a slight angle; and in the former, although there is no record 
of the direction of travel of the storm, there are indications that 
it traveled along the line for some distance. 

Thus far, trouble has not been confined to any defined points 
on the line, but as yet there is insufficient conclusive evidence 
on this point. 

The tabulation of line failures appears to show that: 

Where grounded and ungrounded pins came on adjacent 
poles, damage to the insulators generally occurred at the grounded 
pin, but the damage of a group of insulators on a section of jine 
where all grounds had been removed and on pole 1065 indicates 
that grounding the pins probably did not materially increase 
the danger of damage. 

Top insulators are somewhat more liable to damage than those 
on the sides and those on the brace side are apparently some- 
what more affected than those on the opposite side. 

Overhead grounded wire construction materially protects 


— 1908] VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 415 


insulators. The lightning-rods do not seem to have much 
effect except in cases of direct stroke. 

The one case of pole splitting was a pole with no ground con- 
nection. 

Examination of the tell-tale papers and graphic charts (Ap- 
pendix and Fig. 11) indicates that: 

Storms follow no well-defined paths, nor are their effects 
confined to any particular part of the line. 

Stresses do not occur at any definite points. 

Principal disturbances are due to immense static charges on 
the line in the immediate vicinity of storms. These charges 
are of great intensity and concentration, frequently spilling 
over a number of insulators without traveling along the line 
more than a few hundred feet. 

The disturbances are confined to areas extending from one- 
half to two miles along the line, excepting where storms are 
traveling parallel to the line, as in the storm of August 18, 
which suggests recurrent and decreasing activity as the storm 
passes down the line. Even in this case no area of disturbance 
was over three miles in length. 

In general, the protected nine-mile zone shows an appreciable 
decrease of insulator stress, activity of devices for distant 
storms and a very decided shielding effect of overhead grounded 
wires as well. 

By following the curves for each type of grounded wire down 
through the season on the large graphic chart, Fig. 11, the ac- 
tivity of the grounded wires and the corresponding smoothing 
out of stresses on the insulators appear pronounced and con- 
sistent, with the possible exception of the storm of August 18, 
which was of unusual severity and traveling parallel to the line, 
so that charges may have been induced on the unprotected 
lengths of line between the protected sections of sufficient volume 
to spread out through the protected sections. A study of the 
enlarged chart, however, shows pronounced shielding effect even 
for this storm. The shielding action is especially well shown 
in the plot for the heavy storm of July 4, which occurred when 
the line was dead. This storm in traveling parallel to the line 
from southwest to northeast would naturally affect the unpro- 
tected sections of the line between the shielded sections. The 
chart shows how the shielding effect at the west ends of the short 
protected sections is counteracted by charges evidently coming 
on to the unprotected line as the storm approaches each pro- 


416 VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


tected section and how it prevents the reestablishment of the 
charge for some distance into the unprotected sections at the 
opposite ends. 

Although more damage was done to the top and east or brace 
side insulators, in general the stresses appear greater on the 
west side, which in this case was toward the approach of the 
storm. 

The effectiveness of the various types of overhead grounded 
wire appears to be in proportion to their theoretical value, the 
wires well above the line being the best and the wire in the 
center of the delta the worst. The activity of the lightning- 
rods, especially those at the side of the line, is marked. In 
this same storm, one of type ‘“‘B” rods passed off a discharge 
which can be accounted for only by discharge between cloud 
and ground. This is of especial interest, as a lightning flash 
photographed by one of the inspectors the previous season 
showed ramifications apparently covering a territory a mle 
or two in diameter, emphasizing the necessity for some such pro- 
tection.* This pole may have received a branch of such a direct 
stroke and in any case shielded the line from any unusual stress 
at that point. 

The station arrester records on the graphic chart show the 
low-equivalent type of arresters to have operated according to 
their theoretical design; but whether the volume discharged 
was sufficient to keep down dangerous potentials is not certain, 
since in each important case the simultaneous and vigorous 
operation of the power house horn arrester outside the station 
indicated that it took the brunt of the discharge. The cell- 
type arrester was apparently more sensitive and operated more 
freely than the other types. There is no record, however, to 
show its action in disposing of abnormally heavy discharges. 
On the other hand, it appeared to be more sensitive in respond- 
ing to strains due to a grounded line, and discharged for con- 
siderable periods under this condition without damage. The 
operation of the horn arresters, especially at the power house 
has been very promising and appears to fulfil their intended 
function as an emergency device. Their operation has been 
chiefly when the line was grounded by the failure of an insulator, 
but there is one case where the power house horn arrester dis- 
charged over both gaps in series without any indication of dis- 
charge through the water shunt of the second horn; this indicates 


* See Transactions A. I. E. E., Vol. XXV., p. 901 to 926. 


1908] VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 417 


that it passed off a high-frequency static discharge without 
allowing the line current to follow. But this single case is not 
conclusive. There are other cases, however, which show the 
passage of heavy disruptive discharges which indicate that 
these types have handled high-frequency disturbances as well 
as low-frequency surges. From their action so far it is believed 
that the two and three-gap types of horn arresters will be 
effective in handling occasional disturbances whether static or 
dynamic which might otherwise be of too great magnitude for 
the station arresters to dissipate, and that this can be done with 
settings which will not interrupt the line nor necessarily disturb 
synchronous apparatus. 

The telephone line ordinarily operated quietly, but, although 
often too noisy to use in case of line trouble, it was, as a rule, 
kept from damage by the protectors and recovered when the 
line cleared up. The effectiveness of the protectors was well 
illustrated during a ground on one phase by the immediate burn- 
ing out of two instruments not protected, while a protector on 
the third instrument discharged freely with no damage to the 
instrument. 

CoNCLUSIONS 

The results of the Taylors Falls experiments so far indicate 
that: 

The principal trouble is from temporary or permanent break- 
down of line insulation by static charges induced in the line by 
passing storms. 

Direct strokes between cloud and ground may occur at any 
time. Although there were several cases of damage so caused 
during construction, the first season’s operation gives evidence 
of only one case and that without damage. 

The induced charges are highly concentrated, and often of 
immense volume and intensity, discharging to ground over 
insulators with a disruptive effect that tends to shatter, but 
rarely to puncture them, often without line current following. 
Line current may or may not follow these discharges; if it follows, 
it may only temporarily ground or short-circuit the line. 

Arcs established by insulator spillovers or leakage of charging 
current through damaged insulators may burn pole structures 

or further damage insulators and even fuse the line wire. 
Such disturbances may occur anwhere on the line, but with 
a preference for exposed heights and to a less degree to wet low- 


lands. 


418 VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


There is no evidence of surges other than the direct effects 
of grounds or short-circuits, nor of stress at any definite 
points on the line such as from reflected or standing waves. 

Top insulators, and to a less extent those on the cross-arm- 


146 Galy iron strap 
ground connection 


Notes Lighting rod and grouna 
camection at every 4 pale only 


Scakfsr wancrtasce NAI2437 


Fic, 13 


brace side of the pole, apparently are more liable to damage, 
although the cases are not sufficiently frequent to be conclusive. 
Grounding of insulator pins by tower structures or otherwise 
has comparatively little effect in assisting insulator breakdowns. 
Overhead grounded wires are of decided value in shielding the 


pausng 
21°d 


Sib 


AILS “Py b> “ 
LOL) GCG JO Us10ZS~ 


gala 

001g 

papunap 
fou 

I stl 


220419 
cel 


|568 


j Oare In: Se 2. 
Dato out. oF J 
el 


TFAYEORS' FAEDS TRANS 


g OF 
ie 
TA VLORS ferho TRANS: 


me 
' Date out 7 t7 
PD 


Pale a: a s ‘ sap 


Lig. Rod. 


REMARKS: 


eG a 
Date out ay AA 
D fay Nos 


TAVLORS FALLS: TRAW 


Date In- b = 29 o7 


Date gut mise vom aah 
eT > pie POG 
| TAYLORS FALLS TRANS. i in fa 
| moe 


4 . a 


TAYLORS FALLS ‘TRANS, 


' - 
Lnslitrre, | 
tog. { 
Station Sab, a 
ae REMARKS (aon over) 
Date n/a ofox SERIES 


; out OF © 


Dote in & wo OR go oon oe f 


Lino Ce, H f oh 
Log. C. 
StationSPChory 


REMARKS 
7 


Dato in 6/30 -@ 
" out J-6~ 6, 


: 


Dute in the Yor hs 
6 out Ye-o7 


L0b/ Gf br fo UdsolS 


i LOY CAL YO lila SYRULRL thes papin 


—*- ieee, 


le) 
"0A/ 


4/-8 bie 
49-918 £0-9/-8 


f 


( Nery 3g 
~ Hehe) O ese) 


L0°9/-3 


Salis Be 


LOLI GD CMG YO-UMOLS 


a201g 
Seel 


g901g 


2cel 


L061 0 62th fo. tendo 


“LOGI AIM? JO WHOL 


oy SADE TO Nera 


Ty 


fis 


offs Here 


aT 


The Minneap: 


ity 


seo 


eb): Sr | Sua ible sel gga Ae 


K eS 
, " ie 


a ine 


: th 


: 


| 
i 


MN 


ae 
i in 
il 


Ma 
: 


"a 
i 


Wale 


= 


Hii 
Ht 


Ha, 
ate 


a . Nl 


THe HH aT HVT bi hainas 
He eae | 


Ni 
tin 


il Hi 
Hifi mi H 


Hy 
i! 


ia 


ML i 


vies 
i ae : 


il 


te i 


i 


iil at 


Hl 


i 


= 


= 


ON 
ae 


i i | 
th y 
ana 

iii 


i 
a 


| i 


i i 


i ia 
Ma aA 


rg a 
In 


tile) 


it} } ay ii 
i : } ! a | ri a 


1908] VAUGHAN: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 419 


line from induced static charges and in preventing insulator 
breakdowns. 

In the only case of direct stroke, the lightning-rod pole along- 
side the line was effective in preventing line damage. 

A grounded conductor running down the pole is of decided 
value in preventing splintering of the pole. 

The selective resistance, multigap type of arrester is effective 
in disposing of ordinary disturbances. 

The aluminum cell-type arrester is, in general, more sensitive 
and freer in discharge; it gives great promise for station pro- 
tection. 

Horn arresters of the series gap and selective resistance type 
are fairly sensitive to static discharge as well as to disturbances 
of lower periodicity, and of special value as emergency devices 
to relieve the station arresters in case of abnormal discharge. 
They may be adjusted to be fairly sensitive without interrupting 
service or necessarily throwing out synchronous apparatus. 

The use of the tell-tale-paper system is essential in following 
the action of station protective apparatus, and is of decided 
value in studying line stresses and the effectiveness of protective 
devices. 

The results of the above experiments have led to the recom- 
mendation that the overhead grounded wire construction (Fig. 
13) be immediately extended about 15 miles in sections covering 
both ends and the more exposed parts of the line; that the use 
of horn arresters be continued and further aastments studied; 
that the rest of the station and line protective apparatus be 
left as it is; and that the present system of tell-tale paper and 
otier records be continued during the coming season. 


A paper presented at the annual meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engiueers, 
New Vork, May 19, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I.H.E. 


STUDIES IN LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE, SEASON 1907 


BY N. J. NEALL 


It is intended to discuss in this paper the general import to 
high-tension transmission of the data gained in 1907 as to light- 
ning performance on the Taylor’s Falls line, 50,000 volts, of 
the Minneapolis General Electric Co., and on the Presumpscot 
Electric Company feeders supplying power at 11,000 volts to 
the Cumberland Mills, near Portland, Me. 

By reference to the description of the Taylor’s Falls situation 
given by J. F. Vaughan, it will be obvious that in this case line 
disturbances chiefly are being combated; whereas, in the case 
of the Cumberland Mills, station disturbances have demanded 
attention. 

These two classes of lightning disturbance will be considered 
separately in this paper. 

LinE DISTURBANCES 

Lightning disturbances to a long-distance transmission line 
may be due to an induced (bound charge on the line) direct 
stroke, or both. 

Bound charge. This idea embodies the well known principles 
of the operation of a static charge imparted to any insulated 
body. When this charge is gathered from an electrophorous 
in demonstrating elementary principles of electricity, the amount 
of charge, its potential, rate of accumulation, and rate of leakage, 
are, certainly of small values compared with those, at least, 
that we consider in electrical engineering to-day, not to speak 
of what we imagine the magnitudes to be in lightning phenomena. 

A modern high-voltage transmission line must be highly in- 
sulated from ground at every point; for 60,000-volt service, there- 

421 


422 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


fore, it is easily conceivable that, in general, a tremendous 
electric charge can accumulate on the lines—assuming of course 
perfect equipment—and be held there with relatively small 
leakage. When in such a case as bound charge release takes 
place from the line, due to the discharge to ground, or to another 
cloud from the exciting cloud, an enormous rush of discharge 
undoubtedly follows the first point of breakdown to earth. 
Now since this discharge may be well extended beyond the point 
of maximum strain, there is relatively a considerable flow, once 
the discharge begins. This flow can be conceived as taking 
place over a wide area, changing from a sudden or explosive 
character at the centre of the strain area to a gently quiet one 
at the more remote points. 

Theoretically, there are no ready means of determining how 
great such an area might be; it depends on a variety of con- 
ditions, such as extent of clouds, the degree of their electrifica- 
tion, their direction and rate of travel, etc. Practically on the 
Taylor's Falls Line it has been shown that they may be as great 
as several miles in extent of line, or as short as 1000 feet, approxi- 
mately. From the operator’s standpoint, the worst these clouds 
can do, or at least the usual average, is the desired information. 

It has been shown that all such charges, once they are free 
to move tend to travel in waves, the progress and amplitude 
depending on the resistance in their path. In a limited length 
of line it may be easily possible to have the wave travel the whole 
length of the conductors, and be reflected at the open ends. 
This has shown itself prominently and repeatedly in the over- 
head zrounded wires section tested by the Stone & Webster 
Eng. Corp. (See paper by J. F. Vaughan). 

The tendency of such charges to travel in the transmission 
line is undoubtedly retarded very much by the skin-effeet of 
the conductors; in fact, at the moment of release of bound charge 
we may consider that the charge has the choice of dissipating 
itself in three ways—along the line wires, over the insulators, 
or both. If the insulation is particularly good the charge 
endeavors to travel along the conductors. Its natural rate of 
doing so would be very high, in consequence of which there is a 
constant compromise between impeded progress along the 
wires and tendency to discharge over the adjacent insulator to 
ground. When the latter occurs, the rate of discharge is also 
likely to be again suddenly changed, and this, together. with the 
absence of any inductance in the discharge path, is probably 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 423 


why tell-tale papers in such paths of discharge show violently 
explosive punctures. 

Effect of discharge. From the data presented by Mr. J. F. 
Vaughan it has been shown that such discharges can be very 
violent and yet not harm the insulator, ar produce a short- 
circuit. It has also been indicated that the discharges can be 
apparently of considerable length (compare static machine 
sparks) and yet make but a very fine hole in a tell-tale paper 
inserted in the discharge circuit. The presence of a thin long 
arc, or spark, which would of course be most pronounced in the 
case of “slow discharge over a high voltage insulator, is then 
to be thought of as the detrimental factor in the failure of insu- 
lators from this cause. 

_ Now, curiously enough, there is very little trouble reported 
from lines operating at lower potentials, even at potentials of 
30,000 volts. If the theory advanced herein before as to the 
formation of static strains on a line holds true, then every elec- 
trical line must undoubtedly receive such strains. It is, then, 
an important question—why well extended low-voltage lines 
do not lose insulators more frequently? The answer is probably 
partly this: No line can take a charge much in excess of its 
maximum insulator arcing-over strength. The result is, there- 
fore, that the higher voltage lines must handle a proportionately 
larger and higher potential static disturbance. The character 
of the insulators for this purpose, especially when one considers 
them as special forms of high-tension condensers, undoubtedly 
has a still further bearing on the damage resulting to the line. 
The tendency in high voltage insulator designs to form long 
‘ anticipatory ’’ sparks and arcs is well known among insulator 
designers; this helps, therefore, to form a conducting path for 
the line voltage to produce grounds, short-circuits, or punctures, 
as the case may be. 

Again the action of the insulator under simultaneous static 
discharges and line voltage may have an important bearing on 
such failure. 

From the data gathered thus far from Taylors Falls Line I 
would conclude: 

1. That a bound charge can be impressed on a transmission 
line, with an extent from approximately 1000 ft., perhaps less, 
to several miles. 

2. That its presence at any particular spot cannot be predicted, 
and, save for well known locations established after years of 


424 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE (May 19 


careful observations, must be expected at any part of the line. 

3. That it may occur successively at a number of points on 
the line, provided the exciting storm-centre travels along the 
line, and that the line is long enough to meet the necessary lulls 
between disturbances, or recharging of the clouds. 

4. That there is no measure as yet of its maximum magnitude, 
but there is reason to believe that this is very great. 

5. That the better the insulation the greater the concentra- 
tion, and consequent disturbance once the charge can start to 
ground. 

6. That the size and shape of the insulator determine the 
character of the spark which passes to ground, and govern 
failure. 

Direct stroke. The phenomena of spark-gap performance in 
measuring high voltages, or in discharging a static machine, may 
be profitably utilized in order to understand the action of direct 
strokes of lightning as they affect an electrical transmission line. 

In order that a line may be struck at all it must lie directly in 
the region of greatest strain; that is, form one of the electrodes 
of the lightning spark-gap, the other being the distant cloud. 
As the strain gradually increases between the earth and the 
cloud, the poles of the transmission line simultaneously respond 
to the new conditions. Even though they are thought of as 
being partial insulators, this makes no difference in the prelim- 
inary stages of this phenomenon. At the same time the trans- 
mission wires are accumulating rapidly a heavy bound charge. 
As soon as the flash occurs, it may at first strike a pole directly, 
and only later take the path via the transmission wire over the : 
insulator, once the escape to ground of the bound charge has 
thus paved the way. 

Again, the flash may actually occur between the transmission 
wire and cloud, because in the gradual preliminary increase of 
potential strain the effect of the insulator, so far as the static 
equilibrium is concerned, is comparatively nullified. In either 
case the result is the same—shattered poles, if of wood, and 
perhaps shattered insulators. | 

Upon reflection, it is clear that the common expression, ‘ to 
be struck by lightning’, is technically incorrect: for any ter- 
restrial object that becomes an electrode for a lightning stroke, 
plays as strong a part as the complementary part of the exciting 
cloud. It is the behavior of the electrode when the spark passes 
that determines its resultant condition. To this ma y be ascribed 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 425 


the peeling off of the bark of a tree, shattered chimneys, etc., 
and may be conceived as effects of repulsion inherent in the 
articles themselves, either from electrical causes or excessive 
local overheating. 

In the ordinary conception of direct strokes only one stroke 
is thought to pass between cloud and ground, but it is also 
known that direct strokes often consist of light branch strokes 
as well as the main stroke. Since, moreover, the line under 
strain presents a variety of points along which such discharges 
may play, it is easily conceivable that failure of the insulators 
may occur almost simultaneously in several adjacent parts of 
the line. 

Photographic study of lightning flashes shows that it is 
apparently oscillatory, and there are in fact many strokes in an 
indefinitely short time, although the eye may see only one. 

From the data at hand (Taylor’s Falls) it appears that the 
current flowing at such times may be relatively small as com- 
pared with the lightning voltage. We then have on a grand 
scale a duplication of the static-machine sparks, and others of 
a similar nature. 

The remaining primary disturbance is the discharge between 
cloud and cloud. If these are far enough away from the line 
the effect can be neglected, but owing to their generally low 
altitude such a discharge can either cause a release in the line 
of bound charges of opposite sign parallel thereto, or a secondary 
discharge between the clouds and line or ground as the case may 
be. 

In either event the effect on the line is essentially the same as 
described in the preceding discussion, and may be either simple 
or complex; that is, at present, unless actually observed, it is 
impossible in some cases to tell exactly whether a transmission 
line disturbed by lightning has been affected by induced or 


direct stroke. 
GENERAL 


Effects of the nature of wireless waves. In addition to the 
conditions described in the foregoing paragraphs, there are un- 
doubtedly minor disturbances created in the line by the action 
of the lightning discharge as a source of high-frequency waves 
which, reaching the line, are absorbed in a manner similar to 
that of a receiver in wireless telegraphy. This absorption may 
be more rapid than the line can dissipate, and the result is either 
a surge of “‘ static’, or, even worse, a discharge to ground, by 


426 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


reason of the impedance of the line wires to the free travel of 
the waves. 

The result is, therefore, the same as in the preceding case— 
the imposition of a high peak of static on the line which tries to 
seek a level of zero value by traveling off in either direction on 
the line. 

Effects arising from inherent characteristics of line construc- 
tion depending on: 

a. Insulator characteristics. An insulator for high-tension 
service is a form of condenser made up of a number of condensers 
(petticoats) of larger capacity, placed in series between line and 
ground. The best interest of the designer is, therefore, so to 
apportion his parts as to insure a uniform distribution of strain 
best suited to the service required. When this is but poorly 
attained there occurs the well known failure of insulators on 
test by premature puncture of one of the parts. 

In addition to the absolutely essential qualities of ruggedness, 
high-class dielectric strength, and good finish, an insulator for 
such service must have a strength against arcing over at normal 
frequency at certain values previously determined upon by the 
designer. In general, insulators are designed not to arc over at 
below twice the voltage of the system on which they are to be 
used when subjected simultaneously to some such rain test as 
0.25 im. per min. driven against the insulator at an angle of 45°. 
This, so far as it imitates nature, is of course very severe, and 
gives for any design a much lower voltage of arcing over than 
would be obtained with the insulator dry. 

In testing such insulators the usual practice is to raise the 
voltage fairly quickly until arcing over occurs; if this falls below 
the desired voltage the design must be changed. An insulator 
can, in general, stand a higher voltage thus administered than 
voltage applied continuously, 

Some insulators are designed for large total lengths of surface 
to prevent leakage; and where this is not likely to be linked 
with severe lightning disturbances the design of the insulators 
can be made in a different way. It might be said, however, 
that the insulator thus designed is likely to make a poor showing 
under rain test, while it is not at all improbable that for all- 
round service the insulator well designed for lightning and rain 
may do well in the leakage class. It is not the purpose of this 
paper to consider the latter. 


On the rain test at present, therefore, we look for characteristic 


eo ee 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 427 


performance. Two phenomena exhibit themselves: first, the 
static strain, or envelope of the insulator repulses the drops of 
falling rain away from itself; secondly, the combined forces of 
static repulsion and mechanical deflection of the falling rain 
give rise to a resultant direction of rain, which, if the inner 
petticoats are not properly shaped, throws the water directly 
under the top petticoat. In general this has been found to be 
most pronounced in curved petticoats and absent in straight 
parts when properly inclined. It is obvious that the former 
condition is very harmful to the strength of the insulator under 
high-potential strains. In addition to this, many insulators 
give evidence of internal unbalance long before breakdown. 
This usually means an insulator very liable to puncture. 

So far as the insulator used on Taylor’s Falls line is concerned, 
I wish to state that standard tests which I have made independ- 
ently on this type show a satisfactory performance along the 
lines indicated in the preceding; this leads me to think that its 
characteristics are of distinct value in the lightning problem 
now under consideration. 

Now the preceding characteristics apply entirely to insulator 
performance at normal or commercial frequencies. At higher 
frequencies there is as yet very little data, but the following 
ideas may be tentatively considered as an aid to the present 
discussion. 

Equivalent spark gap. In testing insulators to date no con- 
sideration has been given to their equivalent spark gap. For 
very high voltage insulators this is hard to secure for the general 
want of adequate apparatus but, it is undoubtedly within the 
reach of some. The principle involved is this: that while an 
insulator may have a very good performance under normal fre- 
quencies, it may be very poor at high frequencies, or their equiva- 
lent. i 

Nature of discharge. It is not inconceivable that the dis- 
charge over an insula or may be tenuous as well as abrupt. If 
tenuous, the shape of the petticoats once again materially affects 
the disposition of the arc, and possibly causes a fracturing by 
means of the intense local heating and the consequent unequal 
expansion of the porcelain. There may also be “ percussion ”’ 
effects due to the sudden change of atmospheric pressure around 
the insulator at the time of arcing over, and thus fracture an 
insulator. These ideas are based on the characteristics of shat- 
tered insulators on the Taylors Falls Line. 


428 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


Simultaneous static discharge with line voltage. This is the 
equivalent of static discharge over a liyltning-arrester with 
voltage simultaneously present. In the case of insulator per- 
formance, the object of the investigation should be to determine 
the degree of non-arcing power of any given design under the 
conditions noted. 

b. Mechanical design. The nature of the line construction, 
whether of wood, or entirely of metal, the length of span, size 
of insulator, number and nature of braces, etc., determines to a 
large extent the degree of damage any lightning disturbance 
will cause. If the poles are of wood, splintering of the poles 
may often occur, sufficiently, at that to require renewal of the 
support. Short spans naturally subject more poles to dis- 
turbance, within - given area, and, therefore, to more likelihood 
of damage. Large spans on metal towers invite more trouble 
(relatively at a given support) because of their isolation and 
attraction for the charge. 

c. Line profile and local topography. Attention has long since 
been called to the relation between the topographical location 
of the line, and it vulnerability to lightning. In any layout of 
importance the profile, or cross-section of contour, should be 
made in order to show the maximum and minimum elevations 
and relations of hills to valleys in the iine. Where geological 
formations are known, the extra information thus given is of 
value in determining the probable points of discharge between 
cloud and ground, provided the general direction of a storm is 
also fairly well established. This feature has been demon- 
strated on the Taylor’s Falls line by the apparently greater 
vulnerability of the west side of the line over the east, direction 
of storm from northwest to southeast. It is also thought that 
lightning has shown a preference for striking high elevations of 
the line and in damp, swampy places. 

d. Proxinuty of sub-stations. It is just as possible for a 
lightning discharge to occur near a power station as not, in which 
event ordinary lightning protection would be heavily affected. 
It is doubtful whether any device now proposed for station pro- 
tection, exclusive of horn lightning arrester without appreciable 
effective resistance in series, could handle successfully a release 
of heavy bound charge, etc. It is, therefore, important to insure 
adequate protection at such points. On the other hand, the 
tendency of line disturbances to concentrate might render any 
station immune if sufficiently remote therefrom. These condi- 
tions have been amply illustrated on the Taylor’s Falls line. 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 429 


METHODS OF PROTECTION 


From the data given by this line, and on the basis of the 
preceding considerations, both theoretical and practical, the 
following methods of obtaining protection against line distur- 
bances from lightning may be considered: 

1. Overhead grounded wire. Judging alone from the data now 
at hand as to its behavior, an overhead grounded wire placed 
near the line conductors may be considered beneficial. Ap- 
parently, it is not necessary for the grounded wire to be above 
the transmission wires in order to absorb a certain portion of 
the static charge. This has been positively measured in the 
case of the grounded wire in the centre of the triangle on the 
Taylor’s Falls Line, and is doubtless helpful in reducing the 
strain. Its limitations in this respect are obvious, especially 
~when it comes to increasing the amount of ground wire pro- 
tection over that given by one wire. 

The ideal static protection, as is known, would be a metallic 
envelope for the line; but since this is not commercially feasible, 
it is thought possible to approximate it by supporting several 
grounded wires above the line. These wires are so placed with 
reference to the line wires that an imaginary plane, extending 
at an angle of 45° from the wire on either side of centre, will just 
pass over the transmission wire. There are as yet no positive 
data to show the value of this consideration, but there ave data 
of a definite nature showing the effectiveness of the double-wire 
overhead grounded-wire protection. 

When the possibility of simultaneous direct stroke is borne 
in mind, a further disadvantage of the grounded wire placed 
within the triangle is at once apparent; for a direct discharge 
between this wire and cloud is not easily conceivable, certainly 
not so conceivable as in the external arrangements of grounded 
wires where the possibility of divergence of direct stroke is better 
prepared for. 

The experimental data on this performance have not yet fully 
and completely established the superiority of type, but there is 
certainly good reason to think that an overhead grounded wire 
protection, consisting of several wires supported above the line, 
is good protection. This protection should reduce the disturb- 
ance to the line to a very small amount indeed. In fact, the 
power of absorption shown by such protection leads to the con- 
viction that if'a transmission line were so equipped throughout, 
very little static disturbance would ever reach the stations; 


430 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


in other words, the overhead grounded wire would not only 
shield against the line troubles, but reduce consequent station 
disturbances. 

2. Lightning-rods. There is evidence to show the value of 
lightning-rods to a transmission line, particularly in that case of 
Taylor’s Falls where a lightning-rod was struck and the tell- 
tale gaps on the line adjacent thereto showed no disturbance. 
This diverting power is certainly of value. Two methods of 
application are feasible, first, as an additional feature of line 
protection placed separately but adjacent to the line at points 
known to be particularly subject to this effect. Since the 
latter is at best uncertain, I prefer the inclusion of a lightning- 
rod with the overhead grounded protection at frequent intervals 
throughout the line. On a steel tower construction (solely 
because of the usually long spans) these should be placed on 
each tower; on a wood-pole line, one of these could be placed at 
each grounded pole. These rods should perhaps extend 4 ft. 
to 6 ft. above the overhead grounded wire, and end in spreading 
tips. 

3. Grounds. The importance of good grounds for the over- 
head grounded wire is patent. Too great care cannot be exer- 
cised in this direction. The data given show that even on the 
grounded wire the passage of the charge to earth is apparently 
impeded, even by the short distance it had to travel along the 
line. For this reason it is clear that grounding at every hole 
is beneficial to the discharge. For ordinary line work time may 
prove that grounding every several poles is adequate, but that 
near stations or important points of the line, grounding at every 
pole is essential. This would be particularly desirable in the 
case of partial protection of the line where a stretch of over- 
head grounded wire was used to protect a sub-station. In this 
case the data as to the possible extent of such charges make 
two miles, approximately, the minimum limit of length out 
from the station that would secure nullification of any nearby 
induced disturbances. 

4. Extent of application. It is an open question of economy 
whether to equip a line completely, or partially, with overhead 
devices; but in consideration of the charges which they may be 
called upon to carry at any point, the whole line protected is 
theoretically and generally the safer policy. 

5. Insulators. The Taylor’s Falls data show that while the 
overhead grounded wire appears to remove the greater part of 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 431 


the stress, yet it should not be assumed that the remaining 
charge is negligible. 

For this reason the selection of insulators for such a service 
should insist on as high quality as ever before. The criterion 
of approval should be a non-arcing at no less than double normal 
potential under rain test of 0.25 in. per min. at 45°, with pin 
grounded, or an equally severe test. Under such a test the 
insulator should be relatively free of premature arcs and sparks. 
No rain should be deflected under superposed petticoats, and 
thus promote breakdown. When possible the equivalent 
spark gap of the insulator should be determined, and should 
always be high, certainly giving a large margin over any standard 
lightning protective apparatus connected to the line. 

The reason of this is patent from the performance of insulators 
on high-tension lines. It is clear that when the line is running 
with the neutral grounded the severity of service on the insu- 
lator because of the resulting short-circuit arc is certain to be 
quite destructive. In this respect the ungrounded system is 
better because the discharge over the insulator does not neces- 
sarily mean a short-circuit, or, if two insulators on opposite 
phases should simultaneously discharge, the resulting short- 
circuit may be favorably effected by the intervening resistance 
conditions involved. 

The performance on the Taylor’s Falls line brings out an im- 
portant element of high-tension transmission line design ; namely, 
the probable extra vulnerability of the insulators on all-steel 
towers, cross-arms, and pins. Where a section of wooden cross- 
arm intervenes between the insulator and the nearest ground it 
is possible to conceive of an increased arcing distance, which in 
the case of small insulators might be of some benefit in holding 
back disturbances. I therefore conclude:--If the insulator 
can be properly selected as to size, equivalent spark gap, arcing 
over voltage, and general characteristics, the nature of the 
tower construction may be neglected, particularly if overhead 
ground protection is present. , 

6. Line choke-coils. At the suggestion of Dr. C. P. Steinmetz, 
line choke-coils were originally included in the program of experi- 
mental equipment for Taylor's Falls Line, in order to determine 
by means of tell-tale gaps how far any given disturbance travelled 
along the line. The experiments from which these data were to 
be obtained were not carried out, but the choke-coil papers 
show that the coils operate freely under the static disturbances 


432 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


which are now known to be present on the line. In consideration 
of the small inductance of these coils (1 ft. diameter by 20 turns, 
approximately 60 ft. of wire) the tell-tale indications of static 
rushes are most impressive. 

The chief difficulty in such an equipment is in the construction 
of the choke-coil itself. For the Taylor’s Falls line the coils were 
finally constructed of brass tubing, which has apparently been 
found reasonably satisfactory. Itis yet too early to say whether 
such a feature can be of great benefit. The danger of such an 
equipment is the possible piling up of potential at the nearest 
insulator, and the consequent failure of the same. 

7. Horn lightning-arrester.. The horn lightning-arrester (es- 
sentially a simple spark gap of special form between line and 
ground) is, so to say, a hybrid—part station, part line device. 
In this paper it is considered solely as protection—extraordinary 
against great disturbances of any source reaching a sub-station 
or power house. 

a. Gaps. I think it must be clear from even this one season’s 
records on the Taylor’s Falls Line that when a horn arrester is 
at the centre of a violent static disturbance, for example, a dis- 
turbance that affects the insulators, it will act as do the insu- 
lators—arcing freely over a large distance. In this way, by 
proper relative adjustment of the various gaps, severe dis- 
turbances near important points can be carried off without dam- 
age to either the insulator or the station apparatus. Judging 
from the magnitude of the static discharge as evidenced on some 
of the line tell-tale papers, it is a grave question whether standard 
station lightning-arresters could take care of anything like a 
nearby direct stroke. There is less doubt that the horn arrester 
could do so. In the case of grounding of the line, the horn gap 
will also operate, but in my judgment such action should be 
made as difficult as possible, in consideration of the sensitive- 
ness of the electrolytic arrester to this effect. This leaves the 
horn arresters to care for emergency disturbances like a direct 
lightning stroke and high-power surges only. 

On the Taylor’s Falls plant there has been a pronounced evi- 
dence of the effectiveness of a number of gaps between line 
and ground operating on the selective path principle. In general 
the operation of the gaps has recorded both lightning disturbances 
and disturbed static balance from grounding of the system. In 
the former case all of the gaps between line and ground would 
operate, the tell-tale paper sometimes indicating a light discharge 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 433 


not followed by dynamo current, and again quite a heavy line 
current. The methods adopted apparently establish this action 
very well, irrespective of the arrangement of the resistances, 
whether directly in shunt as in the power house group, or directly 
in series, as at Hugo. The curious preference for the circuit 
through the fuse to ground at the power-house horn instead of 
from the shunt lead to ground—the resistance being relatively 
equal in all Cirections—shows forcibly the ease with which such 
disturbances take a long air path in preference to the regular 
circuits prepared for them. 

b. Resistance. In the matter of resistances there are as yet 
incomplete data on the behavior of water, but certainly the 
operation of the last season did not exhibit any bad traits in this 
material. At the power house the water for the whole arrange- 
ment is supplied by the tailrace, and is, therefore, constantly 
~ renewed. Its resistance, however, is low. My fear was that 
a discharge to ground would go by way of the first path to shunt 
resistance, and thus directly to earth. I find, however, that it 
has apparently not done so, and I conclude that this is due 
partly to the superior character of the horn arrester ‘‘ ground ” 
reached through the fuse (see paper by J. F. Vaughan). The 
tanks at Hugo and at the sub-station have given no trouble. 
The amount of resistance best suited to the purpose is yet to 
be wo1ked out. It may be that the size of receptacle employed, 
as well as the method of arranging electrodes,* has perhaps had 
an important bearing on this matter. The use of bituminized 
fibre conduit enables high insulation at the point of entrance 
of the leads, and controls the degree of electrode exposed in the 
water for the passage of the discharge. 

c. Operation. In general, it must be borne in mind that if 
the horn is to carry any current, the more current it carries the 
better, so far as self-extinguishing power is concerned. This, 
however, is bad for the system, tending to pull out the breakers. 
The employment of light fuses so limits the discharge that pro- 
tection is lacking where disturbances repeat themselves. The 
selective path multigap type of horn (gaps arranged in series 
as at Taylor’s Falls and Hugo see paper by J. F. Vaughan) 
permits a better adjustment theoretically, to the variables 
of such disturbances, and insures less need of attention. 

It is recognized that water resistances must be put out of 
commission in winter, unless special provision be made for 


*This method was suggested to the author by Mr. John L. Harper, 


434 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


keeping them warm. Where such apparatus is near a sub- 
station, this is not difficult. In such a situation as the middle 
of a long-distance transmission line it is still feasible but scarcely 
necessary. Since its chief use may here be considered in con- 
nection with lightning disturbances, there remains only the 
possibility of high-power surges which could be easily provided 
for by a proper adjustment of the horn gaps in series with a fuse. 
Even in this case a fuse might be retained of considerable cur- 
rent capacity, and depend solely on the gap action to relieve the 
strain. 

It seems desirable to have the horns operate coérdinately 
with the arcing over characteristics of the insulator. Since 
the grounding of the line may cause a momentary potential 
rise at some distant point, owing to the rush of line charging 
current to its new position of equilibrium, the setting of the first 
gap in a selective-path type should be approximately 150% 
normal voltage with reasonably high resistances. Too high 
resistance would impede the discharge. The total gaps in 
series should breakdown just under the arcing-over voltage of 
the insulators under its worst performance, usually taken to-day 
as at rain 0.25 in. per min., angle 45° with pin grounded. It 
were better with a single gap to have no resistance in series, only 
a fuse, to be set for the highest voltage. 

These considerations are subject to change with increase in 
knowledge as to actual equivalent spark gaps of insulators, 
lightning-arresters, and horn air-gaps. It may be possible later 
to call for larger air-gaps, in the horns, because of its equivalent 
spark gap characteristics. The present ideas are recorded merely 
to illustrate the purposes and tendencies for the future in the 
Taylor’s Falls installation. 

A horn arrester should preferably not be called upon to 
operate on any condition which a standard station lightning- 
arrester could handle. ; 

The bad effect of wind on the arc has been well indicated by 
both experiment and actual operation. This feature of horn 
lightning-arrester operation will always be a serious menace to 
a system at the time of simultaneous operation of two adajcent 
horns; it is a matter of chance which must be allowed, or 
elaborate preventive precautions must be taken. 

8. Special line-protection station. The operation of the horn 
arrester group at Hugo (centre of the line) Taylor’s Falls is 
critical in that it focuses the whole question of placing station 
type arresters on the line to draw off the static disturbances. 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 435 


It is clear from the data now at hand as to the minimum area 
of local concentration of lightning line disturbances, approxi- 
mately 1000 ft., that in order to do this fully a very large num- 
ber of arresters (approximately six groups per mile) would have 
to be installed, and then, aside from the consideration of main- 
tenance, there is the great question as to their reliability and 
sufficiency under the conditions. During the past season I have 
had a group of low-equivalent alternating-current lightning 
arresters, equipped besides with phase to phase protection, at 
the middle of a 11-mile, 11,000-volt line, in Maine, to assist in 
carrying off discharges from the line; for there has been con- 
siderable action at this plant from lightning. The characteristic 
of the performance of this system as a whole is a phase-to-phase 
operation, rather than from line to ground. Even though 
lightning storms were particularly frequent in this locality, 
and station protective apparatus at both the generating and 
step-down ends of the line operated freely, with considerable 
dynamic current manifested, the discharge at the centre of the 
line was nearly always lighter and colorless. To such a degree 
does this check the performance of the central arrester group 
on Taylor’s Falls line, that I am inclined to conclude that for 
the majority of line disturbances, whether static or otherwise, 
a central group does little good. What a high-power surge 
would do is still an open question. 

While these conclusions do not destroy, theoretically, former 
practice in regard to frequent placing of station arresters on the 
line, they seriously modify its practical value. By the theory 
advanced that the better the insulation of the line the more 
local the serious static disturbances will be, then line arrester 
stations decrease in value as the design voltage of the line in- 
creases. They thus become self-eliminating from our con- 
sideration. 

9. Miscellaneous. So far as attempts have been made to 
protect against line disturbances by larger insulators, or special 
features at insulators, such as horns to modify the effect, it is 
clear there is no reduced interruption to service itself when 
discharges actually occur. For this reason I should prefer, 
where feasible, any protection scheme which aims to prevent 
the static disturbances getting on the line at all. 


STATION DISTURBANCES. 


The characteristics of this feature of lightning disturbance 
tc electrical apparatus are too well known, and too fully dis- 


436 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


cussed, to need further mention here. For the sake, however, 
of new corroborative data, which I now wish to offer, I will 
summarize the phenomena as follows: 

1. Lightning effects causing line-to-ground disturbances. 

2. Line-to-line disturbances. 

3. High frequency (or equivalent) and low frequency. 

4. Internal disturbances due to grounding of line, short- 
circuits, etc. 

Line-to-ground. From the station data at Taylor’s Falls 
power house, as well as from the Minneapolis sub-station, the 
frequent and full operation of all types of station protection is 
fully established. As has been stated by Vaughan, throughout 
the season of 1907 no apparatus was hurt by lightning, save in 
the case of one transformer bushing, which failed by grounding. 

The lively operation of the apparatus, as evidenced by the 
action of the series and shunted gaps, respectively, and the 
heavy discharges over the electrolytics, indicate a considerable 
strain to ground, which for the present must be considered 
effectively handled by the protective apparatus. 

The size of the punctures over the low-equivalent alternating- 
current arrester does not differ materially from similar data on 
apparatus for lower voltages. In consideration, however, 
of the data now at hand as to the action of static discharges 
on the line and the effect on tell-tale papers where free discharge 
occurs, there is a question whether or not station lightning pro- 
tective apparatus must not be limited in action to reflected or 
transmitted disturbances of lesser magnitude, and to such dis- 
turbances as are generated in the system itself. Certainly, 
commercially we cannot expect more than this. Comparing 
the action of the various types, it has been shown that no arrester 
shunts the other entirely. Thus while from the response to 
ground the greater sensitiveness of the electrolytic is apparent, 
yet in case of greater severity all arresters operate. 

I recognize that, theoretically, both types should operate at 
the same point, but in the case of the electrolytic arrester the 
possibility of a closer adjustment to circuit conditions without 
consequent short-circuit is greater than in the low equivalents 
or other multigap resistance types of arresters. 

At the plant of the Presumpscot Electric Company, previously 
referred to, a large amount of experimenting has been carried on 
for the last two seasons, and is still under way. This plant 
consists of three hydroelectric stations feeding a central dis- 


l= 
9F) 


NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 


1908 


tribution station, (Fig. 1) where the power at lowered voltage 


is conveyed to a large synchronous converter load and induc- 


tion-motor load respectively, one of the stations generating 


directly at 11,000 volts. 


T Od 
10 WALITTT LOPSANOS Fg — "SINT NOUISSINSNWYL 20 HILFINS WLOMVIADOG 


"OSIM 
OYE IM SAY O PEYfOS SSO Hi? 
pe xg oe OP aver S$Ib010NG [ips 
aby - 44 Ef 900/f 
ER Aa Ald 24th ‘in Tay 00g 
! AH ff EF 
Way! 
Sh olay ff £/\ sop my COGl O68) my SLb 
Ye ‘Neyofs ste ny my v6 POU CECI 28/3 
JUL 5/83 M b spyb ydjynu —SYUYS OM 8890/7, 
<b (224 480 of \ Yeoenfoos' | 0 21D FadaS eh 
sé plod gf-62\  Seypyhy- B2L808S, 
weal qa) vit [ Oe CSR. ADL PPE BROT. 
(3/07 18M 0] hyiebitoj) t ! 
NOMLILG YIM Og Ty LTS | £ SMi0jsubd, pa 
1 


(yom2o 


(002.10 0M GEE 
My $2) 


MY CEL AY \ 
08/ -206/ Wsy' 
OO9E DE AICS FHOSLO gf 


' 

' 

! 

| woss/ooce O7W/ 
H DTM MY OSH -2 
{ 

' 

1 


! : WIS'e 
*8SMOYCUYUSHG MY OOD + | "He 002 2084, CE MID 
WOY CU Y EUS AY Oe Se ee Yio saving i Fee 
HE MY 006 Btoy Obit ff OC2E yloe ayeygA \aiypy [Of OL1-A04/ Oy 
AY My SEH SYYEY yet YL 1 H PY Oua ad {277 
Cope corn Ose : | SARLASELES BE 
ywospyliapayddnsy NS -zsn0% | | 4 90e my Oss-6 
RY 21 490 HY HEY OF > New9n27- "74 OOWETHILG 
“L007 Se henry 4 ee ee 
SAY TII ~~ NOMYL SHINO VASVHVIDUS 


WPY S22 POY, 02 


$410, 022H18O flO? 01) BE MY COP-£ 
OPW 87M POE) 


yoasreusia? p7edja Stojorab —— y s 
SEATS A Oo, AY 2 Ie EN Ke eS ~ 
NOULYLSATIMIS | X ye oda Kawah heey 
sagusmed sribsnosniys | Perey Peas 3) FS % 
sae Es jiwM™éM) ah paesiaodd jolt Mief Shp 
AL MY OSO/_ 999%, 
[xa mecot-seal PON? 
ae ee Aart 
F yy buf] 
‘ ' 
f23y, 0p Capt SOusGdi, S2/fI49ff , Ss ay re, 
[YHoitlly % PYIIMMOD {7840 i {Ml 2YOkS 
1 1 
‘ 


pe RES, a peer Bae 


NOMVLS HIME STIL Mi 727 


unced line to 
ipment on this 


and fuses (until best ad- 


In consideration of what appeared to be prono 
line characteristics each protective apparatus equ 


system was supplied with extra gaps 


hould have been accomplished) and in one case 


justment s 


438 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


low equivalent arresters were placed across the line. In addi- 
tion to this the regular low-equivalent arresters between line 
and ground were shunted with gaps and fuses, two each, around 
the shunt and series resistances in series, (Fig. 2). The whole 
system was carefully equipped with tell-tale papers so that noth- 
ing could happen without leaving a record. 


AURANGEMENT 
2. 
LNG. PROvEC TIVESPPARATUS 
SER. 
Commncetano Mes even 
cow fee , 
4.0. Long. ’ S27 Ht Power STATION. 
Mresler 
¥r 
FUSE 
ener Ne * ANNES 
pea 
Crete coi 0-7 > b ay 
fection Shehe ae et OE, é 
or “a 
leeds of e0ch oy, ? aro ene 
GOMETOTOr: 7 
2 CVG. PROTEC TUE AURATOS 
i AGLInG, pb 
Prt 
LE2 heel OWER SATION. 
ARRANSEMEN TT 
or 
Crs. ProrecrVe AbeaRaTYS 
ar 
kee Whe /ALWAY STATION. 


Bic.ez 


The results to date are as follows: 

Improved service during lightning storms. 

When the arresters operated to ground there would often be 
a complete action over the low-equivalent arrester between 
line-and ground as well as over the gaps and fuses in shunt 
thereto. 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 439 


In any given discharge not all the fuse paths to ground would 
operate. Fuse paths in operation would sometimes blister 
the paper badly, again a paper would show burning. 

_ Fuses did not always blow even though a discharge had passed 


SI 


fusilators, Locke *16, 
GSS, /bo00 volts, 


S 


Fic. 3.—Detail of Eel Weir line construction Presumpscot Electric Co. 


over them. The action over the fuse paths was apparently 
freer than over the arrester; that is, tell-tale papers on the fuse 
path showed larger holes and greater blistering. 

The shunted-gap papers seldom show any current, from 
which, together with data from other sources, I conclude that 


440 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


the dynamic current seldom passes over the shunted gaps. It 
is the static or disturbing voltage only. 

A new type of selective resistance arrester was installed last 
season, but too late to give much information. It has operated 
on several occasions, but there are as yet insufficient data to 
permit full comment on its performance. 


Fic. 4.—Presumpscot Electric Co. View of Eel Weir half-way line 
lightning arrester house 


Line-to-line. The results in this item at the Presumpscot 
Electric Company have been most interesting. They are: 

A firmly established record of the existence of line-to-line 
disturbances in addition to those disturbances usually considered 
in lightning arrester operation. These disturbances were 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 441 


found to be taking place during “‘ uneventful ” periods of opera- 
tion, with nothing to show from the general indications why 


they had happened. 
Evidence, also positive, that line-to-line phenomena ap- 


Interior of Eel Weir 


Frc. 5.—Presumpscot Electric Co. 
half-way line lightning arrester house 


parently act like static line disturbance, both ‘“ slowly 2 and 
‘suddenly ”’. This was evidenced by getting punctures in the 
shunt-gap papers of the low-equivalent alternating-current 


442 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


arrester line-to-line equipment at Eel Weir Power Station. In 
another case the resistances of the low-equivalent arresters 
used for line-to-line protection were fused. To do this, 
means a potential that could hold long enough over the series 
gaps and shunt and series resistances in series to fuse the wire. 
This was, however, a rare occurrence. 

Indications existed that line accidents, such as the wind 
blowing the wires together, will cause a wave of phase-to-phase 
disturbance to travel a long distance and operate the line-to- 


PRE Fo ngs OO la? 


Fic. 6.—Presumpscot Electric Co. Eel Weir Falls power station 


Just above basement windows, over the tail-race, special ground connectio: 
: : S, ns of broad 
copper straps may be seen. These lead off in two separate directions to additional grounds 


ie Rigi! to assure good operation of the protective apparatus. The original ground is in the 
il-race. 


line protection; that on the closely adjusted gap sets the fuses 
invariably blew; and that some line-to-line action nearly 
always accompanied line-to-ground operation. 

A tabulation added hereto shows the relative number of 
times, etc., this apparatus operated. From this I feel safe in 
drawing two conclusions: first, that proper line-to-line protec- 
tion is as essential as line-to-ground protection. Thus confirm- 
ing Wirt’s contention.* Secondly, that the line-to-line opera- 
tion is likely to take relatively considerable time, and, therefore, 
that in the long run high and stable resistance in the discharge 


* A.ILE.E. Procegpines, Vol. XXIII, p. 558. 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 443 


CUMBERLAND COUNTY 
MAINE. 


Ss 
cms feetg of (Whe s. 


NY AaLouTH. S. 
/ 


Vy »* 
SHELT Ak. 
Rarmerty l. Polls) 


CTMMISO; 
v2 Fuss PRC, 
s (Portiased 
ce power) Aha Ow) 
A VLANOST. (LS y SUMP SCOF 
ee a pana lS Ue ae } 
o zy a \ a CITY of PORT(ANG 
wae : 
= . 
a “ 


MAP OF TRANSMISSION LINES 
PRESUMPSCOT ELECTRIC CO. 


S:.D.WARREN & CO- 
1908. 


Fie. 7 

Presumpscot River is one of the most interesting as well as one of the 
best water-power streams of its size in the United States. Itis the out- 
let of Sebago Lake, which lies about 17 miles morthwest of Portland. 
The lake is fed by Crooked River, a stream heading 35 miles farther 
north and within 3 miles of the Androscoggin. The area of the lake is 46 
square miles; the total water surface on the drainage basin is 97 square 
miles; the area of the drainage basin at the outlet of the lake is 420 square 
miles, and at the mouth of the river 600 square miles. According to the 
survey made by Joseph A. Wairen, of Cumberland Mills, the fall from 
the crest of the stone dam at the foot of Sebago Lake to mean low tide 
at the foot of the lower falls is 265.16 feet in a distance of 21.65 miles, or 
an average of 12.25 feet per mile—From U.S.G.S. Water Supply Paper. 
No. 201, p. 72. 


444 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


path is necessary for uninterrupted operation. A shunted-gap 
equipment, however, may be valuable. 

Since line-to-line protection can be easily added to any 
multigap arresters not already so provided for, its adoption is 
not difficult. 

I have assumed that it is as necessary for high-voltage in- 
stallations as for low-voltage, for although I have as yet no 
data on this feature I believe it will be found there also. For 
this reason I would favor electrolytic arresters arranged in star 
with a common jar or jars to ground, since this does not impair 
the line-to-ground protection, and adds to the line-to-line. 


RECORDS OF OPERATION 


I wish to call attention specifically to the fact that all the 
evidence on which these remarks are based is not speculative 
but actual; that is, assured by tell-tale papers placed in the 
discharge paths at all parts of the respective systems. 

It is safe to assert that in the case of Taylor’s Falls, it has 
furnished us with data of great value to electrical engineering. 
In the case of the Presumpscot Electric Company it has enabled 
us to study very closely the operation of the system, to eliminate 
uncertainties, and to adjust conditions accordingly. 

In both cases it has called for the employment of a large num- 
ber of tell-tale papers, and an irksome filing of the same, but in 
my judgment the results have more than repaid us for the labor. 
In this connection, I recall that probably the first investigation 
of this character was made by A. J. Wurts to determine the 
necessary line protection in street railway service. 

The U. S. Weather Bureau has it in its power through its 
local stations to help immensely in determining the local charac- 
teristics of lightning. These are of great importance to the 
problem as a whole. 

SUMMARY 

As a result of the studies in lightning phenomena on Taylor’s 
Falls and Presumpscot Electric Company’s circuits, herein dis- 
cussed, I would add the following summary on this subject. 

Line disturbance by lightning. 

1. Lightning disturbances on a line are more than likely to be 
local varying approximately from 1000 ft. or less, to several 
miles. The longer areas being less frequent. 

2. They are likely to happen at any part of the line. 

3. A direct stroke of lightning is not necessarily harmful: it 
depends upon the quality of the stroke, etc. 


1908] NEALL; LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 445 


4. A line may be affected by a bound charge and direct stroke 
simultaneously. There is as yet no evidence to enable these 
to be measured separately. 

5. Any grounded wire suspended on the line will tend to ab- 
sorb a charge. 

6. An overhead grounded system of one wire, two wires, or 
more, above the line wires is desirable. 

7. An overhead grounded wire should be grounded at every 
pole near stations and important places, otherwise at every 
several poles. 

8. When an overhead grounded wire is used exclusively for 
station protection, it should not be less than two miles in length 
and be grounded at every pole. 

9. The higher the voltage design of the line the greater the 
possible disturbance from lightning to the line. High-voltage 
lines, therefore, need, more than low voltage ones, overhead 
grounded wire or its equivalent. 

10. Lightning-rods added to the overhead grounded system 
probably add to the protective power. The full value of this 
is not yet determined. 

11. Shattered insulators are liable to occur in every severe 
thunderstorm, but not in light ones. Puncture is more probable 
with power on the line at the time. 

12. Insulators should be carefully selected for the service, to 
test under driving rain not less than two times normal voltage 
between line and pin with pin grounded. The equivalent spark- 
gap should be higher than any arrester path to ground on the line. 

13. Horn lightning-arresters should be employed for extra- 
ordinary service only. The gencral arrangement known as the 
multigap selective path type promises to be of value. 

14. Lightning-arrester stations to discharge line disturbances 
become increasingly expensive, and of questionable assistance 
the higher the voltage transmitted. Their total number depends 
on the length of line. 

15. Wood poles may be effectively protected against splinter- 
ing from lightning discharge by providing them with a small 
metallic conductor to ground. 


Station protection. 

17. Electrolytic lightning-arresters have so far behaved 
creditably, particularly in sensitive relief of grounds, but do not 
indicate a complete superiority over other types. 

18, Line-to-line protection is desirable, 


446 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


19. Apparently there cannot be too much protection on a 
plant. Every lightning-arrester added plays a part, but prac- 
tically there is a limit. For many reasons it is obviously de- 
sirable to keep the station protection as simple as possible. It 
is, as yet, impossible to define what this should be. 

20. If a full measure of line protection is added, such as over- 
head grounded wires, the stations will, in turn, be much relieved. 


General. 

21, Further and fuller data are required on the following: 

a. Amount of direct stroke actually encountered on trans- 
mission lines. 

b. Magnitude of bound charge possible on any given line— 
graded according to design—voltage. 

c. Effect of line impedance to travel of static disturbance. 

d. Corroborative data of the effectiveness of overhead 
grounded wires. 

e. The relative value of overhead grounded wire for wood 
pole lines of short spans as against steel-tower lines of long spans. 

f. Best relative position between overhead grounded wire 
and line wires. 

g. Relative value of one, two, or three, etc., grounded wires. 

h. Best relative position for lightning-rods. 

7. Action of insulators under direct stroke. 

k. Equivalent spark gap of high-tension insulators. 

1. Relations between shunt resistance and given opening of 
horn gap. 

m. Nature of line-to-line disturbances on very high voltage 
systems. 

n. Equivalent spark gap of line choke-coils and consequent 
protective power. 

APPENDIX 


LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE Data, SEASON 1907. PRESUMPSCOT 
ELEctTRIC COMPANY, WESTBROOK, MAINE 
Summary. 
Length of record, approximately, 26 weeks, June to December, 1907. 


Number of changes to tell-tale papers 30 complete. 
4 part changes (local). 


r 
Attending : ne 7 
circumstances Lightning Clear* Switching short Total 
circuits 
Number times disturbance 
occurred to lightning pro- 
tective apparatus........ 10 9 2 4 25 


* Includes all other weather but lightning; causes not known, usually light disch 
over some isolated unit; for example, phase to phase. Bh: ibe 


1908] NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE 447 


Distribution of Operation. 


Two-puase. 2300 volts. Lightning protective apparatus. 


Date Line to ground Phase to phase 

eed 0 % 

Total = 18 paths Total = 9 paths 
6/23-26 2252 2232 

Total = 22 paths _| Total = 11 paths 

6/26-27 72.6 45.4 
7/21-27 9.08 10 
7/27-8/3 4.54 1iyeu 
Average—per wk. for 26 weeks| : 4.18 3.45 
per disturbance... .| (4) 27 11 (4) 22.45 


Note: Figures given Bednl percentage of total protective apparatus paths operating. 


Three-phase. 11,000 volts. Lightning protective apparatus. 


Date | Line to ground - | Line to line 
0 % 
Total (paths) = 33 Total = 15 
6/18-19 a 9.1 46.6 
6/23-26 % = 39 48.8 87. 
6/26-27 ie = 33 54.8 73.2 
(i — > fe = 39 33.3 46.7 
Fivfet at!) 59.1 33.0 
7/14-21 7.7 20.0 
7/21-28 vy = 42 40.4 SN aS} 77.8 
7/28--8/4 71.5 94.6 
8/25-9/1 es 
9/1 -15 Lew 
9/15-22 14.3 Boa 
9/22-29 50.0 78.0 
9/30--10/6 2.38 ths) 40.0 
10/6 -13 at = 18 i Ise | 
10/20-27 Gos 
1 0/27-11/3 4.76 10 
11/3 -10 9.52 50.0 
I2/l-— 8 5.55 
12/8 -15 [Special by switching 35.8 Ne 4 75.0 
{ 
Average per wk. for 26 wks. | 17-20 seas Sul 
Average per disturbance (14) Sh eGiy di (19) 43.3 


OS 
Notr: Figures given equal percentage of total protective anparatus discharge paths 
operating. 


Prominent characteristics brought out. 

1. Line-to-line disturbances pronounced, and of greater fre- 
quency than line-to-ground disturbances. 

2. Line-to-ground, freer over fuses in shunt to low-equivalent, 
but this does not prevent the low equivalent operating at the 
same time. 

3. Circuit-breakers set too light, objectionable; open on blow- 
ing of fuses, disturbing the balance of the system, and then 
frequently causing a loss of power while stations are getting into 
synchronism again. 


Operation of power plants. 

The Presumpscot Electric Company is not always able 
to operate to the best advantage electrically, because of the 
conditions which obtain. In the first place, the flow of water 


448 NEALL: LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE [May 19 


must be maintained primarily for the interest of the direct 
development of the mill at Cumberland Mills. Again, all the 
hydroelectric stations are on the same river, and while the flow 
of this is controlled, the company must, of course, protect the 
other users on the river. This introduces another variable. 
Furthermore, the supply of water to Saccarappa and Smelt Hill 
stations is affected by the run-off from the territory between 
the lake and the sea on which the streams are not ponded. It 
becomes evident, then, that during heavy rains, or in the spring, 
when there is a large amount of side-stream water, the flow 
from the lake may be well cut back, and Eel Weir is then unable 
to furnish its full supply. On the other hand, if the electric 
station below calls for water, more water must be run through 
the Eel Weir station than is desirable. In order to furnish a 
uniform flow at Cumberland Mills, it is sometimes necessary to 
store in the Saccarappa pond, and again to sluice, thus pro- 
ducing a variabie head. 

There are a number of other conditions which have a greater 
or less effect upon the system, and it is to harmonize all these 
that the company maintains turbo-generators, always having 
one floating on the line prepared to make good any little de- 
ficiencies, and the other two are usually warmed up ready to 
run, so that whatever the demands of the paper mill, they can 
be met up to the limit of the water power at that moment avail- 
able, plus the turbine. If the load exceeds that, steam engines 
must then be substituted for motors on some of the large groups 
in the mill. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 449 


Discussion oN ‘‘ CoMPARATIVE TESTS OF LIGHTNING PRoTEC- 
TION DEVICES ON THE TAYLoR’s FALLs TRANSMISSION Sys- 
TEM ’’, AND “STupDIES IN LIGHTNING PERFORMANCE, SEASON 
1907.’’ New York, May 19, 1908 


H. W. Buck: The valuable data presented to-night include 
the most comprehensive and systematic record of lightning dis- 
turbances which has been presented to this Institute. In the 
old days of electrical transmission most of the tiouble we had 
to cope with was due to the station apparatus itself, as the 
insulation of the lines was relatively high. As line voltages‘have 
risen with the progress of the art, the insulation of station ap- 
paratus has risen in proportion. Presumably lightning stresses 
have remained constant, so that at the present time we have 
insulation in our stations which perhaps on the high-voltage 
transmissions is high enough to withstand the original lightning 
surges, and the troubles seem to be shifting out upon the line 
itself. I think that this is the most noticeable feature of this 
paper. During the storms spoken of in the paper, many insu- 
lators were shattered, poles were shattered, and some cross- 
arms burned, and so on, and yet only one transformer bushing 
was damaged within the station. 

It has conclusively been shown that these line troubles have 
been reduced by means of the overhead ground-wire. It is 
shown not only in this particular system, upon which we have 
the record to-night, but the experience over all this country 
with transmission lines, where the overhead ground-wire has 
been installed, shows similar corroborative evidence. There 
are perhaps three functions of this overhead ground-wire: it 
takes the direct stroke and it allows the induced charge to accu- 
mulate on the ground-wire instead of accumulating upon the 
transmission wire itself, so that when the cloud which induced 
this charge discharges itself through a lightning flash the corre- 
sponding charge of opposite polarity on the ground-wire can 
discharge itself through the ground connections on the pole, 
instead of having to spill over the insulators. Another impor- 
tant function of this overhead ground-wire consists in shielding 
the transmission wires from induced potentials between phases, 
due to neighboring lightning discharges, which are presumably 
of high frequency. The guard-wire forms one side of the cir- 
cuit and the ground the other, so that we really have a short- 
circuited shield against induction on the transmission wires— 
the ground and the shield-wire being connected by electrical 
connections. If this theory be correct, it would seem to be a 
decided advantage to have two overhead ground-wires rather 
than one, a connection being made between these two sh‘eld- 
wires at every pole. Then we should have a shielding effect 
in the vertical plane and also in the horizontal plane against 
induced potentials, between the phases in the transmission 
wires. These short-circuited loops in fairly close proximity 


450 LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


to the transmission wires might represent some induced loss on 
the normal frequency of the transmission system, but I doubt 
if it would be enough to be very serious; whereas at the frequency 
of the lightning discharge the possible induced current might 
be high and give a decided shielding effect to the transmission 
wires. 

The evidence of the spilling over of accumulated charge in 
the insulators seems to show that the actual magnitude of the 
momentary current in this ground-wire is very large. I think 
it would be interesting if some form of current-recording device 
could be installed experimentally in some of these guard-wires, 
in order to give an indication of the magnitude of the currents. 
It would seem that along transmission lines there might be 
installed in circuit with the guard-wire a crude form of ballistic 
galvanometer, which would give a record of the maximum cur- 
rent flowing in the guard-wire during a storm. It would tend 
to indicate what conductivity ought to be established in these 
shield-wires to take care of discharges, and would give valuable 
records. 

It is quite noticeable from the records of this paper that 
lightning storms follow certain well-defined paths throughout 
a region. There seem to be certain sections of the line which 
have borne the brunt of the lightning discharges; whereas 
other sections of the line have been practically free from trouble. 
I think that this accords with the experience of the Weather 
Bureau, in showing that lightning storms tend to progress along 
certain well-defined topographical paths. The frequent shat- 
tering of insulators as shown in these records indicates the de- 
sirability of developing some form of insulator which can 
withstand such a stress. The problem is a mechanical one, to 
get some material that can withstand the sudden application of 
the heat of an arc without it resulting in the insulator being 
shattered. It is not so bad to have a momentary short-circuit 
on a system, provided it blows itself out and leaves the insulator 
in comparatively good condition, but if every time a spill-over 
takes place the insulator is going to be destroyed, the operative 
difficulty becomes a serious one, 

The horn arrester seems to have assumed a very important 
function in coping with the lightning problem. It is cheap and 
easy to insulate, and it can be put out of doors and withstand 
heavy rains without the insulation being impaired. It can 
also withstand very violent fireworks without the destruction 
of any valuable apparatus. In conjunction with the develop- 
ment of the horn arrester the problem of a good form of resist- 
ance is brought up. It seems to me that no really satisfactory 
form of resistance has yet been developed. The water rheostat 
is satisfactory under some conditions, but it is bulky, and in 
cold weather there is trouble from freezing. A resistance ought 
to be developed which can withstand frequent discharges and 
which can carry without destruction, for periods of several 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 451 


consecutive seconds, a large dynamic current from the genera- 
tors. With a resistance of this kind, sufficient surge current 
could flow to ground without necessarily shutting down the 
system. 

It is interesting to note in this paper that certain discharges. 
have been noticed on the secondaries of the transformers. 
This accords with my experience and with that of other engi- 
neers with whom I have talked. I have known of several in- 
stances where overhead lines pass through transformers into 
underground cable systems, where cable punctures have re- 
sulted simultaneously with thunder storms along the overhead 
lines. This indicates a possible necessity for having lightning- 
arresters of some form on the secondaries as well as on the pri- 
maries of the transformers. I have noticed in the Taylor’e 
Falls installation that there are such static dischargers on the 
secondary circuits. 

It is also interesting to note that the tell-tale papers in shunt 
with the test choke-coils on the line have been punctured. 
This certainly indicates that choke-coils act as barriers to the 
progress of these lightning surges in spite of the fact that this 
has been disputed so many times. It is evident that choke- 
coils are a decided protection where they are installed. 

In general, I believe that with steel construction adopted 
throughout a transmission line so as to eliminate the burning 
and shattering experienced in wooden construction, and with 
one or more guard-wires installed along the line and over the 
transmission wires, that most of the serious lightning troubles 
on overhead lines will be eliminated. 

P. M. Lincoln: In Figs. 11 and 12, Mr. Vaughan shows a 
number of curves the ordinates of which purport to give the 
static stress upon the insulators. I am not convinced that 
they do represent stress on those insulators. The ordinates of 
these curves are taken as the diameters of holes which were 
punctured in the tell-tale papers, and from that diameter is de- 
duced the stress upon the insulators. I doubt if the 
diameter of a puncture in the tell-tale paper is an indication 
of stress on the insulator; I think it an indication of the 
current that has passed through that tell-tale paper. The 
current may have come from a lightning stroke, but more likely 
it has come from the passage of the dynamic current. 

J. F. Vaughan: The question of interpretation and graphic 
representation of these tell-tale papers is open to discussion. 
It has been given a good deal of thought in the preparation 
of the curves. The curves are drawn up to show graphically 
or pictorially the differences in stress on the insulators, spill- 
overs of static and dynamic discharges; and the scale assumed 
in plotting the curves is intentionally exaggerated in the lower 
ranges to facilitate comparison of the smaller punctures. The 
curves should be interpreted in the liberal spirit in which they 
were plotted; that is, as a general indication (as accurate as 
possible) of the relative activity of disturbances in each case. 


452 LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


P. H. Thomas: These papers differ from most lightning- 
arrester papers in that they are a simple record of practical opera- 
ting results and not a compilation of theories. What is most 
needed in the study of the lightning problem is not so much 
theory and speculation as sufficient data and knowledge as to 
exactly how lightning affects a transmission line, so that an 
intelligent design can be made of protective apparatus, and so 
that the action of such apparatus can be properly judged. 
These papers go a long way toward showing the nature of the 
attack of lightning on the high-tension transmission line. Of 
course the data here recorded are not necessarily typical of all 
lines, but they indicate in a general way what may be expected 
to happen. 

The interpretation of these punctures in the tell-tale papers 
is important. It will be found on examining the data that one 
storm occurred when no generator potential was on the line at 
all; in another case the potential went off in the early part of 
the storm. In these storms, then, at least during the major 
part of them, there was no actual generator potential on the 
line. The punctures in the tell-tale papers were just as severe 
during the times when there was no generator connected with 
the line as at any other time. Most of the punctures show, 
on examination, that the fibres of the paper are unburned 
even when large holes appear, showing them to be purely static 
discharges. In other words, the holes in the punctured papers 
are simple records of the static passing over the line. 

I have not counted the total number of so-called spill-overs, 
but there must be hundreds of them. These are cases where a 
static discharge has passed over the wire to the pin from the 
surface of the insulators and not a capacity current to the pin. 
Only a small percentage of these spill-overs have injured insu- 
lators. 

It is interesting to know that there has been very little dis- 
turbance of any serious character at the stations. Mr. Buck 
draws the conclusion that it is because the insulation of the 
station apparatus has been raised in relation to that of the line. 
It seems to me that the reason for the relative immunity of the 

stations is that the action is entirely local, the attack of the 
discharge being so sudden that it cannot pass more than a very 
short distance along the line. It is not of sufficient energy to 
cause any very great disturbance unless it should startan arc 
from the generator. It has been frequently assumed that the 
high potential on the line wire, due to lightning, is the release 
of a charge. This may be true, but I think the evidence points 
the other way. This is a matter which ought to be stud’ed. 
The evidence suggests more strongly, it seems to me, the direct 
jumping to the line wire of electrical energy direct from the 
atmosphere and not the drawing of the charge from the ground. 

V. E. Goodwin: The papers presented this evening are of 

special interest to me as I lived several years in Minneapolis 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 453 


and am quite familiar with the nature and severity of the light- 
ning storms in that vicinity. I also inspected the Taylor’s 
Falls system with Messrs. Vaughan and Neall during the pre- 
liminary testing of the line and protective devices. I was 
then of the opinion that it would be difficult to draw definite 
conclusions from the results they would obtain, as the system 
was so completely equipped that it would be impossible to 
differentiate the protective values of the various devices. I 
now believe that the papers presented to-night show conclusively 
that reliable data have at last been obtained on the effects 
of lightning on a transmission system and on the relative values 
of various types of overhead ground-wires. 

The phenomenon regarding direct strokes of lightning on 
transmission lines mentioned by Mr. Vaughan has been re- 
ported on several other systems. One would naturally think 
that a line would be more subject to direct strokes after the 
wires are up than before. It seems probable that where the 
wires are up the charge dissipates over several insulators and 
poles and therefore does not splinter or burn the poles. I 
therefore question the ability of an investigator to determine 
from tell-tale papers whether a disturbance results from a 
direct or induced stroke of lightning. 

The magnitude and intensity of many of the strokes indi- 
cated in these records give us a good idea as to what is required 
of a station lightning-arrester. The records indicate that the 
station arrester did not have sufficient discharge rate to relieve 
the line at those points, thus causing the horn arrester, which had 
a higher breakdown point, to discharge. In designing the latest 
types of arresters great care has been taken to avoid all series 
resistance and to increase the discharge rates. This feature 
has been thoroughly carried out in the aluminum type electro- 
lytic arrester, by the use of large plate area and an electrolyte 
of very low specific resistance, thus giving low internal resist- 
ance and a maximum discharge ability. 

It is interesting to note that many of the induced strokes 
on the Taylor’s Falls line were highly concentrated and often 
of great intensity and volume. This is indicated by the storm 
of July 4, where one puncture 1.75 in. in diameter was recorded. 
The absolute protection of a line under such conditions becomes 
a very difficult problem. It is evident that one or two overhead 
ground-wires are of considerable assistance in shielding the line 
wires, but at best they can only be of partial protective value. 
The problem of a line-type lightning-arrester for this purpose in- 
volves the installation of several arresters per mile, and this, 
of course, is prohibitive in any transmission line of over 2300 
volts. The only case where such arresters can economically 
be installed is at an exposed point, where experience indicates 
that the expense is warranted. 

The Taylor’s Falls tests indicate that during every storm a 
great many insulators spilled over without any resultant dam- 


454 LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


age to the insulators or interruption to the service. I believe 
that the only means of entirely protecting an overhead power 
circuit lies in the development of an insulator which will not 
puncture, and, while having a fairly low spill-over, will not 
shatter. This perfection in the petticoat type of insulator is 
probably out of the question, but I believe it can be attained 
by a properly designed and proportioned insulator of the sus- 
pension or strain type. Such an insulator would be the equiva- 
lent of a line arrester at each pole or tower on the line. 

E. E. F. Creighton: The two additional subjects I wish to 
discuss are the interpretation of tell-tale papers and the use 
of resistance type of horn arresters. The conditions which 
muddle the tell-tale records are: first, the impression of several 
static discharges on each paper before they are removed; sec- 
ondly, the complete destruction of the static puncture holes 
by dynamic current. A fraction of an ampere of dynamic 
current for a half cycle of the generator wave is sufficient to 
destroy the static record. The authors were fortunate in ob- 
taining records on an idle line. It may be suggested to those 
who are willing to aid in collecting data on this subject that the 
only data of great value in the study of lightning potential 
should be taken on an idle line, and furthermore should be col- 
lected on moving tapes by clockwork so as to separate the 
punctures due to each cloud discharge. 

The value of the resistance type of horn arrester for dis- 
charging lightning increases as the value of series resistance 
decreases. On the other hand, the disturbance that one of 
these arresters may cause on the line increases as the series 
resistance is diminished. The menace resulting from a dis- 
charge through one of these arresters to ground may be either 
one of two effects, or both. First, the arrester may take suffi- 
cient current to overload the circuit-breaker. Opening switches 
under overload conditions should be avoided as much as pos- 
sible, to say nothing of the interruption of service. Secondly, 
if the resistance is sufficient to prevent overloading, there may 
be a menace to the insulation by the operation of one phase 
only, especially on an insulated neutral system. It requires 
about one to two seconds at best for the arc to rise on the horns 
and go out. During this interval the arc varies from a short 
length to a very long length, and if there is a possibility of set- 
ting up a surge on the system this arc is most likely to produce 
the condition. On any particular system these arcs may occur 
repeatedly with impunity, whereas on another system the surge 
conditions will be such as to cause a destruction of apparatus 
on some other part of the system, To illustrate this two ex- 
amples are cited: 

On a 17,000-volt, 60-cycle, delta-connected system a single 
gap in series with enough resistance to limit the current to 
0.5 ampere was connected between line and ground. Even 
with this high resistance all five of the arresters in the station 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 4E5 


on three feeders discharged continuously so long as the arc 
played across the gap to ground. A lightning-arrester of so 
limited a discharge would have little practical value, yet the 
surges caused by the discharge assumed dangerously high 
values. 

As a second example, it is a common occurrence on cable 
systems to have several failures of cables after one has taken 
place, due probably to the surges set up during the first failure. 

If one goes back over the history of the use of horn gaps with 
series resistance, he will find the hope always held out that an 
operator will finally obtain the right adjustment of resistance 
to give excellent protection without a resulting interruption of 
service. This has never been accomplished, and I think it can 
be shown that it never will be. 

If we did not have the aluminum arrester it would be worth 
while working out the best conditions for the resistance horn- 
gap arrester. A comparison of the two will show the limitation 
of the resistance horn type and the uselessness of the develop- 
ment. At 60,000 volts every ampere of discharge through the 
series resistance of the horn gap represents, roughly, 60 kw. per 
phase, or 180 kw. If an arrester will not discharge 100 amperes, 
I think it will not take the usual run of heavy discharges. With 
this rated discharge the generator would be called upon to furnish 
18,000 kw. On the other hand, if an aluminum arrester is used, 
the energy taken from the generator will be less than 20 kw. and 
the rate of discharge of lightning will be several hundred amperes 
at the same abnormal value of potential. The valve action of the 
aluminum arrester prevents almost entirely the flow of dynamic 
current at normal potentials and has a free discharge only at 
abnormal potentials. This information is sufficient to show the 
futility of using the resistance type of horn-gap arrester. 

Furthermore, the current taken by the aluminum arrester 
from one phase to ground is leading, the same as the capacity 
current of the line or cable, and consequently one phase may 
arc continuously between line and ground without setting up 
high surges on the system. It should be noted that the alumi- 
num arrester actually maintains the voltage and thus prevents 
grounding the line conductor. 

President Stott: In listening to the discussion, I recall the 
experience of eleven years ago with the Niagara transmission 
lines. I am not certain whether this was the first line equipped 
with overhead ground-wire, but at all events it was so equipped 
when it started. After a few months’ experience with the over- 
head ground-wires it was decided to take them down, as in the 
choice of two evils the lesser one seemed then to be the troubles 
due to lightning. This was due to poor material in the ground- 
wires themselves, as they were continually breaking and short- 
circuiting the lines. Now eleven years after, we hear that as 
the result of a most elaborate series of tests and investigations. 
the ground-wire gives the most certain protection. In a prac- 
tical way there is every reason why it should. No one ever 


456 LIGHTNING PROTECTION [May 19 


heard anywhere of an underground cable being struck by 
lightning. That means that if the ground itself is above the 
conductor the line is safe. We cannot possibly afford to put 
all transmission lines underground. A 60,000-volt underground 
transmission line 200 miles long is absolutely impossible 
from a financial or commercial standpoint; but instead of 
putting the wires underground, we can in effect put the ground 
above the wires. The most perfect protection will be got 
where we have the most perfect network of ground-wires above 
our conductors. I think everything said to-night points to 
that fact. : 

Now to avoid ordinary troubles there must be a high factor 
of safety in all apparatus. Troubles with underground cables 
are almost unknown outside of mechanical damage and faulty 
joints, and the reason is that those cables are made with an ex- 
tremely high factor of safety; for instantaneous voltage it is 
five; for continuous service,two. Just as it is with a human 
being, if a man is in a weakened condition every few germs 
that come along will give him a new disease; but if he is strong 
enough they won’t affect him at all. We have got to make our 
system germ-proof, as it were, and have a very large factor of 
safety on the insulators. That, and the ground-wire, I think, 
is going to be the solution of our overhead transmission work. 

J. F. Vaughan: I am sorry not to hear more discussior on 
the interpretation of tell-tale papers, as there is plenty of 
material for discussion. It is rather surprising that with the 
necessarily crude methods of measurement used there are not 
more apparent inconsistencies in the results. For instance, 
the three wires grounding the three pole pins through individual 
tell-tale spark-gaps are not more than a few inches apart and 
are mounted on porcelain knobs only, which might be expected 
to allow disturbances of such intensity as have been indicated 
by the papers to break across from wire to wire. This fact 
brings out one point which has not been touched on, and that 
is the lack of pronounced phase-to-phase disturbance, indicating 
that the main stresses which are between wires and ground do 
not greatly differ in the three wires. 

N. J. Neall: I wish to emphasize again the points which I 
have made about insulators. According to the theory which 
I have advanced in my paper, suspended-type insulators would 
be subjected by lightning to greater disturbance locally than 
any insulator so far used for lower voltages, because I am as- 
suming that there is no special overhead protection at all, 
and am taking the broad case. If the transmission wire takes 
this lightning charge, the charge must get to the ground some 
way or other, and the only place at which it could do so would 
be presumably by way of the insulator support. The sus- 
pended type insulator has not come into the Taylor’s Falls 
problem, and we have no data respecting it; but if insulators 
could be studied with reference to the equivalent spark-gap we 
would probably find certain explanations of the phenomenon 


1908] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 457 


at which we can now only guess. I think that is a point on 
which the Institute should have the fullest possible information, 
if not from a practical reason, certainly in connection with the 
advancement of the art, and, perhaps, indirectly, of the science. 

V. D. Moody (by letter): In a paper presented at a recent 
meeting of the Institute,* Messrs. Rushmore and Dubois re- 
commended for insulator protection steel rods with ends pointed, 
bolted to the vertical members of the towers and projecting 
above the highest point of the line. This method of protection 
was freely criticized, but my experience is that this type of ar- 
rester is highly valuable. 

Several years ago this type of arrester was used on the Winni- 
peg hydroelectric installation at Winnipeg, Canada. The trans- 
mission line was 65 miles long, delivering about 20,000 h.p. at 
60,000 volts, 60 cycles. From the power house to the sub- 
station duplicate transmission lines of No. 00 B. & S. hard-drawn 
cable, with a hemp centre, were run in duplicate on steel towers. 
This line crosses the Winnipeg River with a span of about 760 ft., 
on towers 72 ft. high, each weighing about 6 tons, with a sag 
in the line of about 23 ft. at 50 degrees. The standard towers 
are 40 ft. high, weighing about 2400 lb., spaced 500 ft. apart 
with a sag of about 14 ft. at 50 degrees. There are four railroad 
crossings. At Winnipeg, this line crosses the Red River with 
a 1100-ft. span, the towers are 105 ft. high with a line sag 
of 45 ft. at 50 degrees. These towers weigh 15 tons. The rail- 
way and river crossing towers are on concrete footings, and 
are grounded with a ground-plate. This transmission line has 
10 complete transposition spirals and is paralleled by a tele- 
phone line of No. 8 B. & S. hard-drawn copper wire on porce- 
lain insulators on the towers. The telephone line was transposed 
at each tower. The telephone line and transmission line insu- 
lators were made of the same kind of porcelain. 

On all of these towers this steel-rod type of horn arrester 
was used. In operation it was found that the protection af- 
forded was extremely valuable, as none of the high-tension insu- 
lators was punctured in several very severe lightning storms. 
In this country the storms are very severe in the summer 
months. In one instance five miles of telephone line was 
knocked down and insulators broken without breaking any of 
the line insulators, although the effects of the storm were felt 
in the sub-station by throwing out of synchronism, momen- 
tarily, the 800 kw. motor-generator sets. 

This line has now been in operation since June 1906, and has 
never had a shutdown. As the storms have been severe, I 
feel assured that these arresters are doing good work, as this 
is the only protection on this line. 

It appears to me, that this type of arrester with a ground- 
‘wire and multigap station arresters with choke-coils will afford 
protection that can be relied upon. 


* Transactions A. I. E. E., Vol. XXVI, page 425. 


A paper presented at the 25th annual con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Atlantic City, N. J., June 29, 
1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I.E.E, 


THE EVOLUTION OF ENGINEERING 
PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS 


BY HENRY GORDON STOTT 


Eighty years ago Thomas Tredgold defined engineering as 
“ The art of directing the great sources of power in nature for the 
use.and convenience of man.’”’ Progress in engineering has been 
greater in the eighty years which have elapsed since this defini- 
tion was made than in the previous period of 4500 years beginning 
with the first great, tangible piece of engineering, the pyramid 
Cheops. 

The question naturally arises: does this definition hold good 
to-day? Is it broad enough? If not, how can we better define 
the eng:neer’s sphere of activity? If we accept .Tredgold’s 
definition as our standard, will we reach the position in society 
which belongs to us by right of education, achievement, and 
highly developed power of logical deduction from facts observed 
and investigated ? 

Engineers may be divided into two gene al classes: first, those 
who believe that the engineer should be restricted to a specific 
vocation, such as elcctrical, steam, hydraulic, pneumatic, or 
sanitary engineering, etc; second, those who wish to see him take 
his place not only as an engineer but also as a public-spirited 
citizen and leader. 

The great amount of specialization which obtains in electrical 
engineering to-day is instanced in the subdivisions now found, 
such as telegraphy, submarine telegraphy, telephony, wireless 
telegraphy, railway signaling, underground cable engineering, 
high-tension transmission, electric lighting, electric railways, 
alternating-current generator designing, direct-current generator 
designing, railway motor designing, converter designing, trans- 

459 


460 STOTT: EVOLUTION OF ENGINEERING [June 29 


former designing, railway, lighting, telegraph, and telephone 
switchboard engineering, etc. 

The score or more of divisions of electrical engineering which 
exist to-day are the necessary outcome of the consolidations of 
manufacturing and other interests into a few large concerns: 
they are the natural economic results of competition. As these 
consolidations have undoubtedly resulted in greater efficiency 
and, therefore, in reduced cost of production, there is every reason 
to expect a continuance of this evolution from the simple factory 
manufacturing only one article, to the complex one which manu- 
factures many things. In such a factory it is manifest that as 
soon as any one article is called for in sufficient quantities to 
require the entire time of the man in charge, a new department 
will be formed and another subdivision of engineering created. 
In exactly the same way we will find consulting engineers who 
specialize on cables only, others on illumination, etc., and on any 
pursuit which is of sufficient importance to claim undivided 
attention. This process of segregation is evidently one of in- 
finite application in all pursuits, tending strongly to an ever 
narrower development of the individual, but at the same time 
increasing his efficiency to a maximum in his own particular 
specialty. This increase in efficiency, however, will cease if the 
engineer becomes so highly specialized as to ignore the necessity 
of keeping in touch with the entire sphere covered by his com- 
pany, as ihe evolution of each branch must be synchronized 
w th that of all. 

The other class, to which the term ‘‘ second ’’ has been arbi- 
trarily assigned merely to indicate its numerical inferiority, 
embraces all those who have broadened their field through self- 
education, experience, opportunity, and natural adaptability 
for administrative work. The term self-education is used 
advisedly, as both classes are assumed to start with the same 
technical training, and as a matter of actual fact the second 
class almost invariably evolves from the specialists. 

The engineer who is called upon to report on a projected rail- 
road, for example, must also be a student of political economy 
in order to give proper weight to the various economic prob- 
lems which must be first studied before he reports upon the ad- 
visability of even making a survey. He should be thoroughly 
familiar with the general organization of the state governments 
through whose territory the road may run, as well as have a 
general knowledge of their laws affecting corporations, franchises, 


1908] STOTT: EVOLUTION OF ENGINEERING 461 


etc. In order efficiently to carry out his work, it will be necessary 
for him to come in contact with various officers of the state 
and city governments, so that he should be a man of general 
and broad culture, capable of meeting anyone with credit to 
h.mself and the company he represents. Lastly, if he is per- 
sonally acquainted with some of the more important state or 
city officials, or the members of the legislatu e, his work may be 
greatly facilitated and his services be just so much more valuable 
to his employer. 

Tredgold’s definition of engineering evidently did not con- 
template this enlargement of the engineer’s sphere, and it is 
only by a natural process of evolution that some have reached 
this stage. 

The second class is necessarily a restricted one, as, whilst the 
legitimate field of work of the engineer is extremely broad and 
almost unlimited, yet as a rule he has apparently decided to 
keep in the background and only come to the front when called. 
The result of this policy is that when the opportunity comes, 
the engineer is taken at his own valuation and passed over for 
others who, whilst not suffering from modesty, are lacking in 
engineering education and experience, and therefore are forced 
to call in engineers (to act in a subordinate position) to supply 
the incumbent’s deficiency in the qualifications necessary for the 
office. 

A good illustration of this policy is furnished in the appoint- 
ments made on two state public service commissions, in which 
the ten offices are filled by gentlemen whose occupations had 
been as follows; six lawyers, two manufacturers, one political 
office-holder, and one engineer. These commissioners have con- 
trol of all matters pertaining to public service corporations; and 
as their functions are of an inquisitorial and critical character 
on subjects which are almost exclusively of an engineering nature, 
it is quite evident that their lack of engineering knowledge must 
be a severe handicap, not only to them but much more so tu 
the state that employs them, and lastly, but not least, to the 
company or corporation suffering from their well-meant but 
misdirected efforts. 

What is the cause of this anomalous situation. Is it entirely 
the fault of the executive who makes these appointments? 
Has not the whole body of engineers some share in the blame? 
We have seen that there is to-day an inherent tendency to 
specialization in engineering, and that by far the greater num- 


462 STOTT: EVOLUTION OF ENGINEERING [June 29 


ber of our members are becoming experts in one or two subjects 
only, and that comparatively few attempt to keep in touch with 
the more general aspects of engineering. This condition is 
caused not so much by a lack of willingness as by lack of time 
and opportunity. 

This centrifugal force acting on our profession has fortunately 
a nearly equal centripetal one which is found in such societies 
as the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, by which all 
can once more be brought back to a common centre on the com- 
mon ground so clearly described in our Constitution, which says 
that the object of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
‘‘ shall be the advancement of the theory and practice of Elec- 
trical Engineering and of the Allied Arts and Sciences.” 

The conference held in Washington, D. C., last month, which 
was called by President Roosevelt to consider what steps should 
be taken to conserve our natural resources, was preceded by a 
series of conferences held by the presidents of the four national 
engineering societies, at which a series of broad resolutions were 
drafted and afterwards presented at the conference as represent- 
ing the opinions of 20,000 American Engineers.* The Com- 
mittee on Resolutions presented a very able report to the con- 
ference, embodying practically everything we had recommended, 
with one exception, as that particular item had already been 
covered in a bill introduced into Congress. The resolutions 
were unanimously adopted. 

Several important deductions may be made from this incident. 
First, united recommendations after careful investigations of 
facts by engineers, on any public question involving engineering 
problems, will be not only courteously received but welcomed 
and highly appreciated by our state and federal governments. 
Secondly, the facts presented at this conference were of such a 
far-reaching and important nature that every member of this 
Institute should feel it is his duty carefully to study the 
able papers presented, and to further in every way possible the 
policy of preserving our natural resources. In this we all can 
unite, no matter whether we are specialists or general engineers, 
Thirdly, codperation on the part of the four national engineering 
societies is absolutely essential to success in any movement of 
this kind; and, as a corollary, success is certain if we cooperate. 
Fourthly, if engineers are to take the place in society which 
belongs to them by right of education and training, they must 
gee tL ig a Ee 


* ProceepinGs A. I. E. E., June 1908, Section I, p. 5. 


1908] STOTT: EVOLUTION OF ENGINEERING 463 


take an active part in matters of general policy or civic interest, 
no matter how remote these matters may seem from Tredgold’s 
definition of engineering. 

After nine of the ten commissioners’ names previously referred 
to we can find the significant words, bracketed,“ active in poli- 
tics.’ Is there no lesson for engineers here? Is it not their 
civic duty to the state and nation to take a more active part in 
public affairs, giving of their special knowledge freely, as may 
be required of them, at the same time insisting upon the same 
high ideals of faithful, honest, and loyal performance of duties 
in public life as they have been accustomed to in their every-day 
work as engineers? 

These suggestions are clearly outside the scope of this Institute 
as set forth in its Constitution, and in all probability would be 
pronounced heretical in any of our engineering societies, so that 
to carry them out it may become necessary to organize a new 
society in which membership would be limited to members of 
the four national engineering societies, and whose object would 
frankly be to use all legitimate political methods to influence 
legislation on matters affecting engineering; for example, such as 
carrying out the recommendations of the Conference on Preserva- 
tion of Natural Resources, or the application of the principles of 
political economy to the laws affecting public utility commis- 
sions, etc. 

An enormous amount of work must be done in order to induce 
our state and national legislatures to pass the necessary legislation 
in regard to preservation of our natural resources. No body of 
men is so peculiarly qualified to advise on these matters as that 
composed of engineers. Such a society could with propriety take 
up the consideration of many problems of which the public now 
hears only one side, and that usually the demagogue’s, simply be- 
cause the engineer has maintained an attitude of reserve. His 
silence is frequently mistaken for either assent or guilty knowl- 
edge, when in nine cases out of ten he remains silent either from 
a mistaken policy, dictated possibly by his employer, or be- 
cause he considers it undignified to reply to criticism. 

Belonging to a society whose object itis to guide and instruct 
public opinion in engineering matters, this feeling would soon 
disappear, and the benefit of codperation among engineers in 
this respect would make this society’s influence felt in every city 
and state in the country. Our large corporations and manufac- 
turers are realizing as never before the benefit of publicity de- 


464 STOTT: EVOLUTION OF ENGINEERING [June 29 


partments, not only for advertising purposes, but for the purpose 
of disarming adverse criticism by a calm statement of facts. 

In conclusion, let us remember that if we wish to progress and 
assume our proper place in the world, we must be aggressive and 
not passive in allegiance to our engineering societies; that the 
day is long past for hiding our light under a bushel, and that 
instead of Tredgold’s definition of engineering, the following 
more correctly expresses the position of the engineer to-day: 

Engineering—The art of organizing and directing men, and 
of controlling the forces and materials of nature for the benefit 
of the human race. 


1908] DISCUSSION AL ATLANTIC. CIT Y 465 


’ 


DiscUSSION ON ‘‘ THE EVOLUTION oF ENGINEERING.” ATLANTIC 
City, N. J., JunE 29, 1908 

Charles F. Scott: In the president’s address reference is 
made to the part that the presidents of the national engineering 
societies played at the conference at Washington. One of the 
speakers referred to that conference as marking an era in Ameri- 
can thought and American action. It seems to me it also may 
mark an era in the position the national engineering societies 
are to take as to public matters in general. 

As a society, and as engineers, we may well congratulate our- 
selves on the part our president took in formulating the resolu- 
tions which were the formal outcome of that great and notable 
conference. It has been the ideal of many of us that the engi- 
neers of America, through their engineering societies, might 
get together for concerted action such as this. That was one of 
the ideas underlying the project in the Engineers’ Building, and 
it is a happy outcome that so soon after it was opened, the 
founder societies have taken such an important part in this 

-great national work. . 

The president’s address admirably indicates the position which 
engineers should take in the future with regard to matters of 
this sort. The other papers this morning have been along the 
same lines, calling for the highest action, the codperation of 
engineers, on a larger scale and in larger matters, and we can also 
congratulate ourselves that the new president, in sounding his 
keynote, has looked also to the broader and more useful develop- 
ment of the engineering society. - 


A paper presented at the bth annual convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Atlantic City, N. /., June 29, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A. I. E. E. 


ELECTRICITY AS VIEWED BY THE INSURANCE ENCIT- 
NEER; SHOULD THE A.1.E.E. INTEREST ITSELF IN 
FIRE PROTECTION? 


BY C. M. GODDARD 

If news had been received during the last six months of the 
total destruction of our fleet of battleships on its way to San 
Francisco, even without any loss of life, what a calamity it 
would have been considered, and how messages of sympathy 
would have poured in from all the governments in the world. 
The value of that fleet is probably less than $125,000,000; the 
property loss by the conflagration in the city of San Francisco, 
toward which that fieet was headed, of $350,000,000 by one fire, 
brought similar messages because it was an unusual occurrence. 

The property loss by fire [in the U. S.] for the year 1907 was 
$180,000,000; the average annual loss for the last 32 years was 
$134,000,000; the national debt at its highest point was 
$2,845,000,000, or a little over two and three quarters billions; 
the insurance companies have paid $2,500,000,000 in iosses since 
1860; the total property loss by fire has been $4,250,000,000 since 
1875. 

There are approximately three hundred insurance companies 
doing business in this country, one thousand companies, or more 
than three times the present number, have failed or been re- 
tired since 1850. The three hundred companies have risks 
outstanding of over $30,000,000,000. 

The annual number of fires in American cities averages 40 
for each 10,000 of population as compared with 8 for each 10,000 
population in European cities. The annual per capita loss 

in Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, and Switzerland 
“ varies from 12 cents in Italy to 49 cents in Germany, with an 
467 


468 GODDARD; FIRE PROTECTION [June 29 


average of 33 cents as compared with $2.47 in the United States. 

There is no question but that 50% of our fires are due to 
what we technically call ‘‘ faults of management ”’; this includes 
all sorts of easily avoidable conditions that are likely to cause 


or aggravate fire hazard, a more common word would be “ care- 
lessness ’’. 


Just after the Collinwood School tragedy, a prominent metro- 


politan newspaper printed the following editorial on this un- 
necessary loss of life: 


A spasm of horrified emotion has passed over the country as a conse- 
quence of the deaths of a crowd of children in the fire which destroyed 
the Collinwood School at Cleveland. The horror is natural. It is a 
credit to the country. But the fire and its results were the natural effects 
of a succession of causes which discredit the country because they are 
characteristic of the country. The horror and the sympathy are human; 
they are common to all civilized communities; the recklessness which 


caused the unspeakable disaster is American. It has no counterpart 
elsewhere. 


ey 

The city authorities, the school authorities, all were negligent. Be- 
hind their negligence stands the great, gaping negligence of the public, 
the same negligence that causes annually in the United States more 
accidental deaths and injuries than three great wars. 

There is terrific loss of life and limb in this country from preventable 
causes. No other land shows anything like it, or anything approaching 
it. This is not because of the vastness of our population, but because of 
its carelessness. We are the most careless people on earth. We permit 
a looseness of conditions, a recklessness of method, or a method of reck- 
lessness which would not be tolerated in Great Britain or Germany or 
France. This laxity runs on our railroads, pervades our coal mines, 
meanders in our mills, asserts itself in the slovenliness of our cities and our 
vacant lots and is traced directly to our homes along the icy sidewalks 
to our front doors and the doors of our churches and public institutions. 
The average American cares no more about the conditions outside the 
walls of his home than he cares about the conditions on the most distant 
planet. We are indifferent and unashamed. The spasms of public 
horror are soon over and forgotten. They accomplish nothing. 


This arraignment of the American people applies with equal 
force to our fire loss and ought to bring the blush of shame to 
every public spirited citizen. 

You are familiar with the idea embraced in the first part of 
the title of this paper, “ Electricity as viewed by the Insurance 
Engineer ’’, but do not the foregoing facts and figures warrant 
the second part of that title and demand not only from the 
electrical engineer but also from all classes of business men a 
careful and thoughtful consideration of the subject of fire 


1908] GODDARD: FIRE PROTECTION 469 


protection and fire prevention? Should not every member of 
this Institute join hands with his fellow members of the National 
Fire Protection Association, and do his part to stop this appalling 
destruction of accumulated wealth? 

“ A penny saved is a penny earned” and while the insurance 
or fire protection engineer cannot create wealth as do the elec- 
trical industries, he can endeavor to lessen the unnecessary de- 
struction of created wealth and thereby prove his right to exist. 
We cannot fairly throw the whole burden of this work on the 
insurance companies, their profit would be the same if they did 
nothing to reduce the fire loss and simply made it a matter of 
rates. 

This is true of every public service corporation, but you men 
know that your best efforts are given all the time to reducing 
the cost of production, not solely to increase your profits, but 
because your great desire is to please your customer by giving 
him better service at a constantly decreasing cost and with a 
reasonably remunerative profit for yourselves. Do you not 
believe that the insurance companies are actuated by just as 
reasonable, honest, and business-like principles? 

The market of the stock exchange is known to be the most 
sensitive barometer of the financial condition of the country. 
The prospect of poor crops, and therefore a poor year for the 
railroads, will cause a drop in prices long before the failure of 
the crop is assured. Are you surprised that the underwriting 
interests are equally sensitive, when you consider that the 
combined capital of the American stock companies in 1906 was 
$60,000,000 and the insurance at risk was $22,000,000,000, that 
the net surplus of all American and foreign companies doing 
business in the United States was $147,000,000 and the insurance 
at risk was $30,000,000,000? A fire in the congested value 
district of New York covering an area equalling that of the 
San Francisco conflagration would wipe out of existence nearly 
every insurance company doing business in that city. Do 
you not see, then, that it is but natural for such interests to 
“view with alarm’”’ every newly introduced agent that may 
affect unfavorably the fire loss? Do you not realize that when 
the simple act of a cow kicking over a kerosene oil lamp can 
result in a Chicago conflagration, that the hazard of kerosene 
oil lamps is a very different proposition from what it would be 
if such a careless act on the part of that cow could only result 
in the destruction of the lamp, or, at most, of the building in 
which the lamp is located? 


470 GODDARD; FIRE PROTECTION [June 29 


What must the fire protection engineer know? There is 
oniy one answer—he must know something about almost every- 
thing, he must be versed in the construction of buildings, in 
their equipment with fire protective and fire productive devices; 
he must know the hazards of all the different manufacturing 
and mercantile occupancies of such buildings. How can a 
man familiarize himself with every known business? He cannot. 
That is why he comes to you for advice. His work must be 
largely critical and that is the reason he is unpopular. He 
comes to you and asks you to create, and then to submit your 
creation to him to criticize; and he tells you this or that feature 
is likely to produce a fire, so he will have to charge an admission 
fee if you add your creation to his existing risk. This is un- 
pleasant for you and for him too. He has his own troubles 
without seeking a quarrel with you. 

Cannot you work together? Of course you can. Trust him, 
you are honest; and he is equally entitled to be considered 
honest. Talk it over, find out how your pet creation can be 
changed so as to remain just as attractive to you and become 
unobjectionable to him. It is your duty as a patriotic citizen 
of this country to do all in your power to reduce the fire loss. 
Work with him for that reason and because it will be for your 
advantage; your assistance will be welcomed, even if your prime 
motive is not love of the critic or of the insurance companies 
by whom he is employed. 

It is my intention in this paper to direct your attention to 
the work of the fire protection engineer in a little different light 
from what you might expect from the title; but you must re- 
member that I am here now, not in my capacity as a member 
of this Institute but rather in that of a delegate from a sister 
engineering society, the National Fire Protection Association, 
a society of which this Institute is an active member. I am 
here to urge you to make tnat membership active, not only in 
name but also in fact, as 1ar as you consistently can in con- 
nection with your other and regular professional duties. 

I can probably never divorce myself in the minds of many 
of your members to whom I am personally known, from the in- 
surance or underwriting interests, nor would I do so if I could; 
that is my life work and must claim my best efforts. In con- 
nection with that work, this Institute has, I am pleased to say, 
done able and efficient work, work that has been of great value 
to the underwriters, and, I firmly believe, of equal value to the 
great profession which you honor. 


1908} GODDARD; FIRE PROTECTION 471 


This is the first time that the National Fire Protection Associa- 
tion has been formally represented at an annual meeting of this 
Institute, and it seems to me that the time allotted to me in 
that capacity could not be better occupied than by endeavoring 
to show in a general way why there must be a close relation, 
either coéperative or antagonistic, between the electrical and 
the fire protection engineer. I could, of course, discuss some 
particular hazard or hazards of electricity as a fire producing 
agent, but if I can arouse in the membership of this Institute a 
sense of the duty they owe, not to the insurance companies but 
to mankind in general, so that each will give some thought and 
attention to electrical fire hazard problems, then we can trust to 
committees of conference to work out the details of each and all 
of the individual problems as they arise. Such work must 
always, in its results, be more or less of a compromise, often 
taking on a single point much more time than could be given 
here to the entire subject. 

About fifteen years ago I suggested to some of the members 
of this Institute the desirability of active coéperation on the 
part of the Institute in the formulating of the underwriters’ 
rules. But as this is, and should be a conservative body, it 
was not until 1896, in the National Conference, that the Institute 
itself took up this work, although many of its members had 
given valuable assistance from the outset. 

You must admit that electricity may be a most serious fire 
hazard. The possibilities in that direction can hardly be esti- 
mated, and I believe that it was a most fortunate thing for the 
electrical interests that fire underwriters had begun to appreciate 
the necessity of fire protection before electricity was introduced 
for lighting and power, so that they immediately began to 
surround it with necessary and proper restrictions. 

I think that no small part of the progress of your art has been © 
due to the fact that in its early days, when the electrical engi- 
neer knew little about the fire hazard of electricity, the under- 
writer, knowing less but fearing much, appeared as an unwelcome 
but salutary obstructionist and at least caused the matter to 
be considered and investigated. 

Some of the early fittings and methods of installation cer- 
tainly would seem to justify any fears that the insurance in- 
terests may have entertained. I can remember when, back in 
the eighties, if the notches cut in floor timbers for gas pipes 
happened to be large enough, they were considered as a provi- 


472 GODDARD; FIRE PROTECTION [June 29 


dentially prepared place for the wires, one on each side of the 
pipe. Now, through codperation between the two parties in 
interest, how all this has changed; for I can stand here and tell 
you from the insurance interests that I believe any undue hazard 
from electricity has been and is being guarded against. You 
now give to us the safest illuminant and the safest source of 
power that we have. We welcome you in that you displace the 
open flame of gas or oil and the fire under the boiler, that you 
may by small power units do away with much shafting and the 
inherent liability of hot bearings. In order to retain this good 
opinion, however, we must continue our codperation so that as 
your art progresses in giant strides, we may together keep pace 
with it in restrictions which shall not obstruct but safeguard its 
advance. : 

My great desire has been and is to foster and encourage this 
codperation for our mutual benefit; our interests lie in the same 
direction, we must travel along together and put up with each 
others’ faults whether we will or not. Shall we not walk as 
companions rather than enemies? Neither of us has a right 
to all the good things, nor deserves all the bad things; let us 
share the good things we each have and help each other with the 
bad things we must meet. 

From the National Fire Protection Association, I bring you 
all a greeting and an assurance of a welcome if you will share 
their great work. From the underwriting interests, I also bring 
you greeting and assurance that we like you better as we know 
you better; but to the ordinary underwriter you represent a 
strange and unfamiliar creature, electricity, very difficult to 
comprehend. You do not know what electricity really is your- 
self, and how should we? It has served its time as a convenient 
substitute for our old friends, rats and matches and spontaneous 
combustion; it has proved its usefulness in many ways to us: 
it is rather erratic and sometimes inclined to stray from the path 
assigned to it, but on the whole it has improved so much, as 
it is reaching the age of maturity, that it is no longer of any 
particular use to us as a bugaboo to scare people with. Shall 
we not join hands and work together even more closely in the 
future than we have in the past? 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 473 


Discussion on ‘“ ELecrricity As VIEWED BY THE INSURANCE 
ENGINEER. SHOULD THE A.I.E.E. IntEREST ITSELF IN 
Fire Prorection?” Arrantic City, N. J., JUNE 

29, 1908 — 


Chas. P. Steinmetz: The matter of fire protection is of ex- 
treme importance, and the Institute should certainly actively 
cooperate with other organizations in the effort to reduce the 
risk. I believe, however, the question is a far broader one 
than that of fire hazard. Electrical fire hazard may be of in- 
terest to the fire underwriters, but it is equally important that 
the Institute should consider the danger of electric power to 
human life, to invested capital, to the destruction of apparatus, 
etc., even if the destruction does not mean an increased fire 
hazard. The Institute is the one body which could take up 
this subject in its broader aspect. I think that the Institute 
should appoint a committee dealing with such questions. 
- Such a committee may better existing conditions by establishing 
rules. A safer and better way for the committee to act would 
perhaps be to obtain papers that reflect good engineering prac- 
tice, calling these papers to the attention of the public at large. 
This would be more effective than the formulating of a lot of 
rules. These papers could discuss the practice of carrying 
extra high voltage lines through towns and cities and indicate 
good practice in overhead lines of different voltages, and whether 
these overhead lines of different voltages should be on the 
same poles or not. Rigid rules on all these matters cannot be 
insisted upon, but in a paper an author can readily state his 
views and thereby bring the matter before the whole Institute 
for discussion, 


A paper presented at the 25th annual con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Atlantic City, N. J., June 29, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A. I.E. E. 


WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT IN THE NATIONAL 
FORESTS. A SUGGESTED GOVERNMENT POLICY 


BY FRANK G. BAUM 


In order to insure the supply of timber and to protect the 
water sheds and conserve the water of our mountain streams, 
the government some years ago adopted the policy of with- 
drawing large timber areas from entry by creating national 
forests. The forests were to be operated by the forestry 
department for use and not for profit. Recently the govern- 
ment has given permits to companies proposing to make power 
developments, on condition that the permits be revocable at 
the pleasure of the Secretary of the Agriculture, and that there be 
a conservation water royalty charge by the government on the 
power output of the plant. 

Objections to temporary permits have been made by the 
power companies, as no one wishes to invest money at the risk 
of losing it through the whim of some official. Objections have 
also been made to the conservation charge, especially when it 
is based on the output of the plant. In this paper I shall try 
to arrive at what I believe to be a logical conclusion of a fair 
conservation charge. 

The matter is of great importance, because power development 
is advancing the progress of the country at an increasing rate, 
and a government.policy retarding power development will 
hinder this progress. Power development stands to-day at the 
same stage, so far as its influence on progress is concerned, as 
the construction of railroads did 20 or 40 years ago. The im- 
mense benefits to be derived from the development of cheap 
power and the resulting saving of our timber, oil, and coal 


475 


/476 BAUM: WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


resources should not be deferred by an unfair government policy 
or indefinite assurances for the safety of the money invested. 

The proper development of water powers would utilize re- 
sources now going to waste; the development of coal mines, 
on the other hand, means the consumption of resources now 
stored and available at any future time. Every hydroelectric 
horse power saves the consumption of about twelve tons of 
coal per year. Therefore the proper development of the water 
powers would conserve the country’s coal resources to that 
extent. For example, 1,000,000 hydroelectric horse power 
transmitted to New York and its vicinity for manufacturing 
purposes would result in saving about 12,000,000 tons of coal 
per year. This coal could be reserved for domestic purposes. 
This is about 20,000 cars of 50 tons each per month, or 666 cars 
per day. The development and use of less than 25 per cent. 
of California’s available water powers would stop all wood, 
oil, and coal burning for power purposes, including all railroads 
in that state. The same is true for nearly all the western states 
and a great many cf the eastern and southern states. 

In order to limit speculation, and at the same time to hasten 
water power development and save our wood, oil, and coal 
resources, I suggest that all rights-of-way and lands necessary 
for this development be given on condition that a certain pro- 
portion of the work be done each year and that a certain pro- 
portion of the development be completed within five years. 
This would put the man developing the water power on exactly 
the same basis as the miner and the farmer; it would prevent 
speculation and limit the operations to bona fide developments. 
No man or combination of men, no matter how wealthy and 
greedy, would then be able to monopolize the water power re- 
sources of this country. The statement that there is now 
danger of a water power monopoly in this country is utterly 
absurd to any one having a knowledge of the facts or the con- 
ditions under which water power developments must be made. 
The development of our water areas would help to conserve the 
coal areas, and would protect the national forests, where water 
power is developed, at no expense to the government. 

It will be assumed that the object of the proposed conserva- 
tion charge is not intended as a means to raise revenue for the 
government, but for the purpose of protecting, operating, and 
maintaining the forests, so that the greatest possible use may 
be made of them, not for this year or next, but with the idea 


1908] BAUM: WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT 477 


of using the forests to produce a perpetual supply of food, 
timber, water, etc. 

It follows as a natural consequence that the diferent reserve 
sections must stand on their own merits; that is, the revenues 
in California, for example, should not be made so great that it 
would be impossible to use the revenue in the reserves in that 
section. In other words, it would be only fair that the revenue 
derived from a California reserve, say, should not be used to 
purchase, or maintain, a reserve in Maine. 

It follows, further, that each reserve unit should stand on 
its own merits, and the money derived from any one reserve 
should, as far as possible, be used to maintain and promote 
the interests of that particular reserve unit. The people en- 
titled to the products of the reserve, who should be given first 
consideration, would be those who settled in the country, 
many of them having settled because of the resources in the reserves 
adjacent to their place of settlement. Naturally, they should 
be entitled to first consideration in disposing of the products of 
the reserve. Those who settled in a particularly favorable 
location should not contribute to the reserves of a less favorable 
condition. This policy is, I believe, followed in giving grazing 
permits, and also in timber permits. 

Coming now to a particular reserve. The reserve has re- 
sources mainly in feed, timber and water. The area of the feed 
and timber product of a reserve has no natural boundary. 
When we consider the water product, however, we find natural: 
boundaries for each watershed, and logically to arrive at a fair 
and equitable basis for a conservation water charge we must 
consider each water shed by its natural boundary, and each 
watershed asa unit. The man wishing to make a power devel- 
opment should pay only a just proportion of the cost of main- 
taining the watershed and conserving the water. In a certain 
reserve, for example, there are two adjacent watersheds. The 
area of the two watersheds may be the same, and the water 
output also, but the cost of maintenance of the reserve lands 
in one shed be entirely different from that in the other; the value 
of the power resources in the two adjacent watersheds may be 
entirely different. Watershed A for instance, may, have an 
area of 100,000 acres, a water output of a certain number of 
average second-feet, and the power which can be economically 
developed, say, 5000 kw. Watershed B may have the same 
number of acres, but the economical power development may 


478 BAUM: WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


be 50,000 kw. On the basis of a fixed charge per kilowatt-year, 
as proposed, watershed B would give a revenue to the govern- 
ment ten times as great as that of watershed A. The revenue 
derived by the government on this basis from watershed B 
from the power resource, is much more than justifiable, con- 
sidering the cost of protecting and maintaining same, and much 
more than can possibly be used in that particular watershed 
for any purpose benefiting the power privilege. It is only fair 
that the government’s charge against the power privilege 
should be based on what the government furnishes to make the 
privilege operative. The cost of maintenance in the case A 
might be very much greater than in the case B, yet the revenue 
derived from B, on the basis of a fixed charge per unit of out- 
put, would be ten times as great as the revenue derived from A. 
Some parallel examples will illustrate the principle of the pro- 
posed method of fixing the charge. 

The Reclamation Service, in charging for reclaiming lands, 
applies to each district all the cost equally to all the lands 
to be irrigated. If one watershed district offers opportunities 
for developing a project for $20 per acre, that is the charge made, 
although in the adjacent watershed, or district, the charge may 
be $40 per acre. That is, the principle is recognized that the 
people settling in a particular area are entitled to all the natural 
resources belonging thereto. No profit can be made from one 
area and applied to another. Similarly in power development, 
the man who develops in one watershed is entitled to all the 
natural advantages belonging to that area, and he should not 
be made to pay to help develop power on an adjacent watershed. 
None of the money contributed by him, because of his 
privilege, can be used rightly for any other purpose, except to 
benefit the watershed or privilege which he enjoys. The grazing 
and timber interests pay their just proportion of the cost to 
the government of the privileges enjoyed by them, and the 
power privilege should likewise pay its just proportion. 

Suppose again that the government withdraws a given timber 
area in order to assure ties to several railroads that traverse it. 
What is a just charge for the ties? A charge on the gross or 
net revenue of the road, or a rate on the tonnage passing through 
the reserve would be absurd; the only fair charge would be on 
the value of the ties, calculated on the yearly expense of main- 
tenance and the number of ties the reserve can produce annu- 
ally. Why then should the water-power company pay a 


1908] BAUM: WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT 479 


royalty on the basis of its power output? The grazing and tim- 
ber interests are not taxed with the idea of producing a profit 
to the government, or that the grazing or timber interests of one 
section should support those of another, or that these interests 
should be taxed to support others. The miner is not charged 
a royalty by the government, but the government can rightly 
charge him for any direct benefit he may receive by reason of 
the reserves. 

By all precedent, then, the principle is well established that 
the government should calculate the cost of what is furnished, 
and the conservation charge be made accordingly. This would 
establish the principle that the annual conservation charge 
should be based on the actual yearly cost to the government 
of the cost of conservation. The conservation charge would 
change from time to time, but there would be a definite basis 
for its determination. 

Rights-of-way on lands occupied for reservoirs, pipe-lines, 
and power houses should be sold to the power company at a 
fair value, and these lands would not then enter into the de- 
termination of the conservation charge. Rights-of-way and 
lands necessary for the development should be the property of 
the company. These matters should be fixed independently of 
the conservation charge. We should not expect railroads to 
open up new country if their rights-of-way were revocable, or 
if they were charged on the basis of tonnage carried over the 
right-of-way. 

Coming now to the analysis of a particular watershed and 
the privilege granted to the power company on it: the with- 
drawal and protection of the timber will generally affect the 
stream-flow, and a just charge can be made by the government 
for the protection given, as it directly benefits the privilege. 
The charge made for the protection of the timber and the stream- 
flow must naturally vary with the conditions, and must be 
calculated for each case, because other interests should also 
pay their just charge for the protection. The charge made for 
the reservoir privileges, rights-of-way, for canals, pipe-lines, 
and power-house sites should, however, be based on the value 
of the acreage occupied. Because a power development occu- 
pies a given piece of ground, makes it no more valuable to the 
seller (the government) than if it were to be occupied by a quartz 
mill, and the power man should pay no more than the miner 
or any other interest. 


480 BAUM; WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


When the amount to be charged for the right-of-way, reser- 
voir, and power-house sites is fixed, and the government has 
determined the amount to be expended yearly on the water- 
shed, the amount to be charged for the power privilege can be 
easily fixed. It should make no difference in the charge whether 
5000 kw. is obtained in power, or 50,000 kw. That is, as in 
the case of the farmer and the Reclamation Service, the man 
settling in the valley where conditions are favorable for low cost 
of irrigation should have the benefit of that condition. And 
the power man who uses his ingenuity and money to discover 
a better power development than another should also have the 
benefit of his enterprise. The government has not yet, and I 
hope never will, put a tax upon discovery, invention, and de- 
velopment. 

Still further to show the reasonableness of a fixed total charge 
annually for a given watershed, we may merely cite the fact 
that if the charge is based on the kilowatt output, the man 
who puts in a cheap and wasteful system pays less than the 
man who puts in a more expensive and efficient system. Fur- 
ther, the man who sells his power for $20 per kilowatt year, 
pays double the percentage paid by the man who sells for $40 
per kilowatt-year. And again, the man who takes this power to 
a market, say 100 to 300 miles away, must pay to the govern- 
ment for the losses and expense in doing so and pays more 
than the man who sells to the home market. The man who 
reaches out with his power is equalizing conditions, just as rail- 
roads equalize conditions by their transportation facilities, and 
should be encouraged and not taxed for doing so. 

Coming to the case where the government owns part of the 
property necessary for the conservation and development, and 
part is owned by private parties, or the man making the devel- 
opment. For example, assume that the power company mak- 
ing the development owns a reservoir which controls the stream. 
Assume that this reservoir is the controling feature of the de- 
velopment, that without it the stream is virtually worthless. 
It may even be that the reservoir is all that is necessary, and 
the protection of the timber could have no effect on the devel- 
opment, and its removal would not affect the development in 
the least. Has the government a right to make a conservation 
charge when as a matter of fact the man is paying for his own 
conservation? In this case the government can only charge 
for rights-of-way and lands occupied, and no conservation 


1908] BAUM: WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT 481 


charge can be justly made. If the government furnishes part 
of the conservation—this is usually the case—then a proper 
proportion of the basic rate of the conservation charge can be 
made. 

This may be illustrated by taking the case of a man owning 
a timber area to which he had title before the establishment 
of a reserve. In order to make use of the timber it is necessary 
to obtain from the government land for a mill-site and right- 
of-way for a railroad from the timber to the mill-site. A proper 
charge for the land for the mill and right-of-way can only be 
made on the basis of the value of the lands occupied. A charge 
on the output of the mill would be entirely unjust; this will 
be admitted by all. Change the timber area to a reservoir, 
the mill-site to a power-house site, and the railroad to a pipe- 
line, and wherein lies the difference? The man purchased the 
~reservoir before the reserve was established, to store water and 
develop power. In order to do this he must have the right-of- 
way for pipe-line and land for power-house site, and these must 
be granted him as in the case of the sawmill, on the basis of 
the land value, and not on a royalty of the power output. No 
royalty should be charged for giving the man the only oppor- 
tunity there is to make use of his property. Any number of 
parallel cases could be cited to illustrate the principle. In 
creating a forest reserve the government cannot but recognize 
the rights of private individuals or companies who owned 
lands in the reserve previous to its establishment, and the 
government must allow owners the use of their property. Any 
other course would amount to confiscation. 

The above suggested method of fixing the conservation charge 
is believed to be logical and treats the power interests as others. 
The amount to be charged yearly for conservation would be 
influenced by only one fact; that is, the yearly cost to the 
government of maintaining the area benefiting the privilege, 
and what proportion of the charge should be borne by the power 
company? It eliminates all questions as to the efficiency of 
the development or the amount of development, and hence 
would tend to make for efficiency and maximum use of the re- 
sources. It eliminates the question of the market value or 
distance of transmission. The market value would, as it should, 
depend upon the natural advantages for power development 
in the district, and there should be no additional tax when 
high efficiency is aimed at or long transmission is undertaken. 


482 BAUM: WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


Rights-of-way and property necessary would be a separate 
matter from the conservation charge, and property rights 
necessary for development would be not temporary but per- 
manent. We should not expect a man to establish his per- 
manent home and develop his farm if he is not assured title. 

The above method of charging separately for lands and for 
conservation, and giving title to lands, would remove all ob- 
jection on the part of investors, because then power companies 
would obtain title to grounds occupied by the development 
and there would be a definite and fair method by which the con- 
servation charge would be arrived at, now or at any future 
time. It is believed no logical objection could be raised to the 
plan by the power companies. 

It may be contended by some that the government should 
obtain as large a revenue as possible for every development 
and apply the proceeds for the general welfare, the argument 
being based on the fact that the government grants a privilege 
which cannot be enjoyed by others and should receive a revenue 
in proportion to that derived from the operation of the privi- 
lege. The examples cited, however, make this position un- 
tenable, as the power companies should not be treated differently 
from the farmer, the miner, the lumber company, the railroads, or 
otherinterests. Thereisno monopoly in water power development, 
and the advantage gained by a man who does something shoula 
not be shared by the man not so progressive. It woul4 be just 
as logical to make the thrifty farmer share with <he less thrifty. 
Industry, progressiveness, and individuality should not be 
stifled or taxed. 

Feed, timber, all crops, minerals, water and water products, and 
anything which nature produces, are primary producers of wealth. 
Why should water be classed differently from any of the other 
natural products in the government policy of development and 
control? The general government cannot justly make a charge 
equivalent to a franchise tax or regulate rates; those privileges 
would remain with the state and subject to local laws, where the 
streams are under state control. My understanding of the law is 
that all streams, except those that are navigable, are under state 
control. 

When the conditions of the past, present, and future devel- 
opments of the country and its industries are considered in 
relation to the present and future developments of power, it 
is believed that the only tenable conclusion which can be reached 


1908] BAUM: WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT 483 


is that the power interests must be treated as other interests 
and charged for conservation only on the basis of the cost to the 
government of the thing furnished by the government, and that 
rights-of-way and property required for the development 
should be the property of the company making the develop- 
ment. The only varying element, then, will be that due to 
the fact that the value of the property owned by the govern- 
ment is changing as time advances, and the conservation charge 
should be changed accordingly. 

The conclusions drawn from the above discussion may be 
briefly stated as follows: 

1. Rights-of-way and lands necessary for the development 
should be charged for on a fair basis of value, as would be deter- 
mined if the lands belonged to private parties and a value had 
to be set on them for the power purposes by a court, or a com- 
mission. Rights-of-way and lands necessary should be deeded 
outright by the government to the power company and the only 
changing conditions then, as time goes on, would be the yearly 
conservation charge. 

2. A proper conservation charge can be made only on the 
basis of the cost to the government of that which is furnished 
by the government. 

3. The right to charge a privilege or franchise tax should re- 
main with the state and subject to local laws as conditions 
warrant. 

A. The conservation charge will have a maximum limit at 
any given time which can be determined by calculating the 
yearly cost of the conservation to the government. This charge 
can be fixed for a period of say ten years, and at the end of that 
time a re-calculation may be made, and a new conservation 
charge made yearly, to meet the changing cost of maintenance. 

B. The proceeds from any particular privilege should not be 
devoted to any other watershed or any other section, or for 
any purpose except the particular privilege. 

C. The question of the proper conservation charge is entirely 
a separate matter from the charge to be made for lands and 
rights-of-way for development, and the two matters should be 
kept distinct. 

My suggestion for a government policy on water-power re- 
sources can finally be stated in a single sentence—encourage 
water-power development as much as possible, make a proper 
conservation charge, based on the cost to the government, and 


484 BAUM: WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


make grants for rights-of-way and lands necessary for devel: 
opment permanent on condition that a certain proportion of the 
work be done each year, and that a certain proportion of the 
development be completed within five years when a patent for 
all grounds occupied will be granted, reserving to the states the 
right to charge a privilege or franchise tax as the conditions 
warrant. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 485 


Discussion on ‘‘ WATER PowER DEVELOPMENT IN THE Na- 
TIONAL Forests. A SuGGEstep GovERNMENT Po.icy.” 
ATLANTIC City, N. J., JUNE 29, 1908 


J. H. Finney: Mr. Baum’s paper is an interesting presenta- 
tion of his views as a ‘‘ power enthusiast and a believer in a 
cheap source of power,’’ and his belief that “ cheap power is 
vital and necessary to the present and future development of 
the country” will be, I am sure, supported heartily in this 
assemblage. We may also be classed as power enthusiasts. 
I think, however, that his presentation of the case is wrong 
from several standpoints: 


1. In considering the national forests, wherever located, in 
the light of a local asset and not as a national asset, in which 
all the people should share. 

2. In basing a power charge or franchise solely on the cost 
of forest conservation and not on the value of the grant fixed 
by the earning capacity. 

3. In the attitude which assumes that a policy other than that 
outlined by him would put a tax on discovery, invention, and 
development, by ascribing to capital and genius, seeking legiti- 
mate investment and fair returns, attributes that indicate a 
selfishness fortunately not always true. 

4. By a disregard of what might be termed the “ rights of 
the people ” in and to an asset of perpetual value, national and 
not local in character, a value that increases from decade to 
decade, as coal becomes scarcer and dearer. 

Let us first see what the government’s stand is on the ques- 
tion of charges. It can best be stated in a general way by 
quoting President Roesevelt’s specific statement before the 
recent Conference in Washington. 


My position has been simply that where a privilege, which may be of 
untold value in the future to the private individual granted it, is asked 
from the federal government, that the federal government shall put on 
the grant a condition that it shall not be a grant in perpetuity. Make 
it long enough so that the corporation shall have an ample material 
reward. The corporation deserves it. Give an ample reward to the 
captain of industry, but not an indeterminate reward. Put in a pro- 
vision that will enable our children at the end of a certain specified 
period to say what in their judgment should be done with that great 
natural power, which is of use to the grantee only because the people 
as a whole allow him to use it. It is eminently right that he should be 
allowed to make ample profit from his development of it, but make 
him pay something for the privilege and make the grant for a fixed 
period, so that when the conditions change, as in all probability they 
will change, our children, the nation of the future, shall have the right to 
determine the conditions upon which the privilege shall then be enjoyed. 

Where that policy can best be carried out by the state, carry it out 
by the state; where it can be best carried out by the nation, carry it 
out by the nation. My concern is not with the academic side of the 
question; my concern is in the employment either of the principle of 
states rights, or the principle of national sovereignty, as will best con: 


serve the needs of tne people as a whole, 


486 WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


This is a clear statement of a just and righteous intent, and 
who among us will question its honesty, or the wisdom and de- 
sirability of its proper and successful accomplishment? This 
policy has, I believe, been more specifically elaborated by the 
Forest Service in certain cases, involving governmental grants 
as a definite policy, namely: 

(a). The charge for power permits should be based on the 
power value of the land occupied and the value of the services 
rendered by the government. 

(b). The proceeds from any particular permit may legally 
be appropriated by the Congress for any public purpose, and, 
under the same policy, may properly be used for the expense 
of administering in national forests, or for the reclamation fund, 
or for the proposed inland waterways fund. 

(c). The plan of calculating the maximum conservation charge 
upon the yearly cost of forest conservation to the government 
would be impracticable, for the additional reason that such °* 
cost ought to be vastly higher than it isnow. In the European 
forests the cost is several dollars per acre, as against one cent 
per acre this year in this country. 

(d). The question of the charge for power plants is a unit. 
In considering it, the rental value of the land and the value of 
the services rendered by the government in forest conservation 
should and must be considered together. 

(e). The rental value for power purposes of the lands occu- 
pied should be paid by the permittee, not merely their value 
for forest purposes, farm purposes, and the like. The govern- 
ment is entitled to their value for all purposes, especially in- 
cluding the purpose for which they are actually occupied. 
This value must be fixed by the administrative officers of the 
government at such a rate as will encourage the taking of per- 
mits. But the government should retain permanent ownership, 
subject to the temporary right of the permittee to use the land. 

(f). Practical considerations of administration make it de- 

sirable that the charge for power plants should be uniform. 
It has therefore been fixed at a rate which is believed to be suffi- 
ciently low not to check the development of any project. 
_ While this policy may not be yet fully worked out, perhaps 
may not be the final word, it is, I maintain, in exact accord 
with the views and policy which the President seeks to estab- 
lish, which in its final analysis is simply equal justice to both 
grantee and grantor, in rights which involve the use of the com- 
mon property of the people as a whole, rights which are in 
Se strictest sense, ours Only as trustees and guardians for the 
uture. 

It may not be amiss to say here that this idea of trusteeship, 
while not strictly new, has in the past few years attained a new 
significance; and there are evidences of an awakening of the pub- 
lic conscience in respect to our guardianship and to our obvious 
duty to ourselves and to posterity in these matters that be- 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 487 


tokens a better America. The whole conservation movement, 

crystallized by the notable conference just held at Washington, 

abe I believe, a new era in American thought and American 
abit. 

Forests as a national asset. The national forest in the West 
is the heritage of the whole people. No state or local boundaries 
were in the mind of the Almighty when the forests were first 
planted by him. No state boundary now confines their use or 
benefits or value to the state alone. The California forests 
serve other states in water conservation, in water power, in 
climatic effects, in supplying timber, grazing, etc., and the same 
is true of forests whether located in Wyoming or Washington 
or Idaho. They are public domain, belonging to the nation, 
not to the states containing them. They are, therefore, in all 
the benefits and profits accruing from them, the common prop- 
.erty of the nation. The state fortunately containing them 
gains the greatest benefit, and rightly so, but no claim that they 
are the exclusive property of the state as regards benefits or 
profits is tenable. The nation is the sovereign, and as a matter 
of fact and right the profits from them, while in part shared 
with the state, are converted into the national treasury. They 
should be turned into a forest fund that could be used to estab- 
lish other national forests. 

In the east where the Appalachian national forest is projected, 
and so badly needed, the situation is different only in degree. 
The states agree to relinquish sovereignty, the title passing by 
purchase to the new owner, the federal government. The 
states will get their share of profit—-the balance goes into the 
treasury. Nor can the forest here be considered a local asset. 
The states are manifestly unable to act effectively in its estab- 
lishment. The very fact that the national government must 
act shows its interstate, its national character. 

From the forested mountains of North Carolina flow streams 
that make power and navigation possible in streams in adjacent 
states—north, south, east and west. Some twenty states are 
directly, and the whole nation indirectly affected by what North 
Carolina does, should she denude or preserve her forests. It 
cannot be considered, therefore, as a local question, and I think 
Mr. Baum’s view is narrow and untenable. Does the San Fran- 
cisco post office expend its surplus only on San Francisco’s 
postal service, or the New York post office on New York’s? Is 
not the profit from these larger and more prosperous centers 
used to improve the efficiency and value of the postal service 
as a whole to the whole people? 

Let us look into this a moment. The government at present 
sells the timber on the basis of its selling value, because the 
timber costs have been to the present time practically nothing, 
except the small value of the land set aside, and the maintenance 
and patroling and similar charges. We have not begun to 
spend on our forests the amount of money which they should 


488 WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


have yearly for a definite reforestation policy. Will Mr. Baum 
advocate this charge against the power company, should we 
spend, as we some day must, large sums for reforestation? 

The national forest, so far as the timber is concerned, was 
operated at a loss last year. Other forest products considered, 
there was a substantial profit, and this profit is increasing year 
by year, and rightly so. Forests become without impropriety a 
profitable investment to the government, without imposing any 
purposely designed hardship on the grazer or lumberman or 
miner or homesteader. If the government has instead of graz- 
ing privileges, or lumber, a water power to dispose of, in what 
respect does it differ from the other forest products? Is not 
its value what it is worth to the grantee, whether it be five 
thousand or fifty thousand kilowatts, and is not this value 
fixed solely by what it may be able to earn as a return on the 
investment? The 5000-kw. plant may be just as able to earn 
a fair return as the 50,000-kw. plant. The promoter or the 
developer might prefer the larger plant, perhaps, as offering 
more chance for profit, just as a street railway in New York 
might be a more attractive enterprise than one in Atlantic 
City, and yet both New York and Atlantic City have street 
railways, and it is barely possible that the smaller one is the 
more attractive investment. 

It is largely a commercial problem. The 50,000-kw. plant 
would not be developed if no profitable market existed, even 
if there were no charges imposed by the government. Com- 
mercial considerations govern. There are plants operating and 
making money where fixed charges are abnormally high, cost- 
ing $200 or so per kilowatt installed, and selling power at a 
low price, too; there are others that have cost $80 or less per 
kilowatt installed that are selling power at a higher rate than 
the other plant. They all fix what is claimed to be a reason- 
able charge for current, under the conditions existing in their 
particular field, and this charge varies quite as much and as 
radically as the installation costs. It is a reasonable charge 
at one cent per kilowatt-hour, or two or more, depending on 
local conditions. We cannot well object to a metered tax 
on production when we are at the same time through our pub- 
lic service companies, such as the power company, the tele- 
phone company, the gas company, and the water company, 
strenuously and persistently advocating a metered charge for 
consumption, It is not possible to impose an equitable tax 
in any other way. 

The plant that has so narrow a margin between success and 
failure as to be seriously affected by the imposition of a 
fair tax, whether this tax be 1/1000 cent, or 1/100 cent per 
kilowatt-hour, or even more, perhaps, has small prospect of 
attracting investors. It is not at all impossible or difficult— 
we are doing it every day—to get at exact figures of develop- 
ment costs in any project contemplated, and accurately to 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 489 


estimate its earning capacity. We are doing the tatter, too, 
every day. One needs only to recall the engineering reports 
of the past and the present to see that it is done on the basis 
of “what the traffic will stand,’ nor is there impropriety in- 
volved in this. When this is done and the property cannot 
stand a reasonable tax on its output, that project is not a com- 
mercial one at the present time and under present conditions, 
and must await development, as does many another, until a 
more favorable season. 

A tax on discovery and invention. There are no inherited or 
inherent rights in capital privately to exploit our remaining 
resources in mines and lands and forests, although this state- 
ment seems unduly optimistic in the light of past history. The 
Americans are over-patient and have been over-exploited, to 
put it mildly. There may be no power monopoly contemplated, 
though a water power company is by nature a monopoly 
per se. It is many times the only possible source of supply 
of a given market. The opportunity for monopoly unquestion- 
ably exists in many places now, and there are some striking 
examples of what might happen to water power in what has 
happened in the past in some notable combinations of certain 
railway and other large interests that can be readily recalled. 

The government imposes a tax to-day on inventive genius 
by charging for a patent—the child of one’s brain—a uniform 
charge regardless of the cost of maintenance of a patent office. 
It fixes also a limitation of the grant to seventeen years—-but 
the Patent Office is full. 

No fears are justified, however, that the imposition of a tax, 
which would net him forty-nine per cent. instead of fifty per 
cent., or five and nine-tenths instead of six per cent. on a solid 
investment, will curb either the American’s ingenuity or his 
inventive genius, or his discovery of the quickest way to get 
the forty-nine per cent. or five and nine-tenths per cent., if he 
cannot have the larger returns. 

Disregard of the people’s rights. The real ownership of these 
natural assets in mines and forests and soil and water clearly 
lies in the people as a whole—a part of the nation’s heritage, 
whether natural or artificially created through governmental 
agencies. Some profit therefrom belongs to the people, just 
as clearly and on the same broad ground as that some profit 
belongs to the capital and brains developing them. With this 
right of the people to profit, there exists and there is imposed 
the duty to fix reasonable restrictions on their use. Rights to. 
exploit them properly should be granted on the basis of a defi- 
nite term of years for the franchise; a definite basis of fair charge 
on the output; fair regulation by the government—a policy 
that is embraced in what is termed ‘‘ a square deal ”’ to all con- 
cerned; to the investor, to the corporation, to the power user 
and to the nation, and, incidentally, to posterity. 

As engineers, knowing better, perhaps, than any other class 


490 WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


of observers the immense potential value represented by forty 
trillion cubic feet flowing annually within our borders, descend- 
ing an average of twenty-five hundred feet to the sea, and what 
it means to present America and its future value to future 
America; dimly realizing the infinitely greater value and in- 
calculable good of our waters in the light of the new concept of 
them in their substance, or corpus, we cannot go on record as 
indorsing any plan involving their exploitation and use, that 
does not have strictly in mind, not only their fullest develop- 
ment and conservation in the largest sense for power, for soil, 
for water supply, for the health and very life of the people, 
but the plan must be one that will do equal justice to all and 
contain special privileges to none. 

No less an authority than Jefferson declared that “‘ the earth 
belongs in usufruct to the generation at any time living upon 
it.’ This view is as true to-day and as free from demagogy 
or socialism as when uttered. It is plain common sense and 
common honesty, and we as a people are at last beginning to 
realize it. 

E. R. Taylor: I would like to see Mr. Baum’s paper broad- 
ened out, and my criticism is mostly upon paragraph B, in 
which Mr. Baum says: 

The proceeds from any particular privilege cannot be devoted to any 


other watershed or any other section, or for any purpose except the 
particular privilege. 


I had the honor to read a paper on “ Forestry, Water Storage, 
Power and Navigation ”’ before the American Electrochemical 
Society a few weeks ago. In that paper I think I advocated 
the converse of that advocated by Mr. Baum in paragraph B. 
I said there: 

Let each state or section develop one or two streams completely with 
forest and lakes (and even farmers’ tributary brooks to be paid back 
at cost) as illustrations, and put them to work earning money to de- 
velop others later. Let coéperation be the watchword. Private in- 
terests cannot do it as it ought to be done; public interests must do it, 


and the doing will be immensely profitable and a benefit for all coming 
time. 


All of us realize the great value of these water power privi- 
leges, if they are rightly developed, and I suggest that all who 
are interested in the subject get a copy of the Third Annual 
Report of the New York State Water Supply Commission, 
which deals with this subject. 

P. P. Wells: I desire to explain briefly the forest service policy 
with regard to what used to be called the conservation charge. 
I am not a trained engineer and must ask your indulgence on 
that side of the question. The service is very much indebted 
to Mr. Baum for the careful consideration he has given this 
subject. However, we agree with the conclusions that have 
been expressed by Mr. Finney. 

Mr. Baum’s paper does not clearly distinguish between the 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 491 


policy of Congress and the policy of the Service—the Administra- 
tion. Of course, to find out about the policy of Congress we 
seek the statutes. In respect to the policy of the Forest Service 
as an administrative body I wish to say something about what 
its intentions are, what it has done, and what it would like to do. 

In the first place, it does not like the present system of having 
permits for water power development revocable at the discre- 
tion of the secretary. That condition is imposed by the Act 
of Congress of February 15, 1901, in which it is expressly pro- 
vided that they shall be revocable. The Forest Service would 
like to have authority to issue permits which would be irre- 
vocable except for breach of conditions, for terms sufficiently 
long to guarantee security to the investor and a chance for full 
development. 

At Mr. Pinchot’s suggestion there was included in the Agri- 
cultural Appropriation Bill pending before the last session of 
Congress, a clause which would have given power to issue irre- 
vocable permits for a term of fifty years. That clause, like all 
new legislation in appropriation bills, was subject to be stricken 
out upon a point of order raised by any one member of the 
House of Representatives. Two members made the point of 
order against this clause, and it was consequently stricken-out. 

As the law now stands, the service has gone as far as it can 
to give permanence. It cannot take away from the successor 
of the present Secretary of Agriculture the power to revoke 
the permit. It does, however, specify precisely, before construc- 
tion begins, the maximum charge that is to be made in every 
case. This is fixed in every permit for a term of forty years, 
so that the service has gone as far as it possibly can to give 
certainty. 

Secondly, for the reasons explained so well by Mr. Finney, 
the service stands for the permanent government control of its 
great natural resources, and as each fifty-year license expires, 
new conditions may be then imposed in accordance with the 
changed circumstances that face the men of that time. of 

Thirdly, the policy of the service is that no permit which is 
issued shall be held unused. Pressure is put upon the permittee 
to make full use of his permit, first, by making a preliminary 
small acreage or mileage charge pending construction ; secondly, 
by fixing in the permit a specific time in which construction 
must begin and another specific time in which it must be com- 
pleted. That time will be extended at the discretion of the 
Forester, if unforeseen physical obstacles are met with. 

Fourthly, the service stands for a uniform small charge or 
annual rental based on the amount of power developed. The 
justification of this charge, as Mr. Finney has explained, is that 
the title of the government to lands in the national forest is 
unquestioned and absolute. They belong to all the people of 
the nation. Whatever value there is in them belongs to all. 
If you consider this value, there are three elements in it, bearing 


492 WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT {June 29 


on this matter, which we may call the land resources 
and the services rendered by the government. In _ these 
cases, with respect to water power, the ‘‘ resources’’ of the 
forests may be taken to be the water alone, considered apart 
from the land itself. Our charge is not based on this element at 
all. The appropriation of water is made under the state laws. 
The second element is the value of the land as a power site. 
It is obvious that one piece of land may be very valuable for 
that purpose, and another piece of land less valuable, because 
either of advantageous reservoir sites for storage purposes, or 
because of a greater fall or head. The third element of value 
is the service of the government in maintaining a steady water 
flow by forest conservation. This last is the only element that 
Mr. Baum’s paper considers. 

In my opinion, Mr. Baum’s analogies do not bear out his 
arguments. In the first place, it has been for many years the 
policy of the government to give free homes to settlers, and in 
furtherance of that policy the government irrigates arid lands 
at cost for homestead settlers. The present administration 
does not believe that that policy should be extended to large 
corporations, who use the public resources primarily for gain. 
So there is a broad distinction between the homesteader and 
the commercial user of natural resources that belong to the 
government. 

Take the case of the mineral fuels. Two years ago the pres- 
ent administration definitely announced its policy as that of a 
lease system, rather than ‘the present system of alienation of 
coal and oil lands in perpetuity. Take the case of railroad 
grants and free rights-of-way for railroads; that policy was 
initiated when the resources of the country were thought to be 
inexhaustible, and when the Pacific coast had to be connected 
with the East for political reasons. But the reasons for that 
policy no longer exist and they do not apply in the matter of 
water power. Take the case of timber. Timber is required 
by law, under Act of June 4, 1897, to be sold at public auction 
to the highest bidder, without regard to the cost of adminis- 
tering the particular forest on which it is sold. Railroad ties, 
which Mr. Baum’s paper mentions, could cnly be sold in this 
manner, without any reference whatever to the cost of forest 
conservation. Grazing fees on the forests are an attempt to 
approximate the grazing value of the land. So with mill sites; 
if a man wants a saw-mill site, as Mr. Baum mentions, we varv 
the charge precisely in accordance to the capacity of the mill. 
Thus all the analogies, except that of the homesteader, are 
against the position taken by Mr. Baum. 

A word as to what Mr. Baum says about deductions from 
the charge on account of private ownership of land. It is a 
settled part of the policy of the Forest Service, that if a power 
plant occupies unreserved public land, over which the Forest 
Service has no jurisdiction (private land), a deduction will be 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 493 


made on that account, provided the patent by which the private 

land was acquired did not reserve to the United States a right- 

of-way for canals, etc., constructed under the authority of the 

United States. All patents for lands west of the one hundredth 

meridian, issued since the Act of 1890, do make such. reserva- 
tions. 

Then as to water storage; the policy of the service is to en- 
courage the conservation of water by storage, done by per- 
mittees, in such manner that they will not be charged for the 
conservation of the water they store. They will, however, be 
charged for the head which they get from the use of the forest 
lands, which makes this stored water valuable to them; 
in other words, there is a fifty per cent. reduction from the max- 
imum charge on account of power produced by stored water 
which would not be produced by the natural flow. 

In respect to what Mr. Baum_says concerning the reward 
which should go to the enterpri8ing discoverer of the best 
power sites, a uniform charge is made, believed to be low enough 
not to obstruct development on any practicable site. It there- 
fore leaves a wide margin of profit for the enterprising dis- 
coverer of a better site, and that margin is the wider as the 
site is the better. 

A. H. Babcock: Paragraph B of Mr. Baum’s paper has 
caused considerable discussion. It is my opinion that Mr. 
Baum had in mind the fact that in the case of a water power 
development, the power must be utilized within a limited area. 
The consumers in the area must pay the government charge; 
hence they are entitled to the benefit. The charge should be 
made as low as consistent with the development of that dis- 
trict. Mr. Finney’s analogy to the post office charges being 
distributed for the benefit of the whole country does not seem 
to me to be a happy one, fo1 the reason that a two-cent stamp 
must carry the service into rural districts and other places, 
where an adequate delivery system otherwise could not possibly 
be maintained. 

President Stott: Some very important points have been 
raised in the paper and discussions, which I would hear brought 
out at greater length. 

C. P. Steinmetz: I hardly need to say that I thoroughly 
agree with the opinion, that the preservation of our national 

“resources is a most important problem requiring energetic and 
prompt action. I am sorry to say, however, that with regard 
to the methods proposed by Mr. Baum I must disagree in al- 
most every particular. The first argument made by him is 
that the different water power developments should stand on 
their own merits; that is, that the proceeds from any particular 
privilege cannot be devoted to any other watershed, or any 
other section, or for any other purpose except the particular 
privilege. He contends that the development of the watershed 
should be considered as a private matter in that particular 


locality. 


494 WATERZPOWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


I do not agree with that suggestion, as I believe that, if fol- 
lowed out, it would defeat the very thing we are trying to 
bring about. It is the same argument which can be made, 
and is being made, against setting aside and preserving these 
national resources, that they are not of general, but only of 
local interest. It is of no benefit, it is claimed, to the Central 
States, to set aside the Appalachian reserve, or the White 
Mountain reserve, and therefore the Central States say they 
do not want the national government, to which they contribute, 
to pay for doing it. 

That is Mr. Baum’s argument, but | believe his argument is 
wrong, and there is a contradiction in the very statement, which 
Mr. Baum has overlooked. He starts his paper by speaking 
of the preservation of the national resources, and then he says 
that these resources are only of local interest, and should be 
developed and paid for locally. If they are of local interest 
only, then they do not need the aid of the national government, 
but should be left to local enterprise. Under such circum- 
stances I should prefer to leave them to private enterprise. The 
only reason for calling on the national government is that the 
subject is not of mere /ocal interest, but of national importance. 

It may appear at first sight immaterial to California whether 
the water powers of Maine are developed or not, but if the 
failure to develop the water powers in Maine results in an in- 
creased consumption, say, of one hundred million tons of coal, 
the coal famine resulting will increase the cost of pig iron or 
structural steel to California as well as to Maine, and so one 
part of the country will suffer by the destruction of our national 
resources, by the waste of our national capital, equally with 
every other part. Hence it is not a Jocal, but a national problem. 

If the problem were merely to develop water powers, then 
indeed it would be local; bist the problem is much broader, it is the 
problem of preserving and protecting our national capital. 
Suppose for the sake of argument the cost of the development 
of the water power is charged to the individual location. Then 
there would be developed only those watersheds where the cost 
is lowest and the power greatest; that is to say, those cases 
where government aid is not needed, as private capital would 
sooner or later do the developing. But then the far more im- 
portant problem would remain untouched; the problem where 
the watershed requires to be protected and would not be pro- 
tected by private capital, because there is not enough power 
available in it to justify such protection. The destruction of 
timber and the erosion of hillsides at every rainfall would very 
soon be disastrous to the entire country. No effective protec- 
tion or development can take place when this matter is con- 
sidered as purely local. Such a policy would be very ineffi- 
cient in carrying out our purpose of protecting and preserving 
the national resources, and would indeed be the surest way of 
defeating this purpose. As long as it is a national problem, the 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 495 


nation stands or falls as a whole, is responsible as a whole, 
and has to take care of it or benefit by it as a whole. 

Whether the payment for the work is made by the United 
States treasury, or by assessment on the beneficiaries of the 
development of the national resources, whichever it may be, 
remains for discussion, but certainly we cannot consider the 
development as a matter only of local importance. 

Furthermore, it would be just as unfair to charge a high 
power cost to a moderate water power which may be very 
valuable and necessary, merely because the development of its 
watershed was rather expensive, while another water power 
may be developed almost free of charge where the watershed 
required very little attention. A part of the argument of the 
paper is that the proposed method of charge by the kilowatt 
output is unfair. Granting that, it should not be concluded 
that any other method proposed by the writer is therefore the 
proper method. If one proposed method is unfair, it does not 
prove the correctness of one other method; it merely means that 
we should find a fairer method than that which is proposed. 

I agree with the writer that a fixed charge per kilowatt may 
not be fair. One thousand kilowatts of power developed near 
New York City is vastly more valuable than 5,000 kw. of power 
developed five hundred miles from nowhere. You may say 
we make the charge so low that every one needing the power can 
afford to pay the charge. That is unjust again, because we then 
fail to make a reasonable and fair charge on the profitable 
water power near New. York City, and therefore fail to derive 
as much revenue for use in developing resources as the develop- 
ment of water power can stand. 

The last point I desire to discuss is the feasibility of Mr. 
Baum’s proposition, that the franchise privileges must be per- 
petual. He claims there is no franchise or privilege, but that the 
matter is the same as if I buy a piece of land and build a private 
residence. In the same manner those which develop the water 
power should buy the land. He does not believe in this argu- 
ment himself, however, because in other parts of the paper he 
uses the term “‘ privilege ”’ and so signifies that there is a little 
more involved than buying a plot of land for a private residence. 
However, whether we think it desirable or not, we must realize 
that there is a very strong and growing sentiment against per- 
petual franchises, against giving away national property in per- 
petuity, or even for a long term of years, such as ninety-nine 
years or fifty years. Whether this is desirable or not, we must 
realize that the sentiment is growing and will not reverse, and 
will have to be dealt with as a fact, whether we like it or not, 
so that it will be increasingly more difficult to get perpetual 
franchises or privileges, or even long-term franchises. _What- 
ever arrangements we so recommend, we will have to count on 
this condition—the lifetime of a franchise will be the lifetime 
of a generation, or something like twenty-five or thirty years 
at the most 


496 WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


There are thus two features which we must keep in mind; 
to develop and protect as quickly and as completely as possible 
our national resources in forests and streams and mines, and 
to make the development such as to induce private capital to 
enter into it. The problem which we have to solve is how 
to combine the short-term franchise with such conditions, so 
that private capital will invest in these water powers. 

Now to induce private capital to enter this field requires that 
capital must be guaranteed against confiscation, direct or in- 
direct; that is, there must be a guarantee that at the termina- 
tion of whatever franchise there is, there shall be no confiscation, 
that the value of the plant shall be preserved as a tangible asset 
of the investor. As soon as we guarantee that, I do not see 
that it matters very much whether the franchise is perpetual or 
whether it is relatively short, the only just objection against 
a short-term franchise is that the investor has to face the con- 
dition that he must get his full capital returned with interest 
within seventeen or twenty-five years, because he has no guar- 
antee or protection of the investment beyond that time. The 
value of the investment must be guaranteed in any limited 
franchise. 

There is however a franchise or monopoly very much stronger 
than any other franchise ever dreamed of by anybody, whether 
a water power franchise, or a city railway franchise, or anything 
else. The strongest indeed of all privileges, franchises, or 
monopolies is the manufacture of a patented invention. There 
is no restriction; you may develop the invention or not, you 
can give the public the benefit or not. You can throw it away, 
and no one has any right to object. You can charge ten thousand 
per cent. profit if you choose, but after a limited time, seventeen 
years, this monopoly expires. But there is no confiscation. 
Whatever factories, whatever plants you have erected to carry 
out this invention, they are still your property, except that 
now this invested capital has to compete on even terms with 
all other industries; that is, it is entitled to a fair rate of interest, 
but no more fancy profits. So I believe some similar method 
could be developed for the similar problem of creating values, 
where values did not exist before, in the water powers, forests, 
and mines, and unlimited franchises for a limited time; that is, 
unlimited regarding restrictions, price, time of development, 
etc., might and should be given, because it is necessary to have 
the possibility of unlimited profit to compensate for the chances, 
which are not small, of complete loss in the failure of the power 
development, But that should be for a limited time only, say 
the same seventeen years the letters patent has to run, and 
after that time the franchise expires, and either the government 
can take over the plant at its actual value, or renew the franchise 
with such restrictions, limitations, or conditions, as may seem 
to it desirable, provided these conditions do not constitute a 
confiscation of invested capital, 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 497 


I think this would take away the reasonable objections to 
the short-term franchise, and would make it feasible, by holding 
out chances of very large returns during the unlimited period, 
to take the risk of complete loss. After all, this idea of 
the water powers being very valuable is a misconception, 
derived from looking at those powers which have been a com- 
mercial success, and forgetting to look at those many other 
franchises, city railways, etc., which have been developed and 
capital sunk into them without return. 

The development of a water power is just like the exploitation 
of a letters patent, in the fact that the success of the two is a 
matter of some doubt—they are properties of questionable value. - 
The water power may be, when fully developed, of extreme 
value, or it may be an entire loss. It is not an unquestionable 
asset, like United States bonds. If you desire to get the water 
powers developed, and desire to interest private capital therein, 
you thus cannot expect to limit the returns to the moderate 
values of the usual conservative commercial enterprises, be- 
cause you cannot limit the chances of failure, and where there 
is a chance of loss you must compensate for it by the chance 
of more than normal gain or profit. 

Wm. McClellan: I think we all agree that the word “ na- 
tional’ strikes the keynote of this whole discussion. Those ~ 
who realize the importance of this badly misunderstood ques- 
tion, and have taken the trouble to investigate the conditions, 
have found opinion is very likely to vary according to locality. 
In various parts of the West and South, great water powers 
exist more or less in their natural state. Whatever deficiencies 
or irregularities they have are natural. When we come to the 
East, however, we find a large number of valuable water powers 
which may be called ‘“ spoiled water powers.” This has oc- 
curred on account of the denudation of forests at the head 
waters. During this last winter I have had occasion to examine 
a number of these eastern water powers, many of them of com- 
paratively low head. It is surprising to find how many places 
there are where not more than 500 h.p. can be developed at 
present, and yet records show that years ago, before natural 
conditions had been changed, there would have been at times 
as much as 5000 to 6000 h.p. Steps are being taken by several 
state commissions to determine plans and the cost for over- 
coming these deficiencies by making the flow of the river as 
uniform as possible throughout the year. et 

These great natural water powers of the West, needing in 
many cases comparatively little assistance, and the great spoiled 
water powers of the East, needing in some cases a large amount 
of assistance, all make up the heritage of the nation. The 
fallacy is very subtle, nevertheless it is an absolute fallacy, that 
these resources should be developed for the benefit of the im- 
mediate community or state. In the opinion of the speaker, 
these resources should be considered as a whole, and charges 


498 WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


for development and assistance should be made in every case 
from the standpoint of general utility. The government, like 
an individual, should so manage its resources that all are brought 
up to as efficient a condition, with as great earning capacity as 
possible. 

It is for engineers to say whether a good water power is a 
real asset of the government, and is worth developing. They 
are best fitted to examine the local conditions in each case, and 
see what change is advisable for a water power. 

It is safe to say also that if this matter is nct taken up on a 
national basis, there will be difficulties later, inasmuch as a 
large part of the water power of the country exists at present 
in locations which come under the national government, and 
in many other cases, where strictly speaking it is a state matter, 
attempts will be made to transmit power between the states. 
This will probably become a matter for national control some 
time later. 

C. H. Porter (by letter): It seems to me that every one 
who considers this question must agree with Mr. Baum that 
the regulations of the government with reference to the granting 
of power permits in national forests should be such as to encour- 
age the development of water powers and that the present regu- 
lations are unsatisfactory. That the Forest Service recognizes 
this is shown by the following extract from a letter signed by 
Mr. Pinchot, and dated May 5, 1908: 


I wish to say now that I have never advocated revocable permits. 
The Act of February 15, 1901, expressly requires that all permits shall 
be revocable. I have consistently advocated legislation to authorize 
the issue of permits irrevocable for a fixed term, which should be sufficiently 
long to give reasonable security to investors—say fifty years. During this 
term the permittee, so long as he fulfils the conditions expressed in his per- 
mit, should be as independent as the holder of any other property. More- 
over, the conditions of the permit should define with as great accuracy 
as possible the maximum burden placed upon him. He would then be 
in a position to solicit investment in his enterprise by offering cer- 
tainty and security to the investor. 

For these reasons I secured the insertion by the House Committee 
on Agriculture in the agricultural appropriation bill, now pending, of a 
clause authorizing the issue of irrevocable permits for fifty years. This 
clause was stricken out in the House. I believe that it would have been 
enacted into law if it had received the support of the friends of the power 
companies and that the companies have themselves only to blame if 
they are now suffering from the fact that permits are revocable. 

A conference between representatives of the government and repre- 
sentatives of the power companies and of banking houses interested 
in financing power projects was held in Washington in February and 
March. The government opened the conference by proposing legislation 
of the character above indicated. The companies were unwilling to 
accept that unless they also got much more. The administration cannot 
therefore be held responsible for the fact that this legislation has not 
been secured. 


The real question under discussion, then, is whether the 
government should grant very valuable privileges to the power 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 499 


companies upon conditions more favorable to the latter than 
are necessary to insure the development of water powers.. The 
power companies are justly entitled to a rate of interest on 
their -investment proportional to the initiative 1equired and 
risk involved and one which will make the proposition attractive 
to capital, but why are they entitled to anything more? 

It is stated in the paper that the reserves or national forests 
were created primarily for use and not for profit, but if there 
be profit involved in the administration of the reserves why 
should it not go to the government, representing the public 
rather than be handed over to a few corporations? The fact 
that the government has in the past practically given away 
for private exploitation by far the greater part of the natural 
resources of this country is not, it seems to me, an argument 
for giving away the small remnant the legal title to which still 
remains with the government. 

If the granting of permits for 50 years, irrevocable except 
for breach of conditions, will result in the development of water 
powers with its many obvious concomitant benefits, what is 
to be gained by the granting of permits in perpetuity, except 
the enrichment of a few individuals? If there is any question 
as to whether 50 years is a sufficiently long period to induce 
the desired result, it would seem to be a reasonable method of 
ascertaining the facts for the government to offer to grant per- 
mits for this length of time and then, if permits are not applied 
for, the granting of permits for a longer period can be author- 
ized. In any case the government should retain permanent 
control of all water power resources now in its hands, and issue 
permits for development under conditions fixed for a definite 
period, at the end of which time the government should be free 
to make new stipulations and adjust the conditions to the 
circumstances then existing. 

Mr. Baum raises the question of monopoly, and while a 
monopoly of the water resources of this entire country may, 
as he says, be absurd, a monopoly of the water powers of a 
given locality is certainly possible and in many cases prob- 
able. Even where there is not a monopoly of the sources of 
power there may be a monopoly, through exclusive franchises 
or otherwise, of the power market practically available in a 
given district. Whatever the cause, the resident of a city in 
California confronted with a local power monopoly wi!' derive 
no advantage from the fact that Niagara power, for example, 
is controlled by entirely independent financial interests. 

In the paper it is stated that the profits of a national forest 
in California should not be used to maintain a reserve in Maine, 
but the proceeds from the sale of the public land included in 
the national forest would, if the reserve had not been created, 
have been turned into the national treasury, and not turned 
over to the state of California. Why should not the same course 
be followed with any profits which may arise from the admin- 


500 WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT [June 29 


istration of the reserve? Both before and after the creation 
of the reserve the land belonged and belongs to the nation. 

It is true that settlers in the vicinity of a reserve should be 
given first consideration in the disposition of the products of 
the reserve, but, in general, water powers are not developed 
on a cooperative basis by the people who use the power, but by 
bondholders and stockholders at a distance. The price of power 
will always be determined by the cost of competitive power, or 
by the price at which, with the corresponding amount of busi- 
ness, the profits will be a maximum, not by the actual cost to 
the company of the power sold the consumer. The amount 
of the government charge affects the last item only, but the 
two determining factors are entirely independent of it. 

Furthermore, while it is the policy of the government that 
settlers in the neighborhood of any one forest be preferred to 
people at a distance, so far as the right to use the land and 
resources of the forest is concerned, it is also its policy that, 

They should pay a fair price for all exclusive commercial privileges 
which they get. In other words, they should not be preferred to others 
as to price but should be preferred to others at the same price. This 
is the rule in the case of grazing permits, which are further restricted to 
prevent monopoly by large owners. 

Whether it is ‘“‘ only fair that the government charge against 
the power privileges should be based on what the government 
furnishes’’, depends upon whether the cost or the value of what 
the government furnishes is meant. As an analogy the case 
of railroad ties is mentioned, and it is claimed that the value 
of these should be calculated on the yearly expense of main- 
tenance and the number of ties the reserve can produce annually. 
As I understand the meaning of the word ‘‘ value”’ it is the 
amount of money for which a thing can be sold. As a matter 
of fact, in disposing of any of the timber products of a reserve, 
it is the market value, determined by sale at public auction 
after advertisement, not the cost of maintaining the reserve, 
which fixes the price at which the timber is sold. An excep- 
tion is made in the case of the small homesteader in the imme- 
diate vicinity of the reserve, who is given free certain forest 
privileges for personal and non-commercial use. Thus he can 
have without charge a small amount of timber, $20.00 stump- 
age annually, and is allowed to graze free six milk or work 
animals. When the timber is sold to a railroad or lumber 
company, the government receives the market price of that 
kind and grade of lumber. It would, it seems to me, be absurd 
for the government, representing the public, to sell timber 
from national forests to lumber companies for a nominal sum 
in order that the lumber companies might make an excessive 
profit in reselling it to the public. 

While the charges of the government to the power companies 
should not be excessive and should not exceed a definite max- 
imum set in advance, in order that the fixed charges on a de- 
velopment may be accurately foreseen, nevertheless I see no 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 501 


reason why the value of the power privilege rather than the 
cost of maintaining a given reserve should not be taken account 
of in determining the government charges, just as the market 
value of the timber is consideied in fixing its price. 

The value of the land for power purposes is approximately 
measured by the amount of power actually developed each 
year. It is also an inverse function of the cost of development 
per kilowatt and the distance from a market, but the obvious 
practical difficulties in the way of taking account of these and 
similar factors are such as to leave the amount of power de- 
veloped as the only practicable basis upon which to evaluate 
the power privilege. Mr. Baum says very justly that the power 
man who discovers a better power development than another 
man should have the benefit of his enterprise, and it would 
therefore seem to be fair that the man who discovers a power 
having a low development cost per kilowatt, or one near a 
market, should pay a less percentage of his profits to the gov- 
ernment, as he would with a uniform government charge per 
kilowatt, than a man who can only find a power which must 
be developed at high initial cost, or which is three hundred 
miles from a market. 

As Mr. Pinchot says: 


Any private land owner having a power site on his land would refuse 
to rent it for its value considered as a wood lot, but would insist on its 
power value as the basis of the annual rent. If his property were to 
be taken from him for power purposes by condemnation he would be 
entitled to its value for such purposes. 


The principle involved has been affirmed by the Supreme 
Court of the United States. Why should the fact that the 
renter in the case we are considering happens to be the na- 
tional government, make any difference? The power privilege 
is worth just as much to the power company whether it is 
secured from a private individual or from the government. 

To summarize the difference between Mr. Baum’s point of 
view and my own: he believes that water power development 
should be encouraged as much as possible; I believe that it 
should be encouraged only so much as is necessary to insure 
development. Beyond this the interests of the public, not 
these of the water power companies, should determine the gov- 
ernment’s policy. 

J. A. Britton (by letter): I believe that the United States 
should grant to all bona fide hydroelectric corporaticns per- 
manent rights-of-way and grants of government land without 
any tax whatever being made therefor, other than the cost 
of the land, fixed by the government on the same basis as valua- 
tion is fixed for homesteaders. Such rights, when granted, t» 
become permanent only upon the expenditure of a sum of 
money representing four or five times the value of the land, 
and to provide therefor that upon cessation of use for a period 
of one year, except in case of unavoidable accident or destruc- 
tion by elements of the improvements, the grant should revert 
to the United States. 


502 WATER POWER DEVELOPMENT {June 29 


The protection of a watershed should be a matter within the 
province of the United States, without imposing any tax upon 
the users of the land. The resultant benefits gained by the 
United States and the several states in which these patents 
would be used, and the taxes derived therefrom, are, in my 
opinion, sufficient to warrant the government in taking care 
of and protecting watersheds utilized, as such care and pro- 
tection results as much to the benefit of the entire community 
through which the streams may flow, as it does to the company 
utilizing the water for power purposes. I am unalterably op- 
posed to the levying of any tax by the state, or by the United 
States, where forest reserves are concerned, against enterprises 
of this character. To subject an investment of this kind to 
the whims of the legislature of any state and the Congress of 
the United States would be to invite confiscation of property, 
and would result in eventually paternalizing, and would, if 
neither of the above occurred, bankrupt any corporation, as 
it has no redress. Nor can it in California now, nor will it here- 
after, be permitted to increase its rates, due to the trend of the 
present legislation in the matter of such close regulation of 
corporations. If any law. is to be made, it should be a dis- 
criminatory one, choosing between the bona fide enterprises 
and those which are organized purely for the purpose of en- 
riching the organizers. 

I shall be very glad indeed to see a state or Coast contventica 
held to discuss this subject. I believe it very vital to the 
welfare of those who have, in good faith, invested their money 
in water power propositions in California and other states. 


te 


_A paper presented at the 5th annual convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
» neers, Atlantic City, N. J., June 29, 1908, 


Copyright 1908. By A.J. E. E. 


A STUDY OF. -MULTIOFFICE AUTOMATIC SWITCH- 
BOARD TELEPHONE SYSTEMS 


BY W. LEE CAMPBELL 

This paper treats of three principal topics: 

1. The enormous economic waste which the wire, cable, and 
conduit equipment of a telephone system involves. 

2. A recapitulation and discussion af reasans which make 
this waste necessary or expedient in manually operated systems. 

3. How this waste can and should be greatly reduced in sys- 
tems employing automatic switchboards. 

In other words, as most automatic switchboard plants have 
been installed in conformity with practices which emanated 
from experience with manual switchboard systems, the writer 
will discuss some of the reasons for these practices and endeavor 
to show that they can profitably be ignored in plans for auto- 
matic systems. To accomplish this he has made a study of the 
‘principal factors in the first cost of plants of both types, to- 
gether with certain factors in their operating expenses. Since 
many telephone engineers have possibly not had an opportunity 
to study these factors, and would be much interested in a com- 
parison of them, the writer has so arranged his data that they 
will be of use, not only in the discussion of his theme, but also 
in a determination of the measure of success which automatic 
switchboards have attained in furnishing the speedier, more 
uniform, and more economical service expected of them by the 
men who labored so hard and faithfully to develop them, and 
by the pioneers who had the courage to be their early pur- 
chasers and operators. 

The first cost of a telephone pisat using switchboards of either 
type may be divided into three principal items: ae 

503 


504 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


{. Cost of the apparatus (both central office and subscriber's 
station). 

2. Cost of the central office buildings and furnishings. 

3. Cost of the wire, cable, and conduit plant. 

In the third item of the first cost—the wire, cable, and conduit 
plant—we find the largest factor of the three. The writer will 
not attempt, however, to give any average figures on the amount 
of this item. It is a variable quantity, depending in each 
system, not only upon the number of lines in the plant, but also 
upon the character of the soil, upon the average length of line 
as controlled by the density of population, by the form of the 
city, by the relative location of the business center or centers, 
and by obstructions, such as rivers, lakes, etc., and upon other 
similar conditions. Under almost any circumstances this part 
of the system will cost more than the two other parts combined; 
not infrequently it represents two-thirds of the entire first cost 
of the system. 

It will, therefore, probably tax the credulity of engineers, 
whose experience has been in connection with electric power and 
lighting, when the writer states that in the average telephone 
system containing one central office only, nine-tenths of the 
cable and wire plant is idle—not in use for transmitting con- 
versations, even at the peak of the load; and, too, that on the 
average during 24 hours’ service, 98% of the wires are not in 
use. Yet such is the fact. Indeed, from observations made 
in a large number of automatic plants during the busiest hour, 
it was found that in offices of from 8,000 to 10,000 lines, handling 
a comparatively heavy traffic, the maximum number of con- 
versations taking place at one time was equal to slightly less 
than 4% of the number of lines in service. As each conversa- 
tion represents two lines, this would indicate a maximum of 
8% of the lines engaged for conversation, operating and sig- 
naling at the peak of the load. 

Excepting party-line service, which at best is but a partial 
remedy, there is only one method known to telephone engineers 
of to-day for materially reducing the great economic waste 
represented in the 90% of the costly cable, wire, and conduit 
equipment which is not in use even during the “ rush hours”. 
This method is to divide up each plant so that instead of one 
large central office it will employ a number of smaller offices. 
Just how much saving can be effected in this way, depends 
upon the local conditions in each city; but it will be readily 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 505 


understood that if small central offices or stations should be dis- 
tributed over a city at the centers of well selected districts, the 
telephones in each district being connected only to the local 
station, the subscribers’ lines would be decidedly shorter and 
cheaper than when all run for many blocks to a large centrally 
located office. For interconnecting between the district sta- 
tions, only trunk lines would be needed, and it is necessary to 
have only enough of these to handle the busy-hour traffic; 
that is, the trunk lines need to be but a small percentage of the 
number of wires which would be installed if each telephone 
should be directly connected to one large central office. 

An arrangement resembling that just outlined is in use in 
large cities, where of necessity some division has been made in 
manual systems for the reason that it is physically impracticable 
to terminate all lines in one multiple switchboard; that is, within 
the reach of each operator. Many telephone engineers do not 
consider it good practice to connect over 10,000 lines to one 
manual board, and while several boards have been installed with 
an ultimate capacity of 18,000 lines, the parts are so small and 
comparatively delicate that it is probable that repairs and de- 
preciation will be exceedingly large items. 

The writer does not wish to convey the idea that in manual 
practice systems are not divided up to save wire and cable: 
for in a very large city covering a great area this must be done. 
For example, in Chicago there are 15 or 16 central offices averag- 
ing about 3000 lines each. But division of an office of less 
than 10,000 lines is generally regarded as undesirable and to be 
avoided wherever possible. It is, therefore, the general practice 
in smaller cities to carry all or the bulk of the business on one 
large board, smaller branch boards being installed under suf- 
france and only for urgent reasons. The writer hopes to demon- 
strate that while this antipathy toward dividing offices of 10,000 
lines or less is reasonable in manual practice, it is not reasonable 
in automatic practice. 

Taking up the study of the factors that govern the first cost 
of a common-battery system of either type, and considering them 
in the order in which they have been named, we find first, that 
the cost of the ordinary direct-line, flat-rate telephone at the 
subscriber’s station is about the same ($7.25 each) in all sizes and 
conditions of modern common battery manual plants, and $12.50 
each in automatic plants. The cost of a private branch switch- 
board at a subscriber’s premises is not materially affected by 


506 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


the size, location, or type of the central office to which it is con- 
nected. This, therefore, will not be taken into consideration. 

The cost of the central office equipment when all installed in 
one office depends upon the number of lines entering the office, 
and the number of connections demanded during the busy-hour 
of each day. No storage feature is possible in a telephone plant. 
The switchboard must be designed to take care of the peal: of 
the load, no matter how exaggerated that peak may be. 

For the purpose of this paper, the writer has drawn, as shown 
in Fig. 1, an arbitrary curve, A, from which will be taken all 
figures used on the number of calls made per line per day in 


M 
a 
4 
t 
z 
‘ 
t 
3 
q 
0 


THOUSANDS OF LINES 
Fig. No.1 


Curve A Snows arerrreary NUMBER OF CALLS PER LUNG PER Cay, 
VSEO IN MAKING COMPARISONS a 

Curve B Snows numeer of CALLS PER LINE PER DAY IN CHicago 
DISTRICT FROM 1695 To 1900. 


plants of different sizes. While this curve is not an unreasonable 
one, for flat-rate lines, it does not purport to be an exact average. 
Curve B in Fig. 1 shows the growth in the average number.of 
lines in service and in the average number of calls per line per 
day in the “ Chicago district’ of the Chicago Telephone Com- 
pany during the series of years, from 1893 to 1906. The writer 
supposes that the comparatively small traffic from 1893 to 1897 
is largely due to the business depression then existing, and to 
the fact that the telephone had not then been sufficiently ad- 
vertised to make it such an important factor, as it now is, in 
our business and social intercourse. 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 507 


It will also be taken for granted that the number of calls made 
during the busy hour of each day is one-eighth of the total 
day’s business. Experience shows that this is an average 
ratio. The average busy-hour’s work of an operator in the 
small manual plants is about 225 flat-rate connections; in the 


2 3 4 6 © im 6 E) 10 it 2 
THOUSANDS OF LINES IN SERVICE 
Fiqg.No.2 
Curve wn SHnows AveERAGE NUMBER OF LINES IN SERVICE PER 
SUBSCRIBER CPERATORS POSITION. 


Curve B SHoOws NUMBER OF POSITIONS INCLUDING HOSPITAL 
AND LONG DISTANCE TRUNKING POSITIONS. 


Curve C” Snows cost PER LINE OF ALL CENTRAL OFFICE EQUIPMENT 
EXCEPT LONG DISTANCE SQuibMenT. (MANUAL OFmicts) 


“AL. CAMPBELL, 


large manual plants about 250 flat-rate connections when no 
calls are trunked to other offices. In explanation of this differ- 
ence in connections handled, it might be well to say that discipline 
is usually better in the larger offices, and consequently the 
operators do more work than in the smaller ones. 


508 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


With the foregoing points determined, curves A and B, 
Fig. 2, have been constructed. Curve A gives the number of 
flat-rate lines per operator’s position, and B the number of 
operators’ positions for manual switchboards equipped for 


eas 
a By 


VEGRHE Bl 4 BERS as 
BIGHMOSE Shageamnaena ries 
Ls ol od Da tedb Leal u 


Ptete kts oe Cat 
Fig.No.3 
Ccosr OF CENTRAL OFFice EQUIPMENT FoR AUTOMATIC Ormeces. No TRUNKING 
Curve ax SHows TOTAL COST PER LINE OF CENTRAL OF FICE EQUIPMENT INCLUDING 


Curve BS’ Snows TOTAL coer Pee Hobs OF CENTRAL OFFICE EQUIPMENT EXCEPT DESKS 
vue cosy oF we cH is OWN Br cURVE"C' 


Curve asi SpHows cosT Pre UNE OF Wire cHiErs, J Wrinkle o CLERKS, INFORMATION everks 
ano ormnce SUPERINTENDENTS Ces 


~ w.L. CAMPBELL. 


from 1,000 to 14,000 lines, and for handling the number of calls 
per line per day indicated by curve A, Fig. 1. Curve C was 
then constructed, using the figures represented by curves A 
and B and the average prices at which a number of modern, 
well constructed, manual central office equipments using com- 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 509 


mon-battery multiple switchboards have been sold and installed. 

Curve A in Fig. 3 gives the cost installed of automatic central 
office equipment for offices of from 1,000 to 14,000 lines, designed 
to handle the number of calls per line per day as given by curve 
A, Fig. 1. The cost of central office equipment of either type 
includes cost of terminal racks, power plant, wire chief’s, in- 
formation clerk’s and trouble clerk’s desks; in short, all apparatus 
except a long-distance board and its accessories. In making 
up the figures on the cost of automatic equipment, the number 
of trunking switches necessary per hundred lines for handling 


NUMBER OF TRUNKS PER GROUP 


0 | Alo o | so oO | Bo 
190 1SO 200 250 300 350 400 450 SOO S50 G00 650 700 750 6890 650 900 950 10900 
Busr HOUR CALLS CARRIED PER TRUNK GROUP. 


Fig No.4 


OM BETWEEN NUMBER OF BUSY HOUR CALLS ANO TRUNKS IN AGROUP 
Nae cats IME 83 SECONDS 


Curve A Shows recat 
FUAT 


Curve B SHows FELATION BETWEEN BUSY HOUR CALLS CARRIED CER TRUNK AND THE NUMBER 
OF TRUNKS IN THE GROVE AUTOMEeTIC SYSTEM. FLAT RATE CALLS 


the busy-hour traffic was taken from curve A, Fig. 4. This 
curve, which is the result of thousands of observations made 
in automatic offices, follows the empirical formula: 


3 
Trunks = ee fae 


in which T represents the length in hours of the average con- 
nection and C represents the number of busy-hour calls. 

For the benefit of those not familiar with automatic switch- 
boards, the writer will state that each line terminates in what is 
generally called a line switch, These line switches are arranged 


510 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE ‘June 29 


and multiplied together in groups of 100 each. Connections 
between these groups are made by means of trunking switches 
called first selectors, second selectors, third selectors, and con- 
nectors. In a system having an ultimate capacity of 1000 lines, 
first selectors and connectors are the only trunking switches used. 
When the ultimate capacity is increased to 10,000 lines, second 
selectors are required also; and when the ultimate capacity is 
increased to 100,000 lines, third selectors are added. Ina 
100,000-line system, then, there is one first selector, one second 
selector, one third selector, and one connector for each trunk 
equipped. 

A system with an ultimate capacity of 18,000 lines is made 
by installing a section of switchboard equipped for 8000 lines 
and arranged for an ultimate capacity of 10,000, and another 
section of switchboard equipped for the remaining 10,000 lines 
and using third-selector switches as if installed for an ultimate 
capacity of 100,000 lines. Such a combination does not involve 
any complications and makes the cost less than if the entire 
equipment were arranged for an ultimate capacity of 100,000 
lines. 

The cost of banks for ten selector switches of each type, and 
of ten connector switches per hundred lines, was included in 
all figures to allow margin for the practice, recently introduced 
into automatic plants, of moving selector and connector switches 
about from comparatively idle to busier sections in order to 
handle the busy-hour traffic with the least possible number of 
trunking switches. This practice is similar to that common 
in manual plants of apportioning the work among the operators’ 
positions by means of an intermediate distributing frame. 

In comparing these two first-cost curves (C in Fig. 2 and A 
in Fig. 3), it will be seen that the cost per line of manual equip- 
ment increases rapidly with the size of the office. This in- 
crease is principally due to the greater and greater number of 
multiple jacks which must be placed within each operator's 
reach, whereas, since the automatic is a trunking system, the 
cost per line is affected only by the slow growth in the number 
of trunks necessary to handle the busy-hour calls, and, at in- 
tervals, an increase in the ultimate capacity of the switch- 
board. The price of this equipment, therefore, rises more 
gradually and in the larger offices falls below that of the manual 
type. 

For comparison only, the writer shows in curves A andB, 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 511 


Fig: 5, the respective costs of manual and automatic central 
office equipment as given by curve C, Fig. 2, and A, Fig. 3 plus 
the cost of one telephone per line. 
Taking up the second item of first cost for single office systems 
the writer would direct attention to Fig. 6 in which curves A 


= 
NH 


4 ; 


oy 
aD 


i [oe ei ea ae) 
pe ee a | |e a a ai [i afl spa eee Pope ele [] 
' 2 3 4 5s Se 7 (=) Ss 10 Ww 2 is 149 
THOUSANDS OF LINES IN SERVICE 
Fiq.No.S 


CompPrete cost of CENTRAL OFFICE EQUIPMENT EXCEPT LONG Distance Boaro 
PLUS COST OF ONE TELEPHONE PER LINE. 


pe 
Curve A 's ror Manuar Orrices. 
Curve B Is ror Automatic Orrices. 


Wie CAMPBELL. 


and B give the square feet of floor space required on the average 
for automatic and manual central office equipments respectively. 
Curve C gives the cubic feet of space required for automatic 
equipment, and curve D gives the cubic feet of space required for 
manual equipment. In this same figure, curve & for automatic 


12 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE _ [june 29 


or 


equipment and curve F for manual equipment give the first 
cost of the necessary space in fire-proof buildings at an esti- 
mated rate of 19 cents per cubic foot for housing the automatic 
and manual equipments indicated. The cost of furnishings 


THOULVSANDS OF CUBIC FEET 


r 
Wl 
Wi 
i 
Wu 
14 
q 
=) 
o oft 
oe BB 
fy ee ES 
ie) 
Zz 
¢ 
” 
i 
re) 
I 
Fk 


5 Ss cr) 
THOUSANDS OF LINES 


Fig.No.S 


Curve A Snows square reet or FLooR space ZeQuiReo FoR AL TOM ATIC 
CENTRAL OFFICE EQUIPMENT (NO TRUNKING) 


Curve B SHows FLOOR SPACE REQUIRED FOR MANUAL EQUIPMENT (ho TRUNKING) 

Curve C’ Snows cusic Feet of space FEQUIRED FOR AUTOMATIC EQUIPMENT 

Curve OD Snows cusic FEET oF SPACE REQUIRED FOR MANUAL EQUIPMENT 
Curves EF Snow cost in potvcars or BUILOING SPACE REQUIRED FoR 


AYUTOMATIC AND MANUAL EQUIPMENTS RESPECTIVELY FIRE 
PROOF BUILOINGS ESTIMATED COST 19 CENT PER CuB.cC FOOT 


Web CAMPSEL 


and land, and cost of space used for executive offices, storage, 
etc., are not included, nor is the cost of space usually allowed 
for a growth of at least 20% or 25% in switchboards included. 
The figures do, however, include the cost of space for operators’ 
rest rooms, hospital, dining room, kitchen, etc. 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 518 


It will be noted that the cost of building space for automatic 
equipment is considerably less than that for manual equip- 
ment, and that for offices of over 5000 lines the automatic 
occupies about half the space required for the manual. No 


| 


NUMBER OF OFFICES ON ONE CALL CIRCUIT 


Fig.No.7 


OPERATOR'S LOADS 


_ Wil. CAMPBELL 


effort has been made to secure comparative figures on the cost 
of furnishings, but they are unquestionably more expensive in 
manual offices, since here recreation and rest rooms, restaurant, 
kitchen, etc., are commonly furnished and equipped for the use 
of the operators. In automatic offices the number of employees 


514 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


is comparatively small and the men are in the majority, conse- 
quently, it is not customary to make any elaborate provision 
for their comfort when off duty. 

Having now shown what the average costs of the central 
office equipments and buildings would be in single office plants 


sane 


yt | | 
Stee 
NHHGES 


@ 20RRRESEA 


oy 
iY 


eh eh. 3 4 5 647.99 
NuMBER AND SIZES OF OFFICES. 


Fig.No.8& 
STvoy oF 10,000 LINE SYSTEM WITH VARIOUS “UMBERS AND SIZES OF MANUAL OFFICES 
Esvimateo 173,500 carcs PER DAY Estimateo 21.687 caiis DURING BUSY HOUR 
CURVE “A” SHow6 COMBINED COSTS of CURVES “B” AND “C™ 
Curve “B" Shows cos SER LINE OF CENTRAL OFFICE EQUIPMENT 
Curve “C" Swows COST PER LINE OF BUILDING SPACE REQUIRED FOR 
CENTRAL OFFICE EQUIPMENT FIRE~ PROOF BIILOINGS ESTIMATED COST 
IICENTS PER CUBIC FOOT 
Curve “D" Snows NUMBER OF “A” OPERATORS POSITIONS REQUIRED AT ALt OFFICES. 
Curve “E” SHowS THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF LINES SERVED By EACH “A” OPERATOR'S POSITION 
Curve “F” Shows ToTAL NUMBER OF “B’OPERATOR'S POSITIONS. 


we CAMPBELL. 


handling the traffic indicated by curve A, Fig. 1, it is next in 
order to see what effect dividing up a system so that it employs 
more than one office, has on these two items of first cost. 

In manual systems an operator’s daily quota of connections 
is reduced when part of the calls which she handles must be 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 515 


trunked to other offices. This effect of trunking on the operator’s 
work is indicated by curve A, Fig. 7, which gives the number 
of flat-rate busy-hour connections which one of the largest 
manual operating companies has found that an average ‘‘A”’ 
operator will make with various percentages of trunked calls. 
It is, therefore, necessary in a multi-office manual system to 
install and to provide space for more “‘ A’ operators’ positions, 
as well as to install and provide space for ‘‘B”’ operators’ posi- 
tions and to provide increased space for rest rooms, etc. 

As an illustration, in Fig. 8, curves D, F, and E show respec- 
tively the number of “A” operators’ positions, the number 
of ‘““B”’ operators’ positions, and the average number of lines 
per “A” operator’s position for a hypothetical 10,000-line 
system with different numbers and sizes of offices. The numerals 
along the bottom of the figure which indicate the various num- 
bers and sizes of offices, have the following significance: 


1 office of 8000 lines 
1 office of 2000 lines 
1 office of 6700 lines 
2 offices of 1650 lines each 
1 office of 5725 lines 
3 offices of 1425 lines each 
2 offices of 5000 lines each 


1} represents 
24 2 | 2 offices of 4450 lines each 


2 “ 
13 


1 office of 1100 lines 

2 offices of 4000 lines each 
2 offices of 1000 lines each 
2 offices of 3650 lines each 
27 Tepresctiter) & UG fices of 1000 lines each 
zs 3 offices of 3333 lines each 
s 4 offices of 2500 lines each 
s 5 offices of 2000 lines each 
6 offices of 1667 lines each 
Hs 7 offices of 1429 lines each 
s 8 offices of 1250 lines each 
= 9 offices of 1111 lines each 


© COM OD Ore 09 


It will be noted that the number of “A” and the number 
of “‘B” operators’ positions grows quite rapidly as the number 
of offices is increased, while the number of lines per “A” 
operator’s position diminishes. 

In working out these curves the percentage of outgoing trunk 


516 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


calls from any office was calculated by the formula; trunking% = 


A 


lines in the system, B equals the number of lines in the office 
under consideration and 0.75 is a factor which experience in- 


100 


multiplied by 0.75; where A is the total number of 


n 
n 


ny 


i) 
° 


Busy 
HOUR CALLS 


oO 


ae 
& & & 4% 


PERCENTAGE 
OF TRUNKS 


wy) 
>! 


ws 2 
Be 19 4 Fuerte y= Ss ec? 6 9 
NUMBER ANDO SIZES OF OFFICES 


Fig. NoS 


Syuov oF 10,000 UNE SYSTEM WITH VARIOUS NUMBERS AND SIZES OF AUTOMATIC OFFICES 
Estimateo 173,500 caus Pen pay. Estimates 21,687 cats DURING BUSY HouR_ 

Curve “A” SHows comBINED COSTS oF CURVES “BAND “C” 

Curve “B” SHowS cost PER LINE Of CENTRAL OFFICE EQUIPMENT 

Curve “C" SHowS Cost PER LINE OF BUILDING SPACE REQUIRED FoR CENTRAL OFFICE EQuIPMENT 

Curve "D" SHowSs THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF BUSY NOUR CALLS CARRIED PER TRUNK LIWE 

BETWEEN offices, 

Curve “E™ SHowS THE RATIO OF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF TRUNK LINES BETW 

10,0CO SUBSCRIBER'S LINES ENTERING ALL THE OFFICES OF THE SYSTEM. 


EEN ALL OFFICES TO THE 


Ww. CAMPBEW. 


dicates will allow under average conditions for the community 
of interest between the subscribers in an office district. Of 
course, in a study of a particular locality this factor should, if 
possible, be accurately determined; it may be as small as 0.4 
or as large as 1.5, 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 517 


_ Curve B, Fig. 8, gives the approximate cost per line of the 
central office equipments installed as derived from the data used 
in curves DL, F, and & previously mentioned. It will be noted 
that although more positions are necessary than in a single 
office, the cost of each position is reduced by a decrease in the 
line equipment and in the number of multiple jacks per position, 
so that there is not a great variation in the total switchboard 
cost. In the same Tig. 8, curve C shows the cost per line of 
the buildings for the various sizesand numbers of offices in the 
divided system. The cost of space required for executive 
offices, storage, etc., is not included in these figures, nor do they 
include the cost of land and furnishings. Curve A shows the 
combined cost per line of central office equipment and build- 


F 
u 
L 
W 
(4 
q 
3 
¢@ 
0) 


HOUSANDS OF LINES 
Fig.No.JO 


we 
Curve A Snows FLOOR SPACE REQUIRED FOR AUTOMATIC CENTRAL OFFICE 
EQUIPMENT OF 100000 LINES ULTIMATE CAPACITY. NO INCOMING OR 
“3 OUTGOING TRUNK EQUIPMENT. 
Curve B Same As A EXCEPT SPACE ADDED FOR EQUIPMENT FoR 257 EACH OF 
a» INCOMING AND OUTGOING TRUNK CALLS, 
Curve C Same As A ExcEPT SPACE ADDED FOR EQUIPMENT FOR 50%, EACH or 
a z INCOMING AND OUTGOING TRUNK CALLS. 
Curve D Same as A’ ExcEPT SPACE ADDED FOR EQUIPMENT FOR 6% EACH OF 
INCOMING ANDO OUTGOING TRUNK CALLS. 
WL. CAMPBELL, 


ings. It will be noted that the greater cost of buildings is, to 
some extent, counterbalanced by a reduction in the cost of the 
equipment. The small increase would in any event be of little 
moment in comparison with the saving in the cost of the wire, 
cable, and conduit plant, which might be secured by plant divi- 
sion. It would, therefore, appear that we must look further 
for the cause of the objections to multi-office manual systems. 

Before discussing operating expenses, however, let us see 
what effect plant division has on the first cost of automatic 
central office apparatus and buildings. To illustrate the effect, 
the curves in Fig. 9 have been worked out, using the same 10,000- 
line system and the same numbers and sizes of offices employed 
in Fig. $ for the manual system. The cost, installed, of central 
office equipment is somewhat increased by division, as will be 


518 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


noted by reference to curve B. The central office space required 
is also greater, as shown by curve C, Fig. 9, and by curves A 
B, C, and D, Fig. 10. The slow inurease in the combined cost 
of equipment and building as more offices are added is shown by 


iMBMUNRB KH 
Sy ge Tel tar. ta 


BERS VEE SRS 


|_| 
PACH 


Ne 


ToTAL COST PER ANNUM IN THOUSANOS OF DOLLARS 


ite] ” 12 
THOUSANDS OF LINES IN SERVICE 
No incom'na or OUTGOING TRUNK CALLS 


Fia@. No!) 


Cost OF LABOR FOR OPERATING, REPAIRING AND MAINTAINING ALL CENTRAL OFFICE 
EQUIPMENT EXCEPT “LONG DISTANCE BOARD" INCLUDES ALSO WIRE CHIEF AND 
ASSISTANTS, TROUBLE AND INFORMATION CLERKS 


“an 
Curve A GIVES TOTAL PER ANNUM FOR MANUAL EQUIPMENT 
Curve B) GIVES TOTAL PEP ANNUM FOR AUTOMATIC EQUIPMENT 
Curve C Gives cost °&R LINE PER ANNUM FOR MANUAL OFFICES 
Curve D Gives cost PER LINE PER ANNUM FOR AUTOMATIC OFFICES 


curve A, Fig. 9. The increases are of small import in com- 
parison with the saving in the underground and aerial construc- 
tion secured by using a larger number of offices. 

Taking up the subject of operating expenses, the writer would 
direct attention first to curves A and C, Fig. 11, which show 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 519 


average annual operating and maintenance labor cost for manual 
central offices of from 1000 to 14,000 lines, doing no trunking 
and handling the number of calls per line per day indicated 
by curve A, Fig.1. Curves B and D, Fig. 11, show respectively 
the total annual cost and the annual cost per line of all central 
office labor for automatic offices of from 1000 to 14,000 lines. 
These figures are averages of the labor costs obtained from a 
considerable numbee of automatic switchboard operating com- 
panies. 


z 
3 
z 
z 
¢ 
v 
wi 
O 
u 
z 
i 
u 
u 
ry 
+ 
0 
0 
O 


el 
Saas 
3. a4 5a @ 
THOUSANDS OF LINES 


Cuave "4" SHows cost PER LINE PER ANNUM FOR OPERATING MANUAL CENTRAL OFFICE 
@S SHOWN BY CURVE “C"“ FIG Hl PLUG COST OF POWER, LIGHTING 4WD INTEREST, 
DEPRECIATION, TAXES AND INSURONCE ON CENTRAL OFFICE EQUIPMENT AND 
ON CENTRAL OFFICE BUILOIN 


Curve “B” Same 26 “A” put FoR Automatic EQUIPMENT (See curve “D"Fig I) 


The writer would next direct attention to curves A and B, 
Fig. 12, which give the central office labor expense as shown 
in Fig. 11, plus the cost per line per annum of certain central 
office equipment and central office building charges that are 
materially affected by plant division. Curve A is for manual 
offices of from 1000 to 14,000 lines, no trunking, and curve B 
gives similar data for automatic offices. These figures include 
insurance, taxes, interest and depreciation on central office 
equipment and buildings, renewals for central office equipment, 
and the cost of lighting and power. 


520 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 28 


Insurance of the central office equipment in fire-proof build- 
ings is taken at 1% per annum. Although several companies 
operating automatic apparatus have informed the writer that 
they secured a lower rate than that which they could get on 
manual equipment, it does not appear that the rating authorities 
have made any general rule which would assure a reduction. 
Since, however, much of the damage done to switchboards by 
fire is caused by blazes originating within the apparatus itself, 
and since the insurance companies exempt themselves from 
losses caused by such blazes, it would seem that fire losses would 
be smaller with automatic equipment than with manual. Man- 
ual switchboards are largely built of inflammable material and 
are incased in wooden cabinets. Also, if a blaze should start 
in one end of a manual board, there is little in the construction 
of the board to prevent it from sweeping through the entire 
length. Automatic switchboards are divided up into small 
separated sections so that a blaze in one would have very little 
opportunity to leap across to another. The apparatus itself 
is made up almost entirely of metal. 

Taxes on both types of equipment are figured at the rate of 
1.5% per annum; interest is figured at 6% per annum for both. 

Depreciation on manual central office equipment is figured on 
an average life of 10 years. Of course, many parts of the switch- 
board must be replaced in less time: for example, cords in an 
average time of 1.5 years, plugs in 2 years, keyboard lamps 3 
years, answering jacks 5 years, etc. These, however, are be- 
lieved to be covered by including a 2% charge for maintenance 
materials and renewals. Depreciation on automatic equip- 
ment is calculated on a life of 12 years. Although no automatic 
plants, to the best of the writer’s knowledge, have been in con- 
tinuous service for this length of time, he has found that plants 
which have been in operation for 7 or 8 years show very little 
wear. While some such plants have been replaced by new ones, 
it has been because it was believed that better service and de- 
creased operating costs, made possible by the new and improved 
equipment obtainable at the time the change was made, would 
pay for making it before the life of the original plant was ex- 
hausted. As an example, showing the effect of wear and tear 
on an automatic switchboard, there is in Fall River, Mass., an 
automatic plant which has been in operation for 7 years; at 
this plant the only appreciable wear is on the shaft wipers of 
the busier trunking switches. While these wipers could be 


pian sale ia da (lane 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 521 


renewed at a very modest expense, they will apparently last 
for some years yet. The wear on the equipment, which is in- 
dividual to each subscriber’s line, is hardly noticeable. In fact, 
an automatic switchboard has never been known to wear out, 
while manual switchboards are really worn out by the con- 
tinued use of the parts by the operators. As the writer has 
already stated, such manual switchboard parts as cords, key- 
board lamps, answering jacks, trunk jacks, etc., will need to be 
replaced at intervals during the life of the board. It is also 
found that the keyboards and plug shelves made of wood and 
sole leather become so worn from the continual contact of the 
operators fingers and the rubbing of the cords, and so battered 
by the constant pounding of the plugs, that they must be re- 


_ placed in 6 or 7 years on a very busy board. In 10 years, or 


sometimes even less, the keys, multiple jacks, multiple cables, 
etc., are generally in such condition that it becomes necessary 
to replace the entire switchboard, regardless of whether it has 
become obsolete or not. 

Ten to fifteen years ago telephone apparatus was being de- 
veloped so very rapidly that the life of a board was not more 
than 5 or 6 years. At the end of that time the board would be 
so out-of-date that competition or a proper regard for service 
or for operating expenses would usually compel its replacement 
by a more modern one. That time ended in manual practice 
with the perfection and introduction of the common-battery 
multiple board. No radical improvements have since been 
made. Automatic switchboards have also reached a some- 
what similar plane of development. For illustration, in the 
Fall River system installed in 1901, a subscriber makes a call 
by means of a dial, and secures service very similar to that in the 
most modern plant. Looking at the automatic switchboard 
itself, we find the so-called grouping system, the automatic 
selection of trunks, push-button ringing, and other essential 
features of the latest equipment. It is true that great im- 
provements have been made in automatic equipment in very 
recent years, such as the introduction of common-battery ser- 
vice, party lines, line or individual switches, improved methods 
of manufacture, installation, etc., but these are all points which 
appeal to the manufacturer or to the operating company, while 
improvements in the general appearance of the telephones are 
about the only ones made in the last 7 or 8 years which are 
of much interest to the telephone users. Therefore, consider- 


522 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


ing service only, and viewing the matter from the standpoint of 
the telephone subscriber, the writer believes it reasonable to 
conclude that there is little probability, in the near future, of a 
manual switchboard being rendered obsolete by a more im- 
proved manual board or of an automatic switchboard being put 
out of the arena by an automatic switchboard giving better 
service. He, therefore, has taken the life of a manual switch- 
board at the full amount that a consideration of wear and tear 
only will permit; and, in order to be perfectly conservative, has 
placed the life of an automatic board at but 2 years longer al- 
though there is no reason to suppose that it would not still 
be good for a number of years of service at the end of that time. 
The amount which must be set aside annually at 6% compound 
interest to equal 100% in 12 years is 6% of first cost. There- 
fore, this percentage is used in calculating depreciation on 
automatic central office equipment, while for manual equipment 
the depreciation charge is taken at 7.5%, which is the amount 
which must be set aside eznually at 6% compound interest 
to equal first cost in 10 years. 

Looking into the matter of maintenance material or renewals 
for automatic central office equipment, the writer has found 
from an investigation of a number of automatic plants that the 
renewals for the switchboard proper amount on the average to 
0.2% per annum on the first cost of the central office equip- 
ment. The power plant, main distributing frame, and other 
parts of the central office equipment, increase the renewals 
item, however, and in order to cover everything it has been 
taken at 0.5% for automatic offices. 

The cost of power per originating call handled is about twice 
as much for automatic switchboards as for most of the manual 
switchboards used by the ‘independent companies”. The 
amount of current consumed is almost the same, 0.006 of an 
ampere-hour. Automatic plants generally use a battery of 46 
volts, about twice the voltage of the usual manual battery, 
although in large plants where the lines are long, 40-volt batteries 
are sometimes employed in manual practice. The manual 
switchboards generally used by the Bell companies require con- 
siderably more current than those used by the independent 
companies. The amounts used by the independent boards 
have been taken in working out the curvesin this paper. Taking 
the cost of power, transformed and delivered at the switch- 
boards, at 15 cts. per kilowatt-hour gives a cost of $0.0216 per 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 523 


thousand local calls for manual offices and of $0.0432 per thous- 
and local calls for automatic offices. The additional cost per 
thousand incoming trunk calls received at a manual office would 
be $0.0144. For automatic offices the additional cost for in- 
coming trunk calls would be $0.004 per thousand, assuming 
that the number of calls trunked out from an office equals the 
number incoming. 

The cost of lighting automatic central office equipment has 
been taken at $4.00 per thousand lines per month; and for 
manual offices the cost of lighting the operators’ positions, the 
switchboard rooms, operators’ retiring rooms, terminal room, 
desks, etc., has been taken at $2.00 per switchboard position 
per month. 

The annual charges on the central office buildings have been 
taken at the same rates for the two systems; that is, insurance 
on fire-proof central office buildings has been figured at 0.5% 
per annum, interest at 6%, taxes at 1%, and depreciation and 
repairs at 2% per annum. 

In order to illustrate the effect on the annual expenses, just 
discussed at length, caused by dividing a system up so that it 
employs a number of offices instead of one, the writer has con- 
structed the curves in Fig. 13, which show what the expenses 
would be for the different numbers and sizes of offices in the 
hypothetical 10,000-line system used in Figs. 8and 9. Referring 
to curve A in Fig. 13, it will be noted that the annual cost of 
central office labor for the nine-office arrangement of the manual 
system is 80% greater than for the single office arrangement. 

It might be stated just here that the item of operators’ hire 
is one which yearly grows to greater magnitude. One very 
large telephone operating company instructs its engineers en- 
gaged in development studies to estimate on operators salaries 
being at least 15% higher 15 years hence. © 

Curve B, Fig. 13, shows that the increase in the cost of labor 
plus the annual charges on equipment and buildings, weighs 
heavily against the division of manual systems. In fact, ex- 
perience shows that where the ultimate number of subscribers 
that may be expected in an office district within fifteen years 
does not exceed the capacity of a single multiple board (about 
10,000 lines) and there is no concentrated group of subscribers 
at a considerable distance from the best location for a single 
office, it is generally found that a one office system will be the 
most economical when manual equipment is used. 


524 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE {June 29 


There are conditions under which it is profitable to divide 
manual 10,000 line plants; that is, there are conditions under 
which the saving in the annual charges on cable, wire and con- 
duit, will more than offset the increase in central office expenses, 


BESIVSUBVP ARI Bev eMeah 


NI 
IN 


N 
LN 
CLO ROREOBOR See 


aw 


ANNUAL COST PER LINE IN DOLLARS 


NumsBer AND SiZES OF OFFICES. 


Fig.NoJlS 


CuPve “A” Gives ANNUAL EXPENSE PER LINE OF AcL CENTRAL OFFICE LABOR FOR & 
10,000 LINE MANUAL SYSTEM WITH OIF FERENT NUMBERS AND SIZES OF 
OFFICES THE SAME AS USED IN FIG B, 


Curve “B’ SHows LABOR COST AS GIVEN BY LURVE “A” PLUS INTERES), TAAES, DEPRECIATION 
MAINTENANCE AND INSURANCE ON MANUAL CENTRAL OFFICE EQUIPMENT ANO ON 
CENTRAL OFFICE BUILDINGS, ALSO PLUS COST OF LIGHT/NG AND POWER, 


curve “C" SHows £oR A 10,COOLINE AUIOMATIC SYSTEM (SEE FIG 9 ? 


THE SAME ITEMS AS THOSE GIVEN IN CURVE “B" FOR A LIKE wnahuee 
SYSTEM, 


w . CAMPBELL. 


if division is not carried too far. It is, of course, necessary 
to make a thorough engineering study of each apparently suit- 
able location for a branch office, to determine whether or not 
any real economy would result; but since the annual charges on 
subscribers’ lines less than two miles long using No. 22 gauge 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 525 


cable conductors average about $2.50 per mile, it will be seen 
that the saving in length of line will be less than the correspond- 
ing increase per line per annum in central office expenses (in- 
dicated by curve ‘‘B” in Fig. 13) except where the lines are 
comparatively long. Roughly speaking, an economical ar- 
rangement of the average divided manual system will include 
offices not much less than two miles apart. 

Curve C in Fig, 13 shows that division of automatic systems 
may be profitably carried much further on account of the slow 


Cost PER LINE PER ANNUM. 


* Tnousanps OF LINES 


Fiq.No.I4 


Cunve “A” Shows cost #ER -INE PER ANNUM OF MANUAL CENTRAL OFFICE ANC ~ENTRA- OFFICE 


QUVILO.NG eapeNnses(See curve “A” Fig 12) PLUS INTEREST, DEPRECIATICN AND TAX@S OM ONE 
GELESHONE FER LING AN PLUS COST oF Geanina LINE AND TELEPHONG TROUBLE 


Curve “B” Snows cost PER LINE PER ANNUM OF Auromatic CENTRAL OFF.CE ANO CENTRAW 
OFFICE BUILDING EXPENSES AS GIVEN BY CURVE “B" FIG. IZ PLUS INTEREST OEPRECIATION, 
TAXES AND CALLING DEVICE REPAIRS ON ONE TELEPHONE PER LINE AND Pid COST OF 
CLEARING LINE AND TELEPHONE TROUBLE. 


CAMPBELL 


increase in central office expenses resulting from adding to the 
number of offices. 

The writer hopes that he will be pardoned if, before leaving 
the subject of operating expenses, he pauses to call attention to 
curves A and B, Fig. 14, which include the office expenses as 
given by curves A and B, Fig. 12, plus the annual cost per line 
of clearing line and telephone trouble, and plus the annual 
charges for interest, depreciation, and taxes on one telephone 
per line.: 


526 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


In calculating depreciation, the lire of the telephones for both 
systems has been taken to be 10 years. It might appear un- 
reasonable at first thought to believe that the more complicated 
automatic telephone has as long a life as the simpler manual 
instrument, but experience shows that the parts of a telephone 
which depreciate most rapidly are those which are handled by 
the user, knocked and rubbed against by passers-by and mis- 
chievous persons; also that the parts which must be kept highly 
finished, because they are exposed to view, are most quickly 
affected not only by human contact but by sunshine, dampness, 
etc. Consequently, since very little more of an automatic 
telephone than of a manual telephone is exposed, and since the 
calling device, which represents about 40% of the value of the 
instrument, is locked inside the case, where it is subject only to 
wear and tear of legitimate service, which it will successfully 
withstand for at least 15 years, the writer has concluded that 
automatic telephones could reasonably be considered to be 
longer lived on the average than manual telephones. He has, 
however, as already stated, placed the two on the same basis. 

The cost of material for repairs and renewals on automatic 
telephones is a little greater than forthe manual. It was found 
by a thorough investigation that the cost of new parts peculiar 
to the automatic telephones amounts to 0.14% per annum. 
This difference has, therefore, been noted in comparing main- 
tenance costs of the two systems in Fig. 14. 

The cost of labor for keeping telephones in order is included 
in the curves in Fig. 14 and for automatic telephones is also 
shown separately in Fig. 15. No insurance on the telephones 
is included. 

Returning to the subject of plant division and its results, 
there is still another point to be considered, namely, the effect 
of plant division on service. An investigation of this reveals 
what is a very serious objection to a multi-office manual system; 
because slower service, more mistakes by the operators, and, 
what is most aggravating to a telephone subscriber, more pre- 
mature disconnections during conversation, are the inevitable 
results of having connections handled by two operators instead 
ofbyone. The good will of the telephone user is something which 
cannot be lightly considered in. these days of keen telephonic 
competition. Unpopular service is not only a serious handicap 
in a contest with a rival company; but it also retards growth, 
invites higher taxes and hostile legislation, and often results 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 527, 


as 


in a general clamor for the regulation and reduction of rates. 
On the other hand, a record of giving service which meets with 
the general approval of its subscribers is an asset of inestimable 
value to any telephone operating company, and, in fact, is the 
best reason for the company’s existence. We find, therefore, 
telephone managers, who are chiefly concerned in pleasing the 
public, pretty solidly arrayed against having manual systems 
split up, except where the number of stations is so great or the 
area covered by the system so large that rates would be excessive 
if one central office only were used. In fact, “no divided 
svstems,’’ was one of the battle cries of the leaders of the inde- 


TOTAL cosT PER ANNUM IN DOLLARS 


S ' 2 3 4 Ss 6 cz 8 3 i M6 te SS 
THOUSANDS OF LINES OR PHONES IN SERVICE. 
Fig. No.5 
COST OF LABOR FOR CLEARING TROUBLE IN AND MAINTAINING FHONES 
AND OF CLEARING LINE TROUBLES: Ee. er 
os CLEARIN AUTOMATIC PHONE OvesuU > 
CoE ES ia Sd eeu ta spate atta ah eroee oF Suomen JN SERVICE, (AuTO.c.8,SYSTEM) 
‘= FOUBLE WITH RELATION TO THE 
F orm COST OF CLEARING LINE T ; 
Guess sad Sores LINES IN SERVICE. (AUTOMATIC SYSTEM) 


Cc eve CO SHows LABOR COST OF CLEARING LINE TROUBLE WITH RELATION TO tHe 
NUMBER OF PHONES IN SERVICE.(AUTOMATIC SYSTEMS) 


WL. CAMPBELL; 


pendent telephone movement which has spread over the country 
so rapidly and so widely that its present magnitude baffles con- 
ception. 

Increasing the number of offices in an automatic system does 
not appreciably affect the service. All calls are trunked any- 
how, whether one office is used or many. Therefore, splitting 
up such a system does not add to the amount of trunking or in 
any way affect the speed and uniformity of service. The sub- 
scriber is not required to change his method of calling or to 
make more turns of his dial. No more automatic switches are 
necessary and a connection does not include any more switches 


528 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


in a divided system than in a single office plant. When the 
writer states that the service of a multi-office automatic system 
is on a par with that of a single office automatic system, he be- 
lieves that he gives it the highest endorsement possible in the 
present state of the telephone art; for the companies operating 
automatic switchboards have demonstrated beyond question 
that they can give satisfactory service and furnish any special 
attention to which patrons of the girl-operated systems have 
been accustomed. Indeed, telephone users, who have had 
experience with both, almost universally prefer the automatic 
service to the manual. This fact is not only attested by all 
who have made an investigation, but has been publicly affirmed 
repeatedly in the reports of prominent public servants and engi- 
neers. For example, attention might be directed to the address 
delivered by Mr. Kempster B. Miller, before the International 
Electrical Congress at St. Louis, in 1904. 

Not only has the writer not discovered any reasons which 
weigh materially against division of automatic systems, but he 
finds that the saving in the investment in cable, wire, and con- 
duit would be even greater than in a manual system. First, 
because division may, as clearly shown, be carried much further 
without seriously affecting central office expenses, and secondly, 
because the number of trunk lines required for handling traffic 
between automatic offices is less than between similar manual 
offices. In other words, an automatic trunk will carry, on the 
average, more busy-hour calls than a manual trunk. 

Curve A, Fig. 16, shows the call-carrying capacities which 
one of the largest manual telephone companies instructs its 
engineers to use in arriving at the number of trunks needed be- 
tween proposed offices. As a rule, a manual trunk should not 
be expected to handle over 15 to 18 calls during the busy-hour 
even between rather large, well-managed offices; between small 
offices from 10 to 12 is all that can safely be depended upon. 
Reference, however, to curves A and B, Fig. 4, shows that 
between automatic offices a considerably higher trunk-carrying 
capacity is experienced. The largest number of trunks per 
group almost universally used in automatic systems is 10. 
Therefore, the curves in Fig. 4 are dotted above the line cor- 
responding to 10 circuits per group. With groups of this size 
a minimum carrying capacity of 22.5 busy-hour calls per trunk 
is secured. This is a decided increase over the carrying capacity 
of manual trunks even where the latter are installed in groups 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 529 


of the greatest efficiency; that is, groups of about 73 circuits 
each. It would rarely, if ever, be possible to obtain such a 
large group if a manual plant were so divided that all offices 
were comparatively small, but in almost any multi-office sys- 
tem the majority of the trunks between offices can readily be 
placed in small groups of 10 trunks each. Consequently, in an 


TRUNKS PER GROUP 


atlistecstusstes 
3 PEEP 


10 
Busy [Hou iis| CARRIE dr lrRun 
1 2o/s 
© 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600 
Busy HOUR CALLS CARRIED PER GROUP OF TRUNKS 


Fig.No.1I6 


Curve A SHows RELATION SETWEEN NUMBER OF FLAT RATE CALLS 
AND CIRCUITS IN THE GROUP, LOCAL B TRUNKS AVERAGE 
HOLDING TIME & MINUTES. MANVAL SYSTEM 


Curve B’ SHows RELATION BETWEEN THE NUMBER OF CIRCUITS PER GROUP, 
AND THE NUMBER OF BUSY HOUR CALLS CARRIED SER CIRCUIT 


w.l. CAMPBELL 


automatic multi-office system maximum efficiency is secured on 
nearly all of the trunks. This is illustrated by curve D, Fig. 9, 
which gives the average minimum carrying capacity per trunk 
for each of the different arrangements of the hypothetical 10,000- 
line system. The average minimum number of busy-hour calls 
carried per trunk is, according to the curve, about 20.75, and 
the lowest figure is 19.3 for the nine office arrangement. Sup- 


530 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE {June 29 


posing, for the moment, that it be practicable to use this nine- 
office arrangement in a 10,000-line manual system, the average 
number of busy-hour calls carried per trunk would be about 12. 

The small number of trunks that will carry the tratfc between 
automatic offices even in a thoroughly dividec system is illus- 
trated by curve E, Fig. 9, which shows the ratio on a percentage 
basis between the number of trunks and the number of sub- 
scribers’ lines. With the largest number of offices considered 
this percentage is but 9.3. 

One reason for the increased efficiency of automatic trunks 
is found in the shorter length of time per connection. In 
manual practice it has been found that each trunk is occupied 
on the average at least two minutes per connection, whereas 
automatic experience proves that during the busy-hour a trunk 
is not occupied over 83 seconds per average connection. A 
subscriber to automatic service answers his telephone quicker 
and generally does not hold the line so long for conversation 
as does a manual subscriber; also, the disconnection is made 
much quicker in the automatic system. This feature of the 
quicker disconnection is especially helpful during the busy hours 
when manual operators are most likely to be rushed and conse- 
quently slow about pulling down connections. The interval of 
time that elapses between release of a trunk by one automatic 
selector and seizure of it by another need be, and often is, but 
a fraction of a second. This, too, helps to increase the carrying 
capacity of the trunks. 

The writer was much interested while studying the efficiency 
of the trunks of the two systems to note the difference between 
the number of connections existing at the busiest moment of 
the day in manual and automatic offices. For example, in the 
central office of a busy manufacturing city in Ohio a count was 
taken every day for a week in January of one year to ascertain 
the maximum number of connections “‘up’”’ in the various 
operators’ positions at intervals during the busy hours of each 
day. The results for the busiest day are shown in curve A, 
Fig. 17. A few months after these observations were made the 
equipment of this office was changed to the automatic type. In 
the following January, one year after the original data were 
secured, counts were made every day for one week of the num- 
ber of connections ‘‘ up” during the busy hours in the auto- 
matic switchboard. The results for the busiest day are shown 
in curve B, Fig. 17. It will be noted that the maximum per- 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 531 


centage of connections counted at one time on the manual was 
_@ while on the automatic it was but 4.36. Similar observations 
were made on a number of automatic plants, and, as already 
stated earlier in this paper, it was found that in busy automatic 
offices of 8000 or 10,000 lines, the maximum number of con- 
nections counted at the busiest moment did not exceed 4%. In 
small offices of less than 1000 lines where erratic fluctuations 
of the traffic are more noticeable the maximum ran up to 4.7% 
in some instances. 

A still higher trunk efficiency could often be secured in auto- 
matic systems if the trunk groups could be made larger than 10 


UP" PER (90 LINES IN Service. 


0 
z 
S 
Fe 
ot) 
ws 
Zz 
Zz 
0 
0 
b 
0 
ra 
Ww 
0 
z 
3 
z 
wW 
g 
< 
v 
wi 
> 
<, 


B10 820 630 640 850 900 SIO S20 950 S40 850 10.00 10/0 10.20 
TimME oF DAY (a.m) 
Fig. No.17 
Curve A 1s For & MANUAL OFFICE OF 2000 WORKING LINES AND B09 TELEPHONES 


Ww 
Curve B \s ror THE SAME OFFICE WITH 2239 WORKING LINES AND 3II2 TELEPHONES 
ONG YEAR LATER AND AFTER AUTOMATIC EQUIPMENT HAD BEEN INSTALLED, 


lines each without impairing the speed at which idle trunks are 
selected. This is shown by the dotted portions of curves A 
and B, Fig. 4, which give the carrying capacity per group and 
per circuit for groups up to 28 circuits each. On account of 
the fact that in an automatic system where the number of offices 
is comparatively large, and each office is comparatively small, 
the trunks are generally divided into a large number of small 
groups, and it is doubtful if there would be anything gained by 
making the maximum size of a group of trunks between offices 
greater than 20 circuits. Indeed in such a system many of the 
groups would contain considerably less than 20 circuits each. 


532 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


The manufacturers of automatic apparatus have recognized 
the possibilities of larger groups and are now testing equipment 
designed to enable them to put more lines in each. Since such 
equipment has not come into general use, however, it will not 
be considered further in this paper. 

In endeavoring to form some conception of the methods used 
for introducing trunking of calls on a large scale between auto- 
matic offices, it is well to understand the difference between two 
general types of office that are being used for this purpose. 


SUBSTATION 
IOOAINES 


TELEPHONE 
e745 


TELEPHONE 
1200 LINES *\se7 
MAIN of rice £ 


A 


62) TELEPHONE 
SOOLINES Sas 
Susstation 


Fia.No.18 
Numoers in Alorrice Run rrom 1000 102199 
Numoeers in S-2orrice Run From 2300 ro 2599 
Numeers in Sl ormce Run FRom 2700 102789 


One is known as a “ sub-station:’’ or “‘ district ’’ office and the 
other as a “ branch ”’ office. The difference lies in that a sub- 
station contains line switches and connector switches but no 
apparatus for making local connections; that is, every originating 
call is trunked to a distant larger office containing the selector 
switches, whereas a branch office contains switches of all classes 
and completes within itself ail local connections demanded. It 
will readily be seen, therefore, that a sub-station requires more 
outgoing and incoming trunks than a branch office. 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHCNE 533 


For an illustration of a system using sub-stations attention is 
directed to Fig. 18, in which A represents a ‘‘ main ”’ office con- 
taining the equipment for 1200 lines. ‘‘A’”’ contains also the 
first selector and second selector switches used by two substa- 
tions S-1 and S-2. S-1is represented as containing line switches 
and connector switches for 100 lines and S-2 is supposed to 
contain line switches and connector switches for 300 lines. 

Calls would be handled as follows: suppose for example, 
a subscriber at telephone No. 2314, which is connected to sub- 
station S-2, to be calling No. 1527 connected to the main office A. 
The impulses sent over the circuit through the calling device 
of telephone No. 2314, would first operate a line switch at S-2, 
which would instantly extend the connection over an idle trunk 
to a first selector switch at A. This first selector switch would 
‘be operated by the impulses corresponding to the first digit ‘‘ 1”’ 
of the desired number, and, would extend the connection to a 
second selector, also located at A. This second selector would 
be operated by the impulses corresponding to the second digit 
5 of the desired number and would extend the circuit to a con- 
nector switch in the “‘ 1500 group” at A. This connector switch 
would be operated by the impulses corresponding to the last 
two digits 2 and 7 of the desired number and would complete 
the connection to line and telephone No. 1527. Suppose again 
No. 2314 to be calling No. 2745 connected to the other sub- 
station S-1. A line switch at S-2 would be operated first, then 
a first selector and a second selector at A. This second selector 
would extend the connection over a trunk to a connector switch 
located at S-1. This switch would be operated by the impulses 
corresponding to the last two digits of the desired number, and 
would complete the connection to line and telephone No. 2745. 

Suppose again, No. 2314 to be calling No. 2536 connected to 
the same sub-station, S-2. In this case, a line switch at S-2 
would, as before, extend the connection to a first selector switch 
at A. This switch would éxtend it to a second selector at A, 
which would extend it back over another trunk to a connector 
switch at S-2. This connector switch would complete the con- 
nection to line and telephone No. 2536. During such a con- 
versation, therefore, two trunks would be occupied between the 
sub-station and the office through which it operates. This 
indicates that a sub-station is best adapted to a district where 
there is very little local telephonic intercourse, because every 
local connection occupies two trunks without any immediate 


benefit. 


534 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


The sub-station is also especially adapted to a small isolated 


district where the experse of a constant local attendant would | 


not be warranted, and, where it is, therefore, considered ad- 
visable to install the simplest apparatus obtainable, with ar- 
rangements for supervision from the main office to which the 
sub-station trunks are connected. Under almost any con- 
ceivable condition a sub-station will require more trunks than a 
branch office, for several reasons: first, all calls must be trunked; 
secondly, there is one group of outgoing and one group of in- 
coming trunks for each 100 lines connected to the sub-station; 
thirdly, in order to provide thorough supervision from the 
main office, each outgoing trunk contains three wires instead 
of two. | 

It is, therefore, seen that in considering the advisability of 
installing a sub-station instead of a branch office, the in- 
creased expenditure for trunk installation and maintenance 
should be weighed against the saving in cost of supervision and 
attendance. 

When the proposed office is to be a small one, and the trunks 
to it are to be secured by converting the line cable at present 
- entering the new office district into a trunk cable, there is often 
no immediate advantage in economizing in the number of 
trunks. To such conditions a sub-station is well suited even if 
the trunks are long and consequently expensive. It would 
appear, however, that in the present state of the art such an 
auxiliary to a ‘‘main”’ office would rarcly be warranted if it 
contained over 500 lines. 

A sub-station may often be used to much better advantage 
as an auxiliary of a branch office; that is, a branch may be 
installed at the center of a comparatively large district so that 
all trunks going out from or coming into the district will terminate 
at the centrally located branch office, then shorter and more 
numerous trunks may be run from this office to sub-stations 
located about it. As an illustration of this plan please refer to 
Fig. 19 in which A represents an office of 5000 lines, B a branch 
office of 1500 lines, S-1 a sub-station of 100 lines, and S-2 an- 
other substation of 300 lines auxiliary to the branch office. 
Calls would be handled as follows: suppose, for example that 
a subscriber No. 8712 connected to sub-station S-2 called 
telephone No. 2134 connected to office A. As No. 8712 operated 
his calling device his line switch at S-2 would instantly operate 
and connect his telephone over an idle trunk to a first selector 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 535 


switch in branch office B. This first selector would be operated 
as the subscriber’s calling device transmitted the first digit 
(2) of the number being called, and would extend the connec- 
tion of the calling telephone over a trunk to a second selector 
switch at A office. The second digit (1) transmitted from the 
calling telephone would operate this second selector and extend 
the connection to a connector switch also located at A. This 
connector switch would be operated by the last two digits (3 
and 4) of the number called, and would complete the connection 


S000 LINE TELEPHONE 
¥ 2134 


MAIN OFFICE 


84 INCOMING TRUNKS 


f 
q 
0 
; 
: 


eo OFFICE 
-_ wus 


= S) 
iN 
TELEPHONE ey Zot * 
e712 Za ” OS 
o *NE) 
300 LINES 100 LINES 
SUBSTATION SUBSTATION 


Fia.No.!9 
Numsersin A ormce Run Rom 1000 to 5999 
Numeers in ie: orrice RUN FROM 7000 Tro 8499 
Numeers in'S-l ormce RUN FROM 8600 To 8699 
Numpers in'S-2 orrice mun FRom 8700 To 8999 


to the line and telephone No. 2134. It might be of interest to 
note in passing that the current for the transmitter of the calling 
subscriber would be furnished from the battery located at B 
and the current to the called subscriber’s transmitter from the 
battery located at A. If the call should proceed in the reverse 
direction, that is, if No. 2134 connected to A should call No. 
8712 connected to S-2, then the operation of a line switch and 
a first selector switch at A would extend the connection over a 
trunk to a second selector at B which would in turn extend 


536 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


it to a connector switch at S-2. This connector switch would 
complete the connection to line and telephone No. 8712. 

Supposing the number of calls made per line per day in this 
6900 line system to be 16, and the number of busy hour calls 
to be one-eighth of the total, and that the ‘‘ community-of- 
interest’? can in all cases be taken care of by the factor 0.75, 
then the number of incoming trunks necessary to B from A 
would be 94, and the outgoing trunks to A from B would be 95, 
a total of 189. This number is 9.9% of the total of 1900 lines 
in the branch office district. The number of pairs of wires 
necessary for incoming and outgoing trunks, supervision, fur- 
nishing ringing current, charging substation battery and all 
‘other purposes between B and S-2 would be 78; that is, 26% 
of the 300 lines connected to the sub-station, and between B 
and S-1 would be 28 pairs, which equals 28% of the number 
of subscribers’ lines connected to that substation. 

In order to demonstrate the advantage that there may be 
in making the office S-2, for example, a sub-station instead of a 
‘branch ”’ office, the writer would direct attention to Fig. 20, 
in which is represented the same system as that in Fig. 19, 
except that the office S-2 is now considered to be a branch office 
of “B’”’. S-2 would now contain first selector and second 
selector switches in addition to the line switches and connector 
switches. There would be no difference in the mode of operation 
so far as incoming calls to S-2 were concerned, but there would 
be a difference in the method for handling outgoing calls; also 
all local connections would be completed inside of the S-2 
office. The principal difference in the outgoing connections 
would be that connections from S-2 to A, instead of passing 
through switches at B would be trunked direct from the first 
selectors at S-2 to second selector switches at A. The effect 
of this would be to increase the number of groups of trunks and 
consequently the number of circuits necessary between A and 
the B districts, so that with the particular case illustrated in 
Fig. 20 the total number of trunks between A and B would be 
increased by 15, while a reduction of only 12 circuits would be 
secured between B and S-2. It is, therefore, readily seen that if 
the distance from A to B is equal to, or greater than, the distance 
from B to S-2, that the branch office scheme in Fig. 20 would 
require more trunk mileage than the sub-station scheme in 
Fig. 19. The writer believes that this fairly illustrates the ad- 
vantage that there may often be in using the sub-station as an 
auxiliary of a branch office, 


1908} CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 537 


As an illustration of how trunking of calls is done in a larger 
automatic system, Fig. 21 shows a rough skeleton of a 50,000- 
line system. This contains 5 main offices, A, B, C, D, and E, 
of which A has 8 branch offices and the other main offices each 
have 5 branch offices. Since this system has an ultimate ca- 
pacity of 100,000 lines, all numbers would have five figures, 
but, as is customary, in place of the first figure a letter is used, 
which not only makes the number easier for the subscriber to 
remember, but also designates the office to which the number 


SOOO LINES 
MAIN OFFICE 


INCOMING TRUNKS 


7 S00 LINES 100 LINES 
BRANCH OFFICE SUBSTATION 
Fia. No.20 
Numsers in A orrice RUN FROM 1000 1ToSS99 
NUMBERS IN Borrice RUN FROom 7OOO 108499 
Numeers in Sl” OFFICE RUN FROM 8S00 Tro 8689 
Numeers in S-2 of rice RUN. FROM 8700 To B89S 


belongs. It is supposed that the main office A contains equip- 
ment for 2000 lines, the numbers of which run from 1000 to 
2999: and that each of its branches contains equipment for 1000 
lines, the numbers in A-3 running from 3000-3999, in A-4 
running from 4000 to 4999, etc. Each of the other main offices 
is also supposed to contain equipment for 2000 lines, the numbers 
of which run from 1000 to 2999 in each. Of course, there is a 
letter prefix to each number corresponding to the office to which 
the number belongs. Each branch of the offices B, C, D and E 


A 


BRT oh 
— VS SK 
AT 


1908] CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 539 


ber of impulses corresponding to the No. A, his first selector 
would be operated and would pick out an idle trunk to a second 
selector in exchange A. The second set of impulses correspond- 
ing to the figure 5 sent in by the calling device would operate the 
second selector at A and extend the connection over an idle 
trunk to a third selector in the office A-5. The next set of im- 
pulses corresponding to the 1 of the desired number would 
operate a third selector at A-5, which would extend the con- 
nection to a connector switch in the proper “ 100 group” at A-5. 
This connector would be operated by the impulses corresponding 
to the last two digits of the desired number and would complete 
the connection to line and telephone A-5124. 

It may be noted that on this call the connection to A-5 passes 
through the main exchange A. This would be true of every 
call incoming into the A district; that is, all trunks incoming 
into the district would terminate in second selectors in the A 
office. These second selectors would extend each incoming 
connection to a third selector located at the A main office, or 
at the branch corresponding to the thousands digit of the par- 
ticular number being called. This concentration of the in- 
coming circuits simplifies the trunking arrangement and also 
reduces considerably the number of trunks entering the district, 
because the number of groups of incoming trunks would be nine 
times as great if each of the nine offices received its calls, coming 
from outside the district, direct instead of having them come 
through the main distributing office A. It should be noted 
on the other hand that the outgoing call from E-7 does not 
operate any switch at its main office &. It would probably be 
preferable, however, to have the trunk pass through the cross 

connecting frame at E. Ina similar manner all outgoing trunks 
from each of the branch offices of E district could be terminated 
on the distributing frame at E, and there be cross-connected to 
what might be called a “ through trunk cable” to each of the 
other main offices. If a subscriber connected to any office 
in the A district should call a number connected to an office 
in E district the incoming trunk to EF district would terminate 
in a second selector switch at main office F, and would be passed 
on by it to the desired branch office or thousand group. Tn 
the skeleton diagram no trunk cables are shown interconnecting 
the branch offices of a district; for instance, no interconnection 
is shown between E-6 and E-7. If desired such trunks could 
be put in, or the outgoing trunks from all the branch offices 


540 CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE [June 29 


of E may, as already stated, be run to the main central office 
and there be cross connected on a distributing frame. This 
would in many cases be the most economical arrangement, 
because with division carried to the extent that it is in this 
diagram the number of trunks required between E-6 and E-7 
would be comparatively small. A call from a subscriber at 
E-7 to a subscriber connected to E-6 would operate a line switch, 
first selector and second selector at E-7 and a third selector and 
connector at E-6 so that it is not necessary that the connection 
should pass through the main office £. 

If a manual system should be divided up in the manner 
shown in Fig. 21, supposing for the moment that such a division 
would be practical with equipment of that type, then the branch 
office E-7, for instance, would have 32 different groups of out- 
going trunks; that is, one group for each of the other offices in 
the system, and would have the same number of groups of in- 
coming trunks. With the automatic branch office arrange- 
ment, E-7 has but 10 groups of outgoing trunks; that is, one 
group to each of the other district main offices and one group 
to each other ‘‘ thousand section’ in use in its own £ district. 
E-7 would have but 5 groups of incoming trunks; that is, one 
group from each of the other offices in the E district. It is, seen, 
therefore, that by using the main offices at centers of com- 
paratively large districts and then surrounding each main office 
with smaller branches, all subscribers lines may be made 
very short and the use of the “through” trunks between 
the main offices for interconnecting districts makes the trunk- 
ing system comparatively simple. 

It is probably unnecessary to add that in planning such a 
system as 1s represented by Fig. 21, a careful engineering study 
should be made for each branch office to determine whether 
the trunk mileage required would make a ‘“‘ branch ”’ office or 
a ‘“‘sub-station’”’ the most economical arrangement. 

One of the peculiarities of the telephone business, especially 
when there is competition, is that an operating company is 
compelled to take on the new business offered. It must keep 
up with its rival or drop out of the race. A user of electric 
light doesn’t care how many other customers are connected to 
the same plant that he is, but a telephone user is, of course, 
very much attracted by the larger of two lists of subscribers. 
Unforttinately a one-office plant is somewhat like a water or 
gas plant, in that new customers cannot be constantly added 


1908| CAMPBELL: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE 541, 


by simply connecting their service pipes to the mains originally 
installed. Some day a point is reached when the mains are 
supplying all the flow of which they are capable and it is neces- 
sary to go back to headquarters, dig up the streets anew, and 
put in more mains or larger ones. So in a one-office telephone 
system, if the growth is more rapid than anticipated, as it often 
is, or if the growth of the city takes place in an unexpected di- 
rection, as it frequently does, it becomes necessary to remodel 
the cable and wire plant to suit the new distribution of business. 

A one-office telephone plant sometimes must be almost en- 
tirely rebuilt within a few years of its installation in order to 
adapt it to a shifting of population, or to make it adequate for 
the customers unexpectedly demanding service. 

With a multi-office automatic system this need not be done. 
If an unexpected demand for telephones develops in a certain 
section of the city, it is not necessary to put in more conduits 
and cables or to replace present cables with larger ones to take 
care of the demand, but the situation is readily and practically 
met by putting in a substation or a branch office in the con- 
gested district. The present line cables running to the district 
may be used as trunk cables to the new cffice. Thus the traffic 
carr¥ing capacity of the cable and conduit plant reaching any 
district may be greatly multiplied without any additional ex- 
penditure for cable or duct. Consequently, one of the most 
attractive features of an automatic multi-office system is that 
it affords a stable value to the investment in wire, cable, and 
conduit. 


542 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [June 29 


Discussion on ‘‘ A Stupy or MULTIOFFICE AUTOMATIC SWITCH- 
BOARD TELEPHONE SYSTEMS,” ATLANTIC City, N.J., JUNE 
29, 1908. 


A. B. Smith: For a number of years it has been my hope 
that the automatic would be able to solve the telephone prob- 
lem for large cities; that it would bring the rental a little lower 
for the benefit of the many who need the telephone but cannot 
now afford it, and that it would afford relief from the party 
line. That this can only be done by subdivision into small 
offices with short subscriber lines is acknowledged, but the 
apparently insurmountable obstacles of trunk lines and office 
expenses have stood squarely in the way. However, it may 
now safely be said that the automatic has arrived at that point 
of development where its claims merit serious consideration. 

With regard to the claimed flexibility of the system in being 
able to use subscribers’ lines for trunks, I ask if it would not 
seriously interfere with the practice of making trunk cables of 
lower resistance and electrostatic capacity than subscribers’ 
cables? It would necessitate making the whole installation of 
cables good enough for trunks, which would be very expensive. 

In a continuously growing city the telephones increase in 
number in two ways—increase of density and increase of terri- 
tory. If merely the telephone density increased, and the trans- 
mission equivalents had been properly cared for, any district 
might be converted into a branch office and old subscriber lines 
used for trunk lines with no loss. But all around the edge of 
the city the telephone exchange is expanding and the length of 
lines increasing, so that to continue indefinitely with the process 
would eventually make transmission very poor. In this respect 
the automatic offers no additional advantages except as it 
makes profitable a smaller branch office. 

In a multioffice automatic exchange the trunk repeater is 
used to relay the calls and permit each subscriber to draw talk- 
ing current from the nearest battery. This introduces added 
complications into the selecting mechanism, but as far as talking 
is concerned a little comparison will show the conditions. In 
the common battery manual trunk circuit there are two re- 
peating coils between the two subscribers, one in the cord cir- 
cuit at the A board, the other in the trunk circuit at the B 
board. 

No repeating coils are used in the automatic, their place being 
taken by the condenser-retardation coil combination so common 
in independent cord circuits. From a test which I recently 
made, the repeating coil is considerably less efficient as a trans- 
former of speech than the condenser-retardation coil combina- 
tion. Hence the insertion of the trunk repeater into the line 
will still leave the automatic with an excellent transmission cir- 
cuit. 

Where there area number of groups of trunks from one office 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 548 


district to another, as from FE to A, Fig. 21, it seems that there 
would be considerable advantage in making all the trunks more 
or less accessible to all the offices in that district. I ask Mr. 
Campbell if this can be done? If so, the number of trunks can 
a See and still have the same busy hour capacity as a 
whole. 

__ For the benefit of many who may not now take kindly to the 
idea of an all automatic plant, I ask if the line switch or some 
other device can be used on manual boards to trunk small 
groups of subscribers to the office? My idea would be to place 
such a switch at the center of the subscriber group with as many 
trunks to central as necessary. When any subscriber in the 
group takes the receiver from the hook, he is automatically 
trunked to the manual board and answered by the operator 
just as if he were on an ordinary line. It would enable the giving 
of individual line service with as few wires as would be required 
for party lines. Has this been suggested or worked out, and 
is it considered practical? 

John Wicks: This paper offers encouragement to those con- 
nected with the development of automatic telephone service. 
Few engineers have yet given the matter sufficient thought or 
study to enable them to see its possibilities. The fact that 
telephonic connections are made automatically has been viewed 
as a curiosity. That the public in large communities has made 
use of it for years, even in preference to the best manual service 
offered by competing companies, is still looked upon as in- 
credulous. Many have wondered at its rapid general adoption, 
but few have stopped to investigate the reason of its growth. It 
is therefore interesting and gratifying to learn that it has de- 
veloped along a line which makes it possible to decrease the 
great economic waste, which in the form of idle lines is to be 
found in the old-style telephone systems. 

Automatic telephone service has been tried sufficiently to 
prove itself practical. We know that the telephone-using public 
likes it. We know also that there are no mechanical or electrical 
difficulties in the art which cannot be overcome. ‘To compete 
with manually operated telephone systems, therefore, it has 
only to prove itself economically more efficient than its rival. 

In manually operated exchanges, party lines were long ago 
resorted to as a part solution of the problem involving the re- 
duction of the percentage of idle lines. So important has this 
branch of the service been considered that a prominent tele- 
phone engineer stated only a few years ago that a grave objec- 
tion to the automatic equipment was that it had no party lines. 
The manufacturers of automatic switchboards have since then 
successfully solved the party-line problem, but it is hoped that 
the introduction of multioffice automatic switchboards will 
eventually do away with a large part of party-line service with- 
out putting the rental above the reach of present party-line 
subscribers. 


544 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [June 29 


The principal reason for the moderate price of party-line 
service is the saving effected in line construction by using one 
1ine for several telephones. A similar reduction in line invest- 
ment is obtained by the use of a large number of small offices 
interconnected by trunk lines. It has the advantage of offering 
individual lines to patrons who can now afford only party lines. 

A plan has been proposed and is now about to be tested in an 
eastern city which, if successful, will enable a telephone com- 
pany to offer a still cheaper direct line service. This new ser- 
vice might be termed ‘limited trunk’’ service, because the 
scheme is to limit the number of trunks to the main office from 
the district station to which the limited trunk subscribers are 
connected. For example, if 100 telephones, instead of being 
connected to the main central office by 30 or 40 party lines, 
should be connected individually to a 100-line switch unit in a 
district station, this district station may then be connected to 
the main central office by a number of trunks less than that neces- 
sary for furnishing each telephone a trunk line whenever de- 
manded. For instance, the number of incoming and the num- 
ber of outgoing trunks connected to the line switch unit might 
each be limited to five, thus making a total of 10 trunks instead 
of 30 or 40 party lines. It can readily be arranged so that any 
party attempting to call when all of the trunks outgoing from 
the district station are busy, will receive either the ordinary 
busy signal, or preferably a peculiar signal, which willinform him 
that all trunks are occupied for the moment and that he should 
call again in a few minutes. It often happens that one sub- 
scriber keeps a party line busy for an unnecessarily long period 
to the inconvenience of others on the line, but it would be im- 
possible for any one or two inconsiderate subscribers to occupy 
all of the trunks from a district station. Another marked 
virtue of this limited trunk service is that communication would 
be absolutely private, thus eliminating one of the most objec- 
tionable features of party-line service. 

There may be questions raised as to the advisability of having 
a small sub-station with its apparently complex line switches 
and connectors without an attendant, but experience has proved 
that even the operation of large switchboards contained in 
one room is done to a large extent through supervising signals. 
If a line becomes grounded or open, or if something goes wrong 
with the switching mechanism, attention is called to the matter 
by means of a signal, which may as readily be made to appear 
in another office miles away. Should the trouble be in the 
subscriber’s line or instrument, no other part of the sub-station 
is affected, whereas a trouble in a party line will frequently 
throw all the instruments connected to that line out of service, 
Any part of the switching mechanism going wrong will affect 
only the trunk connected to that particular switch, and that 
can be made “‘ busy ”’ from the main exchange until it is con- 
venient to repair it, 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 545 


Apparently, rural or extremely isolated subscribers would 
still have to be furnished party-line service, but it would appear 
that multioffice and limited trunk multioffice service might be 
used both to the advantage of the telephone company and its 
patrons to dispense with the majority of the party lines. 

The possibilities of limited trunk service will be still further 
enchanced, especially for residence districts, when the manu- 
facturers of automatic equipment put apparatus upon the mar- 
ket that will make two-way trunks practical. It will then be 
unnecessary to have one group of trunks for handling out- 
going calls and another group for incoming calls, but each trunk 
will be available for a call going in either direction. Itisa well- 
known fact that the maximum flow of traffic from the residence 
districts to the business district of a city does not occur at the 
same time as the maximum flow in the opposite direction. 
Consequently, if the trunks could be used in either direction a 
less number would be needed. Two-way trunk equipment is 
possible, in fact has been tried experimentally a number of 
times during recent years. It is my belief that it will eventually 
be made a commercial success. 

E. A. Mellinger: Practically the only argument which can 
at the present day be consistently advanced against the auto- 
matic system is the first cost of the apparatus, which, asindicated 
in Fig. 5, is considerably greater for a single automatic exchange 
than for a single manual exchange, except in cases of very large 
switchboards. In some instances this is a factor of more immed- 
iate importance in deciding what equipment shall be installed 
than is the comparative cost of operation and maintenance. 

Mr. Campbell demonstrates the entire practicability of sub- 
dividing the automatic exchange to an extent not economically 
possible in manually operated switchboards. It is probable 
that, even with a comparatively limited subdivision, from 50% 
to 75% of the cable required for a single exchange can be elimi- 
nated. In comparison with the economy thus effected the ad- 
ditional first cost of the automatic switchboard is of small im- 
portance. 

Since the cost of maintenance and operation of an automatic 
exchange is almost inappreciably increased by subdividing it 
into branches of 1000 lines or more, and since, obviously, the 
service is unaffected by such subdivision, the only items to be 
considered are the slightly increased cost of apparatus and 
buildings. With reference to the cost of apparatus, there can 
be no doubt but that there will be some increase with subdivision, 
owing principally to the present necessity for separate battery- 
supplying units; but in many instances there would be an actual 
saving in the cost of building, on account of the comparatively 
low value of building locations required for the branch offices. 
The central exchange is usually located of necessity in the heart 
of the business district where land values are at the highest, 
and any reduction in space required here would much more than 


546 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [June 29 


compensate for a corresponding increase in branch office space. 
It is probable also that less expensive building construction 
could be employed in branch offices than in central exchanges. 

For the small sub-station serving an outlying district it is 
customary to rent space in some office or store building, or to 
erect a small building for housing the apparatus; but in an ex- 
clusive residence district it is sometimes difficult to obtain space 
in a suitable location. In at least one instance this difficulty 
has been successfully met by placing the sub-station under 
ground in a moisture-proof cement vault, similar to those used 
for housing batteries in railway signal work. The most logical 
location for a sub-station is usually at the manhole where the 
cable distribution for the district begins, and since no serious 
objection has been encountered in the installation and opera- 
tion of the underground sub-station, there appears to be no 
reason why the manhole itself cannot be constructed to ac- 
commodate the switching apparatus, thus eliminating the 
necessity for building space. 

The vault, or monolith as it is called, to which reference is 
made, was constructed complete in one piece before being lowered 
into place. It is elliptical, its dimensions being 4 ft. 10 in. by 
7 ft. 8 in. by 6 ft. high, and accommodates a 100-line unit to- 
gether with protector and distributing rack, batteries, etc. The 
average manhole is almost as large. 

Carefully kept thermometer and barometer records indicate 
a practically constant temperature of 70 degrees fahr. and an 
almost complete absence of moisture, except as the presence of 
the troubleman or others in the vault for half an hour or more 
changes the normal atmospheric conditions. After such visits 
the vault is quickly dried by lighting an incandescent lamp for 
a short time. A small ventilating fan would doubtless prevent 
any moisture precipitation while the vault is open. 

Every city has one or more telephone districts so far removed 
from the telephonic center that the installation of the sub- 
station is an economic necessity, particularly since the tele- 
phones in these districts usually yield smaller rentals than those 
centrally located. Such districts are being satisfactorily served 
by trunking stations of from one to five hundred lines in a num- 
ber of automatic exchanges in various cities, but the limit of 
practical distribution appears by no means to have been reached. 
It is more than probable that in the not very distant future 
every large office or apartment building will have its sub-station 
trunking to the nearest branch exchange, even though the 
distance be only a few blocks, and that these trunking stations 
will in most cases be a part of the underground system. 

From the underground sub-station to the underground branch 
exchange is not a long step, and although the branch office is 
usually of such size as to require the constant presence of one 
or more attendants, the necessity for artificial light and ventila- 
tion is hardly to be counted as a serious objection, The economy 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 547 


which could be effected in the business center of large cities by 
such an arrangement is apparent. 

Morgan Brooks: Mr. Campbell’s paper speaks of the economic 
waste represented by 90% of the wire plant being idle even in the 
busiest hours. Imagine, if you please, a much smaller waste, 
such as 50%, and it is evident that the busy signal would be 
received from half the calls. Good service demands a minimum 
of busy signals, and necessitates economic waste. The author 
has shown that the quickness of disconnection characteristic 
of the automatic system helps the service, especially with trunk 
lines, although it evidently increases the percentage of non-use. 
It is only in private branch exchanges that good service may be 
coupled with a reasonably large load-factor of subscribers’ lines. 

L. E. Hurtz: A word or two about these sub-stations. Mr. 
Campbell speaks from the manufacturer’s point of view; I speak 
from the operator’s point of view. A very large advantage in 
the use of these sub-stations over the ordinary type of equip- 
‘ment is the fact that the exchange can be divided into units 
as small as one hundred lines. When considering the cable 
distribution of a telephone plant, the reasons that make it neces- 
sary to subdivide very large districts into several smaller ones 
are well understood. The question then arises as to the proper 
time to stop sub-dividing. In manual practice, on account of 
the cost of buildings and equipment and in order that satis- 
factory and economical service can be given, these branch ex- 
changes vary in size from 1,000 to 10,000 lines, according to the 
density of the telephone development in that vicinity. With 
the use of low-priced buildings and low labor costs it is practical 
with these automatic switching units to reduce the size of these 
branch exchanges to one or several hundred lines, which increases 
the savings due to sub-division to a corresponding extent. 

In our experience of a year and a half, during which time we 
have had two sub-stations in operation, we find we can give 
high grade service with but little additional labor. It is an 
easy matter to realize what vast savings can be made in the 
cable plant by use of this system. The saving in investment and 
maintenance cost and interest cost must be equated against the 
additional labor; if the additional labor item is low enough 
there isa big saving. This system is being tried in several places. 
Our experience with it leads me to believe that it is thoroughly 
practical and will work out as well as indicated by Mr. Campbell. 

I am convinced that one of the greatest developments made 
in telephony in recent years is the production of this switch unit. 
It is possible now to put in sub-stations as small as one hundred 
lines, locating them at isolated points, and at the same time not 
increase the operative and maintenance expenses to any con- 
siderable extent. : 

Samuel G. McMeen (by letter): The economic waste of which 
Mr. Campbell treats has been recognized for many years, and 
efforts have been made to reduce it in manually operated sys- 


548 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [June 29 


tems. In most of the cases the effort has been successful. The 
method of waste-reduction by automatic apparatus, as treated by 
Mr. Campbell, is the most important recent attack, and is one 
from which a very large amount of new knowledge may be ex- 
pected to be drawn. ‘ 

The broad idea of dividing a telephone exchange wire-plant 
into two general parts, and then using one part at a high effi- 
ciency and the other at a low, isnot new. It has been proposed 
again and again, and has been developed for various forms of 
apparatus and various arrangements of wire-plant. The 
planetary system of operating manual equipment was such an 
effort, proposed eight or ten years ago by Mr. Angus S. Hibbard. 
In that system all calls needed to be trunked from a small local 
office, in which they were first received, to a central switching 
office, even though they might need to be trunked right back 
again to the small first office to find the sought lines. 

The telephone requirements of the business area of every city 
are served very largely by private-branch exchanges, privately 
operated. About two-thirds of the traffic originating in them 
requires to be trunked to a main exchange operated by the 
telephone company. If these private exchanges were to trunk 
all their originated business, even at the cost of receiving again 
all local calls, such a plan would be a manual counterpart of the 
waste-saving system Mr. Campbell describes. As it is, the plan 
is a real counterpart so far as concerns the traffic for which, 
mainly, a private branch exchange exists, and the object is 
the same—to save wire-plant at a cost for apparatus and at- 
tendance. 

A proof of the widespread wish to make such a wire-plant 
saving is to be seen in the long effort to produce a selective and 
secret party-line equipment. It is possible to-day to have and 
use such a party-line system, but at best the privileges of the 
line are divided among the subscribers upon it. None has 
the same good condition as the subscriber on a single pair of 
wires, all his own. In either manual or automatic practice, the 
amount of central office equipment is controlled by the traffic, 
which party-lines do not reduce, unless by discouragement caused 
by poorer service. All that a party-line can do, at best, is to 
save something of the annual cost of its line, and unless this 
line be longer than a certain minimum, nothing at all is gained, 
and always something in quality of service is lost. 

A condition not brought out by Mr. Campbell may well be con- 
sidered asnext in importance to the savings he treats of. I refer to 
the saving possible in the character of lines, as distinguished from 
their extent. The subdivision of the plant, so as to have many 
and short subscribers’ lines, connecting over long and few trunk 
lines, enables the kind of circuits of both sets of lines to be re- 
viewed with great gain. What I mean is this: the facts which 
govern the choice of circuit elements for subscribers’ lines are 
much dependent upon distance, The conductivity of the sub- 


HIT 
A 
AAR 


A 
e= 


Sage Fe Re Sees 
sn rotevhipe ator bra — Trot aigne 8 UA 30 E80 Sy 
gavad ou 


meta = 
Hees 

Ea ee 

Et 


er eiaeeereeee 
oe Pete ee 
ke | 


ieeeae : 
fg BS PG Sew Ae cae ea Bs 
fal a 


a 


Pay: fats] 
a Oe 


i 
a 


eee fae 
Eugaien. 
me a 
ae 
a ie 
a 
He 
oa 
Ex 


a 


Boers rae 


1908] 
Saaneeea! 
Bane ae 


ie te 
ae ae 


EAA 


ey 
eu 
amt 


‘ 


“ nhs a at a eeeus 
Trt Bigeuan oy tee 


Sa 
VE SYSTEMS {June 29 i 


i 


oe 


Aaa gue 
| 


ie 
PAAR 
it sd Nt { 


SEAT 
v 
Ase 
4 
= 
H 
a 


Hi 
ea : ie 


S 


TCP 


1908] - DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 549 


scriber’s loop governs the amount of current deliverable to his 
transmitter from a fixed-voltage central source. The capacity 
of the loop governs both transmitting and receiving. For a 
set standard of either, it is possible to distribute the lines of a 
subscriber’s district, if that district be small, through cables of 
much smaller wires squeezed into a much smaller bundle and 
covered by a much smaller lead sheath, than if the district be a 
large one and the average lines be long. As the transmitter 
current problem is a direct-current distributing one, the analogy 
is that of large and small districts in direct-current power dis- 
tribution, with the further advantages that the telephone prob- 
lem involves great numbers of circuits, in each of which a small 
saving can be made. 

For example, most subscribers’ lines in multioffice manual 
practice require cable circuits of No. 22 B. & S. gauge wires, 
having a mutual capacity of not over 0.06 mf. per mile and a 
resistance per mile of loop of about 190 ohms. Assume that a 
_ system satisfies working conditions with such cables when the 
longer lines of a district have a length of somewhat under two 
miles and a loop resistance of, say, 350 ohms. If it were recast 
so as to be served by more centres, with maximum lines in each 
of a half-mile, a cable formed of No. 28 B. & S. gauge wires, 
pressed so tightly together as to have a mutual capacity of 0.22 
m.f. per mile, should give similar results. Equally, wires of 
other metals than copper may be used, with a gain in certainty 
of jointing and terminating, and the reduced sheath diameter 
is accompanied by a reduction in its thickness. 

The foregoing presumes that each small district contains its 
own source of current, so that the calling and the called sub- 
scriber each receives transmitter current over the minimum 
length of line. Experience with operating conditions shows this 
to be a preferred arrangement,.for reasons other than trans- 
mitter supply; and the increased efficiency of transmission in 
private branch exchanges having localized current sources for 
trunked connections emphasizes the point. 

Mr. Campbell’s observation of the shorter holding of the line 
in an automatic system seems to be generally noted. It is a 
psychological matter more likely to be discovered than predicted. 
The same is true of quicker answering and less waiting for answer 
after actual ringing has been done. These differences in the 
actual performance of the two systems need to be considered in 
any study involving comparisons. The longer time of zmnztzal 
holding of interoffice trunks seems also to be overbalanced by 
the speed of disconnection in the automatic apparatus, and to 
this must be added a consideration of the slowing down of dis- 
connecting efficiency on the part of the manual B operator during 
the rush period. 

No casual study of large city work fails to show the beginner 
the influence of sub-division of districts on the amount of trunk- 
ing. The percentage of calls trunked out of the New York 


550 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [June 29 


Cortlandt Street subscribers’ board in 1896 was 75; in 1902 it 
was 90 or more, and to-day, under accepted manual practice 
for such surroundings, it is 100; that is, it is not worth while to 
complete any call directly in a manual multiple of lines when 
so few as a tenth of them can be so completed. Mr. Campbell’s 
point of trunking all calls in an automatic system is of equal 
force in view of that tendency in manual practice, and of the 
present trend of thought in partly automatic manual systems. 

A feature on which more might have been said is the possible 
danger of excessive changing of subscribers’ numbers. It must 
be admitted that anything which endangers a _ subscriber’s 
privilege to keep the same telephone number through a term of 
years is a bad thing. In a one-office exchange that danger is 
least, and under ideal conditions may be nothing, for the main 
distributing frame in that one office enables the central office 
equipment to follow up his line, into whatever quarter of town 
he may move. But in a multioffice system, it is a penalty upon 
the subscriber that he must change his number when he moves 
from district to district. The more districts there are, the 
worse it isfor him. But it is further a hardship that in cases of 
relief of congested regions, as suggested toward the close of the 
paper, a subscriber may awake to find his number changed over- 
night, through no fault of his own. Certain care in districting 
regions, and certain stubbornness in following the resulting 
plan,-will prevent a large part of the changes required by future 
splitting of original sub-office districts. It is strongly to be 
recommended that this forecasting be done, for the number- 
changing evil is one in which party-line and sub-office systems 
are alike. 

W. Lee Campbell (by letter): Professor Smith asks if it is 
possible to make all of the trunks from E office to A office in 
Fig. 21 accessible to all of the subscribers. It is possible, in 
fact, equipment of the necessary type has already been installed 
for trial and is operating satisfactorily. 

He also asks if line switch sub-stations could not be used with 
manual telephones in connection with a manually operated 
central office. I would reply that they could be, and probably 
will be. 

Concerning the plan for relieving a congested district by con- 
verting the line cable into a trunk cable, I wish to say that this 
would often improve transmission from the original telephones, 
because it would bring the battery closer to the transmitters 
drawing current from it. 

This feature might even permit the district to be enlarged; 
that is, new patrons farther away might be added and their 
transmission be equal to that afforded the original subscribers, 
before the new local office was installed. 

I think that in economically designed plants the conductors 
of the trunk cables are not made heavier than the lines, unless 
the distances are so great that heavier wire is necessary to keep 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 551 


the transmission up to standard. In other words, the sub- 
scribers in the district reached by such a cable would have to be 
served by heavier conductors if no branch office were installed 
in that district. I see no reason, therefore, why adding to the 
number of offices should increase the amount of large conductor 
cable used for trunks; it appears to me that it would tend to 
decrease the amount. 


A paper presented at the 25th annual convene 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Atlantic City, N.J., June 29, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A. I.E. BE. 


WIRELESS TELEPHONY 


BY R. A. FESSENDEN 


SYNOPSIS 
A. Preface. 
B. Brief history of the development of wireless signaling. 
1. Introduction. 5 


2. Period 1838-1897. Origin and development of old 
or damped wave-coherer method. 
3. 1898. Return to first principles and foundation, on 
lines antithetical to old, of new or sustained oscilla- 
tion-non-microphonic receiver method. 


During the course of this work, now extending over twelve years, 
since 1906, I have naturally incurred indebtedness on all hands. Amongst 
others to whom my thanks are due are: Professor Kintner. for much 
valuable assistance in the experimental work; Mr. Brashear, for his 
kindness in making up a number of special pieces of optical and other 
apparatus for use in the work; Mr. H. W. Fisher, and to Professor 
Frost, for the loan of electrical apparatus. For the development of 
the high-frequency alternator, I have to thank Messrs. Steinmetz, 
Haskins, Alexanderson, Reist, Geisenhoner and Dempster, and Mr. Guy. 
For much valuable assistance in the construction of my transatlantic 
apparatus, I am obliged to Mr. Green. Especially am I indebted to the 
gentlemen who have acted as my assistants during the progress of the 
work, especially Mr. Stein and Mr. Mansbendel and Mr. Bennet, 
Mr. Davis, Mr. Hill, Mr. Kroeger, Mr. Boyle and Mr. Bryant, and to 
our shop superintendent, Mr. Williams. 

In order to avoid repetition, patents covering inventions made and 
developed by the writer without assistance or coéperation are referred 
to by the patent number and date only. Where there has been co- 
operation on the part of an assistant the patent has been taken out and 
referred to under the joint names of the codperators. All inventions 
made or developed by assistants are taken out and referred to by the 


assistant’s name, 
553 


554 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


4. Fundamental differences between the old and new 

wireless schools. 

5. Period 1898-1902. 

(a) Development and perfecting of sustained oscilla- 
tion-non-microphonic receiver method. 

(b) Further development of damped wave-coherer 
method. 

6. Period 1902-1908. General abandonment of old 
method and adoption of new method. Later developments. 
. Theory of wireless telephony. 

. History of development of wireless telephony. 

. Methods and apparatus. 

Operation. 

Possibilities. 

How wireless development has been prevented by govern- 
mental action. 

. Considerations. . 

. Appendix. 


HOsso OS 


rH 


A. PREFACE 
The discussion of the theory, practical operation, and possi- 
bilities of wireless telephony is facilitated by first briefly con- 
sidering the history of the development of wireless signaling 
generally. 


B. Brier History oF THE DEVELOPMENT OF WIRELESS SIG- 
NALING 


1. Introduction. In preparing this note it has been considered 
best, for the sake of accuracy, to refer to published results, such 
as scientific articles or theses or patent specifications. For the 
sake of brevity, references to work done in repetition of pre- 
viously published work has as a rule been omitted. So far as 
possible, the expression of personal opinion has been avoided 
in this section of the paper, the object being to gather together 
in concise form the facts known in regard to the development 
of the art. With the exception of Munk’s original paper, which 
could not be obtained, all references have been verified by con- 
sulting the original publications, a work of some labor, and if 
any omissions or mistakes have been made data for their cor- 
rection will be much appreciated. 

2. Period 1838-1897. Origin and Development of Old or 
Damped Wave-coherer Method, Joseph Henry, to whose work 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 555 


the development of wire telegraphy owes so much, was the first 
(1838-1842) to produce high frequency electrical oscillations, 
and to point out and experimentally demonstrate the fact 
that the discharge of a condenser is under certain conditions 
oscillatory, or, as he puts it, consists “ of a principal discharge 
in one direction and then several reflex actions backward and 
forward, each more feeble than the preceding until equilibrium 
is attained ’’.! 

This view was also later adopted by Helmholz? but the mathe- 
matical demonstration of the fact was first given by Lord Kelvin 
in his paper on ‘‘ Transient Electric Currents ”’.? 

In 1870 Van Bezold discovered and experimentally demon- 
strated the fact that the advancing and reflected oscillations 
produced in conductors by a condenser discharge gave. rise to 
interference phenomena.‘ 

Professors Elihu Thomson and LI. J. Houston in 1876 made 
a number of experiments and observations on high frequency 
oscillatory discharges.® 

In 1883 Professor Fitzgerald suggested at a British Associa- 
tion meeting® that electromagnetic waves could be generated by 
the discharge of a condenser, but the suggestion was not followed 
up, possibly because no means was known for detecting the 
waves. 

Hertz’ discovered a method of detecting such waves by means 
of a minute spark-gap and before March 30, 1888, had concluded 
his remarkable series of researches in which for the first time 
electromagnetic waves were actually produced by a spark-gap 
and radiating conductor and received and detected at a distance 
by a tuned receiving circuit. 

Hertz changed the frequency of his radiated waves by altering 
the inductance or capacity of his radiating conductor or antenna, 
and reflected and focused the electromagnetic waves, thus 
demonstrating the correctness of Maxwell’s electromagnetic 
theory of light. 

1. Scientific Writings of Joseph*Henry, Smithsonian Institution. 


2. Helmholz ‘“‘ Erhaltung der Kraft’’, Berlin, 1847. 
3. Kelvin, Philosophical Magazine, June, 1853. 


4. Van Bezold, Poggendorff’s Annalen, 140, p. 541. 

5. Journal Franklin Institute, April 1876. 

6. Fitzgerald ‘Ona method of producing Electromagnetic Disturbances 
of comparatively short wave lengths”. Report of British Association, 


1883. 
7, Hertz ‘‘ Electric Waves ” 


556 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


Lodge later in the same year read a paper on the “‘ Protection 
of Buildings from Lightning ’’', before the Society of Arts, in 
which he described a number of interesting experiments on 
oscillatory discharges. 

Great interest was excited by the experiments of Hertz, 
primarily on account of their immense scientific importance. 
It was not long, however, before several eminent scientists 
perceived that the property possessed by the Hertz waves of 
passing through fog and material obstacles made them par- 
ticularly suitable for use for electric signaling. 

Professor Elihu Thomson in a lecture delivered at Lynn, Mass., 
on ‘‘ Alternating Currents and Electric Waves’’, in 1889, sug- 
gested this use. 

Sir William Crookes in the Fortnightly Review for February, 
1892, discussed the matter in some detail. I quote his state- 
ment in full as it shows what a clear conception he had of the 
possibilities and obstacles to be overcome: 


Here is unfolded to us a new and astonishing world, one which it is 
hard to conceive should contain no possibilities of transmitting and re- 
ceiving intelligence. 

Rays of light will not pierce through a wall, nor, as we know only too 
well, through a London fog. But the electrical vibrations of a yard or 
more in wave length of which I have spoken will easily pierce such medium, 
which to them will be transparent. Here, then, is revealed the be- 
wildering possibility of telegraphy without wires, posts, cables, or any 
of our present costly appliances. Granted a few reasonable postulates, 
the whole thing comes well within the realms of possible fulfilment. At 
the present time experimentalists are able to generate electrical waves 
of any desired wave-length from a few feet upwards, and to keep up a 
succession of such waves radiating into space in all directions. It is 
possible, too, with some of these rays, if not with all, to refract them 
through suitably shaped bodies acting as lenses, and so direct a sheaf of 
rays in any given direction; enormous lens-shaped misses of pitch and 
similar bodies have been used for this purpose. Also an experimentalist 
at a distance can receive some, if not all, of these rays on a properly con- 
stituted instrument, and by concerted signals messages in the Morse code 
can thus pass from one operator to another What, therefore, remains 
to be discovered is—firstly, simpler and more certain means of generating 
electrical rays of any desired wave-length, from the shortest, say of a few 
feet in length, which will easily pass through buildings and fogs, to those 
long waves whose lengths are measured by tens, hundreds, and thousands 
of miles; secondly, more delicate receivers, which will respond to wave- 
lengths between certain defined limits and be silent to all others; thirdly, 
means of darting the sheaf of rays in any desired direction, whether by 
lenses or reflectors, by the help of which the sensitiveness of the receiver 


ils Lodge Society of Arts, 1888. 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 557 


(apparently the most difficult of the problems to be solved) would not 
need to be so delicate as when the rays to be picked up are simply radia- 
ting into space in all directions, and fading away according to the law of 
inverse squares. 

I assume here that the progress of discovery would give instruments 
capable of adjustment by turning a screw or altering the length of a wire, 
so as to become receptive of wave-lengths of any preconcerted length. 
Thus, when adjusted to 50 yards, the transmitter might emit, and the 
receiver respond to, rays varying between 45 to 55 yards, and be silent 
to all others. Considering that there would be the whole range of waves 
to choose from, varying from a few feet to several thousand miles, there 
would be sufficient secrecy, for curiosity the most inveterate would surely 
recoil from the task of passing in review all the millions of possible wave- 
lengths on the remote chance of ultimately hitting on the particular 
wave-length employed by his friends whose correspondence he wished to 
tap. By “ coding ” the message even this remote chance of surreptitious 
straying could be obviated. 

This is no mere dream of a visionary philosopher. All the requisites 
needed to bring it within the grasp of daily life are well within the possi- 
bilities of discovery, and are so reasonable and so clearly in the path of 
researches which are now being actively prosecuted in every capital of 
Europe that we may any day expect to hear that they have emerged 
from the realms of speculation into those of sober fact. Even now, in- 
deed, telegraphing without wires is possible within a restricted radius of 
a few hundred yards, and some years ago I assisted at experiments where 
messages were transmitted from one part of a house to another without 
an intervening wire by almost the identical means here described. 


The statement in the last paragraph of the quotation refers 
to the work of Professor David E. Hughes.’ 

Professor Dolbear also suggested the same thing in an article 
in Donahoc’s Magazine, March, 1893. 

‘In fact the idea of using Hertzian waves for wireless teleg- 
raphy seems to have been quite widespread in the years im- 
mediately following Hertz’s publications. 

Fairly efficient means of generating electromagnetic waves of 
any desired length had been made known by Hertz. Vertical 
antennas connected with the ground had been previously used 
for sending and receiving by Dolbear in 1882 in connection 
with his system for telegraphing by electrostatic induction’ and 
also later by Edison and others. 

Hertz’s receiver, the minute spark-gap, was not suited for 
wireless telegraphy and before any telegraphic work could be 
done a suitable receiver had to be found. 


1. For Report of this work see Electrician, May 5, 1899. 
2, Dolbear U. S. patent 350,299, March 24, 1882. 


558 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


The fact that tubes containing conducting powders had their 
resistance altered by the discharge of a Leyden jar and that 
the original resistance could be restored by tapping the tube 
was first noted by Munk in 1835.! 

In 1890 Branly showed that such a tube would respond to 
sparks produced at a distance from it.? 

In 1892, at the meeting of the British Association at Edin- 
burgh, Professor George Forbes suggested that such a tube 
would respond to Hertzian waves. 

In 1893 Professor Minchen demonstrated experimentally 
that such powders would respond to electromagnetic waves 
generated at a distance. He used a battery and galvanometer 
shunted around the powder to detect the effect of the waves. 

Sir Oliver J. Lodge on June 1, 1894, delivered a lecture before 
the Royal Institution.‘ In this remarkable lecture Lodge de- 
scribed among other things the following: 

1. The filings coherer. 

2. The filings coherer in hydrogen under reduced pressure 
(this in a note added July, 1894). 

3. The automatic tapper back for the coherer. 

4. The metallic reflector for focusing the waves. 

5. The connection of the coherer to a grounded conductor; 
i.e., a gas pipe system. 

6. The method of making the coherer so connected respond 
by setting up oscillations in a separate grounded system, 
i.e., a hot-water pipe system, in another part of the 
building. 

7. The method of detecting distant thunder storms by con- 
necting the coherer to a grounded gas pipe system. 

In this lecture Professor Lodge stated that in his estimate 
the apparatus used would respond to signals at a distance of 
half a mile. 

Early in 1895 Professor Popoff> of Cronstadt, Russia, con- 
structed a very sensitive filings coherer, one form of which was 
used in some surveying experiments by the Russian govern- 


1. See Guthe “ Coherer action’ Transactions of the International 
Electrical Congress, St. Louis, 1904, page 242. Munck. Poggendorff Ann. 
1838, Vol. 43, p. 193. 

2. Branley, Comtes Rendues, 1890, page 785, and 1891, page 90. 

3. Minchen, Proceedings Physical Society, London 1898, page 455. 

4. Sir O. J. Lodge, ‘‘ The Work of Hertz”, Proceedings Royal Institu- 
tion, June 1, 1904, Vol. 14, page 321. 

5. Journal Russian Physico-Chemical Society, Voi.27. April 25,1895, 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 559 


ment.’ consisting of iron filings suspended by a magnet and 
resting upon a metallic plate or cup. Other forms consisted of 
filings in glass tubes with platinum electrodes. He used early in 
1895, the automatic tapping back mechanism, and substituted for 
the galvanometer an ordinary telegraphic relay. He operated 
this apparatus at-a distance by means of a large Hertzian 
radiator. One terminal of his coherer was connected to a con- 
ductor fastened to a mast about 30 ft. high on the top of the 
Institute building and the other terminal of the coherer was 
grounded. 

At the conclusion of his paper, which is dated December, 
1895, Popoff made the following statement ‘‘In conclusion I 
can express the hope that my apparatus, with further improve- 
ments of same, may be adapted to the transmission of signals 
at a distance by the aid of quick electric vibrations, as soon as 
the source of such vibrations, possessing sufficient energy, will 
be found.” 

Among other experimenters who were working on this sub- 
ject at the same time may be mentioned Captain Jackson of 
the British Navy, and Mr. A. C. Brown. 

Marconi, on June 2, 1896, filed a provisional specification? 
showing two forms of apparatus, one similar to Lodge’s 1894 
apparatus using ungrounded aerials for both sending and re- 
ceiving and the other for use ‘‘ when transmitting through the 
eatth or water’ substantially identical with Lodge’s 1894 
and Popoff’s 1895 apparatus, with tapper back etc., and the 
receiving antenna only being grounded. 

Soon after, in July 1896, Marconi arrived in England and 
made a number of experiments for the English Post Office at 
Salisbury Plain and elsewhere, using ungrounded aerials and 
parabolic reflectors and succeeded in reaching nearly two miles. 

On March 2, 1897, Marconi filed the complete specification 
in which was included a statement that the transmitting antenna 
also could be grounded. 

Lodge filed a provisional specification* showing radiating 
spheres but no antenna on May 10, 1897. The complete specifi- 
cation filed on Feb. 5, 1898, shows as one form both antenne 


1. A. S. Popoff, ‘‘ Apparatus for detection and registration of electrical 
vibrations”, Journal Russian Physico-Chemical Society, Vol. 28, Dec, 
1895. 

2. Marconi, Great Britain patent, 12,039, 1896. 

3. Lodge, Great Britain, patent, 11,575, 1897, 


560 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


grounded and also the use of an inductance wound in the form 
of a coil for the purpose of diminishing the rate of damping 
of the waves. 

So far as is known little work was done in America during this 
period. The writer made some experiments in 1896 and in 
conjunction with two of his students, Messrs. Bennett and 
Bradshaw, did considerable work on receivers of various type 
in the fall of 1896 and spring of 1897, the results of which 
were incorporated in a thesis.! 

3. 1898. Return to First Principles and Foundation, on lines 
Antithetical to Old, of New or Sustained Oscillation non-microphonic 
Receiver Method. Up to the year 1898, as may be seen from the 
above, the development of wireless telegraphy had proceeded 
along a single line. In that year, however, an entirely new 
method of wireless telegraphy was developed, characterized by 
a return to first principles, the abandonment of the previously 
used methods and by the introduction of methods in almost every 
respect their exact antitheses. 

While the coherer is of more or less interest theoretically it 
is not adapted for use for telegraphic purposes. Responding as 
it does to voltage rises above a certain limit it does not dis- 
criminate between impulses of different characters, and is there- 
fore peculiarly susceptible to interfering signals and atmospheric 
disturbances, and the operation of coherer systems cannot be 
guaranteed during the summer months or in the tropics. 
Roughly speaking a coherer acts by starting an are and making 
a short-circuit on the line every time a signal is received, which 
short-circuit persists until it is broken by a blow from an ad- 
ditional mechanism, and such a method of operation is obvi- 
ously far from practical. In addition it is practically im- 
possible to obtain sharp tuning in a local circuit containing a 
coherer; its action is always more or less erratic, its electrostatic 
capacity variable, and it is insensitive. 

At the sending end the energy which can be liberated by the 
discharge of an antenna is limited and in the form used prior 
to 1897 the dampening is so great that there are only a few 
oscillations per spark. 

Lodge’ by placing a coil of large inductance in the antenna 
throttled down the amount of energy radiated per oscillation 
and so obtained with the same limited amount of energy derived 
from the charged antenna, an increase in the time of damping. 


1. Western University of Pennsylvania, May, 1897. 
2. Lodge, Great Britian, patent 11,575, 1897. 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 561 


Braun! patented the method of using a local oscillatory circuit 
connected to an antenna, the local oscillatory circuit having a 
much longer period than the natural period of the antenna and 
of a different order of magnitude. Such a system, however, 
does not radiate energy appreciably, and produces a damped 
wave. 

This dampening and the limited amount of energy obtainable 
by charging and discharging the antenna operates to prevent 
sharp tuning and working over long distances. 

The coherer is well adapted for working with damped waves, 
but the coherer-damped wave method can never be developed 
into a practical telegraph system. It is a question whether the 
invention of the coherer has not been on the whole a misfortune 
as tending to lead the development of the art astray into im- 
- practicable and futile lines and thereby retarding the develop- 
ment of a really practical system. 

The fact that no coherer-damped wave system could ever be 
developed into a practically operative telegraph system, and 
the fact that 1t was necessary to return to first principles and 
initiate a new line of development along engineering rather 
than laboratory lines was perceived in America in 1898? and a 
new method was advised which may be called the Sustained 
Oscillation-non-microphonic Receiver method as opposed to the 
Damped Oscillation-coherer method previously used. 

4. Fundamental Differences between the Old and New Wireless 
Schools. The differences between the two methods are shown 
in tabulated form: 


Damped Oscillation-coherer Sustained Oscillation-non-micropho- 
Method nic Method. 
Al: Damped oscillations are pro- Al: Sustained oscillations are pro- 
duced at the sending end. duced at the sending end. 
2: The energy transmitted is ob- 2: The energy transmitted is de- 
tained by charging the antenna rived from a local source and 
and discharging it. fed into the antenna. 


8: A spark gap is used for pro- 3: An arc or high frequency 


ducing the oscillations. dynamo is generally used for 
producing the oscillations. 


1. Braun, German patent 11,578, Oct. 14, 1898. 
2. Electrical World, July 29, Aug. 12, Sept. 16, 1899 and Proceedings 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, Nov. 1899, p. 635 and Nov, 


20, 1906, p. 731. 


562 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


B1: Imperfect ormicrophoniccon- B1: Non-microphonic contact re- 
tact receivers are used. ceivers are used. 


bo 
to 


The action of the receiver de- The receiver response is deter- 
pends upon the voltage rise mined by the integral amount 
and is independent of the of energy received. 

amount of energy received. 


3: An open tuned circuit is used 3: A closed tuned circuit is used 
for receiving. for receiving. 


4: The receiving circuit is tuned 4: The receiving circuit may be 
to the wave frequency only. tuned to a group frequency as 
well as to the wave frequency. 


Cl: Intransmitting messages the Cl: The waves are preferably gen- 


production of the electromag- erated continuously and the 

netic waves is intermittent. transmission accomplished by 
changing the character of the 
wave. 


to 


2: The wave energy flux is inter- The wave energy flux is con- 


mittent. stant. 

3: A high voltage is used. 3: A low voltage is used. 

4: Comparatively short wave 4: Comparatively long wave 
lengths are used. lengths are used. 


iS 


5: The signals consist of dots and The signals may consist of dots 
dashes, whose interpretation only, whose interpretation de- 
is fixed. pends on the station sending 

and receiving. 


D1: Antenne are used adapted, Dl: The antenne are preferably 


roughly speaking, to utilize arranged so as to utilize the 
the electrostatic component of other component of the electro- 
the electromagnetic waves. magnetic waves instead of the 


electrostatic component. 


The history of these two antithetical lines of development 
will be treated of separately. 

5. Period 1898-1902 A. Development. and Perjecting of Sus- 
tained Oscillation-non-microphonic Receiver Method (a) The cur- 
rent-operated receiver. The first essential for the development 
of the system was, of course, a quantitatively responsive re- 
ceiver. Several forms of this were tried including the mod- 
ification of the Boys’ radio-micrometer (consisting of a light 
thermo couple suspended in the field of a permanent magnet 


1908} FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 563 


and heated by radiation from a wire which in turn was heated 
by the current to be detected) described by the writer at the 
Columbus meeting of the American Association in 1897.1. This 
was abandoned in favor of Professor Elihu Thomson's alter- 
nating-current galvanometer’ suitably modified for telegraphic 
work.? 

Among other forms of current-operated receiver may be men- 
tioned the following. 

The Hot-wire Barretter,* consisting of a minute platinum wire 
a few hundred thousandths of an inch in diameter and approxi- 
mately a hundredth of an inchin length. The term “ barretter ”’ 
was coined for this device for the reason that it differs essen- 
tially from the bolometer of Langley in that it is arranged to be 
affected by external sources of radiant heat as little as possible 
_ instead of as much as possible, and, to have an extremely small 
specific heat, an object not sought in the case of the bolometer. 

The Liquid Barretter’ in which the change of resistance is 
effected by heating a liquid, the concentration of path being 
obtained by means of a fine platinum wire point. Some question 
has been raised as to the theory of operation of this device but 
I think there is no question but that the effect is due to heat, 
though what per cent. of the effect is due to change in ohmic 
conductivity by heat and what per cent. is due to depolarization 
by heat is still, as originally stated by the writer,® uncertain. 
The facts that the device operates practically equally well 
irrespective of which terminal is connected to the local battery, 
and that the effect varies as the square of the alternating cur- 
rent (as a heat operated device should do) instead of directly 
with the alternating current as a rectifier would do, and that 
depolarization is produced by the heat, have been confirmed by 
Dr. L. W. Austin.’ The writer has experimentally determined 
the fact that though the electrical impulses may have a duration 
of less than a millionth part of a second the change in resistance 
persists for approximately the ten thousandth part of a second, 
which would seem to show conclusively that the action is not a 
direct effect of the waves. 


1. Electrician, June 24, 1904. 

2. Elihu Thomson, U. S. patent 363,185, Jan. 26, 1887. 
3. U. S. patents 706,736 and 706,737, Dec. 15, 1899. 
4. U.S. patent 706,744, June 6, 1902. 
5. U.S. patent 727,331, April 9, 1903. 

6. Ibid. 

7. Austin, Bulletin of the Bureau of Standards, Vol. 2 No. 2. 


564 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY June 29 

The term electrolytic receiver has sometimes been applied to 
the liquid barretter. This is objectionable, as there are a num- 
ber of electrolytic receivers. For example, the Neughschwender- 
Schaefer! receiver, in which a number of microscopic filaments 
are produced between two terminals by electrolysis, which fila- 
ments are ruptured by the wave produced oscillations, thus in- 
creasing the resistance; also the liquid coherer of Captain Ferrie, 
described by him as follows: 

The same effect of self-decohering coherence has been determined for 
a contact of a metallic wire and a liquid conductor, acidulated water, 
contained in a glass tube of small diameter, and placed under the same 
conditions as the preceding. Always, the sensitiveness of this contact 
is very notably inferior to that obtained in the experiments disclosed 
above. The maximum sensitiveness was obtained when the resistance 
of the imperfect contact was about 2000 ohms and when the extremity 
of the metal wire scarcely grazed the meniscus of the liquid. The re- 
sults obtained were better with a copper wire, attacked by the acidulated 
water, than with a platinum wire. 


which probably acts through a chemical effect producing a thin 
film of gas and has never come into use, doubtless because, as 
Captain Ferrie points out, it is even less sensitive than the 
Marconi coherer. Also the rectifier of Pupin® in which the ter- 
minals are placed so closely together that practically no energy 
is absorbed in the receiver, in order that the rectified energy 
may be utilized outside in the external circuit, in opposition to 
the liquid barretter, where the position of the terminals is such 
that all the received wave energy is absorbed in the barretter 
for the purpose of producing a secondary effect, and so influencing 
the current in a shunted local circuit. 

(b) Methods of Obtaining Sustained Oscillations. 1. Spark- 
gap and Local Oscillatory or “ tank” Circuit. Professor Elihu 
Thomson discovered that by using a transformer without an 
iron core (the well known Elihu Thomson air-core transformer, 
later used by Tesla and others), and a spark-gap and con- 
denser in the primary circuit and with the secondary circuit 
suitably tuned great resonant rises of potential could be obtained. 
In 1892 he constructed such a transformer giving discharges 64 
inches long.* 

The same method was later used by Tesla® in his experimental 

1. Neughschwender German Patent 107843, Dec. 13, 1898, and Schaefer 
British Patent 6002, 1899. 

2. Blondel, L’Eclairage Electrique, Sept. 29, 1900. 

3. Pupin, U. S. Patent 713,044, January 4, 1898. 


4. Electrical World, Feb. 20 and 27, 1892. 
5. U.S. patent 645,516, Sept. 2, 1897. 


1908} FESSENDEN: WIRLLESS TELEPHONY 565 


researches and in his attempt to carry out Loomis’! method 
of transmitting a current through a hypothetical conducting 
stratum in the upper regions of the atmosphere. 

The device, suitably modified for wireless telegraphic pur- 
poses, so as to give instead of a continuously cumulative rise of 
potential an initial rise of potential followed by a gradual feeding 
in of the energy from the local circuit to supply the energy lost 
from radiation, was made use of in 1898 for the purpose of pro- 
ducing prolonged trains of sustained waves. 

Various types of coanection between the antenna and the 
local oscillatory circuit were tested but it was found that the 
most efficient results were obtained by connecting the local 
circuit directly across the spark-gap.? 

The results of some comparative tests are here given. The 
figures in the column ‘‘ A”’ are for the local circuit connected 
directly to the terminals of the spark-gap, those in column ‘“‘ B ”’ 
are for an auto-transformer, those in column ‘‘C”’ for a loose 
coupled primary and secondary. 


A B Cc 
Frequency ........212;000 212,000 212,000 
Tank capacity..... 0,072 m.f. 0.072 mf. 0.072 m.f. 
Kilowatt output dy- 
MMATIEG ro eevee nsec 30 30 30 
shane currenite 55.0. 400 amperes 370 amperes 300 amperes 
Antenna current... 48.5 46. 48. 


The large station at Brant Rock is operated with the local 
circuit directly connected across the spark-gap, partly because 
the efficiency is somewhat greater, but also on account of the 
great simplification of connections and the fact that the degree 
of sustainment of the wave train may be adjusted very simply, 
if desired, by sliding the lower terminal of the antenna along a 
few inches of the lead of the local oscillatory circuit. 

Cooper Hewitt? in 1902 used a modification of his mercury 
lamp to obtain intermittent discharges each followed by a 
train of high frequency oscillations. 

2. Arc methods. The worker with high frequency oscillatory 
currents will soon discover that we are indebted to the genius 
of Professor Elihu Thomson for practically ewery device of any 
importance in this art. 

1. Loomis,-“U. S. patent, 129,971, July 30, 1872. 


2. U. S. patents 706,735 and 706,736, Dec. 15, 1899. 
3. Cooper Hewitt, U. S. patent 780,999, April 25, 1902. 


566 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


The method of producing high frequency oscillations from 
an arc and continuous current was discovered by him in 1892.1 
Fig. 1, taken from his patent, shows the general form of his 
arrangement. If the directions given in the specification are 
followed no difficulty will be met with in obtaining frequencies 
as high as 50,000 per second. 

Between 1900 and 1902 some experiments were carried out 
with the Elihu Thomson arc as a source of high frequency 
oscillations for wireless telegraphy and telephony. 


Fig.1 


Some difficulties were found, for example the arc could not be 
started and stopped as quickly as was necessary for telegraphic 
purposes and the intensity of the oscillations and their frequency 
varied considerably. These were overcome by making some 
minor improvements, for example the difficulty in sending was 
overcome by permitting the arc to run continuously and using 
the key to change the electrical constants of the circuits.2 The 
difficulty in keeping the intensity and frequency constant was 
aceite wet Aad LR ERS SOE SAS 


1. Elihu Thomson U. 5S. patent 500,630, July 18, 1892. 
2. U. 8. patents 706,742, July 6, 1902, 706,747, Sept. 28, 1901, 727,330, 
March 21, 1903, 730,753, April 9, 1903. oar * 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 567 


Overcome by substituting resistance for a portion of the in- 
ductance, and also by using the arc under pressure. ! 

Tests made by Dr. Austin? show that with this method fre- 
quencies as high as 3,000,000 per second and efficiencies as 
high as 60% can be obtained together with an absolutely steady3 
generation of the high frequency currents and an absence of 
harmonic frequencies. 

3. High frequency alternator. The first high frequency alter- 
nator was built by Professor Elihu Thomson in 1889, And it4 
was while experimenting with it in 1900 that Dr. Tatum made 
his very interesting discovery that high frequency currents of 
large amperage could be passed through the body without 
injury. 


Hinesec 


From 1898 to 1900 numerous experiments were made on 
antenne of large capacity and it was found that instead of using 
sheets of solid metal or wire netting, single wires could be placed 
at a considerable fraction of the wave-length apart and yet give 
practically the same capacity effect as if the space between 
them were filled with solid conductors. 

From other investigations on the variation of radiation with 


1. Ibid and U. S. patent 706,741. 

2. Austin, Bulletin of the Bureau of Standards, Vol. 3, No. 2. 

3. Austin assumed from the figure he obtained for the dampening, 
that the oscillations were not continuous; but the method used for 
determining the dampening is not applicable to this case, and a com- 
parison of the currents and voltages with the frequencies given in Austin’s 
experiments, shows that these oscillations must have been continuous. 

4. Thomson, Elec.Engineer, July 30,1890 and London Elec,,Sept,12,1890. 

5, Thomson, Elec. Engineer, March 11, 1891. 


568 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


frequency the result was arrived at that it should be possible 
to construct an alternating-current dynamo of sufficiently high 
frequency and output to give ample radiation for wireless 
telegraphic purposes." 

In 1900 a large American electrical manufacturing com- 
pany kindly consented to take up the construction of such a 
dynamo. Asapreliminary, a dynamo of 1 kw. output and 10,000 
cycles (shown in Fig. 2) was built in 1902. By the summer of 1906 
many of the difficulties had been overcome and a machine giving 
50,000 cycles was installed at the Brant Rock station. Various 
improvements were made by the writer’s assistants, and in the 
fall of 1906 the dynamo was working regularly at 75,000 cycles, 
with an output of half a kilowatt and was being used for tele- 
phoning to Plymouth, a distance of approximately 11 miles. 
In the following year machines were constructed having a fre- 
quency of 100,000 cycles per second and outputs of 1 and 2 
kilowatts. 

The credit for the development of this machine is due to 
Messrs. Steinmetz, Haskins, Alexanderson, Dempster, and Geisen- 
honer and also to the writer’s assistants, Messrs. Stein and 
Mansbendel. 

(c) Closed tuned circuits. In 1898 the open tuned circuits 
originally used were discarded for closed tuned circuits? and 
it was discovered that valuable selective effects could be ob- 
tained by placing the condenser in shunt to the inductance 
instead of in series with it.3 

(d) Combination of wave and group tuning. The fact that if 
selectivity is obtained solely by tuning to wave frequencies, 
the number of stations is limited, was appreciated at an early 
date. In 1900‘ a new method was developed, the stations being 
tuned both to the wave frequency and to an independent or 
group frequency, so that stations might obtain selectivity by 
varying either the wave or the group frequency and thus have 
at their disposal a virtually unlimited number of combinations 
and be practically free from atmospheric disturbances. Fig. 3 
shows a type of group tuner. 

(6) Further development of damped wave-coherer method. 
Marconi by 1898 had carried the development of the filings 
coherer to its maximum point. 

1. U. S. patent 706,737, May 29, 1901. 


2. U.S. patents 706,735 and 706,736, Dec. 15, 1899. 
3. Ibid. 


4. U.S. patents 727,325, June 2, 1900, and 727,330 March 21, 1903. 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 569 


Lodge in 1897! had disclosed the open secondary circuit for 
receiving. 

Marconi in 1898? greatly improved this by adjusting the length 
of the secondary so as to tune it, and by the aid of this im- 
provement was enabled to telegraph a distance of 35 miles? in 
October, 1899. 

Lodge in 1902‘ invented what is perhaps the most perfect 
form of coherer, consisting of a thin steel disc dipping in oil 


Fic. 3. 


covered mercury and automatically decohered by being kept in 


continuous rotation. 
A number of self-restoring coherers of which the Brown’ 


. Lodge, Great Britain patent, 11,575, May 10, 1897. 
. Marconi, Great Britain patent, 12,326, June 1, 1898. 
. Official report U. S. Navy of test U. S. S. Massachusetts, Oct. 1899. 
. Lodge, Muirhead and Robinson, Great Britain patent, 13,521, June 
14, 1902. 

5. Brown and Neilson, Great Britain patent, 28,955, Dec. 17, 1896. 


Bwhd es 


570 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


carbon coherer may be taken as a type, including the mercury 
carbon coherer of Solari, came into more or less extended use, 
and also modifications of the imperfect contact receiver of 
Neugschwender.! 

The small progress made along these lines is to be explained 
by the fact that the damped wave-coherer system is essentially 
and fundamentally incapable of development into a practical 
system. 

Period 1902-1908—Later Developments. Progress in Europe 
since 1902 has been marked by the gradual abandonment of the 
elements of the damped wave-coherer system and the substi- 
tution of elements of the sustained wave non-microphonic con- 
tact type. 

In 1900? Marconi substituted for the plain aerial an aerial 
with the writer’s tuned local circuit or tank circuit for sending, 
thus obtaining a considerable increase in range of transmission. 

In 1902, Marconi invented a very ingenious form of current 
operated receiver, called the magnetic detector*, and with this 
combination achieved some very remarkable results. 

In 1905 Professor Fleming‘ invented a very efficient detector 
based on the ‘“‘ Edison effect’ in incandescent lamps, and the 
observations of Elster and Geitel® on the rectifying effect of such 
an arrangement on Hertzian oscillations. 

Virtually nothing was done in Europe in the way of producing 
sustained oscillations by the arc or hich frequency method until 
recently, possibly because of Duddell’s erroneous statement® 
to the effect that frequencies much above 10,000 could not be 
obtained by the Elihu Thomson arc method, and Fleming’s 
statement’ that an abrupt impulse was necessary and that high 
frequency currents, even if of sufficient frequency, could not 
produce radiation. 

In 1903 Poulsen* invented an interesting modification of the 
Elihu Thomson arc, which consists in forming the are in hydro- 


1. A. Neugschwender, Wied. Ann, der Physik, 1899, vol. 67, p.-430. 
- Schafer, British patent, 6,002, 1899. 

2. Marconi, Great Britain, patent, 7,777, Apr. 26, 1900. 

3. Marconi, Great Britain, patent, 10,245, 1902. 

4, Fleming, Proceedings Royal Society London, 1905, Vol. 74. 

5. Elster and Geitel, Wied. Ann der Physic, Vol. 52, page 433. 

6. Duddell, The Electrician, 1903, Vol. LI, page 902. 
7 
ol 
8 


. Fleming, Proceedings of the International Congress, St. Louis, 1904, 
. 3, page 603. 
. Poulsen U, S. patent 789,449, June 19, 1908, 


V 


— ss 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 571 


gen instead of in air or compressed gas as previously done. This 
modification is not, however, so efficient as the older methods and 
gives oscillations varying in amplitude and intensity and ac- 
companied by strong harmonics,! but I have considered it worth 
mentioning on account of the amount of interest it appears to 
have excited in Europe. 

Some very important and interesting papers on electrical 
oscillations were published during these years by Oberbeck,? 
Wien,? Drude,’ and Bjerknes.® 


iG. Ae 


In America the development of the sustained oscillation non- 
microphonic system has proceeded steadily and it may now 
be said to have reached the stage of commercial practicability. 
On account of the amount of work which has been done it is 
impossible to refer to more than a few of the recent advances. 


. Austin, Bulletin of the Bureau of Staudards, Vol. 3 No. 2. 

_ Oberbeck Wied. Ann. der Physik, Vol. 55, 1895. 

. Wied Ann. der Physik Vol. 8, 1902. 

_ Drude Ann. der Physik, Vol. 13, 1904. 

. Bjerknes, Ann. der Physik, Vol. 44, 1891, and Vol. 47, 1892. 


ar WW rH 


572 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


The following are some of the later types of detectors: 

The frictional receiver,! in which the waves produce a change 
of friction between two moving surfaces and so cause an indica- 
tion. 

The heterodyne receiver,’ in which a local field of force actuated 
by a continuous source of high frequency oscillations interacts 
with a field produced by the received oscillations and creates 
beats of an audible frequency. 

The so called thermoelectric receivers of Austin,’ Pickard‘ and 
Dunwoody.*® 

The ‘‘ audion”’ of deForest,® a very interesting and sensitive 


Fic. 5. 


device, which though superficially resembling Professor Fleming’s 
rectifier appears to act on an entirely different principle. 

The Cooper Hewitt mercury receiver, about which little is known 
but which appears to be very sensitive. 

The following are some of the later methods of producing sus- 
tained oscillations: 


. U.S. application, 251,538, March 22, 1905. 

. U.S. application, 271,539, June 28, 1905. 

. Austin, U. S. application, 319,241, May 29, 1906. 
. Pickard, U. S. application, 342,465, Nov. 8, 1906. 
. Dunwoody, patent, 837,616, March 23, 1906. 

. deForest, U. S, patent, 836,070, Jan. 18, 1906, 


Ooarwhde 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 573 


The substitution of a number of arcs in series having terminals 
of large heat capacity in place of the single arc in the arc method.! © 

The use of regulating or “ fly-wheel””’ circuits in connection with 
the arc method.? 

The method of producing oscillations shown in Fig. 4 by 
using two arcs and throwing the discharge from one side to 
the other alternately at a frequency regulated by the constants 
of the electric circuit.’ 

The condenser dynamo‘ which consists of two radially slotted 
discs separated by a mica diaphragm, charged by a continuous 
current source of potential, and rotating in opposite directions. 

Two-phase high frequency dynamo method.’ 

Commutator method. In this method the high frequency is 
produced by means of a ball rotating at high speed on the interior 

surface of acommutator. Shown in Fig. 5. 


Fic. 6. 


The helium arc method’ in which the arc is produced in helium 
or argon or similar gases. 

The critical pressure method® in which the electrodes extend 
within a certain critical distance, depending upon the pressure 
used, so that the discharge always passes at the same voltage 
irrespective of the distance between the electrodes. 


. U. S. application, 291,737, Dec. 14, 1905. 
Ibid. 


U. S. application, 291,739, Dec. 14, 1905. 
U.S. patent, 793,649, March 30, 1905. 
U. S. application, 316,521, May 12, 1906. 
U. S. application, 351,560, Jan. 7, 1907. 
U. S. application, 355,787, Feb. 4, 1907, 


ONOAR ONS 


574 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


Methods of Signaling. Continuous production of waves but 
‘changing constants of sending circuit.' 

The inverted method of sending and the method of signaling 
by sending dots, the interpretation of which is determined by 
similar commutators at the sending and receiving stations. 

Duplex and Multiplex Methods. A considerable number of these 
have been worked out, mostly operating either by balance 
methods? or commutators.’ It is impossible to discuss all the 
various improvements, such for example as the method of in- 
dicating the busy and free state of a station, the methods of 
sending and receiving in one direction, the various types of 
aerials used for receiving the other components of the electro- 
magnetic waves besides the electrostatic component, etc. 


Fie. 7s 


Fig. 6 shows the harmonic interrupter for determining the 
variation of intensity with change of note. 

Fig. 7 shows a type of receiver described in U. S. Patent 
706,747, in which the telephone diaphram is formed of thin 
copper and repelled by a fixed coil having a resistance of about 
16 ohms. The principle of this receiver was discovered by 
Professor Elihu Thomson. It has been used for wireless tele- 
phony for a distance of 11 miles with fairly satisfactory results. 

Fig. 8 shows a transformer used in the transmitting circuit. 
The number of primary and secondary turns can be altered 
continuously, and also the degree of coupling. The wire is 


1. U.S. patents 706,747, Sept. 28, 1901; 706,742, June 6, 1902; 727,747, 
March 21, 1903. 

2. U.S. application, 366,528, April 5, 1907. 

3. U.S. patent, 793,652, April 6, 1905. 


~—s  S h , 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 575 


wound off from an insulating cylinder onto a cylinder of copper, 
and the cylinder of copper, forming a closed circuit secondary 
of the transformer, annuls the inductance of that portion of 
the wire wound upon the copper cylinder. 

Fig. 9 shows an apparatus for determining the best shape of 
coil for use with the heterodyne receiver. 

Fig. 10 shows a group-tuned call;.that is, a vibration galvano- 
meter which operates a selenium cell and rings a bell when a 
call is received. 


C. THEORY OF WIRELESS TELEPHONY 
For wireless telephony three things are necessary: 


Fic. 8. 


1. Means for radiating a stream of electrical waves sufficiently 
continuous to transmit the upper harmonics on which the 
quality of the talking depends. 

2. Means for modulating this stream of waves in accordance 
with the sound waves. 

3. A continuously responsive receiver giving indications pro- 
portional to the energy received, and capable of responding with 
sufficient rapidity to the speech harmonics. 

Work on the wireless telephone was commenced before a 
satisfactory means was discovered for producing sustained 
oscillations. 

To ascertain the number of sparks per second which was 
necessary to determine articulate speech, a phonograph cylinder 


576 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


was taken and grooves were cut in it longitudinally. It was 
found in this way that practical transmission could be accom- 
plished with 10,000 breaks per second. It is believed now that 
this number is unnecessarily high, possibly owing to the fact 
that it was impossible to cut the grooves on the cylinder without 
producing ridges. The lower limit may be fixed in another way. 

Electrical circuits met with in actual working have resistance, 
self inductance capacity, and leakance. Heaviside gave the 
differential equations for the pressure and current over such cir- 
cuits when alternating voltages were applied, but no method 
of solution being known the mathematical treatment of such 


Fic. 9, 


circuits was restricted to cases where one of the constants was 
neglected, until Dr. A. E. Kennelly in a masterly series of papers 
gave the complete solution. 

The results were immediately found applicable to a great 
variety of problems, such as the transmission of signals through 
cables and of telephonic speech through various types of circuits. 

In this way Dr. Kennelly’ by comparing the results obtained 
by Dr. Hammond V. Hayes? in practical telephonic transmission 


1. Kennelly, ‘‘ Distribution of Pressure and Current over Alternating 
Current Circuits’, Harvard Engineering Journal, 1906, page 43. 

2. Hayes, ‘“‘ Loaded Telephone Lines in Practice”, Transactions 
International Electrical Congress, St. Louis, Vol. 3. 


1908] 


FESSENDEN; WIRELESS TELEPHONY 


Bie. 10: 


578 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


over loaded lines with the theoretical values of the current for 
different harmonics showed that harmonics above 2,000 per 
second could be neglected for telephonic transmission. 

The writer has never succeeded in obtaining good talking with 
such a low frequency, but under favorable conditions fairly 
satisfactory speech may be obtained with 5,000 interruptions 
per second. For really good transmission, however, the radia- 
tion must be practically continuous, for if the spark frequency is 
less than 20,000 per second there is a disagreeable high pitch 
note in the telephone, not noticeable perhaps at first but apt 
to become annoying with use. The most satisfactory way is, 
of course, to use a source of sustained oscillations. 

It fortunately happens that for wireless telephonic purposes 
it is inadvisable to use a wave frequency of less than 25,000 per 
second, on account of the difficulty in radiating energy with 
low frequencies. 

The receiver must, of course, be continuously responsive. 
If, for example, it had to be tapped back in order to restore it 
to the responsive condition, speech could not be transmitted. 

It must also give indications proportional to the energy re- 
ceived or the character of the speech will be distorted. 

It must also respond with sufficient rapidity. If, for example, 
it takes a thousandth of a second to restore itself to its original 
resistance the receiver will obviously not record the higher 
harmonics. I have experimentally determined that a receiver 
which restores itself in the ten thousandth part of a second acts 
with sufficient rapidity. 


D. History OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF WIRELESS TELEPHONY 

The writer has been asked on several occasions how the wire- 
less telephone came to be invented. In November, 1899, shortly 
prior to the delivery of my previous paper,’ while experimenting 
with the receiver shown in Fig. 3 of that paper, I made some 
experiments with a Wehnelt interrupter for operating the in- 
duction coil used for sending. 

In the receiver mentioned the ring of a short-period Elihu 
Thomson oscillating current galvanometer rests on three supports, 
1.e., two pivots and a carbon block, and a telephone receiver is 

in circuit with the carbon block. A storage battery being used 
in the receiver circuit? it was noticed that when the sending key 


cae Se a ae ee See ee 
1. Transactions American Institute Electrical Engineers, Nov. 22, 1899. 
2. U.S. patent, 706.736, December 15, 1899. 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 579 


was kept down at the sending station for a long dash the peculiar 
wailing sound of the Wehnelt interrupter was reproduced with 
absolute fidelity in the receiving telephone. It at once sug- 
gested itself that by using a source with a frequency above 
audibility wireless telephony could be accomplished. 

Professor Kintner, who was at that time assisting me in these 
experiments and to whose aid their success is very largely due, 
was kind enough to make the drawings for an interrupter to 
give 10,000 breaks per second. Mr. Brashear, the celebrated 
optician kindly consented to make up the apparatus and it was 
completed in January or February, 1900. 

The experimental work was, however, delayed as the writer 
was at that time transferring his laboratory from Allegheny, 
Pa., to Rock Point, Md., and it was not until six months later 
that the stations at that point were completed and a suitable 
mast was erected for trying the apparatus. 

The first experiments were made in the fall of 1900 with the 
above mentioned apparatus which was supposed to give 10,000 
sparks per second but which probably gave less. Transmission 
over a distance of one mile was attained but the character of 
the speech was not good and it was accompanied by an ex- 
tremely loud and disagreeable noise, due to the irregularity of 
the spark. 

By the end of 1903 fairly satisfactory speech had been ob- 
tained by the arc method above referred to, but it was still 
accompanied by a disagreeable hissing noise. In 1904 and 
1905 both the arc method and another method in which the 
10,000 cycle alternator above referred to was employed, had 
been developed to such an extent that the apparatus 
could be used practically and sets were advertised and 
tendered to the U. S. Government.t The transmission was, 
however, still not absolutely perfect. 

By the fall of 1906 the high frequency alternator had been 
brought to a practical shape and was used for telephoning from 
Brant Rock to Plymouth, a distance of 11 miles, and to a small 
fishing schooner,’ this being the first instance in which wireless 
telephony was putin practical use. The transmission was perfect 


1. Letter of July 8, 1905; see The Electrician, London, Feb. 22, 1907; 
also catalogue of 1904 and subsequent. 

2. An amusing instance may be mentioned as illustrating the in- 
credulity with which the wireless telephone was received. Some of the 
local papers having published an account of the experiments with the 
schooner above referred to the following appeared under the heading 


580 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


and was admitted by telephone experts to be more distinct 
than that over wire lines, the sound of breathing and the slightest 
inflections of the voice being reproduced with the utmost fidelity. 

As it was realized that the use of the wireless telephone would 
be seriously curtailed unless it could be operated in conjunction 
with wire lines, telephone relays were invented both for the 
receiving and transmitting ends and were found to operate 
satisfactorily, speech being transmitted over a wire line to the 
station at Brant Rock, retransmitted there. wirelessly by a 
telephone relay, received wirelessly at Plymouth and there 
relayed out again on another wire line. On Dec. 11, 1906, invita- 
tions were issued to a number of scientific men to witness the 
operation of the wireless transmission in conjunction with the 
wire lines! A report of these tests appeared in tue American 
Telephone Journal of Jan. 26 and Feb. 2. 1907, ine editor being 
one of the men present. 


“ Current News and Notes’ in the columns of a prominent technical 
journal, Nov. 10, 1906. 

“ A New Fish Story.—It is stated from Massachusetts that the wire- 
less telephone has successfully entered into the deep sea fishing in- 
dustry. For the last week experiments have been conducted by the 
wireless telegraph station at Brant Rock, which is equipped with a wire- 
less telephone, with a small vessel stationed in the fleet of the South 
Shore fishermen, twelve miles out in Massachusetts Bay. Recently, 
it is asserted, the fishermen wished to learn the prices ruling in the Boston 
market. The operator on the wireless fitted boat called up Brant Rock 
and telephoned the fishermen’s request. The land operator asked Boston 
by wire and the answer was forwarded back to the fishermen. This is 
a rather fishy fish story ’’. 

The doubt expressed was, however, only natural. I remember the 
astonishment displayed by one of the company’s new operators some 
months previously on placing the receiving telephone to his head while 
the vessel was almost out of sight of land and hearing the operator at 
the land station call his name and begin to talk to him. 


ike Brant Rock, Mass., Dec. 11, 1906. 
American Telephone Journal, 100 William St., New York City. 

Dear Sirs: A limited number of invitations have been issued to 
witness the operation of the National Electric Signaling Co’s. wireless 
telephone system between Brant Rock and Plymouth, Mass., over a 
distance of between ten and eleven miles. 

The tests will be as follows: 

1. Transmission of ordinary speech, and also transmission of phono- 
graphic talking and music by wireless telephone between Brant Rock and 
Plymouth. 

2. Transmission of speech over ordinary wire line to wireless station 
at Brant Rock, relaying the speech there automatically by telephone 
relay and automatically transmitting the speech by wireless to Plymouth. 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 581 


In July 1907 the range was considerably extended and speech 
was successfully transmitted between Brant Rock and Jamaica, 
Long Island, a distance of neatly 200 miles, in daylight and 
mostly over land,’ the mast at Jamaica being approximately 
180 ft. high. 

In 1907 several European experimenters succeeded in trans- 
mitting speech wirelessly, using some of the earlier forms of 
the writer's arc method, and some months ago the vessels of 


ines We, 


our Pacific squadron were equipped with wireless telephones, 
using this arc method, by another American company. 


transmitting same at Plymouth automatically directly or by telephone 
relay over regular wire line. : 

Invitations have been issued to the following gentlemen, (here follows 
list of some of the guests, including Dr. A. E. Kennelly, Professor Elihu 
Thomson, etc., and a request to the company to send a representative). 

Yours very truly, 
National Electric Signaling Co. 


1, ‘Long Distance Wireless Telephony,” The Electrician, Oct. 4, 1907. 


582 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


E. MetHops AND APPARATUS 
1. Methods and apparatus for producing the electromagnetic 
waves. These have been already referred to. Fig. 11 shows a 
rotating spark-gap giving approximately 20,000 discharges per 


Fic. 12 


second. This was connected to a 5,000-volt source of direct 
current. The terminals are of 40% platinum-iridium. In 
operation the apparatus is arranged to charge a condenser to a 
definite potential and discharge it, 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 583 


Figs. 12 and 13 show formsof apparatus for operating the arc 
in a gas under pressure. 

The apparatus of Fig. 13 is also used for the arc in vacuum and 
the critical distance arc. 


EiGeadon 


Fig. 14 shows a multiple gap with rotating electrodes, brass, 
amalgamated zinc and graphite being used. 


Fic, 14. 


Fig. 15 shows a multiple arc gap with electrodes of different 
materials, the upper terminals being water cooled. 
Fig. 16 shows a condenser dynamo. 


o84 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


Fig. 17 shows a general view of one type of high frequency 
alternator. It is driven by a motor and a DeLaval gear. It has 
been operated at 96,000 cycles per second, but is generally run 


at 81,700. 


PIG? £0< 


Fig. 18 shows a field disc; it is 12 inches in diameter and there 
are 300 slots on it. 

Fig. 19 shows the armature and field coils. There are 600 
armature slots each containing two turns of 13 mil wire. The 


1908] FESSENDEN; WIRELESS TELEPHONY 585 


586 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


field current is 5 amperes. The resistance of the armature is 
6 ohms; it gives 160 volts and about 7 or 8 amperes. Other 
armatures have been constructed having a resistance of 4 ohms. 
For some work double armatures are used giving about 270 
volts. The output of the single armature machines at 81,700 
cycles is approximately one kilowatt. The output of the double 
armature machine is approximately 2 kilowatts. 

Other types of high frequency alternators are under construc- 
tion. One type shown in Fig. 20 is designed for use on shipboard. 
The armature disc is 6 inches in diameter and two armatures are 
used. Itis arranged to be mounted on gimbals and to be driven 
by a steam turbine connected to the steam pipe by flexible 
armored steam hose. The frequency is about 100,000 and the 
output about 3 kilowatts. 


Fic. 18 


Another type, which is at present being constructed by Mr. 
Alexanderson, to whose efforts the success of this type of gen- 
erator is largely due, is designed to have an output of 10 kilo- 
watts. Designs have been made for a generator of still larger 
size with a calculated output of 50 kilowatts and a frequency 
of 50,000. This machine is intended for transatlantic work. 

For some of these machines, instead of driving by gear or 
steam turbine, a special two-cycle motor has been devised, to 
operate at a frequency of 500 cycles per second. 

The high frequency alternator method is believed to possess 
a number of advantages over other methods, inasmuch as it is 
set in operation by merely opening a steam valve and has no 
complicated electrical apparatus or circuits of any kind. The 


1908] 


FESSENDEN: 


WIRELESS TELEPHONY 


87 


588 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY {June 29 


speed is regulated by the steam pressure, this being accomplished 
by an, electrically operated reducing valve. 

For measuring the frequency various speed indicators have 
been tried, but it has been found that the best way is to use a 
resonant circuit with an ammeter shown in Fig. 21 in it,’ this 
being an extremely sensitive means of indicating the frequency 
and in addition affording a means of automatically keeping 


the speed constant to a small fraction of apercent. The reducing 
valve is adjusted so that if left to itself the machine will run 
slightly above speed.” As soon as it reaches one-tenth of one per 
cent. higher than its designed speed the resonance begins to fall 
and a contact is opened which slightly throttles the steam. In 


1. Electrical World and Engineer, Nov. 11, 1899. 

2. Since writing the above, my attention has been calied to the fact 
that the general method of governing by resonance was invented and 
patented by Kempster R. Miller, U. S. patent 559,187, Feb. 25, 1896. 


= 
Te 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 589 


OTE ina oe ir apna, 


Fic. 20, 


Fic. 22. 


FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


this way the frequency is kept varying between the limits 
of one-tenth of one per cent. above speed and one-tenth 
of one per cent. below speed. Where the drive is electric 
instead of by turbine, a storage battery is used to drive the two- 
phase generator and even better results may be obtained as 
regards regulation than with steam. 

2. Transmitters. The types of transmitters most commonly 


Fic. 23. 


used are the carbon transmitter and static transmitter, and the 
carbon transmitter relay. 

Fig. 22 shows the standard type of carbon transmitter. 

It was found that the ordinary carbon transmitter was un- 
suited for wireless telephonic work on account of its inability 
to handle large amounts of power. A new type of transmitter 
was therefore designed which the writer has called the “ trough ”’ 


5991 


WIRELESS TELEPHONY 


FESSENDEN 


1908] 


592 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


transmitter. It consists of a soapstone annulus to which are 
clamped two plates with platinum iridium electrodes. T hrough 
a hole in the center of one plate passes a rod, attached at one 
end to a diaphragm and at the other to a platinum iridium spade. 
The two outside electrodes are water-jacketed. 

This transmitter requires no adjusting. All that is necessary 
is to place a teaspoonful of carbon granules in the central space. 
It is able to carry as much as 15 amperes continuously without 
the articulation falling off appreciably. It has the advantage 
that it never packs. The reason for this appears to be that 


Fic. 26. 


when the carbon on one side heats and expands the electrode is 
pushed over against the carbon on the other side. These trans- 
mitters have handled amounts of energy up to one-half horse 
power, and under these circumstances give remarkably clear and 
perfect articulation and may be left in circuit for hours at a time. 
Fig. 23 shows a modified form with split back. 

Fig. 24 shows a type of condenser transmitter in which the 
vibration of the diaphragm alters the electrical capacity of the 
transmitter, thus throwing the circuit in and out of tune or 
spilling more or less energy through a leakage circuit. 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 593 


Fig. 25 shows a transmitting relay for strong currents. The 
only thing noticeable about this is that the telephone magnet 
is a differential one. 

Fig. 26 shows another type of transmitting relay, for amplify- 
ing very feeble currents. It will readily be understood that 
where a person in Albany, for example, wishes to talk to another 
person on board a ship off New York, the wireless station being 
located near New York, the volume of the transmission received 
at New York will not be very strong, and while it may be possible 


aGeeG 


to transmit it without amplification, amplification is advisable. 

This receiver is a combination of the differential magnetic 
relay and the trough transmitter. An amplification of fifteen 
times can be obtained without loss of distinctness. The side 
electrodes of the trough are water-jacketed. The successful 
amplification depends upon the use of strong forces and upon 
keeping the moment of inertia of the moving parts as small as 
possible. Amplification may also be obtained by mechanical 
means but as a rule this method introduces scratching noises 
which are very objectionable even though comparatively faint. 


594 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


Other types of transmitters have also been used, such as 
liquid jet transmitters, Fig. 27 transmitters operating by clos- 
ing the air-gap in a magnetic circuit, and so changing the induc- 


tance of the oscillating circuit, etc. 


Fic. 27. - 


Fig. 28 shows a loud-speaking telephone receiver. <A small 
iron disk is placed opposite a nozzle through which air at high 


pressure is blown. As is well known, this causes the disk to 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 595 


be held close to the nozzle. The telephone magnets alter the 
position of the disk and thus produce very loud talking. 

The transmitting relays are connected in the wire line circuit 
in the same way as the regular telephone relay, except that in 
place of being inserted in the middle of the line they are placed 
in the wireless station and an artificial line is used for balancing. 
There is no difficulty met with on the wireless side of the appar- 
atus, but on the wire line side there are the well-known difficulties 


Fic. 28. 


due to unbalancing which have not yet been entirely overcome. 
For the correction of these difficulties, therefore, we must look 
to the engineers of the wire telephone companies. At present 
the difficulties are if anything less than those met with in relaying 
on wire lines alone. 

3. Transmitting circuits. Fig. 29* shows a type of arc circuit. 

Fig. 30? shows a suitable type of connection for use with a 
high frequency alternator. 


f ee 
1. U. S. patents Nos. 706,742, June 6, 1902 and 730,753, April 9, 1903. 
2. U.S. patent No. 706,742, June 6, 1902. 


596 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


Fig. 31! shows a type of circuit for use with the condenser 
transmitter. 

Fig. 32°? shows a type of circuit in which the modulation is 
accomplished by changing the inductance of one of the oscillating 
circuits. 

As a matter of fact the transmitter may be placed almost 
anywhere in the circuit between the arc or dynamo and the 
antenna, or between the arc or dynamo and ground, or in the 
transformer circuit, or in shunt to an inductance or capacity, 
the results obtained in all cases being indistinguishable. The 
sole criterion of success seems to be that the transmitter should 
be capable of handling the energy and the circuit should be 


— 


Fig. 29. ; Fig. 30. 


properly adjusted. Some success has also been attained by 
placing the transmitter in the field of the dynamo® but this 
method requires very careful designing of the field circuit. 

_ 4, Receivers. The receiver which the writer has found most 
satisfactory for general purposes is the liquid barretter. Fig. 
33 and 34 shows this receiver. It consists of a fine platinum 
wire, about a ten thousandth of an inch in diameter immersed in 
nitric acid. Tests made with this receiver show that it responds 
without apparent loss of efficiency to notes as high as 5000 per 
second. Some very careful measurements recently made by 
my assistants, Messrs. Glaubitz and Stein, give the following 
results: 


1. U.S. patent No. 706,747, Sept. 28, 1901. 
2. U.S. patent No. 706,747, Sept. 28, 1901. 
3. U. S. patent No. 793,649, March 30, 1905, 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 507° 


Voltage of high frequency circuit necessary to 
produce readable signals, Po 1U- i Vvolts: 


Ohmic resistance of receiver, 2,500 ohms. 


Value of high frequency current necessary to 
produce readable signals, 6 X 10° amperes. 


Electromagnetic wave energy required to pro- 
duce audible note for period of one second, px 104 ergs. 


The telephone used for detecting the signals had a resistance 
of approximately 1000 ohms. Some measurements were made 


LS 
ae 
i 


Fig. 31. Fig. 32. 


| 


to determine the change of current in the telephone circuit by 
using a sensitive galvanometer in series with the telephone but 
the results obtained were obviously too low, possibly on account 
of the electrostatic capacity of the turns of the galvanometer 
with respect to each other. It will be noted that the amount of 
electromagnetic wave energy necessary to produce a signal is 
considerably less than that given in a previous note.' The 
difference is possibly to be attributed to improvements in ad- 
justment and operation. 

The above measurements were taken by shunting the barretter 
across a piece of straight resistance wire in series with a hot- 
wire ammeter, to determine the voltage necessary, and by intro- 


1. Electrical World and Engineer, Oct. 31, 1908, 


598 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


Fic. 33. 


Fic. 34, 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 599 


ducing resistance in series with the barretter to determine the 
resistance of the barretter. The figures were also checked in a 
number of other ways and very concordant results were obtained, 
so that it is believed they may be relied upon. 


Pre36: Fic, 35. 


The previously mentioned thermoelectric receivers or rectifiers 
of Dr. Austin and Mr. Pickard shown in Figs. 35 and 36 
and the vacuum tube receivers of Fleming, deForest, and Cooper 
Hewitt also act very satisfactorily. The fact that the writer 


Fic. 37. 


has not been able to get as good results from them may be due 
to greater familiarity with the liquid barretter and heterodyne 


receiver. 
Figs. 37, 38, and 39 show forms of heterodyne receiver adapted 


for use for telephonic work. 


600 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


5. Receiver connections. Where the wireless telephone is 
operated by first talking into the transmitter and then throwing 
a switch and listening, the usual wireless telegraphic connections 


Fie. 38. 


are used. This has been found in practice to be very incon- 
venient, however, and several methods have therefore been de- 
vised for talking and listening simultaneously, which methods 


Fic. 39. 


can, of course, also be applied to duplex wireless telegraphy. 
Among these methods may be mentioned the commutator 
method! and the balance method.” 


1. U. S. application, 350,199, Dec. 31, 1906. 
2. U.S. application, 366,528, April 5, 1907. 


1908} FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 6O1 


The former method is fairly well known and consists in 
rapidly connecting alternately the transmitter and_ receiver. 
The balance method consists in using a phantom aerial as shown 
in Fig. 40, where P is a phantom aerial, the circuit having such 
capacity inductance and resistance as to balance the radiating 
antenna. The apparatus is shown in Fig, 41. 

- In order entirely to cut out disturbances in the receiver while 
sending, an interference preventer, 7. P., the elements of wiiich 
are shown in Figs. 42 and 43, is used in the receiving circuit. 


< 


Fic. 40, 


It may be here mentioned that balance methods work much 
better with wireless telephony and telegraphy than with line 
telephony and telegraphy, for the reason that the radiation re- 
sistance of an antenna is absolutely definite and is not affected 

‘by the weather, as are line circuits. Consequently, the balance 
can be made very sharp and once made does not need to be 
altered.' Of course, half the energy is lost but this is a matter 

1. This method may, of course, be used for duplex working in wireless 


telegraphy. As some question has been raised in regard to the capacity 
of wireless telegraph lines the writer would say that he has received 


602 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


of practically no importance, as the cutting down of the strength 
of a telephonic conversation to one-half is as a rule hardly notice- 
able, especially where there are no line noises or distortion of the 
speech through capacity effects, 

6. Recewing station relay. The receiving station relay is 
similar to the transmitting relay shown in Fig. 26. The same 


Fic. 41. 


remarks apply to its use in connection with wire lines as to the 
transmitting relay. 


messages at the rate of 250 words per minute by wireless and is now 
experimenting with apparatus designed to give 500 words per minute. 
With duplexing this gives 1,000 words per minute or 60,000 words per 
hour. The manager of one of the largest cable companies has stated 
(London Daily Mail, Sept. 24, 1907) that all the Trans-Atlantic cables 
together send 24,000 words per hour. It would appear, therefore, that 
if capacity alone be considered a single station on each side of the Atlantic 
can handle more traffic than all the present cables. It should be pointed 
out, however, that the mere ability to handle the messages is not suffi- 
cient and that unless the wireless telegraph companies obtain land facilities 
equal to those at present enjoyed by the cable companies they cannot 
handle the traffic as efficiency, 7.e., cannot deliver a message from New 
York to an individual in London and receive a reply in the same time. 
Fig. 44 shows a Wheatstone transmitter used for the test referred to. 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 603 


F. OPERATION 


As will be realized from the above, the operation of a wireless 
telephone system is very simple. The operator merely throws 
his switch to the position for telephoning and talks into an 


Fic. 42. 


ordinary transmitter and listens in an ordinary telephone re- 
ceiver. When the duplex method is used, as is always advisable, 
the conversation proceeds exactly as over an ordinary telephone 
line. Fig. 45 shows a phonograph transmitting music and speech 
wirelessly. Fig. 46 shows talking by relays from a local circuit. 


Fic. 43. 


I believe I am correct in saying that the transmission by 
wireless telephone is considerably more distinct than by wire 
line and that the fine inflections of the voice are brought out 
much better. This, I presume, is due to the fact that there is 
no electrostatic capacity to distort the speech, as in the case of 


604 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY {June 29 


wire lines, though I think the effect is also partly due to the 
absence of telephone induction coils with iron cores. Possibly 
some of the gentlemen present have witnessed the operation of 
the wireless telephone transmission between Brant Rock and 
Plymouth and between Brant Rock and Brooklyn. If so I 
think they will bear me out in saying that the transmission was 
clearer than over wire lines. 

As a rule, there is absolute silence in the wireless telephone re- 
ceiver except when talking is going on, though of course the usual 
noises may be heard if persons are walking across the room, etc. 
This makes listening in less of a strain than when talking over 
wire line. Even during severe atmospheric disturbances the 
talking is not interfered with to any noticeable extent, provided 
of course that an interference preventer is used. 


Ries 444 


A comparative test was made with talking between Brant 
Rock and Brooklyn by wireless and by wire telephony. The 
talking over the wire line was done from a long distance station 
in Brooklyn. The wireless transmission was considerably the 
better. The fact that the wire line included in its circuits a cable 
from New York to Brooklyn was of course a disadvantage, but 
even allowing for this, practice and theory appear to be in agree- 
ment to the effect that transmission by wireless telephony over 
long distances is better than by wire line. 

This method should be of especial value to independent tele- 
phone companies, which have their local exchanges, but no long 
distance lines, especially since no franchises or rights of way are 
necessary. 


1908] 


606 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


G. POSSIBILITIES 


A. Local exchanges. There is no immediate prospect that 
wireless telephony will take the place of local exchanges. The 
difficulty in regard to the number of tunes can be overcome, 
but the fact remains that high frequency oscillations cannot 
be transmitted over wire and hence each subscriber must 
have his own generating station. At the present time no 
method is known which would be practical if placed in the hands 
of a subscriber. If such means should be found it would be very 
convenient to call up directly instead of through an exchange, 
but as I see it there are no immediate prospects of this. 

B. Long-distance lines. I believe, however, that there is a 


field for wireless telephony for long distance lines. The present 
long distance lines are very expensive to construct and to main- 
tain, and a storm extending over any considerable section of 
country inflicts considerable loss on the telephone companies. 
Moreover, the distance of transmission is limited by the electro- 
static capacity of the line, as I understand it. Wireless tele- 
phony would have the following advantages. 

1. The initial cost would be very much less than that of 
wire lines. 

2. The maintenance would be practically negligible in com- 
parison. 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 607 


3. In case of any breakdown, it would be right in the station 
and not at some unknown point outside on the line. 

4. The depreciation would be comparatively small. 

5. The number of employees required would be smaller. 

6. The transmission is better, and as there is no distortion of 
the speech, the working distance is, it is believed, considerably 
greater. 

7. The flexibility is greater. With wire lines a telephone com- 
pany may not be able to give a Boston subscriber a line to New 
York, while having lines from Boston to Chicago and from 
Chicago to New York free. Operating wirelessly the wireless 
circuit normally used for operating between New York and 
Chicago and between Boston and Chicago could be used to 
operate from Boston to New York. 

8. No right of way need be purchased and franchises it is 
believed, are not necessary. 

It will be noted that I have not mentioned any disadvantages 
of wireless telephony for long distance work. I presume 
this is because I am not a telephone engineer. I hope the defects 
will be discussed by the experts who are familiar with telephone 
operation and therefore better able to point them out. Before 
leaving this part of the subject I would say that I think the 
question of interference has been worked out to such an extent 
that no serious difficulty need be feared in that direction. 

C. Transmarine Transmission. Wireless telephony is pe- 
culiarly suited for this class of work. Pupin’s ingenious and 
beautiful method has been successful at Lake Constance, Switzer- 
land, I believe, but even assuming that deep-sea cables of this 
type could be laid and operated successfully, they would never- 
theless be very much more expensive than wireless telephone 
stations. It is believed that wireless telephony will come into 
extended use for this purpose. Even without further develop- 
ment telephonic communication could be established between 
Norway or Denmark or Germany or Spain and Great Britain; 
between Sardinia and Corsica and France and Italy; between 
France and Algeria, between Australia and Tasmania and New 
Zealand: between the United States and Cuba and Porto Rico, 
etc, were it not that it is at present forbidden by law. 

As regards telephonic communication between England and 
America, my measurements show that this should be possible 
with an expenditure of approximately ten kilowatts and suitably 
large towers say 600 feet high, or with some of the new forms of 


608 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY {June 29 


antenna. Whether such a transmission would be commercially 
valuable or not is another matter. Personally I do not see that 
it would, but when I remember that at the time when the tele- 
phone was first being introduced a number of eminent business 
men decided that the house-to-house printing telegraph would 
be more of a success commercially than the telephone for the 
reason that no one would want to do business unless he were 
able to have a record of the transaction, I must admit that 
there is a possibility of my being mistaken in this. 

D. Wireless telephony from ship to ship. Were, of course, 
wireless telephony occupies a unique position. Wireless tele- 
graphy has the disadvantage that a telegraph operator must be 
carried. The additional expense is an objection in many cases. 
The proposition that the captain or mate should also be a tele- 
graph operator has not met with favor. Anybody, however, 
can operate the wireless telephone and almost every vessel 
carries an engineer capable of repairing the electrical apparatus 
in case of acciden*. The final arrangement will, I believe, (f 
we can prevent the governments from carrying out their pro- 
posed laws, forbidding wireless telephony), be this; that pas- 
senger vessels will carry a telegraph operator and use the tele- 
phoning apparatus for ordinary work and for telegraphing where 
it is desired to communicate over long distances. Other vessels 
will use the telephone alone. 

E. Wireless telephone from ship to local exchange. This also 
will, I think, have considerable value, as enabling the captain 
of a vessel to communicate, by relaying over the wire line, with 
the owner of the ship, or enabling a passenger on a vessel to 
communicate with friends on shore. 

F. Range of wireless telephony. 1. Atmospheric absorption. 
The great obstacle to long distance wireless telegraphy and 
telephony is atmospheric absorption. For short distances up 
to 100 miles in the Temperate Zone there is little difference be- 
tween the strength of the signals at one time of the day and 
another. As soon as the distance is increased much over 100 
miles for the Temperate Zones and 40 or 50 miles for the Tropics 
the signals at night are very irregular and there is great absorp- 
tion during the day time. The daylight absorption may be 
so great that less than a tenth of one per cent. of the energy 
transmitted gets through. Some nights will be as bad as 
day-time while on other nights there will be apparently no 
absorption, 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY GO9 


Fig. 47 is a curve showing the strength of the messages trans- 
mitted between Brant Rock, Mass., and Machrihanish, Scotland, 
at night, during January, 1906. Nothing at all was received 
that month during daytime. 

The change in the strength of the signals is very sudden. 
In working from Brant Rock to Porto Rico, a distance of 1700 
miles, the strength of the signals with short wave lengths would 
fall off to one one-thousandth of their former value during a 
period of less than fifteen minutes, while the sun was rising. 

Early experiments showed that the absorption was greater 
as the wave length was increased and the effect was at first 
attributed to absorption in the neighborhood of the sending 


. 


450 


cs 
i= 
<7 


ra 
a 
o 


INTENSITY OF SIGNALS 
UNITY IS JUST AUDIBLE MESSAGES, 


DAY OF MONTH 


Fic. 47.—Curve showing variation of intensity of transatlantic 
messages for the month of January, 1906 


station, and was thought to increase continuously with the wave 
length.t This fluctuating absorption at one time appeared to 
place a fundamental obstacle to commercial wireless telegraphy, 
as telegraph engineers will casily appreciate the impossibility 
of operating telegraph systems with circuits where the strength 
of the received signals may fall to one thousandth of its value 


1. A mathematical explanation of this supposed fact was given by Dr. 
Fleming ‘Principles of Electric Waves Telegraphy ” pages 617-618, 
1906, the following conclusions being reached: 

“ Accordingly, the chief part of the weakening of the wave by sunlight 
is done in the neighborhood of the sending antenna, where the magnetic 
force H is greatest, and it is more sensible for long and powerful waves 
than for short and feeble ones. This agrees with the observations. of 


Mr. Marconi ’’. 


610 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


or rise to a thousand times its value in the course of a few 
minutes. 

It was therefore considered absolutely essential, in order to 
decide whether long distance wireless telegraphy was com- 
mercially possible or not, to investigate this phenomenon fully. 
As a preliminary the station at Brant Rock sent to four or five 
other stations at varying distances and comparative readings 
were taken. The following table shows the general character 
of the results obtained: 


Strength of signals received 
on worst nights (strength of 


Station Distance unabsorbed signals being — 

: taken as 1000). 
Company’s cottage........ 200 yards : 1000 
Ley Ti Wiese Se = hebeltegeieterus cnc 30 miles _ 1000 
Schenectady zn. aeeuieier a ee) eels OU aailes 500 
Philadelphians sate O calles 300 
Washing tons. et ane ie i oe 400 miles 150 
Machrihanish............. 3000 miles 1 


These experiments proved conclusively that the absorption 
did not take place in the neighborhood of the sending station, 
because the strength of the signals received at nearby stations 
was the same during the day as during the night while there 
was great variation in the strength of signals received at sta- 
tions further away. 

It was also found that the absorption at a given instant was 
a function of the direction as well as of the distance, since on a © 
given night the signals received by stations in one direction 
would be greatly weakened, while there would be less weakening 
of the signals received by stations lying in another direction, 
while a few hours or a few minutes later the reverse would be 
the case. 

This was thought to be connected with the coming weather 
conditions but before this fact is proved a much larger amount 
of data must be collected. Through the kindness of the U. S. 
Weather Bureau I was enabled to obtain a chart of the magnetic 
variations and on comparison of these with the absorption be- 
tween the Massachusetts and Scotland stations there appeared 
to be a quite definite relation, 7.e., the greater the absorption the 
greater the magnetic variation. Here also, however, much 
more data is needed before arriving at a definite conclusion. 
The fact that the absorption did not take place in the neighbor- 
hood of the sending station having thus been definitely settled 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 611 


the next point to be investigated was whether or not there was 
any way of overcoming it. 

The fact that variations in the absorption occurred with ex- 
treme rapidity, the absorption increasing sometimes a hundred 
fold in a single minute, and at night, when the effect could not 
be due to the sun directly, seemed to indicate that the body ~ 
producing the absorption, whatever it was, was not in a state 
of continuity but was broken up into masses like clouds.! This 
also was in accerdance with some experiments made in Brazil 
in 1905. 

From optical theories it is known that where the. absorption | 
is produced by conducting masses of a more or less definite size 
the absorption is to a certain extent selective. The next point 
in the investigation was, therefore, #o determine whether there 


ABSORPTION 


200.000 100,000 
FREQUENCY 


Fig. 47 


was any possibility of this being the fact in the case of the absorp- 
tion of wireless signals. 

Comparative tests were therefore made of the absorption at 
night and during the day between Brant Rock and Washington, 
with wave lengths varying from a fraction of a mile up to four 
or five miles. It was found that the absorption did not increase 
continuously with the wave length but reached a maximum and 
then fell off with great suddenness. 

Fig. 47 shows the general character of the curve, the ordinates 
referring to the amount of the absorption and the abscissas to 


the wave frequency. 


1. Electrical Review, May 18, 1906. 


612 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


It may be noted that the absorption is a maximum at a fre- 
quency of about 200,000 per second, nine hundred and ninety 
nine thousandths (0.999) of the energy being absorbed at this 
frequency during daylight, while for a frequency of 50,000 the 
absorption does not appear to be appreciable. Longer experi- 
ments, of course, might show some absorption, but in any case 
it is of a different order from the absorption for the shorter 
wave lengths. 

Experiments were then made between Brant Rock and the 
West Indies, a distance of 1700 miles, during the spring and 
summer of 1907. It was found that the results were of the 
same character, t.e. that while there was greater absorption for 
frequencies of 200,000 there was comparatively little absorption 
for frequencies in the neighborhood of 80,000 and messages 
were successfully transmitted in daylight with this latter fre- 
quency. No messages were received in daylight with the higher 
frequency, though messages transmitted from the same station 
and with the same power and frequency were officially reported 
as having been received at Alexandria, Egypt, a distance of 
approximately 4000 miles. 

The fact that these experiments were made during summer 
weather, and the receiving station was in the Tropics, and the 
fact that the distance, 1700 miles, was practically the same as 
that between Ireland and Newfoundland definitely settled the 
question as to whether long distance wireless telegraphy was a 
commercial possibility or not and the results were therefore 
published.' 

Since the publication of the above results transmission has 
been accomplished by means of these long waves over still greater 
distances during daylight. Sig. Marconi early in October, 
1907, abandoned the short-wave lengths previously used, and 
adopted one over two units in length, and immediately succeeded 
in operating between Glace Bay, Nova Scotia, and Clifden, 
Ireland a distance of more than 2000 miles, the frequency 
being approximately 70,000. The same messages were received 
at Brant Rock, Mass., a distance of nearly 3000 miles. 

Still more recently Captain Hogg of the ‘‘ Glacier ’’ has 
written that during the southward passage of the Pacific fleet 
he received messages from the station at Brant Rock, Mass., 
while off Cape Ste. Roque, Brazil, S. A. The frequency used 
for sending was approximately 80,000, and the messages were 


1. The Electrician (London), July 26, 1907. 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 613 


received with the very interesting and sensitive silicon receiver 
invented by Mr. Pickard. This distance of 3000 miles is the 
greatest yet achieved by wireless transmission during daylight 
and would indicate that with the use of suitably high towers 
much longer distances can be reached. 

2. Range of wireless telephony and wireless telegraphy com- 
pared. For the same power it is possible to telegraph to a 
further distance than to telephone. Distinct speech depends 
upon the presence of harmonics of a frequency as high as 1200 
per second. The amplitude of these harmonics is according to 
some rough experiments made by the writer only about one per 
cent. of the fundamental frequency. Consequently, with a per- 
fectly modulated transmitter 100 times as much energy would 
be necessary to telephone a given Cistance as to telegraph. It 
fortunately happens, however, that a carbon transmitter and 
also the circuits in which it is uscd, can be so constructed as not 
to modulate perfectly but can be arranged so as to accent the 
higher harmonics. 

With transmitters arranged for the purpose good transmission 
has been obtained with thirty times the energy required to pro- 
duce audible telegraphic signals. By still further modification 
the power required has been reduced to approximately ten times 
that necessary for telegraphing, curiously enough without 
noticeably distorting the character of the speech. There is one 
fact, however, which prevents the ratio from being as large 
practically as the instruments show, 7.e., speech can be sat- 
isfactorily understood with a less increase of power above a 
minimum audibility than telegraphic signals. 

The amount of power necessary for wireless telephony may 
therefore be taken as approximately five to fifteen times that 
necessary for wireless telegraphy; 7.e., under the same circum- 
stances and for the same power the wireless telegraph will carry 
two to four times as far. The difference in range would be very 
much greater also but for the curious fact that there is much less 
falling off with sustained oscillations than with intermittent 
groups of waves, even though the frequencies are identical. 

This fact has been repeatedly determined by sending between 
Brant Rock and Brooklyn on the same frequency, using in the 
one case spark produced trains of waves and in the other the 
high frequency dynamo. The difference in the falling off for 
the same frequency and energy is very great but further work is 
necessary before anything very definite can be said about it or 
the reasons finally determined. 


614: FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


H. How WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY HAS BEEN THROTTLED BY 
GOVERNMENTAL ACTION 


The question has been asked why, if wireless telegraphy can 
compete with wire lines and cables, it is not put into operation. 
This is not an unnatural question. Ninety nine individuals out 
of a hundred would probably consider that if an inventor had 
perfected a system of wireless telegraphy or telephony so that 
it would operate reliably over long distances and would handle 
messages at a fraction of the cost of the present cables and 
without interfering with other stations, he would immediately 
pick out from an atlas half a dozen suitable points for operation, 
such as from France to Algiers, Italy to Egypt, Great Britain to 
Germany, New Zealand to Australia, Australia to Hong Kong, or 
Canada to Great Britain, and immediately commence com- 
mercial work, being perhaps delayed a few weeks on account of 
some slight formalities in connection with obtaining permits. 
The statement that nothing of the sort could be done would be 
received with incredulity, especially if it were known that the 
business men who would benefit by the reduced tolls were 
strongly desirous of having them put into operation. 

This is a very important matter, not because the crushing 
out of a new system of telegraphy is so very important in itself, 
but because the prospects are that other branches of the elec- 
trical profession may have to face the same situation in the 
near future and it is, therefore, advisable to show in some detail 
just what governmental ownership means in its relation to the 
progress of civilization. I will, therefore, explain fully, but as 
briefly as possible how commercial wireless telegraphy is hin- 
dered by governmental action. 

Examination of a chart of the world immediately suggests a 
number of points as suitable for the installation of wireless com- 
munication. For example the following: 


1. United States to Cuba. 

Porto Rico. 

3. f a “ Jamaica and other West Indian 
Islands. 

Bermuda. 

Newfoundland. 

Great Britain. 

France. 

Azores, 


iw) 
. 
~ 
ES 
ES 
a 
ES 


COM D OB 


- 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 615 


9. Newfoundland “ Great Britain. 
10. Great Britain “ Ireland. 


11. 7 a “ France. 

12: i. a “ Spain. 

3. ts 3 “ Germany. 
14. ¥ *e, 5 4 Denmariz: 
15: z r “ Norway. - 
16. France “ Algiers. 
biecltaly “ Egypt. 

18. New Zealand “ Australia. 
19. Australia “ Hong Kong. 


The first fact to be noted is that these countries with the ex- 
ception of Porto Rico are foreign countries and that in practi- 
cally every one of these, Porto Rico is believed to be the only 
~ exception, there are stringent laws in force forbidding the 
erection of wireless stations without permits. The difficulty 
of obtaining these permits is shown by the fact that one wireless 
company within the writer’s knowledge has been endeavoring 
for more than four years to obtain permits in the majority of 
the above mentioned foreign countries and has so far succeeded 
in obtaining only one permit and that for direct communication 
between the United States and Great Britain. 

To take a specific illustration. In 1903 an American com- 
pany was requested to install communication between Bermuda 
and the United States. The principal industry of Bermuda is 
the growing of produce of various kinds, which is exported al- 
most entirely to the United States. The only present means of 
communicating is through Nova Scotia, and in winter especially, 
owing to the delays on the land lines, the service is often quite 
insufficient. Permission was asked of the Home Government 
by the Bermudian incorporators, but without success. 

A petition was then signed by virtually every prominent business 
man in the islands and forwarded to the Home Government. 
The members of the New York Produce Exchange drew up a 
petition and forwarded it to the Secretary of State requesting him 
to use his influence in the matter. The Colonial Office stated 
in reply that it was favorable to the project but that the matter 
must be referred to other branches. 

The Bermudian business men also sent several representatives 
to Great Britain to urge personally the granting of the permit. 
After a lapse of several years a definite reply was received to 


616 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


the effect that the permit would not be granted. The Ber- 
mudians then took up the matter through a Canadian company 
which sent several representatives to interview the authorities 
in Great Britain but without success. The Lord High Com- 
missioner of Canada, Lord Strathcona, finally was kind enough 
to interest himself in the matter and personally presented the 
case before the British authorities.! It is hoped by the Canadian 
company and the Bermudians that the permit will finally be 
granted, but this specific illustration will explain the difficulty 
in obtaining permits for operation. 

As illustrating a different obstacle the case of Newfoundland 
may be taken. This is the natural point for establishing com- 
munication with Great Britain and the experiments previously 
referred to as having been made between Massachusetts and the 
West Indies showed conclusively that there would be absolutely 
no difficulty in operating commercially and with ease over this 
distance. On the other hand to operate directly from America 
is a much more difficult proposition for the reason that, as 
examination of a great circle chart will show, the whole of New- 
foundland and Nova Scotia lies between any point in the United 
States north of Hatteras, and Great Britain. 

If operation in Newfoundland were not forbidden by law 
half a dozen wireless stations would be at once erected, and the 
companies would be only too glad to pay into the Newfoundland 
treasury the ten or twenty thousand dollars per annum to be 
collected if they were put on the same footing as the cable 
companies in order to save the cost of the longer transmission. 
The Newfoundland government a number of years ago granted 
a monopoly of wireless telegraphy to one company, which com- 
pany has never erected a transatlantic station in that island. 
While this monopoly has been very injurious to Newfou.dland, 
on account of the loss of revenue entailed, it has been still more 
so to the wireless companies and to the public at large, which 
otherwise would have had cheap transatlantic telegraphy 
several years ago. 

Another very formidable obstacle is the fact that in practi- 
cally all the foreign countries referred to (and in Porto Rico) 
land telegraphy is a government monopoly. Consequently, the 


1, Since the above was written a communication has been received 
from the colonial secretary stating that no decision will be given in the 
matter until the Wireless Company submits a plan for pot persting with 
the present cable companies (letter of Aug. 6, 1908), 


HO 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 617 


wireless companies are entirely at the mercy of the government, 
are barred from collecting their own messages and must pay 
whatever tolls are fixed by the various governments. This, of 
course, also operates to prevent rapid service, since instead of 
communicating directly from Paris to London the messages 
would have to be sent from Paris by wire line to the French 
wireless station thence to the English wireless station and thence 
again by wire to London. 

In a number of countries, the cable lines are also owned by 
their governments which makes them naturally averse to losing 
the invested capital or to permiting private companies to com- 
pete. It would be evident therefore that no matter to what 
perfection the art of wireless telegraphy is brought, years will 
elapse and the exercise of a great deal of political influence will 
be necessary before the public gets the advantages of the cheaper 
rates. 

Ship communication. Here again the development of wireless 
working has been stifled by legislation. Vessel owners were at 
first rather slow to take up the matter of equipping their ships 
but after the system had proved its worth in several cases and 
some of the owners had had to pay large sums for salvage in 
cases where a wireless installation would have avoided the loss, 
its value began to be realized. It was at this point that the 
governments again stepped in with premature and injurious 
legislation. As a specific illustration, a United States company 
had arranged with the owners of some two hundred vessels to 
construct a line of stations from Maine to Texas, to operate with 
stations installed on the ships. The announcement was made 
that the administration proposed to recommend to Congress 
that wireless telegraphy be made a government monopoly. 

A representative of the wireless company requested permission 
to submit some evidence to the effect that such a government 
monopoly was not necessary and that the various stations 
could operate without interference. A reply was received from 
the Administration that “information in regard to the subject 
was not desired’’, and the administration recommended that 
wireless communication with ships should be made a govern- 
ment monopoly.! 

It was proposed to carry this out as follows: 

1. To establish Navy wireless stations at points along the coast 


1. Recommendations of the Inter-departmental Board on Wireless 
Telegraph, 1904 submitted and approved by the Administration. 


618 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


where wireless stations were needed by the merchant marine.*? 


2. To forbid the operation of private stations at these points.* 

3. The Navy stations are to handle all messages to and from 
ships free of charge. 

4, Wireless companies to be permitted, after obtaining a. 
license from the Department of Commerce and Labor, to erect 
stations at points where there was no merchant marine business.‘ 

The official approval and transmission of these recommenda- 
tions by the Administration, although they were opposed and 
never went into effect, terminated, of course, all negotiations 
with vessel owners, since the owners would naturally not agree 
to contract for the transmission of their messages with the im- 
mediate prospect in view that the Government would transmit 
them free of charge. At the present time the masts ordered 
for the proposed line of stations are rotting at various points 
along the seaboard and the apparatus purchased for installation 
is deteriorating in storage. 

The development of ship communication had just begun to 
recover from this blow when an International Wireless Tele- 
graph Conference was arranged for by the various governments. 
In America no opportunity was afforded the wireless companics 


1. Ibid. ‘‘ That the maintenance of a complete coastwise system ot 
wireless telegraphy by the Navy Department is necessary for an efficient 
and economical management of the fleets ot the United States in time 
of peace and their efficient maneuvering ir time of war. ”’ 

2. Ibid. “‘‘ As fast as the naval wireless telegraph stations are in opera- 
tion the Navy Department shall receive and transmit through these sta- 
tions free of charge all wireless messages to and from ships, providing such 
stations do not come in competition with commercial stations, until such 
time as Congress may enact the necessary legislation governing this 
subject’. That the statement in regard to competition is disingenuous 
will be seen from examining the following extra Note 4, since only one 
station, and that a Navy one would be permitted at points where there 
was merchant marine business. 

3. Ibid. ‘‘ In asking for legislation on this point the board invites 
attention to the fact that where wireless stations are needed for the 
merchant marine, as a rule, the navy will also require them. The board 
believes it to be in the interest not only of governmental but of public 
economy and efficiency to permit the naval stations to handle the public 
service, for in the present state of the art but one station is desirable for 
the public interest in such places. It is admitted that there may be 
special cases where private stations can serve a useful purpose and the 
board believes that the Department of Commerce and Labor should 
have the duty of issuing licenses in such cases under such regulations as 
will prevent interference with stations necessary to the national defence.” 

4, Ibid. . 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 619 


of presenting the case to the delegates to the Conference, and a 
very stringent set of regulations was adopted. The Administra- 
tion transmitted these regulations to the Senate.! The ratifica- 
tion of the treaty embodying these regulations was opposed by 
the Marconi Co., and by the National Electric Signaling Co. The 
following facts were pointed out: : 
1. That the proposed regulations virtually amounted to 
confiscation of the property of the wireless companies; that 
the working at present was carried on at a loss; that no wireless 
company was at the present time paying dividends; that the 
proposed rates would not permit of any return on the capital 
invested ; and that the regulations would so limit the amount of 
business which it would be possible to transact that it would not 
pay to keep up thé stations. 
_ 2. That the inventors in the art of wireless telegraphy had 

expended large sums of money in developing their systems, and 
such confiscation was therefore unjust and was thought to be 
unconstitutional. 

3. That the regulations were impracticable in the following 
respects: 

a. By requiring ships to use two tunes only? all stations were 
placed, so tc speak, on two-party lines, thereby producing a 
maximum of interference and preventing any one station work- 
ing while any other was operating. 

b. Allowing only five minutes per message and assuming only 
ten ships each with ten messages to be in the neighborhood of a 
given seaport, more than eight hours would have to elapse 
before the last station had transmitted its message. This time 
is believed to be underestimated, as the regulations provide 
that each ship before sending its message must call the coastwise 
station, have a number assigned to it, inform the coast station 
of its distance, its true bearing in degress, its true course in de- 
grees, its speed in nautical miles, the number of words it has to 
transmit ; must be informed how long it will have to wait, whether 
the transmission is to be in alternate order or in series, interrupt 
the sending after each 20 words, send an interrogation mark, 
wait for repetition of the last word, etc.? Hence it would be 
rather difficult to maintain the average time mentioned. This 
excessive delay would cut down the traffic to such an extent 


as to render it impossible for the stations to pay expenses of 
Leen e nee ee enn ee a I: eaten 
1. Senate Document, Sixtieth Congress, first session. 
2. Regulations II and III. 
8. Regulations 19 to 26. 


620 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


maintainance, and any telegraphic engineer will appreciate the 
difficulty of carrying on commercial business under such regula- 
tions." 

c. Placing all vessels on two-party lines introduces all the 
difficulties of the party line method and loses the only advantage, 
as it might easily happen that a ship in distress using one tfre- 
quency might be within range of a number of vessels using the 
other frequency, but outside of range of any vessel using its 
own frequency. The obvious and practical method is legally 
to establish a single tune to be used exclusively for calling and 
distress signals but not for any other purpose; the transmission 
of messages to be continued by switching over to other tunes 
once the call has been received and accepted. in this way a 
ship in distress can always be sure of calling any vessel within 
range, while the transmission of messages can be carried on with- 
out interference and without one ship having to wait until the 
other is finished. 

4. Its restrictions are of such a character as to prevent the 
future development of wireless telegraphy. For example. 

a. The regulation”? that all stations must carry a licensed 
wireless telegraph operator capable of receiving at twenty 
words per minute would prevent the installation of wireless 
stations on board the majority of ships since only the larger 
vessels can afford the additional expense of the operator. Many 
vessels would install wireless telephones which do not require a 
skilled telegraph operator, if it were not for this regulation. 

b. The rules forbidding* the transmission of telegrams calling 
for repetition of messages, or for acknowledgement of receipt, 
or for telegrams to be forwarded, or for telegrams to be de- 
livered by express or by mail, or for the transmission of money- 
order telegrams or for the transmission of telegrams with answer 
prepaid, or for the transmission of urgent telegrams are especially 
restrictive. By forbidding the transmission of telegrams of 
all the above classes the commercial field of wireless telegraphy 
is limited to such an extent as to deprive wireless telegraphy of 
its chief value. 


1. As a practical illustration of this, on August 12, 1908, the Assistant 
Secretary of the Navy, on board U.S.S. Dolphin, had to wait two hours 
before an important message could be transmitted, as the two stations 
with which he was in range were occupied in sending a long message 
and the Dolphin was unable to cut in. Had a number of stations work- 
ing on different times been available, this could not have happened. 

2. Section 6, paragraph ITI. 

3. Section XXXITI. 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 621 


5. It expressly forbids the use of a number of the most im- 
portant developments in wireless telegraphy. For example. 

a. Section 3 in effect forbids long distance transmission in 
daylight. This section states that ships must not use wave 
lengths exceeding 600 meters. It is now well known that day- 
light absorption is very great for these wave lengths and that 
much longer wave lengths must be used during daytime. This 
rule therefore virtually forbids wireless telegraphy during day- 
light except within a very limited radius, and in case of an explo- 
sion or fire on shipboard during daylight the vessel would be 
unable to summon assistance unless by some fortunate chance 
another vessel happened to be within the radius limited by the 
restriction to the short wave length. It also virtually pro- 
hibits ships keeping in communication with the shore for more 
than twelve hours out of twenty-four. 

b. Section 3 states that the system employed must bea 
syntonized system, thus forbidding the use of systems such as the 
heterodyne system which do not depend for selectivity on 
syntony. This would not be so injurious if it were not for the 
fact that the present indications are that syntony will in the near 
future be abandoned as a means of obtaining selectivity. 

c. The rules of Section 2, 3, and 18 to 26, virtually forbid the 
use of duplex and multiplex systems. There is no reason why 
a number of ships should not communicate with the same station 
simuitaneously, but the above rules forbid this by requiring 
only two wave lengths to be used and the messages to be taken 
one after the other. 

d. It is premature. The expression “that an art is in its 
infancy’ is a very hackneyed one but if it can be applied 
properly to any art it is to wireless telegraphy. The fact that 
the proposed regulations are unsuitable does not reflect in any 
way on the ability or conscientiousness of the delegates, though 
it would seem that it would have been advisable to consult the 
engineers of the various wircless telegraph companies before 
drafting the rules. The main difficulty, however, is that no one, 
no matter what his knowledge of the present state of the art, 
can foresee the future developments. The question of wave 
length and daylight absorption is an illustration of this, as is 
also the question of syntonized circuits. The time has not 
yet come for any such hard and fixed regulations as thus 
proposed. 

6. It was also pointed out that the public had no rights in 


622 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


regard to wireless telegraphy, since a patent differs from a fran- 
chise in that when the public grants a franchise it gives a right 
in respect to something which already exists and which it owns, 
and it therefore has a right to make what stipulation it chooses. 
In the case of a patent, however, the right is not given in respect 
to something which the public owns, but in regard to a new crea- 
tion which exists merely in the mind of the inventor, to be called 
into being or not at the inventor’s will, and therefore a thing in 
which the public has no right except as it obtains one by stipula- 
tion with the inventor. In the case of wireless telegraphy the 
companies invested their money under the patent law contracts 
with the various governments, and therefore the inforcement of 
regulations of the character proposed without the consent of the 
inventors is a breach of contract. 

As a result of the hearing and of representations supporting 
the position of the wireless companies made by a very eminent 
electrical engineer the Senate Committee has decided to do 
nothing for the present in the matter. During the hearing the 
fact was brought out by the committee that the proposed regula- 
tions were passed upon the assumption that interference could 
not be kept out, and that the U. S. Navy had already made 
official reports on tests of interference preventers which showed 
that this was not the fact. On direct question by the Senate 
Committee the representative of the U. S. Navy present at the 
hearing freely admitted that it was a fact that interference could 
be kept out. 

Still more recently another set of recommendations has been 
forwarded by the Administration to the Senate endorsing the 
recommendation of the Secretary of the Navy that a law should 
be passed' making it an offence punishable by imprisonment for 
one year of a fine of $2,000 or both for a private station to con- 
tinue sending when called upon to discontinue by a Navy 
operator, or to produce interference with a Navy station when 
the latter is transmitting an official message. This recommenda- 
tion was not accompanied by any recommendation to the effect 
that the Navy stations should use any means for keeping out 
interference. Before the transmission of this recommendation 
a conference was sought with the Navy officials with a view to 
drafting a form of regulation which would accomplish the results 
sought, without placing the wireless companies at the mercy of 


1. Congressional Record, Feb. 14, 1908. Also H. R. bill 17719, 60th 
Congress, Ist Session. 


_ 


1908] FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 623 


the Government and without virtually confiscating their property 
but it was found impossible to obtain a hearing.' 


The following memorandum of a portion of the interview between 
Secretary Straus of the Department of Commerce and Labor and the 
representative of the wireless company, asking for a hearing, will be of 
interest: 

REPRESENTATIVE: ‘“‘ Will you not, Mr. Secretary, be willing to assist 
us in obtaining a treaty which, while giving the government all it de- 
sires in the way of intercommunication between different systems, 
reservation of wave-lengths for government purposes, etc., will, at the 
same time, avoid driving the wireless companies into bankruptcy?” 

SECRETARY Straus: ‘‘ The treaty was reported by the experts of 
the government departments, and we propose to carry it out, as it is 
the policy of the.administration.”’ 

REPRESENTATIVE: ‘‘ But, Mr. Secretary, these regulations virtually 
prevent the wireless companies from doing any commercial business. 
With everybody on one party line, even without the numerous other 
restrictions, it will not be possible to handle a sufficient number of mes- 
sages to pay operating expenses, and the companies will necessarily be 
forced out of business.” 

SECRETARY STRAUS: That has nothing to do with this department. 
If you are injured you should go to the Congress and ask them to re- 
imburse you. 

REPRESENTATIVE: Mr. Secretary, you know that it would be prac- 
tically impossible to get a bill to reimburse a private company through 
the Congress. Why should the government crush out a new and im- 
portant method of communicating which will save the country millions 
of dollars yearly, when the government will gain nothing by the action. 
We feel that your department ought to assist us in this matter. 

SECRETARY StrRAus: It has been decided by the administration 
that the treaty should be approved as it stands. 


It will be noted that this conversation took place in the 
United States, and not in Russia, as might possibly be otherwise 
inferred. It will appear from this and the experience of others 
that the original object of the formation of the different gov- 
ernment departments has been rather lost sight of in recent 
years, 

It will perhaps be seen that the difficulties in the development 
of wireless telegraphy have not been wholly of a technical nature 
and more patience may perhaps in the future be extended to those 
engaged in the work. 

In his book entitled ‘‘ Public Ownership and the Telephone 
in Great Britain,’ Professor H. R. Meyer has treated specifically 
of the way in which the use of the telephone was opposed in 
Great Britain, by the English postal authorities with the object 


1. See also appendix. 


624 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


of, to quote the Postmaster General, Sir James Ferguson, 
“Guarding the Post Office monopoly.’’ Professor Meyer shows 
how out of 77 companies which applied for licenses from 1882 
to 1884 only 8 companies succeeded in obtaining permission to 
work, and how the various authorities prohibited the telephone 
companies from laying cables in the streets or from opening 
long-distance pay stations or from building trunk lines in order 
to force the public to use the telegraph instead of the telephone. 
It would appear that the same line of policy in a still more ag- 
gravated form has been adopted in connection with wireless 
telegraphy. 


CONSIDERATIONS 


The subject is, however, one which is bound to concern in 
the near future other branches of the engineering profession 
than those now affected and the present appears to be a suitable 
time for considering the matter more broadly. 

Whatever the ultimate object of man’s existence may be it is 
tolerably certain that it is not to occupy his entire mental 
activity with the question of how many grubs he can secure for 
food and where he can find a suitable hollow tree in which to 
spend the night. But whatever we have above this is due 
solely to the inventor (in which term I include not only the men 
who discovered how to produce fire and to build houses and 
steam engines and alternating current motors, and therefore 
all engineers whether they take out patents or not, but also 
those who discover how to distribute what is created in such a 
way as to make it available). 

In the state of nature which Tolstoy so greatly lauds and so 
carefully avoids advance is impossible; all available energy of 
mind and body is necessarily employed in the problem of main- 
taining a bare existence. Before we can advance toward our 
goal, whatever it is, we must first have time and opportunity and 
a means of maintaining any advance. That we have this time 
and opportunity is due to the fact that by means of innumerable 
inventions we are rendered every day less dependent upon the 
accidents of nature. It would therefore appear, that whatever 
our ultimate goal may be, the first essential for reaching it is an 
increased control over the forces of nature. 

This increased control can only be obtained through intense 
effort. When we see a performer at a circus contorting his 
body into apparently impossible positions we realize the peculiar 
aptitude and the many years of training which must have been 


1908} FESSENDEN; WIRELESS TELEPHONY 625 


necessary. It is not generally realized, however, that a still 
more peculiar aptitude and many more years of still more intense 
training are necessary for those who would do useful work in 
any branch of mental achievement. We seldom think, in reading 
a mathematical paper for example, that the author has studied 
possibly for an average of ten or twelve hours a day for twenty 
or forty years before achieving sufficient proficiency in his sub- 
ject to be able to accomplish the work. 

To obtain results in a special line therefore a man with special 
aptitude and training is required. In addition to this there 
must be the opportunity. Hundreds of thousands, and in 
many cases millions of dollars are necessary for the development 
of an important invention. Such sums will not be furnished if 
there is no prospect of areturn. As the success of an invention 
is always doubtful, the return from a successful invention must 
~ be sufficient to cover the losses from the much larger number 
of failures, for if the average return from one hundred inventions 
falls below that obtainable from mortgages or other forms of 
secure investment there will be no incentive. 

The following question seem to me to be worthy of considera- 
tion: 

1. Whether public officials, elected by the people, would con- 
sider themselves justified in expending millions of dollars on 
the development of inventions the success of which was uncer- 
tain. 

2. Whether the best men to develop such inventions success- 
fully would be found among the Government officials available. 

3. Whether development can be expected in an art or industry 
entirely under Government control or ownership. 

4. Whether universal Government control or ownership does 
not necessarily involve a fixed and non-progressive state as 
opposed to a state of progress and development. 


APPENDIX 


In the United States some additional hindrances on the part 
of the Government have been met with. For example, in the 
United States, and in Russia, as well, an inventor has no legal 
remedy in case the Government appropriates his invention.’ It 
might be thought that the inventor could protect himself by 
suing infringing companies, but this is not so. 

The wireless sets originally used by the United States Navy 


1. Russel vs. United States, decided in 1900, 182 U. S. 516. 


526 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY {June 29 


were imported from a country which was not at that time under 
the Patent Convention, and as they were purchased abroad no 
action could be taken. The then Secretary of the Navy, Mr. 
Moody, refused to require the foreign company to appoint a 
responsible representative in America. It was not until some 
years later, when, Mr. Morton being Secretary and the matter 
having been taken up by one of the Senators, this was done, and 
an injunction was obtained against the representative so ap- 
pointed. 

On further protest the next Secretary of the Navy, Mr. 
Bonaparte, stated that the patents could not be recognized as 
they had not been sustained. He was again approached but 
said that he had decided that he was not bound to respect them 
as he considered the price too high.t_ He declined, however, to 
allow the price to be fixed by arbitration, stating that he con- 
sidered that the price should be fixed with reference to the cost 
of manufacture solely. It was pointed out that as the. cost 
of labor and material of the particular device concerned 
amounted to less than a dollar and as a fair manufacturing 
profit on this would not be more than forty cents, this would 
afford no means whereby the company would be reimbursed for 
its expenditure of several hundred thousand dollars in develop- 
ing the apparatus. To this Secretary Bonaparte replied that 
that was a matter which concerned the company and that his 
department had nothing to do with that. The principal 
infringing companies having been enjoined the Navy and Army 
began manufacturing the devices themselves in quantities. 

Through the influence of one of the Senators the matter was 
again taken up and it was arranged that the Secretary of the 
Navy, Mr. Bonaparte, should obtain a legal opinion from the 
Attorney-General in regard to the matter. This opinion was 
prepared by one of the Attorney-General’s assistants and 
proved to sustain the claims of the wireless company on every 
point. Before it was finally transmitted the Secretary of 
the Navy, Mr. Bonaparte, withdrew his request for an 
opinion. 

The wireless company received a letter? from the Navy De- 
partment to the effect that by order of the Administration the 
patents had been turned over to the Navy Department. A 
written request® was forwarded to the Administration, pointing 


1. Letter April 19, 1906. 
2. Letter No. 137,244, July 11, 1906. 
38. Letter April 3, 1907. 


1908] FPESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 627 


out that the above-mentioned property had been confiscated by 
the Government without a hearing and asking for a hearing. 
No reply was received. 

The above is given as an illustration of the effect of the present 
law under which an inventor has no legal remedy against the 
confiscation of his patents by the United States Government. 
Among other recent instances of confiscation of inventions by 
the Government may be mentioned those of the Krupp and 
Armstrong Companies, the San Francisco Dry Dock, etc. 

As the situation is not generally understood attention is here 
called to it. It should be remedied, as it operates very in- 
juriously as regards the Government departments themselves. 
The Government is deprived of the services of American in- 
ventors who either place their talent at the disposal of other 
countries, as in the case of Hiram Maxim, or turn their attention 
to other lines. The general result is that the United States 
Government, instead of leading other nations, is obliged to 
follow after and copy, though the success of the United States 
Navy in developing submarine boats is an illustration of what 
can be accomplished in cases where the inventor has been able 
to develop his work without confiscation. 

In 1906 President Roosevelt’s attention was called to the 
above facts. He was asked if the administration would not in- 
troduce a bill to remedy this state of affairs. He replied that 
the administration had too many bills of its own to look after, 
but, on further inquiry, stated that if such a bill was introduced 
the administration would not oppose it. 

On the strength of this promise a bill was introduced and 
unanimously reported, as follows: 


House oF REPRESENTATIVES, 60TH CoNGRESS, IsT SESSION, REPORT 
No. 184 

The Committee on Patents, to whom was referred the bill (H. R. 7653) 
to amend section 4919 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, to 
provide additional protection for owners of patents of the United States, 
and for other purposes, have considered the same, and recommend that 
the bill do pass with the following amendment: 

In line 7, page 1, strike out the words “ has been or,” and insert the 
word “‘ hereafter’ after the word “ shall.” 

A bill substantially the same as that now reported was passed by the 
Senate at the last Congress, and favorably reported to the House, but 
at too late a day in the session to receive consideration. 

The object of the bill is to provide for owners of United States patents 
a remedy for the taking of their property by the United States for pub- 
lic use, when such taking occurs without the license or authority of such 
owners and without compensation, 


628 FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY [June 29 


In England and in practically all over civilized countries, except 
Russia and the United States, the Government can not appropriate an 
invention without paying a fair price for it. A regular tribunal is charged 
with the duty of determining what is a fair price for the use of an in- 
vention appropriated by the Government in case the Government con- 
siders the inventor’s charge to be excessive. The United States hab- 
itually appropriates at its pleasure the patented inventions of its citi- 
zens and declines payment therefor. And this notwithstanding the fact 
that according to the decisions of the Supreme Court a patent of the 
United States is property within the meaning of the term as used in 
the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the use of a patented 
invention by the Government is a taking of private property, which can 
not be done lawfully without compensation to the owners. (Solomons v. 
United States, 137 U. S., 342, 346; McKeever v. United States, 14 Ct. 
Cis:, R., 896; Affirmed: S. ©. 18' Ct. Cls., R.; 745.) 

But notwithstanding this right to protection which patentees and 
other property owners derive from Article V of the Amendments to the 
Constitution, it has been held by the Supreme Court that the owner of 
a patent can not restrain its infringement by the United States or an 
officer or agent of the Government. (Schillinger v. United States, 155 
U. S., 163 (1894); Russell v. United States, 182 U. S., 516 (1900).) 

In both of these cases the court held that in the absence of an ex- 
press contract between the Government and the patentee, or transac- 
tions between them from which a contract may be implied, no court of 
the United States is vested with jurisdiction to entertain a suit or action 
by a patentee seeking to recover compensation for the use of his in- 
vention by the Government. 

How next to impossible it would be to make a case of implied con- 
tract which would render the Government liable under the court’s de- 
cision may be inferred from the following statement of the facts appear- 
ing in the Russell case just cited. It there appeared that at the Gov- 
ernment’s invitation Russell exhibited his patented invention to a, board 
of officers appointed by the Secretary of War. The Government an- 
nounced that it would adopt and use a device embodying his invention. 
Prior to the adoption and use of the device Russell communicated his 
patent to the War Department, showing that his patent covered the 
device and tended the use of his invention to the Government for reason- 
able compensation. The Government proceeded to use the device 
without denying Russell’s right to compensation, but with the remark 
that he should seek his remedy by some means other than Executive 
action. And the Russell case is only a sample case; one of many. 

It seems to be necessary and proper to provide for patentees a rem- 
’ edy, such as the passage of this bill will secure, for the invasion of their 
rights. Without such remedy, patentees are the only persons who are 
outside the protection of Article V of the Amendments of the Constitu- 
tion. ‘‘ Nor shall private property be taken for public use without just 
compensation.” 

Without such remedy a patent is not what it purports to be on its 
face. Many inventors have spent years of their lives and practically 
bankrupted themselves in developing inventions primarily of use to the 
Government, only to find in the end, after their property has been seized 


1908} FESSENDEN: WIRELESS TELEPHONY 629 


by the Government, that they have no legal means of redress, and that thé 
governmental Departments will not recognize the decisions of the courts. 

Without such remedy there is a ridiculous discrimination between 
inventors. The inventor of a children’s game or of a new brand of 
chewing gum is protected by the courts. But the inventor of a device 
which may save the nation from an humiliating defeat in time of war, 
or reduce the cost of carrying the mails, or reduce the number of ship- 
wrecks on the coast, is afforded no protection; the governmental Depart- 
ments have the power to confiscate his property and habitually exercise 
that power. It may be a new type of breech mechanism, or a dry dock, 
or a. method of communicating with ships at sea; if the invention is valu- 
able the Government can and does seize it, though the inventor may 
have spent years of his life and bankrupted himself and his friends in 
developing it. 

It may be conceded that the Government ought to have the right to 
appropriate any invention necessary or convenient for natural defense 
or for beneficent public use, and that, too, without previous arrange- 
ment or negotiation with the owner. Nevertheless, the appropriation 
having been made it would seem that justice to the citizen demands that 

-in due time he should receive fair compensation for his property. 

The claim is made by some that the Government, being the grantor 
of the patent, ought to have the right to use without compensation 
such inventions as are necessary for its purposes. 

One answer to this is that there is no such limitation or reservation 
in the law governing the granting of patents; and another answer is 
that if that were the law there would be no time, brains, or money spent 
by anyone in inventing those things for which there would be no re- 
muneration. 

But it is useless to multiply reasons to justify the passage of the bill. 
The one fundamental reason already assigned is unanswerable—that no 
American citizen’s property can be appropriated for public use by the 
Government or by anyone else without compensation being made therefor. 

The amendment proposed, by striking out the words “ has been or ”’ 
and the use of the word ‘‘ hereafter,’’ in line 7, page 1, is deemed advisable, 
that there may be no question arising upon statutory construction that 
the law is not retroactive in its effect, but will apply only to future ap- 
propriations of patents by the Government. 


It passed the House of Representatives by a large majority, 
the leaders of both the Republican and Democratic parties speak- 
ing in favor of it. It passed in the Senate unanimously. It 
did not become a law, however, as President Roosevelt de- 
clined to sign it, though its signature was strongly recom- 
mended by Secretary Taft, Senator Knox, and others. No 
reason was given by President Roosevelt for declining to sign 
the bill, but it is understood that his action was due to the 
fact that the ratification of the proposed wireless treaty had 
been opposed by one of those interested in the passage of this bill. 


aa a oe ee wet & a 


Tf 


Sa ae be 


A} 


we ee 


ee ' 


P Amok 
As, 


AD Sas oi 


m4 sa J 
oe ” ¢ ae — 
pps sags om es 


A paper presented at the 25th anunal conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Atlantic City, N.J., June 29, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A. I. E. E, 


THE MEASUREMENT OF ROTARY SPEEDS OF DYNAMO 
MACHINES BY THE STROBOSCOPIC FORK 


BY A. E. KENNELLY AND S. E. WHITING 


It is the object of this paper to call attention to what has 
already been accomplished by others in the direction of measur- 
ing rotary speeds with the stroboscopic fork, and also to a cer- 
tain new modification of the principle which has been developed 
by the authors. 

Definition. A stroboscopic fork consists essentially of a ~ 
tuning fork, such as is shown in Fig. 1, carrying at its extremities 
a pair of thin strips, or flat shutters, in the plane of vibration. 
A narrow slit is cut in each shutter parallel to the fork’s length. 
These slits lie opposite to each other when the fork is at rest, 
so as to permit an observer to see through both slits in this con- 
dition. When the fork is thrown into free vibration, the line 
of vision is interrupted by the vibrating shutters, except during 
a very brief interval once in each alternation, or twice in each 
complete cycle, of the fork’s vibration, when the slits pass each 
other, moving rapidly in opposite directions. If then the fork 
makes say 60 alternations per second, corresponding to a vibra- 
tion frequency of 30~, there will be 60 brief visual stimuli 
per second admitted to the retina of the observer’s eye. If 
the object under inspection through the shutters is rotating in 
such a manner that consecutive retinal images are similar and 
symmetrical, the picture apprehended by the observer will be 
continuous and stationary; that is, the object will appear to stand 
still. Moreover, a certain cyclic range of departure from strict 
uniformity in the successive images formed on the retina will 
give an impression of a continuously rotating picture. 

If the appearance presented by.a rotating object is stationary, 

631 


632 KENNELLY AND W4dITING: [June 29 


when viewed through a stroboscopic fork, we know that the 
speed of the object’s rotation is constant, and also that it bears 
some simple numerical relation to the speed of vibration of the 
fork. Since the rate of a tuning fork’s vibration is remarkably 
constant, is nearly independent of temperature changes, and 
can be determined once for all with great precision, the speed 
of rotation under inspection becomes known with a like degree 
of precision. 

Brief historical ouiline. The stroboscopic fork has been 
known and used by physicists for some time. It has been used, 
for example, in the Lorenz method of determining the absolute 
value of the ohm.' In the Lorenz apparatus, a stroboscopic 
fork has been used to measure the speed of rotation of a small 
driving motor to within one one-hundredth of one per cent. Al- 
though stroboscopic methods have been used to some extent in 
engineering tests, the stroboscopic fork has only recently been 
employed for measuring the speeds of dynamo machinery. The 
stroboscopic fork was described in this connection in a paper 


Fic. 1--Stroboscopic fork 


on ‘“‘Stroboscopy’”’, by Dr. Charles V. Drysdale, read at the 
Optical Society London in 1905, and shortly afterwards re- 
printed. Figs, 1, 2 and 3 are taken from that paper. The 
tuning fork he employed was like that in Fig. 1, held in the 
observer's hand and excited into vibration at suitable intervals, 
by mechanical impulses, such as a light blow on the knee. The 
vibration frequency of the fork was 50 cycles per second, or 
6000 peeps per minute. The target shown in Fig. 2 was mounted 
concentrically on one end of the rotating shaft whose speed was 
required to be measured. At every 100 revolutions per minute 
of the shaft, (7.e. 100, 200, 300, etc., rev. per min.), the serrated 
edge pattern of this rotating target would appear stationary. 
Moreover, at certain speeds, the square, the pentagon, and the 
hexagon would severally appear stationary. Fig. 3 represents 
Gray, London, 18938, Vol. II, page 594. 


2. ‘‘ The Optician and Photographic Trades Review ”’, Dec. 8 and 15, 
1905, 


1908] LTE eS EROBOSCOPIG FORK 633 


the retardation speed-time curve of an unloaded motor, after 
switching off, obtained by stroboscopic-fork observations. 

A paper on “ Accurate Speed, Frequency and Acceleration 
Measurements,’ by Dr. Drysdale, appeared in the “ Electrical , 
Review,’ of London, for September 7 and 14, 1906. Figs. 
4,5, and 6 are taken from that paper, which describes an elec- 
trically driven fork, as seen in Fig. 4, the details. being given 
by Dr. Drysdale in Fig. 7. The standard -vibration frequency 
is 50 cycles per second, and the target described was the same 
as in the previous paper, Fig. 2. Fig. 5 illustrates the device 


Fic. 2—-Stroboscopic target 


for calibrating the fork. This fork, F,is mounted in front of a 
small shunt motor that can be accurately controlled in speed 
with the aid of the hand rheostat, R. The motor is driven in 
synchronous relation with the fork, as evidenced to the observer 
by the standstill of the pattern on the target, 7. The revolution- 
counter, C, geared with the motor shaft, is then allowed to 
register for say ten minutes by a stop-watch; so that the record 
of the counter, C, during that time enables the uniform speed 
of the motor, and of the fork, to be determined closely. 

For rotary speeds intermediate between those at which the 


634 KENNELLY AND WHITING: ' [June 29 


target patterns appear to stand still, the simple stroboscopic 
fork of Figs. 1, 5 and 7 can only serve to measure speeds indi- 
rectly, by enabling the observer to count the apparent revolu- 
_tions of the target image during say one minute by the watch. 
For example, if the motor’s speed was say 1200 rev. per min., 
the target, viewed through the fork, would appear stationary; 
but if the speed increased to 1220 rev. per min., the target 
would appear to rotate 20 times per minute in the direction of 
motion. It is desirable for many purposes, however, to bring 
the picture of the target to a standstill at any or all steady speeds 
within the ordinary range. Dr. Drysdale effected this in the 


TREMBRS 
tt ptt ttt a8 


a eta bem 
Pint lee LANGDON-DaviesS Moror 
LTS So aa7Oer 1905 


4 PEARCE. 
vranan my[ WY BEcKCAKke. 


ARES Akg 
rape CLT ToT im St 


Bs 
aS a 
FERRERS 
ras AORN EN 

3 Boo 

Z 00 


a a a ae | eT) ao 


Fie: 3 


manner indicated in Fig. 6. The conical roller, R, was driven by 
a sort of direct-current synchronous motor, M, which in its 
turn was operated by current impulses from the electrically 
driven standard fork. A thin disc, D, with radial slots, runs on 
the surface of the conical roller; so that by moving the disc 
from the smaller to the larger end of the cone, the speed of the 
dise’s rotation could be increased and regulated very definitely. 
In this way the number of peeps per minute can be brought into 
synchronous relation with the number of revolutions per minute 
of a target on a rotating shaft under observation, and the coin- 
cidence is rendered manifest by the picture of the target pattern 
becoming stationary, when viewed through the rotating slots. 


1908] THE STROBOSCOPIC FORK 635 


Dr. Drysdale’s paper set forth the advantageous application of 
the stroboscopic fork to the measurements of acceleration, 
retardation, uniformity of speed, frequency and slip. 

The stroboscopic fork has also been employed in the United 
States by Dr. Northrup for adjustably varying and controlling 
the speed of a small alternating-current generator or converter, 

The convenience and precision of the method employed by 
Dr. Drysdale was observed by one of the writers of this paper on 
the occasion of a visit to the Northampton Institute, London, 
in 1907. The writers believe that his method only requires to 
be more generally known in order to be used extensively. A 
simple stroboscopic fork, such as is shown in Fig. 1, selected for 
the right frequency, is sometimes capable of being used as a 
speed measurer of an engine, or as a frequency measurer of an 


Fic. 4—Electrically driven tuning fork, with slits 


alternator, without even the use of a special target, by watching’ 
the spokes of its flywheel, in a fairly good light, through the 
slits of the fork. Such a fork can maintain a satisfactory 
amplitude of vibration for more than half a minute at a time after 
being set in vibration, is very portable, simple, and not easily 
deranged, under ordinary care. 

New modification of the stroboscopic fork. The great ad- 
vantage of the stroboscopic fork is that when it is vibrating in 
synchronous relation with the rotating target, the latter appears 
stationary, and very small changes in speed may then be readily 
detected. For example, if the target on the rotating shaft 
makes 1200 rev. per min., and appears stationary through the fork 
slits, an increase or diminution of one rev. per min., or one-twelfth 
of one per cent. in the speed, would cause the picture to rotate once 
per minute forwards or backwards respectively, a rate of rota- 


656 KENNELLY AND WHITING: [June 29 


tion that is readily capable of being noted by the observer. 
The difficulty is that, in practice, the speed to be measured is 
seldom in exact synchronous relation with the fork. If the 
target has such a pattern that its picture becomes stationary 
at each and every 100 revolutions per minute, the speed to be 
measured may lie anywhere between the century limits, and the 
fork is unable to make the picture stationary. As already 
mentioned, Dr. Drysdale has met this difficulty by the use of 
a conical roller with stroboscopic disc, and this may be a satis- 
factory solution of the problem for use in the laboratory with a 
stationary apparatus; but the conical roller device is not portable. 


AN 


TMM 


“y 
1 


C\ 
2a 
rary 
2 2) 
e284" 
77-7 == f 


mae! 
\ 


Fic. 5--Calibrating device 


The writers have succeeded in arriving at a portable type of 
stroboscopic fork, which admits of being adjusted in its rate of 
vibration through a range of about 5% either above or below 
its mean value, continuously, and without sensibly disturbing 
the motion. For this purpose a pair of sliding weights grip 
the sides of the fork friction tight, and can be moved gradually 
from one position to another within a range of about 7} inches 
(19 cm.) by a pair of strings passing over guide-pulleys, and 
normally slack. 

The instrument is shown in perspective in Fig. 8. Its details, 
in plan, elevation, and end views appear in Fig. 9, 


1908] THE STROBOSCOPIC FORK 637 


Details of construction. Referring to Fig. 9, the fork A is 
made of a strap of vulcan tool steel 36.7 in. (93.0 cm.) long, 
1 in. (2.54 cm.) wide, and 3 in. (0.475 cm.) thick, weighing, 
without attachments, 1.925 lb. (873 gm.). The over-all length 
of the fork along its midplane is 18 in. (45.8 cm.). The reason 
for using so long a fork. was to produce a low-frequency vibra- 
tion, or a fork speed comparable with the speeds ordinarily met 
with in rotating machinery. 

The fork is mounted on a base-plate of cast aluminum by 
an aluminum clamp with a steel screw } in. (0.64 cm.) in diameter. 
The free ends of the fork carry a pair’of thin sheet-steel shutters 
with slits 0.59 in. (1.5 cm.) long and 0.008 in. (0.2 mm.) wide. 


Fic. 6--Roller stroboscope 


There are small brass screw adjustments for bringing these 
slits accurately in conjunction when the fork is at rest, and 
there are also small brass screw clamps, with copper washers, 
for clamping the shutters in this position. The fork can be 
tuned to the required normal frequency by small brass weights 
clamped on pins set into the free ends of the prongs, near C. 
The sliders, B, are rectangular pieces of cast iron, milled out to 
travel smoothly over the fork, and closed by brass plates on the 
outer sides of the prongs. The brass covers are provided with 
recesses ¢ in. (4 cm.) deep, into which fit bent strips of clock- 
spring, 1 in. (2.5 cm.) long and 3 in. (1 cm.) wide. These springs 
rest with their two ends pressing against the outer surfaces of 
the prongs, and prevent the sliders from moving when the 


KENNELLY AND WHITING: 


[June 29 


2° — i FOoT. 


SCALE: 


Fic. 7-—Details of Drysdale fork 


1908] THE STROBOSCOPIC FORK 639 


fork is held upright. At the same time the sliders do not grip 
the prongs so tightly but that they are readily slid along by 
strings which are fastened to them. These strings pass over 
guide-pulleys of aluminum, some on the base and others on the 
prongs, and are clamped under screws carried by the aluminum 
wheels J, near the apex of the fork. The strings lie normally 


Fic. 8——Perspective view of variable-frequency fork 


slack, and vibrate with the fork. Tension is applied in either 
direction by the hand of the observer on one of the wheels /. 
The wheels are clamped on a common shaft in such a manner 
that they exert equal and symmetrical tensions on the two strings 
and pull the sliders along-evenly. The sliders carry pointers 
that move over graduated scales, from which the speed of the 


fork can be read directly. 


[June 29 


KENNELLY AND WHITING: 


640 


yaioy Aouonbarj-a[qeliva jo s[tejaq--—6§ “917 


(Panowasy vaaIDS PUO /2ayYM PIHOMIOS YWIM)—MTA/A SOS 


1908] THE STROBOSCOPIC FORK 641 


The fork is driven by the electromagnet, D, held between the 
prongs in a brass sleeve, mounted on an adjustable aluminum 
sole-plate. The electromagnet spool carries 15 layers, each of 
35 turns of enameled copper wire 0.0165 in. (0.42 mm.) enameled 
to 0.018 in. (0.456 mm.), and offering a resistance of about 3.25 
ohms. There is a very light steel spring fastened to each prong 
near the electromagnet, and one of these springs is used to open 
and close the circuit. by a platinum-tipped contact, vibrating 
against the tip of an adjustable milled-head brass screw, F, set 
in an insulated aluminum split post. The resilience of the contact 
spring must have no appreciable effect on the speed of the fork, 
as is easily tested by watching a synchronously rotating target 
while turning the axis of the fork slowly by the handle. In order 
to suppress sparking at the vibrating contacts, a spool H, carry- 
ing a few feet of insulated german-silver wire, of about 70 ohms 


- resistance, is connected permanently in shunt to the contacts. 


Current is supplied to the electromagnet from a single dry cell of 
standard type, having an electromotive force of 1.45 volts, and an 
internal resistance of about one-third ohm. The average current 
strength used in operating the fork is about 0.15ampere. The dry 
cell, Z, is held in spring clips, in such a manner that inserting the 
cell into the clips automatically inserts the cell into the circuit, or 
effects the necessary electric connections. The amplitude of 
vibration of the prongs of the fork is about $4 in. (8.2 mm.) at 
the slits, on each side of the zero position, or position of rest, 
which produces a maximum cyclic velocity of about 1 foot 
(30 cm.) per second at the normal speed of the fork. Since the 
slits pass each other travelling in opposite directions their 
relative velocity is about 2 feet (60 cm.) per second, and the: 
duration of each peep through the slits will be one three-, 
thousandth second, or one one-hundred-eighty-thousandth 
minute. A target rotating at 1800 rev. per min. will only move 
through one one-hundredth of a revolution during each peep, and 
since the pitch of the teeth on the outer edge of the target is one- 
eighteenth of revolution, the blurring of the visual image, . 
due to the motion during the! intervals of vision, will only 
be about one-sixth of the pitch: . The blurring is not trouble- 
some if the motion during each peep is distinctly less than 
one-half of the pitch in the pattern under examination. The 
higher the speed of rotation, therefore, the greater must be: 
the speed of the slits, either by increase of vibration amplitude 
or increase of frequency, and the narrower must be the slits, 


642 KENNELLY AND WHITING: [June 29 


other things being equal. The same result will be produced, 
however, at high steam-turbine speeds, by using targets of 
smaller number of teeth in the pattern, so as to increase the pitch. 

The instrument is held by the handle,G. The handle carries 
a small contact key, which is closed by the hand grasp, for auto- 
matically interrupting the voltaic circuit when the apparatus 
is laid aside. The weight of the instrument complete as seen 
in Figs. 8 and 9 is less than 6 lb. (2.65 kg.). 

A pair of brass rods support aluminum sheets that shield 
the observer’s eye from extraneous light when looking through 
the slits. The sheets also carry the scales for reading off the 
speed of the fork, and they fold over the prongs so as to cover the 
slits when the fork is out of service. 

Process of observing. In order to make a measurement, it is 
necessary to fasten the target concentrically upon an end of 
the rotating shaft whose speed is required to be ascertained. 
Cement, or soft sealing wax, will serve for a dynamo- or motor- 
shaft. A shaft that runs warm, and has an oily surface, is hard 
to apply cement upon. In such cases, a metallic spring clip 
has been used. When neither end of the shaft projects from a 
bearing, it is difficult to fasten the target on. Sometimes, how- 
ever, the spokes of the wheels on the shaft will serve as a target. 
If not, it may be necessary to mount the target on a light aux- 
iliary shaft in bearings, and drive a pulley on the same from the 
shaft which is without projecting ends, by an endless tape belt, 
so as to bring the speed of the target into definite relation to 
the speed of the shaft under test. 

The target should receive good daylight illumination. In 
the absence of such natural illumination, excellent results can 
be secured from a single 16 candle-power lamp and opaque re- 
flecting shade, supported near to the target, so as to throw on its 
surface an illumination of about 25 foot-candles (300 meter- 
hefners). 

The observer takes a convenient position facing the revolving 
target, holds the fork in his left hand, with the prongs vertical, 
and looks through the slits. If he is sitting, he rests the alum- 
inum foot of the baseplate on his knee. He then moves the 
wheels with his right hand, until one of the patterns on the 
target, preferably the external one, comes to a standstill. He 
then reads the speed from the scale. 

Target. After many experiments on different sizes, colors 
and patterns of target, the writers have selected in preference 


1908] THE STROBOSCOPIC FORK 643 


that shown in Fig. 10, bearing white markings on a black ground. 
Its diameter is 9.5 in. (24.2 cm.). It is made, with advantage, 
on paper, with the aid of a stencil, and pasted on a_ backing 
disc of cardboard, pasteboard, or sheet metal, for mounting on 
the rotating shaft. It will be seen that it differs only in minor 
details from the target indicated in Dr. Drysdale’s earlier paper, 
(Fig. 2). 

If the pattern on a rotating target has a positions of symmetry 
per revolution, and makes # revolutions per unit of time, and 


Fic. 10--Target for use with variable-frequency fork 


if the speed of the fork’s vibration is such that it provides p 
peeps per unit of time, then the pattern will appear stationary 
through the fork when (am) and / are in integral numerical 
relation. Ordinarily, (a) is greater than p; so that standstill 


: : an. i s 
occurs in the picture when ps is any integer. For instance, 


either a pentagon or a five-pointed star, rotating about its center 
of figure, has 5 positions of symmetry per revolution. If the 


. 644 KENNELLY AND WHITING: [June 29 


fork gives p = 1800 peeps per minute, and the speed of rotation 


: ; : ; an _ 9400 2 
is say just m = 1080 revs. per min., then ? 1800 —ip rath 


exact integer, and the picture will appear stationary. Moreover, 
the pentagon will be moving through three positions of sym- 
metry, or 216°, between successive peeps. 

The target of Fig. 10 contains a square, a pentagon, a hexagon, 
a 14-point star, and an 18-point star. The fork has a mean 
speed giving 1800 peeps per minute. The square, having 4 
positions of symmetry, will appear stationary at 450, 900, 1350, 
1800, 2250, 2700, 3150, or 3600 rev. per min., that is, at every 
450 rev. per min. or quarter of synchronous speed. Moreover, 
the image of the square will appear doubled, although fainter, 
at the intermediate speeds of 225, 675, 1125, etc., rev. per min. ; 
that is at every 225 rev. per min., or eighth of synchronous speed. 

The pentagon, with 5 positions of symmetry per revolution, 
will stand still at every 360 rev. per min., or fifth of synchronous 
speed. It also appears stationary, doubled but less plainly, 
at every 180 rev. per min., or tenth of synchronous speed. 

The hexagon, with 6 positions of symmetry per revolution, 
will stand still at every 300 rev. per min‘ or sixth of synchronous 
speed. It doubles and will stand ‘still’at every 150 rev. per 
min., or twelfth of synchronous speed. 

The 14-point star, with 14 positions of symmetry per revolu- 
tion, will stand still attevery 128. 6 rev. per min., or fourteenth 
of synchronous speed 

The 18-point star, or “external circle, with 18 positions of sym- 
metry per revolution swwill’stina® still at every 100 rev. per min., 
or eighteenth of synchronous speed. Since nine of the pots 
are long, and intermediate points are short, the series of 18 will 
be stationary and clear for even hundreds, and stationary but 
blurred on the inner edge, for odd hundreds of rev. per min. 

The reason for selecting the above described particular set 
of ‘target patterns is that it includes the following series of 
integral values for a: 

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, and 18. In other words, 
standstill of some pattern will be produced with the normal 
fork speed at any half, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, 
eighth, ninth, tenth, twelfth, fourteenth, or eighteenth of syn- 
_chronous speed. In addition to this, the speed of the fork can 
_ be varied adjustably within a range of 5% above or 5% below 
“normal. This is sure to bring some pattern to standstill at any 


1908] THE STROBOSCOPIC FORK 645 


except very low speeds of rotation. By means of a graphic chart, 
and a little examination of the pattern, the speed of rotation 
can be read off directly from the pointers on the sliders. A 
displacement of 1 mm. (0.0394 in.) corresponds, on the average, 
to a change in fork speed of about 1.25 peeps per minute, or less 
than one-tenth of one per cent. 

The scale of speed variation with slider displacement is not 
evenly graduated. The successive intervals correspond to an 
equation of the second degree. The distance that must be 
moved for a change of one revolution per minute is about 20% 
greater when the sliders are approaching their limit near the 
middle of the prongs, than near their limit towards the end of 
the prongs. This means that the scale must be prepared from 
a suitable number of calibrating observations. The simplest 
way to calibrate the scale is to keep the speed of the rotating 
target constant, by the control of an observer with an auxiliary 
fork, and to count the number of revolutions per minute of the 
image through the calibrated fork, with a stop watch, as the sliders 
are shifted from point to point along the scale, say 1 cm. at a 
time. 

Applications of the instrument. As pointed out in Dr. Drys- 
dale’s papers, the stroboscopic fork is a very convenient instru- 
ment for measuring speeds with precision, and particularly 
for measuring small variations of speed. The device is, in effect, 
a speed-variation microscope. The instrument is useless when 
the speed is rapidly varying through a wide range in an irregular 
manner, except that it gives in such cases ample qualitative 
evidence of such irregularity. Cyclic variations of speed, as 
in the hunting of a synchronous motor, if not too rapid, can be 
measured by observing the angle of oscillation of the target 
pattern. Variations in the frequency of an alternator, or of slip 
in a motor, can be observed with ease. There is something 
fascinating in the pictures presented by the instrument, which 
are very striking when observed for the first time. 

Limits of accuracy in the use of the apparatus. The degree of 
accuracy of the simple stroboscopic fork is remarkably high, 
and of the order of one part in ten thousand. The variation of 
fork speed with temperature is about 0.01 per cent. per degree 
cent. according to measurements renorted.* In the fork with 
adjustable sliders described in this paper, the degree of precision 
in speed is reduced to some extent, owing to errors in the parallel 


_ 8, Electrical Review article, Sept. 1906, 


646 KENNELLY AND WHITING: {June 29 


movement of the two sliders, and to errors in reading off their 
position along the scale. Nevertheless, the degree of accuracy 
remaining is much greater than is ordinarily needed in engi- 
neering measurements. Moreover, the degree of accuracy 
with which slow variations in speed can be observed is as high 
in the fork with adjustable sliders, as in the simple fixed fork. 
At 1800 rev. per min., it is easily 1 part in 1800, and it increases 
in direct proportion with the speed.* 

So far as the writers are aware, there is no patent on the 
method of measuring speeds here described, and it is free to all 
users. 


*The writers desire to express their indebtedness to Dr. Drysdale, 
not only for the matters appearing in his papers, but also for illustra- 
tioi.s and suggestions directly received from him. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 647 


Discussion on ‘‘ THE MEASUREMENT oF RoTARY SPEEDS OF 
Dynamo MACHINES BY THE STROBOSCoPIC ForRK.”’ 
Atiantic-City, N. J., June-29,-1908 


J. B. Taylor: The stroboscopic disc illuminated by an alter- 
nating-current arc or incandescent lamp has been used for a 
number of years to determine the speed of induction motors, 
synchronous machinery, and other pieces of apparatus. This 
method of obtaining intermittent illumination is much simpler 
than by means of the fork described in this paper, and for some 
purposes gives the desired information with greater accuracy. 

The distinction between the two methods is that the. fork 
gives very accurate speed determinations, while the illumina- 
tion by an alternating-current source of light gives even more 
accurate relative speeds of apparatus and frequency in alter- 
nating-current systems. In operating and testing alternating- 
current machinery the electrical engineer is more often inter- 
ested in the relative speeds of generator and motor than in the 

~exact determination of speed referred to the clock. For ex- 
ample, in testing an induction motor it may be desirable to 
know whether the slip under a given load is, say, 2 or 2.1%, 
while it is immaterial to know whether the motor is actually 
tunning at say 1800 or 1795 rev. per min. For this test the 
alternating-current illumination gives the slip directly, while 
the fork would require simultaneous observations on the motor, 
the generator or the synchronous motor. 

When studying pulsation of synchronous machinery or an- 
gular lag of synchronous motors, synchronous converters, etc., 
with variable loads, excitations, and reactances in circuit, the 
alternating-current arc is again superior to the stroboscopic 
fork; for while the fork can give general indications of pulsa- 
tion, it can give no indication of the angular lag referred to. 

I have found these stroboscopic discs useful in another way 
not mentioned in the paper—in the determination of the speed 
of very light pieces of apparatus which have insufficient power 
to drive speed indicators or tachometers. [or this or any 
work where actual speed rather than relative speed is desired 
the fork will be found useful, and I think that the authors of 
this paper should be thanked for having brought it to such 
a compact and convenient form. 

C. A. Perkins: I have been doing some work with the strobo- 
scopic fork, and any one who will try it in the laboratory will 
be interested to find how it smooths out characteristic curves, 
or any curves depending on frequency, to have an accurate 
device for determining the speed. 

I wish to call attention to the range of speed obtained without 
having any shifting device. Use a tuning fork making thirty 
vibrations a second, or 1800 per minute, and the speeds given 
in the first column will be obtained. A fork which makes 
twenty-five vibrations instead of thirty gives the speeds in the 


648 THE STROBOSCOPIC FORK [June 29 


second column, while a fork with twenty vibrations gives the 
speeds in the third column. 


Vibrations 2eeee eee 30 25 20 
full-speed oo5 seer ve et ceicks 1800 1500 1200 
one=halbivveccess een. oie 900 750 600 
one=third 1. ascetic eee 600 500 400 
one-fourthaseeene oe eee 450 Bho 300 
Oisee S18 Evin ie ee 300 250 200 


The first fork gives, without any slider, all the speeds called 
for in 60-cycle, alternating-current machines. 

The method that I have used for observing synchronism is 
different from that described by Dr. Kennelly, and was suggested 
to me by the device which I mentioned at the Asheville meet- 
ing, for measuring the slip of motors, by means of a disc on the 
shaft, with a hole or slit in the disc. If such a disc, provided 
with a single hole, is placed on the end of the shaft of the ma- 
chine whose speed is to be measured, and if the experimenter 
stands so that he looks through this hole at the fork, he will 
have one look at the fork at each revolution. Suppose the shaft 
to be rotating at a speed of 1800, then the two are in exact 
synchronism, and the fork will seem to stand still. Now if the 
motor speeds up five revolutions per minute, he will see the fork 
apparently make five vibrations per minute. Instead of adjust- 
ing the fork, the experimenter counts the apparent vibrations 
of the fork. They can be counted up to 150 vibrations per 
minute, so that the one running at 1800 vibrations can be 
used for all speeds between 1650 and 1950, the one running at 
1500, from 1650 down to 1350, andso on. Therefore, without 
any slider it is possible to use three tuning forks for all speeds 
in ordinary testing work. At the higher speeds, one hole in 
the disc is sufficient, but at the lower speeds the fork is seen at 
such long intervals that it seems to flicker, and it will be neces- 
sary to have two or three slots, according to the speed which 
is to be used. I have used this fork especially for alternating- 
current work; it is a simple, satisfactory, and inexpensive ap- 
paratus for this purpose. 

C. H. Sharp: I think most of us are more or less familiar 
with the various applications of the stroboscopic method to speed 
measurement, but I wish to express my sense of our indebtedness 
to Dr. Kennelly and Mr. Whiting for having reduced this method 
to such a practical and convenient form for actual use. 

It is not difficult in a well-equipped laboratory to assemble 
a combination of tuning forks and rotating discs, or something 
of that kind, and make it work nicely there, but here is a 
thing that can be picked up and taken to any place where a 
test is to be performed, where we merely attach a disc to the 
rotating element and measure the speed accurately, or measure 
the slip or variation of speed accurately, 


—— 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 649 


A. E. Kennelly (by letter): It has been found that no target 
is ordinarily required when the fork is used to measure the speed 
of alternating-current machines for 60-cycle frequency. It 
suffices with such machines to illumine the polar projections 
of the rotor, and examine these through the fork, in order to 
measure their speed, unless the speed and frequency should be 
more than 5% in error. 


I : 


‘ ie ¥ 
9 es he ee ee 


A paper presented at the 25th annual convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Atlantic City, N. J., June 29, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I.E.E, 


NOTES ON THE ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT OF THE 
BILTMORE ESTATE 


BY CHARLES E. WADDELL 


Under the conditions of modern life electricity is an indis- 
pensable adjunct to the successful conduct of an establish- 
ment the size of Biltmore House; in this residence, besides the 
power, lighting and signal service, it is now also used for heating. . 

For the last two years both the hot water system and the 
laundry have been operated by electricity. Before entering upon 
a detailed description of the systems, the reasons for the sub- 
stitution of electricity for fuel will be briefly stated. Under 
former conditions, to supply the laundry with steam and to 
maintain a supply of hot water, it was necessary to keep both a 
hot water heater and a high pressure boiler constantly fired. 
To operate the plant required the services of three attendants. 
At certain hours of every day a portion of the attendants’ time 
was required by other duties; but in the summer months and 
when the house was unoccupied, their entire time was virtually 
bestowed upon this very small duty. Anthracite coal, costing 
approximately $11 per long ton, was used. The difficulty in 
maintaining an adequate supply, together with the noise and 
dirt incidental to unloading, and the cost of the removal of the 
ashes, rendered its use undesirable and very expensive. 

The majority of southern hydroelectric corporations furnish 
power under certain imposed conditions as to peak, load-factor 
and the like, at approximately 8.5 mills per kilowatt-hour. A 
study of all the conditions and a review of these facts indicated 
that economy would result from an abandonment of fuel and 
the introduction of electric heat. 

: 651 


652 WADDELL; ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT. [June 29 


The plant as it stands has a capacity of 167 kw. and it has 
thus far fulfilled all expectations as to economy and reliability. 

Hot Water System. The hot water system is that common to 
alllarge buildings. It consists of a loop system of piping, leading 
from storage tanks, and so laid out that gravity maintains a 
constant circulation. As a consequence, the temperature is to 
all practical purposes uniform throughout the house, and on no 
line is it necessary to withdraw a quantity of cold water before 
the hot comes. The stand-by losses are of course excessive, 
but the comfort more than compensates for the additional cost. 
Two storage tanks are employed, each with a capacity of 500 
gal. Into the top of one of these cold water from the main 
enters; from the side and bottom aloop of three-inch pipe is 
taken out and carried to the heaters which are located some 
twenty-five feet lower. The heaters are the lowest point of the 
system. 

Heat was formerly supplied by a type of heater, which closely 
resembled a self-contained vertical tubular boiler. To main- 
tain an adequate supply of water at a temperature of 200° fahr. 
required a fuel consumption of ten pounds of anthracite coal per 
hour. Tests of long duration showed this to vary but little. 

The electric heater is a cylindrical steel tank, three feet in 
diameter by five long, containing twenty flues arranged in two 
concentric circles, and the whole closely resembling in appear- 
ance a miniature horizontal tubular boiler. Each of the twenty 
flues contains a heating element of 5 kw. capacity; consequently 
the total capacity of the heater is 100 kw. The connecting 
terminals are brought out at one end of the tubes; at the other 
end a nut holds the elements in place. The withdrawal of the 
element is accomplished by simply removing the nut. 

The electric heater is installed beside the coal heater and the 
two are provided with valves so that either or both may be used 
as occasion demands. 

Electricity is supplied in the form of a three-phase, 60-cycle, 
alternating current at a potential of 230 volts. A switchboard 
panel is installed immediately in front of the heater and the 
elements are grouped thereon in three banks, each bank con- 
nected to phase, a feature of great value in balancing the load 
on the transformers. The power-factor of the elements is unity. 
This was determined by observing the current consumption first 
on the direct-current circuit and then on the alternating, the 
amperage in each case being the same. 


1908]. WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT 653° ) 


The form of the hot watér heater and the uniform rate of fuel 
consumption led to the conclusion that its efficiency was con- 
siderably higher than the ordinary steam boiler, and probably 
approximated 65 per cent. Assuming the coal to have a Asae 
value of 14,000 B.t.u., the effective value would be 9100 B.t.u. 
and since 1 kw-hr. is Seateatert to 3412 B.t.u., it appeared that 
an input of 26.6 kw. would be an equivalent. 

The approximation was so close that when the electric heater 
was placed in service, 30 kw., were applied; and with the excep- 


Fic. 1—Fuel dnd electric hot-water heaters 


tan of a- ok Bee in he be evenings when 5 or 10 kw. more are 
necessary, or the early mornings whén not so many are needed, 
this input has been varied but little. 

The energy input in any apparatus is divided into useful work 
and heat losses; in heating apparatus since the entire work is. . 
the production of heat, where the elements are totally immersed, 
the efficiency theoretically should be 100 per cent.; this is 
modified to some extent by the heat absorbed by the Goxeriat 
of which the element i is made. 


654 WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT _ [June 29 


In order to determine the actual working efficiency of the 
above heater, its piping was disconnected from the system, cold 
water was introduced, and the valve so adjusted that with a 
fixed input of 40 kw. the water discharged was at constant 


iad Hibs 

i eaten a fs eae 

7 Se bd ae Dia WE ad PA 

7 ial EE Ere PY es td PP 
Rea Sar fae 


GSES EEA ES BP PS SS 
a ar 


KILOWATT -HOURS 


OcT, NOV. DEC. WAN. FEB. MAR, _ APR, MAY JUN. JUL. AUG. SEP 


Veh ge 


temperature. The discharge was weighed, the input meter 
read at the start and conclusion of the test, and from these data 
the net efficiency found to be approximately 85 per cent. That 
is to say, 85 per cent. of the input becomes available and effec- 
tive, in the hot water system; the other 15 per cent. is lost in 


1908] WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT 655 


radiation from the boiler shell, through the tubes, and from the 
attachments and piping. The author is of the opinion that the 
recorded efficiency is too low and may be considered as ultra 
conservative. Nevertheless it represents the efficiency of the 
plant under everday working conditions, and is not a test under 
artificial conditions, such as electric apparatus is often subjected 
to and which bear scant relation to working conditions. 

The water at Biltmore contains a number of carbonates, 
causing boiler flues to form scale and incrustations rapidly and 
to an excessive degree; and with all steel piping which is sub- 
jected to a cycle of temperature change there is a continuous 
struggle to remove this coating. In the light of experience, 
although it would materially increase the cost, the use of 
copper flues instead of the iron ones now employed seems a 
justifiable expense. With a flue that would not retain scale, 
_ the formation of scale on the s@Il would be in the nature of 
additional heat insulation and would be beneficial rather than 
otherwise. 

Ordinarily the deterioration of electric heating elements 
appears to be rapid; 10,000 hours is seemingly the maximum 
guarantee to be had. In the case of an element employed in 
heating water, where the element is at all times submerged, 
the maximum attainable temperature difference is but 180° fahr. 
and the deterioration is nothing like so rapid as in other classes 
of service. 

Speaking in the dual capacity of purchaser and seller of power, 
the writer does not hesitate to say that electric heating for hot 
water service is the most satisfactory and profitable load to be 
had. Peak loads are the rare exception; close regulation is non- 
essential; and momentary interruptions to service are of no im- 
portance; and even in prolonged shut-downs the slow thermal 
change of the liquid is such that ample time to start the auxiliary 
fuel plant is afforded. 

Fig. 2 is a chart showing the monthly current consumption 
for a year; 20,000 kw-hr. per month is considered normal. When 
less is recorded the consumption was purposely curtailed in 
order to keep the total current for the estate within the contract 
allowance. 

The cost of the fuel heater, complete, installed, was about $350. 
The cost of the electric heater, complete, installed, and including 
switchboard, foundations, and pipe connections, was approxi- 
mately $1200. 


656 WADDELL; ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT [June 29 


LAUNDRY EQUIPMENT 
The electric equipment installed consists of: 
1 Dry room heater, capacity approximately 16 kw. 
1 Mangle, 48 in. by 16 in., capacity 8 kw. 
4 4-iron stoves, each with a capacity of 2 kw., total 8 kw. 
1 Steam generator, capacity 35 kw. 
Total capacity 67 kw. 


From the main switchboard current is conducted to the 


Fic. 3—Rear view of 100 kw. hot water heater 


laundry by three 500,000 cir. mil cables which terminate in a 
three-wire cabinet, the capacity of the panel being 1000 amperes. 
All conductors are run in galvanized conduit, the most sub- 
stantial construction is followed, the aim being to secure an 
installation comparing favorably with steam apparatus in sim- 
plicity and durability. All laundry apparatus works inter- 
changeably on direct or alternating current. 


1908] WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT 657 


The dry room with a cubical contents of 640 feet is provided 
with three heating elements in the form of plates which are 
supported on porcelain insulators resting on the floor. Con- 
nections from the controlling switch box are made through 
asbestos covered wire and mechanical, in preference to soldered. 


Fic. 4—Dry room, showing clothes racks and air flue 


joints are used where possible. The dryer is equipped with the 
ordinary form of vertical clothes racks travelling on rollers. 
To accelerate the process of drying an 18 in. galvanized iron flue 
leads from the top of the room to a nearby chimney. In laying 
out this apparatus it appeared feasible to supply only heat 
sufficient to maintain circulation; the theory being that rapid 


658 WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT [June 29 


passage of warmed air would more or less mechanically exhaust 
the moisture. 

In this connection it may be of interest to show how the 
equivalent heating capacity was determined. Originally the 
room was equipped with 108 sq. ft. of radiation in the form of 
lin. pipe. The steam pressure was kept at 60 lb. gauge; repre- 
senting a temperature of 309° fahr. The temperature of the 
air in the dry room was usually 185° fahr., a difference of 124° 
fahr. Assuming that 1 in. wrought iron pipe radiates 2.9 B.t.u. 
per sq. ft. per degree difference of temperature; and since 1 
kw-hr. is equivalent to 3412 B.t.u.; we have: 


2.9X 124X108 


3419 = 11.4 kw. 


Practically 12 kw.; a capacity on which all estimates were 
based. The discrepancy between the calculated and installed 
capacities is due to our use of certain elements on hand that 
would otherwise have been idle; and the greater capacity appears 
to facilitate the work. 

The following is the average weekly performance, the dryer 
being used three days, and each day listed separately for com- 
parison. 


Monday, March 30, 1908. General household wash, such as shirts, 
underclothes, stockings, table linen, towels, sheets, etc. 


Number of hours used saraswat eee ae en 10.5 
“articles: dried « Ves esenneneie ty tie Meee ae 339 

Weight “ Ce Gry sib inace.chattaciet ape cee 103 

Average temperature: 00... mr. nol eect ee ee 101° fahr. 

Number of lb. water expelled...................... 84 

IG i ee MERE RST Tee MT is eee oe Si od ae 124 

lb, water expelled pers kw-hr-i.Jk..) aces one een EOS 

Ibs clothes.dried) (“9 “SOc aaree eee rte eee ee 0.83 

Number: ofspiecesia ig ait Sent aera ort eben ener eeenereers 2.73 


Thursday, April 2, 1908. Used for drying 18 shirts only. Shirts had 
been starched. 


Number ot bourssised oc. aa ic ie ceeine nea ee ete 4 

< <articlés"dnied's icra enn eee eee 18 
Weight “ i Ory [barks shane cht ee tae ee nee oe 9 
AVErage em perature facts te mieenin ie tte ee a teen 110° fahr. 
Number: of/Ib. water expelled c)c))o mutans ode eee 12 


* 


1908] WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT 659 


The heater was turned on at 8 a.m. and in empty state reached 
working temperature in one hour. Clothes were put in 1.5 
hours after current was turned on; the mere act of drying, 
therefore, required 33 kw-hr. 


Friday, April 3, 1908. Second general wash. 


NiGgnhabetmot hoturceuse dere rnab. vetos are eer. tet ier 7.25 

S EAT EICLESMG TIE Cini mimrcret a wate ae ce clita st alata 276 
Weight “ Sf RAT: Di atejtnir reek era otter iii eee ate LAD 
FAVELA COLLET Pea UULeis seer nnas chee Stree eormer gabe os 110° fahr. 


Fic. 5—Electrically heated mangle 


Number of lb. water expelled.............-0.-.-5-- 182 
Icey ee ee ee eae oa A oR elses felis lon er's b's eho eilejie sin (29 125 
lb. water expelled Devi kam Bt mete sets eet fie bin o> agen ens bee 
Tineclot hes cic samaeiike Scam Ciret art: Pierson lose Syio dusts er 1.14 


Niammbert Of pieces. caig elastics «itis Popiem eg oh -.2.20 
Clothes ordinarily enter the dryer at a temperature of 83° fahr., 
having previously been raised to a high temperature in the pro- 
cess of boiling and washing. 
The steam mangle formerly used was converted to electric 
service by providing the rotating drum with heating elements. 


660 WADDELL; ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT [June 29 


Connection with the circuit is effected by means of a 3-ring 
collector and carbon brushes. Three degrees of heat may be 
had, the maximum input is 8 kw. and the heating intensity is 475 
watts per sq. ft. of surface. The performance of this machine 
is far more satisfactory than when used with steam; especially 
gratifying is the absence of leaky stuffing boxes. 

The record of an average day’s work is given below: 


Current turned on mangle at 6.30 a.m. 

Mangle started to work at 8.30 a.m., stopped at 2.30 p.m., off 45 
min. for lunch; off 30 min. to cool; total hours current was 
on, 6.45. 

Amperes, 45; volts, 118. 

Two girls working. Articles mangled were: towels, table cloths, 
napkins, sheets, bed spreads, pillow cases. 


Total weight articles.in Ib 


PA ENN OMAN: NS aos AS 221 
“"' ‘square feet saaipled.. ioc. 2: = v har sia eee 12,256. 
> number, of: PieceSoamenics seals « 6). 252 cs eee 471 
6s cw bro eon gears vlan 3 ahs 0 Siena ace meee 39.8 


All pieces were’ passed through twice, and many pieces three 
times, this accounts for the large surface area. The articles 
were cotton and linen. 

The cost of equipping this mangle, including freight, drayage 
and installation, was approximately $175. 

The diversity in weights, shapes-and uses of the sad irons 
in this laundry led to the selection of electric stoves in preference 
to electric irons. Experience has taught that such claims were 
given undue consideration, and I am now of the opinion that an 
equipment of-electric irons weighing from 7 to 12 Ib. would be 
preferable. For heating very special shaped irons, used on 
laces, etc., one stove might prove necessary. A consideration 
entirely apart from the merits of the irons has led to their partial 
abandonment, and that is that with the advent of the electric 
apparatus the temperature of the laundry was lowered to a 
degree where the ironed clothes would not “ air” properly, and 
it was found necessary to keep the coal stove going to overcome 
this obstacle. It appears that where clothing is at once stored, 
and not again immediately used, that this “ airing ”’ is essential 
to their preservation: With the coal stove working the use of 
the electric stoves was in the nature of a waste. 


Below is given the record of a day’s ironing using the electric 
stoves: 


1908] WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT 061 


Two girls worked six hours each. 
219 pieces ironed; articles were stockings, handkerchiefs, towels, 
napkins, pillow cases, petticoats, skirts. 


Grosseweic hte dam pl bite yaaa mae Ae aces fa eine tans 63 
Net # Shap, Nelinos hiekicca sts Seti RSG MAAS Ae ac a eee ty 41 
AGI Ob cry aneany mea BB'S Jp od o Beet Deer OR ENTS Oer SOMO CPSIC ORCC 24 


It required 40 minutes to bring stoves and irons to working 
temperature. An iron heats in 8 minutes after being returned 
to the stove, and will hold sufficient heat to iron from 4 to 7 
minutes, depending on the dampness of the article and the 
material. To properly iron a handkerchief Se 7 minutes, 
a bath towel 4 minutes. 


Fic. 6—Electric stoves for sad irons 


The foregoing data are submitted simply as an illustration of 
actual performance, and represent average results; they are 
given in detail that others working along the same line or being 
confronted with new problems may glean some help from our 
experience. When the plant was begun we quickly realized the 
dearth of available data; and I believe that if all experimenters 
will publish the results of their investigations, facts will be 
gathered from the mass of testimony which will result in im- 
proved and more efficient apparatus. 

Allusion has been made to the use of electric irons versus 
electric stoves; in connection with the former attention is called 


662 WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT {June 29 


to the matter of cords and attachments. These are the weak 
points in this class of apparatus. The cords get damp and short- 
circuit. the terminals break loose, and the insulation frays off. 


Fic. 7—Steam generator and laundry tubs 


For small irons and light service the existing practice is fairly 
good, but in heavy work, to insure success, a more substantial 
equipment must be designed. 

By far the most interesting piece of electrical apparatus at 


1908] WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT 663 


Biltmore is the steam generator. With the abolition of steam 
service some method of boiling the clothes had to be provided. 
Of the several suggested and tried forms, the one in use seems 
best suited to the requirements. In the winter when steam 
heat is on the house, it is in the direction of economy to use 
steam from the mains. For nine months of the year heat must 
be secured elsewhere. Boiling the clothes is an csscntial process. 
To retain intact the steam apparatus was an obvious desideratum ; 
to provide supplementary electric apparatus introduced com- 


100 

=n 
ae mia Emit 
wot I HSC EBaGAl 
PATE MAE Fi Ragas 
Sime she MER he Lelie eae 
aot] | LY i pf —4 


CURRENT, KILOWATT-HOURS 
© 
oe 


| | 

SCECUEEEE EMEC eet 
Sn See ee yy | 
CSD eSBs Pees Be 
CR OSS eee 


;834656678 - 10 1) 02 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 BI BE 23 B+ BS &E 27 28 29 JOS! 


“TIME. DAVS 
Fic. 8 


plications; and a compromise was effected by generating steam 
with electricity, piping the generator into the steam mains, a 
series of valves rendering the two sources of heat interchangeable. 
The steam generator consists of a group of five 3-in. vertical 
pipes. Around the pipes the heating elements are placed. 
The pipes are interconnected at both top and bottom; the top 
is provided with a steam dome; and the whole is equipped with 
water column, steam gauge, pop valve and inlet water regulator, 
The function of the regulator is to keep the water level in the 


664 WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT [June 29 


boiler constant. Feed water is taken from the hot water mains. 
At the base, and integral with the frame, are five switches, each 
controlling a 7 kw. element. 

Steam at practically zero pressure is conducted to five tubs 
and there discharged through perforated pipes located in the 
bottoms. The tubs are made of porcelain and contain about 
2c ftreach: 

When new the generator was tested to determine its evapora- 
tive efficiency, this was found to be between 95 and 100 
per cent. The appliances at hand were not adapted to precise 
work, but the result is not very far wrong in my opinion. The 
test was made by bringing the contents of the boiler to the 
boiling point, marking the height of the water on the gauge 
glass, evaporating a given weight and ceasing when the water in 
the boiler was level with the starting point. The meters were 
read at start and finish, and the input determined. The varying 
barometer and the inaccuracies of the thermometers introduced 
error, and it is by no means certain that the mctcrs werc exactly 
right, although they were new and of the highest grade. 

In service the performance is as follows: 


92 lb. water in tub. 
7flbsinen as ae 
To raise to boiling point requires 10 kw-hr. 
Clothes are boiled 20 min. and current consumed is 4 kw-hr. 
Totalkkw-hr- per Gatch merceraa eras sete eee 14 


Digressing from the subject, it seems to the author that this 
form of steam generator is admirably adapted to the service of 
train heating, where steam and electric locomotives are alter- 
nately employed. Worked in connection with a return system 
of piping, water storage only sufficient to supply leakage would 
be necessary. The generator being located on the locomotive 
the increase in weight on the drivers would be an advantage. 
The low cost, and the simplicity of the apparatus together with 
the fact that it would fit existing equipment should, I think, 
render an experiment worth while. 

Plate Warmer—In addition to the two large classes of service 
that have been described, there is installed in the butler’s 
pantry an electric plate warmer. This piece of apparatus is 
in the form of two shelves, each 24.5 in. by 43 in. and each 
with a rated consumpticn of 840 watts; an equivalent heating 
effect of 0.8 watts per square inch of surface. Each shelf is 


1908] WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT 665 


provided with its own switch, the ordinary double-pole indicating 
snap switch is employed for control, the wiring is of the fire- 
proof form of insulation, and the current supply is taken from 
a nearby lighting main. The lighting system being designed 
for operation on either the alternating bus-bars or the direct- 
current storage battery bus-bars, it follows that, like the laundry, 
the plate warmer works interchangeably on the two classes of 
service. 

At the time of purchase this type ef heating apparatus sold 
for approximately $6 per square foot. 

Conclusion—As was aptly pointed out in an editorial of a 
representative technical paper not long since, electric heating has 
suffered from the fact that its economic possibilities have usually 
been considered from its thermal unit value; and the lesson to 
be drawn from the Biltmore installation is that a careful 
analysis of all the conditions may disclose the fact that while 
theoretically a disparity exists, nevertheless economy may accrue 
due to the better operating conditions. 

Enthusiastic advocates of electric heating are to-day making 
broad claims which in a measure mislead the uninitiated; this 
in the author’s opinion should be discouraged. The prices at 
which electric power is generally sold and the state of the 
heating art do not as yet admit a wholesale and unreserved 
usurpation of the heating field; and it is a question whether this 
state ever will be reached. One thing, however, is certain, and 
that is that Utopian dreams and unsubstantiated claims are 
going to do much harm and no good; and all projected heating 
installations of any magnitude should be accorded careful 
attention and considered in the light of an engineering under- 
taking, not merely as a matter of domestic or commercial in- 
stallation. 

We have found that the standard forms of enclosed fuses when 
continuously worked at or near their rated capacity on heating 
apparatus rapidly deteriorate, failing without apparent cause. 
For this fact I have mo explanation to offer. 

Experience leads to the conclusion that for heavy heating 
work a number of auxiliary appliances accepted as standards 
in lighting work will have to be either remodeled or abandoned. 
The temperature at which heating elements work renders the 
use of solder undesirable; in a number of instances that have 
come under our observation the terminals have melted off. 
The use of fire-proof or asbestos covered wire is to be preferred 
to rubber, even in conduit installations. 


ve 


666 WADDELL: ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT [June 29 


Where cords are required it would appear better construction 
to use flexible armored cable. For stationary apparatus the 
switching devices should as far as possible form an integral 
part of the apparatus; and where necessary to separate the two, 
connection between them should be made through conduit, and 
both switch and heating element be arranged to mechanically 
unite with the conduit. In the majority of places where electric 
heating apparatus is employed water or steam is present, and 
for this reason the switching devices should be accorded special 
attention. The open knife switch is altogether unsuitable; 
the enclosed knife switch some, but not much, better; and the oil 
switch entirely out of place. A little mechanical ingenuity 
bestowed upon these details would effect a decided advance in 
the art and would eliminate one source of trouble. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 667 


Discussion on ‘‘ Notes on THE Evectric WEatinc PLANT oF 
THE BittTMorRE Estate.” Atvantic Ciry, N. J., June 29, 
1908 


Percy H. Thomas: This paper is a little out of the ordinary, 
but the subject which it treats is well worth the attention of 
light and power men, as indicating how under certain condi- 
tions additional load may be obtained. I think the main lesson 
to be taken from what Mr. Waddell says, is that it is necessary 
to treat such matters as engineering problems when dealing 
with electric heating on a large scale, just as in the case of the 
boiling of water on a large scale in steam-electric plants. The 
heating of tea kettles and curling irons can be handled satis- 
factorily without special engineering training, but when large 
quantities of water are to be heated by electrical means of any 
kind it is necessary to treat the case as an engineering problem. 

Elmer A. Sperry: Will Mr. Waddell please give us the de- 
tails of his flash boiler? 

Charles E. Waddell: The boiler is made of five 3-inch pipes, 
each six feet long; around each pipe a heating element is wound. 
The elements are externally protected and thermally insulated, 
with metal jacket and dead air space. All five tubes connect 
together at the top, forming a steam header. Water, from the 
hot-water system, enters at the bottom of the tubes, the quan- 
tity admitted being controlled by an automatic regulator the 
function of which is to maintain the water-level at a fixed point. 
The boiler is also provided with a low-pressure safety-valve, 
the discharge from which is conducted into a nearby waste 
pipe. In operation the device is cleanly, noiseless, and auto- 
matic. 

John H. Finney: At what price must current be purchased 
in order to compare with fuel—anthracite coal, for instance? 

Charles E. Waddell: Tests on the large steam heating boilers 
at Biltmore have demonstrated that under normal working 
conditions their efficiency is about 50 per cent. Assuming that 
a pound of anthracite coal has a theoretical heating value of 
14,000 B.t.u., and allowing an efficiency of 50 per cent., the 
effective value would be 7000 B.t.u. A kilowatt-hour is prac- 
tically 3500 B.t.u., hence two kilowatt-hours are equivalent to 
one pound of coal, assuming of course, that the kilowatt-hour 
is delivered at 100% efficiency. 

Anthracite coal with us costs from $10 to $11 per long ton, 
virtually one-half cent a pound. To be on a parity, two kilo- 
watt-hours would have to cost one-half cent, hence at a rate of 
one-fourth cent per kilowatt-hour. 

Taken on the whole this is not altogether a fair comparison; 
for while it establishes the physical equivalent under working 
conditions between fuel and electrical energy, it does not take 
into account the time-element and stand-by losses, both of 
which are important factors in the economy of any plant. 


668 ELECTRIC HEATING PLANT [June 29 


Where the actual use of heat is a small percentage of the total 
time, entailing as a consequence large stand-by losses; where 
the service is intermittent; or where the fuel plant is small 
and the item of attendance large in proportion to the service, 
the cost of electricity could easily be two or three cents per 
kilowatt-hour and still effect economy. 

To compete successfully with fuel in plants of maynitude— 
our house-heating plant for example, where the steam boiler 
capacity is some four hundred horse power—electrical energy 
at from three to five mills per kilowatt-hour would in all proba- 
bility be equivalent to coal at $10 per ton, 


A paper presented at the 25th annual con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Atlantic City, N. J., June 30, 
1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I.E.E. 


MEASUREMENTS OF LIGHTNING, ALUMINUM LIGHT- 
NING-ARRESTERS, EARTH RESISTANCES, CEMENT 
RESISTANCES, AND KINDRED TESTS 


BY E. E. F. CREIGHTON* 

During the past year investigations have been continued in 
the study of lightning and the operation of lightning-arresters 
on transmission lines. Another effort was made to supplement 
laboratory studies with experimental measurements on trans- 
mission lines. Two lines were chosen well up in the Rocky 
Mountains of Colorado as offering the greatest facilities both 
from the interest of the managers and the frequency and severity 
of lightning storms. New types of apparatus were developed 
for measurements and new data were collected. The object 
of this paper is to describe briefly the instruments and methods 
used in the measurement of duration, potential, current, fre- 
quency, and the theory and practise of lightning protection and 
earth connections with data collected during two years of study; 
also resistance measurements of cement under the heating effect 
of dynamic current, and comments on the action of lightning- 
arresters. 

The scope of the work is represented by the following index 
of subject-matter: 


CHARACTERISTICS OF LIGHTNING 


Lightning duration. 
Duration apparatus. 


* The writer wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to Mr. J. A. Clay, 
superintendent and operating engineer of the Animas Power & Water Co., 
for many courtesies in the installation of the apparatus, and for subse- 
quent auxiliary reports; to Mr. W. N. Clark for courtesies extended while 
observations were being taken on the high-tension lines of the Pueblo & 
Suburban Light & Power Co. 


669 


670 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


Lightning potential. 
Apparatus for measuring lightning potential. 
Lightning current. 


SUBDIVISION OF FREQUENCY 


Frequency of recurrence. 
Frequency multiple stroke. 
Natural frequency of discharge. 
Very high frequency. 


ballistic apparatus. 
Movement of charge on parallel wires. 


Quantity of lightning et apparatus — 


MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS 


Pueblo and Suburban Light and Power Company. 
Animas system. 

Lightning recorder. 

Records of discharges. 

Lightning alarm. 

Equipment for study. 

Note on choke-coils. 

Experience with a grounded phase. 

Direct stroke of lightning. 

Wooden versus metallic cross-arms. 


GENERAL COMMENTS ON THE ARRESTER EQUIPMENT OF THE 
ANIMAS COMPANY 
Location of arresters. 
Characteristics of the gap aluminum arrester. 
Lightning alarm and the fuse. 
Aluminum arresters for direct currents. 
Temporary and permanent critical voltage of film. 


EARTH CONNECTIONS 
Methods of tests of earth resistance. 
Pipe earth resistance per foot of depth, Fig. 21. 
Effect on the resistance of varying the distance between pipes. 
Treatment to improve earths. 
Multiple pipe earth connections.. 
Animas earth test. 
Variation of resistance with depth. 
Time resistance variation after salting. 
Measurement of resistance between pipes and groups. 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 671 


Measurements between sub-stations. 

Measurements of resistance of tree, pole, and railroad earths. 
Earths carrying dynamic current. 

Form of pipe earth recommended. 

Station grounds, resistance factor. 

Station grounds, inductance factor. 

Station grounds, permanence factor. 

Lightning conductors for protecting buildings. 


CEMENT As A RESISTOR 
Effect on resistance of cement of various proportions of sand. 
Change in resistance with age. 
Behavior of cement resistors on constant potential circuits. 
Effect of moisture on resistance. 

_ Conductivity at high temperatures or pyro-conductivity. 
Change from moisture conductivity to pyro-conductivity. 
Concrete as a resistor. 

Summary and conclusions on concrete resistance. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF LIGHTNING 


Before a lightning-arrester can be designed along logical lines 
the characteristics of the discharge which may pass through it 
must be known. A complete analysis of lightning phenomena 
on electrical transmission lines has been given by Dr. Steinmetz.* 
This analysis is necessary to a thorough understanding of the 
theory of the subject. 

In considering the design of lightning-arresters, a brief classifi- 
cation based on the effects of lightning may be made as given 
below. The principle factors involved are: 

1. Duration of the surge of lightning. 

2. The potential values of the lightning. 

3. The maximum current discharge rate. 

4. The natural frequency of the lightning. 

5. The quantity of electricity in the lightning stroke. 

In considering the choice and operation of arresters for a 
transmission line, the most important of these factors is the 
duration of the surge. These factors will now be discussed in 
more detail. 

1. Duration of lightning. Lightning from an external source 
(cloud lightning) is usually of very short duration. Measure- 
ments made during the summer of 1907 in Colorado, gave a 


* ProceEDINGS A.I.E.E., March 1907. 


672 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


range of 0.04 sec. to 0.0001 sec. Cloud lightning has been 
known to continue for longer than one-half a second in rare 
cases. Lightning from an internal source (accidentally grounded 
phase, switching, etc.) often continues over a period of several 
minutes, or even several hours. 

Lightning frequently recurs in successive strokes. A num- 


F/G.4 


: LINE 
\OBSERVATION SPARK GAP 


ape 
PN PPE RT URE 
| “SPAR GAP 
Le { 
+ POTATING FILM 
L_ Lh b—21G47 T/GNT BOX Qorred Lines) 
== GROUND. 
(OTOR 


Fic. 1.—Revolving film duration apparatus 


ber of measurements were made on an idle line which gave as 
high as seven separate discharges in one second. In the light- 
ning-arrester these multiple strokes give the effect of long dura- 
tion. 

The duration apparatus. Two different pieces of apparatus 
were used to measure the duration of lightning. They are shown 


"16.2 


“~ PAPER 
Ps ROLLS - MOTOR DRIVEM 
a SPARK GAP 
~ “GROUND 
ROLL OF PAPER. 


Fic. 2.—Moving tape duration apparatus 


diagrammatically in Figs. 1 and 2. For very short duration 
the apparatus shown in Fig. 1 was used. This apparatus con- 
sisted of a spark-gap in front of a rapidly revolving photo- 
graphic film. Figs. 3, 4,and5 are records from this machine; 
they show several different discharges which are made to fall 
on an unexposed portion of the film by moving in the aperture 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 673 . 


to a lesser radius on the film. Knowing the speed of rotation 
of the film, the duration of the discharge was measured. Calcu- 
lations were made on 36 discharges. Nearly all of the storms 
that caused the discharges were distant from the station. This 
may partly account for so many short durations. There were 
two strokes expressed in hundredths of a second, seventeen in 


Fic. 3.—Record from revolving film duration apparatus. This shows 
one multiple discharge consisting of eight single discharges marked 
(a) and one single discharge marked (b) 


thousands of a second, and sixteen in ten-thousandths of a 
second. Besides the duration and multiple strokes, these ex- 
posures show frequencies of the order of the line frequency. 
Each exposure is divided into a broken line which represents the 
frequency of alternation of the discharge. This frequency, 
about 3000 cycles per second, was further analyzed into a higher 


674 - CREIGHTON: LIGHTNiNG-ARRESTERS [June 30 


frequency by the lightning frequency- meter to be described 
later. Three thousand cycles is beyond the frequency that 
can be measured by an oscillograph. Where several segments 
of a circle of the same radius are shown (Fig. 4), multiple 
lightning strokes occurred; these strokes occurred in such rapid 


Fic. 4.—Record from revolving film duration apparatus showing six 
multiple strokes marked a, b, c, d, e, and f. The small dots at the 
side of most of the exposures are ink marks to emphasize the 
markings of the natural frequency of the discharge for fear 
they might not show up in the usual process of reproduc- 
tion. This record is unusual in the number of 
multiple strokes 


succession that they appeared as one to the eyes focused on the 
observation spark-gap. 

Fig. 5 is the only record of a discharge that did not show a 
natural frequency of oscillation. This may have been due to 
earth resistance being exceedingly high under the line where 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 675 


the lightning charge was set free. A fuller explanation is 
attempted later. 

For the measurement of longer durations of lightning, the 
paper tape apparatus shown in Fig. 2 was used. The tape was 
drawn through a spark-gap between line and ground at a uniform 
tate. This apparatus attached to an idle line showed multiple 


Fic. 5—Record from the revolving film duration apparatus showing 
two single discharges. Discharge (a) is the longest one recorded. 
If there are any natural oscillations the speed of the film is too 
low to show them 


strokes; in several instances, as many as four strokes were dis- 
tributed over one second. In these multiple strokes the suc- 
cessive discharges could be detected by the ear. It usually 
produced a rattling sound. Without the apparatus the noise 
might have been attributed to echoes. Records of multiple 
strokes and duration as given by the tape will be shown later 


in this paper. 


676 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


2. Lightning potential. In cases of direct strokes from the 
clouds to a transmission line, the potential at the nearest insu- 
lator builds up so rapidly that even the small inductance of the 
straight line wire presents a relatively high impedance to the 
flow of the electrical charge along the wires, away from the point, 
and consequently it spills over the insulators and down the poles 
to the ground. In this extreme case a lightning-arrester situated 


Fic. 6.—An accidental discharge which passed through the right forearm 
from the wrist to the elbow and out through an arc to an iron sup- 
port. This produced complete paralysis of the forearm which 
lasted several hours. The injury’ was painless except for 

the after-effects of the surface burns 


some distance away will give no protection to the point struck. 
If the electrical charge can be prevented from jumping around 
the insulator by high dielectric strength or overhead ground- 
wire the charge travels to the nearest lightning-arrester. During 
this movement it loses greatly in’ potential and somewhat in 
natural frequency. In every case of induced static charge from 
the clouds, lightning potential on the line is always greatest 
directly under the cloud that is discharging. A number of cases 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 677 


were observed last summer in Colorado when a storm was over 
an unprotected station about three miles from the main sub- 
station in which the lightning jumped three and one-half inches 
over switch bushings at the unprotected station instead of 
being discharged by a gap set at 0.4 in. (one-eighth as large) at 
the main sub-station. . 

If the lightning potential is due to an internal surge of elec- 
trical energy between static and electromagnetic energy, then 
the high potential will exist across the junction point of the. 
parts of the circuit acting as condenser and reactance-coil re- 
spectively. This may for example, be, one coil or all the coils 
of a generator or transformer. 

Apparatus for measuring potentials. Practically the only 
apparatus which indicates the potential of lightning of brief 
duration is the well known needle-gap. A needle-gap without 

series resistance would short-circuit the dynamic potential and 

therefore could not be used. The use of a reasonable resistance 
in series with a single needle-gap affects its spark potential but 
slightly even for high frequencies. The electricity travels along 
the resistance and throws the static stress on the needle-gap 
and produces a spark. The volume of spark which takes place 
decreases as the resistance increases. Since it is necessary to 
record this spark the resistance must be kept at least low enough 
to permit this. As an example of the effect of resistance on the 
relative spark potential at high frequency the following is given: 
two needle-gaps placed in parallel, the first set at 1 in. having no 
resistance, and the second having two 8 in. rods with car- 
borundum as a base, known as 50,000-ohm rods (actually less 
at high potentials). The second gap would not spark when set 
on 1 in. but would, without fail, spark simultaneously when 
set at 0.9 in. The potential, obtained from a leyden jar and 
static machine, had an initial value of about 60,000 volts, was 
very suddenly applied, and had a frequency of about two million 
cycles per second. At 60 cycles: the spark potential of the 
needle-gap was not affected by this series resistance. This con- 
dition of high frequency is probably more severe than will be 
met on a transmission line. 

One needle-gap never actually measures lightning potential 
unless the applied potential should happen to be equal to the 
spark potential. If a needle-gap sparks it shows the pressure 
reached its spark potential but it may have gone very much 
higher. By using several gaps in parallel the potential may be 


678 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


measured with a rough accuracy depending upon the number of 
gaps in parallel and the differences in their setting. Fig. 7 
shows diagrammatically part of such a lightning potential meter. 

In each circuit is a fuse, a needle-gap, and a resistance limiting 
the dynamic current to about one-half ampere. In operation 
the impressed potential must be between the largest gap that 
sparked and the next one above. Since the gap must be set 
after each lightning stroke, the form of the meter is modified to 
give a measurement of several successive strokes, to record the 
time, and to give automatic resetting. Fig. 8 shows one leg of 
this automatic resetting device. 


FIGC.7 


LIGHTNING POTENTIAL RECORDER 


«LINE 
SWITCH ARM SUPPORT (METAL). 


as ROD 70 PRISE SWITCH ARMS. 
/ SPARK GAPS 


wate EAs Oe GROUND 
oe RESISTANCE 

TUBE. 
ENCLOSED FUSE TUBES (oP view) 


Fic. 7.—Plan of lightning potential recorder 


In this leg the gaps are all equal. From the switch arm a 
thread is run to a pen which draws a line on a paper tape moved 
by clockwork. This records the exact time when each gap 
sparks. Since a lightning recording device can be placed on 
each arrester, the combined results of the two will show the 
relative efficiency of the arresters for each discharge. For 
example, the needle-gap of the potential recorder may be set 
on 2, 2.5, 3, and 4 times normal line potential. To get the proper 
operation of the potential recorder care must be taken in its 
design to avoid producing the effect of a grounded phase by the 
arcing of one phase only. 

3. Lightning current. The maximum value that the lightning 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 679 


current may take has an important bearing on the design of the 
arresters. Until recently it was found necessary and expedient 
to install some resistance in the arrester circuit to limit the 
dynamic current which usually follows the lightning discharge. 
This resistance limits also the lightning discharge current, and 
by its ohmic drop (J R) prevents the lightning potential from 
decreasing rapidly. 

If the lightning discharge current is limited by ohmic resistance 
it is easy to calculate what current can discharge at double line 
voltage. Double voltage is usually within the limiting safe 


“P E£CORDING FEN 


SWITCH LS 


Tate: SASTANCE, 


= GROUWD: 


Meee OSED FUSE TUBES. 


We (SIDE VIEW) 


LIGHTNING. POTENTIAL RECOPDER.. 


Fis, & 
Fic. 8.—Elevation of lightning potential recorder 


value. Such a comparison of arresters gives their relative 
values of protection against lightning.* 

The actual measurement of the lightning current is usually 
more difficult than the measurement of the high frequencies. 
Several conditions will be outlined here. Since concentrated 
capacity and inductance are used in the laboratory, these equa- 
tions are convenient to use here. 


* The time constant or natural frequency enters as a factor. A large 
time constant of the lightning allows of higher resistance in the arrester 


circuit. 


680 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


1. In any circuit containing a low resistance, what is the 
current per volt of impressed electromotive force? 


bi Bein Ns he 
Fay (4 pec ele 


In which C is the capacity in farads, 
L is the inductance in henrys, 
R is the total ohmic resistance, 
t is the time of one-quarter cycle of the natural fre- 
quency. 


x zLVC 
V4L—hK?C 


2. What is the maximum current per volt that can flow in 
any discharging circuit? The limiting value is more valuable 
for safe design. If R is assumed zero in the above equation, a 
short and convenient expression for maximum current is: 


I max. = L V 


3. If the frequency is known by measurement or calculation, 
the current may be derived from the equation 


V 
st ba 

4. The maximum current may be estimated from calculation 
utilizing the frequency, quantity of electricity, and logarithmic 
decrement. As an example of calculation of a testing circuit in 
the laboratory the following is given: 

Three one-gallon leyden jars are connected in parallel, and 
this set is connected in cascade or series with an equal unit by 
means of about seven feet of No. 0 wire. 

Capacity of each jar is about 144x10-" farads 

Capacity of all the jars is about 216x10-" farads. 

Inductance is about 24x10-7 henrys. 

I maximum = 0.03 ampere per volt. At 100 kilovolts, the 
possible maximum current is 3000 amperes. 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 681 


ib 


Se? Demi ions. 
O24 VLC 


el fe 


The frequency is n = 


In regard to accuracy of the calculated value of frequency, an 
error in either capacity or inductance is reduced by the square 
root in the result. An error of 25 per cent. in these values 
gives an error of only 5 per cent. in the frequency. 

The resistance which will just destroy the oscillatory discharge 
of the leyden jar circuit in the foregoing description is 7000 ohms. 


SUBDIVISION OF FREQUENCY 


Natural frequency of lightning should not be confused with 
the multiple stroke or the frequency of recurrence of strokes. 
Frequency is distinguished by analysis under four heads. 

_1. Lightning strokes often come into a station during a storm 
at an average rate ranging from two per minute to one in five 
minutes. 

2. Each of these flashes, which appears to the eye as a single 
flash, may often be two or more distinct successive strokes dis- 
tributed over-a second or less. In the next paragraph the 
analysis of each of these individual strokes into oscillations gives 
the natural frequency of the discharge. 

3. Many of the discharge records of the rotating-film apparatus 
for measuring duration are in the form of a uniformly broken 
line whose parts correspond to the half cycles of the discharge 
current. This frequency, when it existed, was of the order of 
the natural frequency of the transmission line, about 3000 cycles 
per second. 

4. Each one of these waves may be made up of higher fre- 
quencies superimposed upon it. Of these high frequencies the 
only ones measured were of the order of a millon cycles per second. 

Comments and data on the four subdivisions. 1. Frequency 
of recurrence, or rapidity of lightning discharges. A note of 
all the discharges during two storms which came into the sub- 
station from three circuits and were recorded on the tape light- 
ning recorder is herewith given. 

Condensed record of second storm of August 12, 1907. First 
discharge 1:10:36; last discharge 1:59:4, p.m. Total num- 
ber of discharges 42. Average number of discharges about one 
per minute. Maximum number of discharges per minute was 
three. In the second storm of August 9, 1907, there were 53 
strokes in 43 minutes. The rapidity of discharge in these storms 
was not unusual. ; 


682 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


2. Multiple strokes. In the second storm of August 12, there 
were two cases of multiple strokes. In each case there were 
two strokes within a second recorded on the paper tape. In the 
second storm of August 9, 1907, there were five cases of multiple 
strokes. When multiple strokes followed each other more 
rapidly than 0.2 second, the paper tape would not show a separa- 
tion. The more rapid multiple strokes are recorded on the 
duration apparatus, Figs. 3 and 4. Discharge marked a, Fig. 4, 
shows three distinct strokes; discharge marked b, shows five; 
discharge c, shows two; discharge e, shows seven; discharge /, 
shows three; and discharge g, shows one. In this storm multiple 
strokes seem to have been the rule. Except for the records 
shown in Figs. 3 and 4, the films show mostly single strokes. 

3. Natural frequency. In Fig. 4 the broken line of the dis- 
charge is made more evident by drawing definite ink lines at 
the side of the record for each half cycle where the record was 
sufficiently distinct to be definite. This is done lest the mark- 
ings be lost in the reproducing processes. The accuracy of 
measurement is not high, so the frequencies recorded are divided 
into eight groups as follows: one stroke of no oscillation, Fig. 5; 
one stroke at 840 cycles per second; eight strokes at about 1400; 
six strokes at about 2000; two strokes at about 2500; twenty 
strokes at about 3000; and one stroke at 4000 cycles per second. 

A careful inspection of the records brings out irregularities 
in the time between half cycles of some of the records, especially 
at the beginning of the discharge. This might be expected from 
the theory, but the constancy and regularity of the discharge 
of the line to earth at about 3000 cycles is surprising. A tenta- 
tive explanation of the phenomena is herewith given: out some 
distance on the line a storm cloud hovered and induced a charge 
on the line which leaked over the insulators. The induced 
charge may have covered a mile or more of the line and may 
have been located at any point between the middle and end. 
The cloud discharged and freed the induced charge. The charge 
immediately tried to spread over the entire line. Apparently 
there was considerable dissipation of energy in the earth re- 
sistance. The first effect, usually, is a static wave of potential 
which reaches the end of the line where the instrument is placed, 
jumps the two series gaps of the instrument to the earth, pours 
out the entire charge to earth, overshoots the zero potential, 
and leaves the line oppositely charged. The gap sparks again 
and the potential again overshoots the zero and again the charge 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 683 
of the original sign covers the line. During each oscillation the 
current passes through the resistance of the earth, line, and 
spark, which uses up the energy. Finally, after a few half 
cycles, the potential can no longer jump the gaps to ground and 
the remaining charge finally settles down evenly distributed 
over the whole line. 

Theoretically, the location of the freed charge on the line 


Fic 9.—High frequency recorder as installed in the high-tension gallery 
of the sub-station 


relative to the ends should make a difference in the rate of dis- 
charge to ground. Since one end of the line is insulated, 
the part of the charge which travels to this end should be re- 
flected back to the discharging end after that end has begun 
to discharge. This should change the regularity of the dis- 
charge, more or less, according to the location and length of 
line covered by the original charge. In confirmation of this 


684 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


theory several records show an irregular spacing and minor 
peaks of current at the beginning; after a few half cycles, how- 
ever, the effect of these reflected waves disappears and the line 
seems to oscillate as a whole. It may be noted here that the 
number of half waves in the record furnishes a means of estima- 
ting the minimum potential that the initial charge might have 
had. 

4. Very high frequencies. In Figs. 3 and 4 the discharge was 
analyzed into waves having a frequency of the order of the 
period of the line. The next step is to analyze the harmonics 
in each of the waves. There may be two explanations of the 
presence of the higher frequency: either the cloud lightning 
may discharge with a frequency of the order of’ one million 
cycles per second, or the traveling wave along the line may meet 
with inequalities of capacity and induction which cause ripples 
in the waves. To detect these waves a recording high fre- 
quency meter was constructed. The meter as installed in the 
high-tension gallery of the Silverton sub-station is shown in 
Fig. 9. It consists of nine vertical coils of wire each closely 
wound in a single layer on a glass tube. The glass tubes and 
the wire are of varying sizes so as to give each one a different 
value of natural frequency. 

The fundamental frequency and frequencies of the higher 
harmonics of each coil are given in the following table. 


Coil No. sf aap Third Fifth Seventh 

1 120,000 360,000 600,000 840,000 
2 175,000 525,000 875,000 1,225,000 
3 232,000 696,000, 1,160,000 | 1,624,000 
“t 290,000 870,000 1,450,000 2,030,000 
5 364,000 1,092,000 1,820,000 2,548,000 
6 593,000 1,779,000 2,965,000 4,151,000 
7 721,000 2,163,000 3,605,000 

8 890,000 2,670,000 

9 1,130,000 3,390,000 


Some of these values overlap and give a check on the results: 
for example, the third harmonic of tube No. 5 almost coincides 
with the fifth harmonic of tube No. 3. 

The high-frequency instrument utilizes the principle of the 
stationary wave. One coil of the meter is represented dia- 
grammatically in Fig. 10. 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRES TERS 685 


Parallel to the tube is an antenna toward which the brush 
discharge takes place. The tube is represented as receiving an 
oscillation which is three times. its natural frequency of vibra- 
tion. This is indicated by the two patches of brush discharge. 

Fig. 11 shows the distribution of potential along the tube. 
An electrical wave passes up the tube to the dead end a, 1s re- 
flected back, and meets the adjacent incoming wave moving in 
the opposite direction. When the waves cross each other at b, 
they have opposite potentials and neutralize each other. When 
the first reflected wave arrives at c, it crosses the peak of the 


— ale -cy “06H7 
= G / 

= if 

7 


4 


L ae > VARA 
\ 


s 


\ 


\ 
\ 

Cr <s ~&- L6nT 
J 
/ 


7 


a 


d Pane —<3- DARK 


c~ £74. /. 
SPARK GAP =+GROUND 


Fug.do. 


Fics. 10 and 11.—Diagrammatic sketches showing the principle of opera- 
tion of a high-frequency recording unit 


next wave when both waves have the same sign of potential. 
The result is double the potential of one wave. Since, if the 
tube is in tune, all incoming and reflected waves cross each 
other at the same point, stationary waves are produced on the 
tube. The presence of these stationary waves can be shown 
by holding a small vacuum tube near the coil, Fig. 11. This 
much has been used by wireless telegraph engineers in conjunc- 
tion with a capacity which can be varied to resonate the tube 
to the oft-repeated waves from a wireless sender. No such 
adjustment can be made in studying lightning, as the discharge 
comes in without warning, is usually over in one thousandth of a 


686 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


second, and does not repeat itself. An automatic recording 
device was found in employing a long photographic film in the 
static field between the tube and antenna, Fig. 10. The loca- 
tion of the film had much to do with the success of the results. 

The conditions of the operation of the instrument may be 
explained by their analogy to musical resonance. 

a. Ifa piano is pedaled to free the strings from their individual 
dampers, and a note is sounded on a cornet at some distance, 
the string on the piano corresponding to the tone of the cornet 
will be set in vibration and can be heard after the cornet note 
is stopped. 

b. If the pitch on the two instruments is not quite identical, 
the string will respond with less vibration. If the pitch of the 
cornet falls midway between two adjacent wires both wires can 
be made to respond to a slight extent. 

* c. If the cornet is blown loudly near the piano the violence of 
the vibration will set in movement nearly all of the wires. 

Corresponding to the conditions of the musical analogy, the 
high frequency instrument cannot, without precaution, be used 
to measure the harmonics of a lower frequency, say 3000 cycles, 
unless these harmonics greatly predominate over the fundamen- 
tal. In consequence, the high frequency of the usual discharge 
coming from a distance out on the line as shown by most of the 
records of the duration apparatus did not give a record. The 
fundamental charge of low frequency travels along the coil, 
and its potential is so much greater than the potential of the 
higher frequency that it blackens the film over its entire length. 
If, however, a cloud just over the instrument is discharging at a 
high frequency, this high frequency potential will be forced 
onto the line and may affect the instrument. 

If the difference of potential of the fundamental wave is 
limited to a small value by using a spark gap, the harmonics 
become relatively more effective. Due to the unpropitious 
conditions on the line, adjustments, and lack of facilities, only 
two of the records were of value.* 

The high frequericy recorder is better adapted to the study 
of cloud lightning directly. The receiving antenna can be made 
with a large coefficient of damping so that sensibly nothing but 
the forced oscillations will affect the film, and furthermore, local 
sparks can be eliminated. 


* The entire credit for the measurements obtained are due Mr. Peek 
for his painstaking and tireless efforts. 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 687 


Quantity of electricity. Fuses have been used to indicate the 
relative severity of a lightning stroke, but a fuse in itself gives 
no absolute information regarding the quantity of electricity 
in a lightning stroke. The factor of duration enters, and this 
depends on the damping effects of resistance, various losses 
during the discharge, and the initial lightning potential. A 
small quantity of electricity oscillating for a long time may 
blow a fuse, while a hundred times as much discharging through 
a damped circuit might leave it intact. 

The essential features of the apparatus for measuring quantity 
are a fuse that just blows and a duration apparatus that records 
the number of oscillations through the fuse. If the refinement 
of taking the logarithmic decrement into account is neglected 
for the moment, the equation for quantity is simple. 

Let Q be the total quantity passing through the fuse (some 

multiple of the quantity freed on the line), 

I the average effective current, : 

t the total duration of the stroke, 

nm the number of half-cycles of discharge, 

J the joules of energy to raise one centimeter of the fuse 
to its melting temperature, 

R the resistance of the fuse per centimeter length, 

T¢ the rise of temperature, centigrade, to melt the fuse, 

w the weight of the fuse per centimeter length in grams, 

S the mean specific heat of the fuse metal. 


Then 


p wie 
perrin2k one 


In which J = TXwXSX2.4, and lightning (g) = aes 


Nothing but approximations are necessary in these calcula- 
tions, therefore the heat radiated from the fuse during the brief 
period of the discharge is neglected or rather allowed for by 
choosing, for calculation, the size of fuse one above the fuse 
melted out. The larger the fuse that is blown the less the rela- 
tive value of radiation, because the surface relative to the volume 
is also less. Our interest in the quantity of electricity in the 
lightning stroke increases as the quantity becomes greater, and 
fortunately, for the upper value, the accuracy correspondingly 


688 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


increases. Other things being constant, it requires a fuse of 
four times the weight to hold a charge of twice the quantity. 
There may be a fraction of the original quantity left on the 
line after the discharge has passed due either to a gap in the 
circuit or to the gap of the fuse that blows. This residual 
quantity has nothing to do directly with the result because there 
has been already more than one oscillation. Its indirect bear- 
ing is beneficial if approximate calculations are being made. 
The fewer the oscillations recorded the nearer is the average 
quantity to the original maximum quantity set free on the line. 
The arrangement of the apparatus for measuring the quantity 
of electricity is shown in Fig. 12. A duration recorder is shown 


416.412. 
DURATION, FREQUENCY,AND QUANTITY. 


APERTURES. 
i poert TIGHT BOX (Derren Linas), 
et 
i 
| 


SWITCHES. 
j een 


VWAGAZINE OF FUSES. 


Fic. 12.—Combined apparatus for measuring duration, frequency, and 
quantity of electricity 


ROTRUING FILIVS. 


+GROUND ~ 


GAP 


in series with three magazines of fuses. Each magazine of fuses 
consists of a set of parallel fuse wires placed one above the other. 
At one end they are connected to a vertical post of some insu- 
lating material and at the other to a inetallic post. In front of 
this fence of fuse wires is a vertical post carrying a hinged arm 
which rests on the top wire. As each fuse blows the arm drops 
automatically on the next fuse below. All the fuses in one 
magazine are the same size but the fuses are graded in size in 
the separate magazines. In operation the are will hold in the 
vapor of the small fuse while a larger one melts. For this reason 
a metal of good arcing quality, like lead for example, is preferable. 

Another method of making the calculations for quantity of 
electricity is by calibration of the fuses using an oscillograph to 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 689 


measure current and time. Using a voltage too low to main- 
tain an arc, currents of increasing values with the same size 
fuse are used and a curve made between the factors of current 
and time. For very short intervals of time the equation seems 
to show independence of the radiation and is: 


ket —sconstant, Onl2t =k 


Using the data taken from one of the tests, which was a heavier 
stroke than the average but not so severe as some others, a value 
of 0.032 coulombs was found for the total quantity that passed. 
It happened that multiple strokes occurred each time a fuse test 
was made, so a near approximation of the quantity of lightning 
induced by the cloud cannot be made on account of the radia- 
tion during the interval of the multiple strokes. A rough 
approximation of the quantity in this case is 0.003 coulombs. 
If this quantity of electricity was spread over a mile of line having 
a capacity between line and ground of 0.01 microfarads, the 
initially impressed voltage would be about 600,000 volts. The 
question whether a voltage’ of this nature will jump an insu- 
lator or not, is not solved by impressing a constant voltage of 
the same value on the-insulator to determine if it will spark 
over, but it is entirely a matter of the relation of the dielectric- 
spark-lag of the insulator to the time constant of the line wire. 
The inductance of the line opposes momentarily the spreading 
of the charge over the entire line. A wooden cross-arm gives a 
much greater dielectric-spark-lag than an iron cross-arm. This 
subject is treated experimentally later under its appropriate head. 

A refinement in the calculation of quantity requires the in- 
tegration of the instantaneous value of current over the duration 


of the discharge. 


y= iB, € sin k, t. 

Quantity meter of ballistic principle. Instead of using fuses, 
which are destroyed and have to be replaced, an ordinary hot- 
wire ammeter may be used if it is properly calibrated and the 
hot wire sufficientiy insulated so that the drop of potential 


690 } CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 . 


due both to 7 R and Lw do not cause a short circuit. In the 
laboratory this method is convenient but in the study of cloud 
lightning effects the hot-wire ammeter has the disadvantage 
of leaving no record and therefore requires constant watching 
and patient waiting. 

If quantity and frequency are known, this method can be 
used to measure duration or number of cycles. 

Movement of charges on parallel wires. It is seen from the low 
frequency of the discharges of Figs. 3 and 4 that the concentrated 
charge under a cloud flattens out over the line when set free. 
The free movement of the wave seems to be greatly retarded 
by the surface resistance of the earth directly under the line wire. 
Incidentally it may be noted that a short line will be harder 
hit than a long one by the same cloud conditions, although, by 
the law of chance, not so often. 


¥7/6. 48. 


STATIO MACHINE, 
G 


| ] |/CAPACITY,’ 
apes . LL / GROUND. * 
* ~*~ 
Roun» A, ay 


Fic. 13.—Laboratory test illustrating the mutual induction between 
two moving lightning charges 


There is another phenomenon observed which modifies some- 
what the potential of the traveling wave. This was first ob- 
served on a two wire circuit. When equal induced lightning 
charges on the two parallel wires are freed, electro-magnetic 
induction will oppose the flow in the same direction. With a 
fixed length of gap at each end in each wire of a two wire circuit, 
only one gap would spark unless the discharge was either un- 
usually heavy or quite near the station. This same phenomenon 
was checked up in the laboratory on a circuit represented in 
Fig. 13. 

The first test utilized the gaps A, and B, only. When properly 
adjusted, both of these gaps sparked simultaneously. The 
second test utilized the gaps A,, A,, B, and'B,. Under certain 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 691 


conditions of test the wires would spark to earth invariably at 
opposite ends. These tests seem conclusive of the tendency of 
the mutual inductance to force the equal charges in the opposite 
direction along the circuit. Line to line discharges due to cloud 
lightning sometimes take place. The above phenomenon no 
doubt is partially the cause of such discharges. 

A brief description of the two lines on which observations were 
made follows. 

The Pueblo and Suburban Light and Power Co. The Pueblo 
and Suburban Light and Power Co. has 24,000-volt lines between 
Pueblo and Victor (altitude 10,000 ft.), Colorado. The power 
house is at Skaguay, somewhat lower than the Victor sub- 
station. General observations only were made here. The 
measuring instruments did not arrive until the beginning of 
~ August and work was then taken up on the Animas Power and 
Water Co’s. lines as the storms were more frequent in that 
locality in the late summer. All the ncw measurements were 
made on the line during the latter part of August, 1907. 

The Animas Power & Water Co. The Animas Power & Water 
Co. transmits energy from the power house (8,000 ft. altitude) 
to the sub-station (9,500 ft.) at 43,500 volts, with the neutral 
grounded at the power house. There are two separate lines, 
one at the bottom of the cafion to minimize the electrical dis- 
turbances in summer, and the other carried directly up 1000 ft. 
to an elevated plateau to minimize the trouble due to snow 
slides in the winter. 

At the main substation, the voltage step downs to 17,000 
volts delta. On the 17,000-volt system there is one customer’s 
station (100 kw. capacity) with grounded neutral; but this seems 
to have no beneficial effect when recurring surges play over the 
system. 

On the system are about 30 customer’s stations, all mines or 
mills except the city circuit of Silverton. The lines run along 
the cafions, up the gulches to the mines, and over the ridges. 
In two places the lines reach an altitude of over 13,200 ft. The 
difference in altitude is about 4000 ft. on the 17,000-volt system, 
and 5200 ft. on the entire system. The system covers a light- 
ning area estimated at 270 square miles. The 17,000-volt circuit 
is not in duplicate. The feeders have sectionalizing switches 
at several points. At the mines, the potential is transformed 
to 440 volts and, in several places, is carried overhead for several 
hundred yards to different tunnels, 


692 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


The severity and frequency of lightning storms during the 
season has been previously noted. Two storms often occur in 
one day. Storms sometimes hover over some part of the sys- 
tem for 24 hours. In that neighborhood it seems that the cool 
winds from the north meet the warm winds from the stretches 
of desert to the south. It is probable that the problem of light- 
ning protection here is as difficult as any place in the world. 

Some of the methods and instruments for measuring lightning 
potential, frequency, duration and quantity have already been 
described. A most valuable aid was a lightning recorder—a 
development of the tell-tale paper. 

Lightning recorder. One of the types of lightning recorder 
used consisted of a cylinder, uniformly rotated by geared power, 


F/G. U4. 


4 SPARK GAPS 
0To nt HE ace 
TAPE 


Fic. 14.—Lightning recorder to show the discharges through a lightning- 
arrester 


carrying a ribbon of paper, Fig. 14. Four electrodes pointing 
toward the axis of this cylinder and separated from the circum- 
ference by clearance only, were connected to the lightning- 
arrester. This recorder was placed at the neutral or multiplex 
connection of the arrester having one electrode connected to 
each phase and one to the ground. This arrangement differen- 
tiates between line to line, and line to ground discharges. A 
single-phase induction motor was used for power in the first 
set of instruments. This power was carried through multiple 
gears which permitted of four speeds in multiples of tens. 
Most of the records were taken with a speed of about 0.1 in. per 
second, Jater designs of recorders using clock work have the 
advantage of greater uniformity of speed and independence of 
the voltage and frequency of the circuit, 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 693 


The records show the exact time and phase of the discharge, 
and, by the size of the punctured hole, give an indication of the 
relative quantity of electricity discharged. If, however, the 
arrester is connected to a circuit supplied with power, the 
dynamic current will burn away all trace of the original hole 
produced by the static discharge. When a phase is accidentally 
grounded, the record tape shows which phase is producing the 
surges and how long the trouble lasts. 

Lightning discharge records. Some typical and unusual records 
of lightning discharges from lines are herewith reproduced. 
Fig. 16 is the record of an aluminum arrester taking a recurrent 
surge due to an arcing ground to the third phase. After 2 
seconds of heavy discharge the trouble nearly cleared itself 
but it was 25 seconds before the surges were entirely over. 


Fic. 15.—Three discharges of lightning through a cone-type aluminum 
arrester on an idle line. The central hole is the largest recorded, 
due entirely to static, during the season. The discharge caused 
a loud report 


Fig. 17 shows three simultaneous records; to the left is a record 
of 4 multiple strokes on the telephone circuit, in the middle the 
discharge of an aluminum arrester, and to the right the dis- 
charge of a liquid-electrode arrester. The telephone record 
shows tiny holes encircled by ink rings. This is a static hole of 
usual size on the telephone circuit when the storm is over five 
miles distant. The aluminum arrester record shows a somewhat 
larger hole which was enlarged by the dynamic current. The 
liquid-electrode arrester record shows large holes burned by the 
dynamic current and shows furthermore that the four discharges 
were so close together that the holes burned into one. Phase 
three, with the same single gap setting, did not spark. The 
aluminum arrester was inside the choke-coils and only one of the 
four discharges passed through the choke-coil. It should be 


CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 


Fic. 16.—Discharge of continuous lightning through an aluminum arrester, There was 
an arcing ground in phase 3. Phase 8, shows an initial discharge only. Phases 2 and 1 
discharged heavily to ground during 3 seconds, then the ground began to clear itself. 
The total time of discharge was 40 sec. The records of longer discharges cannot con 
veniently be reproduced here 

Fic. 17.—Three simultaneous records. To the left, the telephone arrester shows mul- 
tiple strokes; in the middle, the aluminum arrester shows a single discharge; and to 
the right, the record of the multiple discharges of phases 1 and 2 to ground through the 
liquid-electrode arrester. 


Fic. 18.—Two simultaneous records of discharges through liquid-electrode arresters 


1908| CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 695 


noted that these four distinct discharges gave the effect on the 
arrester of a continuous discharge about one second long. 

Fig. 18 shows two discharges of the liquid-electrode arrester. 
These discharges were normal. These arresters were on different 
feeders and discharged simultaneously. 

Fig. 15. This record is most unusual and remarkable. This 
tell-tale paper was in the gap between a cone-aluminum arrester 
and ground on a 24,000-volt line without dynamic potentiai. 
The static discharge usually makes a very small hole. The 
static discharge which punctured the middle hole made a loud 
report. This was the heaviest discharge recorded during the 
season. It produced no effect on the aluminum arrester. 

Lightning alarms. Since the aluminum arrester is designed to 
operate continuously for a half hour or more, an alarm may be at- 
tached to all these arresters, so that an operator in his office may 
know when the arrester discharges. He can begin to take 
precautions to clear the line if the trouble is continuous. 

As a convenience in the Colorado tests, Mr. Peek arranged a 
lightning alarm on the principle of a wireless telegraph receiver 
which would ring a bell for cloud lightning, or grounded phase, 
when such occurred on any part of the system. 


Equipment for study in the main sub-station of the Animas Co. 

1 High frequency recorder on 43,500-volt dead line. 

1 Duration meter and low frequency meter on 43,500-volt 
dead line. 

3 Lightning discharge recorders on three telephone circuits. 

2 Lightning discharge recorders on 17,000-volt liquid electrode 
arresters, outside of choke-coil. 

1 Lightning discharge recorder on 17,000-volt aluminum cell - 
arrester, on bus-bars. 

1 Lightning potential recorder on 17,000-volt line. 

1 Lightning alarm (general). 

1 Quantity recorder on three telephone circuits. 

1 Quantity recorder on 43,500-volt dead line. 


To show if discharges were not taken by lightning-arresters, 
the following device was used: 

In the customer’s stations, all points of the line which had 
less insulation than the main line—for example, leads from oil 
switches and transformer bushings—were wrapped with white 
paper tape or covered with sheets of paper. Only a few of the 
customer’s stations had lightning-arresters installed. It was 


696 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


vital to locate the trouble. There was no indication in the 
main station, except the action of the circuit breakers from the 
resulting short-circuits. Subsequently, the short-circuits could 
be located by means of the arc marks on the tell-tale papers. 
Cloud lightning caused several short circuits during the season 
but in no case did such trouble, due to cloud lightning, occur at 
stations protected by arresters. Although the two customer’s 
stations giving the most trouble were only two and three miles 
from the sub-station, a gap of 0.4 in. between line and ground at 
the main sub-station would not spark over although the spark 
would jump 3.5 in. and more at the customer’s sub-station. This 
is direct proof that the peak value of lightning potential is much 
higher at the point on the line nearest the cloud than elsewhere, 
and rapidly diminishes as the charge travels along the line, 
dragging its complementary opposite charge along the high re- 
sistance of the surface of the earth. 

Notes on choke-coils. Twice during the tests the lightning 
choke-coils showed very materially their beneficial effect. On 
the line side of the choke-coils an arrester with a single gap 
length of about 1 in. was installed and another arrester with a 
gap length of about 0.5 in. on the station side, on the bus-bars. 
Two discharges occurred over the 1 in. gap which did not dis- 
charge over the 0.5 in. gap in spite of its lower sparking potential. 
The conclusion from the experience is that the discharge must 
have been of both high frequency and high potential and further- 
more that the arrester discharged the lightning before the charge 
could pass through the standard lightning choke-coil. 

That many discharges passed through the choke-coils to the 
0.5 in. gap may be due to the conditions of lightning potential 
and frequency. Ifa lightning potential in the neighborhood of 
I in. gap equivalent and of moderately high frequency came 
into the station the choke-coil would allow the potential of the 
bus-bars to build up to a potential equivalent to 0.5 in. and 
then start the discharge over the arrester connected to the bus- 
bars. The aim in the design of choke-coils is to make them just 
large enough so that if the frequency of the discharge is not 
sufficient to pile up the potential in front of the choke-coil it is 
not high enough to injure the end turns of the transformer. 

Once during the season a phenomenon occurred which seems 
to bear out further the experience of the laboratory that a choke- 
coil may, under certain circumstances, cause a longer spark 
after the discharge passes through it than it will on the line side. 


i908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 697 


The laboratory tests were described by the writer in the dis- 
cussion at Niagara Falls last year. The equivalent effect 
occurred on the line. From the main sub-station two lines ran 
south and one north. [ach carried a telephone circuit. The 
lightning recorder on the southern telephone circuits recorded 
a lightning stroke to the south but the lightning-arrester on the 
north power line discharged, although its single gap was approxi- 
mately the same as the arrester on the south power line. In 
other words, the lightning seems to have passed through a choke- 
coil to the bus-bars and back through another choke-coil to the 
north arrester. The hole in the paper punctured by the static 
on the telephone lines indicated a discharge of medium quan- 
tity only. This experience carries only its face value and is 
not sufficient to be the basis of definite conclusion.. A method 
will be outlined later for studying the operation of choke-coils 
on transmission lines, looking toward the procuring of definite 
data. 

Experiences with a grounded phase. Several times during the 
season a phase was accidentally grounded. Each time there 
was an arc to ground and vicious surges occurred on the lines. 
Some of these were extremely odd. A _ lightning stroke 
came into the main sub-station on the 43,500-volt line. The 
lightning-arresters were designed with permanent resistance in 
series limiting the current to about 6 amperes at double normal 
potential; consequently the discharge took place between a 
phase wire in the station and an iron girder, some 18 in. distant. 
This arc roared continuously during the entire trouble. The 
liquid-electrode arresters on the 17,000-volt circuit discharged 
continuously for several minutes but were finally disconnected 
by their fuses as they had reached their limit of endurance. A 
switch broke down at Camp Bird Mill, throwing a ground and 
short-circuit on the 17,000-volt circuit. An are jumped from 
each of two phases downward and out about 16 in. to insulator 
caps and across between caps 20 in. making a total of 52 in. 
Subsequently the arc rose on each side to the ceiling girders 
making a total of 6 ft. Meanwhile all the iron pipes and rods 
in the building were alive with brush discharge. The static. 
from the iron pipe, carrying the 110-volt lighting wires, dis- 
charged against the white brick wall so viciously as to leave a 
permanent dark streak. The 110-volt light cables were short- 
circuited by induced sparks from the arcs on the high tension 
circuits. A spark jumped several inches from a pipe to the iron 


698 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


rod actuating a 2300-volt oil switch. The trouble was removed 
by opening the switches at the power house. Except the oil 
switch at Camp Bird no apparatus was damaged. 

This trouble arose from the lack of a good lightning-arrester 
for transitory lightning. The secondary trouble was due to the 
lack of an arrester that had a long endurance for continuous 
surges. The cone-type aluminum arrester was not installed 
until later. To any witness of these phenomena there can be no 
doubt that the discharging of these continual surges is the most 
difficult problem in lightning protection. 

Another arcing ground. The Champion mine had no protec- 
tive apparatus installed. A stroke of lightning came in and 
damaged a 17,000-volt transformer bushing. Subsequently this 
transformer was thrown back into service on the 17,000-volt 
circuit fora minute. It arced over its bushing to its case. . The 
case was insulated from the earth by wooden supports. The 
lightning-arresters in the main station did not discharge. Later 
the switch was closed for a little longer period with the same 
result. A third time the switch was closed, the case began to arc 
to ground and the lightning-arresters began to discharge con- 
tinuously at the substation until the transformer was again dis- 
connected. 

Subsequent arcing grounds. Later in the season a cone-type 
aluminum arrester was installed on the bus-bars of the 17,000- 
volt system. A grounded phase occurred twice after this 
arrester was installed. The arrester discharged continuously 
for over 15 minutes, and relieved the line, until the ground was 
removed. 

Direct stroke. The writer had planned to make a direct study 
of cloud lightning but, due to the time absorbed by the measure- 
ments on the line and an accident, Fig. 6, it had to be postponed. 
Indirect studies were made both on the line and in the labora- 
tory. There are no overhead grounded wires on the Animas 
system. So far as practicable the lines are run along the bottoms 
of the cafions and gulches. The mountain sides are steep and 
give some protection, no doubt, against induced static. At 
many points the lines run exposed up the sides and over the 
ranges but by the law of chance all these points were uninjured, 
so far as known, except one. This happened on the 43,500-volt 
line about a mile away from the power house. At the power 
house, this line rises abruptly 1000 feet and is carried along a 
high plateau, At the point struck, five poles were more or less 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 699 


splintered, although none was rendered unserviceable, and 
incidentally, no apparatus was lost in the power house. Splinters 
were thrown edgewise out of the surface of the poles to a distance 
of thirty feet. The hole or groove was often less than } in. wide 
but 1 in. or more deep. Along the line, quite near, mau their 
tops higher than the wires, were several trees. The question 
arises, why should the lightning choose a path through the high 
insulation of the poles rather than strike the tall sappy trees of 
greater conductivity? The reason for this differentiation may 
possibly be due to chance but it seems to lie in the conductivity 
of the horizontal line relative to that of the earth and tree. As 
further evidence of this, two direct strokes occurred in this 
neighborhood a year before which scarred the poles and there 
was no tree damaged near the line. 

It may be imagined that when a charge on a.cloud begins to 
concentrate in a discharge path, the corresponding induced 
charge on the earth concentrates under the same point. 

The potential at the tree top depends directly on how much 
static electricity can get to it through the relatively high re- 
sistance of the tree and earth. Although the line is not con- 
nected to the ground, it holds a considerable charge due to 
gradual leakage as the cloud moves over the line. This charge 
can concentrate with no impedance but the inductance of the 
line, and due to this concentration the excessive displacement 
current on the line may swing the cloud discharge into this 
path. Once the lightning strikes the line, the potential builds 
up too rapidly to be released by spreading the charge over the 
line and consequently it takes the shortest single path or mul- 
tiple paths down the poles. The laboratory tests bearing on this 
theory are given below. 

Many of the strokes of cloud lightning observed were between 
clouds and not to earth. 

Wooden versus metal cross-arms. Under the heading of light- 
ning potential the question was raised “ does series resistance 
affect the spark potential of a needle-gap?’’ The answer was, 
that it affected it only slightly if the resistance was not carried 
too high. With a discharge current of half an ampere, there is 
no great change in the spark potential even for suddenly applied 
potentials of high frequency. When, however, the resistance 
in series with a gap is greatly increased, the current necessary 
to charge the static of the needle points and furnish the energy 
for the brush discharge which precedes a spark, is retarded and 


700 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


an equal gap in parallel having no series resistance will take the 
spark. 

The same phenomenon occurs on transmission lines in differen- 
tiating between wooden cross-arms and metal cross-arms. If 
the wood is dry there is no question but that the insulation be- 
tween the two line wires is greatly increased. On the other 
hand, if the wood is wet and dusty the value of the wooden cross- 
arm is not so evident. The following experiments were made to 
show that on low frequency, say 60 cycles, the wet wood gives 
no better insulation than the metal, but at high frequencies it 
gives much better insulation. A wooden cross-arm was arranged 
as shown in Fig. 19: two porcelain tubes held wires 1.7 in. above 


#7G. 19 
STATIC MACHINE. 


“ 


APT ee 


CA PACIF} 
4/GH RESIS. 


PORCELAIN TUBES 
SPRUCE X ARM. 


Fic. 19.—Diagram of connection for the laboratory test. proving that 
the wooden cross-arm has great advantages oyer the iron cross-arm 
in resisting lightning strokes 


the surface of the wood and 10 in. apart. On the upper surface 
of the wood tin foil or a wet towel was placed in imitation of 
line conditions. Fig. 19 shows the conditions of the second 
test. The first test was made on a 60-cycle circuit with a needle- 
gap in parallel with the cross-arm. The voltage breakdown 
was the same whether the wet cloth or the metal was used. 
By transformation, the voltage was 46,900 (eight readings) 
and by needle gap it was 3.5 in. (52,000 volts by interpolation 
from the curve). This higher indicated potential by the latter 
was due to local oscillations set up by corona discharges over 
the porcelain top. After the cloth had dried out somewhat 
the spark potential by transformation rose about 2 per cent. 
The potential was then suddenly applied by means of the 


1908] CREIGHTON. LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 701 


apparatus shown in Fig. 19. The frequency was 2.25 million 
cycles per second. The applied potential was a 4.5 in. gap be- 
tween spheres 1.25 in. in diameter. The equivalent needle 
gap was 5.6 in. (68,000 volts) when the cloth was used very wet. 
The equivalent needle gap was only 2.5 in. (42,000 volts) when 
the metal plate was used between the porcelains. This dis- 
ruptive voltage is even less than with the gradually applied 
potential. It results from the multigap effect of the metal 
plate. The plate has a static capacity which takes an appreciable 
charging current across the gaps. It is well to note that 5.6 
in. was the limiting potential that the needle would spark over, 
so the actual conditions would have been even more favorable 
to the wet wood if the applied potential had been greater. 
Taking it as it was, the wet wooden cross-arm was 160 per cent. 
better than the metal as a protector against high frequency 
lightning and the metal cross-arm is only 80 to 90 per cent. as 
good for lightning as it is for generator potential. 

Although these figures will, no doubt, be somewhat modified 
by changing the relative conditions of the test, it is safe to 
conclude that a wooden cross-arm is always to be recommended 
from the standpoint of insulation and would be a most desirable 
and economical feature even on iron towers. It is usually 
cheaper to add insulation with wooden cross-arms than it is to 
obtain it with added porcelain in the insulator. When the 
wooden cross-arms is only damp or dry it may add greatly to 
the insulation against lightning. These tests have a bearing 
on the use of insulator horn-gap protectors that will be apparent 
to the engineer. 


GENERAL COMMENTS ON THE ARRESTER EQUIPMENT OF THE 
ANIMAS COMPANY 


Last summer the equipment of arresters consisted of four 
43,500-volt special multigap arresters using concentrated series 
resistance, four 17,000-volt multigap arresters using distributed 


-geries resistance, and five liquid-electrode arresters. Two of 


the 17,000-volt arresters were rendered inoperative by. having 
two liquid-electrode arresters installed in parallel. The liquid 
electrodes invariably took the heavy discharges. The following 
brief comments are made on the operation of the arresters during 
the season: 

The series resistance in the high-tension arrester was of such 
value as to limit the dynamic current flow to six amperes at 


702 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


double normal voltage. The lightning strokes in this district 
were much too severe to be discharged at this limiting discharge 
rate, consequently three times during the season discharges 
took place between the station wiring and the girders, jumping 
18 in. or more to ground. The 17,000-volt arresters with the 
series resistance limited the current discharge to 12 amperes, 
and usually were able to take the discharges. In one noteworthy 
exception, an arc took place between a lead-in wire and 
the ground. The liquid-electrode arrester on the 17,000-volt 
circuit gave satisfactory operation in all cases of transitory 
lightning, but during grounded-phase conditions the arrester 
continued to operate for some minutes until it was somewhat 
damaged. These arresters are not designed satisfactorily to 
take care of continual lightning, although they have an en- 
durance that is several hundred or thousand times the endurance 
of the multigap arrester. If the entire system had had adequate 
protection against transitory lightning there would have been 
no trouble with recurrent surges, with but one exception—a 
direct stroke on the high-tension line. Since there are more 
than thitty points to be protected on the 17,000-volt system and 
only seven points protected, recurrent surges from failure of 
insulation at the unprotected stations occurred several times 
during the season and interruptions were caused by short-circuits 
as the result of sparks at unprotected stations. Additional 
arresters for the system were on order but arrived too late to 
be installed for the season of 1907. 

The full protection of the system involves: first, the installa- 
tion of one liquid-electrode arrester at the power house on 43,500 
volts; secondly, one gap-aluminum arrester at the sub-station 
on the bus-bars, 43,500 volts; thirdly, three additional liquid- 
electrode arresters on the 17,000-volt circuit; fourthly, ten 
additional aluminum arresters on the 17,000-volt circuit; and, 
fifthly, completion by installation of reconstructed multigap 
arrester. The units of the multigap arrester formerly on the 
43,500-volt circuits were utilized in the special design of arresters 
for the 17,000-volt circuit. By this change practically no money 
was lost in the lightning-arrester investment. 

Location of arresters. The object to be obtained in the loca- 
tion of arresters to the best advantage is as follows: 

Aluminum arresters should be distributed as uniformly as 
possible over the system, choosing the more important stations 
where there is an actual attendant, or one in the near neighbor- 


-—- —_— ~_e  ee i  eeehCU 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 703 


hood. These arresters should have their series gaps set at a 
comparatively low value in order to take care of recurrent surges 
from an accidentally grounded phase. The liquid electrode and 
multigap arresters at adjacent stations will require a higher 
abnormal potential to start the discharge and by proper pro- 
portioning should be protected against recurrent surges by the 
adjacent aluminum arresters. Recurrent surges have, in general, 
lower frequency than lightning from induced clouds and are not 
so much localized. Therefore the lightning-arrester designed 


_ for transitory lightning should discharge any induced cloud 


effects in its locality, but should pass on recurrent surges to the 
nearest aluminum arrester. In stations where there is no at- 
tendant, and none available within five minutes’ call, the setting 
of the gap of the aluminum arrester should be such as to make 
its action transitory, except for exceedingly bad local condi- 
tions. In the main sub-station the aluminum arrester should 
have a gap setting only slightly above line potential with the 
object of making these arresters discharge, as far as possible, 
continuous lightning from outside points on the line. The 
object of this is twofold; first, to keep the line potential down; * 
secondly, to draw the attention of the attendant to the fact that 
there is trouble on the line which must be located and corrected. 

Since the aluminum arrester is designed ‘to have a duration 
of discharge of a half-hour or more, this should give sufficient 
time to locate the particular circuit on which the trouble occurs 
and make the necessary switching without disturbing the rest 
of the system. It is evidently inadvisable to have any un- 
attended aluminum arrester discharging surges which do not 
make themselves known to the station attendant, because the 
result would be final disconnection of the aluminum arrester 
from the circuit by the blowing of its series fuse, thus leaving 
the station without any protection whatsoever. After such an 
arrester is disconnected the surges will be carried on to the next 
arrester or into the sub-station. In localities where there are 
two or more stations near each other an endeavor should always 
be made tc utilize a multigap arrester at one, and either an alumi- 
num or liquid-electrode at the other. In this way even the 
multigap arrester of low discharge rate could be utilized, since 
the adjacent arrester of large discharge rate would assist in 
discharging the cloud lightning. 

Characteristics of the gap-aluminum arrester (concentric cone 
type). First. The general characteristics of the aluminum cell 


704 CREIGHTON: LIGHTN ING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


with a definite limiting voltage, above which the current flows 
through freely, are known. At voltages above the critical value 
the film has no resistance and the only resistance in the circuit 
is the internal resistance of the electrolyte. In consequence 
of this characteristic the discharge rate at double normal voltage 
can be made as high as desirable. 

Secondly. When the aluminum plate with its film- coadeak 
surface stands in the electrolyte, the film dissolves more or less 
rapidly according to the nature of the electrolyte. This dissolu- 
tion can be made very small or considerable by the choice of the 
electrolyte. 

The third feature in regard to the arrester is its endurance to 
continual lightning. The chief obstacle to the length of en- 
durance is the same as in all other electrical apparatus; namely, 
heating; the arrester can be made to endure from a minute up 
to six months or longer by appropriate designs. 

The fourth factor in the design of the arrester is its total life. 

‘The arrester should be given a life of several years. This is 
influenced by the nature of the electrolyte as well as ae number 
of times and duration of the discharge. 

The fifth factor entering into the design of the arrester is the 
cost. The four other factors can be made as nearly perfect as 
desired, but with the limiting value of cost the three first named 
factors are somewhat at variance with each other; for example, 
with the same arrester it is possible to give high current discharge 
rate and low dissolution of film, but in so doing the duration of 
the discharge will be diminished. On the other hand, the dura- 
tion of discharge and the low value of dissolution of the film 
may be mainta:ned, but the high rate of discharge sacrificed 
somewhat. In designing arresters the aim has been, in general, 
to meet the specific conditions imposed by recurrent surges on 
a system. 

Until the development of the aluminum arrester there was no 
arrester which would take care of recurrent surges. This con- 
dition was one of the justifications for the use of a grounded 
neutral system. To meet the condition of recurrent surges 
requires a lightning-arrester that will discharge these surges 
for a time long enough for switching to be carried out to isolate 
the circuit on which the trouble takes place; meantime a repair 
man can be well on the way to the point where the damage 
has been done. A half-hour or an hour would usually be suffi- 
cient to do this. Therefore in the general design of the arrester 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 705 


to take care of recurrent surges the parts should be so propor- 
tioned as to give, first of all, the duration of discharge; secondly, 
the parts should be so proportioned as to give a discharge rate 
high enough to take care of any kind of induced or internal 
lightning. The value of this discharge rate is 1000 amperes at 
double voltage, correspondingly higher at triple voltage, and dis- 
charges all the way from 125 per cent. abnormal voltage, where the 
spark takes place, up to the highest voltage reached. In order 
to get this favorable condition, an electrolyte is chosen which is 
not the most favorable from the standpoint of dissolution of 
film; consequently in this arrester it becomes advisable to con- 
nect it occasionally to the circuit. In this matter there is a 
wide latitude of time; for example, it may be daily, or weekly, 
or even longer under the usual conditions of temperature. It 
has been found advisable, not only from the standpoint of the 
_condition of the arrester, but also from the standpoint of the 
education of the operators, to recommend that these arresters 
be connected to the circuit at least once a day. To the writer’s 
knowledge circuits have been shut down because the operator 
became frightened at the continuous discharge of the lightning- 
arrester when trouble occurred on the circuit. When continuous 
lightning occurs on the circuit it is desirable to have as long a 
duration of discharge of the arrester as possible. If the arrester 
has not been connected to the circuit for some time there is an 
initial rush of current which, although doing no harm to the 
arrester, warms it up unnecessarily and thereby shortens the 
possible time which the arrester would have operated had the 
film been in prime condition at the start. The wear due to this 
daily testing of the arrester is inappreciable and the time of the 
attendant is valuably spent. 

When the aluminum arrester is to be used as a line arrester 
or in isolated stations where it is desired to take care of transitory 
lightning only it is necessary to make but two changes; first, a 
change in electrolyte to give less dissolution of film; secondly, 
as stated previously;-the length of horn gap in series should be 
set at a value that will not be affected by the numerous surges 
of harmless abnormal potential which occur on transmission 
systems. Since the ordinary lightning-arrester does not begin 
to operate until at least double voltage is reached, and since 
practically all apparatus is tested at double voltage, it should be 
recommended that the gap of the line arrester be placed at not 
less than double voltage. It should be noted that if the arrester 


706 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


gives an initial current rush after being off the circuit for a long 
time, no harm will be done unless such initial rush of current 
should throw the circuit-breaker at the station. The slight 
amount of heating that occurs from this initial rush, lasting for 
not more than a very few cycles, and usually not more than 
one cycle, is negligible in the aluminum arrester used as a 


transitory lightning-arrester. This arrester may be allowed to 


stand for long intervals without connection to the line. 

By sacrificing the duration of discharge, the arrester can be 
given a discharge rate of 2000 amperes at double normal voltage, 
simply by an increase in the amount of the electrolyte in the 
same set of aluminum cones. ' 

To facilitate the testing of the aluminum arrester, the horn 
gaps are made in special form to act in three capacities: first, asa 
horn gap; secondly, as a short-circuiting switch to the gap, and 
thirdly, as a disconnecting switch. 


SomE AUXILIARIES TO THE GAP-ALUMINUM ARRESTER 


The lightning alarm and the fuse. Since the duration of this 
type of aluminum arrester is limited, it is necessary to take 
steps to remove the trouble as soon after it occurs as possible. 
This arrester may be located either in-doors or out-doors; and 
in order to make sure that the operator’s attention will be 
called to the condition of discharge, an extra cell is placed in 
the arrester circuit near the ground and leads are carried from 
there to the office of the attendant or the superintendent. This 
bell begins to ring as soon as the discharge takes place over the 
arrester and continues to ring until the arrester ceases to dis- 
charge. 

The arrester has a definite endurance to the discharge. Actual 
tests have been carried on to determine the life of a 13,000-volt ar- 
rester under different conditions. The arrester was caused to dis- 
charge in relays of two or three hours twice a day until the total 
time was 80 hours. The arrester was then dis-assembled and 
it was found that the plates were somewhat worn but the 
arrester was still in good condition. If the duration of each 
relay had been less than two hours, the wear of the arrester 
would have been very much less. It is estimated, however, 
that the summation of the total time of grounded phases on a 
system would hardly reach the value of eighty hours in many 
years. 

Series fuses in each leg are introduced to meet two condi- 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 707 


tions. First, if for any reason the dynamic potential should 
be increased to a dangerous value, the arrester will discharge 
these heavy currents continuously until disconnected from 
the circuit. - It is evidently impossible to use these lightning- 
arresters to discharge high dynamic current for any great length 
of time. Under normal conditions the dynamic current reaches 
a value of 0.4 ampere on 25 cycles, and 1.0 ampere on 60 cycles. 
Any current above these values is current coming from lightning 
surges. This current does not represent directly an energy 
loss because the aluminum cell is a fairly efficient condenser 
and the power-factor is correspondingly low. When, how- 
ever, the dynamic current for any untoward reason rises above 
the critical film voltage the current is entirely energy current 
and the internal loss considerable. In this discussion only 
energy from the generator is being considered, and it is evident 
to any operator that if the potential on his line rises to such an 
abnormal value for any length of time all the lights on the 
system will be burned out and the motors be operated under 
abnormal conditions. The second condition which may arise 
to necessitate the disconnecting of the arrester from the circuit 
will be that due to the length of time the arrester is discharging 
more than that recommended as the limit. It may be noted, 
although the time recommended is only a half hour or a little 
greater for duration of discharge, in actual practice, the arrester 
has been caused to discharge repeatedly for two or three hours 
at atime. If one of these arresters is placed on the circuit and 
left there the discharge rate remains about 1.0 ampere until 
the arrester reaches the limit of its endurance. This as already 
stated depends upon the heating. The current rises rapidly and 
if the arrester is not disconnected, one cell after another will 
‘ short-circuit, throwing each time the extra potential on the 
other cells until finally the condition of total short-circuit is 
reached. These arcs will tear holes in the aluminum and will 
reduce the stack of cones to their scrap value. If, however, a 
fuse of size amply large enough to take any induced stroke of 
lightning be placed in series, the fuse will still be small enough 
to disconnect the arrester from the circuit in time to save it 
for future use. : In either event, whether the arrester is discon- 
nected by the fuse or is destroyed by dynamic current, this 
point of the system is left without protection, but by the use of 
a fuse the arrester in test has been put back into the circuit 
again with no material damage other than the natural wear due 


to the passage of current. 


708 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


This matter of the use of a fuse in connection with the gap- 
aluminum arrester has been treated at some length in order to 
show the difference in this practise between the application to 
the aluminum arrester and the multigap arrester. There are 
some justifiable objections to a series fuse with the multigap 
arrester which do not apply to the aluminum arrester. 

Aluminum arresters for direct currents. These arresters are 
applicable to pressures from 110 to 1200 volts. The form of 
the arrester differs from the gap-aluminum arrester. Containing 
jars are used to hold the greater quantity of electrolyte and give 
greater cooling surface. The characteristics of this arrester 
differ in some details from the cone type previously described. 
The direct-current arrester has no series gap. It is connected 
to the circuit directly and has a small leakage current flowing 
through it constantly. In consequence of having no series gap 
its dielectric-spark-lag is zero. 

A brief review of the practical properties of the 600-volt 
direct-current arrester is given below: 

There is no series gap. The normal leakage current is 0.001 - 
ampere. The discharge rate at double voltage increases a 
million fold, it is 1000 amperes. Internal resistance above the 
permanent critical voltage is a fraction of an ohm. It may be 
frozen. Its inductive length of circuit is small. Its equiva- 
lent-needle-gap is 0.00 in. as compared to other types of arresters 
which give 0.25 in. to 0.58 in. under the same condition of test. 
Its measured static capacity is equal to over 400 miles of trolley 
wire. 

Temporary and permanent critical voltages. A condition 
which may be designated as a temporary critical voltage of the 
film valves is prominent in this arrester. If an arrester is on 
a 600-volt circuit taking one milliampere of current and the 
voltage rises to a slightly greater value, say 625 volts, the current 
will suddenly rise to several amperes. If the voltage is main- 
tained, a thicker film is formed which again reduces the current 
to a few thousandths. If the voltage decreases again, this 
extra thickness of film is re-dissolved. The temporary critical 
voltage of the film then is the constant running voltage. From 
another point of view, this statement is equivalent to saying 
that the arrester begins to discharge at a high rate of current 
the instant the voltage begins to rise. This is in contradistinc- 
tion of all gap types of arresters which do not begin to discharge 
until the spark potential of the gap is reached. The temporary 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 709 


is to be distinguished from the permanent critical voltage of the 
film. If the voltage impressed on this arrester should rise to 
about 840 volts the limit of film formation is reached. Every 
volt pressure rise above this value causes an increase of current 
which is permanent so long as the voltage remains constant. 
This passage of current through the film should be carefully 
distinguished from the usual failure of a dielectric. For illustra- 
tion, a thin layer of mica may have several thousand volts im- 
pressed upon it before it disrupts. This disruption will take 
place at one point and the voltage will drop to about 50 volts 
which is the ordinary arc voltage. The aluminum film does 
not function this way. The exact physical phenomenon is 
obscure, but it is evident that there is no analogous drop of 
potential at the film when the heavy current discharges and 
furthermore the current is distributed over the entire surface. 

The nature of the film varies with the electrolyte. As a 
working hypothesis it is assumed that it consists of pure gases 
in a liquid form held in a hard insoluble skeleton of aluminum 
hydroxide. This is borne out by tnost of the observed phe- 
nomena and so far as known is not disproved by any. 


EARTH CONNECTIONS 


The ohmic value of the earth resistance in connection with 
protective apparatus is usually unknown. The usual directions 
for making an earth connection are one or more of the following. 

a. Bury a slab of copper about two feet square in coke. 

b. Connect a wire to the water mains. 

c. Locate a copper plate in the mud of a body of water. 

The first is expensive to install, is concentrated at one point, 
and has an unknown value of resistance which may vary greatly 
from a change in moisture. The second gives a low value of 
resistance as a rule but is not available on lines and in many 
sub-stations. The third may give a low resistance but usually 
has an objectionably long earth connection. 

With the object of learning the effect of distance between 
earths on the ohmic resistance, effect of the size of the earth 
plate, depth of conducting stratum and the most economical 
method of reaching it and maintaining contact, the writer has 
made a series of tests, several of which are given below. Some 
of these tests were begun in 1906 and continued to the present. 

Methods. The first consideration was the choice of a method 
of test. The method employing the Wheatstone bridge recom- 


710 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


mended in some publications on telegraphy is unsatisfactory 
on account of the counter electromotive force of contacts. The 
simplest test is the measurement of voltage and current at the 
convenient value of 110 volts impressed and the only question 
regarding this test was the choice between alternating and 
direct currents. Alternating currents gave the most satis- 
factory results. If one volt counter electromotive force was 
subtracted from the impressed direct voltage the same re- 
sistance was obtained as given by alternating currents, except 
in one case. In this case the iron pipe was driven vertically 
through a deposit of coal ashes and cinders. At 1 ft. depth 
the direct-current method gave a resistance of 36 ohms whereas 
the alternating-current gave a resistance of 26 ohms. Since 


this deposit of cinders and ashes was not thick, its relative effect 


disappeared at a greater length of pipe. At a depth of 8 ft. 
the values by alternating and direct current sensibly coin- 
cided. This difference in resistance seems to have been due to 
some effect analogous to that in a coherer. The 110 volts of 
alternating current were obtained by transformation from 2300 
volts; the high-potential static came through the particular 
transformer so badly as to make the handling of a low-voltage 
wire exceedingly disagreeable. This high potential may have 
caused the particles to cohere. The direct current was taken 
from.a battery. 

In all tests l1-in. iron pipes were used. The lettered pipes were 
5 ft. and the numbered pipes 8 ft. in the ground. The resistances 
were measured between each pipe and the water-pipe main 
and also between earth pipes. The resistance of the water-pipe 
main was 3.3 ohms. The resistance of the earth pipes varied 
from 10 ohms to over 1000, according to the condition of the 
earth. 

Fig. 20 shows the location of the earth pipes; numbers 1, 2, 
7, 9, 3, 8, and 5 are on the same level in wet or moist ground. 
No. 4 is in a pine grove on an upper terrace eight feet above in 
dry earth and No. 6 is on a terrace ten feet below in very wet 
earth. The distances between earths: from 2 to 7 is 5 in. 
(probably not accurate to 8 ft. depth), 7 to 9 is 1.6 ft., 9 to 3 
is 4.75 ft., 2 to 3 is 6.5 ft., 2 to 8 is 33 ft., 2 to Dis 1.9 ft., 3 to7 
is 6 ft., 2 to 5 or 6 is 650 ft. Pipe earths B, C, D, E, and F 
were given special treatment to increase the conductivity of 
the earth near them. 


Resistance per foot depth of pipe. The curves, Fig. 21, show 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS Gul 


the resistance of each earth Pipe at each increase of one foot depth. 
The water main is designated asG. G-1 means that the two are 
used as electrodes. The first measurement taken was with the 


Aa B / UPPER TERRACE, 


O86 +44 f Rae } 
Cat 


: | / 


a / / ee 
Siew anny / e D 
12 @., if ie x) 
XN 6 ‘ 7 7 
2 NS is,) \' 7 
Y cs xe 
eM / / Wa 77 
e 
wilt : / 7 a. 
\| i} be Pa sich C 
\! ried fe aoe 
! 7 --~O”’ 
Bey 7 se 
| ‘g oad See 
| eee 
Ws ce 
402 
Pacey 
< ~ 
Mey es agp i WATER MAINS, 
™~ es eee 
~ 
~ 
~ 
yas 
Soo 
N 
~N 


D/NGRAM OF LOCATION OF GROUND PIPES. ~ e 


3 : 
TERRACE WALL. ¥ 
SSS SOOO ooooaoaoana>s—aas>SoSsaS0a_0—«3_ aaSa~_«»=~=“=“O“~_600™— 


BELOW 7FERRACE. : 
439 


F/G, 20. ; 
0. Py 


Fic, 20.—Map of earth pipes at the laboratory 


pipe resting on the surface of the earth. The resistances of 
these various connections varied from 1000 to 8000 ohms and 
cannot be shown on the scale of the print. The curves show 
that pipe No. 1 was well into the conducting stratum at 1 ft, 


712 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


depth; Nos. 2 and 3’at about 2 ft. depth; No. 6 below the wall 
at about 3 ft. and No. 4 on the dry upper terrace had to be 
driven about 7 ft. before it penetrated the conducting stratum. 
No. 5 at 8 ft. depth is equal in resistance to No. 1 at 1 ft. depth 
only. 

Comments on the change of resistance per foot. From the 
curves of Figs. 21 and 22 one may conclude that in making a 
pipe ground there is little to be gained in conductivity in driving 
a pipe more than 8 to 6 ft. into the conducting stratum. Com- 


0 SURFACE OF THE EARTH 


DEPTH !N FEET 


7 80 9 100 110 120 130 140 150 
RESISTANCE IN OHMS 


Fic. 21.—Resistance of an earth pipe at every foot increase in depth 


paring the resistance between pipes 2 and 1 at different depths it 
will be seen that at the surface the resistance decreases in propor- 
tion to the depth but’ already at 2 ft. depth the area or depth 
is increased 100 per cent. over 1 ft. yet the resistance decreases 
only 46 per cent. The ratio of these percentages is roughly 24. 
Between 7 and 8 ft. the area increases 14 per cent. but the resis- 
tance decreases only 3.4 percent. The ratio of these percentages 
is roughly 4. In other terms the resistance is only decreasing 
one-fourth as much as the area is increasing. In fact this curve 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 713 


is logarithmic and theoretically nearly reaches zero resistance 
when the pipe is infinitely long. Since the specific resistance 
of the earth varies with the depth the equation of the curve 
is not simple. There are two parts to it. The equation for the 
greater depth is 7 = 100 (k—b) 4 


Between pipes Nos. 2 and 1 the numerical values are: 


1 


} = feet depth, k = — ; 
Tresistance 


b = 0.0035 and A = 2. 


Fig. 22 shows the resistance of each pipe earth relative to and 
including No. 2. 


FIG. |22 
SURFACE OF THE|EARTH 


ee 


(Jv) 


Laas | 


-5 


DEPTH IN FEET 


ats 
| 
: 


7 | a3 ‘A | 


8 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 
RESISTANCE IN OHMS 


Fic. 22.—Resistance between pairs of pipes at every foot increase indepth 


EFFECTS ON THE RESISTANCE OF VARYING THE DISTANCE BE- 
TWEEN EARTH PIPES 


The desideratum is to determine what distance apart pipes 
must be placed to give practically the maximum possible re- 
sistance. It is a well known fact that after a certain distance 
between earths is reached any further increase in distance will 
not increase the resistance between them. Fig. 23 shows the 
resistance taken between pipes set at various distances. The 
resistance reaches a nearly constant value at about 6 ft. separa- 
tion. Therefore if it is desired to place a ground resistance in 


714 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


series between phase and phase of a line as suggested by Dr. C. P. 
Steinmetz some years ago, it is necessary to separate the ground 
pipes only by this distance. In other words it is not necessary 
to make one at one pole and another at the next pole. 

Treatment to improve earths. The material of the earth in 
this locality seems to be a mixture of clay and sand. Five 
pipes having a length of 5 ft. each were used in this test and 
are designated by the letters B, C, D, E, and H. The variable 
resistance of each of these earths relative to time, is shown in 
Fig. 24. Tests were made for eight consecutive days. 

Earth B was made by digging a post hole and mixing the dry 
earth with 16 pounds of salt and pressing the mixture back into 


RESISTANCE IN OHMS. 
8 


DISTANCE BETWEEN PIPES IN FEET. 


Fic. 23.—Resistance between pipes with the distance between them 
variable 


the hole around:the pipe. Water was then poured around the 
top of the hole. This pipe was located on a projection of the 
terrace, 8 ft. high, so that there was a sudden drop on one side 
of 8 ft. and on the other side a drop of 4 ft., to a ditch. The - 
resistance of the earth decreased daily showing that the salt 
water was percolating from the dry earth of the knoll down to a 
conducting stratum about 3 ft. below the pipe. During the 
eight days water was poured onto the top of this earth four times. 
It has now stood one year and seven months and the ohmic re- 
sistance has not varied materially. 

Earth C was made by digging a post hole, pouring into this 
hole sixty pounds of lime, sixty gallons of water, and filling in 
with dirt around the pipe. The location of this earth was below 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 715 


the terrace in good ground. Earth C is located quite near the 
previous mentioned earths designated as 2, 7, 9, and 3, and this 
treatment added nothing to the conductivity of the already 
moist earth. . 

Earth D was formed by simply driving a pipe 5 ft. into the 
earth, cupping out around the pipe at the top. Four pounds of 
salt were then placed in this cup and water was added. Twice 
subsequently, water was added. Results are shown by the 


curve. 
z Z 
WATER ae ON A 


4 LBS. SALT AND WATER ADDED 


+ 


65 


RESISTANCE IN O 


0 1 2 3 rain * Rain © Rain * 7 8 


TIME IN DAYS (ELAPSED) 


’ Bic. 24.—Decrease of resistance versus time after pipes have been treated 


with salt water 


Earth E was formed by laying a pipe on the level ground and 
covering with earth. Salt was then scattered over the earth 
and water poured on the mound. In this case fairly good con- 
ductance was obtained 1 ft. below the surface. This fact is 
indicated in the curve sheet by the sudden drop in the resistance 
from 60 ohms to 26 ohms during the same day. 

Earth H was formed by laying a pipe horizontally in a shallow 
ditch and covering with earth. Fourteen pounds of salt were 
mixed with the earth and then water poured over all. This 
earth was located on the edge of the upper terrace which is 8 ft. 


(16 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


high. The initial resistance before water was added was 545 
ohms. After two and one-half gallons of water were added, 
the resistance dropped the same day to 87 ohms. Water was 
added each subsequent day and after six days the resistance had 
gradually dropped to 25 ohms, (these results are not shown in 
Fig. 24). They are most remarkable, however, in that the salt 
solution had to percolate about 8 ft. before it struck « stratum 
of good conductivity. After one year and seven months the 
rain has washed out some of the salt from the covering of dirt 
about one inch deep, and the resistance has risen, but it is still 
less than one-quarter its original value. 

The conclusions drawn from these tests are that the con- 
ducting stratum of earth can be reached and maintained by 


£16. 25> 


bo 


+O 


Fic. 25.—Map of earths at the sub-station of the Animas Power and 
Water Company 


the addition of salt and water around the pipe. It is reasonable 
to infer that if the soil is sandy a greater amount of salt would 
have to be added. The salt in itself is hygroscopic and will 
always retain a certain percentage of moisture. In localities 
where the rain washes the salt through to the conducting stratum 
rapidly, it will be advisable to add salt at least once a year. 
Multiple pipe earth connections. The same set of pipes 

(2, 9, 7, 3, and 8) used to obtain the variation of resistance with, 
the distance between electrodes, was also used to get the varia- 
tion in resistance, by putting the different ones in parallel. 
Numbers 2 and 7 were driven 5 in. apart. There is no material 
variation in the resistance of these two earths, whether multiple. 
or singly—the value is about 16 ohms to the water main. If, 
however, No. 2 is combined with No. 3, which is 6.8 ft. away ina 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS “17 


line parallel to the water main, the resistance of the two in: 
multiple is only 10.7 ohms. The data are: 


Gir (D) ee 16 rR eRe 
Gers 159 : 
GAO = 16 « 
GEG Lig 3 « 
GOS 1077 ee 
Gey oTrG « 
Gas) SF og Bs 
Oe 08-7 « 
DT) e=s0 7554-2 


By algebraic combinations, the calculated resistance and con- 
ductance of each pipe is found. 
Pipe No.3 = 16 ohms = 0.0625 mhos 


Cy tNigeue > Liss Me FS Fenn 
“" No. 8 = 18.3 s =O 054 70 a 
Water main No.9 = 3.3 *2==20,30307" ** 


If these resistances are combined by the ordinary rule for 
parallel resistance, the values are different from the measured 
ones. : 

By formula Nos. 2 and 7 in parallel is 8 ohms, but measure 12.7. 

By formula Nos. 2 and 3 in parallel is 7.07 ohms, but measure 
7.4. 

By formula Nos. 2 and 8 in parallel is 7.5 ohms but measure 6.5. 

Inci ‘entally, the last reading is in error due to leaving the 
current on too long. Later it will be shown that when a pipe 
earth rests after carrying dynamic current for a while, the con- 
ductance increases. 

General law for pipe earths in parallel. In order materially 
to reduce the resistance of a pipe earth by additional electrodes, 
the added pipe must be driven out of the denser stream lines of 
current of the pipes already driven. As example, No. 7 was 
driven in the dense stream lines of No. 2 and did not lower the 
resistance by a measurable value whereas No. 3 was pretty well 
out of the stream lines and nearly follows the well known laws 
of paralleling resistances. Figs. 26, 27, 28, and 29, show the 
stream lines for various conditions; Fig. 26, vertical pipe and 
water main; Fig. 27, horizontal current lines between two verti- 
cal pipes; Fig. 28, roughly the vertical cross section of current 
stream lines between two pipes partially driven. The two 
logarithmic factors are represented, one by the straight lines 


718 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [june 30 
and the other by the curved lines—Fig. 29, current stream lines 
of a pipe touching the surface. The similarity of these current 


lines to the static field around a charged conductor is evident, 
in fact if the earth is assumed to have uniform resistivity, the 


F/G 26 


VERTICRL PIPE. 


A 


Fic. 26.—Current stream lines between a vertical earth pipe and a hori- 
zontal water main. They are similar in form to a static field 


DeMWATER 1K he 


laws are almost identical. As an example of the relation, the 
capacity of a single conductor 0.18-in. diameter and 75 in. from 
the earth is 0.0169 microfarads and the capacity of a conductor 
twice the diameter is only 0.0195 microfarads; in other words, an 
increase in size of 100 per cent. increased the dielectric displace- 


F1G.27 


Fic. 27.—Current stream lines (horizontal section) between two vertical 
pipes 


ment current only 15 per cent. If the earth pipe is driven sev- 
eral feet to minimize the proportional effect of the tip and lines 
represented in Fig. 29, the same law should hold approximately 
true for dynamic current as for displacement. current; conse- 
quently with one earth pipe resistance known, the resistance of 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 719 


a pipe of different diameter may be estimated from appropriate 
tables of static capacity. Returning to the static analogy, if 
another line wire 0.18 in. diameter is strung parallel to the first 
at a distance of a few feet, the capacity of the two in parallel 
is twice 0.0169 microfarads. Analagously, the conductance of 
two earth pipes is increased. 

Values of resistance of the condition of the pipe touching the 
surface (Fig. 29) are herewith given on account of their rela- 
tion to a broken line wire touching the ground. Pipe No. 1 
was 1200 ohms, No. 2 was 1260 ohms and No. 4 was 6000 ohms. 


F/G.23, 


FIG. 28 &, 


Fic. 28.—Current stream lines Fic. 28 a.—Current stream lines (verti- 


(vertical section) between cal section) between two earth-pipes 
two vertical pipes touching partially driven. The two sets of lines 
the surface of the ground represent the two logarithmic factors 


of the equation of the resistance 


In connection with the subject, the drying out of the earth by 
dynamic current as given later should be noted. 

Animas earth tests. These tests of earths around the labora- 
tory were supplemented by measurements of earths on the 
Animas Power and Water Company’s system. Fig. 25 is a map 
showing the location of the earths at the sub-station near Silver- 
ton. The ground in this locality is principally the gravel washed 
down from the steep mountain sides. The Animas River flows 
past the sub-station at a distance of about 100 yards. Under 
the station floor at the two points shown are two of the old type 
grounds consisting of expensive copper plates buried in coke. 
These two together are designated as G in the notes. Around 


720 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


the building five iron rods were driven to a depth of 6 ft. en- 
tailing unusual trouble on account of the stones encountered. 
The tests are divided into six parts. 


1. Variation of resistance with depth (dry earth). 

2. Variation of resistance with time after salting. 

3. Measurements of resistance between pipes in variable multiple 
groups. 

4. Measurements of resistance between the sub-station and 
Hobbs’ Switch, 5.5 miles up Gladstone Canon. 

5. Measurement of resistance between sub-station and power 
house 25 miles down the Animas River. 

6. Measurements of resistance of tree earth, pole earth, railroad 


earth, and side hill earth. 


Variation of resistance with the depth as the iron rod was driven. 
All measurements made with the lighting voltage (125 volts 
approximately). Pipe No. 3. 


Depth in feet Resistance in ohms 


604 
172 
250 
312 
125 
161 


OonrwWhd = 


The irregular variations are due to the lateral displacement of 
the iron rod as it pushed by some obstructing stone. 
Time resistance variation after salting the rod at the surface 


of the ground. 


Time in minutes Resistance in ohms 
0 161 
5 62.5 
10 47.7 
30 38.5 
360 oo 


This earth was located at the corner where all the rain water 
from the roof was carried. A storm occurred and considerable 
water was discharged around the pipe. Enough of the salt 
was washed through the gravel to raise the resistance from 33 
to 35 ohms. The other earths were unaffected by the rains. 


@ 
—: 


i a a a a ee 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS fia 


Measurements of resistance between pipes and various multiple 
groups. 


Earth Resistance Pipes in Resistance 

pipes in ohms multiple in ohms 
1 to 3 128 G tol pa. 3, 4.5; 32.3 
2 to 3 64 Goto Ae 2 eA 5. 36.6 
-4to 3 128 . G tol 23,04. 35 

4 to 3 115 Grtork pes os Sak 
Sto; 5 107 G to 1,2 47.4 
G to 5 85 Galton v55 sey 
G to 1 | 115 GALOMMA SAND 39.4 
G to 2 Ste regs to 2, 3, 39.4 
G to 3 57. 


The individual resistances can be found by elimination in 
the algebraic equations, but the resistance of any earth pipe 


is not a constant; it depends on its relation to the other elec- 
trode. This is treated later. The values calculated are: 


Ga 22, ohms = 0.0455 mhos. 


1 = 93 Spee OCOLOT 
22 31,25. 2 = 0.03820. ~ 
3 = 30 a treet Or os Oe ate 
4 = 93 ee) OL0T- 
5 = 67,5 eae) OMS oe 


By summation of the reciprocals the calculated values of re- 
sistances of the pipes in various combinations are: 


1, 2, 3, 4, 5, = 10.3 ohms = 0.0968 mhos, G by subtraction from tests = 22 
Pet Oe ee bee ae = 00682 IPH) 
1, 2, 3, 4, ct ab ie ie =(0.0820 “ pgs - i “= 22. 
20S; = 14. 0 807s ee o: = DES 
Tels = St ee 200427 re Cee . = 23.9 
1,5, 139) 2-60) - = (00255. Seas ‘i pt “ = 19. 
D3, 55 =18.5 “ =0.0541 “ agi Bi A “== 21. 
2.3 GE Gnieee 0.060670 a a : “- = 22.9 


_ Two salient features of these tests are: first, the low total resis- 
tance of the five pipes in parallel (10.3 ohms) as compared with the 
two station earths (22 ohms); second, the low cost and the easy 
and certain maintenance of the pipe earths as compared to the 
old type earths. The pipe earths are to be preferred, from every 
point of view. 

Measurements of resistance between the substation and Hobbs’ 
switch, 5.5 miles up Gladstone Canon. Three earths were made 


722 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


at Hobbs’ switch and by means of the telephone wire connec- 
tions were made between these earths and the earth (G) at the 
sub-station. No suitable measuring instrument was at hand 
so a voltmeter was used. The results are less accurate than 
the previous tests. In calculating the individual earth re- 
sistance the assumption was made that each earth carried a local 
value of resistance and that the rest of the resistance was in the 
main body of the earth between, or since there are mountains 
of granite in direct line between the two stations, that there 
was a resistance of the surface of the earth down one cafion to 
the fork and up the other, quite distinct from the local resistance. 
The calculated results seem to justify the assumption in this 
particular case. The Hobbs’ earths were not salted and were 
made in ground through which snow water was percolating, 
consequently their resistances are high. The following values 
were obtained: Ilobbs No. 1-487 ohms; Hobbs No. 2-100 ohms; 
Hobbs No. 3 (ground for telephony 189 ohms; and the re- 
sistance of the telephone wire plus the 5.5 miles of earth between 
stations was 89 ohms. Subtracting the telephone wire re- 
sistance leaves the 5.5 miles of earth 36 ohms. The resistance ~ 
to a lightning discharge passing along the wires cannot be less 
than this and is probably much greater. 

Measurement of earth resistance between the sub-station and 
the power house, 25 miles down the Animas River. The total 
resistance, including both station grounds, the earth between 
and the line wire, was 55 ohms. The resistance of the power 
house earth plus the main body of earth was only about 30 ohms 
which is less than the main body of the earth to Hobbs’ switch. 

Measurement of the resistance of tree earth, side hill pipe earth, 
pole earth and railroad earth. Up on the gravelly hill side about 
100 ft. above the substation was an evergeen tree. A line of 
nails was driven into the tree just above the ground and wired 
together. Six feet higher another set of nails was driven. 
The tree at the base is 5 ft. in circumference and at 6 ft. up is 
4 ft. in circumference. Resistance of the base of the tree to 
station earth is 770 ohms and from the point 6 ft. up is 2820. 
Resistance per foot height of tree 340 ohms. An iron pipe 
driven 5 ft. near the tree measured 353 ohms dry and 190 ohms 
a short time after it had been salted down and wet with a bucket 
of water. 

Seven nails four inches long were driven around the circum- 
ference of a spruce transmission pole just above the ground. 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 723 


The pole stood on a level with the sub-station. The resistance 
to the sub-station earth was 1290 ohms; 14 in. higher up it was 
3300 ohms. Seven more nails were driven at the same height 


rs) 
& 5 
Oo -~ i ~ 
3 = z Si 
-= k > e 
Z cc Zz CSrSss fe) 
tw WwW wl ° 
fe io . Wo oc a 
FES0045 cz. af ~ 
< WwZeoO rS. 4 w 
Wii oe So OR ee 
Onz EOF Sora : ca 
ZFWLOSO be eee © 
<q, ©O5,u 2G ® 
Fra,59oe Cla Sasa e 
nzZoysZga => 
t fon?) Or n 
Wehe sw 2 Zz o 
at Orr Zu 
ODP 2a: <x ne > 
é bo at ee Mo & 
wo 2 O rat es 5 
— i = 
vate = Q Kaew ws g 
wi Ry 
x= = ie ia ses ii wn 
<= > 2 
> ° Bs 
sm 
aS Ww 
eh ct 
Sy me NN 
oO S78 
= oO 
aie i 
uw O 
ais 
| = co RS. 
@ 
[on 
§ 
N 
ove 4 
w 
oO 
= 
Pape 35) 
o 
‘cj 
ae) 
on 
BS; 
r cs 
° 
G 
n 
Ras 
urve® ‘a 
3 
7 
| CURYE © F 
SURVE|S SORE ea 
So 
Se OR SRST GAS aS eee Ee FR data ean a a) 
SauadWNv fy 


to increase the area of contact. The resistance from the ground 
surface dropped to 980 ohms and correspondingly at 14 in. up 
it dropped to 2700 ohms. This gives about 1450 ohms per foot. 
At 6 ft. up, however, the pole was so dry that its resistance was 


Earth not treated 


724 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS {June 30 


too high to measure with a voltmeter having a scale of 150 
volts and an internal resistance of 5200 ohms. | The low resistance 
at 14 in. up shows the effect of capillary attraction in drawing 
up the moisture from the ground. 

A resistance measurement was taken between the steam rail-_ 
road track which parallels the main transmission line 35 miles 
and the sub-station earth No. 3. The total value was only 46.5 
ohms which leaves 11.5 ohms for the railroad. 


PIPE RESISTANCE TEST. 
EARTH TREATED WITH SALT. 
VARIATION OF CURRENT 
WITH TIME. 
IMPRESSED VOLTAGE 


AMPERES 


0 10 2 8 40 5 1HRe 10 2 30 40° 50 2HRS. 10 2 
TIME, MINUTES 


Fic. 30.—Curve showing the energy capacity of the same earth pipe 
salted 


Eartus CARRYING Dynamic CURRENT 


Variation of earth contact resistance when dynamic energy 1s 
applied. Occasionally dynamic energy is passed through the 
earth connection. This may occur: first, when arresters con- 
nected to different earths operate simultaneously; secondly, 
when a phase of a grounded neutral system is accidentally 
grounded; thirdly, to a less degree, when a phase of a non- 
grounded neutral system is accidentally grounded: and fourthly, 
when single-phase arresters are used connected to different 
earths. 


A study of the effect of dynamic energy was made on pipe 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 725 


earth No. 1 near the laboratory, under the two conditions of 
unsalted and salted. The pipe was 1.25 in. outside diameter 
(known as inch pipe) driven to a depth of 8 ft. 600 volts direct 


PIPE RESISTANCE TEST. 
EARTH TREATED WITH SALT. | 
VARIATION OF CURRENT WITH 
34 TIME AFTER AN INTERVAL 
FOR RECOVERY. 


26 
| CURVE 1, CURRENT AFTER 20 MIN. RECOVERY 


AMPERES 
iS 


i 
Go 


0 1 2 3 t 
TIME MINUTES 


Fic. 31.—Curves of recovery of conductance of the same salted earth- 
pipe 


current potential were impressed. The results are shown in the 
three curve sheets Figs. 29, 30, and 31. Fig. 29 gives curve of 
the unsalted earth and Figs. 30 and 31 of the salted earth. 


726 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


The characteristic behavior was the same. At first there 
was a fairly steady current flow until the temperature increased 
sufficiently to make the pipe steam and boil away the moisture, 
then secondly, a rapid drop of current to a fairly constant value 
such that the moisture was supplied from the surrounding earth 
as rapidly as it was evaporated. This supply of moisture could 
go on indefinitely only if the pipe were driven into a sink or a 
subterranean stream. Thirdly, when the potential is removed 
there is a rapid recovery of conductance. Fourthly, there is 
finally, after a few minutes repose, a higher conductance than 
existed initially. 

Between the unsalted and the salted earth there is a marked 
difference in the endurance or kilowatt capacity. The unsalted 


F/G.32. 


Fic. 32.—A recommended form of pipe earth unit 


Q 


earth carried 20 amperes for 3 min. (12 kw. for 3 min.) before 
it began to lose its conductance, whereas the salted earth car- 
ried 23 amperes for 70 min. (13.8 kw. for 70 min.) which is 
20 times as much. The unsalted test was made one day and 
the pipe was then salted down and left until the following day, 
about 18 hr. While the salted earth was being tested chlorine 
gas was given off. 

Form of pipe earth recommended. Any kind of metal pipe or 
rod driven into the earth a few feet makes a good earth con- 
nection if the soil around the pipe at the surface is cupped out, 
filled with a few pounds of salt, and water added. A neater 
form of earth unit is shown in Fig. 32. A cylinder of metal or 


q 


earthenware of any available diameter is set around the pipe at . 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS (27 


the surface of the ground and covered bya lid. This receptacle 
will hold the salt. Its advantages lie in the easy inspection of 
the connection and protection of surrounding vegetation from 
the saline water. 

Last year it was proposed to draw some distinction between 
the general use of the words ‘“‘ ground” and “earths”? as a 
matter of convenience and clearness; for example, a lightning- 
arrester may be grounded to a cable sheath or a transformer 
case and still be not earthed at all, unless these parts should be 
earthed; on the other hand, the arrester may be grounded to a 
pipe earth or to a system of pipe earths. This distinction will 
be somewhat justified in the ENT eae methods described in 
the following. 

It has always been customary to speak of a low-resistance earth 
as advisable and necessary to the proper functioning of a light- 
ning-arrester. Obviously, this is not always true. It is true 
as a protection to insulators but not so as a protection to isolated 
apparatus. While it is not the object of this paper to encourage 
the use of high-resistance earth, a method of grounding will be 
shown that does not diminish the protection in spite of a high- 
resistance earth connection. There are three factors involved 
which require separate treatment; namely, (a), the resistance 
factor; (b), the inductance factor; and (c), the permanence. 

Station grounds. a. The resistance factor. The object of pro- 
tective apparatus is not to prevent a rise in potential but to 
prevent an increase in difference of potential between the line 
and metal bodies or cases. To accomplish this the lightning- 
arrester must limit the potential between its terminals; at its 
lower terminal it should be connected to the metal cases of the 
apparatus and to a system of pipe earths encircling the station. 
If the resistance of the pipe earths is so high as to limit the 
discharge, there will be a drop of potential from the outside 
of the station to the point under the line whence the charge 
came. The ‘potential of the station may actually rise momen- 
tarily thousands of volts above the surrounding country, but 
this is of no consequence because the potential of everything 
in the station rises simultaneously. 

There is one source of danger which should be avoided. Ifa 
water main runs into the station it should be connected to the 
multiple pipe earth, because if its resistance is low compared 
with that of the pipe earth a person could get a shock from a 
charge passing from the station into the water main. If it 


728 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


were not for the danger of the water main, a fairly high re- 
sistance of multiple pipe-earths would be advantageous in using 
up the energy of the lightning stroke without risk of the J R drop 
causing a dangerous difference of potential. In isolated stations 
where there is nothing corresponding to a water main, multiple 
pipe earths around the building connected to the transformer 
cases should be sufficient. That is to say, a long lead running 
to the mud of an adjacent stream is needless. 

The bearing earth connection resistance has on the protec- 
tion of insulators, so far as known, may be theoretically ex- 
plained. The only protection there is for an insulator is a 
lightning-arrester placed in the region of induced static from 
the clouds. The station arrester acts as a protection to insu- 
lators only when the inducing cloud is over the station. If the 
resistance of the multiple pipe earth is high it will, in the latter 
case, give theoretically a somewhat less protection to the neigh- 
boring insulators. Since salted multiple pipe earths, even under 
the very worst conditions, give lower resistance than the old 
method earth, there is no choice between them. 

b. The inductance factor of earth connections. Since the re- 
sistance factor is brought to a matter of indifference by the 
multiple pipe earths, the inductance factor should be considered. 
It was feared that the iron pipe would offer greater inductance 
to high frequency currents than copper wire. Dr. C. P. Stein- 
metz has made calculations which show that the pipe is actually 
a better conductor of high frequencies than a large copper wire. | 
Regarding the connections between a lightning-arrester and 
earth the rule has always been to make it as short as possible. 
It is advisable to drive a pipe earth directly underneath the 
arrester even if such earth must be of relatively high resistance. 
This earth should be connected to the other earths. A more 
general rule is: make the circuit between the line and earth 
through the arrester short relative to the length around through 
the apparatus to the earth. A choke-coil gives considerable 
added length. While this precaution may not be followed 
rigidly in high-tension apparatus, it seems to be extremely im- 
portant in low-tension apparatus, especially with railway motors. 
Double-cotton-covered wire is delicate insulation. Some con- 
crete ideas of what is possible if a storm cloud is over a trolley 
line may be gleaned from laboratory tests. With two leyden 
jars of the gallon size, giving a frequency of about two million 
cycles per second and a momentary current rush estimated at 


19C8] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 729 


1000 amperes, the potential drop along one foot of No. 10 B. 
S. wire will puncture the insulation between two wires, each 
double-cotton-covered; that is, four layers of cotton covering. 
The shortening down of the lightning-arrester circuit to the 
last possible inch may seem over cautious. With the old types 
of lightning-arresters which contain an appreciable internal 
resistance it is needless precaution, but the new aluminum 
arrester for railway circuits has an equivalent-needle-gap of 0.00 
inches, an inductive circuit of only a few inches, internal resistance 
of only a fraction of an ohm, no series gap and a discharge rate 
of over 1000 amperes at double line voltage. Its normal leakage 
current is only about one millionth of this or 0.001 ampere. 

While this arrester is designed to take care of the severest in- 
duced strokes it cannot of course prevent a drop of potential 
_ along its connecting lead. The ideal connection of this arrester 
to a trolley car consists in,a lead carried from the trolley down 
near the motor or truck frame, connected to the lightning- 
arrester, and then carried back, not in the same conduit, to the 
car wiring. Nearly all the types of car wiring give this con- 
dition with varying degrees of perfection. While in most lo- 
calities the lightning troubles encountered may not warrant the 
expense of rewiring, it is important to examine these features 
when the aluminum arrester is used in localities where the light- 
ning is especially severe and frequent. 

So far, only the length of lead has been considered. It is 
sometimes impossible to shorten a lead below a given length 
and still important to reduce the impedance of it. Since the 
smallest wire that will carry the dynamic discharge of an ar- 
rester has a negligible ohmic resistance, the shape of the con- 
ductor only need be considered. Theoretically, the inductance 
decreases nearly in proportion to the increase in metallic surface.* 
The equivalent-needle-gap, however, shows a less gain as the 
surface increases. The following measurements give relative 
concrete values of potential drop under nearly the same con- 
dition as that noted just above. A 5 ft. length of copper ribbon 
2.5 in. wide and thin as paper was connected in series with an 
equal length of No. 10 B. & S. wire. The equivalent-needle-gap 
of the strip was #; in. (0.476 cm.) and of the wire 7% in. (1.11 
cem.). The potentials corresponding to these values of needle- 
gap are 3760 volts and 8750 volts effective—about two and one- 


* C, P. Steinmetz and K. Ogura, ‘Inductance of Straight Conductors ”’. 


730 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


fourth times as great. Using peak values, the potential drop 
per foot along the wire was 2470 volts. 

From the known data a value of current may be obtained by 
substituting in the equation E = LwIJ. The frequency was 
two and one-quarter million cycles per second, consequently the 
current must have been greater than 550 amperes. A partial 
check on this value may be made by assuming zero resistance 
and calculating the current by the previously given equation 
involving the total circuit. 

oi 
~VVE 


By this equation the maximum possible momentary value of 
current in this circuit is 3000 amperes at 100,000 volts impressed 
potential. 

The foregoing ca‘culations indicate that a discharge of cur- 
rent and frequency so high will tax both the resistance and the 
inductance limitations of an arrester to the utmost. The prac- 
tical question yet to be answered is when and how often may 
these conditions arise? A speculation is useful to the observer 
and student of this phenomenon. 

First of all the conditions may be obtained when a direct 
stroke hits the line; but such a discharge does not, in general, 
reach the lightning-arrester. It is probable that it may happen 
to a degree when a car or station is underneath a thunder cloud 
-which discharges to the earth. It seems quite certain that it 
cannot happen from a traveling wave along the line because of 
the relative valve of the inductance of the line to the capacity. 
It seems safe to presume that the combination of high frequency 
and large current occurs infrequently at an arrester. 

The permanence factor of earths. The permanence of the 
conductance depends on the moisture. Tests have been made 
using 600 volts on a pipe earth to drive out the moisture. 
In this case there was no baking of the material surrounding 
the pipe and consequently there was a quick recovery of con- 
ductance. No tests with more power and higher voltage have 
been made and possibly a more lasting effect might be produced 
by a grounded phase on a grounded neutral system. If such 
occurred during a storm the ed RS pipe earths would be 
especially valuable. 

Lightning conductors for the: protection of buildings. The 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 731 


customary lightning conductor is usually connected to a single 
earth by a single conductor. Numerous cases of side flashes 
from the rod into some part of the building have been recorded. 
The following recommendations based on minimum inductance 
and screening are made: 

Assuming a pointed roof for simplicity of illustration, a rod 
should be carried up high enough to act as an electrode for the 
lightning arc probably six feet or more, basing the distance on 
photographs of the part of the rod rendered luminous by the 
lightning. From a point about midway up on this rod, at lcast 
eight copper or iron wires should be attached; a wire passes to 
each corner of the roof and one at each mid-point. Tach wire 
is carried directly down to a salted pipe-earth. At the eaves 
a horizontal metallic connection should be made to equalize 
the potentials and again at the ground line. The natural in- 
clination of high frequency currents to spread over a surface 
will tend to prevent a side stroke toward the interior of the 
building. The multiple earth will tend to equalize the potential 
over the entire building. With a given amount of copper, the 
more it is subdivided into multiple paths, the surer the protec- 
tion. 

The foregoing is intended to cover only the principle involved 
and will have to be altered somewhat to meet architectural 
demands. 

CEMENT AS A RESISTOR. 

Some time ago the possibilities of trouble with lightning- 
arresters on a system using cement resistors between the neutral . 
of the system and ground suggested the necessity of studying 
its characteristics. It may be noted in passing, that arresters 
for non-grounded neutral systems require an extra leg between 
the multiplex connection and earth to limit the dynamic poten- 
tial across the arrester in case of an accidentally grounded 
phase. If the resistance in the neutral rises appreciably, the 
condition is equivalent to a non-grounded neutral system. 

Another important phase of the subject is related to the use 
of cement in poles and as anchors or foundations for electrical 
transmission towers. In the event of a shattered insulator, 
the cement or concrete will be called upon to carry either the 
charging current or one phase according to the connections. In 
this case the question of conductivity is a minor matter and 
attention should be directed to the possibility of disintegrating 
the cement by overheating. A series of tests was carried out to 


732 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


determine the characteristics to apply to the foregoing prob- 
lems. The writer is indebted to Mr. R. H. Marvin for the tests. 
The report is so replete with data and conclusions it is given 
verbatim. 


These tests were undertaken to determine the suitability of portland 
cement as a material for resistances, especially its use with large currents 
and on high voltages. 

They tend to show the following conclusions. 

At moderate temperatures the resistance depends simply on the 
amount of moisture in the cement and becomes extremely high if the 
moisture is removed, either by long drying or artificial heating. The 
addition of sand increases the resistance, acting apparently as an insulator 
distributed through it. When cement is heated it at first increases 
enormously in resistance as the moisture is driven off, but at a red heat 
it again becomes as good a conductor as when cool and damp. With 
the same voltage per unit of length, a moderate voltage, as 600 volts, 
will not heat the material above 100° cent. so as to pass the interval of 
high resistance; but a higher voltage, as 8000 volts, can pass this interval 
and heat the resistance to incandescence. 

The subject will be treated under the following heads: 


Effect on resistance of cement of various proportions of sand. 
Change in resistance with age. 
Behavior of cement resistances on constant potential circuits. 
Effeet of moisture on resistance. 
Conductivity at high temperatures, or pyro-conductivity. 

6. Change, from conductivity due to moisture, to pyro-conductivity 
with high voltages. 

7. The properties of cement as a resistance when used in the form of 
concrete. 


Sa srs a 


Subjects 1 and 2 are naturally included in the same tests and will be 
treated together. 

1 and 2. Effect on resistance of cement of various proportions of sand, 
and change of resistance with age. Resistances were made up in the form 
of rods of square section. These rods were 14 in. long and had a cross- 
section approximately 2 in. by 2 in. or 4 sq. in. At 1 in. from each end, 
sheet iron terminals were inserted while the cement was soft. These 
terminals consisted of a strip of 17 mil. soft sheet iron, 2 in. wide and 2.5 
in. long with a projecting lug for attaching a wire. The strip was slit 
for 2 in. into eight strips 0.25 in. wide; each 0.25 in. strip was then twisted 
through a right angle, giving a fork like appearance. This terminal 
gave a large area of contact without mechanically weakening the block. 
The terminals were thus 0.25 in. long in the direction of the axis of the 
rod, but in obtaining the specific resistance their distance apart, center 
to center, or 12 in. was taken. 

The materials used were: 


Edison portland cement and ordinary building sand. 
Five different mixtures were tried, six rods being made of each. The 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 733 


materials for each set of six rods were mixed together so as to insure 
uniformity. The proportions were as follows, in parts by weight. 

Set A. Cement 1 Water 0.3 

Set B. Cement 1. Sand 1. Water 0.45 

Set C. Cement 1. Sand 2. Water 0.74 


3 
3 g 
= ul 
= % fa) 
wo ou = 8 
Orns eo 
Znat WS 3 
id Ee 
eae i 
OQ =x 
eS Bor # 
mu Wo 
“<O00 rs) | 
0. oa: BY 
29% Go 
wee | |es (ee ad 
O2%a6 ou 3 
== s 
Eee ae Zz 
Sox =< = u R 
zok ZF = 
<£ez Wa 3 Re) 
< Cie ; Beles 
Rates Ut Zz g rr se 
Ona au Vp, =] < 
zhu ea ve a x0 
4 i wo vy Zz 
Oo oO ar “vy RX 
og i = 
uw ut 
we aX 
i we 
D 3 < 
=f co 
bal) 
= 
oF 
| = 
= 
CELT | 
WHO ey ON s 
iS VS e« 
mE7T) - SNIW39 | ‘ 
* Nawg5 
Pl 
SAV.G-Z1-4NI ° 
HODSW L Y3SA0 
GNVS§| 8 ‘LNSW30 | ; bse 
| : 
25 o 
2 ee eee a 
S 3 S 3 & = Ss 8 = $ 8° $ 8.2 - 


SWHO ‘AONVLSISSY O1s10adS 


Set D. Cement 1. Sand 4. Water 0.58 
Set E. Cement 1. Sand 8. Water 1.57 
The rods of set E having such a large proportion of sand were very 
fragile for sometime after mixing, and never became very Strong, 


33.—Time versus resistance of cement and sand 


Fic. 


734 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


The resistance was measured on a storage battery circuit of about ‘1 10 
volts by means of a voltmeter of known resistance. Resistances above a 
megohm could not be accurately measured, so when they occur they are 


*IN3Oo ‘SYUNLVYSdW3L 
a git ele val Se Sy eaees 


ROD B, 1 CEMENT, 1 SAND 
ROD C, 1 CEMENT, 2 SAND 
ROD D, 1 CEMENT, 4 SAND 


ROD A, PURE CEMENT 


_ 
= 


These curves are of the early stages 


5 d NS Ss 
me 


tals aly ate 
ESSA 
/ S54] = 
ea aie PAS YO I Es 
ACER 
ATS are a ae 
e° S78 252 °3453 Shae 


= 
SWHO ‘SONV.LSISAU 


RESISTANCE, FULL LINES 
TEMPERATURE, DOTTED LINES 


VARIATION IN TEMPERATURE AlvD 
600 VOLTS DIRECT CURRENT. 


RESISTANCE WITH TIME, OF CEMENT RODS 


ON CONSTANT POTENTIAL CIRCUIT, 


a2 8 € 8 8 2 2 


simply indicated. Resistances were measured at intervals of a few days, 
the rods being kept in a moderately dry room. 
The results are shown in Fig. 33, the resistance for ease in comparison 


Bie 24—Anplication of power to cement resistors. 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 735 


being expressed as specific resistance, or resistance in ohms between 
opposite faces of a centimeter cube. These curves show a gradual in- 
_ crease in resistance with age; due apparently, mainly to drying out of 
moisture, but possibly in part to the chemical changes in setting. They 
also show a large increase in resistance with the addition of sand. 


*1N30 0 ‘SUNLVYSdW3L 
Stet shs Ss erg Agi aie's 


oy 

te) 

hale 3 

aoa Se) 

Za @ 

Resim iis idcc =) 

Pp ODS ; q 

seek g 3 

Pee et ibs) Sees me 

wzzz ro) 3) 

ouuwwW " 

waa eer 

5000 » 

4 Qere =) 2 

Ea a ee : 

oaqa wn 

S006 BS. 0 

(od ag a ale ae : 

g 6 

Rai : 

= 2 

ha as 

SE Ope} 5 

fe) 2 29 

yess s = 8 

Zz — ae i =. a) 

252) oy Su u 

wu2Z all ct 

est © Ell ar q 

ae Aaa Slt q 

Pons a5 al E 

<u <a Za Oh 8.0 

Soma iat ° 

a Rr Al me ab ! i) ve 

WiyO>Oo = = 

=s-uw"o oO 

wW=oOc wip a & 

FFO= ow aE. o 

a0 25 oa Py 

24 SE (op) = a 

“EGR bs Be 

25a D wi =] 

Oso wa 2 

puMo> 3 s 

LOZo Ff 3) 

ezoo oy 

<e a 

>wnZ x 
20 

2 

19. 

a oD 

o 

a 


io) =) NR 
gtd eel are | 
So So So o 


8 
i=) 


0.28 
26 
24 
22 

0.20 
18 
16 
14 

0.12 
0.10 


SWHODAW ‘SONVLSISSY 


3. Behavior of cement resistances on constant potential circuits. The 
tests on variation of resistance with age being concluded and all the rods 
being dry and well set, tests were next made to observe their action on a 
constant potential circuit. One rod from each of sets A, B, C, D, was 


the previous curves to a smaller scale 


736 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS {June 30 


taken and soaked in water for sometime so as to insure uniform moisture 
conditions. After draining a few hours they were connected to a 600 
volt direct-current circuit and readings taken of temperature and re- 
sistance at short intervals. The readings are plotted in the curves of 
Figs. 34 and 35. Fig. 35 is the continuance of Fig. 34 to a smaller 
scale of time and resistance. The resistances are those actually meas- 
ured. The multipliers to reduce these to specific resistance are: 


A multiply by 0.836 


B % 02898 
C . f Os007 
D S SOTO 12, 


These curves show that the resistance at first falls rapidly, at the 
same time the temperature rising to nearly the boiling point. At this 
period a large amount of steam is given off. The resistance after reaching 
a minimum commences to rise. The temperature has a maximum 
occurring a few minutes after the minimum of resistance. After this the 
temperature continues to fall and the resistance to rise, both tending 
towards constant values. 

It is interesting to note that rod D has the highest initial resistance and 
the lowest final resistance. The low maximum temperature attained, 
75° cent. is the explanation of this, the initial resistance being so great 
that the rod could not heat up sufficiently to drive off its moisture in the 
time taken for the test. The initial resistance of B being lower than A is 
rather peculiar, in view of the curves obtained on drying out the rods, 
but is probably due to B having soaked up the water more thoroughly 
than A. 

The amount of energy dissipated before the resistance has increased to 
a prohibitive extent is also of interest. If we. consider three times the 
initial resistance as the permissible amount, then these rods gave the 
following results approximately. 


Kilowatt-hours 


Time in minutes to reach absorbed Average 

three times initial resist- and kilowatts 
ance on 600-volt circuit dissipated input 

Rod: Aeon: 28 0.0885 0.190 
Rod Bt actenceep 13 0.0713 0.329 
Rod (Ce anisap se 26 0.0845 0.195 
RodeD Tero te’ 56 0.1170 0.125 


4, Effect of moisture on resistance. The tests already described indicate 
the importance of the moisture in the rods, but to further prove this 
point the following test was made. ‘Two rods of each set, A to E, were 
taken. They were soaked in water for several days. When removed 
they were allowed to drain a few hours, and the resistance was then 
measured, They were next slowly heated over a bunsen burner for several 


1908} CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS 737 


hours so as to drive out the moisture. After cooling the resistance was 
measured. They were again soaked in water as before and the re- 
sistance measured. The specific resistance in each case is given in the 
following table. Resistances over one megohm could not be accurately 
measured, so are simply indicated. 


SPECIFIC RESISTANCE | 


A A B B C CG D D E E 
No. 1: No. 2: No. 1: No. 2: No. 1: No. 2: No. 1:No. 2: No. 1:No. 2 
Wet before 


heating...... 1078 : 1200 : 1552 : 1137 : 1930 : 1764 : 2240 : 1800 : 2910 : 3270 
Dry after 1 meg : 1 meg : 1 meg : 1 meg : 1 meg : 1 meg : 1 meg : 1 meg : 1 meg : 1 meg 

heating...... plus : plus : plus : plus : plus : plus : plus : plus : plus : plus 
Wet after 

heating...... 955 : 1270 : 1310 : 1483 : 2550 : 2810 : 2855 : 3490 : 6520 : 6420 


This experiment agrees then with the others in showing that the con- 
ductivity is due to moisture. 
~ 5. Conductivity at high temperature or pyro-conductivity. Having shown 
that the resistance of cement increased enormously on heating suffi- 
ciently to drive out the moisture, the next point taken up was whether 
the resistance would again become lower on continuing to raise the tem- 
perature. For this a number of rods were made of pure Portland cement, 
15/16 in. diameter and about 6 in. long. One of these rods was taken 
and provided with copper terminals placed 1 in. apart, each terminal 
being a sheet of strip copper ? in. wide, tightly clamped around the rod. 
Connections were made to a 116-volt storage battery so that the re- 
sistance could be determined by measuring the current in the rod and the 
voltage across it. The current was measured by a d’Arsonval galvano- 
meter with adjustable shunt, and the voltage ona Weston voltmeter. 
Arrangements were made to heat the short length of rod between the 
terminals with a blast lamp. It was considered best to use as high a 
voltage as possible for measurement so as to render thermo electric 
effects negligible, preliminary tests having shown that these were very 
noticeable with low voltages. The following table gives a summary of 
the tests. The cement rods had been allowed two days to dry and set. 
Variation of resistance of cement rod on heating. 


Resistance megohms Approximate temperature 
0.144 Cold before heating. 
54.500 
45.900 Slowly heating up 
76.700 
8.970 Beginning to get red hot. 
0.780 Red hot. 
0.178 Partly white hot. 
0.131 White hot. 


These results are rather rough owing to the impossibility of heating 
the rod uniformly, and the absence of any means of obtaining the exact 
temperature, but they indicate the general principle that as the moisture 
is driven out the resistance increases enormously, but as red heat is 


738 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


approached, it falls rapidly, and at white heat is practically the same 
as when cold and moist. That this fall in resistance is due to temperature 
and not to a permanent chemical change is shown by the resistance re- 
turning to its high value when the rod cools. 

The cement was rendered very weak and brittle by the heating, re- 
sembling a piece of chalk. 

6. Change from moisture conductivity to pyro-conductivity with high 
voltages. The experiments of the previous section have shown that the 
conducting properties of cement depend upon three distinct states of the 
material. These are: 

1. A condition of good conductivity depending in value upon the 
amount of moisture present. It is on this account liable to wide varia- 
tion with time, and completely disappears when the temperature is raised 
to the boiling point of water. 

2. A state of low conductivity, approaching that of a good insulator, 
when the cement is dry and its temperature below a red heat. 

38. Another condition of good conductivity at and above a red heat; 
the resistance at this stage being nearly the same as in the first. 

It was in accordance with these properties that in the test of section 3 
the temperature of the resistance rods never rose above 100° cent., the 
period of high resistance being insurmountable by the moderate voltage 
employed. 

To sec if, with a higher voltage per unit length, the interval of practical 
insulation could be bridged, the following experiments were undertaken. 

A number of pure portland cement rods were made § in. in diameter 
and about 6 in. long. Copper bands which could be clamped around 
these at any point were used as terminals. 

The first experiments were made on 600 volts direct current, the ter- 
minals being set at various distances apart down to 0.25 in. Even with 
this small distance between terminals it was impossible to pass the insu- 
lation stage. There would be a violent production of steam for a few 
seconds, and then no further action. Frequently the rods would crack 
in two from the high steam pressure produced. 

Experiments were next tried using a 25,000-volt, 60-cycle, testing trans- 
former. On account of the small capacity of the generator supplying this, 
the current available was very small; also the regulation was poor causing 
a large drop in voltage under load. Tests were made with the terminals 
on the rods 4 in. apart. The voltage was adjusted to about; 8,000 volts 
at no load. If the rod was quite damp when put om the circuit, the 
rush of current was usually so great as to open the circuit breaker. When 
slightly dryer a large current would flow for a short time, lowering the 
voltage very greatly; at the same time incandescent spots and streaks 
would form on the rod from which spectacular streams of flame would 
shoot out a foot or more, continue for a few seconds and then disappear. 
The voltage would then rise to its no-load value indicating a very high 
resistance. The experiment could be repeated by soaking the rod in 
water for a few minutes. But finally a rod was found coming within the 
capacity of the apparatus. The voltage being thrown on the incan- 
descent streak spread from one terminal to the other, the rod gradually 
heating up allover, It ran quietly for about a minute, the voltage falling 


1908] CREIGHTON: LIGH TNING-ARRESTERS 739 


to 2000, and could probably have been kept at incandescence indefinitely 
had the power been available, but the apparatus beginning to heat, the 
current had to be cut off. After the rod had cooled, the application of 
8000 volts produced no effect, showing that moisture is necessary to start 
the action. Probably the rods could in all cases have been heated to 
incandescence had the power been available. 

These experiments at 600 and at 8000 volts show that the passing of 
the period of high resistance is not so much a question of average poten- 
tial gradient, as of maximum potential available. It is reasonable to 
suppose that the material becomes conducting in spots, and that the 
high voltage will concentrate on any high resistance portions. 

It is also important to notice that to.start the action the initial moisture 
conductivity is essential. 

7. The properties of cement as a resistance when used in the form of 
concrete. As in most cases when portland cement has been used for a 
resistance in practice it has been mixed with broken stone and sand to 
make concrete, some further tests were made with this material. The 
-proportions by weight of the material were about as follows: 


Pdisontportlandécementier Sata ae tetas ky te ee 100 
Beh ae he Bo Re choca aL Cua Sut tee Re ear rcr a ee ae a ne ce OR 200 
Broken limestone from ? in. down to powder..............100 
Broxenniimestonews: tile cs- ee was Se ee oe ee ee et 100 
VV LGC ia eae a tS Meted ne REN or pee tinh eee ey ceri Fh eee aa 65 


This mixture was molded in wooden boxes to form blocks 10 in. by 
9. in. by 7.75 in. 

Variation of resistance with age. Yor this a column of six blocks was 
built up. The blocks were joined together with pure cement mortar, 
only enough being used to fill up the irregularities. Several strips of 
sheet iron were placed at the top and bottom for terminals, being bedded 
in cement mortar. The dimensions of the finished column were 484 in. 
between terminals, and 10 in. by 9 in. in cross-section. The blocks 
being made at different times were from two to three weeks old, and 
having stood out doors and been soaked with water in setting up the 
column their condition was rather indefinite. The following table shows 
the resistance for the first six days after building the column. 


Time after 


buildings, Resistance Specific 
days ohms resistance 
0 920 4340 
1 898 4230 
3 1068 5030 
5 1178 3560 
6 Walgecs 5555 


As would be expected in such a large mass of concrete the change in 


resistance is very slow. eae eS ee 
Behavior of concrete blocks on constant potential circuits. The circuit 


7 


740 CREIGHTON: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 30 


used for this test was a 2300-volt, 60-cycle lighting circuit. A single 
block was used, being set up so as to give a length of circuit of 7.75 in. 
and a cross-section of 10 in. by 9 in.; the terminals as before being strips 
of sheet iron. 

The action in this case was exactly the same as in the test made with 
the small rods. The current was at first large but fell rapidly as the 
moisture boiled off, the rod becoming almost an insulator in a short time, 
Pouring water over it and allowing it to soak in would bring the re- 
sistance back more or less to its original value. The action took place 
so rapidly that it was very difficult to obtain good tests. The following 
figures will, however, give some idea. 

In the first test made, the current started at about 15 amperes and fell 
in 23 minutes to .2 ampere. 

In another test made some months later and when the block was 
quite dry, the current started at 2 amperes, reached a maximum of 4.4 
amperes in 1 minute and fell to one ampere in 34 minutes. . 

Summary and conclusions. The tests made with cement rods having 
different proportions of sand show a progressive increase in resistance 
with increase in the amount of sand, leading to the conclusion that the 
sand acts practically as an insulator distributed through the cement, so 
diminishing the effective cross-section of the rod. 

All the experiments on the change in resistance with age or with 
heating indicate that at moderate temperatures the conductivity depends 
almost entirely on the amount of contained moisture. It would appear 
probable that the moisture dissolves a portion of the cement to form an 
electrolyte which being diffused through the body of the cement conducts 
the current, the solid part of the cement simply acting as a container for 
this electrolyte. 

The studies of concrete while not as complete appear to agree with 
these conclusions. 

The experiments on resistance at high temperatures and at high 
voltages show that cement possesses in addition to its low temperature 
or moisture conductivity a high temperature or pyro-conductivity. 
Also that a high voltage is able, in some manner to bridge the interval 
of high resistance and raise the material to incandescence. 


~ 


A paper presented at the 2th annual convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Atlantic City, N. J., June 30. 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A. I. E. E. 


TESTS WITH ARCING GROUNDS AND CONNECTIONS 


BY ERNST J. BERG 

It has long been known that when an arcing ground occurs 
in a system, abnormal voltages and consequent failure of ap- 
paratus often result. This series of tests was started with the 
hope of being able to deduce some mathematical expression 
which would represent these phenomena with reasonable accu- 
tacy. The mathematical expression did not materialize, but in 
view of the importance of the subject, and believing that the 
results will prove of some interest’ and value, I give them in 
the following paper. The theoretical explanation might form 
the subject of a future paper. 

In the tests power was supplied from a three-phase turbo- 
generator operated at 25 cycles and 11,000 volts. During the 
tests this generator also furnished power for railway and other 
purposes, so that the load, and therefore the wave-shape, was 
not the same throughout. Some endeavor was, however, made 
to find whether the outside load affected the readings, but the 
results were not conclusive and rather negative. It seemed, 
therefore, that at least in a general way the impressed, or 
rather the generated wave-shape of electromotive force was of 
little amportance. 

The current was carried to the experimental station through 
a three-conductor cable 4000 ft. long. The diameter of each 
conductor was 0.365 in. and the resistance 0.31 ohms. The 
capacity between conductors was 0.27 mf. and between each 
conductor and the other two and ground 0.45 mf. Two sets 
of 110-kw., single-phase, core-type transformers of similar type 
were used; one to reduce the voltage from 11,000 to 370, the 
other to raise the voltage from 370 to 33,000, the voltage used 

741 


742 BERG: ARCING GROUNDS [June 30 


in the experiments. The arcing grounds were established on 
the high potential side of the transformers. 

Fig. 1 gives the principal dimensions of the step-up trans- 
formers; that is, the transformers at the terminals of which 
the experiments were made. 

The low-potential winding was made in four coils, each of 24 
turns. These coils were placed nearest the core. The connec- 
tions of the coils are shown in Fig. 2. The inside coil on one leg 
was connected to the outside coil on the other, and all coils were 
connected in series for 370 volts. The high-potential winding 
was in 18 coils, nine of which were oneach core. The two outside 
coils, A, Fig. 3, had a tap brought out from the middle of 
the winding, the other coils, B, had no taps. The two A 
coils had each 426 turns, the B coils 482, making 8552 
turns in all. The coils were connected as shown in Fig. 3. 

In the paper one-half of the A coils is referred to as “ the end 
coil,’ which, therefore, have 213 turns, or one-half of the turns of 
the A coils. The normal voltage between them is 2.49% of 
the primary voltage. 

Terminals were brought out from the taps indicated. The 
exciting current was 3% of the full-load current, the core loss 
1.2%. Primary and secondary resistances were each 1% 
The total reactance was 3.5%. The capacity between the 
primary and secondary winding was 0.003 mf., and the capacity 
between primary and secondary and ground was approximately 
the same. In all experiments the transformer cases were 
grounded. 

The arcing connections between seins or to ground were 
made by approaching a small wire to the terminal. Unless 
stated to the contrary, the arcing connection may be assumed 
to have practically no resistance. As will be seen in one of 
the experiments, substantially the same results were obtained 
when a resistance of several thousand ohms was inserted in 
the ground circuit. 

The striking distances were taken by means of needle gaps 
in series with which were resistances of such a value as to limit 
the current to about 0.5 amperes. It: was found that this re- 
sistance could be varied over a wide range without affecting 
the results, but that the actual contacts in the spark-gap circuit 
must be carefully made, since if an arc was established in any of 
the connections local oscillations were set up and too high 
striking distances resulted. The striking distances given rep- 


1908] BERG: ARCING GROUNDS 743 


resent the highest values obtained after a whole series of tests. 
These high values were, however, quite consistent so that tests 
repeated different days would check within a few per cent. 


FD a 


AY 
LN 
AY 
AN 
AN 
AN 
AN 
AN 
A 
AY 
aN 
WN 
WN 
AN 
NY 
AN 
EN 


ib "SMITE MTLIGMEM TE EEELS 
BSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS SSS SI 
AAWACVAa aan 
SILIOIIIIDODI IOLA TTT TS 


CLIT III II II 


F 


The normal striking distance between lines at 33,000 volts was 
2in. The striking distance across the first two taps—820 volts— 
was so low as to make the reading uncertain—it was less than 


0.03 in. 


744 BERG: ARCING GROUNDS [June 30 


In the first test which is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 4 
one of the high-potential terminals of a 33,000-volt transformer 
was connected to one of the high-potential lines of another 
similar idle transformer through an arc. To introduce con- 
siderable capacity in the system, the other high potential line 
was grounded as was also the transformer iron. As the ter- 
minals a were brought within striking distance, a series of 
static sparks was established, which by their bluish-white color 
and snappy sound indicated a very high frequency. 

Shunting the transformer was a spark gap, b, which at 
the time discharged over a 6-in. space; that is, three times 
the normal distance. A spark-gap, c, was placed across 


11000 370 33000 


Volts volt. vo/ts 
Cables 
Step gown. Sep up 


Sranstormer adagram. 
Fic. 4 


the end coil, and this discharged over 0.3 in., or more 
than ten times the normal distance. It was found that gap 
d placed at the end of the winding did not show any abnor- 
mal voltage. 

Needle gaps were also placed at e and f, between the end of 
the winding and ground, and these discharged over a distance 
of 2.5 in., showing that the winding was subjected to excessive 
voltage not only between turns, but also to ground. 

In the second test, Fig. 5, the same general arrangement was 
used, but the ground connection of one of the lines of the step-up 
transformer was removed. Under this condition the spark at 
a was very faint, due to the slight charging current, and 
the voltages were very much reduced as seen in the figure, in 


oe, Mies 


= ~~ er 


1908] BERG: ARCING GROUNDS 745 


which for convenience sake the striking distances are inserted 
directly instead of the spark gaps. These two experiments 
indicate what might take place when transformers are connected 
or disconnected by an air switch, or a switch which permits 
of some oscillations before the circuit is definitely made or opened. 


a 
a 
Sg ae ee) 
Gen ' 
End g 
a) 
% 


ake 


Fic. 5 


In the third test an arcing ground was made at the terminal 
of the step-down transformer as shown in Fig. 6. With an 
arcing ground, the striking distance between the terminals and 
between one terminal and ground was 4.1 in. or more than 
double the normal value. Across the 2.5% tap nearest the 


Gen 
End 


Tanstormer ahagran J 


Fic. 6 


arcing ground the striking distance was more than 15 times 


the normal, but no apparent abnormal voltage existed at the 
end coils on the ungrounded side of the transformers. 
The fourth test was made with transformers connected 


three-phase, Three transformers with the primaries and sec- 


eae 


746 BERG: ARCING GROUNDS [June 30 


ondaries:connected delta were used to reduce the voltage from 
11,000 to 370; three others, with the same connection, to raise 
the voltage from 370 to 33,000 volts. One of the high potential 
lines, or rather the junction of two transformer windings, since 
no transmission line existed, was grounded by an arc, as shown 
in Fig. 7. 

The top diagrams indicate that delta-delta connection was 
used, and show the maximum striking distances across windings 
and across an end coil. The lower diagram is a scale drawing 


Tronsvoriaer Hagraiy. 


: e 
V Voltage weagren 
to show the magnitude of the normal striking distance—in 
dotted lines—and those existing with the arcing ground. 

It is interesting to note that the striking distance across the 
two transformers nearest the ground was 1.9 times the normal. 
The transformer opposite to ground was subjected to 1.2 times 
the normal voltage. 

In the next two tests the step-down, as well as the step-up 


transformers, were connected open delta, or V. By referring 
to Figs. 8 and 9 it is seen that with this connection, particularly 


1908] 


BERG: ARCING GROUNDS 


Fic. 9 


Co 


N 


748 | BERG: ARCING GROUNDS [June 30 


when the arcing ground took place on one of the outside 
lines, the transformers were subjected to very high stresses. 
For instance, in the fifth experiment. Fig. 8, when an outside 
terminal was grounded, the striking distance between the other 
outside terminal and ground was 2.75 times the normal; across 


rIil--+ 


Fig:10 


ohn 


one of the transformers it was 2.2 times, and across the other 
i.55 times the normal value. The striking distance across the 
first 2.5% tap was 0.45 in., or about 15 times the normal, across 
the next tap 0.3 in., or ten times the normal. 

In the sixth test, Fig. 9, the middle line was grounded and 


FIG.M. 


Ii 
| lee 


revionce | © [noone se [net] ave? 
won [36 [ae [arf ae [a] ae 


the striking distance across each transformer was 2.1 times the 
normal. In both experiments the striking distance across the 
end coil nearest the ground was from 15 to 20 times the normal, 
but no abnormal voltage was detected at the end turns opposite 
the grounded side. 


1908} BERG: ARCING GROUNDS 749 


In the seventh test a very wide range of inductance in the 
shape of air coils was inserted at the transformers, as shown in 
Fig. 10, and the ground made on the line side of the coils. These 
coils were of the same dimensions as the coils used in the trans- 
former. It was found that the number of turns did not affect 
the results in any way that could be classified. 


At times a large reactance, say 20% of the transformer turns, 
would show lower striking distances, then suddenly perhaps 
the wave-shape slightly changed, or something else happened 
outside of the experiments, and the striking distances would be 
even greater than when no coils were used. The coils seemed 


4 


750 BERG: ARCING GROUNDS [June 30 


to resonate with some of the higher harmonics; and since there is 
probably a large number of higher harmonics, each coil found 
one which suited the natural frequency of the transformer 
winding and the coil. 

The eighth test recorded in Fig. 11, shows the effect of re- 
sistance in the circuit of the arcing ground. The diagram and 
the table explain themselves, and show in a general way that 
arcing grounds over insulators, through wood, etc., are practi- 
cally as destructive as grounds without resistance. 


Electrolytic cells 7 serles~ Wits 
res/stace 


Fig. 13 


Lach cell consis? | 
of | 


175 OAns. 


Volts \AB\BC AC |-2 |2-3 |7-4 | 4-7 


Gap \4%, |\2%|S% 1095 |462 1% VI 


Various methods of relieving these strains, particularly the 
strains on the end turns, were tried. 

For instance, in Fig. 12, which illustrates the open delta 
connection, the end coil was shurited by a resistance in series 
with a gap, the gap being so proportioned that a discharge 
would take place at abnormal voltage only. Various resistances 
were tried, but even the most favorable did not reduce the 
voltage entirely. By comparing Fig. 8 with Fig. 12, it is seen 
that the reduction in voltage across the first end turns was 50%, 
but the stress across the next coil was somewhat increased. 


’ 


1908] BERG: ARCING GROUNDS 751 


The voltages across the entire transformers were also decreased. 
It may be of interest to add here that this method of protection 
was quite effective at low voltages. This leads the writer to 


Electrolytic Cells 177 series with resistanee 


A ie 


F19. 14. 


Arciag B (ache cel consists 
foe. ea 

1000 Otrrs. 
Valts \ABIBC \AC \6-7 |5-6 | 4-7 |/-4 | 


Gap |3f4 3% 22 1195 |250\//4 VY | 


500 Ohins — 
(volts \aB |Bc \ac 6-7 |5-6 |4-7|/-4 | 
\Gap |24%,|3/2 12% |/70 |305V% Ve 


175 Ohms. 


Valis \AB\BC \AC \6-7| 5-6 |4-7 V-F | 


Gap |\2'713G)2 G\/5/ |355\/ Bu Y% 


believe that with very high voltages when local oscillations 
of considerable energy are set up in the shunted circuit, this 
method will prove of relatively little value. 

Ordinary tin foil, mica and electrolytic condensers shunting 


752 “BERG: ARCING GROUNDS [June 30 


the end turns were very effective in relieving the strain in the 
shunted coil, but transferred it to the next section. 

Resistances in series with a few cells of electrolytic con- 
densers caused some improvement as is seen by comparing Figs. 
13 and 14 with Fig. 8. 

Loading the transformers experimented with did not ma- 
terially affect the results. 

Finally, tests were made where one line was grounded perma- 
nently instead of through an arc, and it was found that no ab- 
normal voltages existed, the striking distances being those 
corresponding to the impressed voltage. This suggests the 
advisability of making a permanent ground on any line which 
by some accident has become grounded, the permanent ground 
to be removed after the fault has been remedied. 


ef 


95 


Fie. 15 


Before closing it may be of interest to add an instance of the 
effect of an arcing short circuit which took place during one of 
the open-delta tests with the connections shown in the wiring 
diagram, Fig. 15. 

Line a was grounded through an arc, line b connected to 
ground by an electrostatic voltmeter, having 4.5 in. distance 
between plates. As line a was grounded, an arc struck between 
the plates of the electrostatic voltmeter, resulting in a short- 
circuit on the transformers. At that time an arc struck from 
the terminal of line a to the terminal which was brought out 
from the middle of the winding, a distance of 7.5 in., or practi- 
cally seven and a half times the normal striking distance. It 
is of course possible that the spark might have been still longer 
if the terminals had been further apart. 


1908] BERG: ARCING GROUNDS 108 


In conclusion it would seem as if with increasing line voltages 
it may be desirable to resort to some new methods of protecting 
the winding of transformers and other apparatus connected to 
the high-potential lines. One method might consist of a series 
of small electrolytic cells shunting the individual coils; by this 
arrangement these high-frequency surges would be transferred 
from each part of the tranformer to the lines. It seems un- 
likely that electrolytic cells shunting the lines but not con- 
nected to individual coils would entirely eliminate these internal 
disturbances, although with such cells there is no likelihood 
of the voltage across the entire transformer being materially 
increased. 

Finally, it must be remembered that in these tests no high-po- 
tential transmission lines were used, and that, therefore, the 
~ results do not actually show what happens in a large system. 
From a few observations made in such systems the writer feels, 
however, that in general similar stresses result. Actual careful 
tests on such systems would prove of great value, bearing as 
they do on the choice of transformer connections. 


A paper presented at the 25th annual ponenton 
of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gmeers, Atlantic City, N. J., June 30, 1208. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I.E.E, 


CRITICAL STUDY OF LIGHTNING RECORDS ON TAY- 
LOR’S FALLS TRANSMISSION LINE 


(Papers By J. F. VauGHAN anv N. J. NEALL*) 


BY PERCY H. THOMAS 

The following study of the Taylor’s Falls line lightning data 
has been made for the purpose of discovering what inferences 
as to the nature of the attack of lightning on a transmission line 
can be safely and properly drawn from the unusually complete 
data recorded. 

Interpretation of tell-tale papers.: The corsectness of all 
inferences presumably depends on a correct interpretation of 
the significance of the various types of punctures in the tell-tale 
papers; hence this matter was given special consideration. A 
careful study of the original papers shows the punctures in the 
tell-tale papers taken from the gaps in the ground connection 
of the insulator pins to be of three sorts. 

1. Very fine, almost invisible punctures, usually occurring 
in large numbers and scattered round a central point or points. 
These are often so numerous that the paper is actually eaten 
away for a small space, giving a superficial appearance of 
the second type. This first type is characterized by a sharp 
edge, looking almost as though it had been scorched and usually 
by a few small punctures in its neighborhood. 

2. Distinct individual holes, varying in size from that made by 
a small needle to large holes, all having the appearance of having 
been torn in the paper. These all have rough hairy edges but 
show no signs of burning. 

3. Individual holes of the general character of the last but 
with burned or charred edges. This type may show any amount 

*Presented at New York, May 19, 1908. 


mer 


499 


756 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY [June 30 


of burning from a slight scarring to the complete destruction of 
the paper. 

In general these three types are clear and easily distinguished. 
They are clearly to be interpreted as follows: 

First type. Puncture due to charging current taken by the 
pin in view of its static capacity to the line wire. This charging 
current evidently will exist under normal voltage conditions, 
if the width of the gap in the ground connection where the tell- 
tale is placed is sufficiently small to be broken down by the volt- 
age normally existing. Trouble was experienced at first from 
the honeycombing of tell-tale papers during normal operation, 
since the ground gaps were set too small. The readjustment 
of these gaps is noticed in the large chart, Fig. 11, under date 
of June 10. When these gaps were finally set above the break- 
ing limit of the normal voltage, punctures of the first type must 
have indicated abnormal voltages, and the size of the puncture 
indicated the amount of charging current taken by the pin or 
sometimes the number of times such voltages were repeated. 

The second type above, indicated “ spill-overs’’; that is, the 
jumping of a static charge over the surface of the insulator. 
This was a very common occurrence in these experiments. Spill- 
overs are distinguished from the first type of puncture by their 
size. Only the finest punctures can be caused by the charging 
current to the pin itself, on account of its small static capacity. 
On the other hand, when the spark jumps from the line to the 
pin the static capacity of the line comes into play and also any 
charge coming to the line from the atmosphere and a much larger 
discharge results. 

The third type is of the nature of the second, except that after 
the spill-over, current from the generator has followed. 

The following analyses are based on the above interpretation 
of these paper punctures, which the writer has no doubt are 
substantially correct. 

Analysis of storms. Storm of July 4. This storm is of special 
interest, since there happened to be no power on the line at the 
time the storm occurred. The direction of the storm is west 
to east, crossing the line two miles from Hugo at about pole 918. 
There are a number of relatively small punctured papers between 
the main centre of disturbance near pole 918 and the sub- 
station; those occurring beyond pole 1135, five miles from pole 
918, appear to have been caused by the first type of sparking; that 
is, by charging current to the pin itself without discharge over 


1908] THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY 757 
the insulator. These punctures were made presumably before 
the taking off of the power from the line on the morning of 
July 4, or perhaps after it was put back before the papers 
were taken out on July 6. They may, however, have been 
made by waves of static from the disturbances occurring near 
the middle of the line. The first explanation, if true, means 
that these particular gaps were set so close as to show these 
fine punctures when there was no noticeable abnormal dis- 
turbance. 

There seem to have been two distinct local disturbances in 
the neighborhood of pole 918. A heavy discharge must have 
struck at pole 918 on all wires and have traveled in both direc- 
tions on all wires. The spill-overs tributory to this dis- 
charge on phase A appeared last at pole 928 in the direction of 
the sub-station, and at pole 906 in the other direction. On 
phase B spill-overs appeared last at pole 924 in the sub- 
station direction and at pole 909 in the other; on phase C 
there were small spill-overs to 909 (possibly to 894) and a 
large one at 924. 

_ There must have been a second discharge near by, according 
to this analysis, centering at poles 931, 934, and 937. The 
spill-overs from this disturbance seem to have been confined 
to poles not distant from the center at pole 934 more than six 
or eight poles. And although three insulators were shattered 
near pole 934 there were apparently not more than four other 
spill-overs. It is possible that the very small spill-overs 
at poles 955, 958, and 961 were due to this same discharge. 
Their appearance indicates rather quiet static. 

It so happened that this discharge, or these discharges, came 
on the section of line, a little over a half-mile long, between 
ground wire A and ground wire B. That this is the case seems 
certain, for the punctures of the papers are nowhere so large in 
the general region of that storm as around 918 and 934. It is 
unfortunate that the storm did not actually strike over one of 
the sections protected by grounded wire, as this would have 
given more valuable evidence as to the protective effect of such 
wires than now exists. 

As a matter of fact nearly all of the tell-tale papers in the 
ground connections of the overhead ground wire B discharged 
enough electricity to show a hole perhaps one-half as large as 
the largest punctures in the tell-tale papers in the insulator 
pin-ground wires on the unprotected portion of the lines. These 


758 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY [June 30 


overhead ground punctures, further, grew smaller in size from 
the end nearest the maximum disturbance to the other end. 
They are quite as likely to have been caused by the static wave 
passing down the transmission line from the region of pole 918 
as by the direct effect of the disturbance on the overhead ground 
wires. They may, of course, conceivably be due to a suddenly 
released bound charge, but they seem to be much too large for 
this. The evidence against the ‘‘ bound charge ’’ hypothesis 
is summarized in the second paragraph below. Two insulators 
were shattered under this overhead protection, one only one pole 
within, the other four poles within. This shattering probably 
had little to do with the effectiveness or lack of effectiveness 
of the ground wires, since the disturbance arose on an un- 
protected portion. The grounded wires on the other side of 
the unprotected portion of the line showed very much smaller 
punctures in their ground connections and only three in all 
located next to the end of the section. 

The smalicr of the two main disturbances, near pole 934, 
which was the one nearer the last described section of ground 
wire (type A) was central about seven poles away, while the 
greater disturbance near pole 918 was central about five poles 
from ground wire B section. No very satisfactory conclusions 
can be here drawn as to the protective power of the overhead 
ground wires, since the storm did not strike so as to give them a 
trial. It may, however, be safely concluded from the tell-tale 
papers that the ground wires are very active and pass much 
current. This is almost certain to be helpful. The other types 
of overhead ground wires located at distances from one to six 
miles, seem to have taken no discharge of any particular sig- 
nificance. 

It is very important to note the nature of the discharges in 
the tell-tale papers of the lightning rods that are entirely sepa- 
rate from the line structure. In the case of nearly every lightning 
rod on the whole system small punctures were observed, usually 
much less than the size of a normal spill-over puncture on 
the line, but very numerous. In one case, not near the centre 
of disturbance by two miles, pole 820, what would be taken 
as a very severe spill-over puncture if found in the insulator 
tell-tales, was observed. This must have meant a severe direct 
stroke. In none of these cases of spill-over size discharges 
in the lightning rods was there any sign.of disturbance on the 
adjacent portion of the line. From these observations gn light- 


1908] THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY 759 


ning rods it may be concluded that the disturbances on the line 
are in all probability due, at least in their severe form, to direct 
charges from the air and not to the accumulation and release 
of bound charges on the line. The latter could not occur on the 
rods; and if the rod discharges come directly from the air, it is 
evident that the line charges as well do so in the main, since 
both sorts seem of the same nature and of the same general mag- 
nitude. Furthermore, the heavy discharge at the lightning rod 
near pole 820 should have produced a severe discharge on the 
line, if the sudden release theory be the right one, for the con- 
ditions must have been particularly favorable at this time. 

During this very active storm there were only very few dis- 
charge indications on the station arresters. At the power-house 
there were very small discharges on all three legs of the horn 
arrester. At the sub-station there were discharges, both series 
and shunt, in leg C on the low equivalent and a discharge in 
leg A on the electrolytic. This is very significant, for the storm 
was severe and prolonged in the center of the line and yet was 
hardly noticeable at the station arresters; in other words, the 
disturbances did not travel to the station without a consider- 
able loss of energy. 

Storm of August 18. This storm followed the direction of the 
line from sub-station toward power-house pretty closely and 
caused apparently five principle disturbances. The storm first 
made itself felt at or about pole 1387, where it caused spill- 
overs on all three line wires in the immediate neighborhood, espec- 
ially on Aand B. Here it very possibly started a short-circuit 
on the system through wire B on pole 1387 and probably through 
either leg A of the low equivalent or the horn arrester at the 
power house or leg A of the electrolytic arrester at the sub- 
station. This, then, may be taken as the cause of the dip in 
voltage referred to in the notes of this storm. Then nearly a 
mile farther on another discharge of great severity occurred at 
or about pole 1357. This destroyed several insulators and prob- 
ably caused another short-circuit through wire C on pole 1341 
-and through leg A on one of the above arresters or perhaps 
more than one. This shut down the power house as reported and 
for the rest of the storm there was no power on the line. There 
are no more evidences of burning of papers. 

Poles 1342 to 1385 had the ground connections removed from 
the pins and can show the actual discharges only by the shat- 
tered insulators and the split poles. Heavy spillovers oc- 


760 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY [June 30 


curred on wires A and C on the pole having grounded pins 
nearest to the disturbance at pole 1351 and spill-overs were 
continued for nine poles on wire A. Spill-overs on other 
wires seemed to stop at pole 1341. Two or three spill-overs 
occurred in the next third of a mile on wire C, the last one on 
pole 1314, being one of the most severe of the storm. This 
spill-over was probably due to a separate disturbance. 

No more very serious spill-overs occurred, though there 
was a single one of some violence at pole 909 wire A, four poles 
under the overhead ground wires, type B. This is significant, 
since there is no discharge of any importance at all in the neigh- 
borhood outside of the ground wire section. A single very 
severe spill-over occurred at pole 563 on phase C. No 
other spill-over occurred near it. 

Overhead ground wires B were active, since at nearly every 
grounded pole a hole occurs in the overhead ground tell-tale 
papers of the size of a large spill-over puncture. There does 
not seem to have been any other evidences of a discharge in 
this neighborhood except that at each end of the ground wire 
section a line spill-over occurs on one wire, though these 
are different wires, and both are within the overhead grounded 
wire section. This looks suspicious, as the line spill-overs 
either cease on the line wires or at least become very much smaller 
exactly at the ends of and outside of the ground wire sections. 
There is apparently no evidence to show what is the phenomenon 
causing this particular condition. 

The series coil tell-tale papers in this storm are very significant. 
The choke-coils at pole 1356, within one pole of shattered insula- 
tors on both sides on one wire and very close on all wires, had 
all three papers burned up, showing a very violent discharge in 
shunt to the coils, enough to ignite the papers. The papers 
for the coils on wires A and B at pole 1230 were burned up, this 
pole being a distance of two and a half to three miles from the 
nearest disturbance. There is a small puncture in the series 
coil in wire A at pole 1615, five miles in the other direction from 
the nearest discharge of any apparent severity. As these coils 
have only twenty turns of conductor of one foot diameter, 
probably not equal in inductance to more than a hundred yards 
of line wire, a very sharp wave-front is shown by these series 
coil discharges. 

The above storms have been taken as samples. The analyses 
of the others have been made similarly, but the results can be 
best studied by topics. 


1908] THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY 761 


Protective power of overhead ground wires. In making infer- 
ences on this subject, the most important one of all in some 
ways, it is necessary to use the greatest caution not to be misled. 
The data are not as full as was to be hoped but are nevertheless 
better than any definite data obtainable elsewhere. 

Ground wire A. This section was subject to some disturb- 
ance, more or less, in five storms. There was one spill-over 
on an insulator in this protected section due undoubtedly to a 
disturbance outside the section, and four punctures in tell-tales of 
equivalent size in the grounds from the overhead wires, all in 
the storm of July 4. In only one instance was there any violent 
disturbance in the immediate neighborhood of these ground 
wires, viz., July 4. This occurred just outside the protected 
section. The overhead wires did not seem to have much 
effect. This was not of the most approved form and not much 
was to be expected of it. 

Ground wire B. In case of this section there were fifteen 
spill-overs of all sizes over insulators under the ground 
wires and twelve more or less equivalent punctures in the ground 
connection of the overhead wires. There were six storms in 
which records are furnished, but only two in which punctures 
of spill-over magnitude occurred. In one case the centre 
of discharge was just outside of the grounded section and in 
the other was direct'y over it and did not extend outside. In 
the former case two insulators were shattered, one located one 
pole inside the protected section, the other four poles inside. 
This probably had little to do with the effectiveness or lack of 
effectiveness of the overhead ground wire. In the latter case, 
where the line showed spill-overs and the attack was in the 
grounded portion, the discharges seemed to occur near the two 
ends mainly as though there had been two independent dis- 
charges. The protective power does not seem to have been 
particularly effective here. 

Overhead ground C. Records on this section are given for six 
storms, none however showing any discharges of any serious 
amount near this section. In only one case was there a notice- 
able discharge in any ground connection from the overhead 
ground wire. There was, however, no spill-over on the line 
wires on this section. This type of overhead ground is not a 
good one and in no case seems to have exercised much if any 
protecting power, nor to have had an opportunity to exercise any. 

Ground wire D, This section is reported in six storms, two 


762 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY [June 30 


line spill-overs are shown on same pole, and nine more or 
less prominent discharges in the ground connection of the over- 
head wires, none being larger than 0.1 in. and most being 
smaller. No severe storms appeared to have attacked this 
section of the line. However, the two spill-overs were 
fairly severe and occurred six poles from the end of the section. 
The middle pole is eleven miles from the ends. 

While the overhead ground sections as shown in the records 
are very active in discharging current, it is doubtful whether 
any of them would be wholly effective, as installed, in protecting 
the line wires from every severe discharge, such as occurred a 
number of times on this plant. It seems probable that the 
line wires would share the most severe discharges that attack 
the ground wires; the danger is that the latter are neither well 
enough spaced from the line wires nor often enough grounded 
completely to protect the line wires. 

Lightning rods. There were six spill-overs on the line on 
the section protected by type A lightning rods on pole tops in 
five storms, and four more or less severe punctures in lightning 
rod papers. In the storm of August 4 and 6 there was one severe 
discharge in which there were three insulators shattered on this 
section and some very severe spill-overs but the lightning 
rod papers seem to have been omitted or destroyed, except a 
few at the end away from the disturbance. A very severe dis- 
charge occurred at pole 1028 three poles from the lightning 
rods, but no noticeable discharge occurred in the ground connec- 
tions. The line, however, was evidently not protected. Al- 


though the rods will undoubtedly take such discharges as come 


to them, they probably cannot be relied upon to protect the 
line wires and insulators. They will undoubtedly, except in 
very extreme cases, however, protect the poles from injury. 

Lightning rods B, These rods showed minor activity in all 
or nearly all storms, and greater activity in the three August 
storms which were centered- within five miles or less of this 
section. This activity consisted in a multiplicity of very fine 
punctures aggregating a ‘good size hole in the case of some 
ten or twelve rods. In addition on July 4, there was a violent 
discharge showing what would be considered one of the most 
violent spill-overs in an insulator pin ground. The center 
of the July storm was over two miles away, but some smaller 
disturbances evidently occurred nearer to this special arrester 
discharge. 


— 


ess wh i at oh 


1908] THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY 763 


Lightning rods C and D. These showed very much the same 
phenomena as the other types: activity with small punctures, 
many per paper—in about one-fourth of the rods—nothing on 
many of the intermediate poles. The active poles were pretty 
evenly distributed. There were no disruptive punctures of mag- 
nitude in the lightning-rod grounds. There were, however, no dis- 
turbances in the immediate neighborhood of these rods. 

Line choke-coils. Choke-coils were located at poles 986, 1203, 
1356, 1615. The storm of August 18 was severe at pole 1356 
and moderately severe at poles 800 to 900. The tell-tale papers 
at pole 1356 were all burned up, these at pole 1203 three miles away 
were burned up in wires A and B, and a fair-size explosive 
puncture occurred at pole 1615, five miles away. Three good 
size punctures occurred also in the coils at pole 986 in wires 
B and C about two miles from the nearest disturbances. 

This appears to show that charges of some magnitude pass 
along the line or possibly that their effect is increased by oscilla- 
tion. It must be remembered that a ground on the line, last- 
ing for even a very small fraction of a second, will cause the 
full static charge of the line on the one side of the choke-coil 
to pass by to earth, not merely a charge received from the air. 
Also that a burned paper is quite likely to be merely ignited 
by a spark of some violence, when it may be subsequently con- 
sumed by natural causes. This action is known to have 
actually occurred. 


EFFECTIVENESS OF ARRESTERS. 


Storm of June 25, not severe. A relatively small but sharp 
discharge occurred at pole 1571, four and a half miles from the 
sub-station. Small static discharges occurred on one leg in 
the sub-station low-equivalent arresters in both series and shunt 
gaps and on one leg in the series gaps only. On the electrolytic 
at the sub-station, discharges occurred in all three legs, and two 
showed the following of a small quantity of generator current. 
The discharge on the line caused spill-overs on all three 
wires at the same pole. The low equivalents at the power 
house did not discharge. 

Storm of June 29, not severe. This storm showed no spill- 
overs except the shattering of two insulators at poles 1474 
and 1478 causing a short-circuit. There was no evidence of a 
discharge on the low-equivalent arresters at the sub-station, 
seven miles away, nor on the electrolytics at the same place. 


764 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY [June 30 


The plant was shut down by this experience. There were no 
arrester discharges at the power house. 

Storm of June 30, not severe. In this storm which at- 
tacked the line four miles out from the power house, 
all legs of the power-house low-equivalent arresters dis- 
charged, showing signs of dynamic current in the series gaps, 
but only a good static puncture in the shunts. The power- 
house horn arresters discharged only in leg B, but showed a 
heavy burning in the tell-tale paper of the resistance shunt 
ground connection, and a smaller burning of the paper in the main 
ground. These discharges of this storm out on the line were 
relatively severe and eight insulators were shattered, distributed 
on all three wires. No injury was done to station apparatus. 
On legs A and C the only arrester to discharge was the low 
equivalent. Furthermore, on line wire C there were two heavy 
spill-overs only a mile from the station, and two more spill- 
overs a little farther off. The sub-station arresters showed 
no signs of discharge. In all probability there was no discharge 
on the line within some 35 miles of the sub-station. 

Storm of July 4, severe, no power on line. Although this 
storm, which has been already analyzed, was very severe, no 
great disturbance was manifested at the stations. The dis- 
turbance.was centered at the middle of the line about 20 
miles from each end. At the power-house the horn arrester 
discharged in all phases and the low equivalent probably in 
leg C, series and shunt, and the electrolytics at the sub-station 
in leg A. The discharges in the horns were small while those 
in the others were relatively large. The low equivalents at the 
sub-station discharged faintly in leg C. This is an interesting 
case, showing that the very severe discharges do not necessarily 
carry with power for half the length of the line. The nearest 
real spill-over to the sub-station seems to have been at pole 
1135, 14 or 15 miles away though a number of quiet static 
punctures in papers occurred around poles 1500 to 1600. The 
nearest spill-over to the power-house was the main disturbance 
over twenty miles away. 

Storm of July 13 and 14, not severe. A sharp stroke occurred 
at about a mile and a half from the power house, shattering two 
insulators on wire B and causing a number of spill-overs 
on wire C. At a point three miles from the power-house on 
wire A, there was an uncertain sort of burning in tell-tale which 
may have been a severe spill-over but probably was not. 


1908] THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY 765 


At the sub-station the horn arrester discharged in all legs. 
The electrolytic showed a heavy dynamic burn in leg A, and 
static in leg C. The low equivalents showed nothing. At the 
power house the low equivalents showed small burns in legs A 
and B, and the horn in B, with static in A and C. 

Storm of July 19, distant from line. ‘There was considerable 
quiet static near the center of the line and many of the lightning 
rods showed small punctures, as did the overhead ground 
wires. There were however no spill-overs and no arrester 
discharges on either end of the line. This storm was said to 
be distant. Some of the punctures in the lightning rods are: 
given as over 0.04 in. in diameter. They must have been 
caused by repeated discharges of very small magnitude. 

Storm of August 1, distant from line. This storm was similar 
to the last storm except that the lightning was distant to the 
west instead of to the east. There were no spill-overs and 
no activity in the lightning rods nor in the overhead grounds. 
None of the arresters discharged. 

Storm of August 4 and 6, severe, parallel to line. This storm 
was very severe at a point about 14 miles from the sub- 
station, and showed almost no activity at any other point, 
except that through the central portion activity was evident 
but in no very great violence. There are one or two doubtful 
spill-overs recorded nearer the sub-station. Except for a 
good clear static puncture in the ground connection of the power 
house horn on leg C, there was no discharge at the power house. 
At the sub-station, on the other hand, there were discharges in 
all legs of the horn arrester; in legs A and B, small in volume 
but perhaps as large as the 5,000 ohms series resistance will 
permit, and very numerous; and the tell-tale paper was nearly 
burned up in leg C. The electrolytic at the sub-station showed 
static in leg A, a small amount of burning in leg B, and also a 
second static discharge, and no discharge in leg C. The low 
equivalent at the sub-station showed a discharge of fair size 
in leg C, but no burning. The Hugo arrester showed discharges 
in the first gap in all legs, and in legs A in addition a heavier 
discharge in the next gap which has a less series resistance. 
The Hugo arrester is only three-quarters of a mile from the nearest 
severe discharge, occurring on leg A, which is the leg on which 
the discharge in the second arrester gap at Hugo occurred. 
This case is a good example of how quickly the energy of a trav- 
eling wave can lose its intensity. 


766 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY [June 30 


Storm of August 8 and 15, severe, parallel to line. This storm 
passed from the sub-station up the line but was not severe. 
There were a few scattered spill-overs but no broken insulators. 
One heavy discharge occurred on leg C at pole 1434, about 
7 miles from the sub-station. At the sub-station the horn 
arrester discharged in all legs and held dynamic current in leg C. 
The only other indication of holding of current on any other leg 
is at the power house in leg A in the horn. Discharges occurred 
in all legs in the Hugo arresters and in one case in all three 
gaps. This suggests that the test on the arrester is more severe 
when there is no spill-over; this seems reasonable, for the 
line then has no relief at the point of attack. At the power 
house the horn discharged in all three legs and held a little in 
legs A and C. The low equivalents discharged in the power 
house in leg C and held the arc a little in the series gaps; static 
only appeared in the shunt. The electrolytic discharged at the 
sub-station in leg B. 

Storm of August 18, very severe—parallel to line. This storm 
‘passed up the line just as did the previous one and had a severe 
spill-over at a point about 10 miles from the sub-station 
and another at about 19 or 20 miles and a small one at 
12 miles from the power house. At the sub-station the horn 
arrester discharged in all legs, the electrolytic in legs A and B, 
and the low equivalent in leg C, series and shunt. The electro- 
lytic seemed to hold a little generator current. The Hugo ar- 
rester discharged in all phases in the first gap and in the third 
gap on legs A and B. At the power house discharges occurred 
in all legs in the horns and the low equivalent. 

Storm of September 6, nat severe. No spill-overs occurred 
on the line except two or three near the center. There were 
numerous quiet static puncturings throughout the length of 
the line. The only arrester activities were at the sub-station 
where quiet disturbances occurred in legs A and B on the horns, 
in leg C on the electrolytic, and leg A on the low equivalent. The 
storm was to the east of the sub-station and not directly on the 
line. ; 

The remaining storms can be briefly summarized. On the 
16th of September a storm crossed the line at the power house 
and caused two shutdowns. All legs of all power-house 
arresters discharged in all gaps, and there was one spill-over 
on wire C near the power house, within a few poles of the end 
of the line, The horn showed hold-over current in all legs, the 


1908] THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY 767 
low equivalent in only leg, B, and not much there. At the 
sub-station discharges occurred in the horns in legs A and B, 
and in the electrolytics in legs B and C. There was one dis- 
charge in each leg at Hugo. 

On September 18, spill-overs occurred on all wires about 
six or seven miles from the sub-station. Discharges occurred in 
the sub-station horns in all legs, and in the electrolytics in 
legs B and C. No other discharges on the system. 

On- September 19, a storm 11 or 12 miles from the 
power house caused a discharge in all three phases in the horns 
in both stations and in phase C at the Hugo arrester. No other 
discharge occurred. 

General. An examination of tell-tale papers shows that the sub- 
station horn with 5,000 ohms resistance in series showed only very 
fine punctures, showing great limiting of discharge. Thehornsat 
the power house having about 500 to 600 ohms of series resistance, 
and all the low-equivalent arresters, showed considerably larger 
punctures indicating a freer discharge, while the electrolytic 
would probably show a still larger puncture except for the fact 
that the charging current to the arrester itself, which usually 
follows the discharge for a few moments, burns the paper and 
enlarges the static punctures, so that it is nearly impossible 
to determine the size of the hole made by the static. Of course, 
a holding of the generator current will mask the static punctures; 
this often happened with the horn arresters as well. 

It seems highly probable from the data as to the discharges of 
arresters that the sort of disturbance making the heaviest demand 
on the station arrester is the stroke on the line which is nearly but 
not quite sufficient to cause a spill-over. This disturbance may 
send a wave the length of the line sufficient to cause arresters 
to discharge, but not severe enough to be more than the arresters 
(in this case at least) could handle. These waves go far but they 
are not enormously severe. This is an important conclusion. 
The cases in which a much more severe attack on the line causes 
a spill-over does not send as severe a wave to the station 
apparatus as the latter type. This is natural as the spark once 
established to ground will readily discharge most of the severity 
of the disturbance which would not have been able to get to 
ground without the actual establishment of a ground arc. Ex- 
ception is here made of course to the direct stroke of great 
severity at the station which still remains the most dangerous 
of all lightning attacks. It is interesting to note that the storm 


768 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY {June 30 
of September 16, occurred at the power house and that no 
damage was done to apparatus, though the arresters showed 
vigorous action in all gaps. This could not have been a very 
severe disturbance. 

The arresters seldom if ever, during this season seem to have 
been put to the limit of their ability to care for the discharges. 
In no single instance on any one leg did all the sub-station ar- 
resters of various kinds discharge at the same time in all gaps. 
The Hugo arrester discharged in all three gaps only once and 
then in only one phase. At the power house, omitting the storm 
of September 16, which occurred at the power house itself, there 
were only three cases where all the available gaps on any leg 
discharged, and in one of these cases the severity of some of 
the discharges was not the maximum. This is important, and is 
part of the evidence tending to show that the waves coming 
in to the station (omitting again the direct stroke at the station 
itself) are not of enormously great volume or energy or voltage 
and can be properly handled by non-arcing arresters, even of 
the series resistance type. This conclusion is of the greatest 
importance, and seems very well substantiated by the data 
of this paper. Of course, the insulation of this line is not as 
high as can now be obtained through the newly developed in- 
sulators on the very high voltage lines, so that more severe 
waves must be expected to appear at the stations in some of the 
systems now building, but the principle is the same and addi- 
tional insulation strength can if necessary be given to station 
apparatus and circuits. 

From this line of reasoning; namely, that the limit of dis- 
charge capacity of the arresters was not reached, it may be 
concluded that the so-called sensitiveness of discharge, at least 
as between the arresters installed in this plant, is of relatively 
no moment. Since the arresters have been able easily to care 
for all discharges, and since they have discharged often but 
rarely if ever to their limit of capacity, any greater sensitiveness 
would add nothing. In fact the less sensitive the arresters the 
better, as long as protection is secured. A certain risk is run 
every time that an arrester discharges, and they should act 
only when necessary to protect the line. The quality 
most requisite is the freedom of discharge. Furthermore, any 
degree of sensitiveness may be obtained by the proper setting of 
the initial gap and any arrester can be set as sensitively as neces- 
sary, provided only that it still remains non-arcing, 


: 


1908] THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY 769 


The following is a summary of the relative acticn of the 
various arresters during this season: 


At the sub-station Discharges. 
Horns without low equivalent or electrolytic........ 12 
* % ey ee eS, 21 
a $ BISCULOlytiCn. 4. we Sabb Same 15 
Low equivalent with electrolytic............... 2 
S a without TO hates. ke ads SEP a ee 6 
Electrolytic ielow equivalents...) 7.5... | 12 


It thus becomes evident that the horn arrester is here set to 
be the more sensitive and always responds, and that if either one 
of the others starts it prevents a discharge in the third. It must 
be noted that no direct discharge on to the line occurred near 
the sub-station. 


At the power-house. Discharges, 
Horm without low.equivalent.....2 2.0.0). .0%.. 7 
“ with 7 ALLL Sarees OY unesyir. ies 10 
; ; b 
Pow equivaleat without hotness eters 
resetting. 


The same conclusion follows here as from the sub-station data. 

It is probable that the horn arrester when using series re- 
sistance is not a free discharge but that either of the other types 
were, since they would seldom discharge together. 

As to non-arcing power, it may be said that the horn with 
resistance and the other types were non-arcing on this plant 
which has a relatively limited power behind it, but that the horn 
without. resistance was not non-arcing. This is as expect d, 
and is shown by the numerous records of the opening of the 
circuit breakers. 

Shattering of insulators. This is a most important and in- 
structive study. Out of forty-two injured insulators only three 
were punctured. The others were shattered, that is, had their 
petticoats cracked or broken without any direct puncture of the 
porcelain. The cause of this phenomenon, at least in the case 
of these results, must be taken to be the shock of the static 
and not at all the effect of the generator arc, as is frequently sup- 
posed, for in the storm of July 4 there was no power on the line 
and eight insulators were shattered. This shattering some- 
times does and sometimes does not cause a shutdown. This 
direct shattering of insulators without puncturing by the light- 
ning is startling and undoubtedly indicates that the discharge 


770 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY [June 30 


is very abrupt and violent, it further indicates the difficulty of 
testing insulators for actual service conditions by laboratory 
apparatus. In addition to the 39 shattered insulators there 
were nearly 150 spill-overs that did not cause injury to the 
insulators. Inspection of tell-tale papers shows that these 
spill-overs were often just as severe in many cases when no 
injury was done the insulator as in the other cases. Al- 
though the data in the paper do not enable a conclusion to be 
definitely drawn, it seems true that many of these spill-overs 
occurred without shutting down the plant. 

From the general appearances of the disturbances it seems a 
fair inference that, while the number of spill-overs was un- 
doubtedly increased by the presence of the ground wires to 
the pins, there would have been many such discharges in any 
case. This view is supported by the breaking of insulators in 
the storm of August 18, when there were six insulators shattered 
in a section of line where the ground connections had been 
removed. A most important result follows from such a premise. 
If the discharges that are to be expected are irresistable and are 
going to ground in any case, then the great cost and mechanical 
complication that is proposed for many high voltage plants may 
fail to serve the purpose expected. And also a second most 
important conclusion—which is nothing but common sense 
and has already been sometimes recognized—every insulator 
should be so constituted as, when subjected to an irresistible po- 
tential, always to fail by discharge over its surface and without 
cracking, for then often little or no inconvenience or delay will re- 
sult, while if the insulator is broken or punctured, an interruption 
and long delay for repairs may result. This point cannot be 
too much emphasized. This ideal condition seems to have been 
pretty well realized at the Taylor’s Falls plant as far as freedom 
from insulator puncture is concerned. If each spill-over had 
been a puncture it is easy to see what a serious menace it 
would have been. 

Character of individual discharges. A careful examination 
of the distribution of punctures and spill-overs indicates with 
considerable certainty that a given disturbance attacks the 
line at a very definite point and may either go over or through 
an insulator to ground, or if unable to do this to pass along the 
line to find a weaker spot or to wear itself out. It is certain that 
such a discharge, at least in this plant, will pass by at least three 
to six ungrounded poles to go to ground over a pole with a 


4 Go See Eee 


1908] THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY 771 


grounded pin. These pin grounds occur every third pole. This 
means that the front of the static wave does not drop as much in 
potential along the line for three poles as the difference in the 
insulation strength between the grounded and the ungrounded 
poles. On the other hand, the wave will not pass by, perhaps 
ten poles, to discharge over one of the grounded pin poles. This 
indicates that the drop of potential in the wave front is greater 
in the ten poles than the difference in pole insulation strengths. 
The latter data come from the storm of August, 18 where six 
insulators on ungrounded poles were shattered within less than 
ten poles of grounded pins. In other words, not more than a 
thousard or at most a few thousand feet of the wave front 
will have travelled by an insulator before the maximum or at 
least the spill-over point is reachel. This steep wave front 
corresponds to a very high frequency. It is well to notice in 
this connection that the feature that is of importance is the 
steepness and magnitude of the wave front of the initial discharge 
and not the frequency in the usual sense as is generally assumed 
In rapidly decreasing oscillations such as characterize static 
discharges, if a break-down does not come at the first wave it is 
not likely to come at all. There can be no proper frequency 
unless there are several complete cycles established and the 
formulas for steady alternating currents do not apply even 
momentarily for the initial wave front. 

Damage due to a given storm is not usually limited to a few 
poles, it is limited but may often extend over a mile or two of 
line. This indicates that in a given stress locality there are a 
number of more or less individual discharges due to the same 
general conditions yet separate in space and perhaps a little in 
time. This conception seems very reasonable. 

It appears to the writer that the spill-overs that have been 
here considered are largely due to direct strokes, major or minor, 
actually reaching the line wires. Not necessarily all of great 
magnitude, such as the strokes that are visible for miles, but 
large enough perhaps for discharging a relatively small area or 
volume of air, even only a few hundred feet in extent. This 
seems almost an inevitable conclusion from the Taylor’s Falls 
data since the lightning rods several times showed tell-tale pune- 
tures in the ground connections exactly similar to the punctures 
in the pin tell-tale papers. These lightning rod punctures could 


not be due to released bound charges as the static capacity 
of the rods is too small, It is further hard to conceive of such 


772 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY [June 30 


concentrated discharges as are shown being due to induction 
from a distant cloud. Again it is difficult to see how enough 
energy can be stored in a short length of line wire such as seem 
to take part in most of these disturbances to do the damage 
that is manifest in the actual case. [or these reasons and for 
others the writer considers these data strongly to confirm his 
previous opinion that disturbances of the general nature of these 
shown here, which are almost universal in transmission lines, 
are due to direct discharges of electricity at high potential out 
of the atmosphere onto the line wire. 

A careful study of all the tell-tale papers in relation to their 
phase relation and their position on the poles shows that in a 
large majority of cases of isolated single spillovers, the top 
insulator is not the one affected. The fact is marked when the 
total number of the specific instances recorded are considered. 
This has a most important significance, for it can indicate only 
that the charges approach from the side before the actual dis- 
charge rather than from the top, straight downward. On con- 
sideration this seems to be the natural course, for although any 
gradually approaching source of disturbance will tend to come 
downward gradually, yet at storm times there are always strong 
currents of air along the ground which would certainly over- 
balance any downward motion. Downwardly moving air can 
have no place to go without passing to the side after reaching 
the earth, so that it is extremely probably that the course of 
the air will always be along the ground with a slightly upward 
or downward motion. This means that the chances are that 
the side wires as well as the top wire will sometimes be reached 
by a discharge. Of course, this does not mean that the top 
wire will never be struck nor that the same exact phenomena 
will be found everywhere else as in this case, but in such matters 
as the locating of ground wires this possibility must be clearly 
borne in mind. 

Furthermore, in some eight or ten cases of the most severe 
discharges the same pole shows spill-overs on all line wires, 
one of which (usually a side wire) is generally much lighter than 
the other two. This suggests the probability that, after such a 
very severe discharge has jumped onto one or two of the line 
‘wires, their potentials are so raised that they cannot contain the 
discharge and it jumps to the third wire. This will be of course 
on account of the impedance in the ground path. This does 
not seem perhaps a remarkable conclusion but it leads to an im- 


1908] : THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY 773 


portant inference, namely, that if overhead ground wires are 
to protect they must be so far spaced from the line wires as to 
prevent a discharge thereto. It is evident that the power of 
these overhead ground wires to carry a discharge to ground and 
prevent its jumping to a line wire will depend on the nearness 
of its ground connection to the point of attack. With such 
discharges as have been found in this case, which are un- 
doubtedly typical of most plants, a ground connection more 
than a few poles away would be entirely inadequate. It is 
not so necessary that this ground be a perfect one, as to some 
extent any local rise of potential at the ground connection at 
the foot of a pole would tend to protect the line wires on the 
same pole. 

Origin of lightning. Before summarizing the above discussion, 
it will be interesting to speculate a little about the nature of the 
phenomena in the clouds from which these disturbing actions come. 
According to a recent hypothesis, the rise of potefitial in the clouds 
is as follows: by some cause, perhaps the action of the sun’s 
rays, there is produced a more or less gradual ionization of the 
air in certain strata of the atmosphere some distance above the 
earth. This produces electrons, (or negative charges) and 
positive ions, (which are loose atoms of matter with a positive 
charge). At the same time there is usually an accumulation of 
water vapor in the locality. It is known by laboratory experi- 
ment that at a certain pressure, water vapor will condense on 
electrons. Whenever the necessary pressure of water vapor is 
reached undoubtedly such a condensation will occur and these 
electrons, being loaded down each with a drop of water, will 
fall to the earth or toward the earth, leaving the positively 
charged ions suspended in the air. This will, of course, raise 
the potential of the positive charge, the energy for which pro- 
cess comes from the potential energy of the water drop, which it 
possesses in virtue of its elevation and its attraction by gravity. 
As this action goes on, there is produced a higher and higher 
potential of positive electricity built up by the step-by-step with- 
drawal of the electrons by weight of the condensed water vapor 
It may also be assumed that the water vapor goes on increasing 
in pressure in the upper region until finally, at a much higher 
pressure than before, the vapor begins to condense on the 
positive ions and they also then come down gradually. 

Now as the two charged layers of air, positive and negative, 
will usually be widely separated by the wind and other agencies, 


774 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY [June 30 


there will exist throughout the region, charged bodies of air or 
mist which are some positive and some negative, the negative 
getting to the earth first or being carried to some other point, 
while the positive electricity (the usual polarity of the clouds) 
remains. 

When, however, any two of these highly charged bodies of 
air of opposite sign come into the same neighborhood, there 
will be a discharge between them, if their potentials are high 
enough. This will be the well-known lightning in the clouds. 
Or if a positively charged region does not find an opportunity to 
discharge to a negative region in the air, it will gradually ap- 
proach the earth and then discharge to ground. 

Suppose that at the end of a hot day a highly charged layer of rel- 
atively cold and heavy air has accumulated above a warmer un- 
charged layer below, which has been heated by contact with the 
earth in the sunlight, much as a layer of oil may be made to sup- 
port alayer of water above it, momentarily. “The equilibrium is 
evidently unstable and the layers willoverturn at any opportunity. 
When this process starts the cool air will break through the 
lower layer of hot air and the whole cold body of air, which is 
heavily charged electrically, will come to the earth at some 
point while the hotter uncharged air will move to one side and 
upward to make way forit. This action suggests the cold breeze 
which so often accompanies a lightning storm. In this case, of 
course, all the charge of the air will be discharged into the earth 
at or near the point at which it breaks through the warm layer 
either in a few heavy strokes, or, more likely, in a few heavy 
ones and a great many smaller ones, ranging all the way in size 
down to brush discharges to earth or accumulations of charge 
on a line, where there is not enough power to make a direct 
discharge. 

Now this hypothesis accounts very nicely for the tentative 
assumption that a number of relatively severe flashes occur in 
one immediate neighborhood, practically simultaneously but not 
identical and not in exactly the same position. There is a large 
bulk of air to discharge and each discharge relieves only its own 
immediate region which is accessible to its discharge path. 
Other regions in the neighborhood may have no discharges at 
all, for the cold or charged air has come down only at a relatively 
few places. There would presumably be other more or Jess 
distant locations where the upper cold air layer would break 
through again and repeat the phenomena, 


1908] THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY 775 


It is interesting to note that the effect of these ions on the 
air where a discharge is imminent, especially in the upper air, 
is greatly to reduce the jumping voltage of the intervening dis- 
tance. This is the well-known action by which one arc will 
start another, and indeed is the process by which the arc itself 
is maintained when once started. It is the presence of the ions 
and electrons in the are path, which allows the normal voltage 
to maintain an arc which may be so much longer than the 
distance that normal voltage will jump in the first place. If it 
be assumed that the number of ions in the upper air be con- 
siderable, this may mean that the jumping distance through the 
air in the region may not be so very much greater than the arc- 
holding distance. This would go far toward making the great 
length of many lightning strokes seem reasonable, especially in 
view of the generally accepted hypothesis that the long dis- 
charges are progressive, that is, made up of a great many shorter 
ones, following in quick succession. All the above discussion is 
purely speculative, but it helps to give a concrete idea of actions 
that are regularly observed. 

Summary. The net result of these various considerations 
may now be summarized. The Taylor’s Falls system as here 
reported was disturbed from time to time in particular localities 
along the line by lightning. In each such locality, the extent 
of which rarely extended over more than a mile or two, there 
were usually several more or less severe discharges which struck 
the line wires from the atmosphere. These charges when rela- 
tively mild charged up the line and sent waves of static in both 
directions along the line without spilling over. These waves 
though of diminishing volume were able to pass many miles 
and still cause arresters to discharge at the stations. These 
waves, however, were entirely within the power of the standard 
arresters at the stations to discharge to earth. This must 
inevitably be the case since the wave energy has to be carried 
along the line and by the capacity of the wires and the insulation 
strength of the insulators. 

When the discharges striking the line are too severe for the 
insulators to withhold, however, they pass over or through the 
insulator to earth. This may or may not cause a shutdown, 
a fractured insulator, or an injured pole. In the great majority 
of cases here reported none of these resulted, unless it may be 
that shutdowns were frequently brought about. The data are 
not quite complete on this point. In going to earth these dis- 


776 THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY [June 30 


charges will choose a path to earth not more than a few poles 
from the point at which they reach the line. They will exert a 
preference for the weakest of the two or three nearest poles, pro- 
vided the difference in insulation strength is great, but they will 
not go much farther for a ground, probably even for a dead 
ground. 

Also in this case in which spill-overs occur, waves of static 
are sent in both directions along the line but in view of the dis- 
charge to ground at the starting point these waves are very likely 
to be of less intensity than the waves produced by discharges 
into the line not quite severe enough to cause a spill-over. 
Thus a mile or two from one of even the severe strokes on the 
line the effect on the system is not especially severe. 

The abruptness of the wave front of these discharges is of the 
order perhaps of that of a periodical oscillation of 100,000 per 
second, though it may vary through wide limits. Extra severe 
discharges when they come are almost sure to reach all three 
line wires at the same point, though it seems entirely probably 
that, at least in this plant, the discharges from the air do not 
strike directly downward but come in from one side or another. 

In this district the discharges striking the line were sometimes 
very severe, so severe that they jumped freely to earth over in- 
sulators, cross-arms and poles, and with such static shock as to 
crack off petticoats in the absence of generator current. 

Little protection is obtained from lightning rods located beside 
the line. Whether protection will be obtained from overhead 
grounded wires or not depends entirely on the arrangement of 
wires, the frequency of grounding, etc. Station arresters of the 
best types should, in the absence of severe discharges close to 
the station, protect adequately the station apparatus if prop- 
erly insulated. 

Horn arresters as here installed with some paths to ground 
without adequate series resistance, are not non-arcing and can 
be relied upon occasionally to shut down the plant. On the other 
hand, both the electrolytic and the low-equivalent arresters 
showed themselves properly non-arcing and caused no trouble 
on this score. The size of punctures in tell-tale papers pro- 
duced by the discharge of one of the waves of static after passing 
along the line in the worse case does not exceed a very few hund- 
redths of an inch in diameter, while the disturbances striking 
the line directly caused enormously greater punctures in the pin 
grounds, sometimes measuring an inch or more. 


a al i i eh ll Mel ei i ai Ni i ial 


1908) THOMAS: LIGHTNING STUDY V77 


The above conclusions apply strictly only to this line and to 
this particular season, but it is evident that the nature of the 
phenomena must be essentially the same in most cases; and by 
making a common sense allowance for different conditions and 
different numerical values of voltage, insulation strength, 
capacity, etc., the present results can be applied to almost any 
high tension line. 

In the operation of any high-tension system, it should be a 
strict rule to record and analyze all important breakdowns, 
use tell-tale papers and other recording devices where practicable, 
and to require reports of observed conditions and otherwise to 
arrive at the actual nature of the disturbances at the particular 
plant. This method of procedure though irksome, especially 
at first and if not systemized, will go far in the long run toward 
obtaining the most satisfactory operation. The educational 
effect on all persons concerned is in itself very valuable. Fur- 
ther, it forms a basis for future review of the situation should 
that become advisable. 


778 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS [June 30 


Discussion ON ‘‘ MEASUREMENTS OF LIGHTNING, ALUMINUM 
LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS, EARTH RESISTANCES, CEMENT RE- 
SISTANCES, AND KINDRED TeEsts’’, ‘“TESTS WITH ARCING 
GROUNDS AND CoNNEcCTIONS ”’, ‘“‘CriITICAL Stupy oF LIGHT- 
ninc RECORDS ON TAYLOR’s FALLS TRANSMISSION LINE. ” 
Atxantic City, N. J., JuNE 30, 1908 


J. F. Vaughan (by letter): It is gratifying to have a careful, 
independent analysis of the Taylor’s Falls lightning records 
such as Mr. Thomas has given in his paper, and interesting to 
see wherein his conclusions differ from those of the original 
papers on this subject. 

The main idea suggested by Mr. Thomas’ paper, that the 
more pronounced disturbances at least have been due to some 
form of direct discharge between clouds and line, is funda- 
mental, and requires radical modification of present concep- 
tions of the nature of the direct stroke. It suggests that such 
a stroke may be: 

(1) Of length varying from a few fect upward. 

(2) Of quantity and intensity varying from a relatively 
small disturbance to a destructive bolt. 

(3)* Of such a nature as to distribute itself with considerable 
uniformity over sections of line and overhead ground wires. 

(4) Of frequent occurrence, amounting to hundreds of strokes 
during the season. 

The main objection to the ‘‘ Release of bound charge ”’ theory 
is that the capacity of the line is not sufficient to account for 
the volume of discharge indicated by the tell-tale records. 
However, the potentials and rates of discharge may be suffi- 
ciently high to compensate for the relatively small capacity. 
There is little evidence of any great amount of energy in the 
discharges, even in the shattering of insulators, providing a 
high enough rate of discharge is assumed. 

There is, however, ample evidence of extremely high velocity 
of disturbances in the rapid damping out of potential in the 
line, the mechanical nature of the insulator fractures, the ac- 
tivity of line choke-coils and the splitting apart of the lamina- 
tions of the tell-tale papers. 

In the discussion of overhead ground wires, Forms A and B, 
the records of storms of July 4 and August 18 are not con- 
sidered as showing definite protective power. By reference to 
the original curves (Fig. 12 of the writer’s paper) the record of 
the storm of July 4 shows by the activity of overhead ground 
wires A and B that the latter were well within the active area f 
the storm. If the curves representing line-insulator stress and 
overhead ground-wire discharge are added together, this fact will 
be evident. The curves for the ground-wire sections on each 
side of the storm center show that as the center is approached 
the activity of the sections increases rapidly, with no corresnond- 


* See original paper by J, F, Vaughan, Fig, 12, curves of July 4, 


7 —s s.r 


1908] DISCUSSION. AT ATLANTIC CITY HUE) 


ing increase of stress in the line insulators until the unprotected 
section of line between the shielded sections is approached within 
a few hundred feet; that is, the shielding effect of the wires ap- 
pears to be pronounced even to within a few hundred feet of their 
ends. The storm of August 18, which was reported as the most 
severe for years, was active over ground wire B. Although the 
discharge from the ground wire was considerably larger than 
in any of the other storms, the average disturbance in the line 
shielded by this construction is shown by the curves to be low 
compared with those of unprotected sections in other storms. 
Over the central portion of this section of the line there is only 
one heavy spill-over, and as that is within less than 1000 feet 
from the end of the ground wire it may have come in from the 
adjacent unprotected section. 

Mr. Thomas calls attention to the probability that the side 
transmission wire toward the direction from which the wind 
blows is probably subject to more disturbance than the other 
wires. This exposure is shown in the general graphic chart by 
greater activity in the wire toward the approaching storm, ex- 
cepting where the storm is overhead ead near enough to cause 
spillovers and physical damage, in which case the top wire 
seems to be the one most subject to trouble. 

In interpreting the curves the following should be borne in 
mind: 

(1) That the lower ranges of the scales of ordinates adopted 
for plotting the curves are exaggerated in order to show the 
smaller values more plainly. 

(2) That the discharge paths of the shielding-device grounds 
are freer than those of the line, and the discharges being ccnse- 
quently less disruptive, are probably quantitatively greater than 
the line discharges for given sizes of puncture. 

(3) That the sections of shielding wire are not long enough 
to insure the damping out of charges coming in from adjacent 
unprotected sections within the length of each shielded section. 

In connection with the direct-stroke theory it is interesting 
to note that no clouds have been observed sufficiently low and 
close to the line to account for short direct strokes. Nor have 
any spill-overs been actually seen. Close watch is being kept 
on the line this summer to get information on the appearance of 
clouds and line during spill-overs, and the nature of insulator 
breaks is being further studied. 

Charles P. Steinmetz: While some years ago the problem of 
electrical-power transmission and distribution, in its stationary 
condition, was already very well developed in most of its features, 
there always remained this class of phenomena, of which light- 
ning is characteristic, which we may call transient phenomena; 
that is, phenomena which last only a short time, frequently an 
extremely short time, but which are of such a character that the 
damage they may do makes up entirely for their short duration. 

We are approaching a clearer understanding of these phe- 


780 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS [June 30 


nomena and also a control of them, so that it looks not im- 
probable that in a very short time lightning, and all these dis- 
turbances in transmission lines and transfoimers, will have lost 
their danger to us; that we will be as familiar with them as 
with the design of an alternator or of a motor, and that we 
shall be able to predetermine, control and eliminate them. 

I am particularly glad myself to be able to see how the con- 
sensus of opinion of those engineers who are studying the 
subject most deeply is coming around to what I have maintained 
so many years, that the most effective protection of the trans- 
mission line is through overhead grounded wires. Some years 
ago, very few people agreed with that statement, now we find 
that most of them agree with it, and even these few doubting 
Thomases will, I hope, be convinced. 

I believe to protect an electric system efficiently and ef- 
fectively it is necessary to protect the line and protect the sta- 
tions. We cannot expect to escape damage, no matter how 
complete the protection we install in the station, if we leave the 
transmission line unprotected. Neither is the protection of the 
line alone sufiicient; but what I believe we can already, at this 
time, state in with fair certainty is that if the transmission 
line is well protected by overhead ground wires, whatever dis- 
turbances we get will not be so severe that we can not take 
care of them safely by protective devices in the station. 

I do not quite agree with Mr. Thomas in explaining the dis- 
turbance in the Taylor’s Falls transmission by direct strokes; 
or rather, to explain it more fully, I do not see an essential dif- 
ference between a direct stroke, as described there, and the phe- 
nomenon of the bound charge of lightning. 

Let us see what happens in a direct stroke. If the potential 
difference between the line and cloud rises so high that some- 
where in the field the potential gradient exceeds the breakdown 
strength of air, a breakdown occurs, as a discharge from line to 
cloud, or into space, thus equalizing the potential. In the 
other case, if by a discharge in the clouds the potential dif- 
erence between the clouds and ground is suddenly changed, 
the bound charge of the line is set free, and that means that 
suddenly upon the line a very high electrostatic potential is 
impressed which discharges from the line into space, if the volt- 
age is beyond the disruptive strength of the surrounding space. 
In either case—whether this potential difference is created by 
a discharge into the cloud, setting free the bound charge, or 
whether it is created by potential difference between the cloud 
and ground—if the voltage is high enough, the discharge passes 
from the line into space, toward the cloud. I thus do not see 
how we can distinguish the phenomena of the bound charge 
from the phenomena of the direct stroke, but believe thes2 two 
phenomena are practically the same. 

There is only one point I want to mention, and that is to 
express my regret that in the tests and investigations valuable 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 781 


records have been lost by the combustion of tell-tale papers. 
These tell-tale papers can be protected by fireproofing, and I 
bring that to your attention, because it can easily be done (and 
it 1s very desirable to do it) by treating these papers with 
a solution of sodium tungstate (also called sodium wolf- 
ramate). They become fireproof by such a treatment, and there 
is no longer danger of losing them or setting fire to them. A 
quarter of a pound of the sodium tungstate bought at any 
wholesale drug house, is dissolved in a pint of hot water, and 
the tell-tale papers immersed in that solution, and then dried. 
There is no apparent change, except that the paper is slightly 
rougher. You can write on it the same as before, the light- 
ning discharge makes the same markings, the same punctures 
appear in the tell-tale paper, but it cannot be set on fire, 
the flame cannot consume it, and therefore you cannot 
lose any of the papers by fire. I believe it is very desirable 
to carry out this precaution. I do not know that there is 
anything else to add, and I thank you very much for the 
opportunity of expressing my opinion on these papers which 
have been presented. 

P. M. Lincoln: I agree with Mr. Steinmetz that the most 
important question raised by the lightning-arrester papers is 
that of the ground wire, and I will take issue with Mr. Thomas 
in his interpretation of Mr. Vaughan’s results which were pre- 
sented to the Institute at the last meeting. In my own inter- 
pretation of Mr. Vaughan’s results, I found to my satis- 
faction that there was a very marked protection given to the 
line at Taylor’s Falls by the presence of the overhead ground 
wire. 

Possibly I have not given this matter quite such close attention 
as Mr. Thomas has, but I would like to have him detail, if he 
will, the reasons why, and how he can draw conclusions to the 
contrary. ; 

I would like to ask Mr. Creighton, too, whether or not the 
records obtained by him in igs. 3, 4, and 5 were obtained with 
current on the line, or whether the line was dead at that time. 
I presume there was no power current on the line at the time 
the records were taken, judging by their shape. I would also 
like to ask Professor Creighton for his opinion as to the efficacy 
of the overhead ground wire. 

A. E. Kennelly: Overhead wire protection is a matter of very 
great importance on account of the radical nature of the con- 
struction which it involves. This matter is one concerning which 
experience of some kind has been gained for more than fifty years; 
that is to say, ever since overhead wires have been put up for 
telegraph purposes there has been the same trouble with light- 
ning, differing only from the trouble that transmission engineers 
have had, in the fact that the poles were ordinarily not so high 
as at present, that the insulators were very much weaker elec- 
trically, and that instead.of having a high-potential dynamo 


782 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS (June 30 


at the end of the circuit, there was no appreciable power on the 
circuit. Nevertheless, the damage done by lightning was recog- 
nized at a very early date. Apparatus was burned out, insu- 
lators were destroyed, poles were smashed or damaged. 

It was found that the lower wires largely escaped. I think 
that is the consensus of telegraph engineering opinion all 
over the world. The upper wires bear the brunt of the damage. 
Poles were found to be saved in very large measure by putting 
grounded wires on the poles themselves, putting a lightning pro- 
tector on each pole. The upper wires were not grounded every 
half mile, as is customary with protecting wires; but never- 
theless the protection from overlying wires grounded at distant 
stations was found to be material, although incomplete. 

In my opinion we shall never have any system of ab- 
solute and complete protectiom against lightning, even with the 
best devices that we can install in the station, or the most 
perfect system of overhead grounded wires that we can devise. 
We can hope with care to minimize the damage due to light- — 
ning, but we shall always have some trouble left. Anyone 
who looks for a panacea against lightning is entertaining a very 
courageous expectation, which is lhkely to meet with some dis- 
couragement. 

I think that we ought not to attempt to form too definite 
a conclusion as to the source of lightning disturbances upon 
the wire. Mr. Thomas intimates that the disturbances are 
mainly due to little direct strokes, but others think, from the 
same records, or with the same data before them, that the 
disturbances are due to the release of bound charges; while still 
others think they are due to inductive disturbances. There 
are so many possible causes for disturbances that we should 
hold our minds open and not consider that everything is due to 
one and the same source of injury. For example, in the case 
of an overhead wire, we all know that there is a movement of elec- 
trified air over the wires conveying electrical charge to them 
continuously. Secondly, we have the release of bound charges, 
and thirdly direct strokes. Fourthly we have a source not 
generally recognized, namely, electromagnetic waves. If over 
a distance of several miles there can be produced in a wireless 
telegraph antenna a received e.m.f. of fifty or one hundred 
volts from a small alternator at the generating station, surely 
a lightning discharge with its enormous generating power is 
able to produce electromagnetic-wave disturbances in long 
wires of very much greater magnitude. 

It seems, therefore, that we should not try to formulate a 
rule and declare that all disturbances due to lightning in over- 
head transmission wires have one and the same origin. We 
must expect, with a number of disturbances, that a number of 
different kinds of apparatus may be necessary to be installed, 
some to protect against one kind of disturbance and others to 
protect against other kinds of disturbance, 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 783 


_ John B. Taylor: Professor Creighton has shown his ingenuity 
in devising special pieces of apparatus to determine what is 
actually going on in a transmission line. We wish to know what 
we have to guard against, and I think that papers of this sort 
are more to be desired than many we have had in the past. 
The conditions of operation are so variable that some conclu- 
sions drawn as to the better of two types of arresters are not 
justified; but when we know what we have to deal with, and to 
a certain extent can duplicate the conditions in the laboratory, 
we can begin to produce apparatus which will meet the 
requirements. 

I have not had a chance to give this paper as critical reading 
as I would like, but there is much confusion in my mind over 
the use of the term “ lightning.”’” I do not know why the 
word lightning should be applied in a new sense. The word has 
been in use for many years, and almost everybody in the pro- 
fession, and out of it, has a pretty definite idea of what the 
term signifies. Professor Creighton, apparently, wants to call 
anything abnormal on a transmission line “ lightning.”” When 
he speaks of the natural frequency of lightning, does he mean 
the natural frequency of the lightning stroke from the clouds, 
or the natural frequency of the discharge of the line, with which 
he is experimenting, to ground? The records show mainly fre- 
quencies of three thousand cycles, or in that neighborhood, and 
as I read the tests, this frequency is merely the one at which the 
particular line discharges to ground, and gives no indication 
of the frequency of the lightning discharge itself. The varia- 
tion between 3,000 or 4,000 and 15,000 may be due to the dis- 
tances out on the line at which the lightning discharge proper 
occurred. I trust he can give us a little defense of this use 
of the terms, because to my mind it has made a good deal of mis- 
understanding in reading the paper. 

Reference is made to a further analysis showing in addition 
to 3,000 cycles or thereabouts, superposed higher oscillations 
of a million cycles. I believe he used the term lightning as 
applied to these million cycles. How can a lightning stroke a 
mile or more in length be expected to oscillate with a frequency 
of a million cycles? A stroke a mile long, with a period of os- 
cillation of one million cycles, would mean a velocity of at least 
one million miles per second, whereas the known velocity of light 
and electrical impulses in the ether is only approximately 190,000 
miles per second. Does the apparatus demonstrate this high 
frequency in the lightning stroke, or is it the period of parts of 
the test line and apparatus—a secondary effect of the lightning? 

The data given on actual resistances of ground connections 
are valuable. The putting in of these ground connections goes 
largely as a matter of chance, and more perhaps as a matter of 
faith. We put up an expensive equipment of lightning arres- 
ters—and then run some kind of a wire into the earth, and 
seldom make tests to determine whether the latter is effec- 


tive or not. 


784 LIGHTN.NG ARRESTERS [June 30 


From one test, a value of 30 to 40 ohms is given as the actual 
resistance of the ground itself between two points several 
miles apart. I think there must be some mistake in this, as 
judging from a test made in dry rocky soil, the resistance of 
the earth, apart from that at and near the contact plates, is 
not likely to be anywhere nearly so high. Was this measurement 
made with alternating or direct current? 

Mr. Berg gives us figures from tests of practical value, because 
the arcing ground unfortunately occurs at times on trans- 
mission systems. Mr. Berg does not offer any explanations as 
to the cause of this excess potential, and possibly in discussion 
he may give us his idea of it. 

What appears to be the simplest explanation of this excess 
potential, as evidenced by the needle gaps, is a compensator or 
auto-transformer action in the transformer itself. The wind- 
ings of the transformer have electrostatic capacity to ground, 
which capacity is not evenly distributed along the winding, 
but is greater in some parts than in others, giving an arrangement 
equivalent to condensers connected between points of the wind- 
ing and ground. Considering one of these condensers near the 
terminal where the arcing ground is to take place, this con- 
denser will become charged to a high potential, and as soon as 
the gap to ground breaks down, the charge will pass through 
a small portion of the transformer winding, stepping up the 
voltage at the other terminal of the transformer. Where two 
transformers are interconnected in an open-delta arrangement, 
the normal potential of one transformer is added to this excess 
potential derived through compensator action in the other 
transformer. This might explain why one line terminal in the 
open-delta arrangement shows higher voltage to ground, by 
needle gap, than the other line terminal. 

In practice, of course, the action is not as simple as this, on 
account of the complex nature of the distributed capacity, 
reactance of winding, losses in iron core, etc., but this explan- 
ation of the phenomenon seems to be a simple, rational one. 

One word more on Mr. Thomas’s paper. I want to take issue 
with him on his choice of terms. I cannot understand why 
the term ‘‘static’’ is used here to represent anything but a 
static condition. In the old days we had “static ”’ electricity 
and “dynamic” or “ galvanic” or ‘‘ voltaic ” electricity, and 
the study of static electricity had to deal with the distribution 
of charges on bodies of different shapes, the forces of the attrac- 
tion and repulsion between bodies when they were charged, 
and similar matters. The term “‘ static” applies to a condition 
of rest. Now we seem to use the term to call to mind anything 
but a condition of rest. The term has crept into this use in 
the last few years and I hope we can find some other word 
which will more truly represent the condition of affairs, and 
not upset a term which already has a well-recognized use in 
the older books. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 785 


R. H. Marriott: In the territory in which Mr. Creighton was 
making his tests there were several wireless-telegraph stations 
from 1905 to 1907. At these stations we had a great deal of 
trouble with what is called ‘‘ static.’’ There were four stations: 
one at Pueblo, one at Altman, one at Colorado Springs, and one 
at Denver. At the Denver station were two masts 200 ft. 
high and 300 ft. apart, with a station house half-way between. 
One aerial consisted of a flat-top loop in the same plane with 
the masts, and stretched across the top of the masts with 
the ends in the station house. Another aerial consisted of forty 
wires suspended from a cable, and in planes at right angles to 
the plane of the masts. The highest point reached by the forty 
wires was about four feet, directly below the flat portion of the 
loop. The relation of the flat-top loop to the forty wires was 
in some respects similar to the relation of the grounded over- 
head wire to a transmission line. 

On a test made between points to ground while a thunder 
shower was approaching, the maximum discharge from the forty 
wires was approximately 2 inches long, and the maximum dis- 
charge from the flat-top loop was approximately 2} inches. 
We accounted for the greater discharge from the loop as due to 
the fact that it was higher in the air than the forty wires. 

At all the Rocky Mountain stations the wire that extended 
the highest in the air gathered the most static, as indicated by 
the wireless receiver, even though the natural frequency of that 
wire was greater or less than that of the lower wires. 

There were about three months of the year 1906, June, July, 
and August, when we had bad static practically all the time, 
exc2pt between 3 a.m. and 6 a.m. The natural frequency, 
1.e., the number of alternations in the discharge itself, was ap- 
parently at times about 1,000,000 cycles—so estimated because 
the tuner was set frequently at 300 meters, and the static im- 
pulses were received better on that tuning than on others. 
The tuner consisted of variable inductances and a fixed con- 
denser. I should say, from my experience with these static 
discharges, that they were sometimes as low in frequency as 
£0,000 cycles, and sometimes as high as 3,000,000 cycles per 
second. The discharge frequency, that is, the number of sparks 
at Pueblo, on one test from a seven-wire, 200-ft. aerial across a 
34-in. spark gap to ground, was one spark per forty seconds, 
whereas across a }-in. gap, a discharge took place about every 
one-half second. 

We accounted in different ways for the static which troubled us. 
One explanation was that a discharge took place between a cloud 
and the earth, or between two clouds, setting up electromagnetic 
waves which traveled out like the electromagnetic waves from 
our transmitter, and thus set up oscillations in our receiver 
antenna. Another cause that we attributed the static to was 
that the air about our aerial had a potential difference to earth, 
and discharged to earth tiirough the aerial, Another cause was 


786 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS (June 30 


friction of winds on the wires. In our telephone receiver, when 
attached to the wireless detector, the static makes a buzzing 
noise, weak static making a faint buzzing noise, and strong 
static making a loud buzzing noise. The strength of this 
buzzing during a wind storm increased with the velocity of the 
wind. This may mean, however, that when more air is passing 
more charges are carried to the wire. 

I have never known of a wireless station being struck by 
lightning. In one case a report came in of damage to a station 
due to lightning, but on investigation it was found that the op- 
erator, not realizing the conditions, had moved an antenna 
from its original position and had placed it above and across 
a 1300-volt line. The antenna guy ropes stretched and ground- 
ed the line through the receiving instruments, which acted as 
afuse. This occurred at Altman, where lightning is so common 
and severe in the summer that a description of its activities 
is almost unbelievable. The aerial here was 160 ft. in height. 
On one occasion when I was present lightning burned out a 
transformer situated about 100 yds. from the wireless station. 
These burn-outs were said to be quite frequent. In Pueblo we 
had a 200-ft. tower mast at Minnequa Park, in a district in which 
lightning is said to strike very frequently. This mast, with 
16 steel guys, broken by strain insulators, had just been com- 
pleted, and a steel cable was pulled up about 100 ft. with its 
lower end lying on the ground. During the night lightning 
struck a one-story house about six squares away, but there was 
no evidence that it had struck the mast or any of the cables. 
It appears to me that the most probable explanation as to 
why these wireless stations were not struck is that the antenne 
served as a path through which the charges above and around 
the antenne gradually leaked to earth, thus preventing the 
accumulation of a sufficient quantity of electricity, at any one 
time, to cause damage upon discharging. This explanation is 
based on the fact that the severest static occurs shortly 
before a thunder storm reaches a station 

D. B. Rushmore: Our knowledge of lightning phenomena is 
constantly increasing, and the operation of lightning arresters 
is each year becoming better understood. For much of this 
we have to thank the oscillograph. 

Some caution is necessary in interpreting the results of indi- 
cations caused by the puncturing of a piece of paper. It is 
possible for discharges to take place over series resistances 
which puncture paper and which have the optical effect of a 
considerable discharge, whereas in reality the conditions may 
be such that but little relief is afforded to a rise of voltage. 

A great deal of engineering must be done on more or less 
inexact knowledge. This is true of the use of a ground wire, 
where it is difficult to get exact comparisons of operation under 
the same conditions with and without that protection. 

Complete protection against lightning is being more or less 


: 
7 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 787 


closely approximated at present. From the experience which 
the speaker has been able to gather, it would seem that a trans- 
mission line can be practically protected against atmospheric 
disturbances by appropriate tower design, by the use of one or 
more ground wires, by the use of lightning rods and by the use 
of a much higher factor of safety in line insulation than has been 
customary. With modern protective apparatus, intelligently 
installed and kept in efficient working condition, it should be 
impossible to obtain a rise of voltage in that vicinity. 

It would seem to be a fair statement to say that we are now 
at a point where, with the best apparatus installed in the best 
possible manner, and with the most careful design of transmission 
lines, practically complete protection against lightning can be 
had. 

J. W. Fraser: I want to say a few words commending the 
work that has been done on this subject, and that has made 
possible the papers which we have heard this morning. The 
scope and thoroughness of this work is highly deserving of 
mention, and I am glad to see such a large attendance, and to 
find that so many of the members have taken such a deep in- 
terest in this work; for it is only by such intelligent and pains- 
taking investigations that manufacturers can obtain sufficiently 
reliable data to give us an arrester which will be of real service 
under all conditions, 

In the past it has been the practice of the Southern Power 
Company to install alternately a multigap or low-equivalent ar- 
rester, at all its sub-stations, in addition to the grounded 
wire over both steel and wood lines; and this company installed 
last autumn and this spring fourteen aluminum-cell arresters, 
half of one make and half of another, at various points on the 
lines Several severe storms have passed over different parts 
of the lines since these arresters were put in service, and they 
seem to be doing good work. On grounds these arresters have 


‘operated continuously for several minutes, apparently with 


very small variation in the voltage. 

Although there are 315 miles of 44,000-volt line with 98 trans- 
formers, and 50 miles of 11,000-volt line with 48 transtormers 
in service on the Southern Power Company’s lines, most of which 
were installed last summer, only one transformer has been lost, 
out of the entire number in operation, from causes traceable 
directly to lightning. It is to the credit of the manufacturers 
that this is the case. True it is that a few terminals have been 
burned off and a few bushings broken, but such troubles are not 
comparable with burned-out transformers, and show the necessity 
for a better path to ground than the old arrester. 

It has been the intention of the Southern Power Company 
to make a systematic study of lightning and freak voltages, 
but so far all that has been done was to keep an accurate log 
of all disturbances on lines since January 1, 1908. Ot the 
twenty-one lightning storms which have passed over the lines 


788 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS [June 30 


since that time, eighteen were severe and three were light. 
Out of eight storms there was no damage of any kind. In five 
storms, a total of about a dozen insulators had either one or 
two petticoats broken off; in two storms two meters were dam- 
aged; in two storms one leg of three 44,000-volt oil switches 
was punctured; in one storm, one 2200-volt oil circuit-breaker 
blew up (no current on the transformer-and the lightning struck 
a short secondary about 300 feet long) ; in one storm, transformer 
leads were burned off two transformers inside the case; and in 
two storms the line was grounded through a punctured insulator 
and caused considerable damage. 

The most difficult thing we have to contend with is a grounded 
conductor. The overhead grounded line and the old form of 
ligatning arresters seem to take care of ordinary lightning 
storms comparatively well, but as soon as a conductor is 
grounded, due to any cause, there is sure to be a fire display 
over the entire system and damage is inevitable. We believe, 
however, from the experience we have had with the aluminum- 
cell arrester that this arrester will be of great service in trouble 
of this nature. Its ability to withstand continuous discharge 
for some time without varying the voltage materially gives it 
a place unheld so far by any other arrester A rather peculiar 
incident happened the night before I left to. come to this meeting. 
I had just read the part of Mr. Creighton’s paper that refers to 
the station grounds, where he cautions every one to couple 
all grounds, when our superintendent of construction came in 
and related an experience he had had that day bearing out Mr. 
Creighton’s warning. The superintendent had two heavy steel 
towers erected in concrete, one on each side of the tail-race of the 
Great Falls power house and was guying to an old cedar stump the 
end of a messenger cable which he had strung between the towers 
to carry conductors across. He and five of his men who had hold of 
this wire received a very severe shock and heard the electrolytic 
arrester about 200 feet away discharge and hold for an instant 
or two. As soon as the are broke the men were relieved. On 
investigation it was observed that the end of the pipe to which 
the arrester was grounded was only five or six feet away from 
the men’s feet, and that the earth was comparatively dry around 
the pipe, which was only a few inches in the ground. 

This pipe was not installed for a ground, but for part of anold 
water main used in construction. It is quite evident that the 
current was seeking a better ground through the foundations 
of the steel towers, the concrete of which was still moist. 

Mr. Thomas speaks about the bits of paper being punctured in 
various places. An insulator on our line was punctured in 
three separate places and shows the slag formed evenly around 
each hole. 

W. L. Waters: I was much interested in the conclusions 
which Mr. Berg draws from his experiments. He finds that 
whenever we have an open-air are on a circuit, we get ex- 


4908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 789 


tremely high-potential rises on the end coils of the transformers. 
According to his figures, we would get a potential rise equal to 
about 15 or 20 times normal voltage on the first 200 turns. 
This will probably mean that we get a potential rise of 100 to 
200 times normal on the end turn of the winding, and it should 
be remembered that this potential rise is not a sudden strain 
merely, but that it continues as long as the open-air arc is on 
the circuit. I think that only a transformer designer can realize 
how serious such a potential rise would be. On large 60-cycle 
transformers we have up to 200 volts per turn normal potential, 
so if we get this sudden rise, described by Mr. Berg, it might 
mean 40,000 volts on the end turn of the transformer. It would 
not be commercially possible to insulate the transformer to 
stand such a high voltage between turns. 

The only suggestion which Mr. Berg offers for protecting the 
transformer is to place a series of condensers across the various 
coils. There would be little difficulty in insulating the indi- 
vidual coils of the transformer for high voltage—the great 
difficulty would be in insulating the end turns of the individual 
coils. For these condensers to be effective, therefore, they should 
be connected between the various end turns of the end 
transformer coils, rather than across the coils themselves. I 
think it will be realized that the suggested remedy of put- 
ting condensers across the individual coils of the transformer 
would do little good, besides being unpracticable. It is well 
known that the weakest parts of a transformer are the vari- 
ous voltage taps which are brought out, and it is easily 
seen that the additional danger due to numerous taps being 
brought out from the winding to the condensers would offset 
any advantage which might be gained from their use. The 
additional cost and complication of this series of condensers 
would also make the size and cost of the transformer prohibitive. 
I think that the only practical method of protecting the trans- 
former against these high-potential strains is the insertion of 
choke-coils between the transformer and line. These choke- 
coils will most certainly afford some protection to the windings, 
and it is just a question of selecting choke-coils with the re- 
quired constants to give suitable protection. : 

I rather think, however, that Mr. Berg in his experiment 
has chosen conditions which are in some way different from 
practical operating conditions. We have been operating 
transformers for the past fifteen years on power circuits 
which are exposed frequently to open-air arcs and have 
done this without any extra insulation on the transformer 
windings and without choke-coils. According to Mr. Berg’s 
experiment, we ought to lose our transformers every time we 
had an open-air arc on the circuit, and we all know that this is 
not the case. I think, therefore, that Mr. Berg must have 
had some special conditions present in his test which caused him to 
obtain unusual results, and that he should guard against drawing 
general conclusions from a limited series of special tests. 


790 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS [June 30 


William McClellan: After some experience with lightning 
arresters at voltages varying from 11,000 to 60,000, I cannot 
help but think that the two methods of obtaining data as shown 
in the papers of this morning, while both valuable, fill very 
different places in the study of the subject. 

So far as effectiveness is concerned, the speaker believes the 
method used by Mr. Creighton is of the very highest value, 
and it is with the greatest pleasure that he bears testimony to 
his enjoyment in reading the paper. It seems almost certain 
that the final solution of the problem will be reached by this 
method sooner than by any other. 

It must be conceded that results obtained by a test-paper 
method can only be corroborative of the conclusions and pre- 
dictions obtained from the experimental methods. As is well 
known in all laboratory work, results can only be obtained 
when conditions can be isolated, and most engineers will agree 
that in work of this kind isolation is well-nigh impossible so 
far as commercial lines are concerned. ‘The variables are so 
many, the causes of each are so subtle, that it is dificult to get 
any positive knowledge of what the conditions are at the time 
the phenomenon occurs. 

It would be well for all to note that the real problem at pres- 
ent in lightning protection arises in connection with trans- 
mission lines. It may safely be said that we can protect at 
present any kind of station, and all the future can do is to 
make this protection simpler and less expensive. We are far, 
however, from a solution of lightning protection to transmission 
lines. In this connection the writer can only repeat his opinion, 
expressed before, that the ground wire will be found eventually 
to be the only method which will give real protection. But the 
ground wire, to be adequate, will have to be installed in a more 
elaborate manner than isnow customary. There isno doubt that 
in time to come we wll build our transmission lines with as 
much care, and they will warrant as much expense, as a high- 
speed railroad right-of-way. I think we must recognize sooner 
or later that if the transmission line is to be protected adequately, 
so as to give practically continuous operation, we shall be com- 
pelled to put on it several times the expense that we do at 
present. The error we are making at present is in attempting 
to get line protection cheap. ; 

Farley Osgood: I would ask Mr. Thomas if he can tell us 
from these tests something about the limits of the area of the 
disturbance. Not very long ago most operating engineers felt 
when a lightning storm came that they were likely to feel the 
effects of it everywhere in their system. A number of en- 
gineers now tell me that half a mile is likely to be the limit 
of the area disturbed. Possibly in the test made on the Taylor’s 
Falls line this point was brought out. If I remember Mr. 
Vaughan’s paper correctly, it indicated that one-half to three- 
quarters of a mile seemed to be about the limit of severe dis- 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 791 


turbances, but as an operating engineer, I feel safe in saying 
that we dare not have very great confidence in that statement. 

I would also like to ask if any one can tell what bene- 
fits are derived from serving the phase wire near the in- 
sulator. This practice is not a general one, but some engineers 
follow it and they record remarkable results in the loss of a 
great number of insulators without the parting of the phase 
wire. I therefore simply bring it up as a matter for discussion. 

I wish to agree with Mr. Rushmore about forming final con- 
clusions from the results of the tests and experiments which 
are now going on. His reference to Mr. Thomson’s chain of 
lightning disturbances reminds me that a year or two ago, 
when the sun spots were observed, and it was supposed this 
condition would give us a good deal of trouble, our good friends 
who seemed to be in pretty close touch with the folks who send 
us lightning storms, alarmed all the operating engineers 
_ at the prospect of some terrible lightning storms that season. 

These conclusions were based on very careful study, but as a 
matter of fact I think we had less disturbance from lightning 
storms that year than in any previous year. 

Dugald C. Jackson: I wish to call attention to the enterprise 
and foresight of the manufacturers who have supported the ex- 
periments Mr. Creighton carried on, and likewise of the owners 
of transmission lines who have supported the experiments pre- 
sented by Messrs. Vaughan and Neall. We have been this 
morning viewing the papers from the standpoint of the results 
that have already been attained. Now, these results are 
large, but they are merely indicative of the path to be followed 
toward a solution of the lightning difficulties. I believe that Dr. 
Kennelly is too much influenced by his experience in the tele- 
graph art, when he throws out the inference that lightning 
protection for transmission lines will not be reasonably perfect 
in the future. We spend so much money for the insulation 
of transmission lines as compared with the insulation of tele- 
graph lines, and the value of the apparatus to be protected is 
so great as compared with that in the telegraph lines, that we 
can afford to spend enough moncy to protect transmission lines 
and protect them thoroughly. 

It used to be said that successful paralleling of alternators 
was impossible. Now it is one of the commonplace matters of 
engineering practice, this paralleling of alternators. Of course, 
now and then an accident occurs to paralleled alternators, but 
that does not alter the fact that paralleling of alternators is 
successful. Likewise, we seem to be ina fair way to soon see the 
“impossible” accomplished in the protection of transmission lines, 
The experiments that are now being carried on with trans- 
mission lines are doing more to bring us to a real knowledge of 
the characteristics of lightning strokes, and of the measures to use 
for protecting the lines from their injurious effects, than every- 
thing that went before. We should view the experiments that 


792 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS [June 30 


have been set forth in these papers from the standpoint of 
what they lead toward, and also from the standpoint of the great 
ingenuity and ability with which the work has been done,— 
not merely viewing what they show in completion. If such 
results and such methods of work as are laid down in Mr. Creigh- 
ton’s paper, or as are laid down in the paper that Messrs. Vaughan 
and Neall earlier presented, came from a laboratory of “ pure 
science,” these results and a statement of these methods would 
be heralded with acclaim. Coming from engineers, as they 
do, as part of the engineer’s daily work, they are part of the 
craft of the engineer and we forget the tremendous labor and 
tremendous ability that have gone into the experiments, and our 
discussion is likely to tend toward criticism instead of en- 
couragement. That does not seem to me to be in keeping with 
the pioneer character of the papers or fair to the art dealt with. 
A reasonable amount of acclaim given to the experimental re- 
sults and beautiful methods used will encourage and lead 
toward the more rapid extension of such work, a result which 
is earnestly to be desired. The Institute is fortunate in having 
these papers before it for discussion, and I desire to express my 
particular admiration of the manner in which the authors 
conceived and executed their experiments and presented their 
results. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: I caution you not to accept too broadly 
the statement that lightning disturbances extend only over a 
half-mile or less. This is really not the fact. I know from my 
own experience that occasionally when a lightning storm passes 
in the Hudson valley, the lights in my house, thirty or forty 
miles away, go out. The statement made in the paper is cor- 
rect only in that the disturbance produced by the lightning 
stroke, by its very abrupt discharge, extends only over a half- 
mile or less, possibly even over only a few poles; but internal 
surges produced by these lightning disturbances, as by a grounded 
phase resulting from the puncture of an insulator by lightning 
extend over the entire system, and the latter disturbances are 
those which are most serious and thus most noticeable. Whereas 
the direct lightning stroke is only the starting point of the dis- 
turbance, the latter disturbances are really the phenomena 
against which we have to guard, and expect to guard by 
the aluminum arrester. : a 

With the statement made that transformers break down 
equally as often in the middle as at end turns, I cannot agree. 
It was the frequent breakdown of end turns which caused manu- 
facturers to increase the insulation of the end turns again and 
again. The transformers, as they stand now, with the very 
heavy insulation of the end turns, may break down equally as 
often at the end turns as in the middle, but this merely shows 
that the engineering design is correct, that we have increased 
the insulation toward the ends so much as to give the same 
margin of strength throughout the entire transformer. The 


ant 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 793 


equal frequency of breakdown throughout the entire trans- 
former, with the much heavier insulation of the end turns, 
proves that the strains are far more severe toward the ends. 
If we left the end turn unprotected, we would find a very dis- 
astrous state of affairs. 

Regarding the weird phenomena described by Mr. Berg in 
his paper: it is true we can make a picture of these, as Mr 
Taylor shows, but what we desire Mr. Berg to give us some- 
time is not a mere picture—how it happened—but we expect 
to get equations of it. 

I have seen phenomena of the same character, which are 
quite curious. Some years ago we built a 500,000-volt trans- 
formet—this was quite some time ago, and we knew a great 
deal less of very high voltages at that time than now. With 
the transformer fully assembled, and with the terminals brought 
out from the oil, we were never able to run the transformer up 
to full voltage. It always broke down. If we took the ter- 
-minals off, below the point where they come out of the oil, 
leaving the transformer connected with full voltage, we could 
run the voltage considerably beyond 500,000, without doing 
any damage. It was merely a case of a small terminal capacity, 
and by bringing the terminals out in the air, the brush dis- 
charge produced a high-frequency oscillation, which made the 
transformer break down internally, at a nominal effective 
voltage below that which it would stand as a steady stress. 

E. E. F. Creighton: In reply to Mr. Lincoln’s question, of 
whether there was dynamic current on when these records, Figs. 
3, 4, and 5, were taken, I will say there was not. Of course, 
if there had been dynamic current there, the arc would have 
continued to play and the record would have been lost. The 
record shows nothing but the oscillations of the circuit. 

In regard to the overhead grounded wires, I think that 
phase of the subject has been discussed pretty thoroughly. 
The overhead grounded wire cannot produce complete protec- 
tion, but it will, as a rule, bring the protection within the range 
of the insulation of the line, and in that way reduce the prob- 
ability of interruptions to a very small value. When a very 
heavy direct discharge strikes the overhead wire, there is still 
a possibility that the line will arc to ground, due to “ side- 
stroking.” The farther away the ground wires are from the 
line wires, the less will be the danger from this source. 

A number of years ago we made some laboratory experiments 
on the protection afforded by the overhead ground wire, and 
we found that the wire gave about fifty per cent. less sparking 
potential with the overhead grounded wire placed above it. 
The test was carried out by placing a large plate of sheet metal 
above the wires experimented upon, and regarding the plate 
as the cloud. ; 

In regard to the storms themselves, there is no doubt that 
every storm varies in its characteristics from every other storm, 


794 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS [June 30 


to a certain extent. We might get an analogy by noting that 
in any dusty place, around a building or fence corner, every 
wind current or every wind storm that comes up has a different 
effect; but if you watch you will find that little currents or 
whirls of air will frequently form at certain places. You find 
the same thing with cloud effects. Out on the plains thunder 
clouds may appear anywhere. In the mountains the heated 
air in the canyons will cause thunder clouds to form repeatedly 
in the same location, and the mountains themselves give a 
direction to the winds. Although I think the direct observa- 
tion of storms in general gives very little practical information 
in engineering, yet an attempt at classification explains some 
differences in their destructive effects. Not very long ago we 
observed a storm which was rather peculiar. It was made up 
of clouds in the form of an inverted cone. I was stationed at 
a point about two miles away from the apex of the cone, and 
I observed that the lightning strokes would start from all direc- 
tions in the body of the cloud-cone and discharge at one partic- 
ular point, the apex. The conditions are shown in the figure. 


Fic. 1 


At the station where the speaker was there was not even 
rain until some time after the lightning display ceased. 
The electrical storm was severe but its effect on the trans- 
mission line was negligible. There were over fifty strokes at 
the apex of the clouds. If the apex of the clouds had been 
situated directly over the station or line the destructive effects 
would have been great, and the protective apparatus would 
have been called on for its maximum discharge rate. 

The distance to the point on the earth struck by the discharge 
was located by the well-known method of counting seconds 
between the instants of seeing the flash and hearing the thunder, 
and allowing five seconds to the mile. Since the apex of the cloud 
was only ten seconds distant and the thunder would roll for 
fifteen seconds after it started, some confusion would naturally 
be experienced unless the conditions were analyzed. There 
were at least three definite relations between the thunder and 
lightning which a fortunate situation relative to the storm aided 
in checking. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 795 


1. There was the flash to ground, followed about four seconds 
afterward by mild rolling thunder, which increased in intensity 
up to ten seconds, and then ended in a loud crash. This thunder 
was due to a discharge which started in the clouds directly over- 
head at an elevation of nearly a mile and darted to the apex, 
gathering a greater quantity of electricity as it went. This 
increase in the quantity of electricity is not the only factor 
affecting the noise of the thunder. The wet atmosphere in 
the clouds relative to the dry atmosphere between cloud and 
earth was a good conductor.. There would therefore be less 
tendency for the discharge in the cloud to collect in one streak. 
Between these two effects, the noise of the rolling thunder 
increased despite the fact that it came to me from a greater 
distance. 

2. After an interval of ten seconds following the flash to 
earth the thunder started with a heavy crash, and then rolled 
_ during eight to fifteen seconds, gradually diminishing in inten- 
sity. This thunder was due to a stroke coming from the 
farther side of the cone to the apex. 

3. After the flash to earth there was an interval of ten seconds 
and then a crash of thunder with little or no rolling. This 
thunder was due to a stroke moving through the clouds to the 
apex at right angles to the point of observation. All the path 
of discharge being at nearly the same distance the sound from 
the different portions arrived at the same time, hence the lack 
of rolling. 

Since the strokes occurred at intermediate angles also, these 
three effects were obtained only to a lesser degree. 

The theory of the formation of thunder clouds leads to the 
conclusion that this conical form of storm cloud occurs frequently 
on the line. 

Mr. Taylor questions the use of the word lightning to express 
all abnormal conditions of potentiai on the line. That name 
is due to Dr. Steinmetz—it was a very convenient term, and we 
adopted it. Subsequently, the use of the word “lightning ” 
was discussed by several interested engineers, with the result 
that Dr. Steinmetz and the writer agreed to use the term light- 
ning only in its time-honored sense—cloud discharges and their 
induced effects. Some general term is needed to cover the 
various abnormal surges which occur on a transmission line. 
Several words were discussed but none agreed upon. 

Mr. Taylor brings up the question of lightning frequency. I 
think my statements will be clear if one accepts the general 
term lightning as any abnormal condition of tension on the line. 
A frequency of one million cycles per second was measured by 
a number of coils, described in the paper, and I am very glad 
to get the opinion of wireless-telegraph engineers that they 
also have noticed frequencies of that order, measured by a dif- 
ferent method. Jr. Steinmetz has made calculations on the 
probable frequency of cloud discharges, and the value has 


796 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS [June 30 


come out of the order of a million cycles. A cloud discharge 
may have a frequency of only fifty thousand, or it may have 
no frequency at all—may be anon-oscillatory discharge. There 
is reason to believe that this latter condition may obtain under 
some circumstances. The lightning is gathering from perhaps 
miles around, or may be merely passing through a few acres of 
cloud, but in gathering it has to pass through a high resistance— 
pass from point to point in the clouds, in the form of brush 
discharge. Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume that cer- 
tain lightning strokes can occur without any oscillations at all. 

Mr. Taylor brings up the question of the resistance of the 
earth independent of the contacts. The usual contact resist- 
ance of an ordinary pipe earth, if well made, will be about 


fifteen ohms. It may be considered that the resistance is con- . 


centrated in the immediate neighborhood of the pipe. In the 
case referred to, the data is given for a condition out in the 
Rocky Mountains, where as the term indicates, everything is 
rocky—the mountains are composed of solid rocks. The rock 
is dry, hard, and of low conductivity. The conducting earth 
between the two points measured was in a very narrow canyon, 
consequently the resistance depended upon the distance. In 
another case the earth resistance was very much less, being only 
a few ohms. In a neighborhood where there is plenty of good 
loamy soil, and plenty of moisture, there is no doubt that the 
actual earth resistance, independent of the local and contact 
resistances, would be very small. 

In regard to the questions brought up in connection with 
Mr. Berg’s paper, I wish to corroborate the statement made 
by Mr. Berg, that the biggest problem we have to-day is not 
the protection against cloud lightning, but protection against 
the internal surges. Some of the worst conditions observed last 
summer in Colorado were due to these internal surges, com- 
bined with short-circuits. This combination gives the worst 
condition that can exist on the line, outside of a direct stroke. 
A direct stroke affects only a small locality, whereas a grounded 
phase, combined with a short-circuit, may affect the whole 
circuit, and usually does. 

There is just one other point I wish to take up: the conditions 
of further study. Personally, I am indebted to a number of 
operating engineers who have assisted in this work; and the 
operating engineer has put up to him part of the problem 
which he must solve himself. So far as we are able to do go, 
we shall continue to study; but from the factory end we cannot 
hope to solve the entire problem, because the conditions on one 
line are not the same as on another. The problem relates to 
protection against accidentally grounded phases, the installa- 
tion of the number of lightning arresters necessary to effect 
this protection, and the spark potential of the lightning arrester. 

Now, in order to make a lightning arrester that is marketable, 
it is essential to keep the price down to a value which is compar- 


1908} DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 797 


able to the cost of the apparatus to be protected—say the trans- 
former, the generator, or whatever it may be. This condition 
has necessitated the use of a gap in series with an aluminum 
arrester. The questions are: what gap-setting to use and how 
many of these aluminum arresters must be placed on a trans- 
mission system; that is, how many stations must be protected 
with the aluminum arrester, to give protection to all the rest? 
For example, if we have thirty stations, will the protection 
of ten of them with aluminum arresters protect the balance 
against internal surges? 

E. J. Berg: I have purposely refrained from giving any 
theory for the action of these arcing grounds, because an in- 
complete theory is worse than no theory at all. I believe, 
however, that Mr. Taylor’s theory will not apply: Referring 
to the diagrams showing grounding of one side of the open 
delta, you see that the transformer nearest to ground is subjected 
to a voltage which corresponds to 3.25 inches striking distance. 
At that time the striking distance across the outside transformer 
is 3.21 inches. If Mr. Taylor’s theory were correct, the striking 
distance across this latter transformer would have been 2 inches. 

It may be of interest to add that at the time of such an arcing 
ground not only are the end turns subjected to high voltages, 
but also to considerably greater current, and correspondingly 
greater heating, than the other turns. 

Regarding Mr. Waters’ discussion: I tried, as you see from 
the paper, to overcome the difficulties discussed in the paper, 
by the use of reactive coils, but was unable to reduce materially 
the stresses incidental to these arcing grounds. This was true 
even when using a large number of coils, the turns of which were 
approximately one-sixth of the total number of turns in the 
transformer. These coils did not contain any iron, but they 
were of the same dimensions as the transformer coils. 

Regarding the stresses on the end turns, Mr. Waters is no 
doubt perfectly right, but it may interest you to know that 
the company with which I am connected insulates the end turns 
of its high-potential transformers for one hundred to two 
hundred times the normal voltage. For very high-voltage 
transmission, it is likely that delta-delta connection will not be 
used, but instead the delta~-Y grounded neutral, with which an 
arcing ground can not occur since such a ground means a short- 
circuit, and consequently the line has to be cut out of service. 

Percy H. Thomas: I wish first to say a word about Mr. 
Berg’s paper. I think it is very important here to draw a dis- 
tinction in arcs, so-called. The arc which carries a great deal 

of current, and in which there is no cooling of the arc between 
alternations, and the type of arc that is under discussion, in 
which apparently there is a practical healing of the gap between 
alternations, are entirely different things. I think it is clear 
that these rises of potential are produced by that type of arc 
which drops out between alternations; in other words, it is 


798 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS (June 30 


but little more than a constant repetition of the condition of 
the initial ground. It is pretty well known that when a trans- 
mission wire grounds, the charge from the capacity to ground 
starts oscillations in the system and produces waves and re- 
flections of the same which may cause a rise of potential. 
This may have in the simple case a value twice normal, or in 
more complex cases somewhat more than this, on account of the 
presence of series inductance and on account of variations of line 
capacity, etc.; but the action does not give enormous voltages, and 
introduces no new principles or features. I think this point of 
view will explain a great many of the pheromena reported in 
Mr. Berg’s paper. I do not find here anything new, in the way 
of a danger which we have not heretofore recognized. By any 
one who is familiar with experimental work of that character, 
the difference in the types of these arcs is easily detected. 
There is a rough, irregular sound in all arcs where there is a 
large percentage of ‘‘healing’’ in the gaps between alternations. 

Another thing, which has tended to increase the apparent 
rise of potential reported in Mr. Berg’s paper, is the fact that 
he has given jumping distances, and not voltages. This causes 
a considerable exaggeration with voltages higher than 25,000. 

I also wish to make one or two comments on Mr. Creighton’s 
paper. I was going to raise the same point as was raised by 
Mr. Taylor in connection with the production of a lightning fre- 
quency of 3,000 alternations. I see the explanation of this low fre- 
quency is that the term “ lightning ” does not indicate cloud light- 
ning, but the natural discharge of the line. I want to protest 
against this use of this word “‘lightning.’”’ I donot think there is 
anything that will cause us more confusion than to use the term 
generally for all sorts of discharges in the circuit and also for all 
disturbances outside, as well as the natural lightning phenomena. 
If we could all get together and agree that we would give the 
word ‘‘ lightning ” a certain new meaning it would perhaps not — 
be misunderstood. but we are writing for a great many people 
over whom we have no control and they will not understand it 
at all. 

Another point: In regard to the word “‘static’’, I wish to 
defend Mr. Berg. If there is one term that we need in the 
business, in electrical high-tension work, it is a general term to 
describe these disturbances which come from discharges or 
surges in the line, due to other than normally generated elec- 
tromotive force. These disturbances are entirely different in 
their nature from the so-called dynamic electricity. I know 
of no word anywhere which nearly so well expresses the idea 
as the word “‘ static.’’ 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: Lightning. 

Percy H. Thomas: The word “static” is used broadly at 
the present time with this significance. It is true, surges are 
not static electricity, but this seems to me a meaningless ob- 
jection. I wish strongly to urge the general adoption of this 
term. No one will be misled, and it fills a long-felt want. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 799 


I wish to inquire of Professor Creighton, whether the use of 
salt, in perfecting ground connections using iron, would not be 
a pretty dangerous recommendation, on account of the corrosion. 
It is well enough for experimental purposes, to determine losses, 
but it seems to me would be undesirable for use in permanent 
grounds. 

I wish to state that in the past I have been inclined to doubt 
the efficiency of overhead ground wires and their effectiveness, 
but at the present time I am pretty well convinced that ground 
wires give the best and almost the only hope of completely pro- 
tecting transmission lines against lightning. The point I at- 
tempted to make in my paper, and which seems to have been 
taken too broadly, is that the particular experiments referred 
to in the paper have not proved that these particular ground 
wires were effective. If these ground wires are properly in- 
stalled, I believe they offer a very promising remedy. The 
danger is, first, that as they are ordinarily used, ground wires 
_are not sufficiently separated from the transmission wires, and 
lightning striking them will also jump to the wire itself; and 
second, that they are not so located that the lightning will 
always strike them first. There is always a probability that 
there is one transmission wire, or possibly two, which is at a 
lower potential with regard to the cloud than the ground wire 
itself. There will be a tendency for a discharge to pick out this 
transmission wire rather than the ground wire. 

I cannot agree with Dr. Steinmetz that it is not possible to 
distinguish between the effect of a bound charge and a direct 
stroke of lightning. To my mind, this difference is vital, for 
the reason that the character of protection required will be dif- 
ferent for the two types of disturbances. If it is a matter of a 
bound charge, you must have a static shield, which is difficult 
to obtain completely, but the intercepting of a direct stroke 
may not be so difficult. There can be no doubt that all these 
types of disturbances do affect the line, whether it is a bound 
charge, direct stroke or electromagnetic induction. The vital 
question is, which sort is it that punctures insulators and splits 
the pole? If we find which one of them does that real harm, we 
can then protect against that, and let the others go. 

Mr. Vaughan’s paper shows that there are a tremendous number 
of lightning disturbances which do not go over the insulators. 
I think a careful study of the paper proves that the attack 
which did the damage came from the air. 

Mr. Osgood asks about the extent of the disturbances shown 
by the Taylor’s Falls tests. There are two criteria: first, the 
individual stroke, which I believe is felt in severe form on only 
a very few poles; and second, the static waves in the line which 
are of limited energy and voltage but which travel all over the 
system. The evidence in Mr. Vaughan’s paper and other evidence 
corroborate this. 

I wish to protest against the statement that we find 


800 LIGHTNING ARRESTERS [June 30 


about three or four times on every occasion when we have 
a. lightning-arrester paper, that this sort of data which is pre- 
sented should not be taken seriously, that it will not do to 
infer too much from it, that we must reserve our judgment, that 
it is necessary to prove these things before people can accept 
them, etc. It seems to me that is a narrow view to take of the 
subject. If all had taken that view, we would know almost 
nothing about lightning at the present time. One or two ex- 
amples from other branches of scientific work may be called 
to mind to show how untrue such a position is. Take the in- 
vestigations of Hertz, who drew inferences from ordinary 
microscopic sparks in an exploring coil—the theory he built 
up has proved itself to be true. Our data are fully as illustrative. 
Take the case of radioactivity, the results that have been ob- 
tained from the study of very minute and apparently most in- 
significant measurements. Similar is the work of J. J. Thomson 
and others on the ionization of gases. All these results were 
worked out from data naturally much more inconclusive than 
the data we have on lightning experiments, 


SS eer 


A paper presented at the 25th annual con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Atlantic City, N. J., June 30, 1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.I1.E.E. 


THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR 


BY AUSTIN BURT 


Based on the commonly accepted definition of power-factor, 
-as ‘‘ The ratio of true power to volt-amperes’”’, there can be no 
single factor that will exactly express such a physical relation- 
ship in a delta-connected, unsymmetrical, three-phase system. 

It is possible, however, to determine, by practical methods, 
the weighted mean of the three power-factors of the single- 
phase paths of such a three-phase system, and to express that 
value by a single-factor. It has been suggested that such a 
factor might have importance under certain commercial con- 
ditions. 

It is the purpose of this paper, first, to derive from the va- 
rious relations that exist between the electromotive forces and 
currents in a three-phase, delta-connected system, a general 
expression which will enable the mean power-factor to be de- 
termined exactly; and, secondly, to develop a method by 
which the required values employed in the above expression 
may be readily determined from the standard switchboard 
instruments. 

It is proposed, therefore, to find an expression for the total 
energy volt-amperes and for the total volt-amperes in the 
general case of a three-phase system in which the electromotive 
forces and currents in the single-phase paths may have any 
assigned value and phase relation. The ratio of these two 
expressions will be the desired mean power-factor. The total 
volt-amperes will be taken as derived from the total wattless 
volt-amperes and the total energy volt-amperes, or, in other 
words, from the sum of the wattless volt-amperes and from 
the sum of the energy volt-amperes existing in each single- 


phase path. 
801 


802 BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR [June 30 


In the simple case of a single-phase system let 


E 
I 


the impressed electromotive force 

the current in the circuit resulting from inductive con- 
ditions in the receiver 

g = time-angle between E and J. 


I 


Fig. 1 will represent vectorially such a single-phase system. 
Then if the energy volt-amperes be represented by P, and 
wattless volt-amperes by Pw, we have, 


P= losgh . (1) 
Py = T sin gE (2) 


From the definition of power-factor we have, 


power-factor = - a ee i cos (3) 
and, 
& = cos (power-factor) (4) 
from (1) and (2) 
Ld se ao ae a (5) 
and by multiplication, 
con = pe = tang 6) 
then from (6) and (4), 
¢@ = tan-! (=) = cos-’ (power-factor) (7) 


It is seen, therefore, that the angle 4, whose tangent is the 
ratio of the wattless ampere-volts to the energy ampere-volts 
will give directly the power-factor from its cosine. A gential 
expression for the total wattless ampere-volts and the total 
energy ampere-volts in a three-phase system, gives a ratio whose 
value is a weighted mean of the similar ratios of the several 


1908] BURT; THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR 803 


single-phase paths, and the angle whose tangent is this mean 
ratio gives the mean power-factor desired from its cosine. 

In the three-phase system under consideration the total 
wattless ampere-volts is the algebraic sum of the wattless 
ampere-volts, and the total energy ampere-volts is the sum of 
the energy ampere-volts in each of the three single-phase paths 
of the system. 

Such a three-phase system is represented by the vector 
diagram in Fig. 2. Let the impressed electromotive forces and 
currents in the single-phase windings be represented respectively 
by Eas, Ea. Eca, and tq, tp, 7-, and the phase relations between 
the several electromotive forces and currents by a’, f’, 7’, 
with the additional convention that angles measured counter 
clockwise are lagging, and measured clockwise they are leading. 

- In Fig. 2, then, the delta (abc) represents the value and 


ie 


aE, 


Fic. 1 


phase relation between any selected values of Eqs, Ey, and Ea. 
The current in phase a 0b and its phase relation to EF,» is repre- 
sented by vector i, at angle a’ with E,,. Similarly the currents 
in phases bc and ca are represented by vectors % at 6 and 4g at 
c, making lag-angles 8’ and ;’ respectively with Ey, and Evg. 
It should be remarked that angles a’, 8’ and y’ could just as 
well have been taken leading as lagging. 

The star or line current will be the resultant of the currents 
in any two adjacent paths; that is, the current at a will be the 
resultant of the single-phase current in c a, or z,, and the current 
in ab, or — 1g. 

i, is represented at a by the broken vector aa’, and —1, by 
vector aa’. The resultant of these two vectors, I,, therefore 
represents, in length and position, the line current at a. Sim- 
ilarly, the line current at b is the resultant of ta and — 1, which 
are represented at b by 0b” and b b’ respectively. Therefore, 


) 


804 BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR [June 30 


vector J, represents, in length and position, the line current at 0. 
And again, at c, the vector J, is the resultant of 7 and —%, 
represented by the vectors cc” and cc’, and it therefore repre- 
sents the line current at C. 

This diagram therefore illustrates graphically the essential 


j / 
a £4) v 


" ( ‘ 
\ 0 

EP ae =< i, \ / Sb 
XA Ls ‘\ é \ a 

: \ “ae 


Fia.2 


elements, in general, of any delta-connected, three-phase 
system. 

The energy ampere-volts in phase ab, in phase bc, and in 
phase ca are then, if Pay, Py,, and Pa represent the respective 
single-phase. paths, 


1908] BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR 805 


[eas ~- de COS @, ae (8) 
Py, = tp cos f’ Ey, (9) 
Fett COST ae (10) 


adding (8), (9) and (10) for total energy ampere-volts, 
P-="4, 60s a! Egy +t, cos B’ Ey, +i; cos 7! Eq (11) 


Similarly the wattless ampere-volts, if (Px)a, (Pua and 
(Pw)ca Tepresent the respective single-phase paths, are, 


(Pw)ab = tq Sin a’ Egy (12) 
(Pa) b = 1p sin oe pe (13) 
(Pw)ca a 4 sin ie Fieg (14) 


adding (12), (13) and (14) for total wattless ampere-volts, 
Pw = tq Sin a’ Fqp+% sin B’ Ey, +4, sin wana (15) 


Since it is ordinarily inconvenient, if not impossible, to make 
measurements in the single-phase paths of a three-phase sys- 
tem it is required to find more useful expressions than (11) and 
(15). General expressions, based on and equal to (11) and (15), 
with external values for electromotive forces and currents, may 
be derived by a consideration of the relations existing in vector 
diagram, Fig. 3. This diagram is in all essential particulars an 
exact duplicate of Fig. 2. It is desired to prove from it that 
the following general proposition is true: that for any selected 
position of point O whatsoever, with lines Oe, Of and Og 
passing through the delta vertices a, b, and c, respectively, 
the sum of the products of the projection ae, of line-current 
vector J, on Oe, by Oa, and the projection b7, of line current 
I, on Of, by O}, and the projection c g, of line-current vector 
I, on Og, by Oc is equal to P the total energy volt-amperes 
and therefore equal to and may be substituted for equation (11). 

Similarly, it is desired to prove that the sum of the products 
of ea” by Oa, and fb” by Ob and gc” by Oc is equal to Py, 
the total wattless volt-amperes, and therefore equal to and may 
be substituted for equation (15). 


806 BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACIOR lJune 30 


Expressing these statements in form it is desired to prove 
that, 


P =I,cosa”OatlIycos B”0b+I, cosy” 0 ¢ (16) 


Py = 1g sin a” Oat, sin B” 06+, sin 7” Oc (17) 


Referring, successively, to the following: pairs of triangles, 
aObandanbd, bOc and bsc,cOa and cta, and noting that 
bk is equal to and parallel with vector 1,, that cm is equal to 
and parallel with vector 7, and, finally, that ah is equal to and 
parallel with vector 7,, we have the following set of equations: 


1908] BURT; THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR 807 


ig Eqp 008 a’ = ig Oa cos $, +i, Ob cos &, (18) 
ty Ey, cos B’ = i Ob cos d,+% Oc cos ¢, (19) 
4c ca COS 7” = 14, Oc cosd, +1, O a cos ~, (20) 
1, Eq sin a’ = 1,0 asin ¢, —i,0 b sin d, (21) 
Ey, sin 8B’ = % Ob sin d,+ »Ocsin d, (22) 
1; Hea Sin 7’ = 4,0 c sin d, —7, Oa'sin ¢, (23) 


adding (18), (19), and (20) and referring to (11), we have, 
4,¢0s a’ E.,4+% cos 8’ B,,+%4, cos 7’ Ecqg = P = 

(tq cos $, +1, cos d,) O a+ (t% cos $,+%¢ cos f,) O b+ 

(1, cos 6, +% cos f,) Oc (24) 


but from Fig. 3, by inspection, 


(ig cos $, +4, cos f,) Oa = (aa’ cos ¢,+a’ a” cos ¢,) Oa = ae. 
Oa=TI,cosa”Oa . (25) 


and 


(ip cos f, tig cos $4) Ob = (6 b’ cos f,+0b’ b” cos gy) OO = Of. 
Ob = I, cos Bf” O86 (26) 


and 


(i, cos $, +% cos $4) Oc = (cc’ cos dtc’ c” cos $,) Oc = cg. 
ori] cosy, ¢ (27) 


substituting these results in (24) we have, 
P =I1,cos a Oa+lI, cos 8” Ob+1, cos 7” Oc (28) 
thus proving equation (16). 


Similarly adding (21), (22), and (23), there are, referring also 
to (15), 


8U8 BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR [June 30 
i, sin a’ Eqyt+%tp sin B’ Exe+4- sin 7’ Eca = Pw = 

(ig sin d, — i, sin d,) Oat (% sin f, — tq sin d,) O b+ 

(i, sin $,+% sin d,) Oc (29) 


but from Fig. 3 by inspection, 


(ig sin $, —1, sin¢,) Oa = (aa’ sing, —a’ a” sing,) Oa = ea’. 
Oa = Iysin.c’ Oa (30) 


and 


I 


(iy sin d, — ig sin ,) Ob = (bb’ sind, —b’ b” sing, Ob = FW’. 
Ob =I,sinB" Ob (31) 


and 


I 


(i, sin 6, +% sin d,) Oc = (cc’ sind,+c’ c” sin d,) Oc = go”. 
Oc=T1,siny’ Oc (32) 


substituting these results in (29) we have, 
Py = I, sin a@ Oa+TIy sin 8” Ob+I, sin 7” Oc (33) 


thus proving equation (17). 

Equations (28) and (83) are general expressions for any 
possible location of point O. If, therefore, point O be taken at 
vertex c in Fig. 3 there are: : 


a =a Oa= Exe 
A" = B Ob= Ey 
O.¢ =.0 


substituting these values in (28) and (33) there are: 


P =I,cosaLE.qtJ, cos B Ey, (34) 

Pw = I, sin a E-g+T, sin B Ey, (35) 

Let Poa = Iq cos a Eg (36) 
Py, = I, cos B Ex, (37) 


then from (34), 


P = PogtPr | (38) 


1 


1908] BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR 809 


A standard three-phase wattmeter, consisting essentially of 
two single-phase measuring elements, if placed in the system 
represented by Fig. 2, with the current coil of one element in 
line current represented by vector J, and electromotive force 
coil across phase ¢ a, and with the current. coil of the second ele- 
ment in line current represented by vector J, and electromotive 
force coil across phase bc, will measure by the first element 
that portion of total power, P, expressed by P., and by the 
second element that portion expressed by P,., the two com- 
bined giving the total energy ampere-volts, P. 


Ie, a 


It will be observed:by a comparison of (34) and (35), that Pw 
may be derived from P by substituting the sines of a and £ for 
the cosines, and further it will be ohserved, that a and # may 
be obtained from (86) and (387) provided the single-phase ele- 
ments of the three-phase wattmeter could be read separately. 

A method for accomplishing this result consists in causing to 
become inoperative, first one element and then the other, by 
opening the potential circuit of the element. Fig. 4 shows a 
standard connection of a three-phase switchboard wattmeter 
operated by current and potential transformers. Ata 6 and¢ 


810 BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR [June 30 


are shown the usual primary fuses for the potential transformer. 

I,, I» and IJ, are the line currents. By removing fuse b the 

wattmeter element operated by current J, and electromotive 

force across bc becomes inoperative and a reading taken from 
. the instrument is expressed by (36) or, 


Po Pte 208 OC Be 


from which, 


Cosa = Pra (39) 


Similarly by the removal of fuse a, Fig. 4, the other element 
becomes inoperative, and by replacing the first fuse, a second 
reading from the instrument is expressed by (37), or 


rie = Ip cos 8 Ep, 


from which, 


Pe 
Cosf = 5 z . (40) 


As line currents, J, and J}, and voltages, E,, and F,,, are 
readily found from standard switchboard ammeters and volt- 
meters, (39) and (40) can be easily solved for a and #, the 
sines of which substituted in (35) will give the total wattless — 
volt-amperes, Px. 

Having demonstrated that equations (34) and (35) are true 
and derived from general expressions for P and Py, and that 
they may be solved practically, it follows that values deter- 
mined by them when substituted in equation (7) will give the 
desired value for ¢ and thus also the proposed mean power- — 
factor. 

It may be of interest to take the simple case of a single-phase 
load in the three-phase system under consideration, and derive | 
the power-factor by this method. 

The same values may be assumed as represented by Fig. 2, 
with the single-phase inductive load in phase ab, and repre- 
sented by 74. Currents i and 7, will be absent from phases 6c 
and ca, and therefore equal to zero, 


1908] BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR sil 


This condition of affairs is represented more plainly by 
Fig. 5, in which, 


te i o = a +d. Oa = E,, 
(ewe =p = ¢,20' Ob = Ey 
I, = 0 OG =) 


Te = = LG 


& 


Fic. 5 
Eetituting these values in equation (24), and (29) 


je 


Il 


ve cos (a’ +7) Feat Tp cos (ds a a’) Eu (41) 


Ee i sin (a’+¢,) Eig a Ty sin (Ps = a’) Eu (42) 


812 BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR [June 30 


But it is seen from Fig. 5 that, 


Eq cos (a’+,) +E, cos (fg — a’) = Egy cos a’ (43) 


E.q sin (a’+¢,) — Ey, sin (6, — a’) = Eqs sin a’ (44) 


substituting in (41) and (42) and dividing (42) by (41), remem- 
bering. that J, = 1, = 44, we have, 
Pw Eqp sin a’ tg 


= ay a ’ 
Tan d Pp foe tan a (45) 


Therefore ¢ = a’ and since their cosines are necessarily equal, 
the mean power-factor must equal the power-factor of the 
single-phase winding a b. 

As this is a general solution of the single-phase case, it follows 
that it will be true for any assigned conditions as to electro- 
motive force, current, or phase-relation. 

Assuming the above single-phase load to be non-inductive, a’ 
will then be zero and from (45), 


_ Py _Egsn0Ot O 
Shes h voatie pda arn ak 


0 = cos! (1), therefore power-factor equals unity. 

Still another simple case is that of the balanced three-phase 
load, equal electromotive forces and uniform phase-relations in 
the single-phase windings. For convenience, this phase rela- 
tion will be taken as 30° lagging. 


Referring to Fig. 2 there will be, 
Ea a Ec = Fea =E 


Rg 
l 
ee 
I 
Re 
l 
ie) 
So 

° 


I, =I =I, =I 
By inspection from Fig. 2, 


$; =>, =¢, = 60° 


and 


angle a’ aa” 


I 


Ot Gomer, 
60° + 30° — 30° = 60° 


I 


7 


1908] BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR 813 


_ therefore, since aa’ = aa” = i, there is 
a= angle a’ aa”+7’ = 30°+30° = 60° 
and also, 


angle b’ b b” 


I 


Ps ett 
60° + 30° — 30° = 60° 


Il 


therefore, since bb’ = bb” = i, there is 
8 = 4 angle b’bb”+a’—¢, = 30°+30° — 60° = 9° 
substituting these values in (34) and (35), 


P =I1£cos60°+/ Ecos 0° 
= 1 (4+1) = 3/2TE 
Py = 1 FE sin 60°+/ E sin 0° 

=1E (4/3+0) 


substituting in (7), 
OL ye 
@ = tan"! (x31*) = tan:} (S)- 30° 
i V3 


2 
Therefore, 
power-factor = cos 30° 
In conclusion, the following practical illustration will em- 
phasize the proposed method. It may be remarked in passing 


that the values taken are those used in Fig. 2. 
Using the same nomenclature as in the previous demonstra- 


tion there are,-- 


Eqp = 2.050 kilovolts. J, = 214.8 amperes. 

Eye ="2.248 - lex ss PAIS: s 

Evq = 2.400 i ee, 

P.eq = 371.49 kilowatts, Py=—_ 011,30 kilowatts 
from (88), 


P = 371.49+ 511.30 = 882.79 kilowatts. 
from (39) and (40), 


371.49. 
— as 430° , 
oe i oA = A 


814 BURT: THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR [June 30 


511.30 ae 
= $$ ——— e \ 
Cos 8'= 555-69, D48) me ene 


whence, 


Sin a = sin (43° 54’) = 0.6935 
Sin B = sin (5° 36’) = 0.0977 


substituting in (35), 


Py = 214.8 <X0.6935 X2.400+ 228.5X0.0977 X 2.248 = 357.46 
+ 50.18 = 407.64 wattless kilovolt-amperes. 


Substituting these values of P and Py in (7), 


@ = tan? a) = 24° 47’ 


therefore, 
. power-factor = cos (24° 47’) = 0.908. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 815 


Discussion on ‘‘ THREE-PHASE Power-Factor.”’ ATLANTIC 
City, N. J., JuNE 30, 1908 


Comfort A. Adams: I think that at least a part of Mr. Burt’s 
demonstration may be rendered less mathematical, to the ad- 
vantage of one’s physical conception of the problem. I refer 
to that part leading up to equation (34). which is the algebraic 
statement of the validity of the ordinary method of measuring 
three-phase power by means of two wattmeters. 

Since in any three-wire system the algebraic sum at any 
instant of the three currents counted positive in the same 
direction along the circuit is zero, one of these currents may 
be legitimately looked upon as the common return for the other 
two, since when counted positive backwards it is equal at each 
instant to the algebraic sum of the other two currents counted 

« Fae 


Tq 


Power Flow 


Generator 
Receiver 


Fic. 1 


positive outwards. Any three-wire three-phase system may 
then be considered as a three-wire two-phase system. 

In Fig. 1, ¢ is taken as the common return and the total 
power at any instant is, p = Cactatlnts = Pact Pc. The small 
letters indicate instantaneous values, the order of voltage sub- 
scripts indicates the direction in which the voltage is counted 
positive, and the arrows the directions in which the currents 
are counted positive. 

What is true of the instantaneous values of the powers is 
true of their average values and of the ~sadings of the wattmeters; 
or using Mr. Burt’s notation, P = Pac+Pr. No assumption 
is here made as to the shape of the electromotive force or current 
waves. If the power flow is from left to right in both circuits, ° 
both wattmeters will give positive deflections when connected 
as shown. If one gives a negative deflection when so con- 
nected, it indicates a backward flow of power in that circuit and 


816 THREE-PHASE POWER-FACTOR [June 30 


the reading of this instrument, when its pressure-coil connec- 
tions have been reversed, must be subtracted from that of the 
other wattmeter to give the total outward flow of power. 

Thus the point of view involved in this proof (if it may be 
dignified by that name) not. only emphasizes the direction of 
power flow and its relation to the relative direction of current 
and electromotive force, but it also points out a positive method 
of connecting the two wattmeters into the circuit. 

The proof given above is only a special statement of the more 
general proposition* that if in any three-wire system, (Fig. 1), 
the currents 7, and 7, and the simultaneous electromotive forces 
Cac and ¢p, are given for any instant, the system is for that in- 
stant completely determined in all its vital aspects, and that 
it is entirely immaterial as to how the three wires may be inter-. 
connected in the receiving apparatus, which may be two-phase, 
single-phase, three-phase star, three-phase delta, or a com- 
plicated network of many branches. 

There should therefore be a power-factor so definable that it 
is wholly determined by Fa, Es-, Ic, Jy and their phase rela- 
tions, and thus independent of the number of branches of the 
receiving circuit. Of such a power-factor Mr. Burt has very 
opportunely supplied the definition. 

The proposition given above, as well as Mr. Burt’s definition 
of power-factor, apply equally well to an m wire system of 
which n—1 line currents and n—1 line voltages are given.f 

Frederick Bedell: As I understand Professor Adams, the 
explanation he has given can be made to form a rigorous proof 
if it is expressed in mathematical language by the method given 
by, Professor Blondel in his paper on ‘“‘ Measurements of the 
Energy of Polyphase Currents ”’ in the Proceedings of the Inter- 
national Electrical Congress of 1893. 

H. L. Wallau: The method of measuring the power-factor 
of an unbalanced delta system appeals to me because in our 
system we use exclusively a three-phase delta, 2300-volt dis- 
tribution. The main power feeders are separate three-phase 
feeders and are, generally speaking, balanced. However, our 
lighting circuits also have small amounts of power connected 
to them, a great many having single-phase loads in the form 
of small motors, mercury rectifiers, and arc lamps, together 
with single-phase branches supplying straight incandescent 
loads. For that reason our lines are to a greater or less extent 
unbalanced, and it has been of a great deal of importance to 


* At the time of the oral discussion of this subject at Atlantic City 
the writer was convinced and stated that the proposition given above 
covered also the proof leading up to Mr. Burt’s equation (35), but 
while the conviction remains, he has been unable to see the connection 
clearly enough from the physical point of view to express it in simple 
non-mathematical form. ; 

+ ‘Polyphase Power Measurement” by C. A. Adams, Electrical 
World Jan. 19, 1907, p 143. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 817 


us to obtain an average power-factor which would truly represent 
the conditions on any particular feeder. 

I think that in all cases where similar systems are being used, 
the power-factor on the system, as a whole, can be closely 
approximat2d by obtaining power-factor on various feeders. I 
have used various approximations to get at the average power- 
factor on the sub-station, for the purpose of determining the 
proper size of rotary condenser to be installed, to bring the 
power-factor up to such a value as would give an economical 
transmission from the generator to the sub-station, and also 
under certain cases the proper size of condenser to be installed 
on the customers’ premises, in order to bring the power-factor 
up, sometimes, from a value as low as fifty per cent. to what 
might be called a livable value, one commercially practicable. 

B. A. Behrend: I think that Messrs. Adams and Bedell are 
correct in regard to their simple way of proving the time-honored 
method of measuring the power-factor and the kilowatts of a 
three-phase alternating-current circuit. Their method is very 
interesting and instructive. 


A pater presented at the 25th annual con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Atlantic City, N. J., June 30, 
1908. 


Copyright 1908. By A.i.p.x. 


SOME ENGINEERING FEATURES OF THE SOUTHERN 
POWER COMPANY’S SYSTEM 


BY J. W. FRASER 


It has been aptly stated that in order to build a hydroelectric 
power system there are three fundamental requirements: 

1. A sufficient source of power. 

2. A market for the sale of power within economical trans- 
mitting distance. 

3. The necessary capital. 

It is not the intention of the writer to discuss these three 
fundamentals in a general way, but to take a’concrete example 
and show how the conditions governing the sale of power must 
affect the design of the system as.exemplified in that with which 
he is connected, and to describe in a general manner this system 
proposed ultimate extension of the same. 

We will assuine for the purpose of this paper a sufficient source 
of power, as any discussion of the hydraulic conditions would 
lengthen this paper undesirably. In passing, attention will be 
called only to the location of the various sites shown on the 
map, Fig. 2. These aggregate not less than 150,000 h.p. One 
only, the Catawba plant of 10,000-h.p. capacity was partly 
developed. The nine others are scattered along the Catawba 
River for a distance of 120 miles, with one on the Broad River 
about 30 miles west of Catawba Station. 

In discussing the market at the time when the Southern 
Power Company was organized (1905), attention is first called to 
the map, Fig. 1, showing the location of cotton mills in the 
South, on which is shown a rectangle covering an area of 140 
miles north and south by 180 miles east and west, about 
equally distributed in North and South Carolina. This area 


819 


[June 30 


FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. 


820 


LOGI PU ZEST W2ENI0q JING O 768 HOFEq yM_ © 
‘s]]itu w0y409 jo de—'T “91g 


1908] FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. 821 


is enlarged on the map, Fig. 2. It will be noted that it contains 
the largest number of mills that can be taken in by any such 
area in the South. It represents a power consumption of ap- 
proximately 200,006 h.p., one-fourth of which is water power. 
It is all within easy transmitting distance from the various power 
_ sites referred to in the above paragraph. 


Thanh une 


7. 
Sen scary @_ — — oy OPERATION ______ erorrmnmveorene 


Southern Power Co. 


—— 
reel 


= Charlotte, N4Ca- 
MAP SHOWING LOCATION OF HYORO- 


ELECTRIC POWER DEVELOPEMENTS & 
=VNOER CONSTRUCTION ee 


TRANSMISSION LINES. 


O-— — —Prosecteo 
; Se 


POr kA PANTS 


ys 
f 
a 
a 
° 
5) 
4 


! 


fae & 


Before investing in these sites a careful investigation showed 
the average cost of power to be in the neighborhood of $34 per 
brake h.p. year of 3366 hours; that, although a few of the larger 
mills had got this cost down to $30, the majority of the smallet 
mills could not produce power for much less than $40. With 


Fic. 2.—Map of Southern Power Company’s transmission lines. 


FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. 


‘SJUMUIISULIIV BSUIYDIIMS PUL Soul] UOTsSIUIsSUeI-—"¢E “OI 


Fey, xi 
O48 
a) 
Sy 
iq 
bs x 
i ' oP 
i ny Byege syee3 e. re ay : ° ' : * H * 
: d ET ig Ss Sha: i it i ee 
* , oopee OQ PUB) YI ii WO 4ApjaD OF - : { H 
0004 me \ : . * qed deel geld | Oatd yea peasy cwcne Jeli. 
, “egestas” Oe ceed . 1 - i ¢ 
\ a ' | ° : 
Ogre fe Paces | | i , 
nig?” as daar ° ; 4 } 
ose -£ H BT gee HH } 
Bike Devo te i - f Bre i ; 
‘ i uid Sicaooyy otc @ : 
Wowie : he BGmeyoo L 
— 
1 ites 2 
low my 200-6 poe 45 BP Beneiyed 
\ oe Ay 0 Es ey Hots ‘lr of 
H Ae th t 
\ 4 t ae [Fz 
{ / > > 
Hh ~ ; 
t P € voyuer pueys/ yi" Ie 
VOI IO le 
syoous wreeey. ooee 6 eee ey ie 


oy ser. 
OP OE Lay ESE Beye 


TT eewee 


Or wy -5 0D by sao ad 
my PL-2 hyp v8ewessag Sue 


m0 eahsreyD 


av %C-6 Ageys Be 
my 00f=L 
mopnay) COufg 


\ / 


SM 
spuoysy Es wx, 2S ty 


< 


PewabUOY SU jajMS SUNOS 
SINT NOISSINSNVAL 7° WVGIV7 


1908] FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER Co. 823 


coal at $3.50, power couid not be distributed for less than $28, 
even from large central steam stations. Experience acquired 
from the Catawba station and some smaller stations, to the 
records of which access was had, showed a fair margin of safety 
after transmission and other losses were taken into account. 

True it is that in recommending investment in these sites it 
had to be considered that although the electric drive had demon- 
strated in some instances its reliability, convenience,and economy, 
yet the unsatisfactory history in other instances, the general im- 
pression that power was produced for much Iess than it actually 
cost, and the fact that mill owners were averse to further invest- 
ment, would make the sale of power a difficult matter. Still 
the main question which interested the investor was the cost of 
steam power, for prejudice could be overcome and the real cost 
of power could be demonstrated. In a further discussion of the - 
market, it is found convenient to treat of it under separate heads 
embodying the various engineering features. 

Frequency. In determining what frequency would best suit 
the market conditions the following had to be taken into 
consideration: 

a. That the 60-cycle generators at Catawba station and some 
8000 to 10,000 h.p. in induction motors receiving power from 
that station would have to be rewound or exchanged, if other 
than 60-cycle were used, on account of the fact that separate 
lines would be too expensive and would complicate matters. 
Motor-generators would make the cost prohibitive, because of 
the large number of distributing points. 

b. That 60-cycle motors to a total of approximately 8000 h.p. 
were driving mills in the vicinity of proposed lines, which load 
might be obtained, provided the frequency were the same. 

c. That there were also quite a few smail city plants operating 
at 60 cycles. At present this might not amount to much, but 
the growth of these cities had to be considered, particularly in 
reference to arc lighting. In three years 2500 arc lights have 
been put in service, and if motor-generators had had to be installed 
the cost to small mill towns would have been excessive. 

d. That a high frequency would give a better power-factor, 
due to the leading charging current. 

e. That 25-cycle generators, transformers, and motors would 
cost at least 10%, 25%, and 10%, respectively, more than 60- 
cycle generators, transformers, and motors. 

fj. That there was ety little prospect in the near future of a 


FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. 


and there were plenty of 
Il the power which 


"_ e0z2/00/z/0002/006/ —~09 IM/O M¥o00Z-2/ 


nchronous converter or railway load 


cotton mills in the district covered to use a 


could be generated from the rivers. 


Sy 


‘weIseIp BUIIIM Uor}e}s Jo dA. —'F “OI 


PE eras rae 
EINFIHIOTINIO 
N 7 IN-A 4. LVI. 


vor 


WVZYODWIT.ON/IA/IM a 


(peey,, aa £OEU/GINY UIMJ PH COFS — A 
=A 
svousMOD puoqgwo7 N eo - 
wos Fer 6) 
SYQJOIEUEO J COFF ‘W~CO'Us £ MY COOS — ° 


wovroge SvaAVIXFTOTO NOSE ‘MM OO¢-2 
“snyardde } 
es sugp/r’ene-voy ‘) coz? Jue ©02/- @ 

SOSQIIMS pISIP JOO ZA 902/-pzF ) 


\ @nyontfe &NG B/8/2VO2 f coze) 


coins posyp Swe 0007— 2/) 


Bravo 4UAG Soja POQa0 
ay Bite) Yj BIG D //0 0/NE 4 0022 YE Wu COOF_ % ) 


LOUIOSCUQS 4) COO$p 


SOD BYOWYD DS/O “AWusp 00/-2/ a 


SAOVA! POO/IAO fIhii] AL/1f r 
Win PIGD /10 (© adhy fj C0009 'WuwD 002 HA F- & 


yajimne worpounl sy 


SOYAIMS BOOSIE 9) 000 Of "Awe 007-2/ 
£4EG-SNYJ f COO¢S 


soyayms buszypouerjoes sng -27 ' 


SH/IYIMS pOS1P 4 00009 CWE 007 -2/ 7 : 
i shoyet PRO/18AO SRL] KAS > 
wn £19 2 10,0, Bly “f 06009 "we 007 f-+ | ono fon | ) cin | | oon 
YSaAfas 
Brn yim zajsaise busyybl] F7 1400p % -2/ 3 J ; y 
SHAMS ,IS/p NE000G Wu 00? -2/ ia tipo if fe 


svepeay 


Against the above is the extra line-drop, but when all the 


developments are completed very little power will be trans- 
mitted more than 40 miles, except over trunk-lines where the 


1908] FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER Co. 825 


drop may be taken care of by raising the generator electromotive 
force. For instance, the voltage at Catawba and at Spartan- 
burg, two centers of distribution, can always be maintained at 
44,000 volts. 

These considerations seemed to favor 66 cycles, but as exact 
figures were necessary in this case the following rough calculation 
was made: the saving in cost: of generators and transform- 


6ot. 704 


V4 
30000 


Sel CO 


1 3F fire 


Tower for 2-3 ? /ines /oo, 000 


Fic. 5.—88,000 volt tower. 


ers amounted to $75,000, and if the saving in copper due to 
increased power-factor is added the total will be in the neighbor- 
hood of $100,000. 

There is an additional loss of about 10% of the loss which 
there would have been at 25 cycles, and the integrated loss over 
the present lines when fully loaded will be in the neighborhood 
of 27%. In power this amounts to 10% of 27% of 26,000 kw. = 


826 FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. [June 30 


700 kw., which at $5.00 per kw. is $3500.00. Capitalized at 6%, 
this amounts to $60,000—a balance of $40,000 in favor of 60 
cycles. It is possible that a very careful analysis might show 
this loss to be a little greater, but the error cannot be over 25% 
as. the integrated loss referred to has been taken over a period 
of six months and covers losses from generators to meters on 
load. The only other error which could be made would be in 
estimating the line-drop when the present lines were fully loaded, 
but as the drop on the present load has been measured the 
. error could not be very large. 

Considerations (a), (b), and (c) have been left out of the above 
numerical calculation but might easily amount to several times 
the figure mentioned. 

Voltage. Some of the reasons for keeping the electromotive 
force as low as 44,000 volts were: 

a. That 44,000-volt transformers would cost from 18% to 
33%, depending on the size, less than for 66,000-volt transformers, 

b. That transformers and switches are more reliable at 
44,000 volts. 

c That insulators would cost about 80 cents less each. 

d. That line operation would be more successful. 

e That smaller transformer stations could be built. 


It was estimated that the extra copper to give the same drop 
over the entire system at 44,000 volts as compared with 66,000 
volts would not exceed the extra cost of transformers, insulators, 
sub-stations, switches, and other apparatus. The estimate 
proved correct. With the present 30,000-h.p. load there are 
on the system 72,000 kw. in step-up and step-down trans- 
formers; the additional cost if 66,000-volt transformers had 


been used would have been $64,000 
Additional cost of 30,000 insulators at 80¢.......... 24,000 
3 “© 30 66,000-volt sub-stations, i.e. 205% 
OF SIZS O00 wc. ee eee ele 25,000 
34 “ “step-up transformer stations, i.e 
109} 0£2$200,000 hin tees ee 20,000 
$133,000 


Against this is the saving in copper in the transmission 
line had the higher e.m.f. been used, roughly 50%. .$130,000 


This shows a saving of only $3000 but the present lines will 
carry a great deal more power than they are now carrying, 
which will increase this amount materially. 


1908] FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER Co. 827 


One line only of those proposed stands out as an exception, 
the trunk line running from Great Falls to Spartanburg and thence 
to Greenville, about 100 miles in length. This line now under 
construction will be so built that when overloaded at 44,000 
volts delivered electromotive force it can be changed to 88,000 
volts (z.e. 100,000 volts at generating station). This will be ac- 
complished at a very small additional expense by mounting pins 
and insulators similar to those now used on our wood-pole lines on 
the towers as shown in diagram, Fig. 5, for after conversion to a 
higher electromotive force these pins and insulators can be used on 


a —— 
as) 


Tt ee eneeree 


<7 SOUTHERN POWER CO. 

a ROCKY CREEK STATION 

CROSS SEXTION USKHEAD & POWER MCLE 
axe 

4 meh Tiss oon 


=| 


Fic. 6.—Section of Rocky Creek power house showing racks, gates, 
intake and tunnel for inner turbine bearing 


44,000-volt lines, or this line may be permanently used for local 
distribution. The intention is that this 88,000-volt trunk-line will 
not be tapped at any point except at Spartanburg. This could be 
done more easily by using 100,000-volt suspension-type insula- 
tors, but it is felt that by the time it is necessary to change to 
the hicher electromotive force thefe may be enough improve- 
ment fade in these insulators to warrant the extra expense 
which would be incurred. 
Transmission lines. Further examination of the transmis- 
sion-line map will show that two-thirds of the obtainable 


28 FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER Co. [June 30 


power is in the neighborhood of the Great Falls development. 
This position was selected as a main switching station, the 
idea being to mass the output of Great Falls, Fishing Creek, 


Rocky Creek, and Rich Hill at this point on outdoor bus-bars 
and control the line switches from the operating room in this 
station. 


oe 


LOS metsewteteenemunione ee 


howing arrangement of generators, transformers 


10NS S 


_ high- and low-tension swite 


. 7.—Plan Great Falls and Rocky Creek stat 


Fic 


+ ee a ee ee 


SOUTHERN POWER Co. 


. 


FRASER 


1908] 


ssuruedo 


SUT] YIM esnoy JouNIOjJsUeIy pUe T[eM PLoyA[Nq Surmoys ores STRPY Jee MIA opIsjnO—’s “oI 


salt 


Pete eee 


[June 30 


SOUTHERN. POWER CoO. 


FRASER 


1908] FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. 831 


The generators and transformers were designed to operate 
continuously at 85% power-factor to take care of an induction 
motor load, and at 115% normal electromotive force to take 
care of line-drop as the load increased. The main trunk line, 
from Great Falls to Catawba Station will take care of 20,000 
kw. at 85% power-factor, with a line-drop of 13.5% and a loss 
of 7.25%. This represents the economical section of copper 
at 20 cents per pound with power costing $5 per kilowatt- 
year. 


Fic. 10,—Main line steel tower. 


It should be pointed out before leaving the subject of trans- 
mission lines, that the impossibility of making contracts with 
mill owners on account of their skepticism with regard to the 
electric drive, before the greater part of the present lines was 
actually built, made estimates on the amount of power to be 
sold in any one territory so difficult that the location and size 
of transmission lines could not be determined even approxi- 
mately. In other words, where and in what amounts power 
was to be sold was a very uncertain matter. 


832 FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. [June 30 


This brought up the question of wood-pole lines versus steel 
towers. A little consideration showed that if the cost of towers 
per additional foot in height erected were $7.00 and copper were 
at 20 cents per pound, a No.0 B. & S. gauge would be the smallest 
wire which could be strung economically on account of the in- 
creased sag in wires below this size for 500-ft. spans; that 
a single-circuit tower line would cost approximately twice as 


Fic. 11.—Steel pole used for city work 


much as a pole line and would last probably twice as long; 
that a double-circuit tower line would cost very little more 
than a double-pole line; and that it would be more economical 
for cotton mills to shut down for a small percentage of time 
than to pay the additional price for power which would be neces- 
sary to cover the extra expenditure for steel tower lines. It 
therefore seemed good practice to build main trunk-lines of 


1908] FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER Co. : 833 
steel towers and all single lines below No. 0 gauge of wood 
poles. 

Still another factor ineeared this difficulty. One large 
development under construction and several others recently 
financed by competing companies tended to make mill owners 
hold off for better prices. I refer to this merely to show how 
such a matter may affect the design. Considerable discussion 
resulted as to whether Great Falls and Kocky Creek should 
not be made into one development by means of a canal and 
pipe lines. This would take at least as long again as to develop 
one source and would cost the same as separate developments. 
Decision was made for separate developments on account of the 
quicker delivery of power. ; 
- Sub-stations. The first motor installations in cotton rails on 
this system were of 550 volts, but it was soon seen that the num- 
ber of small transformer sub-stations, besides complicating opera- 
tion, would cost excessively, and after some investigation 2000- 
volt motors were recommended for all mills converting from steam 
to electric drive. These installations proved so successful that to- 
day over one-half the total horse power in motors is at 2000 volts. 
The cost of the conduit in the mills for 2000 volts is nearly 
offset by the smaller wire used, and this electromotive force 
permits all mills within a radius of two miles to be fed from 
one sub-ctation. Many new mills, on account of using individ- 
ual drive and consequently motors below 30 h.p., are com- 
pelled to step-down at least a part of this current to 550 
volts. 

_ The sizes of transformers in sub-stations are as follows: 
11,000 volts 44,000 volts 


(All purchased before beginning of 
new development) 


5 Stations ae 3-100 kw. 1 Stations with 2- 100 kw. 
5 “ 3-125 “ 1 “ “ hee 125 “ 
3 “ “ S150 “ 1 “ “ aE 159. & 
1 “ ’ “ 3-900 * 7 “ «“ IE 9121 010 
1 5 “ “ : 3-250 “ 8 “ “ a 3800 “ 
1 “ «“ 2-500 “ 5 “ “ 9. 500 4 
1 “ “ 52 apie 4 
4 “ “ 83-1000 “ 
7,575 kw. 34,175 kw. 


Many of the 44,000-volt sub-stations below 900 kw. are now 
partly or wholly owned by customers, as are also some of the 


834 “FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. [June 30 


900-kw. and 1500-kw. stations, most of the mills in one town 
preferring to take shares rather than pay the additional price 
for power necessary when the station is owned by the power 
company. The customer usually requests that the power com- 
pany buy and install the sub-station apparatus. The customer 
gets the benefit of any experience which the power company 
may have and obtains sub-stations at a minimum cost. In 
the larger towns where attendants must be kept it has been 
found more satisfactory for the company to own the sub-station. 
The power company has discountenanced the buying of trans- 


Fic. 12.—44,000 volt insulator. 


formers below 200 kw. on account of the high cost of completed 
stations per kilowatt. In the case of a 900-kw. station (3-300- 
kw. transformers) when the transformer cost. is two-thirds of 
the total and 150-kw. cost 50% more per kilowatt than 300-kw. 
transformers, the power company has taken a share in the station 
rather than have the customer install the small transformers. 
The companies consider this to be to their interest in view of 
the facts that they get all new mills and that the interest on the 
additional investment for two years would not pay the in- 
stallation charges for substituting the large transformers when 
they were needed. 


a he. 
6: q 

9 

‘ 

d 

2 


ee 


ia 


1908] FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CoO. 835 


“All sub-station transformers have been purchased under a 
standard specification in order that a few stock transformers 
which the power company has made it a policy always to keep on 
hand may serve as spare apparatus in case of accident. 


ar Crass-arm see deg T-%09 


ea ee 


Caner oO 


Fic. 13.—Standard wood pole 


It is believed that no transformers below 300 kw. and very few 
below 500 kw. will have to be purchased in the future; for with 
the present rapid growth of cotton mills and the use of 2200- 
yolt distribution in the towns where sub-stations are located, 


836 FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. [June 30 


the small transformers will have to be exchanged for larger ones, 
the smaller ones being available for the new sub-stations carry- 
ing small loads. 

It may be of interest to some to know that there are now on 


Fic. 14.—Type of sub-station 


our lines 114 50,000-volt fuses of the expulsion type and that 
they have proved entirely satisfactory. 

Secondary power. From government records and from six 
years of gaugings before the completion of the Catawba plant, 


Fic. 15.—Type of sub-station 


together with two years’ operating experience, the flow of the 
Catawba river had been pretty well determined. The question 
which presented itself most forcibly was whether to develop the 
average minimum 12 months’ flow, or to develop for 10 months, 
8 months, or less, and to supplement with steam power—a 


1908] FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CoO. 837 


problem which has to be determined by the first cost of de- 
velopment and by local market conditions. 

Owing to limited library facilities at his command, the writer 
was unable to ascertain if this question had been touched upon 


Fic. 16.—Type of sub-station 


elsewhere and how in other cases it had been determined, and 
so trusts that a few words with reference to this particular case 
will not be amiss. 

In the following calculations where the cost of primary and 


Fic. 17.—Catawba dam 


secondary power is taken at a fixed rate, the intention is not to 
convey the idea that these are actual figures but relative figures 


which will serve the purpose of this paper. 
There are many different solutions to the problem of ascertain- 


838 FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. [June 30 


ing the amount of secondary power which may be economically 
developed. At onc of our developments it was found that the 
average minimum primary power was in the neighborhood of 
16,000 kw. and that the increase per month of secondary power 
was in the neighborhood of 12.5%; i.e., 2000 kw. per month. 
In other words, if secondary power were to be developed for 8 
months’ sale, the total development of primary and secondary 
power would be 24,000 kw. If this secondary power can be 
sold without an auxiliary steam plant, the amount of secondary 
power which may be developed economically depends only 
upon whether or not the price received for such power will cover 
interest and profit on the investment; that is, the investment 


Fic. 18 


which is over and above that for developing primary power: 
but if a steam plant has to be maintained the amount of second- 
ary power to be developed depends also on the cost of steam 
power. It is very clear that the cost of secondary power is 
practicaily the same, whether it is sold for 11 months or 1 month. 
With this cost, say at $10.00 per horse power delivered, steam 
at $28.00 per horse power-year ($6.00 interest and depreciation, 
$22 for coal, operating expenses, etc.), if interest and deprecia- 
tion on the steam plant is entirely chargeable to the months 
when steam plant is in operation, then 

Cost of steam power per month = 1.834+~ 


When x = the number of months in operation. 


1908] FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. 839 


Amount of secondary power to be doveloped = 16,000 kw. 


12.5% 2000x 
QF Pane 6746 


x h.p. 


2000x (1.8342) x+ 2000x x 10 
0.746 
_ 2000 (1.832? + 6x + 10x) 
0.746 


Cost of steam + secondary = 


If power is selling at $20, profit 
_ (2000 x 20— {2000 (1.83x?+ 16x)! 
0.746 
_ 2000 (20x—1.83x?—16x) 
0.746 


(For max.) 2 = 3.66x*—4 


o—lelmontua 


On this basis maximum profit would be made on 2200 kw. 
secondary development. 

A more practical method under existing conditions seems to 
be to charge the interest and depreciation of steam plant to the 
operating expense of the system, inasmuch as the steam plant 
is an insurance against a partial shut-down and makes spare 
units unnecessary, and in the case of steam turbines, when run as_ 
synchronous motors, saves copper because it brings up the 
power factor. The above equation now becomes: 


2000x (1.83%) + 2000« x 10) 


Cost of steam + secondary = 0.746 
2000 (1.83x? + 10x) 
ey 0.746 
2 / 
Baga 2000 x 20— ore + 10x) 
2000 (20x—1.838x?—10x 
oF 0.746 
2000 (10*—1.83x*) 
= 0.746 
(For Max.) 2 = 3.66x%—10 
20D 


Maximum profit on this basis would be made on 5500 kw. 


(35%) secondary development. 
Had $24.50 been taken as the selling price of power, x would 


840 FRASER: SOUTHERN POWER CO. [June 30 


equal 4 months, or the total development should be made for 
150% of mean average low water. Although power from 
hydroelectric plants has been selling in the Carolinas for less 
than this Jatter figure there is no doubt that reliable service 
demands this price. 

There is another argument in favor of developing for 150% 
mean average low water. If it costs only one-half as much to 
develop secondary power as primary, twice the loss can be al- 
lowed on transmission lines; or, in other words, one and one-half 
times the power can be transmitted during secondary power 
seasons. Now, if the transmission lines are figured for an 
economical loss when transmitting primary power only, second- 
ary power to the extent of 50% of the primary power can be 
developed without additional copper. This only holds good 
when the auxiliary steam plants can be built in the neighbor- 
hood of distribution centers whose consumption of power is equal 
to the amount of secondary power. 

Many mills which had steam plants already installed made 
contracts for secondary power for eight months in the year, 
but after a few months’ operation by electric drive their owners 
found the production so much increased and their labor and 
other troubles so much lessened that many of them desired 
_to change their contracts to primary power. The result of this 
is that the plans for a supplementary stearn plant are now in 
course of preparation. The initial installation will be 15,000 
kw. and will be located at Spartanburg, S. C., near the southern 
end of the system, 64 miles from the main switching station at 
Great Falls on the 88,000-volt line. The ultimate installation 
is expected to reach 40,000 kw., divided between this point 
and some point near the eastern end of the system. It is thought 
better to divide the plant for safety and in order that the line 
loss may be kept as low as possible. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 841 


Discussion on ‘Some ENGINEERING FEATURES OF THE 
SOUTHERN PoweR CompPaNny’s Systems.” ATLANTIC 
City, N. J., June 30, 1908. 


J. H. Finney: I believe that many of us here fail to realize 
the actual value of the work that has been done by the 
Southern Power Company in the south. I think that there 
are not many electric plants in this country that I have not 
seen at one time or another, and I believe the work that has 
been done in developing the water-power system of the Catawba 
river by the Southern Power Company is as creditable as any 
similar work in the United States. It is well worth while to 
go down and see that Great Falls plant, the Rocky Creek plant, 
and the others there. 

W. S. Lee: Perhaps a good many engineers do not know 
the conditions that we have to meet on southern streams. There 
-is an erratic flow, a flood discharge on several of these plants 
one hundred times the minimum discharge; this means quite a 
problem in designing the structure from the hydraulic end, as 
well as trying t» apportion the station equipment so as to use 
the secondary power to the best advantage. We have studied 
this condition carefully, and while we have adopted the plan 
of putting in station equipment about one and one-half times 
the minimum low-water requirements, naturally there is a possi- 
bility of even changing that, due to the fact that a great many 
southern cotton mills have efficient, large steam plants. We 
are now offering power for sale on a six months’ basis, which 
we call six months’ secondary power, at.a much lower price. 
This six months’ power is an inducement to the large plants, 
which can run six months on steam and six months on water 
power. In some years the water flow is a little greater, and the 
mills can then be operated by water power eight months, or 
even ten months, and on rare occasions, twelve months in the 
year. 

We first had a great many 550-volt motors on the cotton- 
mill work, and were endeavoring to make the voltages multiples. 
We saw at once that in cotton-mill work it was not advisable 
to install a 44,000-volt sub-station for each mill, consequently 
almost all installations are now using 2200-volt motors. We 
have towns in which we operate seven or eight mills from 200 
to 500 h.p. each, where it is possible to locate one sub-station. 
All our transformers are wound for 550 and 2200 volts on the low- 
tension side, and 11,000, 22,000, and 44,000 volts on the high- 
tension side. 

Reference to the map will show the location of the Great 
Falls station, Rocky Creek station, and Fishing Creek station. 
Great Falls station being between the other two, it is our inten- 
tion to feed Rocky Creek and Fishing Creek stations into a 
common switch house or bus-bars, which will be located at the 
Great Falls station. This will enable the attendants at Great 


842 SOUTHERN POWER COMPANY [June 30 


Falls station to control all lines or feeder circuits. We are also 
designing an 88,000-volt transmission line from Great Falls to 
Spartanburg, S. C. The transformers and control of lines for 
this voltage ‘will also be handled by attendants at Great Falls 
station. 

D. B. Rushmore: The plant of the Southern Power Company 
is one of considerable interest. The voltage of the plant, 
44,000, was the maximum conservative voltage at the time of 
installation. At present one would use a higher potential for 
such conditions. Efforts should be made to standardize trans- 
mission voltages. Below 44,000, the figures are fairly well 
fixed; above, there exists a wide variety of voltages. We must 
either decide on delta-star combinations, or else choose some 
arbitrary figure. For high-voltage transmission work one does 
not change the system of connections from delta to star after 
the first decision has been made; therefore an arbitrary decision 
on multiples of eleven seems the most logical basis. The follow- 
ing voltages are recommended for transmission work: 6600, 
11,000, 22,000, 33,000, 44,000, 66,000, 88,000, 110,000, and 
165,000; 66,000 is already in operation in so many places that it 
already has an existence; 88,000 is taken as the double of 44,000. 
On transmission lines it is often desirable to double the voltage 
and to wind transformers for the higher voltage, using them for 
parallel connection on the lower voltage. A large number of 
plants are now being installed at or about 100,000 volts. It 
seems desirable to fix this.figure at 110,000, these voltages being 
the voltages at the generating station. 165,000 is proposed for 
the next step. 

One of the factors which has entered into the successful opera- 
tion of this plant has been the use of 60,000-volt insulators on 
the 44,000-volt line. The greater margin of safety is one of the 
results of experience in this line of work. 

It is to be noted that this system employs a delta connection 
on the transformers on the high-voltage side; also that a com- 
promise is effected concerning the use of transformer compart- 
ments, and that the high-tension wiring is entirely open. 

A feature of especial interest is the use of expulsion fuses 
instead of automatic switches for protecting the sub-station 
apparatus. It is understood that this feature has been very 
satisfactory. 

P.M. Lincoln: I agree with Mr. Rushmore that it is desirable, 
if possible, to fix high-tension voltages in advance of their use, 
but I am not sure that it is best to eliminate the 88,000 volts. 
There are a number of plants in which this voltage is proposed; 
the reason for it is that the plants are to go in at first at half 
that voltage, 44,000 volts, while the amount of power called for 
is small, but they are being installed with the intention of eventu- 
ally doubling this voltage. The fact that there are two different 
but obvious methods by which transmission voltages may be 
increased is responsible for the existence of the odd voltages. 


1908] DISCUSSION AT ATLANTIC CITY 843 


Voltages may be increased either by doubling the previous 
voltage or by throwing delta-connected transformers into a 
star connection. In the former case the factor of increase is 
two and in the latter 1/3, With this constant tendency toward 
odd transmission voltages the adoption of standards becomes 
all the more important. : 

In regard to the question of delta- versus star-connected trans- 
formers, I think that the selection of delta or star. connection 
depends largely upon whether the neutral of the high potential 
system is to be grounded or not. If the grounded neutral is to 
b: used, the star connection of the high-tension side is essential 
to obtain a neutral point. If the grounded system is not to be 
used, there is not much choice between the delta and the star. 
It is true that the star-connected transformers are somewhat 
less in cost than a similar set of delta-connected transformers, 
but this is not a controlling advantage. ‘The whole thing hinges 
upon the larger question of whether the high-tension transmis- 
+ sion system is to have a grounded neutral or not. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: 1 desire to commend the engineers who 
have designed this plant, on their conservative way of choosing 
transmission voltages and transmission design, which ought to go 
a long way to maintain the record of reliability of operation 
acquired by the smaller station, of which this big system is the 
successor. Many of us do not realize the enormous work which 
is being carried on in the electrical development of the South. 
We read, and have heard, for many years of the long-distance 
transmissions in the West and Central states. Great results 
have indeed been accomplished there, where coal is almost out 
of the question by reason of its price, and where the distances 
are long and the voltages high, but not all of us realize that 
similar development is going on in the South. The development 
may not be of greater magnitude, but it is under different con- 
ditions, in competition with steam. The southern plants do 
not supply mines and towns which do not mind an interruption 
once in a while; they supply consumers like city lighting plants 
or cotton mills, where it is a serious matter to shut down and 
throw hundreds, if not thousands of hands out of work. There 
more conservative voltages must be used, and while 100,000 
volts may be all right in the West, they are a little high for 
the South. 

It is very encouraging to see how a system of enormous mag- 
nitude, fully as large in kilowatt capacity and in extension over 
distances as any western system, has chosen 44,000 volts as the 
trunk-line voltage for transmission, using half or quarter thereof 
for the high-voltage distribution system, and leaving it for the 
future, when necessary, to use a line of double that voltage, 
88,000 volts. ; ae 4 

Fourteen years ago the first cotton mill was installed in the 
South with electric drive. It is hard to realize how the whole 
South has rapidly developed commercially, and how electric 


844 SOUTHERN POWER COMPANY [June 30 


) 
power is coming to the front. Water power systems are every- 
where being developed. It is encouraging to see that this 
great development has been on conservative lines, and it 
is to be hoped, that as a result of the development of these 
systems, we will be able to say that long-distance transmis- 
sion is as reliable as local distribution, and that it will not be 
necessary to say—among ourselves not to the public—that long- 
distance transmission is ideal where you get the power, but after 
all you never know whether you will get the power or not. 

P. H. Thomas: I ask Mr. Fraser if he should not add to 
the advantages of the large secondary steam development, the 
extra capacity of reserve, in case of trouble? ‘ 

One other question: Does the term “average minimum pri- 
mary power ”’ indicate power that could be actually developed 
with no steam auxiliary at all? 

J. W. Fraser: Mr. Lee has answered the question as to the 
44,000 volts, and higher voltage, which we expect to use, and 
he has also answered the question regarding the wiring diagrams. 
With regard to the fuses, we have something like one hundred 
and twenty-five 50,000-volt fuses in use, and have used them 
in all the sub-stations. They work very satisfactorily indeed. 

Replying to Mr. Thomas’s question; that is the average power 
obtained for a number of years without any secondary power 
at all which would be developed if we had no steam power. 

P. H. Thomas: Will you describe the fuses more particularly? 

J. W. Fraser: The enclosed fuse referred to is mounted on 
line insulators, which in turn are mounted on a treated board 
about 6 ft. long and 10 in. wide. The explosion takes place in 
a short metal barrel at the end of the fuse, which is 42 in. long, 
and is discharged through a fibre tube about 3 ft. long, 
The fuse is also used as a disconnecting switch. 

With regard to voltage regulation, it does not matter what 
the voltage at the Great Falls station is, so long as the voltage 
at the Catawba station is maintained at 44,000. The main 
trunk line is not tapped between Great Falls and Catawba sta- 
tion, so that the voltage at the former station may be varied 
between 44,000 and 50,000 as the load changes, 


7 — 


INDEX 
PAPERS AND DISCUSSIONS 


Alternating-Current Feeder Regulators. (Illustrated.) (W.S. Moody.) 
Aluminum Lightning Arresters, Earth Resistances, Cement Resist- 
pers and Kindred Tests; Measurements of Lightning. (Illustra- 
Nel) gees ices SO UR ace chet ee eae coins TR ee ae nec rh rete ae 
Arcing Grounds and Connections; Tests With. (lllustrated.)... 
Automatic Switchboard Telephone System, A Study of Multioffice. 
Uilitistrated:)reccane eis (cet DOTA So Sere ee Oe REE ee CREE ea 
Best Engineering Education; The. (Illustrated.) (Chas. F. Scott.) .. 
Biltmore Estate, Notes on the Electric Heating Plant of the. (Illus- 
Tess cite GN eae gemem eae cursors ur, cet s enarte ns Be crits tte Senta ea ha eee ny 
Boats, Notes on Electric Haulage of Canal. (Illustrated.)....... 
Calculation of the Starting Torque of Single-Phase Induction 
Motors with Phase-Splitting Starting Devices. (Illustrated.) 
(CE FBiy SENOLISS ATO An eoete eo ae RASC he OR oe Pa ea ee 
Canal Boats, Notes on Electric Haulage of. (Illustrated.)........ 


Cement Resistances and Kindred Tests; Measurements of Lightning, - 


Aluminum Lightning-Arresters, Earth Resistances. (Ilustrated.) 
Central Station and other Work, The Non-Synchronous Generator 
fren AUNTS SAG CC) ae speteeete aa ciccifoycrs) ieee Sach Sale Soeree eee eee chen ele eRe 
Characteristics of Motors for Large Shears.  (Illustrated.) 
GET MY ViLLCN)) mee eee avo ha hee PAN iSt $e tition cumitmasls: Siva. aint a eyes has Bon. suse sce 
Commutator-Type Motor, The Single-Phase. (Illustrated.)...... 
Comparative Tests of Lightning Protection Devices on the Taylor’s 
Falls Transmission System. (Illustrated.) (J. F. Vaughan)... 
Connections, Tests with Arcing Grounds and. (lIllustrated.).... 
Conservation of Power Resources. (Illustrated.) (H.St. Clair Putnam) 
Converter Design and Operation; Some Features of Railway. (Illus- 
GUANOGI AGS & is WEES Hehe gn ok oR CcRD ORM Dn oct Reena 
Pee) Some Developments in Synchronous. (Illustrated.).. 
Critical Study of Lightning Records on Taylor’s Falls Transmission 
Tana GEER EN: SHBG ACIS Ne chat ab cael One eR Renee Re ORE aaa 
Design and Operation; Some Features of Railway Converter. 
(G@illusirate dls) ieeeentrn fcr sen sce cus et wicious fh sys oiaimiec bs soo cook 
Developments in Synchronous Converters, Some. (Illustrated.). 
Development in the National Forests, A Suggested Government 
RoOltGy; mma Lei O Wel em emir atmer ihe Pastries ia eae 8 oes) eco 
Discussion on ‘* Alternating-Current Feeder Regulation.” Toronto 
Section Feb ntiatyie 2 Onevl MOS. omucuetcursleraiel 1c cnc Seow, nate Pe woes ane 
Discussion on ‘‘ Comparative Tests of Lightning Protection Devices 
on the Taylor’s Falls Transmission System,” and ‘‘ Studies in 
Lightning Performance, Season 1907.’ New York, May 19, 
LO Spe pe eRe ee tec eay rete ory. oA RECON eepa Nic aateoats 
Discussion on ‘‘ The Education of the Electrical Engineer.”” New 
Vaciakcy ale vadbuetseny gn CRS i cote en aca ot ag a i Pee acre ee sae 
Discussion on “‘ Electricity as Viewed by the Insurance Engineer. 
Should the A. I. E. E. Interest Itself in Fire Protection?” 


Pelee (Clty ye New age (les 2O LONS, SivGcoctes sit ats. « feeb 
ix 


x INDEX 


Discussion on ‘‘ The Engineer’s Activity in Public Affairs—Public 
Utility Commissions and Franchise Valuations.” New York, 
April 10),1908. 24:4 2. gn eee aan he ne ho eae 

Discussion on ‘‘ The Evolution of Engineering.’’ Atlantic City, N. J., 
June 295 1908 5 wey. «ous shutters Cheemie resets eee ee eee: 

Discussion on ‘‘ Measurements of Lightning, Aluminum Arresters. 
Earth Resistances, Concrete Resistances, and Kindred Tests,” 
“Tests with Arcing Grounds and Connections,” and “ Critical 
Study of Lightning Records on Taylor’s Falls Transmission 
Line:*!--Atlantic, City,- Ni |g a}une 3G) 1908. nee sparen 

Discussion on ‘‘ Measurement of Rotary Speeds of Dynamo Ma- 
chines by the Stroboscopic Fork.” Atlantic City, N. J., June 29, 


Discussion on ‘‘ The New Haven System of Single-Phase Distribu- 
tion with Special Reference to Sectionalization.’’ New York, 
January) 10,1908 25s cuatet cetteet abe hong che ce Reenter nee ae 

Discussion on ‘‘ The Non-Synchronous Generator in Central Station 
and other Work,” ‘‘ Some Developments in Synchronous Con- 
verters,”’ and ‘‘ Some Features of Railway Converter Design 
and Operation.’’ New York, February 14, 1908............ 

Discussion on ‘‘ Notes on Electric Haulage of Canal Boats.”’ 
New T¥ork, Maréhe 13)" 1908 as rte te ene ee ee 

Discussion on ‘‘ Notes on Electric Heating Plant of the Biltmore 
Estate; Atlantic City, N. J) 7 June! 29s 1908 hee ae eee 

Discussion on ‘‘ A Single-Phase Railway Motor.’’ New York, 
January iO TOOS US ss Sit ees ear cies es yi eee net a 

Discussion on ‘“‘ Some Engineering Features of the Southern Power 
Company’s Systems.” Atlantic City, N. J., June 30, 1908.... 

Discussion on ‘“‘ A Study of Multioffice Automatic Switchboard 
Telephone Systems.’’ Atlantic City, N. J., June 29, 1908.... 

Discussion on ‘‘ Three-Phase Power-Factor.’’ Atlantic City, N. J., 
pee KSOK OOS? SUS ak cathe ona sane: Secrets Maree Ge neerteta fap achat eee re 

Discussion on ‘‘ Water-Power Development in the National Forests. 
A Suggested Government Policy.”’ Atlantic City, N. J., June 29, 
OOS self ortack ges sr accee shegmche A g's. spinel 4.888 51.500, acs ae eee 

Distribution with Special Reference to Sectionalization; The New 
Haven System of Single-Phase. (Illustrated.)............ 

Dynamo Machines by the Stroboscopic Fork, Measurements of 
Rotary -Speeds\of) —(iustrated) = 22s aie. oe eee 

Eartn Resistances, Cement Resistances and Kindred Tests; Measure- 
ments of Lightning, Aluminum Lightning Arresters. (Illus- 
15?) -10 A) Pee AN a aS aed dial len i Pd ee I we 

Education; The Best Engineering. (Illustrated.).............. 

Hducation; Blectrical: Mngineeting. 13,7 cn dues a onteiieeee eee 

Electric Heating Plant of the Biltmore Estate, Notes on the. 
(Uiltstrated.:) vv cst eeee crete cc ate eee le ae ek 

Electric Haulage of Canal Boats, Notes on. (Illustrated.)..... 

Electrical Engineering Education. (Chas. P. Steinmetz.)........ 

Electricity as Viewed by the Insurance Engineer. Should the 
A. I. E. E. Interest Itself in Fire Protection? (C. M. Goddard.) 

Engineer's Activity in Public Affairs—Public Utility Commissions 
and Franchise Valuations, The. (Henry Floy.).......... 

Engineering. The ~ Hvolution col. ccna oe tee eee nee nee 

Engineering Education; The Best. (Illustrated.)............. 

Engineering Education; lectrical: >. 2%... te ie eee 

Engineering Features of the Southern Power Company’s System, 
some.***(Illustrated.) Siccias ccs. rae eee ee 


Evolution of Engineering, The. (Henry G. Stott.)............ 


Features of Railway Converter Design and Operation, Some. 
(Tilustrated 2) age s.c Sop fs ante nee ae ieee eae ree 


Features of the Southern Power Company’s Systems, Some En- 
gineering. (lIllustrated.) 


ae ee le fenes Sole 0 ¥, F ibs iNet e 4, tr ® tec 6 dL Alig taiih) eae) p. ceacpeet ne 


INDEX 


Feeder Regulators, Alternating-Current. (lIllustrated.)........ 
Fire Protection? Electricity as Viewed by the Insurance Engineer. 
should tthe "Atel yea dben interest ditseliqim: ) ae. ees wa we 
Forests, A Suggested Government Policy; Water-Power Develop- 
ae, kok wid ves NIE OKenae ila iment oo: le uence eee eee ee 
Franchise Valuations, The Engineer’s Activity in Public Affairs— 
Pulplies Uiilinn Comumissioms samc endemet, eect. Ss soe ce vais 
Generator in Central Station and Other Work, The Non-Synchron- 
OUSnsee HUSA wr ncaereen Tueet tiers Riven Ged idicac Guna eae Ge hae 
Government Policy; Water-Power Development in the National 
DOTestswe Moe ect eclamen ee Srewenete ath aris seat eraelis co motes ¢ 
Grounds and Connections, Tests with Arcing. (Illustrated.).... 
Haulage of Canal Boats, Notes on Electric. (Illustrated.)..... 
Heating Plant of the Biltmore Estate, Notes on the Electric. 
(CHUN Wis sean eNGt a Yet hones tote 5 MEER Pen ee yo ony rn Se ee Re eee em 
Induction Motors with Phase-Splitting Starting Devices, Calcula- 
tion of the Starting-Torque of Single-Phase. (Illustrated.). 
Insurance Engineers. Should the A. I. E. E. Interest Itself in Fire 
Protection? Electricity as Viewed by the....:........... 
Lightning, Aluminum Lightning Arresters, Earth Resistances, Ce- 
ment Resistances and the Kindred Tests; Measurements of. 
(CHUTES ev Oy anche ary anne ate MRS Oe areata 7 Coe a ae 
Lightning Performance, Season 1907, Studies in. (lIllustrated.). 
Lightning Protection Devices on the Taylor's Falls Transmission 
System, Comparative Tests of. (lllustrated.)...../..... 
Lightning Records on Taylor’s Fall’s Transmission Line, Critical 
* SREORONS CIS 5 occcd Genes, 41 a SR ele Ack ot RIN Pee ee REE De eT 
Measurements of Lightning, Aluminum Lightning Arresters, Earth 
Resistances, Cement Resistances and Kindred _ Tests. 
Ciilvisbra techs) aC! i Hp Hin CV EUSNLOM AN: tamutres te isii-l sie gle. ty eels Siren 
Measurement of Rotary Speeds of Dynamo Machines by the Stro- 
boscopic Fork. (Illustrated:) (A. E. Kennelly and S. E. 
VLEET TES en ree cic 5 Onl By ORS ORR eC Re CRMs a ae eee oe Ohi oet serine 
Motor, The Single-Phase Commutator-Type.  (Illustrated.)...... 
Motor, -Asingle-Phase Railway. (Illustrated is fc. wee ce ons et 
Motors for Large Shears, Characteristics of. (Illustrated.)....... 
Motors with Phase-Splitting Starting Devices, Calculation of the 
Starting Torque of Single-Phase Induction. . (Illustrated.) .. 
Multioffice Automatic Switchboard Telephone Systems, A Study 
Om Clbst rated) reper aed here mee aais.< ateFa so aketers - oats hia eta Se 
National Forests, A Suggested Government Policy; Water-Power 
IDeyeloromaesae “rst “AM a(S e Solera ile Bie neaene roe eine aCe oe tas rc 
New Haven System of Single- Phase Distribution with 
Special Reference to Sectionalization, The. (lllustrated.) 
CHV. Sie META HOIY Sew Sck co, Oko Cree cee wn cao Re eC 
Notes on Electric Haulage of Canal Boats. (lllustrated.) 
(Lewis B. Sillwell and H. St. Clair Putnam.)............. 
Notes on the Electric Heating Plant of the Biltmore Estate 
(illustrated). —(Chas.HatWaddell) ensihe cd pe ree upon SENS 
Non-Synchronous Generator in Central Station and Other Work, 
sinew (uistravecs) wen ome VV GterS2) Canis cn seco ute ecere eke O 
Phase-Splitting Starting Devices, Calculation of the Starting- 
Torque of Single-Phase Induction Motors with. (Mlustrated.) . 


Plant of the Biltmore Estate, Notes on the Electric Heating. 

(ARMM ETE EIOIED) Io ssihoecy AepRONS co. pyc eh SSA DRE ATO Che a SR aa a aa 
Powerhactor lnree-Phace. ~(Mlustrated.)... ds. <e eye iegten se « 
Power Resources, Conservation of. _ (Illustrated.)............... 
Puplic Affairs, Dhe Bngineer’s Activity im.......4..% ..-gert. oe 
Railway Converter Design and Operation, Some Features of. 

CLM SSPE RUC ES) A ie, 2 ony RO TERN CIC I a 
Railway Motor, A Single-Phase. (Illustrated.)...... 06. .e esses 


xii INDEX 


Records on Taylor’s Falls Transmission Line, Critical Study of 
Lighting’. 20 5 We cage ie Age aoe ee ee ea ee 
Regulators, Alternating-Current Feeder. (Illustrated.).......... 
Resources, Conservation of Power. (Illustrated.)...... Oh ERA 
Rotary Speeds of Dynamo Machines by the Stroboscopic Fork, 
Meastirémenit : Gf. 008 Perk! 2. ER ee Reem rahed % 
Sectionalization; The New Haven System of Single-Phase Distri- 
bution with Special Reference to. (Illustrated.)......... 
Shears, Characteristics of Motors for Large. (Illustrated.)...... 
Single-Phase Commutator-Type Motor. (Illustrated.) (B.C. Lamme.) 
Single-Phase Distribution, With Special Reference to Sectionaliza- 
tion, The New Haven System of. (Illustrated.).......... 
Single-Phase Induction Motors with Phase-Splitting Starting De- 
vices, Calculation of the Starting-Torque of. (Illustrated.).... 
Single-Phase Railway Motor, A. (Illustrated.) (E. F. Alexanderson.) 
Some Developments in Synchronous Converters. (Illustrated.) 
(Chas WA Stone SHG SAR, EE. SEUSS ots ee 
Some Engineering Features of the Southern Power Company’s 
Systems.: (Ulustrated.) (is Wi) Praser eos eos ee eee 
Some Features of Railway Converter Design and Operation. 
(Titustraved:).32G/s> Ee “Wiootbridge:)'. Sse i. Stat ee alee 
Southern Power Company’s Systems, Some Engineering Features 
of The (illustratedjyne ie 2 a eee ee ee 
Speeds of Dynamo Machines by the Stroboscopic Fork, Measure- 
ment" of - Rotary} (illustrated). ceiek See eae ee 
Starting Torque of, Single-Phase Induction Motors with Phase- 
Splitting: Starting Devices, Calculation of The. (lIllustrated.). 
Starting Devices, Calculation of the Starting Torque of Single- 
Phase Induction Motors with Phase-Splitting. (Illustrated.). 
Stroboscobic Fork, The Measurement of Rotary Speeds of Dynamo 
Mathines’ by the.) (illustrated) 4. 0.90Se5 Dee ee ee 


Studies in Lightning Performance, Season, 1907. (Illustrated.) — 


CIN JS INEGILY ks Oe rd ra Wha wR Soo Me nek Hh pee ee ee 
iva of ah ee Records on Taylor’s Falls Transmission Line, 
PIGICEL co cacte ee webs OMAR NCA Ale SOE ce ee 
Study of Multioffice Automatic Switchboard Telephone System, A. 
(ilhistrated:) (Wi) Eee ‘Campbell is. 8 eon ee eek See 
Synchronous Converters, Some Developments in. (Illustrated.).. 
System of Single-Phase Distribution with Special Reference to 
Sectionalization, The New Haven. (Illustrated.)......... 
Talyor’s Falls Transmission Line, Critical Study of Lightning 
Records OMi7 7.6.40 6 4cue orden 4 ae Bide eed Oe PR ain iether 
Taylor’s Falls Transmission System, Comparative Tests of Light- 
ning Protection Devices on The. (Illustrated.)............ 
Telephone Systems, A Study of Multioffice Automatic Switchboard 
(UUtaB pa GEG D2 aie a: BEARERS © FDS oa ieee Rin eae 
Telephony, Wireless: ~(illustrated.)., +... 0s ene ee 
Tests of Lightning Protection Devices on the Taylor’s Falls Trans- 
mission System, Comparative. (Illustrated.)............. 
Tests with Arcing Grounds and Connections.  (Illustrated.) 
(Ernst J Brg )) pin SNe etek OO Ane Oa eee 
Three-Phase Power-Factor. (Illustrated.) (Austin Burt.).......... 
Torque of Single-Phase Induction-Motors with Phase-Splitting 
Starting Devices, Calculation of the Starting. (Illustrated.) . 
Water-Power Development in the National Forests: A Suggested 
Government (Policy 9 (FaiGua baum) ne. eee eee 
Wireless Telephony. (Illustrated.) (R.A. Fessenden.).......... 


755 


coh, 


SS ee 


_— ae ae 


INDEX OF AUTHORS. 


INGoiiicm Comorian | Discticsion. —. 5... ....ane.one.s.... 241 
Alexanderson, Wee ePaper. Lo) Disetesioni.-ie02taceds asec 2 1. 89. 
Babcock, A. (20 Discussion RE eR eee ites AG Ramen Redes CUTE ee ad 
Baum, F. Gs Pap (Sib Sais ost uaa asem Sood 4 toh, Ge GRIPS Gime ea he Merce eee Se 


’ 


Berg, Ernst J., ee 741: IDES SUG Cine terns Bee Mean bon oan Soke aaah eae 
Bibbins, J. Re Discussion 26.5 £ oot pd) OR a LA eae ne OL ae aoe a 
IBilenetle IRE AG ars DERTO CSS Count a 7 Gates ley 2 eng Re Re eee ee a 
CISCMmbm Wie LISCHSSION teksty te oe ee ay pce 


PS rec ce Ms | MOA eI ISCUSSI ON. 2.4 <P wh sore fee ek eet tote aR, oe seein oan 
StooccmMloroan, DISCUSSIONS so...) 4 etic cast tb acs towns hoes Dos bea week 
Shem lee WV OISCUSSHON rors se-cicaiels mealies tie. Ghee tae mes eee 97, 
Se AMS ELEM ap Cleats 6 Aisa ols taeece edt Mus sae adyatans cuctkpem ha ewes 
Campbell, W. Lee, AMET OU oe DISCUSSION am eee ere eer sae. ae 
Clark, POG, , Discussion oS. 8. begat Any RODE Re ed We ee eT oe 


Goleman ccoreerss Liscussiomina. ct. «his: eae we es ceils wn ODS, 
Creighton, Her. is Paper, 669; Discussion... i040 560%. <. en 454, 
Choe weer Db eDASGUSSION: 565.5. 15, Netto la Eh eh to kaa ee weit aro abs 
PO etainyeme elas UI SCUSGIOR nas rcveat. arf are... Gusts isabdeunacne shop h Sioa 
Ble USOn mL OUiSman. DISCUSSIONS... fio. oss eal nee outa a 109, 
eno tc One Omens DISCUSSION soi wun, acts gm ote ei eee se os a 
Hier seine ChMminey Acre aOGlr acre naan ks on. x alent herpes Gualete she 
Hp NCVAEe eels & DISCUSSION Si cic sino Seen ak Sa, sek 485, 667, 841, 
PMOVAMcninya Paper Ooo; HDISCUSSIOM. aa. .aue esc) ae acs getas aes 
fe rctn ahaa Pen OTS CUSTOM emu e) suqi ers rooiel ib ctles tress Myce ci Goad. a 99, 
accim| Pave miacper ol; WAsCuSSIONG na. 60) fe 2 os ta siete ee a" 
Recta time eae WEEE DISCUSSION mr ierds fcsnsha na no Sd anges wn «vile ole 


ane AU Met hee ISCUSSIO Mere 4 utscsesta fear nephs vo veel wa tie ee are ; 


Graallenrél, (GaN. TE aw ayes sa oN eh ei ea ae 
EOOUNVITIOON cer DISCUSSION cues steed eee hs kgcgO ec a Gos a ys aeons 
(Blrammscveya, ll, [Be TREY Otero ic) eugechaonn cate woaciee ey coeene nn ment, cst ea ae aetna an 
Siig ee AGCUSSIOM amram nr ae facta n ict ua ooo inlht cone uate eee woes 
Jackson, Dugald C., DISCUSSION MEM ten Rhee wie |e aoa e soe at 131; 
Kelsch,_R. S., oHie Giga uel ite alee oan ek ea 
Kennelly, A. E., IRApere OSU we DISCUSSION: nt iins iicasgls 124, 649, 
erate ame San ete DV ISCUSSOIINns hieh ahi wce ae ahh eke a wah ee a tue ae 
Kynoch, J., eres re ee span ae, 
Lacombe, Chas. Wa IDIS@HS SLO Tia meen oE ete tens ete ien cor oir etna opti 
Lamb, Richard, DD iccce amen tran he en dat cra ts 
Lamme, BGs Paper, HS Me DISCHSSION sents om Mae tt hts arene at ; 
Lee, W. S., en ene are ce on as 
Lincoln, Paul Mee IGCUSSIOner co clame Mest eae it Ag 218, 451, 71, 
lvtord, jr. ©: Se DISCUSSION rere Ric at wear cde Cee 29, 
McAllister, ‘A. Son IIS ere ae eee ech ee gr ee eral 
’ McClellan, Wm., Re taht Peek Ort ie oc ecewrs sgt Maes 
McMeen, Samuel Gs, EERE SARS, ratte ON are ae MO an 
emi att Ot Ore DISCUSSION eye ot sie qe cc aerate ht 114, 
Micumatenie, TR. IE liy DMG SISE soy sions 1 seat haat Me at cece ae cee 
Mn a. LUGCUSSION wwe sqorces oslo es meee ere ee eee et 


Xiv INDEX 


Moody; V.D., Discussion’. ..c.< 5... .tas se iste Ot ghee eee 
Moody,,. W...S;;. Papers vojoc ict car sai g: -) ene ete tene ste cs nen eee 
Murray, W.. S., Paper,.43; Discussion. 9... +). - 1). eee 38, 56, 
Neall, N. Ji.; Paper, 421; Discussions 5 oy <2 te. ry-n 2 ete ee 
Osbortie: LL. A.,-Disctission: 7. ae eis sn ote cee ee ee 
Osgood, Farley, Discussions. 2. c4\6 13s sae seus ee aie ee eee 
Pérking..C.A:. .<Diseussioncieecgacm <i ao oe se aan eee eee 
) Porter #Cs His, DISCussionins as tases amet cle cre cette era ene eee 
Potter“) WoL Bsn DiISCuSsion Sco tice ceniee nett ene nena 
Putnam.) H. St-.Clair-Paner=.6 oe ane nee ee 
RObB = Wis dssy DISCUSSION. &c-2icnd scsinctenyern Ge er eae ee an ee eee 
Rushmore, DB Diseussiomscactas eis cis crete oe eee ee 
Slichters Wo be sDiScussionci..m teecieie ose eke ate cee eee eee eee 
Scotta Chass. Papers.0(.. e1ISCuSSlOty sete ena eee 86, 
Sharp, Ce HU aD IScussion:, «qs paces ee ae eee cee 
Sheldon, Samuel; Discussions..csuu ae erate cere nee een 
Smite; AgiB..,« Discussion s2.(3 0. camcee rete che eee oar ict eaten 
DPOlr yay lamer Ap MISCUSSION So ciacot & sic k Gytohe Ae tee Se eee 
Steinmetz, Chas. P., Paper, 79; Discussion. .35, 91, 104, 122, 

319, 473, 493, 779, 792, 


StullwellewdaB... bapet.. 2.0; DISCUSSION teenten eet 18, 57, 
Stone, Charles, Wi, Paper, 181. Discussion. =: .< © ares eee 
Stott, sHenry .G., Paper; 459; Discussions: 9. ..25 122; 
Taylor, (he. DiscussiOn’.. tc, sss lays 20.) Se os ene ee 
Pet LOLs wel aa sy LDISCUSSIOti ent tar tet ease cena een ae 243, 253, 
Temples Woks. Oey DISCUSSION ccoetcle fois ete ee eee ee 
Thomas, P. H., Paper 755; Discussion....111, 452, 667, 797, 
Lorcbio. wb bili, = Discussions. cantetacyas « .- co seeee ete eee ees 1 
Vaughan ]i.. H.3. Paper) 9397; ; Discussion? 9... eee 451, 
WaddelliChas. Be Paper, 651; Discussioni. «= eee oe 
Walla tit. lL DISCUESION iat ae ciaeteiu sees es er ee 
Waters, We Ly Paper.167: Discussion... 1, <a seen 
WV Sie PE DISCUSSIOT ot cyti tay bea ctiehssaxs) tacit sofa once 
Wihite: @iacstGr, @ DisGussion 7 ..c«c:64 4s ee ee ee ee 
Wihiting ; (Sb sPaper 162 1: scents ley ss So ence rene ee: pa 
Wicks, eh DISCUSSION creo; sent Que et weiss ees ee ne ee 
WileW, MSTON, Pa DEL Ys cm crcutor ys rely. «tes o10 el aat ee eee Ee 


Woodbridge, Jl... Paper, 1913 Discussion... .... aac eee 


MEETINGS OF THE INSTITUTE. 


Meeting, INewaeVoncm janucty LOW 1908.9 cmele ere ie ee es 
WieetimcmNewe vor. January 245 LO0S ico. oe fayette ees ante Cie 
‘Meeting, Philadelphia, Hebritaryverl Onl O0 Ser. a: erent ee ene ee 
Meeting, New York, February. 14, 1908.............. S76, ANS 
See cctines Coronto, Pebruary” 20, 1908... ........5.....2. sah 0 ee 
Mumeecome, New York, March’13, 1908... 0.2.02. oe cee eee 
Meeting, Pittsburg, April 1, QOS <a ©, ant y Sano eee iat 
_ Meeting, New York, naa 10, 120) ieee ie BRA a" ey tN er oe oe 
Meeting, Pittsburg, May 6, FOO cs rina er Oe 
‘Conference on the Conservation of Natural Resources, White House, 
Washington, D. C., May 13-15, 1OGR ea: eee geo 
— Meeting, New York, May, ORO OS rea. Wee tee hie Ne wee 397, 

“Atlantic City Convention, June 29-July 2, 1908..... 459, 467, 475, 

: 503, 553, 631, 651, 669, 741, 


i 
.A 


GAYLORD 


DATE DUE 


PRINTED INU.S.A 


CU 


81 98.3 0 6,8 0 9.6 


- - ' 
, 
, 
= Fs 
7 y =e - . ZA 
> -_ i] 
Pa ti A i Svan De le eee » pall siey m ae 
: : Eee ae . 
oe ee iy *3 . Pd i EO AEN ition 
SPEER HAS FRSTER VasonInIos seamen iene Anenrrr pee honest aig oo —— 
wets : : <- wegen " 
‘= “ : = = 
¢ 7 = 
: ; 
Se - 
a ¥. 
‘ 
>, Ss f i 
vf - . 
cabot ROAST 
y 
; a -s _ he, iA 
Re : 
7 — 
: = 
= ; : 
’ 
= - 2 - s . 
ant os ever mg, 
. — een ace ’ - rs 


. - - cere 


SN 


‘ 
SN 
\ 


‘ REN = RSS 
|. 


RRS 
AX 
SS 


