WAY 
RQ 


\ 
~ \ 


SS 


IW 


UNIVERS!? OF ILLINOIS 
AT criCAGO 

g01 & MORGAN 
CHICAGO. It 60607 


, es ay ee i _ 
a je ~. 
me : 1068 

~ ; 
¢ - 4 
= = 
. = 
ed ——=—=s - 
— 


“INTERNATIONAL TELEPHON Ee 


te CAND % | 
TELEG RAPH CORPORATION © 
“ie LIBRARY | 


oe iain iti 3 
a | % 


? 1 
oN 
S| 

» AS 
- wi~ 

4 


|. TRANSACTIONS 


q 
S AMERICAN INSTITUTE 


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


JANUARY TO JUNE 1903, 


a aes eee 
| INTERNATIONAL TELEPHONE 
AND .- 
TELEGRAPH GOR? N pepe 
LIGRAR® fie ORS 


JAN 5 1948 


INTERNATIONAL TELEPHONE 
LEPHONE 
ND TELEGRAPH CORPORATIV 


PUBLISHED BY 
Tue AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, 
95 LIBERTY STREET, 
NEW YORK CITY, U: 5. A. 
1904. 


Copyright 1903 
by the 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


Press of McILroy & Emmet, 22 Thames Street, New York, 


“nv 


OFFICERS AND BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 


/ 1902-1903. 


PRESIDENT. 


CHARLES F. SCOTT. 
Term expires 1903. 


JUNIOR PAST=PRESIDENTS. 
CARL HERING. CHARLES P. STEINMETZ. 


VICE-PRESIDENTS. 


Terms expire 1903. Terms expire 1904. 
Dr. MICHAEL I. PUPIN. BION J. ARNOLD. 
Dr. SAMUEL SHELDON. C. O. MAILLOUX. 
GEORGE F. SEVER. Dr. SCHUYLER S. WHEELER. 


MANAGERS. 


Terms expire 1903. Terms expire 1904. Terms expire 1905. 
JOHN J. CARTY. JOHN W. LIEB, Jr. GANO S. DUNN. 
W.S. BARSTOW. Pror. W. E.GOLDSBOROUGH. E. H. MULLIN. 
RALPH D. MERSHON. Cot. SAMUEL REBER. CHARLES A. TERRY. 
CALVIN W. RICE. R. T. LOZIER. TOWNSEND WOLCOTT. 


TREASURER. SECRETARY. 
Terms expire 1903. 
GEORGE A. HAMILTON. RALPH W. POPE, 
463 West Street, New York. 95 Liberty Street, New York. 


PAST-PRESIDENTS. 


Dr. NORVIN GREEN, 1884-5-6. FRANK J. SPRAGUE, 1892-3. 
FRANKLIN L. POPE, 1886-7. Dr. EDWIN J. HOUSTON, 1893-4-5. 
T. COMMERFORD MARTIN, 1887-8. Dr. LOUIS DUNCAN, 1895-6-7. 
EDWARD WESTON, 1888-9. ? Dr. FRANCIS B. CROCKER, 1897-8. 
Pror. ELIHU THOMSON, 1889-90. Dr. A. E. KENNELLY, 1898-1900. 
Pror. W. A. ANTHONY, 1890-91. CARL HERING, 1900-01. 

' ALEX. GRAHAM BELL, 1891-2. CHARLES P. STEINMETZ, 1901-2. 


COMMITTEES AND LOCAL SECRETARIES. 


STANDING COMMITTEES. 


Committee on Papers. Library Committee. 
Dr. S. SHELDON, ChairmanWM. D. WEAVER, Ch'm. 
BION J. ARNOLD. GANO S. DUNN. 

T. C. MARTIN. W. J. JENKS. 
CHAS. P.: STEINMETZ. CHARLES E. KNOX. 
HAiGasrori. LEONARD WALDO. 


Executive Committee. 
CHARLES F. SCOTT, Ch’m. 
JOHN J. CARTY. 

GANO S. DUNN 
GEO. A. HAMILTON. 
CALVIN W. RICE. 
RALPH W. POPE. 


Editing Committee. 
GANO S. DUNN, Chairman. 
EDWARD CALDWELL. 
HENRY A. LARDNER. 


Board of Examiners. 
WM. MAVER, Jr., Ch’m'n. 
F. W. ROLLER. 

HENRY A. LARDNER. 
L. B. STILLWELL. 
TOWNSEND WOLCOTT. 


Committee on Finance. 
JOHN J. CARTY, Chairman. 
W. S. BARSTOW. 
CALVIN W. RICE. 


SPECIAL COMMITTEES. 


Reception. 
T. C. MARTIN, Chairman. 
WILLIAM J. HAMMER. 
E. H. MULLIN. 
B. GHERARDI, Jr. 
W. S. BARSTOW. 
W. HAND BROWNE. 
ARTHUR WILLIAMS. 
F. C. BATES. 
CALVERT TOWNLEY. 


National Electric Code. 
A. E. KENNELLY, Ch'm. 
L. A. FERGUSON. 

P. G. GOSSLER. 

F. A. C. PERRINE. 

C. P. STEINMETZ. 
ARTHUR WILLIAMS. 
Cc. J. H. WOODBURY. 


Local Organizations. 
CALVIN W. RICE, Ch’m'n. 
GANO S. DUNN. 

P. G. GOSSLER. 
W. E. GOLDSBOROUGH. 
SAMUEL SHELDON. 


Membership Committee. 
W. S. BARSTOW, Chairm'n. 
J, J. CARTY. 
W. E. GOLDSBOROUGH. 
SAMUEL REBER. 
W. D. WEAVER. 


Theses. 
GEO. F. SEVER, Ch'm. 
W. S. BARSTOW. 
F. W. ROLLER. 
Collection of Data on Trans- 
mission, 
R, D. MERSHON, Chairm'n. 
F. O. BLACKWELL. 
C. C. CHESNEY. 
P. M. LINCOLN. 
R. S. MASSON. 


Standardization. 
Pror. H. J. RYAN, Ch’m. 
H. W. BUCK. 

JOHN F. KELLY. 

R. D. MERSHON. 

J. S, PECK: 

Pror. E. B, ROSA. 
CHAS. P. STEINMETZ. 


Building. 
CALVIN W. RICE, Ch'm. 
WM. D. WEAVER. 

Cc. O. MAILLOUX. 
Dr. S. S. WHEELER. 


LOCAL HONORARY SECRETARIES. 


RICHARD H, PIERCE, H, F. PARSHALL,. 
1409 Manhattan Building, Chicago. Salisbury House, London Wall, E. C., Lon- 
\ don, Eng. 
Pror. ROBERT B. OWENS, 


McGill University, Montreal, P, Q. 
CLARE F.BEAMES, 


JAMES S. FITZMAURICE, 
210 George St., Sydney, N. S. W. 


GEORGE P. LOW, 


City of Mexico. 
320 California St., San Francisco, Cal. 


W. G. T. GOODMAN, 
Dunedin, New Zealand. 


EDWARD P. BURCH, 


JOHN S, PECK, 


1210 Guaranty Building, 
Minneapolis, Minn. 


P. O. Box 911, Pittsburg, Pa. 


CONTENTS. 


FRONTISPIECE.—Portrait of Charles F. Scott, President of the InstTITUTE. 


TELEPHONY. 
REGULAR MEETING, NEw York, JANuARY 23, 1903. 
The Telephone Switchboard.—Introduction by President Scott..... 1 
The Evolution of the Telephone Switchboard.—By Thomas D. Lock- 
UWRODEIS a] NB din Sierdas kerncble eng Renee Settle Ai ae RP oil ak YC 3 
An Automatic Telephone Operator.—By William J. Hammer....... 31 


Discussion at New York, on The Telephone Switchboard, by 
Thomas D. Lockwood, Samuel Sheldon, J. J. Carty, F. A. Picker- 
nell, B. Gherardi, Jr., E. F. Sherwood, G. C. Allen, F. E. Kins- 


MEETING aT Cutcaco, May 19, 1903. 


Some Features of Telephone Traffic and Their Effect on Service—By 
i Cem \circl teem rat aires bosentan cians Aitey a? Ae Ae ae 73 


-Concerning the Telephone Engineer.—By S. G. McMeen........... 81 
MEETING at UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS, FEBRUARY 7, 1903. 
Dicetiscronmon a LelephOnive tec .myaas, tone aeebAcyele scr oe cus aie 84 

MEETING AT PittsBuRG, FEBRUARY 5, 1903. 


Discussion on Telephony, by S. P. Grace, Charles Bradley,.. 84 
Communication after adjournment, by Sidney H. Browne.... 90 


MhevArcophone:— Bye Raila PMY CET 2.9... 0\ls fis Melee et ae oie 93 


ANNUAL DINNER OF THE INSTITUTE. 
At New York, FEBRuaRY 9, 1903. 


iSpecen Dy Pressdent Charles I Sc0tt, .. 1 oe ielpine sees es tapes 97 
Reet Vea GOT HELICON on atas ile idiwicie ms «ajerieise vie ss Pdi < deena s 105 
Bere ICME WGI Se VIELE T 0 oroiah = usa on 0 wi o wescpenthv @, shee ve Biss 2 oe ee ht 110 
Bae eU le CIS OWE ce wieivce. «+ oy shepeiciprwien= Hele pine whe fegie ee wse ee 114 
Speech by J. S. Buillings..... Foes eri etterntcta ors wan ln Col ialleh e/a olecsh werden fate co sh * 118 
Speech by i acaalane He. IDEA GR OPES. 5 ee eae eS a De Oe 120 


Speech by James C. Bayles. ... 2-26 cree eect cnet rere neeewnees 124 
‘ RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. 
RecuLtaR MEETING, New York, FEBRUARY 27, 1903. 


Introduction:—By pM ES a ae a 129 
An Electric Car Lighting System.—By W. L. Bliss................ 2 Ly3} 
Axle Lighting.—By Elmer A. Sperry............. RR a ae 155 


An Axle-Light System of Train Lighting.—By Arthur J. Farnsworth. 163 
Some of the Problems of Electric Train Lighting.—By George D. 
BHepAardsonls J hii gteiiee «yo 2 ees Lhe Peete ore ececaes emia anh ve 173 
Discussion at New York, on Railway Train Lighting, by Chas. 
F. Scott, H. S. Carhart, Lamar Lyndon, W. L. Bliss, Max von 
Recklinghausen, George W. Blodgett, C. W. Hogan, A. J. Farns- 
worth, Mr. Lockwood, Hy. G. Stott, Elmer A. Sperry, W. N. 
Craaiiin, [fayadrecolOe IN KOI bite nie ccc oo) ale rha coat eas cettio ear bry eet a ape 179 
Communication after adjournment, by J. R. Bibbins........ 193 


Vv 


v1 


Meetinc At Boston, Marcu 26, 1903. 
A System of Electric Lighting for Cars.—By James F. McElroy...... 


Meetinc aT MINNEAPOLIS, Marcu 6, 1903. 
Discussion on Railway Train Lighting. (0°. 2.50. s. 6 we is 


MEETING AT PHILADELPHIA, Marcu 9, 1903. 
Discussion on Railway Train Lighting, by Carl Hcring, W. L. 
Bliss, Chas. B. Dudley, Ralph W. Pope, Hugh Lesley, Cornelius 
W. Woodward, Chas. E. Hewitt, W. C. L. Eglin, Chas. j. Reed, 
Philip L. Spalding, .John.B Mlumpp.<..0us- set eee =e 


MeetTINnG at Pitrspurc, Marcu 12, 1903. 


Discussion on Railway Train Lighting, by P. M. Lincoln, J. S. 
Peck, N. W. Storer, A. H. Masters, B. B. Abry, J. M. Campbell. . 


MEETING AT SCHENECTADY, Marcu 17, 1903. - 
Discussion on Railway Train Lighting, by A. H. Armstrong, 
C..P.*Steinmetz; W... LosSlichter 2 25 aq os oe eae 
Communication after adjournment, by R. Neil Williams. . - 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION LINES. 


MEETING aT NEw York, Marcu 27, 1903. 
Introduction.— By, President. Scotts Jy sue. as eee ee ee 


Mechanical Specifications of a Proposed Standard Insulator Pin.—By 
Ralph De Mershom. 6; vévers Gress ss, sjaue, susie r= kis eg area ee 


The Testing of Insulators.—By F. O. Blackwell..........7...... 


Transposition and Relative Location of Power and Telephone Lines.— 
By 2B; Ma Lincolnt cy Dina \aresacer sere sea er tece ae te ee 


Burning of Wooden Pins on High-Tension Transmission Lines.—By 
CnC a CHESTisy 8 rss e sis 5.5 whore ied a agererees taper en lor 


Model Showing Distribution of Electromotive Force and Current along 
a Single-Phase Alternating-Current Transmission Line.—By W.S. 
Bramiklinin ns feces cour ogn.s tues, aiSraks. susLencus ae SiaketoL ee cathe, eae ae 


Discussion at New York, on High-Tension Transmission, by 
Ralph D. Mershon, M. H. Gerry, Jr., Wm. R. C. Corson, C. L. 
Cory, A. L. Huntington, W. N. Smith, P. H. Thomas, Samuel 
Sheldon, P. M. Lincoln, T. W. Shock, F. N. Waterman, C. C. 
Chesney, W. L. Waters, C. E. Skinner, C. O. Mailloux, H. W. 
Buck, Carl L. de Muralt, Philip Torchio, W. S. Franklin...... 

Communication by M. H. Gerry, Jr., entitled A Note on Line 
Insulation for High Voltage. . 98. Saas nose ee 

Communication after adjournment, by W. N. Smith........ 

Communication after adjournment, by J. R. Armstrong. ... 

Communication after adjournment, by F. S. Woodward.... 

Communication after adjournment, by Henry Floy 


MEETING AT MINNEAPOLIS, APRIL 8, 1903. 
Discussion on High-Tension Transmission 


® 


MEETING AT ScHENECTADY, Apri 7, 1903. 
Discussion on High-Tension Transmission, by F. A. C. Perrine 


MEETING AT PuILrapELpnia, ApRIL 6, 1903. 


Discussion on High-Tension Transmission, by Mr. Hodges, 
P. M. Lincoln, Carl Hering, Washington Devereaux, Charles 
Hewitt, James T. Hutchings H. F. Sanville, Thos. Spencer.... 


MEETING at Cnicaco, Aprit 7, 1903. 


Discussion on High-Tension Transmission, by W. G. Carlton, 
Ernest Gonzenbach, H. H. Wait, Mr. Hatch, J’ R. Cravath. ... 


209 


220 


224 


. 226 


229 


223 
239 


301 


307 


Vil ~ 


MEETING aT PitrspurG, APRIL 9, 1903. 


Diseussion on High-Tension Transmission, by C. E. Skinner, 
S. B. Grace, B. Frankenfield, Mr. Bedell, P. M. Lincoln, H. 
Etheridge, P. H. Thomas, J. S. Peck, C. F. Scott 312 


RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES. 


MEETING aT NEw York, Apri. 17, 1903. 
IaiROuluc iON. ve President SCOthe: hay slate conse. dee). 2 baci anne 820 
Radium and Other Radioactive Substances with a Consideration of 
Phosphorescent and Fluorescent Substances. The Properties and 
Applications of Selenium and the Treatment of Disease by the 
Ultra-Violet Light.—By William J. Hammer 3el 


TENDENCIES OF CENTRAL STATION DEVELOPMENT. 
MEETING at NEw York, AprRIL 24, 1903. 


Intoducton.—-Biy Presidentsscattn... 6.6 0 «alder aus ode anne t seeks 408 
Economical and Safe Limits in the Size of Central Stations.—By H. A. 
HAVA CN CIOS Mies Gongs d Stee ARES. 0 dah & Chen te Cnet ee 407 


Safety Devices in Central Stations and Sub-stations.— By Philip Torchio 417 
Multiple versus Independent Operation of Units and Central Stations. 
ype etm (nice rorel avin miei stuart Pa tke vec oo Sea Me -e 425 
Discussion at New York, on Central Station Development, 
bya Chase scott. Hy Ge stott, Herbert A. Wagner, B. A. 
Waldron, Edw. Sniffin, Jno. W. Lieb, Townsend Wolcott, 
W. S. Rugg, A. V. Abbott, Peter Junkersfeld, H. A. Lardner, 
rime nol Oa etite Ke StI os ois tikys Seimioe sv Stem ein saute a anes dmsens 441 


MEETING aT Cuicaco, May 5, 1903. 
Discussion on Central Station Development, by B. J. Arnold, 
W. L. Abbott, Peter Junkersfeld, H. B. Gear, W. G. Carlton, 
Te JR. (GRAIVETNOGS us orice co ciel kee GR eR OS GR CEM Cae aera ene IC 457 
Communication after adjournment, by Carl Schwartz....... 461 
MEETING aT PittspurG, May 11, 1903. 
Discussion on Central Station Development by Francis 
Hodgkinson, H. Etheridge, C. W. Rice, P. M. Lincoln, Chas. 
IE, GRO ie 5 Gk Syke SBC eee A Oe Cea ee 462 
MEETING aT St. Louts, May 16, 1903. 
Discussion on Central Station Development, by E. D. 
Menem ata mia Clzneee ne Step. euorem ce) Hasan bodreiousue wmverntes 467 
MeetTING at PHILADELPHIA, May 11, 1903. 


Discussion on Central Station Development, by W. C. L. 
Eglin, H. A. Foster, Carl Hering, Chas. Hewitt, Ph. Torchio, 
TPeeyuil Sheeley 6 a Se cio Babe Bane Ob GeO Mine teero en eR Cee eC 469 


Meetine at Minneapo.is, May 1, 1903. 
Discussion on Central Station Development.......-........ 476 


ANNUAL BUSINESS MEETING. 
Hetp at New York, May 19, 1903. 


Remarks by President Scott.............+... Lh eee Pig pA hice! , 479 
Report of Board of Directors for the Year Ending April 30, 1903... .. 480 
Resume of Membershtp 2. ooo wk ee ee ee 484 
Resignations during the Year... 0:0. 01 e cece eee eee ees 484 
PUS CUUIIe WEY COL. vie avs se wo eee ee ee eG Ree ohare See 484 
Secretary's Balance Sheet.... 0.0... cece eee ees 485 
ME CUSUTEN SUING DOT LS alate ofl vole pets eka) sca eeus + ty l2bie ogo yeie a eye erat 486 
ete Sie OTE itera ie Leta aS, Since ® ahs Wily Feta hs oh a We Sed pre wire oa 486 


Union Engineering Building. . 0.0... 00. c cece cece eee eee eee 486 


Vill 


ALTERNATING-CURRENT MACHINES. 


Meetinc at New York, May 19, 1903. 
The Experimental Basis for the Theory of the Regulation of Alter- 
nators.—By BA: Behrendiit 2 0:0 ee ecge we oe = sites ee 497 
A Study of the Heyland Machine as Motor and Generator.—By Com- 
fort A TA GAMS ihe ele She set cheers feet eves ep hace elena a tege (ove ree Ne a Reece 519 
The Compounding of Self-Exciting Alternating-Current Generators for 
Variation in Load and Power Factor.—By A. 5. Garfield....... 569 


Discussion at New York, on Alternating-Current Machines, by 
Chas. F. Scott, B. A. Behrend, Comfort A. Adams, Gano 5. Dunn, 


We La Waters. er eh cae cop oto eas eee as 578 
Communication after adjournment, by J. R. Armstrong..... 582 
Communication after adjournment, by Marius Latour...... 583 


MEETING AT PittsBurRG, JUNE 4, 1903. 
Discussion on Alternating-Current Machines, by P. M. Lincoln, 
V. Karapetoff, Mr. Schmit, J: S. Peck, E. M. Olin.........-:: 586 
ALTERNATING-CURRENT THEORY. 


MEETING AT SCHENECTADY, May 18, 1903. 


A Discussion of Some Points in Alternating-Current Theory.—By 
WS Branklins oes ise fate 2 Une ee Re epee wa ep 589 


A paper read at the s72d Meeting of the 
Amercan Institute of Electrical Lngineers, 
New York, Fanuary, 23, 1903. 


THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 


INTRODUCTION BY PRESIDENT SCOTT. 


Imagination is outdone by invention. The inventor and the 
engineer accomplish more than the weird story-teller or the far- 
seeing prophet can portray. For centuries conditions have been 
imagined or a future pictured in which men were endowed with 
superhuman attributes. Ancient mythology made the swift- 
‘winged Mercury the messenger of the gods. Fairies have been 
given magical powers and charms, and there have been legends 
of seven-league boots; but all the flights of imagination, at least 
until electricity came to its aid, are transcended by the evolution 
of the telephone during the past quarter century. What would 
have been thought of a young man fifty years ago had he pre- 
dicted that the time would come when he at his office desk or at 
his home, could in a moment’s time be in conversation with any 
one of a thousand or of ten thousand or of a hundred thousand 
or of three-quarters of a million people in his own city or scat- 
tered anywhere within a thousand miles in city, town, hamlet or 
country. The thing has become so common that it has ceased to 
be a wonder oramarvel. Butit underlies modern existence. It 
is a part of our business method, our commercial system, our 
social life. It has modified and modernized our methods, it has 
enormously accelerated the rate at which men can do work. The 
communication between the home and the store, the home and 
the office, the communication from office to office, the communi- 
cations between the departments of a large organization and 
between office and store and factory—in fact, almost every 
species of communication, which formerly required hours or days 
of time expended for personal travel and for interview, or for 
letter-writing—all these things have been revolutionized by the 
evolution of the telephone. High-speed tools are modernizing 
the machine-shop—increasing output and reducing cost; the 

1 


2 THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. [Jan. 23 | 


telephone is the high-speed tool of the commercial world—it 
facilitates organization and cooperation, it increases output by 
doubling the work a man can do. It is one of the essential 
conditions of the increasing and enlarging activity of the present 
years. . 

The telephone is not merely an invention. The elements are 
the work of the inventor, but the great system of conductors and 
connections are more properly the work of the engineer—of him 
who applies the scientific discoveries of the inventor and embodies 
them into useful apparatus in an operative system. We may 
discard the marvel by which the voice through the infinitesimal 
current is reproduced at a far distant place and consider simply 
the mechanical apparatus by which the simple transmitters, 
receivers and conductors are combined into one great inter- 
changeable flexible system. What are the means by which the 
wires from my telephone may in a moment be connected to the 
wires of any one of a hundred thousand telephones at the same 
moment that a thousand others are being connected in the same 
great system? Here it is that the work of the mechanical 
designer and the engineer have supplemented that of the inventor. 
Here it is that we see how the minutest details must be specialized 
and elaborated to bring the work of the inventor to the service 
of the people. True, there is the magic of electricity, but there 
‘ has been also most elaborated scientific investigation coupled 
with the most exacting mechanical design in order to produce 
great results. ' 

The telephone switchboard has not sprung into existence fully 
equipped for its requirements. It has been an evolution. The 
requirements themselves have been an evolution; an evolution 
in a field quite apart from that in which dynamos and motors and 
electric lighting and power transmission have held sway. The 
telephone evolution may have attracted less attention; it has 
been less heralded, and the details and methods are aye gener- 
ally known. The apparatus and the methods used in the 
modern telephone system have not come as the result of inspira- 
tion or luck, but they have followed along the lines of scientific © 
evolution. The advance has been step by step, but the steps 
have followed rapidly, and in a score of years a system has been 
evolved, almost perfect in its operation, of colossal extent and 
marvelous in detail. It has brought about in these few years 
changes in our social and commercial methods greater than have 
occurred throughout centuries in the past. 


— - 


A paper read at the sr72nd Meeting of the 
<imerican Institute of Electrical Engineers 
New York, January 23, 1903. 


THE EVOLUTION OF THE TELEPHONE SWITCH- 
BOARD. 


BY THOMAS D. LOCKWOOD. 


A historic account of the development of 
the telephone exchange, and an analysis of 
the mechanical and electrical features of tele- 
eR aee switchboard apparatus from 1877 to 

ate. ; 


Two poets, as far apart chronologically as Lucretius and W. S. 
Gilbert, have sung the praises of the magnet; and the muse of 
Cowper has not disdained to celebrate such homespun and 
ordinary household gods as the sofa and the timepiece, and 
though the telephone switchboard is not a prominently mani- 
fested effect of a great force of nature, and not even a household 
god, it is in such close alliance with more than one of nature’s 
forces, and stands in such faithful attendance to some of our 
home divinities, that it well merits more attention from the 
chronicler than it has thus far received. . 

The highly organized and highly specialized collocation of 
apparatus that we now term the telephone switchboard, and 
which is at present employed in the large central stations of our 
great city exchanges, such as the Cortlandt street central station 
in New York, and the main central station in Boston, as a means 
of carrying out the varied and complex functions required at the 
central station end of a great number of telephone circuits, has 
doubtless been seen by, and is familiar to many of you; while 
probably many more have a speaking acquaintance with it, and 
have considered it with more or less attention. 

Its present condition of relative perfection and high efficiency 
has, however, been attained only after persistent effort, and after 
many previous attempts, each in its result showing some progress, 
but each. indicating or developing faults and errors to be over- 
come by its successor. . 

At the outset of the telephone exchange business every tele- 
phone man had to learn his trade. Even the telephone itself 
' 3 


4 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF [Jan. 23 


was but two years old, and except Professor Bell and his immediate 
associates no one knew anything worth mentioning about that 
instrument or its capabilities. None certainly could foresee 
what direction the lines of improvement would take; and none 
could foreshadow the extent of growth which might be expected 
for such systems. 

But notwithstanding the general ignorance, the telephone 
exchange came into existence; and with it necessarily came 
something for the convenient connection and disconnection of 
lines. It would be profitless to devote much time to the earliest 
switchboards of all. It is enough to say that during what I may 
call the dark ages of exchange telephony, the switching appliances 
were of three different types; and this largely because in the 
beginning there were three different classes of incipient telephone 
engineers. The electrical expert coming into the telephone 
exchange from the ordinary or regular telegraphic systems, 
naturally pinned his faith to the standard pin switchboard usually 
employed by the telegraph companies. Those coming from 
special systems such as the stock quotation printing, burglar 
alarm and district messenger companies as a rule exhibited a 
preference for a switchboard whereon the lines had brass terminal 
plates with plug holes in them, the same to be united by switch- 
cordsearmed at both ends with plugs to be inserted in these holes. 
The telephone men with no previous telegraphic experience of 
any kind, chiefly those who had grown up round Professor Bell, and 
under the influence of his immediate associates, were inclined to 
eclecticism as regards the rival claims to merit, of pin and cord 
switchboards; but believed in dividing the work of interconnect- 
ing and its sub-operations between two or more operators, of 
whom one set received calls and n.ade the required connections 
on the switchboard proper; while the others acting in some sort 
as dry nurses to the subscribers, supervised the communication, 
sent outgoing calls and encouraged the subscribers to talk. 

As a means of receiving calls, some of the pioneer switchboards 
had a row of clectric bells mounted along the top of the board, 
one for each line, and in such cases there was a normally con- 
nected battery, supplying current to.a group of lines, the bells 
being operated by break keys at the substation. Still others had 
closed circuit annunciators, one for each line, these also being 
operated by breaking the circuit. Soon, however, the battery 
was discarded, being superseded by magneto generators at the 
substations, and then of course open circuit annunciators were 


; 1903.) THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 5 


substituted at the central stations. It is of interest to note that 
the battery, discarded twenty years ago as a cumbersome 
adjunct, is now one of the most cherished features of central 
station practice; and all through the history of telephone practice, 
thus it has proved, that appliances and methods discarded as 
being inferior at certain stages, have been revived under the 
stimulus of more favorable conditions and advanced knowledge, 
and have turned out to be useful in the highest degree. 

Before 1880, it had become decidedly manifest that some kind 
of telephone exchange service must be provided during the night. 
Few exchanges could afford to keep regular operators constantly 
at work later than ten o’clock. Consequently, a compromise 
measure was resorted to, and a night operator was stationed in 
the central office with permission to sleep; and a night alarm 
consisting of a loud sounding vibrating bell was provided, 
connected in a local circuit extending in one direction to a bar 
constituting a stop on which all annunciator drops might fall, 

- and in the other direction to all of the several drops; so that the 
operation of any annunciator would ring the bell and awaken the 
operator. This contrivance is still employed in many small 
exchanges, and enables exchanges to remain operative at night, 
while as yet the number of subscribers is so small that a night 
attendant could not be otherwise afforded. Before this date it 
was also discovered that while the Western Union pin switch- 
board unmodified might be a satisfactory switchboard for tele- 
graph offices, it was decidedly unsatisfactory for a telephone 
exchange. It was slow; it was not easily manipulated; it. did 
not easily lend itself to codperation with the other exchange 
apparatus; and it occupied considerable space. In brief, it had 
been devised for the needs of a telegraph office where a switch- 
board is but an incidental device arranged mainly to facilitate the 
connection of any particular line with any particular instrument 
or battery; and only on rare occasions to connect one line with 
another. In telepuonic work, however, the function of the 
exchange is the interconnection of one line with another at all 
times and nothing else. To paraphrase the well-known couplet 
of Byron, the switchboard is in the telegraph office a thing apart; 
it is of the telephone exchange the whole cxistence. 

Summarizing these considerations, it may be truly said that the 
main difference bétween the telephone exchange switchboard and 
that of the telegraph office, or any preceding system, was that 
whereas the manipulation of the telegraphic switchboard 


6 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF [Jan. 23 


involves the employment of experts, the telephonic switchboard 
is so designed that it may readily be operated with great celerity 
by persons who are not only inexpert, but who actually are 
entirely ignorant of the nature of the operations which they 
continually perform. 

In 1880 the most representative exchanges had switchboards 

employing long brass or painted connection strips extending 
from end to-end of the board. In New York as elsewhere, 
switchboards possessing this feature were employed, but there the 
preferred switchboard was operated by cordless plugs; the cross 
strips having a number of plug-holes, while a series of vertical 
conductors representing the subscribers’ lines crossed these 
horizontal strips at a right angle in the rear of the board, these 
being spring plates overlapping the holes. Thus, when the plug . 
was inserted in the hole of the cross-strip, it made a good rubbing 
connection with the spring line strip behind. The cross strips 
were arranged in pairs and were connected by looping wires to 
an adjacent table fitted with an operator’s telephone and a call 
generator where connections were supervised, and any two lines 
concerned in a connection were attached by separate plugs to the 
two strips of a pair respectively. 

In other cities the long brass strips were employed without any 
vertical line strips, each line being represented by a single spring- 
jack only. When such was the case the connection could not be 
effected by simple plug connectors; but necessitated the employ- 
ment of cords fitted at one end with flat wedges to enter the 
spring-jacks, and at the other with plugs to enter the holes in the 
crossing strips. In this case, also, the crossing strips were 
looped to tables where the connections were supervised by 
operators. . 

In these systems an incoming call announced itself by the fall 
of an annunciator. One of a number of switchmen (so-called) 
provided with a magneto telephone connected with a loop-plug 
adapted to fit the spring-jack of the calling line, would plug in 
and receive the order. The same switchman then united the 
calling line and the line wanted, to the two cross-strips of some 
particular pair; and thus connected them not only with one 
another, but also to the table of some particular operator. The 
operator notified of the connection thus made, would first send a 
call current from a generator to the subscriber wanted, and 
receive his answer orally, and would then unite the two lines 
through a disconnecting drop. It was usually a matter of diffi- 


1903.] THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 7 


culty to get the two subscribers to talk with one another, and 
the operator had, as it were, to coax them along. 

An early appearing difficulty with this class of switchboard 
was, that the connecting strips running as they did from end to 
end of the switchboard took up an amount of space entirely 
disproportionate to their usefulness. Accordingly, they were 
later severed at one or more places, so that a number of connecting 
strips on the same horizontal plane might be severally connected 
to the same or different operators’ tables. 

Although the pin switchboard unmodified had not proved itself 
to be desirable, a new form of it was evolved during the year 
1880, which considerably prolonged its lease of life. It was in 
desk form with a vertical part behind the desk, and in it the lines 
were represented by corrugated strips of brass mounted on edge, 
and crossed without touching, by a number of other corrugated 
brass strips also mounted on edge; the connections of any two 
line strips with any one or two cross strips being made by sheet 

‘brass connection plugs adapted for insertion at the intersections. 

This switchboard was arranged in a number of groups, each to 
be presided over by a single operator, performing all of the sev- 
eral functions in the connection of lines; and several cross strips 
were assigned to her for local connections, while a certain num- 
ber of others were extended to each of the other sections. An 
attempt about this tirne was made to classify lines by the trades, 
professions or vocations of the subscribers, but this failed by 
reason of the fact that it turned out that very few subscribers 
cared to communicate with others in the same business. 

One horizontal strip of each group was connected with an earth 
branch ‘including the telephones of the operator of such group, 
and another such strip was in like manner connected with the 
magneto generator of the same operator. Thus, by inserting a 
connection plug at the intersection of any line plate with the 
operator’s telephone or generator, cross strip, and performing any 
other requisite operation, the operator might converse with the 
subscriber, or send a call. 

This switchboard was of low initial cost, and was, therefore, 
suited to the times, for it had already been discerned that the 
income of a telephone exchange was not by any means all profit.. 
It was, however, mechanically and clectrically bad. It occupied 

considerable space and the electrical connections made by its 
plugs were imperfect. There is, indeed, a iegend than an electri- 
ca\ engineer was visiting a certain central station, where this 


8 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF [Jan. 23 


switchboard was exhibited with pride, and asked whether the 
plugs made good connections. \,..en assured that they did, it is 
said that be blew at the switchboard with the result that some 
forty or fifty of the plugs were blown out of place. 

Meanwhile it had dawned upon a number of the telephone men 
of the day that the separate call generator at each switchboard 
adapted for manipulation by the operator, might be profitably 
superseded by a common generator supplying the entire central 
station, and having branches to each operator’s position, and 
keys whereby the current might be transmitted over any line at 
will. This sometimes, and especially where power could not 
conveniently be applied, took the form of a calling battery 
supplemented by an automatic electro-magnetic pole-changer; 
but was preferably an alternating current magneto-electric gen- 
erator, driven by any suitable power. 

It will be seen that up to this time, indeed up to about 1884, 
there was no uniformity in switchboard apparatus; and there 
was no standard switchboard. 

It had been ascertained by experience that the function of the 
central station was not merely to connect and disconnect tele- 
phone lines. It was far more complex. Calls were to be re- 
ceived, and signal receiving appliances therefore were to be pro- 
vided. Calls were to be answered and orders received, and for 
this purpose means were requisite to connect the operators’ 
telephones with a call-originating line. Before connection could 
be established between a calling and a wanted line, it was essen- 
tial to ascertain whether such wanted line might not be already 
engaged, and for this ready means of communication between 
the operators was necessary. If occupied, the fact had to be 
reported to the call originator. If not, a call signal had to be 
sent to the station wanted; and thus means for sending signals 
was also essential; and finally some device had to be rearranged 
for the indication and reception of ring-off signals. 

Most of these appliances had of course been associated in a 
kind of haphazard fashion with switchboards from the beginning; 
but not until about this time, was any attempt made to incorpor- 
ate them in the switch apparatus as a definite part thereof. 

Upon the commercial introduction of the multiple switchboard, 
which, though invented as early as 1879, did not obtain general 
acceptance until about 1884 or 1885, it seemed that the time 
for organizing these several devices into a complete and self- 
contained machine had arrived. 


1903.] THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 9 


The thought underlying this type of apparatus is that the 
entire switchboard shall be divided into sections ot suitable 
magnitude, and that each telephone line entering the station 
shall pass to every section and be furnished at each with a switch 
socket, so that at each section any two of the entire number of 
lines may be united for through communication. As practically 
worked out, the call receiving indicators of the whole number of 
lines were divided between the sections; and thus it came about 
that the call of a subscriber is always answered at some one 
section, and that switch connections in response to such call and 
between the calling and the wanted line are always made at the 
section where the call has come in and been answered. 

There is no truth, however, better established than this: that 
each radical advance in electrical apparatus involves and paves 
the way for a number of subsidiary devices. And so it was here. 
The very fact that all of the incoming substation lines were 
represented by switch-sockets, and were accessible at each of a 
-plurality of switchboards or switchboard sections, rendered 
further invention imperative. It became absolutely necessary 
to provide some means whereby the operator at any one of the 
sections could quickly find out for herself whether a line called 
for, was or was not “ busy.’’ Accordingly, such means were 
devised. Without a “busy test” the multiple switchboard 
would be little better than a theory. Provided with a busy test 
system it becomes the practical basis of continued subsequent 
improvement. 

Nearly all practical ‘‘ busy test ’’ arrangements provide that 
the insertion of a switch-plug into any one of the switch-sockets 
of any line at any switchboard shall bring about some electrical 
change which can be tested for, and detected at all of the other 
switch-sockets of the same line. If found to be present, the 
operator infers that such line is busy, but if when tested for, such 
change be not manifested, the line is free and may be switched. . 

Scores of ‘‘ busy test ’’ arrangements have been proposed; but 
few are really practical. In that which was associated with the 
earlier multiple switchboards, the socket frames cf every line 
were represented on the face of the board by a metal ring sur- 
rounding the plug-hole; and all the metal rings of all of the 
sockets of each line were permanently united to one another by a 
wire running along at the back. The shank of the switch-plug 
was also wholly of metal, and when inserted in the socket of any 
jine at any board it acted to establish a conductive connection 


” 


10 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF [Jan. 23 


between the telephone line proper, and the conductor uniting the 
metal rings, thus grounding the latter, since the telephone line 
was grounded at the sub-station. A small battery was included 
in circuit with the operator’s telephone at each section-operator’s 
position, and keys were provided whereby the telephone might be 
looped into any one of the switch-cords, a number of which were 
placed at each position. Thus,to test at any section for the ground, 
cross, or other abnormal condition, which would indicate that a 
wanted line was engaged at some other section, it was mercly 
necessary to touch the tip of the switch-plug to the metal ring 
(hence termed the ‘‘ test ring’’) of the socket, which at such 
section represented the line called for. - Should the wanted line be 
busy, a portion of the current of the small battery would pass by 
way of the test ring and the tip of the plug through the oper- 
ator’s receiver and produce a clicking sound therein; but if the 


Fires. 


line when thus tried were disengaged, no such sound would be 
heard. In the multiple switchboard of that period, the jacks or 
sockets of the lines at each section were arranged in panels over 
the front of the board; the call devices were annunciators 
arranged in banks below these panels; the switch-cords with 
plugs at each end hung from a kind of gallows frame above; and 
on a keyboard in front of the operator were keys associated with 
the several switch-cords respectively, for directing the call current 
over any line switched to any particular cord, and for similarly 
connecting the operator’s te! -phones in the circuit of any cord to 
answer calls, and to talk with either subscriber. The discon- 
necting annunciators, one for each switch-cord, were mounted on 
a single row at each section. The circuits were of the single wire 
type with earth return; the switch-sockets of the several lines— 
_ one for each line at each section—each had a spring and point 


1903.] THE TELEPHONE, SWITCHBOARD. oe Ppl 


contact, and these contacts as indicated in Fig. 1, were all in 
series in the line. i 

As arranged for the switchboard of that period, the operators’ 
telephones common to all cords of the section, were connected in 
an earth branch of the cord conductor; and the disconnecting 
annunciators, one for each switch-cord, were each connected 
directly in the circuit of its own cord. Fig. 2 indicates this ar- 
rangement. 

Switchboards of this general type were installed for several 
years—the first one employed in New York being placed in a 
central office in John Street—and in general were clear improve- 
ments over everything preceding them; and among other 
features of advantage they greatly increased celerity in operation. 

The disclosure, under operative conditions, of faults, weak- 
nesses and opportunities for improvement was, however, inevit- 


tebiorre. 


able, where the engineers of both manufacturer and user were 
constantly on the watch. It was very soon observed that the 
manipulation of switch-cords hanging from a point above, was a 
strain upon the operators, besides being in other respects incon- 
venient; and soon their position was changed, and the plugs 
were made to rest with the calling and listening keys on the 
keyboard, the cords hanging below with a weight for each, to 
keep it taut, and for its automatic retraction, Then it was noted 
that the speed of operation was restricted because on the receipt 
of a call signal, the jack of the'line, the call of which was to be 
answered, had to be found in the panel where it and adjacent 
numbers were placed; and to the avoidance of this defect, the 
next improvement was directed. There was provided for each 
line at the section where its calls were answered, an additional 


12 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF [Jan. 23 


switch-socket to be used for the answering plug of a pair, and in 

“responding to calls only. This was termed the “‘ answering 
jack,’ and was placed close to the call signal of its own line. 
Switch connections were greatly facilitated by this expedient 
because whenever a call was received the operator was not 
required to take thovght, but might at once plug into the answer- 
ing jack which was close by. 

After some four or five years’ use of grounded circuit multiple 
switchboards it became evident that the time for the inductively 
neutral metallic circuit had arrived. One multiple board, the 
largest thus far constructed, had been set up and wired for 
grounded circuits; but ‘so clearly was it seen that to proceed 
further in that direction would be a mistake, that this board was 


ieee i 


ie iaeraren Ieee Ni 


a a 


i Sani 
Fic. 3. 

not put into operation until it had been comp'etely re-wired for 
metallic circuits. This advance was a radical one, and followed 
the introduction of underground wires, almost as a matter of 
course. The series mode of arranging the spring-jack contacts 
was at this time retained, these being in one conductor, while 
the other main conductor was connected by parallel branches to 
the test rings of the circuit at the several sections respectively. 

In this arrangement which is shown in Fig. 3, the call annun- 
ciator was connected on the answering-jack section between the 
two main conductors, the normal circuit through it being opened 
by the separation of the jack contacts when the switch-plug was 
inserted. This step in the onward progress of the switchboard 
carried one or two auxiliary improvements in its train. The 


1903. ] THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 13 


operators’ telephones and clearing out annunciators were no 
longer connected alternatively in series in the cord conductors, 
but after a few tentative arrangements, were bridged between 
the cord strands, controlled, however, as before, by their several 
keys; but when thus placed, it became necessary to wind the 
disconnecting annunciator with many turns, and thereby give it 
a high resistance and impedance; as otherwise the voice currents 
from either of two circuits switched together, tended to be 
shunted through the bridged signal device. 

The switchboard had now become a really good and homo- 
. geneous machine, well adapted to satisfy the conditions and re- 
“quirements of its own day; and here for awhile its development 

seemed to be stayed. Yet it was soon seen that there was abun- 
dant scope for further advance. New switchboards became old, 
and old ones older. Others though still new were employed in 
the soft-coal consuming cities of the middle west. In all of these 
cases, and more particularly in those last-named, the series- 
‘connected jacks developed high-contact resistance which 
materially weakened the loudness and clearness of conversation 
transmitted through the circuits concerned; and as the number 
of lines connected increased with marvellous rapidity, it was 
found that the switch-sockets occupied too much space on the 
face of the board, so that a considerable reduction in size soon 
became imperative, in order that the requisite number of switch- 
sockets might be crowded, without detriment to operative effi- 
ciency, into a given space. 

The subsequent development of the telephone switchboard 
depended upon the outcome of three apparently parallel and 
independent but really codrdinate and gradually convergent lines 
of investigation, which were all about this time under con- 
sideration. ; 

These investigations were directed towards :— 

(a) The further improvement of the switchboard apparatus 
proper, by abolishing the serially-connected jack contacts, which 
as indicated, were a prolific cause of imperfect service; and by 
substituting some form of construction wherein each subscriber’s 
line, when switched to another, would have a clear, continuous 
ani highly conductive path through the switchboard for the 
voice currents; together with such other changes as each pro- 
gressive advance might render necessary. 

(b) To do away, if possible, with the multitudinous transmitter 
batteries of the sub-station and operating room, and to substitute 


14 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF Ua «23 


for them-a common central source of transmitter cnrrent; for if 
this could be done, there would not only be effected a great. 
reduction in the number of cells required, but such as were 
required might be kept at all times under the eye of skilled 
employees. 

(c) To arrange if possible for the gradual displacement of the 
sub-station call generator, and the necessity for its operaticn in 
the transmission of incoming call signals; to provide that call 
and disconnect signals should be automatically transmitted by 
the simple acts of taking the receiver from the hook switch, and 
restoring it thereto; and to devise suitable appliances at the 
central station for the appropriate display of these signals. 

These several directions of prospective advance seem super- 
ficially to have little necessary community with each other, but 
_ the closer they are viewed ,the more apparent willit appear that the 
realization of all would inevitably involve the complete re-organi- 
zation of the switchboard; and that the efforts thus far devoted 
to the subject must be regarded henceforth as having resulted 
mainly in the determination of the principles which should be 
followed; and of what features were and were not desirable in 
an ideal switchboard. This was a well advanced position; and 
constituted a definitive foundation on which the completely | 
organized super-structure of an efficient modern switchboard 
might be successfully reared. 

Considering first the direct improvement of the switchboard as 
a means for the rapid interconnection and satisfactory through 
operation of lines, it is sufficient to say with respect to the 
diminution in the size of the parts, that experience and practice - 
had by this time enabled manufacturers to make Spring-jack and 
other mechanism very small. The main problem was clearly the 
elimination of the serial spring-jack contacts. But how? Natu- 
rally, by arranging the switch-socket contact members at eack 
section in parallel branches from both of the main conductors of 
their respective lines. But here was a difficulty: the serial spring- 
jack contacts were not by any means purposeless. The mani- 
festation of incoming calls involved a subscriber's circuit, closed 
at the central office end, and an annunciator or similar call device 
connected in it; and the main purpose of the separable contacts 
in each jack was to ensure that while the spring member of such 
contacts which was on the lineward side should engage the 
inserted plug, the seme should also be lifted by the plug tip from 
the fixed or insulated pin contact, thus opening the circuit at that 


1903.] THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 15 


particular socket, and cutting off all that portion ot tue circuit 
inwardly; that is to say, the original terminal including all follow- 
ing switch-sockets, together with the annunciator. Herein lay 
the difficulty; for if the insertion of the plug merely made contact 
with two branch springs, and did not sever the main conductors, 
how should the original terminal and annunciator be cut off? 

It is of interest to note that the connection of multiple board 
jacks in parallel was not at this time a new idea. Indeed, the 
multiple board as first devised was qn this plan; but as then sug- 
gested, the difficulty outlined did not occur, since the board in 
question was intended for use in association with circuits over 
which incoming calls were not sent (there being a special call cir- 
cuit), which circuits therefore did not have a central station 
annunciator, and might be, and were left normally open. 

Every telephone engineer had known almost from the inception 
of the art, that electromagnets indiscriminately placed in series 
in a telephone circuit strongly opposed the passage of the rapidly 
-changing voice currents, making reproduction of speech weak and . 
indistinct; and by this time Oliver Heaviside had coined the 
word ‘“‘ impedance.”’ 

But if we take electromagnets out of the main conductors, 
they will of course no longer oppose the passage of the voice 
currents in their legitimate circuit, and if we then connect the 
magnets in bridge between the mains, we no longer need to dis- 
connect them when we unite one line with another, because they 
still retain the impedance, which can be increased to any desir- 
able extent, and because we can then make that impedance 
useful to prevent wastage of the voice currents through the 
bridges thus constituted. The disconnecting annunciator had, 
in fact, as we have already seen, been so connected; and on party 
lines there were many high impedance “‘ bridging bells,’’ so- 
called, also in parallel between the mains; which were employed 
without bringing about any perceptible depreciation of the trans- 
mitted speech. So then the first solution came to several minds 
at once. Why disconnect the calling annunciator at all? Why 
not disregard it, and leave it connected with the line while the 
circuit is switched, depending upon its impedance to prevent the 
short-circuiting of the currents through the annunciator branches 
thus left intact. This was done, but it became necessary as in 
the prior case of the disconnecting annunciator, to wind the 
magnets with many turns, and generally to make them of high 
impedance. There was, however, nothing objectionable in so 


16 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF [Jan. 23 


constructing them, because the higher the impedance, the less 
chance there was for the voice currents to be shunted that way. 

Fig. 4 shows in diagram the talking circuit as thus formed 
between two sub-stations; the circuits of such sub-stations being 
switched together under these conditions. In this figure L and 
Uv? represent circuits extending from sub-stations s and s? 
respectively, to a central station c, and there provided with 
permanently connected call annunciators A and a?. They are 
supposed to be united for conversation by the switch-cord con- 
ductors c, between which the disconnecting annunciator d is 
bridged. So connected, the line annunciators are obviously 
bridged also, and thus the through circuit has at the central 
station three bridges, each containing an electromagnet. Here, 
then, arises another difficulty. The wanted station must be 
called by the central station operator after the switch-plug is 
inserted in the proper line jack; and since the annunciator of the 
wanted line is not cut off, it will respond unless means are taken 
to prevent. Moreover, since it may be and probably is at another 


Fic. 4. 


section of the board, its operation will doubtless be regarded as a 
call by the operator there, who of course will try to answer the 
supposed call. Again, when the conversation is over, and the 
sub-stations s and s? ring off, the line annunciators a and a? 
are again likely to respond, one of them in any event being prob- 
ably at another section of the board, so that this also will be 
taken as an incoming call. A number of propositions looking to 
the avoidance of such false signals were proposed, but the most 
promising plan for the latter contingency was so to arrange the 
switch-plugs and sockets, that the insertion of the plug might 
close a local circuit containing an electromagnet, which magnet 
would when excited by the closure of its circuit, act to hold the 
armature of the annunciator in its normal position so that the 
annunciator could not operate and display its signal, even though 
a current should pass through its actuating magnet. This 
device, which is indicated by Fig. 5, worked in fact so satisfac- 
torily that it not only prevented the undesired operation of the 


1903.] ‘THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 17 


annunciator, but also acted to re-set the same, when the signal 
had been given, pursuant to an original call; so that a drop fallen 
to display such signal did not need to be manually replaced, but 
was automatically restored as soon as a plug was inserted to 
answer the call. 

In Figure 5, a represents the actuating and d the retaining 
magnet; and h’ are switch-sockets having line contact springs 
7 and’, and contact rings kk’ one behind the other, arranged 
to be conductively united on the insertion of the plug and 
through the metal shank thereof. The tip J of the plug makes 


akan Ks 
A212 
Tay 
a A 
/ 
A: A| |k 
Ayn bo 

a- 

° “V7 A 
Uceltl 2 
fe 
x3 

C4 


aa 


€ 


Fic. 5. 

contact with the shorter line spring 2’, the ring contact /? of the 
plug with the longer spring ¢, and the shank or sleeve /° with the 
two rings k k’. The inner rings k of each line are normally 
connected to each other, and to the grounded battery k*; and 
the outer rings to each other, and to one end of the winding of 
the retaining magnet d, the other end of which is connected to 
ground. : 

A pivoted shutter of iron ¢ is normally heid by the armature 
catch ct, and when released effects the display of the signal plate 
g. When the plug is inserted, the current of the battery Fk 


18 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF LJan. 23 


excites the actuating magnet d, and this magnet attracts the 
iron shutter e, preventing the display of the signal, and with- 
drawing the said signal if it has been displayed. 

In sending outgoing calls over the wanted line, a satisfactory 
expedient to prevent the operation of the annunciator of the line 
wanted, was so to connect the actuating and retaining magnets, 
that while incoming call currents passed through the actuating 
magnet only, outgoing call currents were passed through both 
actuating and retaining magnets. 

So many adverse electrical influences were now abroad, by 
reason of the numerous heavy current systems which had been 
installed, that the “‘ busy test,’’ arrangement already described 
was no longer serviceable. Charges and stray currents on the 
line due to such influences tended to produce false busy signals. 
Accordingly, a form of “‘ busy test ’’ circuit never crossed or con- 
ductively associated with the line conductors, but altogether 
local was substituted. The insertion of the plug for the purpose 
of switching one line to another, was made to close one of two 
gaps in the local test circuit which was in part formed of the 

‘several test-rings of each line and the conductor uniting them; 

and also acted to connect a battery thereto, thus raising the 
potential of all the test rings of the line at all sections. The 
other pole of the battery was connected through the operator’s 
telephone to the tips of all of the calling or companion plugs. 
Thus, when the tip of such a second plug was applied at any 
section to the test ring of the wanted line, the occurrence or 
non-occurrence of a click in the instrument, enabled one to 
readily infer the engaged or disengaged condition of the said 
wanted line. As thus modified, a number of switchboards were 
installed, and the type of apparatus became known as the 
“branch terminal” switchboard. The talking currents, had 
through this board a clear conductive path not liable to be 
impaired by the presence of jack contacts or other abnormal 
resistance; and in fact without any contacts other than those 
made at the actual switching points. Thus far, then, a desirable 
advance had been attained, and the branch terminal or parallel 
connection switch-socket arrangement has remained in use until 
the present time. 

The branch terminal switchboard at first brought commercially 
to the front, did not provide for the other two desiderata which 
have been indicated. Yet these were not very far behind. It 
was more important to provide a central source for sub-station 


1903.] THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 19 


transmitter supply common to all or a great number of lines, 
than it was to provide a similar arrangement for calls and other 
signals. But it seemed likely that if either could be practically 
arranged, the other might also be provided for by some modifica- 
tion of or addition to the same means; and in the end, thus it has 
turned out. ee 

After much consideration and trials, both experimental and 
commercial, of many plans, the ‘‘ how”’ of an efficient central 
and common battery system for telephone circuits, and the 
central and sub-station transmitters, together with a system of 
incoming call signals and supervisory signals was as a whole 
devised, and decided upon. In it, the same central office source 
of current may be employed for both signals and transmitters. 
The branch terminal mode of switch-socket connection was 
retained, each socket being composed of a frame-piece with a test . 
ring in front, and two or more internal contact springs. At each 
section are the call devices, and the answering jack for the lines 
which are to be answered there, and a switch-socket for all lines 
entering the office; there being also a sufficiency of switch-cords, 
each with a switch-plug at each end. 

The sub-station circuits were then arranged to be, while at 
rest, conductively closed at the central station through a battery 
and call device, and conductively open at the sub-station; but it 
was necessary to provide some kind of an operative circuit for the 
polarized sub-station bell, as otherwise calls from the central 
station could not be received; and the plan which seemed most 
promising, and which has been generally adopted, is to place a 
condenser between the severed ends of the two line conductors 
and in series with the bell magnet. By this expedient while the 
circuit is open at the sub-station for a steady current, it is prac- 
tically closed for the passage of the alternating ringing currents 
of the central station generator, to which the bell is adapted to 
respond. There is also the ordinary hook-switch which serves 
as a support for the receiving telephone when not being used; 
and as long as the receiver remains in place on the hook, the fore- 
going conditions continue; but as soon as the receiver is lifted 
from the hook, the metallic circuit is closed through the sub- 
station telephones and the current of the central battery being 
thus enabled to flow, causes the operation at the central station 
of the call signal relay. 

A small glow lamp serves as the line or call signal, possessing 
the great merit of being prompt and self-acting both in display 


20 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF [Jan. 23 


and withdrawal; and in practice is placed in a short local circuit 
controlled by the call signal relay, which has its magnet connected 
in the main line, and is responsive to the initial operation of the 
sub-station hook-switch. 

Fig. 6 indicates the arrangement, which as regards the initial 


. Fic. 6. 


call signal was now complete; and also illustrates the devices now 
to be described. 

The constantly connected annunciators of the branch terminal 
board were thus superseded by a relay and a lamp, and the 
appliances formerly employed to maintain the quiescence of such 


1903.] THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 21 


annunciator were now made, instead, to operate a cut-off relay 
by means of which the lamp-operating relay might be cut away 
or disconnected, and the lamp signal thereby withdrawn, as soon 
as the call was answered by inserting the switch-plug. This 
cut-off relay has two resting contacts through which the two 
conductors of the main circuit respectively pass, in such manner 
that on the excitement of the relay and the consequent attraction 
of its armatures, the contacts are parted and the continuation of 
the line, including the call relay and the normal battery con- 
nection is cut off. The cut-off relay itself is in a local switch- 

board circuit controlled by, and leading through contact pieces 
of the switch-plug and socket. The switch-socket for this pur- 
pose has interior contact springs for both main conductors, thus 
leaving its frame-piece or test-ring at liberty for the local circuit; 
and the several test rings of each line are united by a fixed con- 
ductor extending from all of them to one terminal of the cut-off 
relay. The plug also has three insulated contact pieces adapted 
to register with the two line springs and the test ring of the 
socket; the cord conductor extending between each pair of plugs 
comprising two main line strands which extend from plug to 
plug, and a local circuit strand for each plug. A battery has one 
of its poles connected with the plug local circuit conductor and 
the other to the remaining relay terminal, so that when the plug 
is placed in the socket of any line, the cut-off relay circuit is 
closed, and the relay operates to disconnect the line terminal and 
relay. At the same time the potential of all of the united test 
rings of the line thus switched is raised to furnish appropriate 
conditions for the ‘‘ busy test.” 

But this is not all. Supervisory signals are regarded as 
being necessary. These, also, are lamps, and two such are 
provided for each switch-cord, and associated with the two — 
plugs respectively, being placedin the cord section of the local 
or cut-off relay circuit. Thus placed, they are, of course, 
non-operative except when the plug is in its socket; but the plug 
being thus inserted, their function is to afford an indication to 
the operator of the condition of things at the sub-station. They 
can only be displayed when the hook-switch at the sub-station is 
in its lower or normal position; that is to say, the position in 
which it is maintained while the receiver hangs on the hook. 
When in answer to a call the operator inserts the answering plug 
in the socket of a given line, the associated lamp does not light, 
because the sub-station receiver has already been taken from 


22 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF [Jan 23. 


the switch to give the order. But when the companion plug is 
placed in the socket of the wanted line, the lamp signal of that 
plug does light, because the receiver at the wanted sub- 
station is not removed from the hook; it thus follows that when 
this receiver is taken up in response to the call, the light is at 
once withdrawn. Again, when the conversation is over, the 
replacement of either or both sub-station receivers will once more 
illuminate the corresponding lamps to serve as a disconnecting 
signal. Or if either party desire at once a connection with some 
other line, the lamps may be made to flash several times in suc- 
cession, by oscillating the hook switch. It must be apparent 
that such a system of supervisory signals is both ingenious and 
scientific. Its essential and underlying principle is that the 
supervisory signal of each plug is controlled in part by the plug 
and socket switch contacts of the local circuit wherein it is con- 
nected, and in part by the hook switch at the sub-station of the 
line to which the switch-socket belongs; and further, that the 
working of the signals is dependent in the first instance upon 
which of these two switch devices was first operated. Thus, in 
the case of a call being answered by the insertion of the switch- 
plug, the signal is not displayed because the corresponding hook 
switch has previously been operated; but in the case of a sub- 
station to be called, the supervisory signal is displayed because 
the plug and jack switch is the first to be operated, the hook 
switch in this case remaining unchanged until after the call is 
sent. 

Ta enable the hook switch to control the signal, a low resits- 
ance relay is placed in the main circuit conductors of each plug, 
which relay being thus connected in the main line, is responsive 
to the closing and opening thereof as the hook switch is moved in 
one direction or the other. 

The sketch Fig. 7 illustrates this arrangement, and shows that 
the relay in question does not act directly upon the local circuit 
of the lamp to open and close the same. This cannot be allowed © 
because the same local circuit serves also for the operation of the 
cut-off relay and “ busy test.” It acts, however, by controlling a 
shunt round the lamp signal, closing the said shunt and prevent- 
ing the display of the light when the main circuit is closed, and 
current consequently flows through the relay; and opening the 
shunt to permit the display of the lighted lamp when the receiver 
at the sub-station is replaced, causing the hook switch to open the 
main circuit so that current to excite the relay no longer flows. 


1903.] THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 23 

In the figure, L L? are the sub-station circuits extending be- 
tween the sub-stations s s? and the central station c, and adapted 
to be switched together for conversation at the latter. The 
switch-cord ¢ has the battery B bridged between its main con- 
ductors, and has local circuit conductors for each plug, forming 
in association with the fixed conductor which unites the test 
rings, the local circuit; R R are the cut-off relays, R? R? the super- 
visory relays, m m the supervisory lamp signals and h h their 
controlling shunts. 


a 


S 


Fic, 7 


The battery which develops the current for the main line to ‘ 
excite the relay, is, as shown, preferably bridged between the two 
main circuit cord conductors, which respectively unite the tip and 
forward sleeve contacts. of the two plugs, and so connected, 
divides the cord circuit into two well-defined sections looping 
from each plug. The same battery provided with an earth con- 
nection at one pole, may serve also to furnish current in the local 
' circuit to illuminate the lamp-signal, and indeed also for the 
operation of the cut-off relay and busy test appliances; the 


24 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF [Jan. 23 ~ 


several circuits being properly proportioned to the battery power 
and to one another by suitable resistances. 

Another improvement tending to increased promptness of 
service in responding both to “‘ call ‘and “‘ disconnect ”’ signals, 
is the ‘‘ pilot lamp.” This is an auxiliary luminous signal which 
may be advantageously associated with both of the foregoing 
classes of regular signal. It complements the regular signals 
much in the same way that a bell in a hotel or domestic annun- 
ciator system is made common to and complementary to the 
several individual drops. This pilot lamp is thus common to the 
signals of a group of call signals, or to a group of the supervisory 
switch-cord .signals, and it is adapted to light whenever any 
of the regular signals with which it is associated is displayed. It 
may be placed in a conspicuous position on the front of the 
switchboard, so as to be readily seen by the monitor or chief 
operator, and its protracted display is an indication that some 
signal of the group to which it belongs is being neglected or dis- 
regarded; or at any rate, that some signal of such group, thus far 
has not been attended to. It is by reason of this function that 
the term “ pilot lamp” has colloquially been, applied to the 
device; although I do not say that the term is eminently appro- 
priate. The pilot lamp like the others is connected in a local 
circuit and controlled by a relay, which may conveniently be 
placed in the circuit of the main ccnductor through which 
current is supplied to the branch lamp circuits of the group. 
This can readily be arranged in several ways without producing 
such an undue drop of potential in the branch lamp circuits as 
will adversely affect the regular lamp signals. 

When the battery is bridged as has been described, it is 
properly connected for use also as the source of transmitter 
supply; and as has been suggested, may be and is so employed 
in connection, both with the transmitters of the several operators 
and those of the sub-stations. Animportant condition of success 
in the employment of a single battery for a large number of 
transmitters, is that its internal resistance shall be so low rela- 
tively to that of the circuits supplied, that the operation of any 
transmitter will not cause any material variation of potential at 
the battery terminals. When this condition is properly com- 
plied with, there will not be any interference between the cir- 
cuits of the several transmitters; and such compliance is best 
attained by the employment of storage batteries. To further 
reduce the internal resistance of the battery’and the chance of 


1903.] THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD, 25 


interference, a plurality of banks of cells, each bank having a 
sufficient electromotive force for the work—say 24 volts—may 
be connected in parallel with each other. 

But another condition equally essential in the operation of the 
sub-station transmitters of an exchange from a common battery, 
is that by means of the switchboard devices and in their normal 
operation, it shall be possible at any time to disestablish this 
universal state of reciprocal neutrality or non-interference as 
regards any two circuits, and so to segregate or set aside any pair 
or any number of pairs of circuits united for through communi- 
cation, that the component circuits of such pair or pairs may 
freely communicate each with the other, but shall not disturb, . 

or be disturbed by, any other circuits connected with the battery. 
- One plan of operation meeting this condition, which to a cer- 
tain extent has been used, is to introduce a considerable imped- 
ance into the conductors connecting the main circuit strands of 
the switch-cord and thereby the main conductors of the two 


circuits concerned, with the pole or poles of the battery; and to 
establish a short-circuit, preferably containing a condenser, 
between the corresponding conductors of the two component 
circuits, and round the impedance. The steady current of the 
battery finds no further difficulty in flowing through the imped- 
ance devices than that due to simple resistance, and thus readily 
passes over the line in either direction to the sub-station trans- 
mitters, but cannot pass the condensers; while the voice currents 
developed by the action of the transmitters upon this steady 
current being in a state of constant and rapid fluctuation, are 
prevented from short-circuiting themselves through the battery 
bridge by the interposed impedance coils, but pass with great 
facility round these coils and through the path which includes 
the condenser to the distant station. 

Fig. 8, however, illustrates an alternative plan which thus far 
has found more general acceptance. It consists in associating 
the two united sub-station circuits L L? and the common battery 


26 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION JF [Jan. 23 
B bridged at the central station between their main conductors, 
with an induction coil I of the type often styled repeating coils, 
wherein the two windings 7 # have a like number of turns and 
like resistances. The two windings, as is clearly shown in the 
figure, are connected in the component circuits respectively, so 
that the circuits are in inductive relation with one another. 
Both windings are centrally divided, and the bridged battery 
unites the halves of both on one side to those on the other side 
of the circuit Each component circuit is thus supplied separ- 
ately with battery current for the transmitter of its sub-station 
through its own winding of the induction coil; and each is 
‘alternately the transmitting and receiving circuit. The voice 
currents developed by each transmitter circulate in the trans- 
mitting component circuit only, but acting through the induction 
coil they develop substantially identical voice currents in the 
receiving circuit also, which passing through the same, operate 
the distant receiver. This arrangement well complies with the 
second condition of success. It divides the circuit up into two 
sections, having no conductive connection, and thus tends’ to 
minimize the possible effect of a fault which may exist in either; 
and it reduces the adverse effects which otherwise would be very 
noticeable when the two lines connected differ considerably in 
length. 

In Fig. 9 is 1ilustrated the application of this plan for central 
and common transmitter battery operation to the switchboard 
apparatus; -and furthermore, represents in diagram the sub- 
station and switchboard connections of two circuits, showing 
how the same central source of current may be emplcyed in 
connection with call signals, circuit control and speech trans- 
mission. 

I may in conclusion briefly advert to a minor improvement 
which in some installations has been added with a view to further 
relieving the operator of the time-consuming duty of following 
up sub-operations. This is a device combined with the ringing 
key, which acts after the key has been manipulated, to lock it in 
the ringing position with the call generator connected to line for 
a definite and supposedly sufficient period of time, or until the 
attendant at the station called, responds by taking the receiver 
from the hook. One way of arranging such a device is to provide 
a spring latch which when the key is depressed engages a shoulder 
on the key spindle; to mount the spring upon an armature; and 
to associate with each key an electromagnet to act upon this 


1903.] THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. Bi 


armature, the same being wound with but few turns of coarse wire, 
and connected in the key branch of the generator circuit. The 
key having been pressed, is thus held in operation, because the 
current of the generator through the circuit (which, before the 


[eloldleltlala}-— 


in 


Fic. 9 


removal of the receiver from the hook at the sub-station is, as 
we have seen, kept conductively open by the inclusion therein of 
a condenser), does not excite the releasing magnets. But as soon 


28 LOCKWOOD: EVOLUTION OF [JJan. 23 


as the call is responded to by the removal of the receiver from the 
hook, the circuit is conductively closed; and the generator cur- 
rent now steady and strong, is sufficient to excite the magnet, 
which attracting the armature, acts to release the key; so that 
the call current over the line is cut off. Such auxiliary devices, 
however, and others which have been suggested and which 
are intended to bring the operators’ telephones into connection 
with a calling line as soon as the plug is inserted, and to discon- 
nect them by an electromagnetic switch after the lapse of a 
definite period of time, or when the companion plug is inserted, 
or when the call current is sent to the second line, present them- 
selves to my mind, not as essentials of the switchboard appar- 
atus, but as refinements of the lily painting or gold gildirig order; 
which may be employed or not, and which do not alter the 
general character of the finished machine or effectuate any 
materially modified result. 

There are, furthermore, certain concomitant appliances that 
have grown up round the switchboard as do suburbs round a 
city, and which should at least receive mention. These embrace 
mainly the power room apparatus for charging the universal 
storage batteries, and for the generation of alternating currents 
for outgoing calls; protective devices of several coéperative 
types interposed between the cable heads and the switchboard to 
arrest and guard against the effects of various harmful intrusive 
currents; the main distributing frame, an iron open-work 
structure with interior channels through which a multitude of 
insulated connecting wires are led, and having binding screw 
terminals of cable and switchboard conductors on its two sides 
respectively, between which such connecting wires extend to 
unite any pair of line conductors to any desired pair of switch- 
board conductors, and at which any circuit can readily be 
opened or otherwise altered for testing purposes; and the inter- 
mediate distributing board placed between the main distributing 
frame and the switchboard proper, where all main wires are 
represented and can be cross-connected, and at which to dis- 
tribute the business equitably between the operators, any line 
while retaining its multiple switch-sockets can readily be con- 
nected or re-connected with any desired answering jack and line 
signal, and thereby be transferred in a few minutes from any 
switchboard section to any other, as the fluctuating character 
of the work may require. 

While these appliances which in every large and well-appointed 


1903.] THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. 29 


central telephone station are now uniformly provided as acces- ° 
sories of the switchboard, cannot within the reasonable limits of 
this paper be discussed in detail, they are of course to be kept in 
mind in planning and preparing specifications for the central 
station apparatus generally and the switchboard in particular; 
and their proportionment, design and relation to the switchboard, 
with which they are to be associated, are matters which in each 
installation require the most careful and exhaustive consideration. 

There is no great invention which has more thoroughly revolu- 
tionized business methods than the speaking telephone. The 
exceeding value of time is better appreciated now, than at any 
previous period in the world’s history; and it is universally recog: 
nized that a business man’s time is a business man’s best asset 
Wherever the telephone is employed—and it may truly now be 
said that ‘‘ there is no speech or language where their voice is not 
heard,’’ and wherever the telephone exchange has obtained a 
footing, there at once is a valuable economy of this most valuable 
possession attained. 

It is, however, obvious that to realize this conservation and 
economization of time to the fullest extent, the possibilities of 
usefulness inherent in the telephone itself must be competently 
seconded by a central station switchboard through which all of 
the several operations and sub-operations requisite for the con- 
nection and disconnection of lines, can be carried out with 
accuracy and celerity. The Standard Relay Switchboard—as 
the organization of apparatus and circuits whose development I 
have traced has been entitled—is such an instrumentality; and 
by it, notwithstanding the marvellous increase of late years in 
the number of lines entering large central stations, and in the 
number of calls received and connections made in pursuance of 
such calls, the speed and efficiency of operation has been not only 
well maintained, but has exhibited marked improvement. 

Here, then, at least for the present, we take leave of our theme. 
The efforts expended in producing the switchboard which for the 
time is standard, are amply justified by the general satisfactori- 
ness ofits work. ‘True, its organization is complex, but so is that 
of every poly-functional machine; and why should we object to 
complexity if accompanied by corresponding efficiency; or unless 
it shall be proved that the same efficiency can be achieved by 
simpler means. 

This switchboard, though not yet a perfect product of evolu- 
tion, is at least a complete and successful machine; but evolution 


30 THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. Jan. 23 


still goes on. It may well be that the next step in its never-ceasing 
progress will be in the direction of simplifying the organization 
either in its concrete devices or in its circuit arrangements, 
without any sacrifice of efficiency. 


A paper presented at the rend Meeting cf 
the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, at New York, Ja»uary 23, 1903. 


AN AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE OPERATOR. 


BY WILLIAM J. HAMMER. 


A description of an automatic telephone 
exchange operator, power driven, which per- 
forms the functions of switching, signalling, 
line-clearing, etc., of the human operator, and 
by exactly similar means. Also a comparison 
of the salient features of the manual and auto- 
matic systems, 

For a considerable period of time the public mind has been 
steadily educated up to a high appreciation of, and great confi- 
dence in automatic time, energy, and money saving appliances. 
In the telephone field the subject of automatic telephone ex- 
changes has been one which has attracted a great deal of attention 
ever since the original work in this direction of Messrs. M. D. and 
T. A. Connolly and T. J. McTighe, whose system the writer had 
the pleasure of examining as long ago as 1881, at the first electri- 
cal exhibition held in Paris. : 

The above system has been the basis of very many of the pat- 
ents which have since been taken out on automatic telephone 
exchanges; and it is my privilege to-night to present for your 
consideration a radical departure in automatic exchanges which 
embodies a new principle of which it isthe pioneerexponent. Itis 
a most meritorious and ingenious piece of apparatus, and is termed 
the ‘“‘ mechanical operator,” in contra-distinction to all other 
types of automatic exchanges, as it is the only invention which 
does the work of switching in a telephone exchange in exactly 
the samé manner as by the human operator, and by exactly 
similar means. It is a light machine, and occupies compar- 
atively little space. It is driven by power, and moves 
mechanically the equivalents of the ordinary plugs and cords in 
the usual switchboard, connecting the subscribers’ terminals 
together when desired, signaling both parties, and disconnecting 
the same automatically when parties have finished speaking; 
and accomplishing this without necessitating any departures from 
the general arrangement of circuits met with in standard prac- 

31 


HAMMER: AUTOMATIC [Jan. 23 


oo 
i) 


tice; and doing away with all but a fraction of the relays, mag- 
nets, electrical contacts and connections essential in all other 
systems, both manual and automatic. 

The multiple system of telephone exchanges has now reached a 
very high degree of perfection; and it has become more and more 
costly; and it is well understood that as the number of sub- 
scribers connected to any manual or automatic exchange increases, 
the operating and maintenance expenses increase in far greater 
proportion than the number of subscribers, because of the in- 
crease in the number of multiples. 

There is an urgent demand to-day for a system which will very 
materially cut down these very heavy expenses and cut off the 
very heavy outlay now necessary for operator’s salaries. 

Before entering into a description of the apparatus itself, it will 
perhaps be as well to consider just what the functions are which 
the human operator fulfils in connecting and disconnecting sub- 
scribers, and in what way the mechanical operator duplicates these 
functions; and I will, therefore, place them side by side: 


- 


CYCLE OF OPERATIONS. 


THE AUTOMATIC SYSTEM. 

1. The subscriber sets his 
sender to the number wanted, and 
winds it; this requires the turning 
of the discsand moving the lever, 
his responsibility ending there. 


2. The exchange drops his (the 
subscriber’s) terminal shuttle, 
which starts his sender going. 


3. The sender sends a signal 
into the exchange selector, 
thereby establishing one of a 
hundred local circuits. 


4. The exchange drops shuttle 
of subscriber wanted. 


5. The motive power at ex- 
change lifts both shuttles into an 
idle bus bar. (This operation has 
no parallel in manual working). 


MANUAL SYSTEM. 


1. The subscriber takes the 
receiver off its hook. 

la. Operator notes ‘‘ pilot” 
light signal and individual signal 
light. 

2. The operator places an an- 
swering plug in his jack upon see- 
ing his signal dispiayed. 

3. Operator raises the listening 
key cam, which depresses the key, 
thus enabling her to communicate 
with the subscriber. 

4. She asks ‘‘number” (this 
operation has no parallel in the 
automatic exchange, as the start- 
ing of sender is a natural conse- 
quence of the dropping of shuttle). 

5. The subscriber gives the 
number wanted. 

6. The operator repeats the 
number to prevent error. 

7. Operator must select ‘‘ jack’ 
wanted. 

8. Operator makes a busy test 
by tappiag with tip of her plug 


1903.] 


6. The ringing device rings 
bells of both subscribers, 


7. The subscriber on hearing 
signal takes off his receiver. 
(This operation not in~ manual 
practice, as receiver there is off 
already). 


TELEPHONE OPERATOR. 


33 


the collar of the multiple jack of 
the line wanted. 

9. The operator plugs the mul- 
tiple jack of subscriber wanted. 

10. Operator presses ringing 
key, thereby ringing up subscribe: 
wanted. 

11. Operator restores the 
listening key, evtting herself out. 

12. Operator notes that sub- 
scriber’s signal lamp goes out. 


Next, conversation begins. 


Upon its Termination. 


8. Subscriber hangs up re- 
ceiver. 


9. Clearing-out magnets drop 
both shuttles back to rest. 


13. Subscriber hangs up re- 
ceiver. 


14. Two keyboard signals light. 


15. Operator removes both 
plugs of the pair from jacks. 


This is the entire series of operations gone through in a 


mesucsesstul switch,” 
then the following happens. 


Should, however, a busy line be called, 


Busy TEssv. 


THE AuToMATIC SYSTEM. 


1, 2, 3, same as above. 


4. Operator attempts to drop 
called shuttle, but it is out of the 
way, and a special circuit is 
opened. 

4a. Shuttle is for a moment 
hung up, but then clears out 
again. 

(No further operations follow, 
as subscriber waits for bell, be- 

fore taking down receiver). 


MANvuaL System. 

1, 2, 3, same as above. 

4, Operator in multiple board 
taps the collar of the multiple 
jack of the line wanted, and she 
TECelViesuecnmsenics wOl, muclickse: 
known as the busy test. 

5. Operator tells calling party, 
line is busy. 

6. Subscriber hangs up re- 
ceiver. 

7. Operator removes answering 
plug from calling subscriber’s 
jack. : 


It will be noted from above that the number of operations 
necessary varies, and favors considerably the mechanical oper- 
ating system, those requiring the subscriber’s attention are less 
in the automatic, and he need not wait for the operator to ques- 
tion ‘‘number,’ and after receiving the same, repeating to 
prevent error and saves that time as well as the time often 
lost in getting the operator to understand the correct number 


etc. 


34 HAMMER: AUTOMATIC 


[Jan. 23 


COMPARISON OF APPARATUS FORMING SALIENT. 
FEATURES OF BoTH SYSTEMS. 


THE AuToMaTIC SYSTEM. 

1. Subscriber’s instrument. 

2. Sender. 

3. Subscriber’s line. 

4. Protective devices, lightning 
arresters, heat coils, etc. 

5. Subscriber’s terminal car- 
riage with contact springs and 
connecting rod. 

6. Individual magnet. 

Above comprises the first 
group of exchange apparatus, and 
there are as many above items, as 
there are subscribers. 


AUTOMATIC. 
Group 2. 

1. Bus bars. 

2. Shuttle locks. 

8. Clearing-out magnets. 

The apparatus in this group is 
present in a number equal to 
1/10th of the number of sub- 
scribers. 


AUTOMATIC. 

Group 3. 

1. Battery ard leads therefrom, 
or dynamo. 

2. Operating power. 

3. Operating mechanism 
proper. “ 

The apparatus in this group is 
provided once only per section of 
100 lines. 


MANUAL SYSTEM. 

Same. 

Not in Manual. 

Same. 

Same. 

This is represented in a manual 
exchange by subscriber’s line 
jack. 

This is equivalent in office to 
subscriber’s drop or lamp signal 
and its operating relay, cut-off 
relay, also puts line lamp out by 
cutting out line relay. 

Same. 


MANUAL. 
Cords and Plugs. 


Clearing-out drops or super- 


vision signals. 
Same. 
MANUAL. 
Same. 


These two items are repre- 
sented by the operator, in a man- 
ual exchange. 


Same. 


DESCRIPTION OF THE AUTOMATIC SYSTEM AND ITS OPERATION. 


It is difficult to give a complete technical description of this 
system without recourse to many numbered drawings, diagrams, 
photographs, etc.; and those who are specially interested in this 
subject will find it of great service to witness the actual operation 
of the system itself, which may be seen at the present time in 


New York City. 


This system comprises two separate devices: first, A “‘ mechan- 
ical telephone operator,” situated at the telephone exchange, 


4903.1 TELEPHONE OPERATOR. 35 


the original form of this being shown in Fig. 1; secondly, A 
*“ sender ”’ or signaling apparatus, as shown in Fig 2. 


THE ‘‘ SENDER.”’ 


Let us first consider the “sender” and its functions. It is 
preferably placed near each subscriber’s telephone, and by its 
means each and every subscriber is enabled independently to 
control the mechanical operator at the central exchange. There 
is no mechanical connection of any kind between the subscriber’s 
instruments and the “ sender;’’ and it can be attached without 
cutting the circuit; it being only necessary to connect it in par- 
allel across the existing line and to ground. The ground con- 
nection is only made for the switching act, when the instruments | 
are idle, and during conversation they are free from ground. 

The subscriber’s ‘‘ sender” or calling apparatus consists of 
a small metal box containing a set of disks, numbered on the 
periphery from 0 to 9—one comprising the units and the other 
‘the tens; and in the case of higher numbers being employed, 
additional disks are attached—three disks would give numbers 
up to 1,000; four disks would give numbers up to 10,000 and five 
disks up to 250,000. The number of the subscriber to be called 
is displayed in a line across the ‘‘sender”’ face, and a series of 
impulses corresponding to this number are sent over the line to 
the exchange by means of a clockwork started by turning the 
calling lever projecting from the front of the ‘ sender.” This 
lever upon being turned upwards winds the spring of the clock- 
work, it then returns to its first position, where it is locked, thus 
preventing further interference until the call has been sent and 
properly received at the central exchange. When the “sender” 
starts the varying series of impulses which are sent over both legs 
of the metallic circuit simultaneously, the ground (which has 
been automatically thrown on) is used for a return circuit. The 
“sender ’”’ also contains a magnet whose armature normally 
retains the clockwork until the magnet is energized by current 
trom the exchange. As in the case of a messenger call or fire 
alarm box, the calling lever must be turned to its full extent to 
send a signal, and after this has been done, the protective 
devices in the “ sender,”’ as already stated, keep all the essential 
parts of the “ sender ”’ locked during the dispatch of the signal. 
When the switch is completed at the exchange, the subscriber, as 
well as the party whom he has called, receives a bell signal. 
There are four of these signals given to called subscribers, cover- 


*(UtIOF yeur8u10) joyvi0dg esueygoxy onewmony eayL—'T “A 


Se 2 
a: 
it 
2 | 
] 
8} 


1903.] TELEPHONE OPERATOR. 37 


ing a period of 30 seconds time; this period giving the called sub- 
scriber time to reach his Rete none: As soon as he has taken 
off the receiver the signals cease and conversation begins , 


THE MECHANICAL TELEPHONE OPERATOR. 

We will now consider the operator (shown in Fig. 1), and its 
functions: 

All subscribers’ circuits are normally free from ground and as 
already stated, the subscriber’s calling device or “sender” is 
normally open, both as to ground and metallic circuit. In Fig. 3 
is shown a diagram of the circuits. 

Each subscriber’s line terminates in one place only at the ex- 
change—this being a feature not possessed by other automatic 
systems—each subscriber’s line, consisting of two wires, is con- 
nected at the exchange to two parallel rods on the mechanical 
operator. 

These rods are insulated from the rest of the machine, each pair 

_ supporting a carriage, mounted so as to slide on these rods. 

This carriage holds the subscriber’s terminal springs, which 
are insulated from each other, but each spring makes an elec- 
trical contact with one of the two rods. 

The springs on the carriage are adapted to slide by, or at some 
particular point to-make.céntact. with one of a series of bars laid 
in a grill at right angles to and above the carriage rods. 

All of the rods or bars employed in the machine are of such 
dimensions as to have practically no resistance, and the con- 
ducting bars and loop circuits connected with them containing 
impedance coils, and a source of electrical energy, such as a 
storage battery, and constitute the equivalent of the cord cir- 
cuits of the manual exchange, and in their peacuons correspond 
identically therewith. 

While the number of subscriber’s terminal carriages is equal to 
the number of subscriber’s lines, the number of cord circuits, or 
pairs of parallel bars necessary, need not be more than 10 per 
cent. of this number, this figure having been found safe in manual 
exchange practice. There are instances in which boards have 
had to be equipped with twelve and even sixteen cord circuits 
per 100 lines, but the average present multiple practice is from 
seven to ten. 

It is never found that all subscribers wish to talk at one and 


‘the same time. . 
When the subscriber’s line terminal switch or carriage at the 


3 


HAMMER: AUTOMATIC 


Fic. 2.—Subscriber’s Instrument and Sender. 


[Jan. 


oe 


1903.] TELEPHONE OPERATOR. 39 


exchange is at a position of rest, one of the subscriber’s line 
terminal springs makes a contact with the ground spring, which 
is connected to one of a circle of commutator pins. These pins ~ 
are swept over by a revolving brush attached to the shatt of what 
is termed the “‘ busy wheel ”’ and which is normally in rotation, 
There are as many pins on the commutator as there are subscri- 
bers, and the revolving brush establishes a connection between a 
ground spring (subscriber’s line) and a battery, operating magnet 
and ground. 

The “ busy wheel”’ to which the commutator brush is attached 
is driven by a friction clutch from a power device operated 
preferably by an electric motor, and is-arranged to be stopped by 
a pawl and ratchet controlled by the operating magnet 
termed the “ starting magnet,”’ which initially controls the entire 
switching operation of the exchange. The energizing of the 
“starting magnet”’ stops the ‘‘ busy wheel” and starts the opera- 
ting gear, which passes through its complete cycle, after which 
the “‘ busy wheel ”’ is again started, continuing to revolve until 
the “ starting magnet ”’ is again energized. 

A second magnet termed the “‘restarting’’ magnet is em- 
ployed to start the master shaft going again; in order that the 
carriage-moving or cord-circuit operating device of the called 
subscriber may be thrown into gear. 

These two “ starting’ and “ restarting ’’ magnets operate in 
conjunction with the subscriber’s ‘‘ sender ”’ through the medium 
of a controlling contact apparatus and selector. 

The commutator above referred to consists of two sets of cir- 
cularly disposed contact pins, the number of the pins in each 
circle representing the number of subscribers. 

There are also two metal contact rings, one of whichis solid and 
the other divided into ten equal segments. 

The rotating trailer arm attached to the “ busy wheel ”’ shait 
sweeps over these contacts. The contact pins of one circle are 

each connected to a separate ground terminal spring; and one 
of the contact rings is connected in circuit with the “starting 
magnet,’ a battery and ground connection. The purpose of ‘the 
contact device is to prevent any other subscriber from throwing 
the “ starting eee ” into operation while switching is going 
on, the circuitin this ‘‘ starting magnet ”’ being always opened, 
save when the ‘‘ master shaft’ is at its point of rest. Each sub- 
scriber’s line is brought into connection with the ground—once 
in each revolution, by the revolving contact arm. 


oe 


(Jan. 23 


AUTOMATIC 


HAMMER: 


40 


l H 

OvOw i | 43N9vW 1N0- ci 

I 10 Penfl 
| 


SIGIYISGNS 


GITWI INIHDod 404 JPAIG LIVLNOD ONILVLOY 


—it——? 


ite + $1102 NOLWONVLI. 


co 


oe a es mes iP AFIAIFIFY 
a | I oe ee , i 
ol | od a ae = ; i re ‘OO 


ph ber | 


ae 


Sires ey i= 
Giaey a ili - 


eee 


LINIVN INL 


“YIGIAICGNS ONITTVD INIHIIA HOI = 
[sis FHUAID LILLNOD ONILYLOY ? ta 


== pez “al bf eee ae aS 

I G Zs 

{ ©) | WwW So es 

| © at ae i ee © 


LINIMI CAOD |i 


! phe I NEE 
4V9 LIMOS Oi om L ad 3 e70Naz¢ 
D 


CHUYT HIMCS SYILNI FOVIAAVD NIHM LINIVW A ‘g @INIAO SLIVLNOD 


Wiring shown in dotted and 


, Fic 3.—Diagrams of Circuits. 
Brokdn lines show circuits clos 


~ 


Dotted lines show 


ed. 


in solid lines. 


n 


: 


s she 
circuits which are op 


All apparatu 


broken lines. 


1903.] TELEPHONE OPPERATOR. 41 


The “ busy wheel” which has been referred to, consists of a 
shaft extending through the entire letigth of the ‘‘ mechanical 
operator,”’ which carries mounted upon it and disposed around it 
in the form of a helix of a single turn, a series of resilient fingers of 
thin sheet steel, their number corresponding to the number of 
subscribers. 

When the “busy wheel,” which is normally running, has been 
stopped by an impulse sent through the “‘ starting magnet,’’ one 
of the steel fingers, which is always the one in a perpendicular 
position, remains resting against the latch holding that particular 
subscriber’s terminal carriage. Next the power mechanism acting 
through a clutch and cam shoves forward a light shaft termed a 
“ rack,” which is studded with pins corresponding to the number 
of steel fingers and latchcs, and which runs parallel with the axle 
of the “‘ busy whecl.’’ As this ‘‘ rack ’’ moves longitudinally, the 


Fic. 4.—Subscriber’s unit, original 
form of operator. 


Fic. 5.—Subscriber’s unit, new 
form of operator. 


upright steel finger is bent uver by a rack pin tripping the 
latch and thus releasing that subscriber’s rod and shuttle, 
which drop into contact with a long lantern pinion; this 
pinion then rotates through an arc dcpendent upon the 
number of subscriber’s lines busy at that time. Instantly 
a lever engages the two subscriber’s shuttles, lifting them up so 
that their hook heads engage a shuttle detent. There areas many 
of these detents as there are talking circuits., 1.e., one-tenth the 
number of subscribers (in this machine the number being ten). 

A circuit is now established between the springs of the sub- 
scriber’s carriage and the grid bars representing the cord circuit 


6 epcoceaoscoesoeocee senses 


terminals. eee 
The magneto generator is now thrownon the circuit, ringing the 


belis of both calling and called subscribers. The length of this 


re 


42 HAMMER: AUTOMATIC [Jan. 23 


signal may be varied to suit requirements and is controlled by a 
timing device. In the meantime the power nechanism has been 
automatically thrown out of operation and the “ busy wheel ”’ 
again rotates until another call is sent in. 

When the subscriber takes his receiver off the hook a “ clearing- 
out ’’? magnet prevents the switch from clearing out; but when 
both receivers are hung up, the “ clearing-out ’’ magnet becomes 
de-energized, and its armature causes the shuttles connected to 
return to their position of rest. 


INDIRECT OR TRUNKING SYSTEM. 


Up to the present time we have considered the original type 
of the operator, as illustrated herein, and applicable to small . 
exchanges up to 100 subscribers and employing the so-called 
direct connection, requiring a single machine accessible periodi- 
cally to all subscribers. There have recently been made very 
important changes in the general design of the operator and its 
mechanical details, without altering the general principles under 
which the system operates. These changes have greatly in- 
creased the speed of making connections, cutting the time down 
to 34 or 4seconds for a trunked connection. .The new operator is 
considerably smaller and lighter in weight, more compact, more 
‘‘ get-at-able,”’ and much cheaperin cost of construction. In this 
machine also is embodied the indirect or trunking system, appli- 
cable to exchanges from 100 up to 250,000 or more subscribers, 
uniting all, if required, into a single system without sacrificing the 
plug and cord principle, and without multiplying the subscriber’s 
contacts, as in all other systems, and finally, making it entirely 
practicable to sub-divide the lines into groups of 100, thus keep- 
ing the dimensions of the connecting machines within moderate 
limits. 

The act of connecting subscribers, consists of three functions, 
each represented by an independent section of the operator. In 
the ofder in which these devices are thrown into use in estab- 
lishing a connection, they are termed the “‘ originator,’”’ the 
“‘ pilot,’’ and the ‘‘ terminator.’ 

The “originator”’ performs the office of establishing a connection 
of the calling subscriber’s line with the ‘‘ A’ trunk. These‘ A” 
trunks are conductors connecting the “‘ originator ” and “‘ pilot,” 
and their number represents the maximum number of. sub- 
scribers which would at any time be Sirah eameOns! y using the 


section, It is well ta note here that these “‘ A” trunks always | 
\ 


\ 


| 


\ 


1903.] TELEPHONE OPERATOR. 43 


have their beginning and ending in the “‘ originator ”’ and “‘ pilot” 
of one and the same unit of 100. In this initial act of the “ origi- 
nator,” no selective operation controlled from the subscriber’s 
station takes place; but the “A” trunks which are already in 
use are made inaccessible to subsequent calls, the ‘‘ originator ”’ 
always selecting a free and idle ‘A ’’trunk. The end of the 
first free ‘‘ A’ trunkis connectedin the “ pilot,’ with a receiver 
or selector, which immediately upon the establishing of the con- 
nection between the ‘‘ A” trunk and the subscriber’s line re- 
ceives a group-signal referred to later: and thereupon selects a 
“ B” trunk corresponding to the signal received. Immediately 
the mechanism of the “‘ pilot ’’ connects the ‘A’ trunk and the 
“ B” trunk, at the same time breaking the connection between 
the “A” trunk and the selector, and putting the selector in 
connection with the next idle “A ” trunk—the “B” trunks 
teferred to connecting the ‘‘ pilot’ and the “‘ terminator.” 

The ends of all of the ‘‘ B ” trunks, coming from one and the 
same section of 100, are distributed over all the ‘‘ terminators ”’ 
of the exchange, rendering it possible by the aid of one of these 
‘““B”’ trunks to establish a connection between the “ pilot ’’ and 
any one of the ‘“‘terminators.’’ Here again, as many “B” 
trunks are provided for each ‘‘ terminator,’ as are necessitated by 
the maximum demand for simultaneous conversations between 
the two groups. 

In the “terminator ’’ the first idle ‘“‘ B ” trunk is again con- 
nected with a selector which, upon the connection of the ‘‘ B ” 
trunk with the ‘‘ A ’”’ trunk, receives the number signal. Imme- 
diately the connecting machinery establishes a contact between 
the ‘“‘B”’ trunks and the contact element in the “ terminator,” 
representing the number of the subscriber wanted, which num- 
ber has been transmitted to it. 

Each subscriber, it will be understood, belongs to a certain 
group of 100, and in this group he possesses a contact element 
both in the “ originator ’’ and “‘ terminator,” these being con- 
nected to his line in parallel, protective devices being provided by 
means of which, as soon as the subscriber making a call has 
caused this particular contact-element in the “ originator ”’ to 
leave its normal position, his corresponding element in the 
“terminator ’’ becoines inaccessible to other calls, and should 
any be made they would result ina “ busy ”’ signal. 

The ringing up of subscribers, conversation and the clearing- 
out is done in precisely the same manner as in the direct method 


of connection previously described. 


44 HAMMER: AUTOMATIC JJan 23. 


CERTAIN OF THE CONSTRUCTION DETAILS. 


The ‘‘ sender ’’ is identical with that already described and 
employed upon the original type of the operator. The faecalis 
at the exchange, as I have already stated, embodies the “ origi- 
nator?’ “pilot,” and “ terminator 

The ‘ Originator.’’-—This consists of the switchboard, the 
movement and clearing-out device.” 

The switchboard consists of 100 perpendicular tracks, upon 
which 100 shuttles independently ride up and down. The track 
rails are insulated from one another, and connect in pairs to the 
subscribers’ lines. The shuttles consist of two metallic parts in 
contact with the rails, but insulated from each other, each carry- 
ing a contact spring, by means of which thev may be brought into 
contact with the “ A ”’ trunks. 

The ‘‘A”’ trunks in the “ originator’’ consist of horizontal 
metallic rods placed at right angles to the tracks, enabling each 
one of the shuttles to be brought into metallic contact with any 
one of the trunk rods. They are arranged in two parallel ver- 
tical planes, one in front of and the other behind the shuttle 
tracks. The ends of these rods are metallically connected to 
similarly disposed rods in the ‘‘ pilot.’”’ It is self-evident, there- 
fore, that when a subscriber’s line is connected to an ‘‘ A’ trunk 
this is practically an extension of this line into the ‘“‘ pilot.” 

Each shuttle is provided with an actuating rod, by means of 
which it may be operated by motive power. In the position of 
rest, this rod is supported by a trip which, on being actuated by a. 
magnet, allows the shuttle to drop. This magnet receives the 
current as soon as the subscriber winds his sender—this act 
resulting in putting the shuttle into its initial working position. 
The moment the shuttle reaches this position a projection upon 
its actuating rod protrudes into the path of a helical projection 
mounted on a continuously rotating drum, so that the shuttle is 
carried into its second working position. 

The actuating rod cannot be moved further in this direction, 
owing to a stop in its path; consequently, the drum which is 
driven by friction is brought to a standstill. The moment this 
happens, the main mechanism is started, actuating the working 
beam which extends across the entire switchboard. A projection 
on this beam seizes the shuttle rod and lifts it into the so-called 
speaking position, 7.c., that in which its springs make contact. 
With the first idle “A ”’ trunk. 


On completing its ae the working beam retinas to rest. 


\ 


” 


1903.] IAD DslOPNUH (CAN IIEA MONS 45 


This stops the connector movement, and tie drum driven by 
friction is again started. The shuttle in tle meantime remains 
in the position in which it was placed. In this position the 
shuttle actuating-rod rests upon a clearing-out bar, which pre- 
vents it from dropping back. There are as many of these clear- 
ing out bars as there are ““A”’ trunks. These have a lateral 
movement, and when moved they release any shuttles which 
happen to be suspended from them. How this is accomplished 
will be referred to later. 

At the next call the entire operation is repeated, save that the 
busy “A” trunk is “‘ jumped ” and the next one occupied, and 
SO on. 

The ‘‘ Pilot.” —In this we find again the switchboard move- 
ment, clearing-out apparatus, and in addition a group signal 
selector. 

The construction of the switchboard is identical with that of 
the ‘‘ originator,”’ save that the drum is eliminated, and shuttle 
actuating-rods pass directly from position of rest into second 
working position. 

The ‘‘ A’”’ trunks from the “ originator’ again terminate in 
rods, being provided with a branch circuit to the selector. These 
branch circuits are normally opened, and are opened during con- 
versation over the trunks; being closed automatically part of the 
time during the switching act and during the transmission of the 
group signal. 

The shuttles are here connected to rods in the various “ ter- 
minators,” so that the particular shuttle which is selected de- 
cides into which groups the subscriber’s line will be extended. 

The electrical stop motion in the subscriber’s sender permits 
only partial running down of the “sender,” but sufficient to 
transmit that part of the signal corresponding to the first two 
figures of the number desired. This is the group signal; and 
after its transmission, the selector in the “ pilot’ causes the 
particular shuttle to drop into working position. But immedi- 
ately the shuttle reaches such a position, the actuating move- 
ment is started, and, as already described, establishes connection 
between the shuttle and that one of the ‘‘ A” trunks over which 
the signal came. Thus, the subscriber’s line is continued into 
that one ‘‘ terminator ” in which the subscriber’s line which is 
desired is located; and it now remains to show how the particular 
line wanted is selected out of the hundred lines in that group. 
his will be shown in the description of the “ terminator.”’ 


d 


46 HAMMER: AUTOMATIC (Jan. 23 


It is essential to mention here that the circuit, thus far built up, 
has in it a clearing-out magnet and parallel with that anon- 
inductive resistance. The province of the former being to main- 
tain the established connection until the conversation is finished, 
A clearing-out in the “ pilot” effects a clearing-out in the 
“ originator.”’ 

The ‘ Terminator.”"——Here we find again the switchboard 
actuating mechanism, clearing-out mechanism, signal selector, 
and the ringing apparatus. 

The construction of the switchboard is identical with the ones 
already described, the 100 shuttles forming the terminals of the 
100 lines of the group, and the metallic ends of the terminals of 
the ‘““B”’ trunk which meet here coming from the different 
“pilots ’’ where they had their beginning in shuttles. 

All these rods have open branch circuits to the selector; but 
one of these branches at a time is closed temporarily the moment 
the *‘ pilot ” establishes connection between an ‘‘ A ”’ trunk, and 
a‘ B’’ trunk. Now, the sender is again released, and the trans- 
mission is effected. When the signal has been transmitted, the 
selector at the “ terminator ’’ effects the dropping of that one 
shuttle which carries the number wanted; and if its corresponding 
shuttle in the “ originator ”’ is idle, it isthus connected witha“ B” 
trunk; thereby establishing connection between two subscribers. 

In the other case the ‘‘ busy ” signal is given to the ‘‘origina- 
tor,’’ and the connection so far established is taken down. 

Next, the ringing machinery is actuated, causing the signal at 
the called subscriber’s instrument—this signal being repeated 
usually four times. It may be any number. 

Should the subscriber not answer, the connection is cleared out, 
again. ; 

As soon as the subscriber answers, the ringing mechanism is 
cut out and the talking battery is thrown in, so that no time is 
lost. On completion of the conversation the clearing-out magnet 
with its parallel resistance clears the line. 

The comparison as to simplicity of operation in trunked calls 
is evidently still more in tavor of this automatic system than 
even that.shown in local calls—as the following comparison of 
operations necessary—shows. 


” 


AUTOMATIC. MANUAL. 
Ie enibnembars neta ce bender" 1. Subscriber takes off receiver, 
and winds it up. 2. Subscriber's individual light 


at exchange lights up, above pilot 
light. 


1903.) 
2. Subscriber’s shuttle drops. 


8. Subscriber’s shuttle is lifted 
into connection with an “A ”’ 
trunk. 


4. Subscriber’s ‘“‘sender” 
gives the group signal. 


5. Pilot drops corresponding 
““B ”’ trunk shuttle, and connects 
it with “ A ”’ trunk. 


6 Subscriber’s ‘ sender 
gives number signal. 


7. Terminator drops. called 

. shuttle, or, if busy, gives busy 

signal, Otherwise connects shuttle 
with “ B”’ trunk. 


8. Terminator throws auto- 
matic key on called subscriber’s 
line, ringing same, 


9. Called subscriber and call- 
ing subscriber take off receiver. 


10. Automatic key is restored, 


and talking battery throws on the ° 


line. 


TELEPHONE OPERATOR. 47 


3. Operator places answering 
plug. 

4, Operator varies listening key. 

5. Operator asks number. 

6. Subscriber gives number. 

7. Operator repeats number. 

8. Operator presses order wire 
key. Gets into communication 
with the trunk operator in the 
central offlce with which the 
called for subscriber is connected. 

9. Operator gives number of 
subscriber wanted to incoming 
trunk operator at the second ex- 
change. 

10. That operator repeats num- 
ber. 

11. That operator gives num- 
ber of idle trunk to be selected. 

12. First operator releases order 
wire key. 

13. First operator connects idle 
trunk to her cord circuit, thereby 
establishing connection between 
‘trunk and calling subscriber. 

14. Second operator tests 
called subscriber’s line, for busy 
using the trunk plug. 

15. Ifidle, operator plugs mul- 
tiple jack with trunk plug. 

16. Second operator presses 
automatic key. — 

17. Automatic key rings sub- 
scriber. 

.18. Called subscriber takes off 
receiver, thereby restoring auto- 
matic key. 


Next, conversation begins. 
Upon its termination: 


11. Calling subscriber hangs up. 

Clearing-out magnet drops.his 
connection in originator and 
pilot. 


13. Called subscriber hangs up. 


14. Clearing-out magnet drops 
balance of connection. 


19. Calling subscriber hangs up 
receiver. 

20. Supervising lamp at first 
operator’s position lights up. 

21. Called subscriber hangs up. 

22. Second supervising lamp 
lights up. 

23. First operator pulls out 
plugs. 

24. Disconnect lamps at second 
operator’s position light up. 

25. Second operator pulls out 
trunk plug from multiple jack. 


48 HAMMER: AUTOMATIC [Jan. 23 


SPECIAL CLASSES OF SERVICE. 

In modern te.ephone central exchange practice certain special 
classes of services are demanded; and these the automatic system 
already described will take care of in an eminently satisfactory 
manner; also adapting itself to the present central energy or 
common battery system, in a manner impossible with any other 
automatic exchange. 

This system eliminates totally the large force of manual ex- 
change operators, and only in the ‘toll service” the human 
operator is for the present essential. 

‘I will consider in turn the manner in which the system would 
take care of each of these special classes of service. 

Selo Commecndion ven special number on the sender will be 
designated as ‘‘toll operator’s ’’ number at the exchange, she 
being called up just as any subscriberis. The operator then asks 
one what number is wished, and what the number of the calling 
party is, stating that she will call you when she gets the party 
‘you desire. This acts also as a check upon the service, and pre- 
vents a dishonest party giving another subscriber’s number. 

‘“« Restricted Service.’—As in manual exchange practice, the 
toll operator would have a complete list of parties receiving such 
service, and decline to give any outsider long distance connection 
until he has been properly identified. 

“« Appointment Calls ,’’—As in manual exchange practice, these 
would be made through the toll clerk, who is communicated with 
through the operator’s number on the sender. 

“* Automatic Pay Station Service.’’—Such service would require 
a meteriny device, perferably a nickel-in-the-slot attachment. 
The nickel being returned in case no service is rendered. Or 
a metering device such asa cyclometer, responding to the action of 
the receiving hook, but only when circuits are established or 
service actually rendered. At the central exchange, a ede 
device would be operated in conjunction with the “ busy test ’ 
apparatus, enabling the operator to check off such service, as in 
present manual exchange practice. 

“Inquiry Calls,” “ Information Bureau,” ‘ Complaints ’’ and 
““ Transmitted Messages.’-—In addition to the operators in the 
modern manual exchanges, information men, trouble men, etc. 
are employed to answer inquiries, attend to complaints, and 
transmit messages. The four classes above mentioned would 
be attended to in prey the same manner. 

“ Party Lines.”’—A four-party line selective ringing service 
can easily be given. 


1903.] TELEPHONE OPERATOR 49 


ADVANTAGES OF THIS AUTOMATIC SYSTEM OVER OTHERS. 

The following points of advantage which are claimed for this 
automatic system have been investigated by me; and I deem 
them well worthy of consideration of every telephone engineer. 

It is applicable to an exchange of any size. 

It is applicable to the present standard central energy system. 

It is applicable to any commercial telephone, and to the present 
arrangements of circuits met with in standard practice. 

The total elimination of the multiple principle from this Sys- 
tem makes it possible to sub-divide the exchange into several 
separate local exchanges together forming a large city system, 
and this without destroying the principle of unity in the system 
and without decreasing the speed of connection. In this manner 
a great economy in line construction and maintenance is effected. 

It employs the usual protective devices of lightning arresters, 
heat coils, etc. . 

It gives a prompt service, the total time taken to transmit reli- 
ably a trunked signal of four figures, is about three-fifths of a 
second, and the average time to secure connection is found to be 
from three and one-half to four seconds. 

It will give a more reliable service, and with equal efficiency at 
alltimes. Unlike the human operator it is never impatient nor 
impertinent, and does not become fatigued or ill, and does not 
drop in efficiency, under stress of the rush hours. 

The saving of space occupied by this exchange will be very 
great, as compared with the space required for a multiple manual 
system. I am informed that the lowest calculation for space in 
cities is about a thousand square feet per one thousand sub- 
scribers, giving, say, ten thousand square feet for a ten thousand 
line exchange, and this is a very conservative estimate. Incon- 
trast it is claimed that 100 machines of 100 lines each, with suffi- 
cient lane-ways between each machine both ways, of say 2 feet, 
andacenter lane of 3 feet, would only occupy 62 by 55 feet, or in 
all three thousand four hundred and ten feet. 

It will do away with a large corps of skilled attendants at the 
switchboards, eliminating one of the heaviest expenses attendant 
upon the telephone industry. 

It will do away with a percentage of employees necessary to 
keep the central station cables, wires and appliances in condition, 
and lessen the cost of inspection and maintenance. 

It is claimed that it can be installed in large and medium sized 
exchanges, at 30 to 40 per cent. less cost than the present multiple 


50 HAMMER: AUTOMATIC - (Jan. 23 


exchange system, and that the contacts in say, a ten thousand 
exchange would be 80 to 90 per cent. less in number than in a 
multiple exchange. It is possible to add at any time groups of 
100 very easily without disturbing the existing installation, and 
thus increase from time to time in proportion to the demand. It 
would show much more nearly in a direct ratio an increase in ex- 
pense of operation and fixed charges with the increase in the 
number of subscribers, than would be possible with the manual 
exchange which, as is well known, increases out of all proportion 
to the increase in the number of subscribers. 

It will do away with employee’s dressing, dining and reading 
rooms, clothes lockers, infirmary, matrons, etc., as well as con- 
siderable expense for ventilating plant, lighting and other sani- 
tary arrangements necessitated by the usual crowding together 
of a large number of human operators in modern exchanges. 

It permits of a large number of subscribers calling simultane- 
ously, without producing confusion, the calls being stored up and 
brought into communication with the exchange in numerical 
rotation. 

It requires a single piece of machinery for 100 lines, in contra- 
distinction to the majority of automatic exchange systems, which 

‘require one machine to perform the switching for each sub- 
scriber’s line. . 

A most important feature is, that it does away with the cords 
and snultiple connections; and as the ground or drop connection is 
broken when the subscriber’s carriage leaves its position of rest, a 
perfect balance of circuits is ensured, and the absolute isolation of ~ 
each pair of communicating subscribers. 

It gives a continuous trouble test, instantly throwing any line 
in which trouble has developed, either inside or outside the 
exchange, into communication with one of the lines, which may 
be the wire chief’s. A permanent record is also made of these 
troubles. 

It requires no batteries and no extra circuits at subscriber’s 
stations, as in all other automatic systems. 

It does not necessitate the subscriber’s waiting to hear the 
operator ask “number ?”’ and repeat same to prevent error— 
thus saving the subscriber’s time on each call. 

It provides a sender which is “ fool-proof,” it being locked 
when operating, preventing further interference until signal is 
sent and properly received at the central exchange. - 

It does not require extra wiring, or even cutting of subscriber’s 


1903.] TELEPHONE OPERATOR 51 


lines in order to install the sender; there being no mechanical 
connection of any kind between the subscriber’s instrument and 
the sender; and the sender may be placed at the subscriber’s 
telephone or at any convenient point. It is only necessary to 
connect it in parallel across the existing line, grounding the third 
binding post of the sender. 

It necessitates no multiplicity of idle wires, crowding and com- 
plicating the working space, as in other exchanges, which 
amounts at times to 25 per cent. or more. ; 

It requires but a single power driven pulley. — 

It embodies no parts operating at excessive speeds, in the 
original type of machine, the driving shaft being run at but 250 
revolutions per minute with the operating parts driven by double 
back gearing at from 12 to 15 revolutions per minute. 

It embodies in the mechanism of the original form, but four 
cams on a single shaft, each acting upon rollers; a single cam con- 
trolling all movements, with the exception of the ringing con- 
troller. In the new type of ‘‘ operator,” ‘sun and planet ”’ 
gears take the place of the four cams iri the original ‘‘ operator.” 

It employs a single carriage with a connecting rod for each sub- 
scriber at central. 

It provides a set of metal rods exactly corresponding to the 
connecting rods of the manual exchange in place of a large num- 
ber of contacts constituting a multiple of all the lines 1n the ex- 
change at each “ selector,” which is a predominant characteristic 
in all other automatic exchanges. It is substantially built with 
comparatively few wearing parts, and no telephone cords, plugs 
ana jacks, line drops, lamps, relays, etc., to wear out; the cords 
being especially troublesome and expensive. 

It requires but two operating patteries, no matter what the size 
of the exchange may be. One battery furnishes current to the 
switching apparatus, the other for conversation. Some auto- 
matic systems employ several batteries at the exchange, andin 
addition, a local battery at each subscriber’s station. 

Tt uses less current than the present multiple boards, as only 
one per cent. of the circuits of the exchange when idle receives 
any current at all, and that for but a fraction of a second. In 
some automatic exchange systems the current is very consider- 
able, as compared with the maximum requirements of the 
exchange. , 

It makes and breaks every contact by power. No contact in 
the exchange is made or broken by means of an electro-magnet 


52 HAMMER: AUTOMATIC [Jan. 23 


(on the principle of a relay), not a single relay being employed 
on the machine. 

It can cooperate with manual exchanges, and can call and be 
called by such exchanges. 

It can be completely wired in sections at the factory, with the 
single exception of the “ B”’ trunks; and at the place of installa- 
tion it is only necessary to connect the ‘‘ 1” trunks to the 
“terminator,” and to connect each subscriber’s line once, a 
proceeding which is not possible in any installation employing the’ 
multiple system. It employs large contact surfaces. It handles 
all calls, no matter how many subscribers call at once. It pos- 
sesses a perfectly balanced circuit at all times, having no multiple 
branches or taps. This is impossible with the manual or with 
automatic systems generally. 

DISADVANTAGES OF THE ManuaL EXCHANGE SYSTEM. 

Heavy disbursement for operators’ salaries. 

Important conversations ‘between subscrihers may be listened 
to by the operator and others at the exchange; end although this 
is not to be feared to any considerable extent in large exchanges, 
it is nevertheless a fact that the absolute privacy ensured by the 
automatic exchange system is highly appreciated by the tele- 
phone subscriber. At each call considerable of the subscrib-r’s 
time is consumed in giving the operator the number desired, and 
having her repeat the same to prevent mistakes; and frequently 
the subscriber has to repeat the number séveral times by reason 
of his or her indistinct speaking, or standing too far from or too 
close to the transmitter; or by reason of disturbances on the linc, 
or interference of other sounds in the proximity of the telephone. 
There may also be interference due to other subscribers being cut 
in on the lines. 

During rush hours it has been necessary at times to station 
behind the usual operators, special operators, who facilitate the 
handling of the board by pulling out the various plugs. And it is 
not an uncommon practice when there are troubles at the switch- 
board, and possibly even during the con gestion of the rush hours, 
for the operator to report a line busy, thus staving off temporarily 
the calling subscribers. Circumstances have been known where 
subscribers have been told repeatedly that the party whom they 
have called was busy; and on his making inquiry at that party's 
office he has found that the telephone had not been used during 
that period. 

The reason why the multiple board deteriorates faster than the 


1903.] TELEPHONE OPERATOR. 53 


balance of the installation lies in the fact that practically every- 
thing has to be sacrificed to considerations of space. A well- 
known telephone authority in this country has stated that the 
allowance for depreciation on the switchboard should not be less 
than 10 per cent; and while the common battery board is doubt- 
less much better than the magneto board, it is believed that with 
this mechanical operator, with its large surfaces of contact and 
ample mechanical margins, the depreciation would be much less. 

The cost of construction where the multiple section system is 
employed is enormous. It is a fact well understood by ex- 
perienced telephone men that, as the number of the subscribers 
which are connected to any exchange (whether manual or auto- 
matic), increases, the expense, both of operation and maintenance 
increases in far greater proportion than the increase in the num- 
ber of subscribers. This is not the case, however, with this 
automatic system, which, as regards the central exchange ex- 
penses and construction expenses and maintenance charges, in- 
creases more nearly in a direct proportion with the increase in the 
number of subscribers. 

The length of reach of the human operator in the manual 
exchange is very limited. She is generally expected to cover a 
section of board 30 inches each side of her. This is not the case 
with this mechanical operator, the range of which is practically 
unlimited. Furthermore, in tlie latter case, the machine is not 
delayed by connecting and disconnecting, as it can connect and 
disconnect at. ene and the same time, a function which is not 
possible with the human operator. 

In considering the disadvantages: of, automatic exchange 
systems hitherto invented, it is readily understood why they 
have met with such limited application up to date, notwithstand- 
ing the realization by telephone men the world over, of the many 
advantages of automatic exchanges; it 1s because of the inherent 
delicacy of the various. electrical and mechanical devices em- 
ployed and the rapid depreciation of tnese devices. It is also 
due to their extreme complexity, especially in the multiplication 
in the numbers of wires, contacts, relays, magnets, etc., which 
increase out of all proportion with the increase in the number of 
subscribers. It is quite common to employ from five to seven or 
more magnets and relays in each switching device, and employing 
one to three of these switching devices in establishing the neces- 
sary connections, and utilizing these magnets and relays for per- 
forming the actual mechanical work of lifting, rotating and 


54 HAMMER: AUTOMATIC [Jan. 23 


switching the mechanism employed with all the disadvantages 
which this entails; and finally, it is by reason of the very high 
class of engineering talent essential in the designing and con- 
structing of the complicated apparatus which has been employed. 

It is self-evident to all electrical engineers-who have had 
experience with electromechanical devices that it is far better 
to employ a well-designed mechanism pertorming a definite cycle 
of operations and driven by some source of power. 

This mechanical operator has been designed and constructed 
upon the following lines: 7.e., an absolutely reliable, prompt, 
rapid and uniform service in telephone exchanges of any size; an 
embodiment of all essential features demanded by the exigencies 
of modern telephone practice; an elimination of the unreliable, 
flimsy and complex features inherent in systems heretofore pre- 
sented to the public; and finally, the effecting of large economies 
in construction and maintenance charges. 

The author of this paper believes as a result of his investiga- 
tions into this system, that these claims made for it will be borne 
out in actual practice; and he considers it a privilege to be able 
to present for your consideration what he believes to be one of the 
most important and interesting inventions ever brought before 
the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


ou 
oO 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 


Discussion. 


PRESIDENT Scott:—Mr. Thomas D. Lockwood, electrical 
engineer and advisory electrician of the American Telephone and 
Telegraph Company, will read his paper on “‘ The Evolution of 
the Telephone Switchboard.” 

Mr. Lockwoop:—It will take a good paper to stand up to the 
introductory remarks of President Scott. It is a number of 
years since I last stood in this place, but the InstTiTUTE, never- 
theless, is always, and always has been, with me an object of 
solicitude; and I shall never, I think, be perfectly satisfied with 
the condition of the InstiturTe until it has an audience room of 
its own far more fitted to its importance and requirements than 
this room, good as it is, can ever be. Perhaps, as President 
Scott has pertinently observed, there never was a greater 
invention than the speaking telephone. I do not think I am 
ever more impressed with its far-reaching consequence (and that 
is never absent from my’ mind, although I have been nearly 
twenty-five years connected with the telephone business) than 
when I sit in an office in Chicago and talk to my home near 
Boston. On such occasions the mystery of it comes over me, 
as I fear it can over very few persons; for when I think that one 
small iron plate can perform, under the influence of varying mag- 
netism, and varying currents, all of the several functions which 
in the human individual require the codperative work of the 
lungs, the palate, the lips and the tongue, I cannot but realize 
how great indeed is the intellect of man and how wonderful this 
one of his achievements. I was much impressed at a meeting 
held in Washington to celebrate the institution of the patent 
system of the United States, when an orator observed that while 
he felt that he could get upon familiar terms with a dynamo at a 
respectful distance, and while to some extent he could appreciate 
the electric telegraph as being something which even he was 
capable of measureably understanding, when it came to the 
telephone he was stricken with awe, for, as he said, while we 
have it on the authority of the Master that none of us by taking 
thought can add one cubit to his stature, Alexander Graham 
Bell by taking thought had added not merely a cubit but hun- 
dreds of miles to the length of our tongues and ears. I, there- 
fore, you will understand, am one of the very last men in the 
world to belittle the telephone; and yet, standing here, as I do 
this evening, I am willing to asseverate even in this distinguished 
company, that the telephone without the telephone exchange - 
system would have been incomplete; and that to the inventors 
who have perfected the plans for the telephone exchange, aided 
by the brilliant engineers who have made effective these plans, 
almost as much honor is due in the interest of commercialism, at 
least, as to him who laid the foundation for them—Alexander 
Graham Bell. 

[Mr. Lockwood then read his paper (see page 127) ]. ; 

Mr. Lockwoop:—I did not intend to read as much of this 


56 VHE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. [Jan. 23 


paper as I have, but it is the first time I have had a chance to 
read it, and I grew rather interested in the paper as I went along. 
If its contents have been to my audience but one-tenth as 
luminous as they are voluminous, I shall be perfectly satisfied. 

(Vice-President Dr. Samuel Sheldon in the chair.) 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON:—I think we have all enjoyed 
this extremely interesting and valuable paper by Mr. Lockwood. 
It is doubtful if anyone else could have written so acceptably and 
so authoritatively on the subject. The discussion will be opened 
by Mr. J. J. Carty, chief engineer of the New York Telephone 
Company. 

Mr. J. J. Carty:—To-night we have enjoyed the rare privi- 
lege of listening to a paper from Mr. Lockwood. The subject of 
his discourse is one of which he is the master. Condensed with 
admirable precision, he has put into 27 short pages an epitome 
of switchboard progress of the past twenty-five years. This was 
twenty-five years of intense effort, of struggle and failure, and of 
ultimate success. Within no similar period in history has there 
been displayed so much energy and so much successful work in 
connection with any industry. Of the magnificent results of 
this work the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
has particular reason to feel proud. 

Beginning with the telephone itselfi—the foundation of it all— 
we find it is the invention of one of our own members, Prof. Bell. 
I regret that he is not present with us to-night. In speaking of 
Prof. Bell, we cannot help but think also of another distinguished 
member, Mr. Edison, whose work in connection with the tele- 
phone is so well known to us all. Upon the foundation work of 
Prof. Bell down almost to the humblest improvement which has 
not yet been passed upon by Mr. Lockwood, this entire develop- 
ment has been the work almost exclusively of the members of this- 
InstituTE. Nearly all of these electrical mechanisms of which 
we have heard to-night are the direct product of our own mem- 
bers, or have been produced by those codperating with them or 
under their directions. I think, therefore, that in no other 
branch of electrical engineering can it be said that the AMERICAN 
INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS is more immediately con- 
cerned. In reference to no other branch of electrical work can it 
be said that they have reason to feel such a just pride. 

It is not only as members of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, but also as Americans, that we have 
reason to be proud of this work. It is nowadays the fashion to 
talk much, especially in the daily papers, about ‘‘ American 
industrial supremacy.’ With braggadocio of that sort I have 
no sympathy. ~Nevertheless, for a special reason, it is pertinent 
to call attention to the fact that little,if any, contribution to the 
results described to-night has been made by any country except 
America. Of course, from this I must except the foundation 
work which was done by the noble band of immortals headed by 
Faraday, which the old world has produced. As specific 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 57 


workers in the telephone field I must except two names—I refer 
to Van Rysselberghe of Belgium, who has given to us simultane- 
ous telegraphy and telephony, and to the Rev. Mr. Hunning of 
the Church of England, who gave us the granular carbon trans- 
mitter. In the form in which we received it from him it was not 
fitted to survive this evolution of which we have heard to-night. 
It remained for an American, the late Mr. Anthony White, to 
convert the granular carbon transmitter of Hunning into the 
“solid back ”’ transmitter of to-day, 

Mr. Lockwood tells us of the successes which have been at- 
tained in telephone switchboards, but he has said little, if any- 
thing, of the failures. For every one of these successes there has 
been a multitude of failures. Many of the ideas which have been 
discussed have been contributed directly by Mr. Lockwood 
himself. With reference to many of the improvements, he has 
exercised great influence, and toward all of them has acted as a 
sort of godfather. With respect to the failures, his relation has 
not been so pleasant. Toward them he must be considered as 
being a “ Lord High Executioner.’’ I think it is safe to say that 
not a single important invention in relation to the telephone has 
been seriously proposed for the last twenty-five years, that has 
not been fully considered by Mr. Lockwood, and upon which he 
has not reported. In my experience I have found that he has 
rarely allowed a bad thing to pass by him without being properly 
stamped, and I have never known him to turn down a good 
thing. J am sure that there are a multitude of inventors who 
would not agree with me in this statement, but it is nevertheless 
(erble 

I had intended to offer some statistics showing what results 
might be obtained from systems employing the apparatus which 
Mr. Lockwood has so well described, but time will not permit, 
and there are many speakers to follow. I will give one fact, 
however, from our statistics which is very significant as showing 
the degree of practical perfection which telephonic apparatus has 
now reached. From carefully kept records of all the troubles 
in connection with the 100,000 telephone stations in Manhattan, 
it is found that each station is out of order during the year for a 
period of only 1 hour and 27 minutes. That means that on the 
average, each station would be in good order during the entire 
year, except for the brief period of 1 hour and 27 minutes. These 
figures are taken directly from carefully kept records. They are 
trustworthy and accurate. 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON :—The discussion will be continued 
by Mr. F. A. Pickernell, engineer of the American Telephone and 
Telegraph Company. 

Mr. PickeRNELL:—The subject has been so well covered in 
the paper which Mr. Lockwood presented that there is really 
not much opportunity for discussion. I do want to refer to one 
factor, however, that has been abundantly taken care of in the 
modern switchboards. You all remember in the early days of 


58 THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. [Jan. 23 


telephony very many exhibitions were given of telephonic trans- 
mission between cities over lines of considerable length. Such 
development was not particularly rapid in the early days, 
because the number of stations was small, and some of the 
switchboard difficulties referred to had not been fixed up. How- 
ever, as the switchboard was improved and the number of sta- 
‘tions increased, the demand for long distance service, service 
between the cities, increased enormously, and every part of the 
apparatus used in switchboards had to be designed so that it 
would work satisfactorily in connection with such lines. A 
switchboard engineer, if he designed defective apparatus, might 
impair the service to an extent which could not be counter- 
balanced by the introduction of tons of copper in the long _ 
distance circuits. Some of those electromagnets in series 
which Mr. Lockwood referred to might not only impair the 
volume of transmission, but they might also introduce sources 
of disturbance due to their lack of electrical balance. All these 
things had to be cared for in designing switchboard equipment. 
The effort has been made and successfully carried out to arrange 
the apparatus so that any particular station may be connected 
with any other particular station within the range of say a 
thousand miles. The switchboard engineers have designed their 
apparatus so well that from the telephone station located in this 
building connection can probably be had with three-quarters of a 
million, if not a million, other stations in various parts of the 
country. None of these results could have been produced or 
attained if the switchboard design had not been of the highest 
possible order. That is the one thing I care to point out in con- 
nection with the subject under discussion this evening. 

VICE-PRESIDENT SHELDON :—The discussion will be continued 
by Mr. B. Gherardi, Jr., chief engineer of the New York & New 
Jersey Telephone Company. 

Mr. GHERARDI:—The prevailing idea of the electrical engineer 
just graduating from college is that in telephony there is little 
for the engineer to do; that at best it furnishes only a field for 
the electrician or the mechanician. An instrument screwed upon 
the wall, a pair of twisted wires connected to it and an opera- 
tor with some plugs and spring jacks at the central office, is all 
that is required. To be sure, it is not the daily task of the 
telephone engineer to design ponderous machinery such as is 
employed at Niagara; he is not concerned in transmitting for 
unheard of distances currents at enormous voltages; he does 
not make the grosser forms of engineering his exclusive concern. 
But it is a grave mistake to assume that with these branches of 
electrical engineering he has nothing whatever todo. The paper 
before us clearly brings out the multitudinous functions which 
must be performed by the modern telephone central office 
and indicates the variety of agencies which the telephone engi- 
neer has called to his aid. 

Let us compare for a moment some of the functions of an 


* 
1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 5a 


electric light station with those of a telephone central office. At 
the electric light station a certain gross amount of current is 
generated. This is distributed by feeders and mains through the 
various streets and highways of the district to be served and 
connections are made for the mains to the various houses requir- 
ing current. No particular unit of current generated at the 
central station is intended for any particular lamp or motor 
connected therewith. Large copper wires constituting the 
mains may-be tapped to feed any house. The user of the electric 
light may turn on or off his current at will, and is not required to 
cooperate in any way with the central station, or with any of the 
other users of the electric light system. 

+ In the telephone central office, however, there must be dis- 
tributed from the central office current destined to a particular 
station, and this current, as a rule, is received at the central 
office from some other particular station where it originates. 
While in both electric light and telephone systems copper con- 
ductors are used, in the electric light system common conductors 
of large mass are employed. The cturent for all customers is 
sent out over these common wires. 

In the telephone central office, while large amounts of copper 
are used, the particular current intended for a given ‘station 
must be sent along its own conductors and delivered to its own 
destination. Not only must the central office arrangement 
provide for this, but it must provide that this current shall be 
delivered in the particular form and at a particular time, both of 
which shall be under the control of the subscriber. 

The conductors leading to the electric light station extend to a 
switchboard, to be sure, but the connections there made are 
elementary in their character. Intercommunication between 
conductors centered at an electric light station is not the rule. 
In the telephone central office any line there centering must be 
so constituted that it can, within a fraction of a minute, be con- 
nected to any other line in the system. Ina central office of ten 
thousand lines there are about one hundred million possible com- 
binations of connections, which must be provided for. But it is 
not only subscribers in one central office that must be thought 
of, but connections between subscribers in different central 
offices must also be considered. This must be accomplished 
regardless of the number of central offices in any city. Not only 
this, but connections between any central office in a given city 
and between any central office in a neighboring city, must be 
capable of instantaneous establishment, and with the growth of 
the telephone system, the number of cities and towns which 
must be included within the vast network of wires has become 
practically unlimited. 

Between the electric light system employed in the city of New 
York and that employed in the city of Boston, there is no 
necessary relation, but with the telephone system this is not so. 
The telephone system at Boston and the telephone system at 


60 THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. [Jan. 23 


New. York must be so constructed that they will be interlocking. 
This is true of all large cities which enter into the problem. 

While, as I have stated, telephone engineers do not concern 
themselves with the transmission for great distances of high voltage 
currents, they have to contend with a transmission problem 
which in point of difficulties is of a vastly serious nature. Deal- 
ing, as it does, with currents defying measurement, and almost 
infinitesimal in amount, the work of the telephone engineer 1s 
attended by obstacles without number. Not only must the 
telephone engineer design his transmission system so as to take 
care of the currents generated by the telephone apparatus, but 
he must so plan that system that it will be defended against the 
inductive attacks of electric light and power circuits. For his. 
own protection, therefore, if for no other reason, he must have a 
working knowledge of the behavior of currents of greater degree 
and higher voltage. 

At the central office itself we have no Niagara dynamos, but 
we have an, aggregartion of parts which may with precision be 
called a multitude. These parts, as Mr. Lockwood has so well 
pointed out, have varied and complex functions to perform. 
Each part has its special function, and must be maintained in 
definite relation to all of the other parts in the system. 

Taken altogether, the demands upon the engineer in designing 
a modern telephone central office are‘not exceeded by those made 
upon engineers engaged in the grosser or heavier branches of the 
work. 

I have mentioned this point, because, from observations I 
have made in visiting our various colleges in search of assistants 
from the graduating classes, I have found that the point of view 
which is taken by engineering students generally at these insti- 
tutions is that which I have already indicated in my previous 
remarks. It is for this reason that I have made these compari- 
sons, and not with a view of “ blowing the horn ” of the telephone 
engineer. 

It would, perhaps, be interesting to enumerate briefly some 
of the electrical engineering branches which are represented in a 
modern telephone exchange. Wherever it is possible to obtain 
service such as is given so admirably to us at New York by the 
Edison Company, the prime source of current employed is from 
the street mains of the electric light company. To these are 
connected a motor, sometimes of 40 horse-power, and in reserve 
it is customary to keep an additional motor ofthis kind connected 
to the switchboard and ready for action at all times. Each of 
these motors is connected to a generator of suitable horse-power, 
which is employed to charge a storage battery. Where a direct 
current source of power is not available, two and three-phase 
alternating current motors are often employed, these being used 
to run the direct current charging generators. Often no electric 
current of any character is available for motor driving, and fre- 
quently such as may be available cannot be relied upon, and in 


~ 1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 61 


such cases gas engines or other prime movers are used, either as 
reserve or to furnish all of the power required. This use of 
direct current and two and three-phase alternating currents, 
and of gas engines.and other prime movers, brings into the 
problem- various factors of engineering supposed to belong 
exclusively to other branches and to be far removed from tele- 
phone engineering. 

While the storage battery at a telephone central office is not 
to be compared in magnitude with those such:as are used in our 
electric light stations, yet in so far as the care required in its 
maintenance and the knowledge of storage battery practice is 
concerned, the telephone engineer must be suitably equipped. 
He must at all times maintain the battery in condition to per- 
form the service required of it. 

From the storage battery are run various other motor-gener- 
ators, which produce both direct and alternating current at 
various voltages to serve the diverse uses of the system. While 
the magnitude of the currents employed is not great, the necessity 
for absolute reliability is present and requires most exact and 
careful attention in design, installation and maintenance. 

In the modern central office, the telephone switchboard is not 
‘ the only one employed. To provide for the proper switching 
of the various machines and the prompt supplying of new 
sources of current in case of break-down, a power switchboard is 
needed. On this switchboard there are massive bus-bars, 
switches, fuses, circuit breakers, starting and regulating boxes, 
and the measuring instruments usually supposed to be peculiar 
to electric light and power stations. This apparatus, which | 
have just enumerated constitutes a complete power plant, and 
in its general aspects suggests an electric light station rather 
than a telephone office'as ordinarily conceived. 

Between this power plant and the telephone switchboard 
proper is drawn a dead line of specially designed fuses and cut- 
outs. In the consideration of these fuses and cut-outs alone the 
telephone engineer has been obliged to study questions which to 
the electric light engineer have probably not even occurred. 
Instead of large fusible wires or magnetic cut-outs carrying 
heavy currents, fine, hair-like fuses are employed, and in some 
cases we use heat coils surrounding easily fusible metal, which 
melts at a predetermined point and releases a spring which 
operates a cut-out or sends an alarm, as the case might be. 

To the telephone man, a one-half ampere fuse is one that blows 
. when that amount of current flows; to the electric light engineer, 
a one-half ampere fuse is one which will carry that amount of 
current plus an unknown quantity for an indefinite length of 
time. To tell the story of the fuse question as applied to tele- 
phony would be of great interest in itself, but in this discussion 
it can only be alluded to. 

In the switchboard itself, as has already been clearly pointed 
out in the paper of the evening, there abounds a multitude of 


62 THE TEI-EPHONE SWITCHBOARD. [Jan. 23 


questions involving intricate circuits, the mechanical disposition 
of a large number of parts, and the orderly arrangement of the 
whole so that it may at all times be ready to answer the various 
demands which are made upon it at all hours of the day and 
night. In every switchboard there are miles of conductors and 
cable, thousands of incandescent lamps, hundreds of relays, 
transformers, keyboard apparatus and other devices, each having 
its special function to perform, and which must be maintained 
at all times in a definite relation to all of the other parts. The 
orderly and economical arrangement of all of this aggregation 
of elements is one of the problems of the te!ephone engineer. 

It is not the electric light engineer alone who has had to do 
with the development of transformers. Their extended use in 
telephony has called for a vast deal of time and study on the 
part of the telephone engineer, and while the transformer prob- 
lem as presented to him is vastly different from that which is 
presented to the electric light engineer, it is still none the less diffi- 
cult, and while in the design of transformers and other electric 
light and power apparatus, the degree of loss which should be tol- 
erated is oftentimes dependent upon the cost of coal, we have no 
such conditions in telephony, for here the amount of current gene- 
rated has absolute limit, and must be conserved in all of its parts 
if success is to be attained. Not only is there no margin for 
losses of current, but in respect to frequency and the shape of the 
wave, the telephone engineer is held to rigid limits. 

The problem of centering at one point and housing such a 
large number of wires as are required in a modern telephone 
central office is a question requiring most careful study, and 
involves not only electrical, but also questions of mechanical and 
civil engineering. To terminate these wires properly and to 
provide for their distribution from time to time, as the varying 
demands of the business require, has been the subject of a great 
deal ‘of study and invention on the part of many minds. 

The size and efficiency of the underground cable, depending 
not only upon its conductor resistance, but also upon the dielec- 
tric capacity, influences the size and number of ducts in the under- 
ground cable system. This in turn affects the size of the office 
district which it is economical to serve, and this, taken together 
with a large number of other factors, determines the size of the 
central office. The switchboard design depends upon the size of 
the offices, and this, as I have indicated, is, in a large measure, 
dependent upon the character of the cable it is possible to 
employ. Thus slight changes in cable design, apparently having 
no relation whatever to the central office apparatus, are often 
found to affect its design. 

In view of the vast costs and peculiar requirements of the 
modern telephone switchboard, it is rarely that a building 
already constructed can be found well adapted for the purpose 
of a telephone central office of any considerable magnitude. 
For this reason, a specially designed building must be prepared, 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW- YORK. 63. 


and ordinary prudence requires that this building should be as 
nearly as possible fire-proof. The construction of the building 
bears such a close relation to the arrangement of the telephonic 
apparatus that it must be subordinate thereto. For this reason 
there devolves upon the telephone engineer the task in the first 
instance of designing the telephone central office building before 
the matter is turned over to the architect. 

All of these things have been brought to my mind by a perusal 
of this most valuable paper of Mr. Lockwood’s, and perhaps at 
the risk of being irrelevant, I have felt it worth while at least 
to mention them in the discussion. 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON :—Will Mr: E. F, Sherwood, super- 
intendent of traffic of the New York Telephone Company, 
please continue the discussion. 

Mr. SHERWooD:—The title of the paper of the evening is of 
itself sufficient to attract the favorable attention of all engaged in 
telephony, but coming as it does from Mr. Lockwood, whose 
relations to the subject are so well known to us all, it is doubly 
interesting. What he has to-night told us may be taken with ail 
the weight of authority. He has rapidly sketched for our interest 
and information the progress of the switchboard from its imper- 
. fect beginnings to that high degree of perfection which it has 
attained to-day. But all of the care and thought and effort 
.which have been applied by the ablest engineers to the design and 
construction of the modern switchboard would go for naught 
unless, after the switchboard is installed, it is operated in accord- 
ance with correct methods. These methods themselves have gone 
through the same harsh process of evolution which has given to 
us the splendid mechanism of to-day. Indeed, the relation 
between the method of operation and the design of switchboards 
is so close that there has often been controversy as to which was 
the more important. Into a discussion of this matter it is not 
now my intention to enter, but I will say that as between oper- 
ating method and switchboard design there is, when rightly con- 
sidered, no necessary conflict. Each must be adjusted to the 
other and their correct mutual relations must be established. It 
is a fact not without significance that between the highest type of 
switchboard design and the best operating methods, there is no 
incompatibility. Both may be found together in the same 
organization, each in its highest form. In fact, I am convinced 
that in the highest form one cannot exist without the other. 

In the paper itself, as well as in the discussion, the physical 
features of the switchboard system have been developed at 
length. For my own remarks, I think it might be of interest if I 
should present in brief form data which will give some idea of the 
results which may be obtained from the relay board such as Mr. 
‘ Lockwood describes. I have taken data as applying to New 
York, bécause it is with traffic of that company I am particularly . 
familiar. itd 

For the past eight years it has been the practice in New York 


64 THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. [Jan. 23 


to make service tests in such a way as to show the quality of the 
service received by telephone subscribers. These tests show the 
’ time taken by the operator to answer subscribers’ calls, the time 
taken to complete local and trunk connections, the time taken to 
disconnect after conversations are finished, the percentage of con- 
nections on which irregularities occur, etc. Records of these 
tests have been valuable not only as a means of showing in what 
respects improvements in the service might be made, but have 
afforded accurate information as to the improvements brought 
about by the installation of relay switchboards. 

The first standard relay switchboard installed in New York 
was cut into service on November 13, 1898, and the last one, 
which for Manhattan Island rounded out the conversion of the 
entire system of local switchboards to a relay basis, was cut into 
service November 2, 1901. The tests of service for the year 
preceding the installation of the first relay switchboard in New 
York and for the year 1902 show the following resuits: 


Avg.timetaken Avg.timetaken Avg timetaken 


by operator to. tocompletelo- tocomplete trunk Avg. time taken 

af ner. cal connections. connections. ta disconnect. 
1897 sida 27.6 50.7 Liat 
1902 3.8 PRT) 30.7 2.8 


The improvement made in the time of answering is chiefly due 
to two causes: First, unlike the arrangement of magneto equips 
ment, the answering jacks in the relay board are imimediately 
associated with the line lamps or calling signals, so that no time 
is lost by the operator in locating the answering jack correspond- 
ing with the calling signal; and second, with relay equipment 
subscriber’s lines are promptly released after conversations are 
finished, and delays due to slow clearing out of previous con- 
nectious do not occur as they did with magneto equipment, 
which required that operators should listen in and ask ‘ are 
you through?” in every case before disconnecting. . 

The improvement in the time taken to complete connections is 
partly due to the use of trunk line machine ringing keys, which 
when set, cause the bell of the called subscriber to ring inter- 
mittently until the receiver is removed from the hook; and 
partly to the use of cord supervisory signals, which show whether 
the called subscriber has answered or not and enable the operator 
to give a second or a third ring when necessary, without delay. 

The slowness of disconnection, with the old type magneto 
~ switchboard, to which Mr. Lockwood referred, was largely due to 
the failure of the subscriber to ring off in a large percentage of 
eases—something like 14 per cent. of the subscribers hung up 
their telephone without giving any signal, and the operator had 
to discover whether the subscriber had finished by groping 
around and listening on the line. 

The improvement in the time of disconnection is entirely due to 
the use of cord supervisory signals, which immediately light when 
the receiver is placed on the hook, and enable the operator to 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 65 


disconnect without listening in on the connection. In fact, the 
work of making disconnections is largely an overlapping opera- 
tion, and is frequently performed simultaneously with other 
operations which require the use of the operator’s telephone. 

Further evidence that the installation of relay switchboards 
has improved the service is furnished by the record of written 
complaints from subscribers. During the year 1897, when the 
average number of subscriber’s lines in service in Manhattan 
was 17,066, a daily average of 3.2 written complaints were 
received or one complaint a day for every 5,330 lines. During 
the year 1902, when the average number of subscribers’ lines in 
service in Manhattan was 49,955, a daily average of 3.3 written 
complaints were received, or only one complaint a day for every 
15,138 lines; or to put it another way, at the rate of one com- 
plaint for each line every 41 years. 

The relay switchboards in New York have been put to the most 
severe test, and have stood that test in a most satisfactory 
manner. Since the installation of the first relay board in New 
York, the number of lines in Manhattan has increased from 
20,740 to 53,792, and the number of stations in Manhattan has 
increased from 25,516 to 91,945. During this time the daily 
average number of calls originated by subscribers has increased 
from 243,590 to 549,940, and the daily average number of con- 
nections handled by each subscriber operator has been increased 
from 750 to 1070; and yet, with this very large increase in lines, 
stations and traffic, and the material increase in the number of 
calls handled by each operator, the relay switchboards have en- 
abled us to make a very substantial improvement in the service. 

The evolution of the telephone switchboard, which has resulted 
in standardizing such equipment and has permitted us to install 
uniform equipment throughout Manhattan Island, has made it 
possible to establish a school for the instruction and training of 
new operators; and such a school was established by the New 
York Telephone Company on February 1, 1902. This school 
is equipped with a switchboard, which on a small scale is just as 
complete as any switchboard in service, and is so designed that all 
types of calls are handled by the student operators in practice 
in exactly the same way that they are handled at the regular 
central offices. 

In this school student operators are thoroughly instructed in 
the theory and practice of telephone operating. They attend 
twelve lectures given by the head of the school, and after each 
lecture they put in practice at the school switchboard the in- 
structions given in the lecture. In this way they learn how to 
handle properly the switchboard apparatus, trunk lines, etc., 
and also learn by actual practice the methods of handling the 
various classes of traffic. The course of instructions is such that 
on being transferred to a regular central office, student operators 
are competent to handle moderately busy switchboard positions. 

Before the operators’ school was established, the new opera- 


66 THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. [Jan. 23 


tors were sent to the various central offices, and were instructed 
by experienced operators, who devoted to them as much time as 
could be spared from their regular duties and permitted them to 
practice at the switehhoard when the traffic was light. The great 
disadvantages of this method of training operators were that 
students had a great deal of time during which they were not 
occupied except in listening in with another operator and when 
they first began to handle subscribers’ calls, they necessarily 
were not so proficient as operators who have had experience at 
the school switchboard. 

The principal adyantages of our present method of instructing 
new operators over the old method of training them in the 
various central offices are as follows: 

1—The raw student element has been entirely eliminated 
from the central office, thereby greatly reducing the amount of 
interference with the service caused by inexperienced operators. 

2.—The students in being trained by expert teachers acquire a 
uniformity of method, which has proved to be very beneficial. 

3.—The time required to develop a new operator into an 
expert operator has been reduced two months by the establish- 
ment of the school. 

4.—The total cost of training operators in the school is less 
than it was when they were educated in the various central - 
offices. 

The necessity for our present method of training operators 
becomes apparent when it is understood that in order to fill 
vacancies caused by resignations and to fill positions caused by 
the increase in the New York Telephone Company’s business, 
and to supply operators for subscribers who take private branch 
exchange switchboards, of which there are 3,300 in Manhattan, 
we are obliged to train upwards of 700 operators a year. It is 
interesting to note in this connection, that there are more than 
twice as many operators employed in operating private branch 
exchange switchboards as are engaged in the various central: 
offices in Manhattan. 

With the evolution of the telephone switchboard, as I have 
already pointed out, there has gone on a corresponding develop- 
ment in the methods of operation, or handling the “ traffic,” as it 
is nowadays called. This development is by no means limited 
to the mere routine to be followed by operators in working the 
switchboard. It has been applied to the founding of the Traffic 
Department, the organization immediately charged with the 
duty of giving at all times to the public prompt and satisfactory 
service. So large have some of these departments grown that, in 
the number of their employees, the complexity of their organiza- 
tion, and the importance of their work, they may be compared 
to the entire organization of a telephone company of years ago. 

From the facts which Mr. Gherardi has so clearly brought out 
in his remarks, there can be no doubt that among the various 
branches of electrical engineering, that of the telephone engineer 


> yi 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 67 


deserves a high rank. In addition to the varied demands now 
made upon the telephone engineer, there are many others which 
might be mentioned. So comprehensive is the subject that there 
are in telephone engineering already, specialties and sub-special- 
ties. 

To deal adequately with the traffic questions and operating 
methods required in connection with growing systems and 
changing types of switchboard, there has come a demand for the 
telephone engineer specially skilled in these matters. In all of 
the large telephone companies nowadays, we have a traffic 
engineer, whose special duty it is to study switchboard problems 
in their particular relations to operating methods. 

To give even a slight’ idea of the nature of the problems 
encountered in traffic departments, would require a paper 
devoted to that subject alone. In my remarks I simply intended 
to call attention to problems, the nature of which are not gener- 
ally understood, and the very existence of which is probably 
known to but few outside of those immediately concerned. 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON:—The next speaker on the pro- 
gramme is Mr. G. C. Allen, superintendent of construction of the 
New York Telephone Company. 

Mr. ALLEN:—It was with great interest that I read the ad- 
vance sheets of the able paper which Mr. Lockwood has presented 
to us to-night. After studying with much care the splendid 
presentation which he has made of an intricate subject, I have 
wondered why it is that I should have been asked to discuss a 
paper dealing so particularly with central office apparatus. But 
after giving some thought to the subject, I have concluded that 
while the central office apparatus is of controlling importance 
in telephone systems, that, after all, it would be of little use 
unless it were supplemented by adequate provision for the out- 
side plant. It is to the design and construction of the outside 
plant that my work in telephony has for the past fifteen years 
been especially directed. The central office apparatus may be 
considered as the cerebral headquarters of the telephone system; 
it is the brains of the working plant. But as the brain, without 
nerves extending to all parts of the body, would be unable to 
perform its function, so would a telephone central office be 
without purpose unless there were leading from it to all parts of 
the district served, suitable conductors cooperating with the 
organization represented at the central office. 

In the paper which we have before us for discussion, there has 
been briefly traced the history of the development of the tele- 
phone switchboard and the essential principles of the existing 
system, which has survived from a multitude of fa“lures. This 
description is notable for its accurate brevity and for its clear and 
forcible statement of an involved subject. It has been ably 
pointed out by Mr. Gherardi that the installation of the modern 
telephone switchboard has drawn upon the resources of electrical 
engineering in practically all of its departments. I shall confine 


68 THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. [Jan. 23 


my remarks to explaining some of the new demands which have 
been made upon the telephone engineer to adapt the outside 
plant to modern conditions and to bring it up in point of 
efficiency to the standard set at the central office. 

With the old magneto system there was upon the lines no 
normal current. Under ordinary conditions, that is, when the 
telephone lines were not in use, no current was flowing upon the 
subscribers’ lines. The only current which these lines had to 
carry was the occasional ringing current employed when signal- 
ling a subscriber, and the minute telephone current impressed 
upon the line during conversation. Neither of these currents 
imposed upon the conductor or its ‘dielectric any substantial 
strain. With the common battery system, however, there is 
upon the line at all times an electromotive force of 24 volts and 
during conversation there is a current flowing, although in small 
amount. The strain put upon the diclectric of the conductor by 
such a small voltage as that employed is not in any sense to be 
compared with that encountered in electric light practice, but 
considering the large number of wires which must be placed zn one 
cable and considering the smail amount of insulating material with 
which it is practicable to enclose the conductors, the strain is by 
no means negligible and as compared with former conditions, it is 
most substantial. Perhaps in employing the word “ strain,” I 
am conveying an erroneous idea, but when we consider the 
presence of a very small voltage upon the line for a long period 
of time, possibilities of destructive effects in the dielectric are 
present to a considerable degree. For this reason, an unusual 
amount of care is required in the maintenance of cables con- 
nected with commor. battery systems. The same is true of all 
of the wiring in the outside circuits. 

As is now well understood, paper has been universally accepted 
as being for telephone conductors altogether the best insulating 
medium to employ, both on account of its low inductive capacity, 
as well as on account of its high insulating qualities. But these 
high insulating qualities of paper are present only so long as the 
paper is kept free from moisture. Even small amounts of 
moisture, which might in chemical language be referred to as 
“traces ”’ will produce a lowering of the insulation which is not 
allowable in the best practice. For this reason, the methods of 
laying and maintaining cable have become more and more 
rigorous as our experience with this new switchboard system has 
progressed. Notwithstanding this, the development of engineer- 
ing practice as applied to the outside plant has kept pace with 
that which has been applied to the central office apparatus. 

Periodical insulation tests are made and incipient faults are 
immediately noted and steps at once taken for their rectification. 
It is now a matter of every-day practice by means of electrical 
measurements, to locate within a few feet faults in cables, 
whether due to the discontinuity of the conductors or to a 
failure of insulation. ' 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. €o 


With the advances of central office construction and with the 
enormous increase in. conductors in such cities as New York, 
has come a greater extension of underground wires. - At the 
present time I think it may be stated without fear of contradic- 
tion that considering the total mileage of wire employed, that a 
larger percentage in mileage of the conductors on Manhattan 
Island is underground than may be found in cities elsewhere. 
At the present time on Manhattan Island there are installed as 
part of the telephone system, outside of the company’s ex. 
changes, 222,543 miles of telephone conductors. Of this vast 
mileage of wire, 98.08 per cent. is wholly underground. Sub- 
stantially all of these wires are paper insulated and covered with 
lead pipes. Within these lead pipes the paper insulated wires 
must be hermetically sealed. Exposure to the air due to a per- 
foration of the lead pipe, even so small as a pin head, would 
result in the ultimate failure of the cable. This perforation of 
the lead pipe is as certain to produce trouble in the underground 
cable as a perforation in a can containing vegetables would 
be attended by the decay of its contents. 

To give an idea of the magnitude of the task of maintaining 
all of these wires in lead pipes which shall be practically her- 
metically sealed, I may state that the total area of the lead 
covering required to enclose these 222,543 miles of conductors 
amounts to more than fifty acres. Had it been known at the 
inception of the telephone that the full working out of the idea 
of Prof. Bell would require the maintenance of such conditions, 
it is safe to say that at that time, no one could have been found 
who would give countenance to such a fool-hardy project. 

The early practice of the telephone art was to employ for its 
cables gutta-percha or rubber-covered wires. This was natural 
enough in view of the fact that telegraph men were, as Mr. 
Lockwood has pointed out, among the first telephonists, and in 
telegraph-cable practice rubber and gutta-percua, particularly as 
applied to submarine cables, was then and is still a well-established 
usage. But in telephony the peculiar effects of capacity were 
particularly troublesome and drove us to the use of a dielectric 
having a low inductive capacity. In paper we have found a 
material which, up to the present time, has proved to be the best 
to use, notwithstanding its susceptibility to the influences of 
moisture. The maintenance of so vast a network of paper 
cables as is required for such a system as that of Manhattan 
Island is possible only by the exercise of eternal vigilance. -The 
last central office converted from the magneto to the standard 
type of switchboard was the Cortlandt street office, which was 
corrected a yearago. The work of establishing the new central office 
involved an additional story on the building, putting in a new 
switchboard and a rearrangement of all cables. Some of the 
cables had to be handled two or three times, and there were 
over twenty thousand to be handled and re-terminated in the new 
terminal room and connected to the switchboard. When the 


70 THE TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD. [Jan. 23 


switchboard went into service on Monday morning—we generally 
do work of this character on Sunday—it was found-that five or 
six of the circuits were misplaced and that connections on ten or 
twelve had not been properly made. These troubles were 
remedied, and the rest of the subscribers did not realize a change 
had been made in the system. The continued extensions and- 
re-arrangements of the plant due to growth and changes in the 
city, and to the establishment and re-arrangement of central 
offices, require a degree of attention in the employment of such a 
large staff of engineers, that, could it have been realized at the 
beginning, would have been sufficient to have dissuaded any but 
the rashest of men from undertaking the development of what 
has proved to be one of the most important adjuncts to modern 
civilization—the telephone exchange. 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON:—Mr. William J. Hammer will 
now present his paper entitled, ‘“‘An Automatic Telephone 
Operator.”’ 

[Mr. Hammer then read his paper (see page 31) ]. 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON :—Mr. L. W. Stanton is on the pro- 
gramme to participate in the discussion, but I understand he is 
not present just now. The hour is so late that we will not have 
any further discussion, with the exception of some closing 
remarks by Mr. Lockwood. 

Mr. Locxwoop:—I shall not keep the gentlemen more 
than a very few minutes. I am in the unusual position of 
being able to agree with all of the discussion. I thought when I 
came into this room that I really knew something more about the 
telephone exchange business than I find is the case. I have 
learned.as much as any man in the room from the gentlemen who 
followed in the discussion after the reading of my paper. There 
are many things with which I was, of course, familiar in a general 
way, but the details never had been brought to my notice in such 
a forcible manner as they have been this evening. Mr. Gherardi’s 
remark about the necessity for codrdinating the stations in large 
cities, for example, cities like New York and Boston, was highly 
interesting. That is a remarkable thing, but it is not a matter 
which is reached in a moment; and the necessity for codrdina- 
tion was not apparent until after the long-distance telephone had 
rendered commercial service and rendered it well. I also was 
much instructed and interested in his statement, which I perhaps 
may paraphrase, that the telephone engineer has to be more 
kinds of an electrical engineer than perhaps any other electrical 
‘engineer following a specialty. That may sound paradoxical, 
and sophistical, but it is true; and I have been accustomed to 
congratulate young telephone engineers on the fact that having to 
deal with the weakest current which is employed industrially and 
thus with the most sensitive instruments, they must also be 
familiar with the operation of all other currents, and the systems 
wherein such other currents work; so that whenever any ques- 
tion arises, they may be able to handle it with intelligence and 


1903.) DISCUS ION AT NEW YORK. 71. 


ability, even though it concern engineering work, dealing mainly 
with heavy current utilization. It is certainly a fact that to bea 
telephone engineer of the first rank, a man must also be a good 
mechanical engineer, and a good electrical engineer on the 
broadest lines. 

I was also interested in and instructed by Mr. Sherwood’s 
description of the training school for telephone operators; by his 
account of the wonderfully low average of complaints and 
faults; and by his statements concerning the resignations of 
operators and the difficulty in maintaining the supply of good 
ones. Within my own experience, marriage has always been an 
active agency in depleting the force of operators; and a number 
of operators have married patrons of the telephone exchange, 

Of course, no one at this hour could seriously think of devoting 
discussion to the paper upon a new subject which Mr. Hammer 
has brought before us; but I think we can all agree that the 
“mechanical operator ”’ of which he spoke does indeed have one 
advantage over the human operator now generally employed. 
It will not resign to the number of 700 within a year because it is 
desirous of marrying; and our wildest dreams cannot, I am sure, 
suggest the conceivability of a telephone subscriber—in any con- 
tingency—wanting to marry one of Mr. Hammer’s “‘ mechanical 

- operators.” é 

Mr. F. &. Kinsman:—Mr. Lockwood omitted reference to 
the first telephone exchange established in Boston. He said, if I 
recall, that it was a connection made by twisting a-wire from one 
post to another. Asa matter of fact, I was employed in 
Boston in August, 1877, and my recollection is that the first 
exchange was operated by transmitting the message through the 
operator. If the hour were not so late, I would give you some 
more points on that subject. That was the first exchange 
established in Boston. 

Mr. Lockwoop:—There is a brief reply needed to the last 
remark. The first exchange was established in Boston in May, 
1877, through some burglar alarm wires. But of course Mr. 
Kinsman has observed that my paper concerns the “ Evolution 
of the Telephone Switchboard,”’ and does not in any sense pro- 
fess to be an historical account of the rise and progress of the 
telephone exchange system. : 

Mr. KinsmMan:—I will take the correction as to date; but I 
will say that the exchange was first introduced in Mr. Holmes’s 
burglar alarm office and it was made by the operator taking the 
message and turning about and talking through the telephone 
to the party to whom the message was to be given. I was there 
and helped in the work. : 

[The meeting then adjourned]. 


A paper read ata mecting of the Chicago Branch of the 
American Institute of Electrical Enginzers, May 
19 1903 


SOME FEATURES OF TELEPHONE TRAFFIC AND THEIR 
EFFECT) ON*SERVICE. 


BY J. G. "WRAY: 


Traffic, in the strict acceptance of the term, implies the transfer 
of goods or commodities from one person to another in exchange 
’ for other goods or commoditiesorformoney. We, of course, may 
consider as traffic exchange of ideas over a telephone wire from 
one person to another and such a construction puts telephone 
calls within the meaning of the word. 

Mr. S. }. Larned in a recent paper before the Chicago Electrical 
Club enumerated several essentials of good telephone service. — 

A vast clientele. It should be possible to reach all of one’s 
friends or business correspondents by telephone. Uniform 
answering. There should be no long wait for the response of an 
operator. Rapid and accurate service. The party called for 
should be obtained quickly and there should be no interruption 
of the conversation. Communication should not be prevented 
by busy lines. (Busy calls arise from the fact that two persons 
desire to talk to a third party at the same time and such 
instances are common on very busy telephone lines.) Apparatus 
and other plant should be well maintained. The telephone and 
its wires should receive proper expert attention with a view of 
minimizing interference with the service, and when out of order 
should be repaired promptly. Courteous treatment of the sub- 
scriber by the telephone employees and vice versa. 

Consider first the part the subscriber plays in telephone traffic 
and in making either for good orfor badservice. Iam perhaps open 
to criticism from the laymen when I say that the subscriber’s part 
is an important one and often militates against good service. 
Who has not called for a number and after waiting for a few min: 

73 


74 WRAY: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC: [May 19 


utes hung up the receiver with imprecations against the telephone 
service? In the meantime the telephone apparatus has perhaps 
performed its functions properly and the operator is in a fair 
way to get the called subscriber. When the latter answers— 
he may not have answered promptly—and finds no one on the 
line, he, and not the calling subscriber is certainly the aggrieved 
party. : 

False calls are a frequent and annoying source of complaint 
against the service and are caused in many ways in addition to 
the one just named. The calling party may give the wrong 
number or the wreng office. The number or office may be mis- 
understood by the operator, or the calling subscriber may change 
his mind and decide not to make the cail. Incase the call is from 
a subscriber in one office to a subscriber in another otfice there is 
of course always a chance of a misunderstood number resulting 
in a call for the wrong party. 

I recently noticed a curious fact in observing traffic from 10- 
party-line subscribers in a city not 1,000 miles from Chicago. I 
noted the extreme smoothness and accuracy of the service, the 
apparent absence of any hitches or complaints and was surprised 
when I learned that the operator’s load was practically 30 per cent. 
higher than operators’ loads in similar service in Chicago. I can 
explain this condition only by assuming that the operator had 
the intelligent and courteous coédperation of the subscribers and 
this Was apparent from such observations as I was able to make 
during a two hours’ visit in the office. 

Calls should be answered promptly lest they become lost 
and the called subscriber lose perhaps a chance for an important 
business transaction. Prompt answering and short conversa- 
tions will always tend to keep the line free for other inward calls 
and will minimize busy calls, which more than anything else are a 
source of bitter complaint. 

Practically 20 per cent. of all calis made are never completed 
because the line called for is busy. About four calls out of every 
five are completed properly. This feature of telephone traffic is 
one of the most annoying to the subscriber, but unfortunately is 
almost beyond the control of the telephone oompany. Many 
busy calls result, of course, from the fact that certain lines are in 
use a great deal of the time. The subscriber may come to a 
realization of the fact that as the business on his line increases 
the probabiity that he is excluding other business calls with a 
busy signal increases even more rapidly. However, inasmuch 


1903.] WRAY: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC. 75 


as there is always the possibility that two subscribers may desire 
to talk witha third subscriber at the same time there willalways 
be calls stopped by the busy signal. 

Other things being equal, the busy reports that may be ex- 
pected from telephone lines will become more numerous and will 
increase With the number of conversations carried on over that 
line. In actual practice, however, other factors enter in. The 
New York City telephones, for example, are reported busy about 
as often as the Chicago telephones, practically 20 per cent. The 
number of conversations per line on New York telephone lines, 
however, is much less than on the Chicago lines. We would 
therefore ordinarily expect fewer busy reports from the New 
York lines. The other factors entering in this particular case are 
undoubtedly shorter conversations by Chicago telephone users 
and a disposition to rent additional telephone wires where cir- 
cumstances seem to warrant it. Another factor which has even 
greater bearing is the fact that the New York City telephone 
‘calls are crowded into a shorter day and that hour for hour the 
lines are nearly as busy as in Chicago. 

Leaving aside any further discussion of the part the subscriber 
may have in that which will militate for good service we have 
only to remark that if the subscriber would exercise the same 
courtesy and good judgment in his use of the telephone that he 
would show under ordinary circumstances in dealing with his 
business acquaintances face to face there would be amarked 
improvement in the service and the trials of the unjustly maligned 
telephone operator would be considerably mitigated. 

Uniform answering with rapid and accurate service can only 
be accomplished by minimizing the work on each call and by 
giving an operator enough calls to keep her busy and not any 
more than she can handle properly. The service may be con- 
sidered as being good when the average answering is in 6 or 7 
seconds and when say %5 per cent. of all calls are answered 
Within 1 seconds. This grade of service is obtained only under 
favorable conditions. The operator must not be overworked 
and she must be continuously under a competent supervising 
operator. The practice is to have a supervisor for every eight 
or ten operators. This supervisor should work under the direc- 
tion of a chief operator. 

One of the requisites of good service mentioned above 
is that the time and operations required of an operator on 
each individual call shall be a minimum. Obviously, the 


; \ 
76 WRAY: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC. [May “> 


operator has no time for discussions with the subscribers on the 
merits of a complaint. These are turned over to the supervising 
operator for adjustment. It is the aim of the operating manager 
so to control the two factors just named that good service wiil 
result. By the proper manipulation of the intermediate distrib- 
uting board he may, by increasing or decreasing the number of 
lines that an operator must answer, keep the operators load 
uniform under the fluctuations of traffic experienced in a tele-. 
phone exchange. He must also minimize the work and time 
required of an operator on‘each particular call. This is done by 
paring down phrases that the operator must use, by providing 
machinery to eliminate-certain manual operations, and easily 
read and interpreted signals to keep her informed as to the condi-- 
- tion of the line called for, whether busy or out of order, or of the 
various phases of the connection; and charts to indicate changes. 
of number of service, etc. 

In a typical telephone exchange the load curve indicating the 
volume of traffic shows during the midnight hours a value of from 
1/10 of 1 per cent. to perhaps 5 per cent. of the maximum hourly 
load. This period of light load will vary from 7 to 14 hours, de- 
pending upon the location of the exchange and the habits of the 
telephone users. In the offices of the business district of a city, 
like Chicago, very few calls are made. between 7 p. M. and 7 A.M. 
Between the hours of 10 p. m. and 7 A. m. the calls per hour will 
vary from 1/10 of 1 per cent. to perhaps 1 per cent. of the maxi- 
mum. Between the hours of 7 and 8 in the morning traffic will 
rise to perhaps 5 per cent. of the maximum. The rise will be 
extremely rapid, until the maximum load of the exchange is. 
reached between 10 and 11 in the morning. About the noon 
hour there is a cessation of business and the telephone traffic 
curve shows a drop of perhaps 40 per cent. below the maximum. 
After the lunch hour when business has been resumed the traffic 
curve rises to an afternoon maximum between 2 and 3 o'clock. 
This maximum will be less than the maximum in the morning 
and will in a typical office approximate 80 per cent. of the maxi- 
mum traffic of the day. From 3 p.m .until 5 or 5.30 p.m. there 
will be a rapid decrease in the traffic load with an almost com- 
plete cessation of business at 6 P.M. * 

In a residence district the slump of traffic at noon-time is pot 
very well marked. There is, however, a decrease in the number 
of calls made late in the afternoon and a corresponding increase 
in the number of calls for the telephones of a residence district,, 


=1903) | WRAY: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC U4 


the latter arising from the fact that the head of the house wishes 
to explain why he cannot come home for dinner, or to announce 
that he wishes to bring a friend. The evening traffic is also a 
feature of the residence district. Social calls are made, appoint- 
ments for the theatre, invitations, etc. Evening traffic of a resi- 
dence district often continues heavy until 9 or 10 0’clock, indeed, 
in one of the Chicago offices the evening traffic runs from 30 to 60 
per cent. of the maximum and heavy traffic/is maintained until 
nearly midnight. The curve of traffic indicates in a measure 
the habits of the people in the district. 

In the Main office district in Chicago the business day may 
be said to have begun at 8.30 in the morning. There is a partial 
cessation of business for luncheon between 12.30 and 1.30 
o'clock and the business day closes at about 5.30 Pp. m. For Cen- 
tral office also in the downtown district the business day is from 
8.30 in the morning until 5.30 in the afternoon with scarcely any 
let up forlunch. Lawyers predominate in the Central district. 

_ In Harrison office the day is the same as for Central and Main, 
but there is a marked reduction in the traffic between 12.30 and 
1.30 o’clock. 

The South office business day is practically from 8 o’clock in 
the morning until 9 o’clock in the evening, and even later, withno 
indications of aluncheon hour. North office telephone users are 
satisfied with a shorter day than the people of South office dis- 
trict, the limits being from 8 o’clock in the morning until 8 
o'clock in the evening. For West office the limits are from 8.30 
in the morning until 9 in the evening. 

For Monroe office the traffic shows heavy business from 7.30 in 
the morning to 6 o’clock in the evening with a distinctly marked 
lunch hour between 12 and 1. Monroe district is a manufactur- 
ing district. 

Canal office traffic is largely like Monroe, extending oer 8 in 
the morning until 5.30 Pp. m., with noon hour between 12 and 1. 

Yards office telephone users like those of Monroe office begin in 
the day early and business is in full swing about 7.30 and con- 
tinues until 5.30 with noon hour between 12 and 1. 

In Wentworth district, out in Englewood, the business of the 
day is done between 8 a.m. and 6 P. M., with some indication 
that the people have lunch between 11.30 and 1 o'clock. 

Hyde Park and Oakland offices, both in residence districts of 
similar character, show heavy traffic between 8 a.m.and 8 P.., 
with no trace of an hour for luncheon. 


78 WRAY: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC. {May 19 


Lake View office, also in a residence district, shows the work 
day beginning at 7.30 a. m. and extending until 8.30 P. M. The 
habit of carly rising was evidently formed before the advent of 
the Northwestern Elevated. 

A similar comparison of traffic load curves of other cities wil! be 
of interest. In Philadelphia, for example, we find the heavy 
traffic between 9 A.M. and 5p.m., with lunch between 12 and 1.30. 

In Boston the traffic shows a work day from 9 A. M. to 5 P. M., 
with time for luncheon in different offices varying from one and a 
half to two hours, between 12 and 2 o’clock. 

New York telephone users seem to take life even more serenely 
than those of Philadelphia or Boston and we find the work day 
beginning as late as 9.30 in the morning and ending at about 4.30 
in the afternoon, with two hours for lunch between and 12 and 
2 o'clock. 

Telephone traffic varies with the seasons as well as ay the 
time of day. 

The Canal office district of the Chicago Exchange shows a fluctua- 
tion of 50 per cent. between summer and winter traffic. This is 
caused by the vast lumber interests of the district, which practi- 
cally close down during the winter months. There isa heavy 
rush of traffic in April and May, followed by a 40 per cent. reduc- 
tion in traffic during July and August. In the fall business 
increases to a maximum in September. This is followed by a 50 
' per cent. reduction in traffic, culminatingin January. A change 
in the character of the traffic from Canal district, however, has 
been noticed within recent years and the wide variations of 
traffic with the seasons are less marked. This is undoubtedly 
due to the change in the character of the district with the gradual 
building up of vacant prairie with residences, small shops, 
saloons, etc. 

The traffic of all offices slumps decidedly during the summer 
months. There is a reduction of perhaps 30 per cent. during 
July and August, the vacation period. 

The volume of traffic of a telephone exchange is also an unfail- 
ing index of general business conditions. This is shown by the 
fact that during 1894, 1895 and 1896 there was a very slight 
increase in traffic. With the return of prosperity, however, the 
traffic has increased by leaps and bounds until now it will approxi- 
mate four times as heavy as during 1895 and 1896. 

In passing it will be of interest to note that for 10;hours per day 
the traffic of Chicago Exchanges ranges above the average hourly 


1903.] WRAY: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC. 79 


trathe figured on a 24 hour basis. For the other 14 hours per day 
the traffic is much lower than the average hourly traffic. 

The average traffic for the maximum hour is about 25 times 
the average traffic of the day, and perhaps 200 or 300 times the 
traffic of the hour of minimum traffic. The percentages and 
ratios of traffic given herein take no account of rushes of traffic 
for short intervals due possibly to the news of a prize fight, a fire, 
a panic or a foot ball game. These and the tremendous rushes 
of traffic always preceding or following every important holiday 
make a severe test of the resources of the operating plant. | 

The traffic of Saturday forenoon is always the heaviest of the 
week and is taken as a basis for the adjustment of operator’s loads 
and the loads on trunk lines. The adjustment of the operator’s 
load must be made with a view of handling the traffic well during 
the busiest hour of the day. Experience has shown that approxi- 
mately one-eighth of the business of the entire 24 hours must be 
handled during the busiest hour. 

From the above it can be readily seen that the capacity of the 
operators and the physical telephone plant must be extremcly 
flexible to take care efficiently of the rapid and extremely wide 
fluctuation in loads just described. 

To the advantage of the telephone manager be it said that the 
human machine is extremely well adapted to the handling of this 
fluctuating load. A well-trained operator will frequently take 
three or four calls in rapid succession and complete them almost 
- simultaneously. 

Just a word on the efficiency of the telephone plant. Assuming 
an efficiency of 100 per cent., when all the subscribers’ lines are in 
use all the time, we find that in actual practice they are working 
under an efficiency of only 2 or 3 per cent. 

Assuming 100 per cent. efficiency when the apparatus used by 
an operator is in use all the time we find that in actual practice it 
is working under an efficiency of 25 per cent. 

Thousands of dollars worth of multiple jacks lie in the switch- 
board practically idle. Some are perhaps never uesd. 

The traffic of a telephone exchange determines the capacity 
and design of a telephone central station equipment and the size 
of its operating force. Changes in traffic whether a decrease due 
to business depressibn, a change of contracts to a message rate 
basis or to any other cause; or an increase caused by new tele- 
phone subscribers, by better business conditions or perhaps by a 
change of policy in the matter of party lines or Private Brauch 


80 WRAY: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC. [May 19 


Exchanges must be met promptly by a corresponding readjust- 
ment of facilities and operating force to enable the business to be 


carried on economically and well. 


A paper read at a meeting of the Chicago Branch of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, May 
i9, 1903. 


a 


CONCERNING THE TELEPHONE ENGINEE2, 


BY S. G. McMEEN. 


Mr. Lockwood’s contribution concerning the telephone switch- 
board, and the discussion brought out by it, form so valuable a 
. portion of the too meager literature of the telephone that the 
writer makes bold to act as spokesman for those who would 
record appreciation. 

There are two principal values in all statements of fact; one, 
the record of the truth for immediate information and subse- 
quent reference; the other, the correcting of false impressions. 
The paper and discussion referred to have gone far in exhibit- 
ing both of these values, and at the risk of paralleling what 
has been said so well and honestly, this item of additional dis- 
cussion is presented. 

The telephone engineer’s profession is so varied in its con- 
tact with commercial and social conditions that its scope is 
apparently not well understood even by those practising similar 
professions. Indeed, the very existence of the telephone 
engineer is in some quarters denied. Let us look at his work from 
some of the several sides to see if we may generalize about it. 

To many persons, the telephone instrument on the wall is the 
telephone system, and an art based on so little a thing seems a 
simple one. Yet there are involved, in even the instrument 
on the wall, the problems of apparatus-design for electrically 
transmitting speech at the highest efficiency ; for the least and 
greatest distances without change of local equipment and of receiv- 
ing speech and signals from distant stations. 

Granting that the substation telephone set stands for too 
narrow a view of the whole matter, and that at least a connecting 

&1 


32 McMEEN: TELEPHONE ENGINEER. [May 19 ~ 


D 


line is necessary, it is seen that here is involved a problem - 
of alternating current transmission. Note, also, that this 
line, in such a system as Mr. Lockwood has described, must 
do in the best manner several kinds of things such as carrying 
currents for speech and signaling, and some of these things must 
be done simultaneously. Owing to conditions of topography 
and degree of congestion of population, the line may be buried 
or erected with a wide variety of surroundings. As its in- 
sulation, capacity and conductivity have vital bearing on its 
efficiency. and as they also govern its cost, a responsibility rests 
with the engineer who controls the design of these points. For 
example: ‘“‘If by decreasing the effective electrostatic capacity 
between wire and wire of an underground telephone cable by b 
microfarads, the efficiency of speech transmission is increased 
by d per cent., at a cost per mile per year of c dollars, is the 
expense warranted?” Instances might be multiplied to illustrate 
the importance of knowledge and judgment in connection with 
this costly and important part of a telephone system. 

To the telephone instruments and systems of lines must be 
added the central office equipment, so well described in the 
principal paper under discussion. Of the switchboard and its 
appurtenances which make up this equipment, three important 
features have been pointed out. First, the switchboard 1s an 
aggregation of a greatymany parts; secondly, the parts must 
inter-operate with complete harmony; and thirdl; , the aggrega- 
tion is often of such size as to compare favorably with the big 
work of an engineer of any other craft. 

In connection with the equipment in general in its relation to 
the lines in general. - The location of central offices, their sizes, 
now and hereafter, the number, size and character of under- 
ground ducts and cables, together with all other elements, 
must be considered and solved for one conclusion—the giving 
of the best telephone service at the least cost, now and _here- 
after. And it is not to be overlooked that the factors upon 
which the solution depends are subject to change so that such 
change must be foreseen and discounted if possible ; 

' It may be replied that all other engineers must take ac- 
count of rates of interest, prices of material and labor, density 
of population, etc., and the possible shifting of values. Granted. 
But a telephone system must be planned and begun it is believed, 
a longer time before its development to its ultimate size than 
most other works of magnitude. Because the speaking current 


1903.] McMEEN: TELEPHONE ENGINEER. 82 . 


of the telephone is very small, usually alternating, and so not 
Susceptible of easy and exact measurement, there has grown up 
the idea that the telephone engineer does not deal with exact 
quantities, and does not use in his work that accuracy of observa- 
tion and precision of execution common to the engineering pro- 
fession. This impression is not correct, for two reasons. First, 
the speech-transmission current is far better understood to-day 
than formerly and is determined with a very great degree of ac- 
curacy, as also are the many other currents having to do with 
the operations attending speech-transmission. Second'y, the 
telephone engineer requires the same observing and reasoning 
powers which distinguish engineers in general fromthe men 
about them in other occupations. 

As an instance of the possibility of mathematical and physical 
accuracy, witness the work of Prof. Pupin in the matter of 
distortionless circuits. An intelligent mathematical reading of 
the specifications of either of his patents upon the elimination of 
the hurtful effects of the electrostatic capacity of an alternat- 
ing current transmission line is recommended as furnishing con- 
clusive proof of the claims here advanced. Considering the art 
as caused by and based upon a single device—the telephone 
itself—it is evident that the great usefulness of the present system 
is largely due to the codperation of a great mass of additional 
circuits, methods and apparatus. 

The destiny of the art is to place all the peoples of the earth 
in speaking relation with one another, itis also destiny that the 
telephone engineers shall specialize. Yet the assertion is ven- 
tured that no other branch of engineering demands so thorough 
a retention of the general lore of the art by the specialist within 
the art as does this. 

Upon the basis of these thoughts, may we not define as follows: 

A telephone engineer is one who practises the design and con- 
struction of telephone apparatus, telephone circuits and tele- 
phone operating methods, and the correlation of all three into 
systems of telephone communication. 

If the definition be approved, let us then claim a place for him 
among the engineers of more classical reputation, giving him 
credit for his accomplishment and our best wishes for his future. 


84 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


Discussion AT UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS, FEB. 7, 1903. 


In regard to Mr. Hammer’s paper, Prof. Williams said that 
intricate automatic machinery required expert attention, in- 
stancing the necessity for adjustment and repairs upon linotype 
machines, and suggesting that the saving in operators’ salaries 
might be required for the pay of expert mechanics. Prof. 
Brooks thought that the 10 per cent. depreciation claimed by Mr. 
Hammer as ample for the automatic switchboard would prove 
inadequate, especially in view of the probable changes in details 
of construction to be expected. The bookkeeper’s 10 per cent. 
depreciation becomes but 9 per cent. the second year, and about 
8 per cent. the third year, hence at the end of ten years the 
entire first cost has by no means'been charged off. He asked if 
any switchboard built in 1893 would now be worth 35 per cent. of 
its original cost, as it would have to be on the basis of a 10 per 
cent. yearly depreciation deduction. 


Discussion AT PittsBurG, FEB. 5, 1903. 


: TELEPHONY. 
Programme: 

President’s remarks at the New York Meeting read by Secre- 
tarye|os. Peck, 

‘* An Automatic Telephone Operator,” by Mr. W. J. Hammer, 
abstracted by Prof. S. M. Kintner. 

‘“Bvolution of the Telephone Switchboard,” by Mr. Thos. D. 
Lockwood, abstracted by Mr. S. P. Grace. 

Exhibition and Description of Arcophone, or Talking Arc 
Lamp, by Mr. R. A. L. Snyder. 

GENERAL DISCUSSION. 

The discussion was participated in by Mr. S. P. Grace, Mr. 
Charles Bradley, Mr. P. M. Lincoln, Mr. Gallegher and Mr. L. 
Hommel. 

Mr. Grace.—Mr. Lockwood in his paper on the Evolution of 
the Telephone Switchboard has admirably described the manner 
in which the present perfected arrangement of switchboards 
developed from the crude switching devices of the early days of 
the telephone. 

Mr. Lockwood has also given a very complete description of a 
modern common-battery telephone switchboard, and has also 
shown and described the line of investigation which was pursued 
to attain this development. [t is not necessary for me to add 
anything more on the evolution of the telephone switchboard, 
since Mr. Lockwood has covered this matter in such an admirable 
manner; I shall simply call attention to a few of the great 
advantages that the common-battery system possesses. We 
may sub-divide the advantages accruing from the common- 
battery system into three general heads: 

1. Improvements in operating. 


1903.| BRANCH DISCUSSIONS : PITTSBURG. 85 


2. Economy of maintenance. 

3. Quality of service. 

In discussing the question of operating, it is, perhaps, instruc- 
tive to look back and see the difficulties under which the operator 
workea under the old arrangement of magneto swi.chboards. 
The switchboard was arranged with a large number of annuncia- 
tors or drops mounted on the face of the switchboard near the 
top. When a subscriber turned the crank at his telephone, his 
annunciator was displayed in front of the operator, who had to 
look up at the annunciator, ascertain its number, and then hunt 
out the corresponding answeting jack in which to plug. This 
kept the telephone operator’s head tilted upward at an awkward 
and disagreeable angle. 

In the common-battery system the subscriber merely removes 
the receiver from the hook, which act lights a small incandescent 
lamp immediately adjacent to the answering jack belonging to 
the calling subscriber. The operator in answering does not have 
to ascertain the particular number calling, but merely “ plugs 
out ’ the light. This act alone increases the speed of overating 
from three to four seconds. 

Another great disadvantage of the magneto system was the 
entire absence of supervisory signals, 7.c., the operator had no 
means of knowing when the calling or called subscriber was at 
the telephone. The only arrangement for disconnection was a 
clearing-out drop bridged across the cord circuit. It was 
necessary for the subscriber to ring off when through using the 
line. 

Undoubtedly, many of you have run across the sign painted in 
large letters on the telephone, ‘“‘ Ring off.” But it is human 
nature to do as little as possible when once you receive the 
benefit asked for; so, while all the subscribers would ring in 
to get central, but a very small percentage of them would remem- 
ber the injunction to “ ring off.” 

In the common-battery system there is placed a supervisory- 
lamp signal on each side of the cord circuit, which is used to 
connect together two subscribers’ lines. When a subscriber is 
rung by the operator, one of these lamps remains lighted until he 
answers. When both subscribers are finished with the con- 
versation the simple act of hanging the receiver upon the hook 
lights both of these supervisory-lamps, which is a signal to the 
operator that that pair or cords, and consequently the connected 
lines, are no longer in use. She will, therefore, immediately 
remove the connection. If either one of the subscribers wishes 
to call in the operator during the course of a connection, it can be 
done by simply working the hook up and down, which flashes the 
supervisory signal. It is thus seen that for all local connections 
the operator has complete supervision over the calls. 

It is, however, in a multiple office district, such as Pittsburg, 
where the advantages of the common-battery system are par- 
ticularly in evidence. . In such a district is it necessary to operate 


86 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS : PITTSBURG, {Feb. 5 


a number of offices and arrange for trunking connections between 
them. ; 

In the magneto system there were provided no supervisory 
or disconnect signals on these trunk lines. This made the opera- 
tion of them extremely difficult and also impaired the quality 
of the service rendered, since the operators would frequently 
make mistakes and take down the connection before the con- 
versation was finished. 

In the modern common-battery system, when a call is received 
for a line in a distant office, the operator who receives the call 
cuts in directly on what is known as a calling-circuit wire, to an 
operator who is located at the exchange which contains the line 
asked for. This operator assigns a trunk to be used and at the 
same time plugs the trunk which ends in a plug and cord into the 
line asked for. The originating operator, of course, plugs into 
the other end of the trunk line. When both subscribers are 
through talking, the disconnect signals are received by the 
originating operator in the usual manner, who will take down the 
connection. The taking of the plug out of the trunk line auto- 
matically gives the trunk operator at the distant exchange a 
disconnect signal to show her that the trunk line is no longer in 
use. She will then remove the trunk line from the local sub- 
scribers’ line. Similar automatic trunks are provided for use _ 
between the local boards and the long distance boards. It will 
thus be seen that from an operating standpoint the common- 
battery system removes the necessity of the personal supervision 
of calls by the operator, automatic signals being the means of 
warning her of all stages of the connection. 

The common-battery system also enables us to increase the 
operator’s load, which means that an operator can answer more 
telephones than in the old style systems. Our payrolls show that 
with a first-class common-battery system we can handle the same 
business with about 20 per cent..less number of operators. The 
common-battery system is therefore easier and cheaper to operate 
than the old style system. 

Economy of Maintenance.—In the magneto systems each indi- , 
vidual telephone was a small edition of a central office power 
plant. We provided batteries for furnishing the direct trans- 
mitter current and a complicated magneto generator for furnish- 
ing alternating current for signalling the central office. 

Anyone who has had experience in the maintenance of even a 
small central office power plant will recognize the difficulty and 
the expense of maintaining these thousands of isolated power 
plants which were located in each telephone. The maintenance 
of this generating outfit was trom $2.00 to $3.00 per year per 
telephone. But in the common-battery system all these isolated 
power plants are done away with, anda single central office 
power plant suffices for the entire exchange. One large storage 
battery, consisting of eleven (11) cells, is installed. This main 
battery is charged fram motor-generators from off the lighting 


1903.] BRANCH DISCUSSIONS ; PITTSBURG. 87 


mains and supplies all the current used in the telephone exchange. 
The cost of all current supply per telephone, including the fixed 
charges, probably does not exceed $1.00 per telephone per. year 
in a modern common-battery system. The removal of the 
generators and batteries from the instrument has also cheapened 
its first cost and maintenance, and the instrument as it exists 
to-day contains the fewest possible number of parts. 

It might be well to remark at this juncture that the successful 
operation of the common-battery system depended upon the 
evolution of the storage-battery, We had to have at the central 
office a source of current of constant e.m.f. and which possessed 
practically no internal resistance. If the source of power were 
not constant or contained any internal resistance, all the lines 
connected with the exchange would be noisy or would have 
cross-talk on them. As is well known, the modern storage- 
battery produces a current of constant e.m.f., and it besides pos- 
sesses a very low internal resistance, these two features making 
possible the common-battery system of to-day. 

In the common-battery system there is a pressure of 24 volts 
on every line all the time, and any poor or defective insulation 
will cause a leak of current and consequently the display of the 
signalling apparatus at the central office. 

One of the great objections to the use of common-battery by 
telephone engineers was the fact that it required superior outside 
line construction, but this in reality has been a benefit, for with 
the common-battery system we must put our wires and cables 
underground and use as little open wire as possible, in order to 
obtain a good quality of service. Also the current being upon 
the lines at all times, it acts as a sort of watch-dog to the entire 
system, and makes those in charge of the plant keep it in good 
repair. 5 

From the above statements the economy of maintenance of the 
common-battery system is plainly apparent. 

Service.—From the subscribers’ standpoint the common- 
battery system is eminently satisfactory. He is not required to 
grind a crank in order to signal central. All he has to do is to 
remove the telephone from the hook which immediately displays 
the signal in front of the operator. This gives the subscriber 
practically nothing to do and transfers all work to the central 
office, where it can be taken care of by skilled operators. It is 
always possible for the subscriber to call in the operator by 
moving the hook, and the possibility of his being hung up and 
unable to get the central office is very remote. 

That the subscriber is satisfied with the common-battery 
- system is evidenced from the fact that in ordering a telephone or 
a private branch exchange he will always tell you “that he wants 
that system where you take the receiver off the hook and it lights 
one of those little lamps.” 

I have stated above'that in the old systems batteries were 
provided for each telephone for supplying the transmitter with 


88 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS ; PITTSBURG. [Feb. 5 


current. When these batteries were new and in good condition, 
the service from the telephone was good, but after they had been 
used for a short time, or if the subscriber accidentally left the 
receiver off the hook and thus allowed the batteries to run down, 
the transmission from the telephone would be very poor. There- 
fore, from the magneto system, with local batteries, we never 
could hope to obtain a uniform grade of service. 

It is highly necessary that all of the instruments talk well 
over both local and long-distance lines, for it is our aim and 
ambition to produce a satisfactory volume of transmission be- 
tween all telephones in the entire country. In the local-battery 
system, if we spent a large amount of money in battery mainte- 
lance and kept the batteries in first-class order, the transmission 
for all local connections would be entirely too strong, although it 
must be admitted that it would be excellent for the long-distance 
connections. In the common-battery system the source of cur- 
rent supply is from the central office battery and we can, therefore, 
regulate the amount of current for each connection; 7.e., for all 
local service we will have our apparatus so wired that the instru- 
<nent receives sufficient current for local transmission, but when 
a long-distance connection is put up we will triple or quadruple 
the amount of current given to the transmitter. Thus, with the 
common-battery system we are enabled to give an absolutely 
uniform grade of transmission for all local connections, and for 
long-distance connections we can give the transmitter the ulti- 
mate amount of battery power that it will stand. This, in my 
opinion, is one of the most important advantages of the common- 
battery system. 

So successful has the common-batterv system proved in large 
exchanges that it is now the intention to carry the work still 
further and make even the smallest exchanges in country towns 
work on the common-battery basis. Plans have been prepared 
for a number of these small exchanges, which will work on the 
common-battery basis, but which will be provided with no power 
plant. The necessary current for operating the transmitters and 
es will be supplied from the nearest large common-battery 
plant. 

In conclusion, at the risk of being considered too optimistic 
in my views, I will say that within the next ten years the local 
battery magneto telephone instrument, with its associated 
magneto switchboard, will be considered as a rarity in the 
United States. . 

Mr. CHARLES BrapLtey:—As has been explained here this 
evening, great improvements have been made in the design 
and operation of the telephone switchboard since 1880, and 
also in central office apparatus. It is however, only, in 
the past ten or twelve years that the planning of in- 
stallation work has been given much attention, especially 
from an engineering standpoint. Previous to the advent of 


1903.] BRANCIT DISCUSSIONS « PITTSBURG. 89 


the branch terminal switchboard nearly all work outside of the 
building of the switchboard proper and the distributing frames 
was done by the foreman at the time of installation. In fact, 
the same man wrote the specifications, went into the shop and 
superintended the forming of cable, such as they were, and then 
started on the road to look after the erection of the switchboard 
Up to this time switchboard cable was made on the unicolored 
insulation principle; 7.e., in a twenty pair switchboard cable, all 
the twenty pairs had one red and one white wire. As you can 
readily understand, this necessitated the testing of one of every 
pair of wires before soldering them to the multiple jacks or to any 
other terminal. This, of course, entailed a great loss of time in 
the erection of the switchboard. The multi-colored insulation 
scheme was then devised. This consisted of having the insula- 
tion of one of each pair of wires of a color different from all the 
rest; for example, one of a pair blue, of another pair orange, of 
another pair blue-orange, etc., until the whole combination was 
effected. Also a regular form was made so that the same colored 
wire would take the same jack throughout the multiple. Also it 
was found, since the framework of the sections was made of 
iron and more uniform than those of wood, that by careful 
measurement the cables could be cut and soldered to the multiple 
jacks in the factory. This plan was tried with great success in 
one or two installations and thereafter used universally as it 
meant more accurate work anda great saving of labor on the 
road. 

With the advent of the branch terminal board came the power 
plant. Instead of the gravity batteries a storage battery was 
used, necessitating charging machines, a power board and con- 
duit work. This storage battery was used to restore the drops 
clectrically as well as for the transmitters. 

As improvements were being made from time to time by 
different installation men, though each had his own ideas regard- 
ing the work and no two installations were made in the same 
manner, certain of these men were retained in the shop as con- 
sultation men and an attempt was made to classify the work and 
have it done ina uniform manner. More elaborate specifications 
were prepared, and plans furnished showing the location of the 
switchboard, power plant, conduit, etc. 

When the common-battery board was planned this work 
increased greatly, owing to the number of cable runs, more 
apparatus and power plants of larger capacity. It was found 
that by locating exactly each piece of apparatus that the racks 
for carrying the cables could be designed accurately and built in 
the shop, conduit plans be prepared and in fact innumerable 
details that were formerly left to the installer were now figured 
out by the engineer before the installation actually started. 
Particular attention was paid to the arrangement and location of 
apparatus on the switchboard proper, so that the cable work 
could be done in such a way that all apparatus would be accessi- 

\ 


90 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS: PITTSBURG. [Feb. 5 


ble and easy to maintain. To-day practically all cables are cut 
and formed from plans made by the engineer, andare soldered to 
their respective terminals or jacks before they leave the factory. 

Of course, I have taken but a few examples to illustrate the 
progress of installation work, but I think it sufficient to show 
the great improvement made in this class of work in recent 
years. 


(COMMUNICATION AFTER ADJOURNMENT BY SIDNEY HAaAnpD 
5 BROWNE.) 

In his closing remarks, Mr. Lockwood, in his article entitled, 
“The Evolution of the Telephone Switchboard,” refers to the 
complex organization of the modern relay switchboard and 
intimates that the next step in its evolution may be along lines 
which will simplify it rather than in a direction involving a 
radical departure from its present organization. 

A partial simplification has been obtained; resulting in a better 
“ talling circuit ’’ and reduction in first cost and in maintenance. 
Such simplification consisting of a reduction in the amount of 
switchboard cable required in wiring the multiple jacks to two- 
thirds of what is required under the system described; avoiding 
the use of a shunt to put out the supervisory-lamp; dispensing 
with thé use of the repeating-coil in the cord-circuit as shown, 
and with the third contact in the multiple-jacks. 

In the diagram, Fig. 9 (Lockwood's article), it will be seen 
that the relay which controls the operation of the supervisory- 
lamp is placed in series on one side of the talking-circuit, although 
there is no corresponding impedance in the opposite side of this 
circuit. And although this relay is of low resistance, it will 


slightly unbalance the line; its insertion in this manner 


should. be avoided if possible. 

It is also seen that the test-rings of the multiple-jacks are 

connected by a third wire running the entire length of the switch- 
board. If this third connection could be avoided, it would 
simplify matters and be a desirable improvement. By reference 
to the diagram attached hereto, it will be seen that this has been 
accomplished, with a consequent saving in switchboard cable, 
first cost of construction, and reduction in cost of maintenance. 
By dispensing with this third wire in the multiple-jacks, we hav2 
also been able to use a two-conductor cord instead of a cord with 
three conductors, as shown in Mr. Lockwood’s diagram. This 
reduces the first cost of cords and their maintenance. 
_ It is desirable, if possible, to avoid the use of the repeating-coil 
in the circuit shown in Mr. Lockwood’s diagram, as it. is fre- 
quently the case that these coils are not properly balanced; and 
a very slight variation in the size of the core, or inaccurate wind- 
ing by the manufacture will cause enough unbalancing to 
interfere with the proper working of the circuit. The use of this 
repeating-coil has also been avoided in the system described in 
the drawing attached. 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS : PITTSBURG. 91 


_By shunting the supervisory-lamp,as shown in Mr. Lockwood’s, 
diagram, when the telephone as taken from its hook, the flow of 
current through these lamps and their shunts continues and 
causes considerable drain on the batteries. 

Figs. 1 and 2 show two telephones connected through a tele- 
phone exchange system whose operation is as follows: 

The operation of removing the receiver from the hook of the 
substation instrument: closes the circuit and energizes the line 


5vb-STation 
Facipment— 


>) GINELANP 
=—) = Signal 


DOU 


PG 2) 


signal-relay x in the usual manner. The operator; by inserting 
the plug in the answering-jack, allows current to flow over the 
ting of the plug through a relay y, of high impedence, to the 
ground; this relay being energized attracts its armature, z, and 
disconnects the line signal apparatus, consisting of relay x and 
lamp, and also “‘ puts current”’ on the sleeve of the jack, which 
will give the busy-test through a relay T placed in the operator’s 
circuit. The advantage of this relay controlling the busy-test 
ds that by its use the operator only gets the signal without con- 


023 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS : PITTSBURG. [Feb. 5 


veying it to the subscriber who has made the call. The insertion 
of the plug also causes current to flow through relay P, closing the 
local contact at L, and allows current to flow through the lamp 
to the local contact at L on relay R to ground. These relays are 
of low resistance and are placed on each side of the cord-circuit. 
When the subscriber answers his call by taking the telephone 
from its hook, it allows the current to pass back over the tip of 
the cord to relay rR to ground and opens the local contact at L, 
thus cutting out the supervisory-lamp. It will be noticed that 
there is a straight through circuit from the tip and sleeve of the 
answering cord to the tip and sleeve of the calling cord with the 
condensers C, and C,, inserted. These condensers permit the 
flow of voice-currents and prevent the steady flow of current 
from the battery, which simply supplies current for the sub- 
station transmitter. 

The system. described eliminates the features which we stated 
above we did not think were desirable and as shown in diagram, 
Mr. Lockwood’s article. It is true we have introduced the relays 
R and p and R, and P,, but these relays are wound to a high impe- 
dance and are not connected directly in the talking-circuit, but are 
bridged across it. The circuit is perfectly balanced, which is not 
true of the circuit as shown in Mr. Lockwood's diagram, and 
instead of shunting the lamp we open the lamp circuit and save 
the drain on our batteries. 

To anyone who is familiar with the amount of wire necessary in 
a large multiple switchboard and the consequent greatly in- 
creased cost of manufacture, it will be apparent that immense 
saving can be made by the elimination of one-third of the amount 
of multiple switchboard cables necessary in the system described 
by Mr. Lockwood, by the use of two-contact jack instead of three- 
contact, by the use of two conductor cords instead of three con- 
ductor, and in addition to these savings in first cost and main- 
tenance we obtain a much more direct and better talking circuit. 


A paper read at the 4th Meeting of the Pitsburg 
Branch American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
February 5 1903 


THE ARCOPHONE. 


BY RAS) (SIN DER. 


The arcophone or speaking arc is the first successful loud- 
speaking telephone receiver thus far discovered. The discovery 
of this property of the electric arc to reproduce speech was first 
made by Dr. Simon at the University of Erlangen. In the Fall of 
1897 he found that by making and breaking the current in a cir- 
cuit paralleling an are circuit sounds corresponding to the 
make and break were reproduced by the arc. Since that time 
Dudell and Ruhmer have taken up the subject and added very - 
materially to the results. Dudell shunted the arc with induct- 
ance and capacity, and produced the whistling arc. By vary- 
ing the amount of capacity and inductance he could produce a 
note of any desired pitch. Ruhmer, copying Bell’s photophone 
principle, used a searchlight for transmitting the light waves 
from an arc lamp toa selenium cell—a telephone receiver and 
battery are placed in series with the selenium cell. By this ar- 
rangement, speech can be transmitted for a considerable dis- 
tance by means of the light waves. The Electrical World and 
Engineer of December 20, 1902, contains an article by Frederick 
Collins describing how Herr Ruhmer transmitted speech by 
means of light waves to a distance of 12 miles, and in a very 
satisfactory manner. 

Dr. K. E. Guthe, at the University of Michigan, gave an exhi- 
bition of a speaking arc before the University Engineering 
Society, March 28, 1902. He claims to have discovered that the 
sound continues a short time after the arc is blown out. 

The lamp on exhibition to-night is an ordinary Schuster hot 
wire arc lamp, working on 110 volts direct current. In series 
with the lamp is an impedence coil. This impedence coil is 
shunted by an ordinary solid-back transmitter, and the lamp and 
93 


94 SNYDER: THE ARCOPHONE. [Feb. 5 


coil are shunted by acondenser. The positive carbon is a special 
kind, being impregnated with foreign substances to produce a 
longer and more uniform arc. In the arc formed between 
ordinary carbons there is a great fall of potential close up to the 
positive carbon; in the arc formed between impregnated car- 
bons there is a more uniform drop of potential all the way across 
the arc. 

Fig. 1 shows a diagram of the circuit. 

I have seen a number of arrangements suggested for the speak- 
ing arc circuit, but none with a condenser shunt. The condenser 
shunt adds very materially to the results. We have tried to 
make an alternating current arc reproduce speech; the results 
were reasonably good, except that it sounded as if the speech 
were confused with the notes of a jew’s-harp. 


CONDENSER 


IMPEDANCE 


FPRHEOSTAT 


TRANSMITTER 


FIGURE *7 


Several theories have been advanced as to what causes these 
sound waves to issue from the arc. The most logical explanation 
appears to be the one giving the cause as the sudden expansion 
and contraction of air due to variations in the temperature of the 
arc. 

In speaking into the transmitter the sound waves strike the 
diaphragm causing the current to pulsate in the transmitter 
circuit, and this pulsating current sets up similar pulsations in 
the arc circuit. The temperature of the arc varies as the square 
of the current passing through it. As the arc is composed prin- 
cipally of carbon-vapor in a high state of molecular vibration, it 
has a very low specific heat. The temperature of this vapor 
varies almost instantly with the current. When this current is 
pulsating, the temperature of the arc is raised or lowered corres- 


1903.] SNYDER : THE ARCOPHONE. 95 


pondingly, and the volume of vapor is increased or diminished 
in accordance with its temperature. Hence the volume of the 
vapor increasing and diminishing sets up sound waves in the 
surrounding air. 

After hearing this novelty and knowing howit works, the natural 
question is as to itsuse. It may possibly be used in the near 
future for a single speaker to address great audiences with but 
little effort. This can be done by the speech waves from a trans- 
mitter circuit being impressed upon the field of an arc light 
generator. All the lamps supplied by this machine will repro- 
duce the speech. 

Besides being of use in Bhdreceng large audiences and trans- 
mitting wireless telephone messages, the value of the arcophone 
as an advertiser is obvious. 


Thunder, one of the loudest known sounds, is produced by the 
electric arc. 


LIBRARY DINNER 
OF THE 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


HELD at SHERRY’s, New York, Monpay, FEBRUARY 9, 1903. 


At the conclusion of the service of the dinner, President Charles 
F. Scott said: 

It is my pleasant duty to extend to you, ladies and gentlemen, 

‘Members and guests, a hearty welcome to our Annual Dinner. 

Within the past year the InstituTE has been privileged to do 
honor to two men of world-wide fame. The dinner of last year 
was in honor of Signor Marconi. It followed shortly after the 
flashing of a single letter across the wireless ocean. The three 
dot message was so meagre that it was almost in doubt, but it 
made Marconi the hero of the hour.- A second memorable event 
was the reception given to Lord Kelvin, whose name is indelibly 
connected with the first signalling across the ocean. Lord 
Kelvin told us the interesting story of the early days of the 
Atlantic cable. He told of the messages which demonstrated 
the possibilities which lay within the cable and of the accidents 
which followed and of the difficulties which were overcome after 
years of patient labor. The cable was not ready for service until 
eight or ten years after the first message. 

It is notable that before our annual dinner of this year 
every letter of the alphabet has passed across the wireless sea and 
a lengthy message of gratulation has likewise flashed from Presi- 
dent Roosevelt to King Edward of England. 

But things move faster in these days than in the olden time. 
Progress and activity mark every department of life. Scientific 
discovery, invention, engineering development—all these underlie 
the awakening of recent years. To such an audience as this I 

97 


98 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


need not dwell upon the importance of electricity in the new era, 
nor recite the many ways in which it has led to the revolution of 
old methods and the evolution of new ones. But I do emphasize 
the magnitude of the work which devolves upon the youngest of 
the professions and the need of developing effective men and 
efficient methods. With few exceptions, the electrical enter- 
prises of the present day, in which $4,000,000,000 of ‘capital are 
invested, have grown up within the past fifteen or twenty years. 
Not only that, but the men upon whom this work has depended 
for its inception, its development and its operation have likewise 
been developed during the same time. They have worked with- 
out precedents. There has been no lamp of engineering experi- 
ence to guide. Nor have electrical matters stood still. One set 
of problems is scarcely met before new requirements arise. 

Note the evolution in electrical transportation in New York 
City. Ten years ago horse cars were being replaced by cable 
cars. Scarcely had their places in turn been taken by the electric 
surface cars before the equipment of the elevated railway with its 
extensive and exacting service was undertaken. Before the 
Manhattan trains were in operation an underground system was 
planned with heavier trains and higher speed, and long before the 
Rapid Transit is started, the Pennsylvania Tunnel is under- 
taken for trains operating under steam railway conditions. 

Responsibilities of increasing magnitude confront the electrical 
engineer. What provisions are there for making his work more 
certain and more efficient? What means are there for selecting 
out of the vast and varied sum total of achievement, that which 
is most worthy to become standard practice? What are the 
forces which tend to codperation and advancement among elec- 
trical workers and in electrical work? 

In reply to these questions I desire to present the AMERICAN 
INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS as a definite positive force 
for the advancement of the electrical engineering profession and 
its work. The InstiTUTE cannot take as its type the learned 
societies of the old school. Anewerahascome. Modern science 
and engineering belong to a new order of things. The electrical 
engineering profession is unique. Electricity enters into so many 
departments of our modern civilization that its function is diffi- 
cult to describe. If I were called upon to state the effect of 
electricity in briefest terms I would reply, Electricity increases 
efficiency. By its use the worid’s work may be done more 
quickly and at less cost. The telephone is an instantaneous 


1903.] . LIBRARY DINNER. 99 


messenger, it doubles the work a man can do. The railway 
motor, the motor in the mine, the erane motor, the motor in the 
machine shop, bring results more quickly and more cheaply. 
Electrochemical processes produce cheaper products. The 
electric light adds to the hours of efficient ‘activity. Electricity 
has given to the whole world a new method of doing things—of 
doing them more efficiently in time and in cost. The work of the 
electrical engineer is not separate and apart, it is interwoven with 
every branch of engineering, with every industry, with commerce 
and in a score of ways with the conveniences and necessities of 
every-day life. The history of the past few years and the ten- 
dencies of the present promise an expanding future. Activity is 
the characteristic of America. It is the keynote of American 
electrical engineering. The national organization which repre- 
sents the electrical profession must be an active organization, 
it must be a broad organization, it must have an ever-expanding 
ideal. It must take a definite grasp upon present conditions and 
. it must be a positive force in electrical engineering advancement. 
Its mission is not restricted to the welfare of the electrical 
engineer alone, but through him and through his work it comes 
in touch with our modern life in as many points as electricity 
itself. He was reputed a benefactor of the race who made two 
blades of grass grow where one had grown before. How much 
more a benefactor is he who controls the subtle agent that can 
double the effectiveness of effort in a thousand ways. 

The INSTITUTE must be in touch with many men. To one 
class of our membership are admitted only those who have 
attained a high standard in the electrical profession. To the 
other belongs the larger body of electrical workers. The ideal of 
the one is dignity; the ideal of the other is usefulness. 

There are those who question whether the extension of our 
membership may not compromise our dignity and lower our 
standards. But I question whether we are truly representative 
of the Electrical Engineers of America and whether we can exert 
our proper influence upon electrical progress while there are out- 
side our ranks thousands of electrical workers—not only those 
‘advanced in the profession and those prominent in pursuits 
closely associated with electrical applications, but young men of 
promise—the engineers of the future. We have failed to catch 
the spirit of the times and the keynote of electrical progress if. 
we do not realize that we must expand and broaden and progress 
as well as maintain high standards of excellence. Full member- 


109 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


ship should be exclusive; associate membership should be inclu- 
sive. 

The benefits which come from activity and association are 
being secured through the many Local Branches which have been 
formed during the past half year. In a dozen or twenty cities 
and colleges, among InstiTuTE members and among students 
there are local meetings usually following shortly after the New 
York meetings at which the original papers with their discussions 
are reviewed and again discussed by members and students. 
There is scarcely any other means which can conduce more to the 
effectiveness of our INsTITUTE in directly strengthening and 
developing the electrical workers of America than a system of 
local meetings which brings together men in electrical work and 
puts the students in educational institutions in touch with present 
problems. : 

In its influence upon electrical engineering progress the 
InstiTUTE is doing a good work. Its Transactions are a con- 
tinuous panorama of electrical engineering progress. The work 
of its Standardization Committee and of its National Electric 
Code Committee has been an influencing factor in establishing 
definite and uniform practice; its Transmission Committee for 
securing and publishing extended data upon high tension trans- 
mission is now actively at work. A new Committee has just been 
established for the collection and publication of general electrical 
engineering data. This will be an efficient medium for the pub- 
lication of useful and up-to-date data which may be furnished by 
engineers or by manufacturing companies. 

We are looking forward to the time when we may have a. build- 
ing which will be suited to the dignity and the demands of our 
InstituTE. We have been holding our meetings in the assembly 
rooms of a sister society. On many occasions those standing 
almost equaled the number of those seated. I am among those 
who constitute, I believe, a large and growing number among 
American engineers, whose ideal is a magnificent engineering 
building giving adequate accommodations to many societies, 
where each may have the individual facilities which will enable 
it to carry on 1ts own particular work most advantageously, and 
it will have those common facilities, such as a large assembly 
hall and reception room, and a general library, which will be of 
the greatest common advantage and benefit. The value and 
influence of such a building is not merely in the convenience of 
the building itself, even a greater benefit is its influence as a 


1903. | LIBRARY DINNER. 101 


definite material representative of the general engineering pro- 
fession and the codperation between engineering societies and 
engineers. 

President Pritchett of the Massachusetts Institute said at the 
Stevens Institute inauguration last week that ‘‘ Isolation indi- 
cates a low state of civilization.” Let us be civilized! Let us 
cooperate! 

This modern world of ours depends most vitally for its efficient 
operation upon the engineer whose work enters so fundamentally 
and so completely into everything which differentiates our 
material conditions from those of the savage who preceded us. 
May it not be that our present prosperity is not merely a crest on 
the recurring cycle of financial ups and downs, but a normal-con- 
dition in a new era of wealth production, which has been brought 
about through the thought and effort of the engineer ! 

It is of inestimable consequence that every means should be 
afforded for increasing the effectiveness and the efficiency of the 
. engineering profession. As electricity has been a unifying ele- 
ment in modern affairs, making it possible to operate street cars 
and passenger trains, elevators and printing presses and machine 
shops, to light the lamps in street and office and home, to illum- 
inate the advertising sign, to heat the curling iron and to cook 
the luscious steak—all from one system, from one power house, 
from one dynamo; so, likewise, may not the electrical engineer 
be a unifying agent among the engineering professions? Let the 
spirit of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
be—not isolation—but codperation. 

We are here to-night for the special purpose of directing our 
attention to one of the fundamental departments of the INsti- 
TUTE. Weare to celebrate the founding of its Library. 

How fitting it is that the national engineering society which 
without reflection upon its sister societies may claim to represent 
most closely the modern idea in industrial and engineering 
activity should have as the foundation and the nucleus of its 
electrical library, a library for research and for reference, such a 
collection as the noted Latimer Clark Library which was secured 
and presented through the appreciation and generosity of our 
own member, Dr. Schuyler Skaats Wheeler. 

_ What is the estimate which those who have been prominently 
connected with industrial and engineering work place upon the 
value of a library? An English engineer in referring to the 
American iron and steel industry makes this statement: ‘‘ The 


102 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


most remarkable industrial development in the history of iron 
making is mainly the result of two factors, the popularization of 
practical science by the American scientific journals ae the 
courage and inventive genius of the American iron masters.’ 

We are proud to do honor to the men who have been prominent 
in this great development. Our InstiTuTE has taken part with 
other societies in the founding of the Medal in honor of the 
venerable John Fritz. We are closely related to another man of 

‘iron and steel. He has been successful, he has accumulated 
wealth, but he has also followed the new Gospel of Wealth. 

In what way, let us ask, has this man, whose ability has 
enabled him to accumulate one of the largest fortunes that a man 
has ever possessed and who has given the best years of his life to 
a study of problems of industry, of government and of progress, 
and the needs of his fellow-men—by what channels, by what 
means has this man found that he can most efficiently employ 
his wealth for great and noble ends? You all know the answer. 
The Carnegie Steel Company is not so widely known as the 
Carnegie Library. And, how fitting it is that the means for 
cataloging and otherwise making our library useful should have 
been contributed by the man so highly appreciative of libraries, 
who has done so much to extend their usefulness and their 
popularity—Andrew Carnegie.: ; 

Our members have not been in the receiving mood alone. A 
score or two of them, as well as attorneys and companies and 
societies have been generous, not only in contributing collections 
of past works, but in several cases in providing endowments for 
continued additions; and more than one has provided in his will 
that his technical library shall pass to the Institutr. Such a 
foundation, accompanied by such appreciation and such interest 
is well worthy to be celebrated by the InstiturTE in its annual 
dinner, with guests so illustrious in the library and the literary 
world, as those who honor us by their presence to-night. 

TOASTMASTER Martin:—You have been informed, ladies and 
gentlemen, by no less an authority than our esteemed President, 
Mr. Scott, that this is our second annual dinner. I have noticed 
it as a peculiarity of Presidents that they’ date everything 
from the time at which they took office. I did it some fifteen 
years ago myself (laughter) and have since then wondered what . 
other presidents could find todo. This is not exactly our second 
annual dinner. There are others of us who have attended 
earlier feasts, but I think we can say that it is the second occa- 


1903.] LIBRARY DINNER, 103 


sion upon which we have mustered in such large numbers and 
with such enthusiasm as characterizes our gathering to-night. 

As Mr. Scott has reminded you, one year ago we had the honor 
and pleasure of entertaining Mr. Marconi, who had just taught 
the ether to spell the one letter ‘‘S.”” Since that time the ether 
has succeeded in mastering every letter of the alphabet. When I 
had the opportunity, a week or so ago, of asking Mr. Marconi to 
be with us this evening, he expressed his regret that he could not 
join us, and he said that his time and his hands were full of 
creating an “‘ Ether Library.”’ 

It is due to the New York Edison Company to inform you 
that circuits and current which furnish us special illumination 
this evening are supplied through their generosity and courtesy. 
It is also due to our friend, Mr. Russell Spalding, of the 
Elblight Company, of America, to state that the beautiful 
festoons which you see around the room are supplied by Mr. 
- Spalding and the company. The Insriture desires through me 
.to thank the New York Edison Company and its officers and Mr. 
Spalding and the Elblight Company for the service they have 
done us to-night. 

As I came down Pittsburg Row to-night—I mean Fifth Avenue 
—I had a dim sort of speculation whether my esteemed friend on 
the right would really allow me to begin my duties, and would not 
take from me the pleasure of beginning at the beginning of the 
programme. These new Pittsburg men are very worthily proud 
of each other, and it has seemed to me a singular felicity that we 
should have one Scctt introducing a brother Scot to-night, 
both of them hailing from that nation which has been 
justly characterized as irrepressible (laughter.) Our President 
is himself an example of that band of brilliant young engineers 
who, directed by the finest executive and financial skill this 
world has ever seen, have made the name of our greatest indus- 
trial center, Pittsburg, known throughout the civilized world. 
So that while the iron and steel industry may justly claim its_ 
Carnegie and its Schwab, we, too, will boast our Westinghouse 
and our Scott. Also our Calvin Rice, and ‘so on, through all 
the degrees and Lamme-nations. 

As Mr. Scott has said to-night, we electrical engineers, we 
younger men, came late into the world. We found everything 
pre-empted; the others had been here before us—the earth and 
the waters under the earth, the coal deposits and the iron mines 
had already been taken up, and there was nothing left for us but 


104 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


the vacuum and the ether. We are to-day creating tangible 
properties out of these intangible elements. But it stands to 
reason that for the great majority of the members of this INsTI- 
TUTE the opportunities are somewhat scarce and scant, the emol- 
uments cannot be large and the salaries will be small—tfor a few 
of us more rewards will come through inventions—but to most 
of us the opportunity to do that which is in our hearts for the 
InsTITUTE will always be more or less lacking. Once in a while 
we shall find our ‘‘ angel” and shall then be able to contribute 
to the work which the InstiTuTE is doing. I have even ven- 
tured to think for myself that had I the good fortune to mect our 
friend Mr. Carnegie earlier in life it might have been a good deal _ 
better for both of us. 

There are two good reasons why Mr. Carnegie, our guest of 
honor to-night, should be with us. One is that he is one of us, 
and I do not think he will chide me if I venture to remind him 
that some of the first good, honest money that he earned in this. 
world was made in the service of electricity at the key and the 
sounder, with our good friend, Thomas Alva Edison. And 
that is why to-night we hang upon our walls,our “73.” Mr. 
Carnegie understands that a good deal better than a good many 
others of you— 

Mr. CARNEGIE (sotto voce) :—Yes, I do. 

Mr. Martin:—A second good reason why Mr. Carnegie: 
should be with us to-night is summed up in the magic word. 
“library.” 

‘The play’s the thing, 
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.” 

said Hamlet, and when I said ‘‘ library,’’ I ventured to hope and 
believe I might get Mr. Carnegie to be with us to-night, 
because he lets no guilty library escape. Our work appeals. 
to Mr. Carnegie who, I venture to assure you, is a discriminating 
giver and has to be extremely careful as to what he does. Only 
the other day in this city he awarded to a small boy a gold medal 
for fishing a man out of the Hudson River. The police of this 
city tell me that since that time the waters of the North River 
and the waters of the East River and the waters of the Lower Bay 
have simply been aswarm with small boys trying to earn another 
gold medal. 

I do not know how Mr. Carnegie regards it, but we are the good 
little boy who has his first medal, I believe, in the ranks of the 
engineering societies; and I do not believe that anything would 


1993.] LIBRARY DINNER. 105 


give Mr. Carnegie a greater pleasure than to see our sister socie- 
ties do as we have done and join hands with us so that our 
libraries might be of benefit to the world. I was one of 
a party at the trial trip of a motor—an electric car—in a village 
up the Sound a week or two ago, and after the trial trip of the 
motor we were entertained by a well-known millionaire at his 
house in company with several others. We were having a good 
time, and as our legs were stretched under his mahogony he looked 
pleasantly down the long board and said, ‘‘ Now, you fellows, I 
want you all to have a good time, because I don’t think many of 
you will ever be here again.’”’ I do not know that it will ever be 
my honor and privilege and good fortune to introduce Mr. 
Carnegie to another audience, and you will therefore forgive me 
if I have made the most of the present opportunity. Gentlemen, 
our friend, our benefactor, Andrew Carnegie, Rector of St. 
Andrew’s University. 

(Three cheers for Andrew Carnegie. The cheers were lustily 
given.) 

Mr. CARNEGIE :—Mr. Toastmaster: I suppose he takes prece- 
dence even of the President, and I address him first, because he is 
an editor in addition to being a toastmaster and they rule the 
world nowadays—and you, my fellow Scot, Mr. President, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, with especial emphasis, superior to that 
upon either editor or President, upon the ladies.. The engi- 
neers of Ameica, set many good examples; particularly the 
electrical engineers. Permit me to congratulate the INSTITUTE 
upon having ladies at your. banquet—they give an air of dis- 
tinction and refinement which nothing else can produce. 

You say truly, Mr. Irrepressible Toastmaster (laughter), that I 
have a right to be here among the electrical engineers. Before 
the electrical engineer was, Mr. Edison, Mr. Barclay and myself, . 
we messenger boys—were. There was no engineering elec- 
tricity in those days, but I have very delightful reminiscences of 
those days, and chew the cud over them many and many a time. 
The greatest change that ever came over me was when I passed 
from the dirty cellar where I was firing and running the steam 
engine (and many a time was afraid it would explode, because I 
did not know whether I was firing right or not, as I was not an 
engineer), and translated to a telegraph office, where they had 
- clean writing paper and pencils and windows—that, ladies and 
gentlemen, was my first glimpse of paradise on earth in my early 
career in making a livelihood. The telegraph office was to me 


106 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


a paradise, and I began surreptitiously to practise on the instru- 
ments in the morning before the operators came. The line was 
not completed to New Orleans when I first began to practise on 
the key, but it was completed before I became an operator and 
received the tremendous salary of twenty-five dollars a month. 

The line was compieted during the time I was practising, and 
I called up New Orleans in the morning—the boys got Louisville 
to connect—that I might say N. O. G. M., New Orleans, Good 
Morning, and the answer came back ‘‘ Good Morning, Pitts- 
burg.” I said to myself, this is what Swedenborg, that wild 
Swedish seer, said about heaven, ‘‘ space is annihilated.’ So 
when I.see Mr. Edison sitting there and Mr. Barclay, and think ° 
of us three; with the privilege of mature years I turn to you and 
say, ‘“Boys, you are modern, you're a new generation; we are 
your pioneers, your predecessors. But looking at youand knowing 
what you have done, no father was ever prouder of his boys than 
Edison, Barclay and myself are of this generation which has 
succeeded us.”’ 

I have been looking you.all over—well, with an occasional 
glance at the ladies, for which I hope I may be excused. 
Gentlemen, America has been first in electricity. As Mr. 
Martin has truly said, you came late upon the scene. To Britain, 
the other half of our race, we are indebted for all the great inven- 
tions upon which depend the material progress of the world. Our 
advance is focused upon the steam engine of Watt, with one arm 
spreading over the sea in the boat of Symington, seven years 
before Fulton, and another arm spreading it over the land in the 
locomotive of Stephenson. That is the triad upon which the 
material progress of the world rests, and that was before we-of 
America were. I may remark that all three of these gentlemen were 
Scotch. I called Mr. Martin irrepressible, and he is asample 
of the American. The American does not get left; he does not 
take ‘‘no’’ for an answer; he knows how to court a woman— 
“no” doesn’t mean anything; he knows how tocourt fortune and 
he knows how to get a man to a dinner after he has declined three 
times. The man who Wins is the fellow that says to woman, or 
to fortune, or to the gods themselves, who refuse, ‘‘Don’t believe 
you; you don’t mean it.” The American says “I am going 
to get there anyhow,” and that is what the American does. You 
take Edison and Staniey and Thomson and you take Scott and 
Martin and other great ‘lights I see around me—there were no 


1903.] LIBRARY DINNER. 107 


corresponding men in the old branch of the race, it takes the 
clectrical. atmosphere of America to produce such electrical 
forces as these men, such hustlers. One man has just said to 
me, “ Mr. Carnegie, that man Martin is what you say—but he 
came from Jamaica.” That puzzled me—Jamaica, an English- 
man. Well, there is no saying what you can do with a Scotch- 
man or an Englishman if you catch him young enough. Mr. 
Martin said to me, ‘“ Mr. Carnegie, I feel a bond of sympathy 
with you’’—this is Martin’s style—‘ there’s a bond between 
you and me, my mother was a Scotchwoman, of Edinboro.” 
That accounts-for Martin. 

The toastmaster mentioned St. Andrew’s University—there 
was another Scotchman greatly honored there last October by 
being made a doctor—Graham Bell—another inventor: so that 
even in electricity do not forget that there is a little Northern half 
of an island in the North Sea that is not to be left out of account 
very often when anything good or great is to be done. 

The President struck the keynote of the success of the Ameri- ~ 
can. I have often taken occasion to say—and I have known 
both lands well—the American men, this body of electrical 
engineers, for instance, are the most codperative men, I believe, 
that exist to-day. You remember what Emerson said about the 
Briton—every Briton was a little island by himself, not com- 
municable with others; they are exceedingly distinctive; they 
do not codperate well—they want to go each their own way; but 
there is this about the American which is different from most 
other men—he is fair-minded; I don’t think the American 
wishes to override; he is not implacable; is not prone to irritate 
ortomake enemies. I think there is a harmonizing feature about 
him, which counts for everything in the progress of any great 
movement, political, social or scientific. And it is institutions 
like this of the Electrical Engineers. which do so much;. you can- 
not over-estimate the influence such organizations exert. You 
hear a man spoken of as Mr. Pope, your Secretary, was spoken of ; 
I noticed the outburst of applause; that appreciation; that feeling 
that his fellows, his associates, his friends appreciate him—that 
man would rather have the appreciation of a few of his friends 
who know how to judge him than he would have the plaudits of a 
million who knew not his services. The test of greatness is not 
the popularity of a man, is not how widely he is spoken of; the 
true test of greatness—as it isof goodness and personal virtues— 
is what his colleagues think of him, how they rate him, Take 


108 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


any of these young men—Edison, Sheldon, Thomson, Fritz, 
Stanley, or even Martin, though an editor—what do his colleagues 
think of him? Their approval is the crown of victory that will 
bring out all the man’s reserved force. That is wanting in any 
nation which does not know how to assimilate, how to combine 
the social with the scientific. When men who work with you at. 
the bench. or at the desk or at the machine become your best 
friends—and their appreciation, the highest mark that you can 
win depends upon this —the enterprise in which you are engaged 
has behind it such a force as nothing else can give it in this world. 

President Humphreys, of Stevens’ Institute, made a remark 
to me the other day. He said, ‘‘ Mr. Carnegie, I read your 
Rectorial address in which you compared Britain to the other 
nations of the world. I think you very correctly describe the 
conditions. I have an American friend who has lived in Britain 
and has a large business there, and he says that Britain will never 
equal America, because in America the man who does the work 
gets recognition, status, social position and everything follows 
him in America if a man performs service.’’ In Britain it is not 
SO. 

I go further than that—our Republican institutions are to be 
credited with much of the vigor, the ability and the success with 
which we are going forward to the material supremacy of the 
earth. 

We are all here together in this room. There is not a hair’s 
breadth of difference between any of us. There is not a right or 
a privilege that one man has that is not every man’s right. We 
are not asking who your forefathers were, or what they did, or 
what your rank or position of wealth is; we are asking what you 
do, how you behave yourself, and let all the other nations go into 
manufacturing, or science, or research, or anything you please—I 
tell you this nation has a tremendous advantage in that, that we 
stand, not for the position of this or that family, but for the work 
of the individual man. That is the card that wins, and that is 
the reason I back America against all the other nations in the 
world, because she is a Republic where any man’s privilege is 
every man’s right. 

TOASTMASTER Martin:—Ladies and Gentlemen: When the 
menu and order of exercises was being made up, my friend on the 
right said, ‘‘ Well, by the merest chance Mr. Carnegie may refer 
to Scotland, and so I would be glad if you would spell the Skaats 
out in fullin my name.’’ As Mr. Carnegie says, it takes a great. 
many nationalities to create an American. 


1903. LIBRARY DINNER. 1v9 


I attach a great deal of interest to and sometimes look with a 
great deal of pride and perhaps a little pathos on an old and 
somewhat yellow paper which my good friend Dr. Wheeler and I 
drew up together.eighteen years ago, proposing that the Inst1- 
TUTE should have a library, and in our document we mentioned 
the Latimer Clark Collection as the element and the foundation 
with which we would like to begin. At that time we were both 
poor and struggling young men of genius (laughter) and we did 
not exactly know where the money was to come from, but we had 
faith in our profession and perhaps a good deal more in ourselves, 
and so we put that document together and signed it and it is in 
the archives of the InstiTuTE to-day. I would not have men- 
tioned this, but for the fact that Dr. Wheeler’s name is on it. 
Shortly after that episode our good friend Dr. Wheeler dis- 
tinguished himself by inventing that which I think is perhaps.the 
most typically American invention of the last century—a machine 
known as the fan motor, which will distribute more hot air in 
large quantities in a given time than any other known machine 
in the world. I was encouraged by the success on my friend’s 
part and was glad to see him move on to higher and larger 
enterprises. I was glad to encourage all my friends to go into it 
as a good thing, something which might even prove to be a gold 
mine. Dr. Wheeler’s success is known to you all, for he is one of 
those who, as Mr. Carnegie has said, has carried our name as 
engineers, inventors and designers of machinery around this 
great globe. In doing that, I venture to hope and believe 
Dr. Wheeler has achieved a competency; at least he gave us a 
faint indication of that fact when he purchased the Latimer 
Clark collection for us. I shall never forget the thrill of satis- 
faction I had when, on going to the telephone one evening, I 
heard his voice at the other end of the line, and he said: ‘‘ Martin, 
I see the Latimer Clark collection is for sale at last. Do you 
remember what we did some years ago? I wonder if we can get 
it for the Institute?” I think it was within the brief space of 
two weeks that we had the much-coveted Latimer Clark collec- 
»tion. (Applause.) Gentlemen, the Latimer Clark collection 
is now yours, thanks to the generosity and public spirit, and the 
altogether altruistic and disinterested action of our Dr. Wheeler. 
Now, we have had gifts from men outside of the InstiruTE and 
are glad of them and proud of them, but we have to do something 
for ourselves. Dr. Wheeler and I, since preparing that docu- 
ment, have seen the investment in electrical apparatus rise from 


110 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


less than $1,000,000,000 to $4,000,000,000, and we venture to 
hope that at least a portion of that wealth will be turned into 
the treasury of the InstiTuTE. Only yesterday, in the Sunday 
paper, I read a cable despatch which stated that this wonderful 
radiating material, known as radium, was being sold in London 
at the rate of $900,000 a pound, chiefly to American electricians, 
and I could not help wondering how many of them were standing 
in line. I know I was not—I was too busy buying coal—but if 
we have men in our ranks who can thus afford to take up radium 
at that rate, surely we may venture to hope and believe that they 
will also purchase for us a little of that intellectual radium, that 
infinite, brain power of the intellect represented and preserved 
in the library. 

No pleasure that I enjoy to-night in discharging the lugubrious 
duties of toastmaster will afford me a keener and deeper thrill 
than now to present to you and to ask you to receive him with 
cheers three times three, our fellow-member, Dr. Schuyler Skaats 
Wheeler, the founder of the Institute Library. (Three cheers 
were given for Dr. Wheeler.) oo 

Dr. WHEELER:—Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen: I 
shall not say very much about the Clark collection, because I do 
not know much about it; and if I had realized at the time of its 
purchase that it would result in my having to stand up here 
to-night and do an after-dinner stunt, I think I would have kept 
clear of it altogether! I did exa'mine the exteriors of numerous 
enormous boxes at the appraiser’s office and watched the Col- 
lector of the Port while he ripped open their hermetically sealed 
linings and read all the books, most of which are in Latin. As 
books that are over twenty years old are entitled to free entry, 
he was about to say, “‘ I do not see anything here to collect on,” 
when he came across a couple of tons of the current issues of the © 
electrical papers, the Review, of London, and the World, of New 
York. He then said that I must pay duty on these. He asked 
me how $125 would strike me, and I said it did not strike me at 
all, but as I was tired of waiting I would pay it. Then I went 
away. The next day I received a bill for $250, and went down ~ 
and made some remarks about it. Then I was told the whole 
thing had been passed and now no power on earth could change 
it! That is about the way the books got into the city. 

When I first began to take notice of things electrical, I thought 
I would like to know something about the telegraph and so I 
turned to my encyclopedia and read up on the subject, and there 


1903.] LIBRARY DINNER. 111 


I found the telegraph described as a series of towers spreading 
across the country several miles apart, depending on whether the 
country was hilly or not, each tower carrying a swinging arm. 
(This is a long story, but I have the point in view.) The operator 
in one tower would watch the arms in the next tower and when 
its arms were moved he would move the arms in his tower accord- 
ingly, and in that way signals were transmitted across the 
country by the process now called “ wig-wagging.”” I made up 
my mind it was time to purchase a new encyclopedia and did so, 
and then the publishers of the encyclopedia asked me to re-write 
the article on Telegraphy. I had to make it fit the same space . 
that the old article had occupied so that they would not have to 
change the page numbers. That was more difficult than de- 
scribing the telegraph. This was the method of signalling used in 
England in 1816 and in France, at any rate according to Dumas 
in his Count of Monte Cristo. Shortly after that time a scientific 
man named Francis Ronalds invented an electric telegraph. 
His telegraph consisted of 400 feet of wire laid underground, with 
a clock at each end, but in place of the hour marks on the dials of 
the clocks were the letters of the alphabet. He-would send a 
spark over the wire, the operator at the other end would see 
what letter the hour hand pointed to, and in that way they started 
out on a system of electric telegraphing. The Government at 
that time in England was relying on the wig-wag telegraph for 
signalling from London to the dockyard at Portsmouth. Ronalds 
was anxious to get the Admiralty to take up his new electric 
telegraph, and he made a great many efforts to get the authorities 
interested init. Finally, they turned him down in the following 
rather remarkable message from Sir John Barrow, Secretary of 
the Admiralty: ee 

‘Mr. Barrow presents his compliments to Mr. Ronalds and acquaints 


him, in reference to his note of the 3d inst., that telegraphs of any kind 
are now wholly unnecessary and that no other than the one now in use 


will be adopted. - 
Admiralty Office, 5th August, 1816. 


Francis Ronalds was a scientific man. He was director of the 
Kew Observatory, a man in delicate health, and also of a very 
sensitive disposition. This episode caused him to leave electricity 
entirely. He went to Italy and remained there for ten years and 
during that time he amused himself making a very fine collection 
of electrical books. He consulted the book dealers all over the 
world and got them to send him lists of what they had that was 
attractive and he prepared a very fine catalogue of all the elec- 


112 LIBRARY DINNER. ° [Feb. 9 


trical books extant. He left this library to trustees to be pre- 
sented to the British Institution of Electrical Engineers. A few 
years before he died he was made a Knight. Up to this time this 
was the finest electrical library there was, but unfortunately the 
trustees did not present it promptly to the Institution. They 
kept it about ten years and there was more or less haggling about 
it which gives the matter rather a bad taste, but finally the 
British Institution received it. 

Then Latimer Clark, who had been collecting books, kept on 
adding more and his correspondence and records give every indi- 
cation that he was very anxious to make a finer collection than 
Ronalds. All through his catalogues and correspondence are 
notes everywhere such-as “‘ This book is not in Ronalds’,”’ etc. 
Evidently the desire to surpass Ronalds’s collection was one of 
his incentives in making his own a fine collection. This in a way 
is the history of the gathering together of these, our books. A 
few years ago the executors of Mr. Clark wanted to dispose of the 
books, and some friends of mine, wishing to enlist the support of 
a well-known patron of libraries, thought they would write him a 
letter calling his attention to the fact that this library could be 
had. They then conceived a second thought, which was that it 
would be very nice to have a newspaper clipping to enclose with 
their letter. They did not have such a clipping, so they deliber- 
ately set about manufacturing one by writing up an article, 
pretty nearly a column long, describing the library, which they 
published in their paper. This was to be cut out and sent to this 
prominent. patron of libraries, but in the natural course of events 
a regular issue of the paper containing the article fell under my 
eye and I called up the proper source of information and found 
who had the books. I cabled for them and got them. 

I think the matter of appreciating these books is a very hard 
subject. They treat of all sorts of things. It is impossible to 
read them all—I know I cannot; and in fact, from reliable 
information, I understand that the InstiruTE itself has employed 
an expert guide and interpreter to tell it what the books are. 
There are very many interesting things in the collection. Of 
course, there is the first book that was ever printed! And then 
there is the first book that was ever printed which mentions in 
any way electricity or magnetism, and then there is the first book 
that was ever printed in English, which mentions anything on 
the subject, and then there is the first book that was devoted 
entirely to electricity and magnetism, that is, was issued as a 


1903.] LIBRARY DINNER. 113 


Separate treatise on the subject, all previous books having only 
incidentally mentioned it, and so on, through an innumerable 
~ list of books that have some special interest. Then there is the 
book which Galileo wrote containing sentiments which were not 
altogether approved of, and for which he afterwards did time. 

I am very enthusiastic about having a good collection of elec- 
trical books in this city, and I am delighted to see that the sub- 
ject received such warm support all around, that there are so. 
many’ contributors and such extensive contributors, because 
there is no question that this city is destined to be the electrical 
business centre of the world, if it is not now. 

_ ToastMASTER Martin:—President Scott has received this 
dispatched from Cincinnati: 

“The Cincinnati Branch assembles to-night fifty-five strong. It 
extends greeting to the parent society and its honored guest. Tell Andrew 
‘Carnegie we can use a library too.” 

Mr. CARNEGIE:—Hand that over to Wheeler. 

Mr. Martin :—I like to witness the emulation or rivalry of 
' great, generous souls. I did not suppose for a minute that either 

of them was through. Our last speaker in his remarks has 
touched on the scope and extent of our INstTITUTE Library, and 
it is really remarkable the manner in which it illustrates the senti- 
ment which is attached to the next toast, namely, “ The Unity 
of Science.” An electrician never knows where to stop reading 
in order that he may add to his store of useful information. My 
good friend and old instructor in electricity, Mr. Thomas A. 
Edison, told me once how he began reading in the free library at 
Detroit, a mere bit of a boy, but still an omnivorous reader, and 
having no one to instruct him as to the pursuit of his studies he 
began at the bottom of the first stack, at the end of one 
shelf, and read straight through fifteen feet of it. He was about 
to begin on the second fifteen feet, when the librarian thought it 
was about time to investigate the proceedings of that extra- 
ordinary youth. 

About a year or two ago I was again impressed with my good 
friend’s, my hero’s omnivorous appetite and thirst for knowledge, 
when being in his library I happened to say that I had never seen 
in print that I could remember the original statement of Joule 
of his famous law. The “ Grand Old Man’s”’ eye gleamed, and 
he pulled out a book and read to me there and then the identical 
passage about which I expressed a little curiosity. 

I sometimes wonder what is going to happen to the publishers 
when this library furore gets through. An old friend of mine 


114 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


whom Mr. Carnegie will remember, the late James D. Reid, once 
told me how, when building the telegraph line through to Pitts- 
burg and finding that the circuit was leaking, he determined to 
insulate it and immediately proceeded to smear the whole wire 
with beeswax. He says that never since have the bees all down 
through the Alleghenies and the Valley of the Monongahela had 
such a boom time as they had that year. Our good friend, Mr. 
‘Carnegie, has been beeswaxing the publisher's circuits for a long 
time. 

[ We have with us to-night to respond to this toast one who is 
not only distinguished as a publisher, and especially as a cata- 
loger, but one whom we are glad to welcome again as one of 
ourselves and as an old Edison man, Mr. R. R. Bowker, of the 
Publisher's Weekly. 

Mr. BowKer:—Mr. President, the Irrepressible, Ladies and 
Gentlemen: I am not quite sure of good standing in this goodly 
company, because I cannot claim, like Mr. Carnegie, Mr. Edison 
and others who have accomplished things, to be a reformed 
telegrapher. There used to be a book entitied, ‘‘ Men Who Have 
Risen.’’ I suppose the next generation will read that book as 
‘“Men Who Have Telegraphed.’”’ But I can bring one “ char- 
acter ’’ to this occasion. In the antediluvian days of the New 
York Edison Company, when I did duty as its Executive, there 
was a public-spirited and private-spirited gentleman who had 
just finished his palace on Fifth Avenue but had not yet occu- 
pied it, when he received an electric light bill. He came in great 
Seamer to the Edison offices and insisted on coming to head- 
quarters with his light bill. He said that he had asked the archi- 
tects about this bill for $346, and was told that they had been 
moving furniture, etc., on the elevator, but could not account for 
more than half of the bill. I asked our friend if no one had noticed 
a decimal point between the 3 and the 4, whereupon he paid his 
bill for $3.46 and went away to ask further questions from the 
architects. Afterwards I learned that in his judgment I was the 


only man in New York who knew anything about electricity—I | 


suppose because I was the only man who had ever shown him how 
to reduce an electric light bill. But I come before you rather asa 
member of “‘ the executive profession,’ who has had something to 
do with electricity in the course of a varied business career, ta 
speak to you rather from the layman’s than from the engineer’s 
point of view. 

So short a time ago, Mr. President, as when I was in college, 
our electrical equipment consisted chiefly of a galvanic battery, 


1903.] LIBRARY DINNER. 115 


warranted to kill fourteen freshmen in series —we never tried it 
to its full capacity—the Geissler tubes which Prof. Pupin later 
turned to so good purpose, and never returned, and an electro- 
magnet which under tho inspiration of.that’same battery would 
grow a beard of a hundredweight of tenpenny nails in less than 
half a jiffy. That was a great outfit for those days, and the con- 
trast with college equipment of to-day tells, in a sense, the story 
of electrical development. To think that one person within this 
‘generation—as has been my personal experience—should have 
handled, reverently, from the hands of the noble woman who 
dictated that inspiring message, the first telegraphic despatch 
with its wonderful prophecy, ‘‘ What hath God wrought ?”’ 
should have known the man commercially responsible, Cyrus W. 
Field, and the man electrically responsible, now Lord Kelvin, 
for the first Atlantic cable; should have received, at the Como 
exhibition commemorative of Volta, one of the first despatches 
without wire, and-later have sent wireless messages from ship to 
shore; should have witnessed Elisha Gray’s earliest showings of 
his form of telephone from room to room of a private residence; 
should have seen Prof. Pupin in his laboratory working out that 
wonderful tuning system, extending the range of the telephone, 
possibly across sea, for which tune the piper had to pay a quarter 
to a half million dollars; should have seen a great electrical sys- 
tem grow from nothing until it reached and outreached a million 
lamps’ equivalent; should have known the first electric station 
in which Edison did his pioneer work and in which he discovered 
that inevitable element in every electrical enterprise, the electric 
“ bug ’’; should have seen the generating unit grow from Edison’s 
wonderful “ steam Jumbo ”’ of 150 horse-power to the 300 horse- 
power, the 600, the 1200, the 2500 horse-power unit, until now 
the unit of 5,000 horse-power, the size of the great turbines at 
Niagara Falls, is that which you see in many great electrical 
stations to-day—to think that all this which I have indicated 
has been accomplished within the compass of one short genera- 
tion, that is an epitome in itself of the progress which this industry 
of ours has made—an art new-born, responding to a science new- 
born. For throughout all electrical progress, this creating of a | 
new art, the important fact has been the mutual responsiveness 
of science and art, the flowering of science into art, and the 
response of art to science, step. by step. 

All the way along from the days when Lavoisier and Berzelius, 
at the beginning of the nineteenth century, gave to chemistry 


116 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


reasonable names and its algebraic language, how wonderful has 
been the growth of every science until at last all of them seem to 
have culminated and concentered in our own. And all that 
progress has been a progress in and toward unity, a progress also 
at an accelerating speed, for it seems as though, as the last cen- 
tury put away its hundred volumes on the book-shelves of time, 
that century had told us more than all the centuries that had 
gone before, the latest generation more than all the generations 
that had gone before, the latest years more than all the years - 
that had gone before. And now, progressing in and toward that 
unity, we face the questions which the nineteenth century has 
left for the twentieth century to solve. 

With all its achievements, the nineteenth century has done the 
one great thing of putting question-marks for the twentieth cen- 
tury to answer, and it is that to which the twentieth century is 
now applying its talents. It seems as though Nature has no 
exceptions to her laws, as though every time she presented an 
exception it is only with the query into what greater law does this 
fit. Let me take one example which has already been touched 
upon to-night. Two or three years ago in London I remember 
being seated at a dinner given by Lord Kelvin, between himself 
and Becquerel, soon after the great French chemist had made the 
start in his contributions toward our knowledge of the extra- 
ordinary properties of uranium, and Lord Kelvin said that 
Becquerel’s discovery of the radiant properties of that element 
seemed to be the first note of query that had been put against the 
conservation of energy since that great doctrine took its place in 
our scientific knowledge. To-day the real nature of the “ Bec- 
querel rays ’’ is one of the chief questions put before us, and those 
Americans who are in line in London to secure their share of 
radium at $900,000 a pound, will be asking questions con- 
cerning that still more wonderfui newly-discovered element 
as to what it really does, whether really and truly it is throwing 
out its atoms at a velocity equal to that of light so that in the 
year 2003 they would have melted a column of ice a quarter of a 
mile thick, the supposed limit of its ultimate energy, or whether 
it will be proved that its light or radiation is simply another phase 
of radiant energy. Of course it is radiant energy with which the 
electrician, above all, is dealing. When we glance along the 
sciences, there seems no longer any division line; the chemist and 
the physicist are one, the atom is itself perhaps only a mode of 
motion. And the chef who has supplied us this excellent dinner 


1903., LIBRARY DINNER. whiny 


would be without his calling were it not that somehow in this 
marvelous electrical organization, the human body, the nerves 
which translate the sensations of food apparently into electrical 
vibrations, send the telegraphic messages to the brain. The 
physician of to-day will tell you that his eye is fixed most keenly 
upon these new developments of radiant energy which have such 
marvelous relations to the human body, and it seems that we may 
be on the brink of a discovery that physical substances are 
known to us only through the messages of their vibrations, which 
have to be translated into terms very like electricity before we 
recognize them at all, so that all the problems of science find the 
path of unity a possible answer in terms of electricity. 

It is interesting, Mr. President, that at last the InstrtuTE has 
recognized practically through the gift of those generous donors, 
Dr. Wheeler. Mr. Carnegie and others, the desirability of bringing 
together into one place all the knowledge that can be had in books 
as to what electricity means, because the knowledge of the past is 
the only safe ground for advance into the future. The genera- 
tions past built cathedrals; the library is the cathedral of to-day. 
And no nobler cathedral could be made than one in which the 
representatives of the several engineering sciences should meet 
together with the equipment of a great library which would 
answer all the questions which could possibly be asked of the past. 
So not only the Institute, but the whole electrical profession, is 
to be congratulated that this Instirure has arrived at the point 
where a great library is to be its next work, and I think every 
one should be stimulated to give of their own collections to make 
this collection adequate and approximately complete, and so far 
as possible, to concentrate all knowledge in this field. 

To me one of the most beautiful symbols in the world exists in 
the old Mexican city of Vera Cruz, the City of the True Cross, 
where there were more churches than modern life had time to use. 
One of those old churches to-day represents what we have come 
to know as the library spirit—what we also know as the Carnegie 
spirit—for the lower part of it is used.as the home of a public 
library, and its tower for a beacon which throws its light far out 
upon the sea. So, with the foundation of the library as a basis 
for the far-reaching beacon of electricity, how much will this 
INSTITUTE mean in the future! And let us hope that everything 
that it does will give to its members the inspiration of the widest 
thought of the man of science. May I read to you, in con- 
clusion, a few lines of alliterative Saxon fashion, in which I try 
to suggest the range and the unity of his work: 


118 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


THE MAN OF SCIENCE. 

“* He weaves the whole world one with weft of wire, 
Till at one touch it throbs and thrills and thinks, 
Then wins the wireless wave to hail and hark. 

For him the lightning fills Aladdin’s lamp 

And fiercest force is free or fast at will. 

One beam builds bridge across the boundless blue 
And brings him secrets of the spectred stars. 
Rev'rent he reads rude records of the race 

And from faint footprints fashions the full frame. 
Watching with wisdom’s eye the witless worm, 
He scorns not from the small to grasp the great. 
Seeing sure-eyed beyond the scope of sense 

And tracing throughout all the timeless throught, 
Strong-souled to serve, and by the service save— 
Such, Science, is the seeker at thy shrine !”’ 


TOASTMASTER Martin:—In the creation of the INsTITUTE 
Library we are glad to secure expert advice of the highest order; 
and I think we can say we have that when we call upon our friend 
Dr. J. S. Billings, Director of the New York Public Library, to 
speak to the toast, “‘ The Technical Library.” I have much 
pleasure in introducing Dr. Billings to address himself to that 
subject. 

Dr. Bititincs:—Mr. President, Mr. Toastmaster, ladies and 
Gentlemen: In the early days of the exploitation of electric 
light systems in this country, an objection urged by the engineer 
of one company against the light of another company, was that | 
the other company’s light was surrounded by “so much non- 
luminous verbosity,’”’ a very serious objection. In the light 
which I am to turn on the subject of technical libraries, I am 
going to endeavor to avoid it by being very brief. 

Technical libraries, that is to say, collections of technical books, 
are pretty old. I suppose the first ones were theological libraries; 
but technical libraries in the modern sense began with the patent 
systems, and the best general technical libraries in existence to- 
day are those connected with the patent offices of various 
countries. The relations of technical libraries to great general 
libraries are of some interest. I have looked over the collection 
of technical books in the Library of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
EvectricaL ENGINEERS, and find that it is very complete in the 
separate works relating to electricity alone, and its applications 
as it stands to-day. Much literature on this subject is contained 
in that of other departments, so that the investigator may wish 
to see the transactions, journals and reports of learned societies 


1903.] ° LIBRARY DINNER. WARS, 


that at the present time do not perhaps seem to have any con- 
nection with this work. These you are accumulating and you 
have been extremely fortunate in being able to get some of the 
great sets of such reports and journals. Now, these journals 
and transactions of the learned societies in London, Paris, Berlin, 
Vienna, etc., are in the New York Public Library, and as your 
library is not yet well known, there are more engincers who come 
to read these volumes in the New York Public Library than to 
tead those in your library, and at first sight one might think it 
raised the question which it is said was raised after the discovery 
of the law of the conservation of energy—a statement of the 
mechanical equivalent of heat by the first engineers who went 
to the infernal regions and after looking around inquired if there 
was not a tremendous waste of energy there. 

I think both libraries are necessary; the public library and the 

special library. The special technical library of the special 
society, if so managed as thoroughly to enlist the interest of the 
men who use it, will receive many things which would not ordin- 
arily come to the public library. I found that to be the case with 
the medical library in Washington. This technical library is now 
the greatest and most complete medical library in the world, and 
this is due to the fact that it was kept separate from the Library 
of Congress. The doctors did not take any special interest in the 
books when they were in the general collection, did not feel 
bound to look after them or give service to them. There should 
be what has been talked about here to-night—codperation be- 
tween the two. It is not necessary both should have everything. 
For example, take the book referred to in the programme to- 
night, that of Albertus Magnus, printed in 1494. That is not 
primarily an electrical book and is of small importance in con- 
nection with electricity. It is in the New York Library for 
‘another and different reason. So it is with a number of other 
books which are in your library because there are two or three 
lines in them about electricity. There are some very old books 
that it is not worth while for both libraries to have. The first 
great encylcopedia, the very first, is in the New York Public 
Library, but it is not in the Institute Library, and it will be 
many years before it will be there, no matter what price you 
offer for it, and it is not worth while for you to get it. 

The men who consult the books in the Astor Library want the 
collections of patents, books on physics, transactions of engineer- 
ing societies, etc., to refer to. Most of them want the latest 


120 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


periodicals. That is the demand you will have in your library— 
it is the latest periodical literature they want; the text books are 
of small interest for the engineer who is up-to-date in his work. 
He wants the very latest literature and that is what he goes to 
libraries for. There is plenty of room in New York for two of 
these collections; and in the case of patents it would be good for 
you to have collections of the electrical patents. I donot know 
anything that is needed by the engineers of New York in the way 
of literature to-day so much as a full collection of the German 
patent specifications. We have the English, French and Ameri- 
can; the German specifications are not here. Should both the 
InstiTuTE and the Public Library endeavor to get them? I 
think not. The INstiTuTE may confine itself possibly to getting 
the specifications for the electrical patents, and yet there will be 
many specifications for other patents that your members will 
want to read, and it is hard to say what they will want to read. 
If they want anything that you have not secured for your library, 
the chances are that we shall have them at our library. So I ° 
‘think there is plenty of room for both; and abundant oppor- 
tunity for putting energy into both. 

Your library is in first class condition now; and I congratulate 
you heartily upon it and upon the way in which it has been taken 
up. Icongratulate you upon another thing in connection with it, 
which perhaps you may not quite understand at present, but 
which you will understand in years to come, and which is more 
important than the books and that is that you have a man 
who is thoroughly intelligent, zealous, enthusiastic and persever- 
ing to look after your library, push it on and take care of it, look 
after its interests, in the person of the chairman of your Library 
Committee. 

TOASTMASTER MartiIN:—I was glad indeed to hear the refer- 
ence to the chairman of the Library Committee from one who is 
the best judge in this country of the value and quality of such 
work—I mean our good friend and fellow-member, Lieutenant 
Commander W. D. Weaver. I think it only fair to Mr. Weaver 
to say that the work which he does for the library is entirely a 
matter of self-sacrifice and labor of love. 

I now have the pleasure of calling upon Mr. Theodore L. 
De Vinne, who will speak on the subject, ‘‘ The Debt of Mechanics 
to Science.”’ 

Mr. De VinnE:—Mr. Toastmaster, Mr. President, ladies, and 
gentlemen of the AMerican Ins7vITUTE oF ELECTRICAL ENGIN- 


193%] : LIBRARY DINNER. 121 


EERS: I feel as if I were somewhat out of place. If there is ary 
one present who knows less about electricity than I do, his ignor- 
ance is deplorable. My business is that of recording and pre- 
serving the thoughts and experiments of other people, and not 
that of trying to record my own; and yet I cannot let the occa- 
sion pass by, as I am probably one of the oldest men in the room, 
without calling your attention to the work that has been done in 
the application of electricity in a relatively few years, in fact, 
less than an ordinary lifetime. 

It was about sixty years ago, during my last term in school, that 
I attended the lectures on Natural Philosophy, and there I saw 
for the first time what we would now call a very crude electrical 
apparatus. I wondered at it, and so did my classmates— 
wondered at the incessant and apparently fruitless activity of 
the machine. One of the class asked the teacher if that electric 
power or force could not be turned to good account, and be 
applied to mechanics. The teacher shook his head and said no; 
that Prof. Page, the scientific expert at Washington, was then 
trying to utilize it, but so far with small success. The teacher 
said he had no doubt the time would come when it would prove 
a success, but at the present time we should regard the electrical 
machine, and in fact all exhibits of electrical apparatus shown in 
ordinary schools and colleges, as nothing more than scientific: 
toys. This was in 1842. Fifty years after that I stood in the 
pit of the Niagara Falls Power Company and gazed. with undis- 
guised admiration and astonishment at the gigantic machines that 
were set up there. I was told it was proposed to send light, heat 
and power to the distant cities of Rochester and Buffalo. So they 
did. It is but two years ago that I was at the Pan-American 
Exposition, and there I saw by the simple operation of turning a 
key that light, heat and power were furnished in a way that was 
perfectly unaccountable. It was plain that electricity had’ be- 
come something more than a scientific toy. It was one of the 
great working forces of the world. * 

Long before that I had some opportunity to witness the 
wonderful flexibility of electricity in our own printing house. 
There was there a little humming dynamo whirling around at 
great rapidity, that was generating an unseen power, liberating 
atoms of copper, finer and purer than could be attained by fire 
heat, and making the exact duplicate of an engraving at about 
one-tenth of its cost, and I had good reason to be thankful that 
electricity had been applied to the art of typography. It was 
something more than a scientific toy there; it was doing work. 


122 LIBRARY DINNER. [Feb. 9 


I shall not tire you, gentlemen, by telling you of the triumphs 
of electricity in other directions. You know the story a great 
deal better and can tell it better than I can; but I do think it is 
worth while to call attention to the fact that notwithstanding 
the advances which have been made in many directions of elec- 
tric power, that there are some teachings of political economy 
which have not followed the development of machinery, which 
threaten to make some disturbance in the world; and it is on that 
point I want to make a few remarks. Horace, the old Latin 
poet, sharply divided the people of the world into two classes, 
those who grew corn and those who ate corn. Following this 
lead the political economists of the eighteenth century and 
many of the nineteenth, laid down the proposition that all work 
was the result of labor, and that labor has been understood 
erroneously by too many people as manual labor only. In my 
own trade every invention that has been made by science has 
been denounced at one time or another. At the introduction of 
the art of stereotyping, the rotary printing machine, the cylinder 
press, the type-setting machine—these inventions were stigma- 
tized as ‘‘ robbers of the poor,”’ “‘ taking the bread out of the poor 
people’s mouths.”” The notion has gained currency, particularly 
among the more ignorant classes in our own community, that 
machinery is of great disadvantage to the laborer, that it has 
made the rich richer and the poor poorer. I dissent from that 
teaching; I reject it altogether. I contend that the wealth of 
the world has-been increased by invention and machinery, and 
that their combined influence has tended, not to the debase- 
ment, but to the uplifting of labor. We have not outgrown the 
old false ideas which people entertained some hundred years ago. 
At that time every man who devoted himself to science and 
~ invention was looked upon as an idealist, a visionary and an 

enthusiast. The working class, if I can so call it, the laboring 
class, stuck to the idea that these men were practically parasites 
upon society, and that the working men were the ones who pro- 
duced the wealth of the world. There never was a greater mis- 
take. To help them to this wrong conclusion some of our 
writers, notably Ruskin and William Morris, have laid down the 
proposition that society was at its best when every man was his 
own employer and did not work for a factory or any aggregation 
-of capital. This has been said in spite of the fact that there are 
places in the world, especially in the Far East, where there are ~ 
no large factories, and where manufacturers do not employ’ 


1605.; LIBRARY DINNER . 123 


machinery, but in such places as in China, the manual laborers— 
many of them most expert of workmen—do not earn dimes 
where machine tenders here earn dollars. 

Personally, I am acquainted with few of you, but I understand 
very well that you as electrical engineers are the conservers and 
controllers of one of the great working forces of the world. You 
are not capitalists and you are not manual laborers, and yet you 
are indispensable to both. Without you capital could do noth- 
ing. Without you labor would be only half-paid. Worse than 
that, without the machinery which you regulate the product of 
labor would be faulty, almost contemptible. And yet, notwith- 
standing all the benefit which has accrued to the world at large 
from invention and from machinery for the last fifty years, the 
unrest of labor is as great as ever. ‘We have strikes continually. 
The future of society is threatened. It seems of very little use 
for any mechanic or any manufacturer to appeal to Congress or to 
Legislatures. The Legislatures as a general rule are inactive 
because their members are anxious to secure re-election by cater- 
ing to the whims of the majority of voters. Samson Brass, one 
of Dickens’ characters, says that the first axiom of the law is to 
look after itself. It follows that any tendency on the part of the 
public to stop litigation works great injury to lawyers and is not 
to.be approved: Just so, the merchant and manufacturer can 
get very little help from the Church. The Church ought to be, by 
virtue of its mission, the great disseminator of the gospel of peace 
and good-will; and yet it is now, as it was more than a hundred 
years ago, when John Wesley said that he found it impossible 
to reach the two extremes of society—the very rich and the very 
poor. The Church could not keep its hold on them. 

Now it is to you, gentlemen, according to my notion, that we 
have to look for the maintenance of peace and harmony during 
this century. As I have said before, you are not capitalists nor 
laborers, but you are indispensable to both. You are the inter- 
mediates that connect discordant forces. You have shown to 
capital that it is of little value unless there is skill, knowledge and 
efficiency on the part of the intermediate who secures from 
, capital its due reward. You have shown to labor that it is quite 
possible. for a person without capital or means to qualify himself 
for a position of profit and honor. Although capital has been 
called so hard and selfish, there is no class that is more willing to 
give generous acknowledgment to skill and fidelity. I look to 
you, gentlemen, as the great pacifiers of existing troubles between 


124° LIBRARY DINNER. [Fcb. 9 


labor and capital. I am sure you will join with me in wishing 
that the differences which now exist will come to an end. The. 
time will come and it is not far off, when the manual laborer, 
encouraged by your example, will discern that his true interest 
is in the encouragement of science and invention, in making 
himself the ally of capital and machinery, and not its fractious 
enemy. No class can be more helpful than electrical engi- 
neers in the attainment of this result. 

ToOASTMASTER Martin :-—The Library of the INsTITUTE at the 
present time does not include any bound volumes of newspapers. 
I believe, however, that owing to the rapid manner in which the 
daily press is becoming the expositor of electrical ideas, it will 
soon be found necessary to include in the collection at least some 
of the typically representative daily newspapers. There is none 
of us who takes up a newspaper in the morning who does not 
there learn some electrical fact of whose existence he never had 
the least suspicion. Such men as Sprague and Stanley and 
Iidison and Tesla and Pupin, have all consulted the columns of 
the daily papers to find new ideas with regard to the possibility 
of inventions that had never before entered into their wildest 
contemplation. Dr. Bayles, who is with us to-night, represents 
this new journalism, and has the advantage over a great many 

-of his compeers on the daily papers in being also an engineér. 
I wish from my heart that there were more men like Dr. Bayles 
connected with the daily press in this city, and it is one of the 
most encouraging factors, one of the most encouraging signs 
of the manner in which they regard engineering ideas and 
ideals, that they are willing to trust to such a man the treat- 
ment and discussion of the topics which lie nearest to us. It 
is therefore that I have much pleasure in introducing Dr. 
James C. Bayles,. of the New York Times, who will speak to 
the toast ‘‘ Electricity in the Daily Press.” 

Dr. James C. Baytes:—Mr. President and gentlemen: 
Lest it be supposed that in restraining a natural tendency to try 
a fall with the toastmaster to balance not merely my own account 
with him but the accounts of previous speakers whom he has 
introduced with airy persiflage, I fear the keen and pliant 
rapier of his wit, permit me to relate an incident which came 
under my notice while traveling in the East. It occurred in 
Abyssinia and, besides serving the purpose immediately in hand, 
is an interesting ill.stration of the survival of the Roman lex 
talionts among primi ive peoples. 


1903.] LIBRARY DINNER. 125 


Two boys were playing in the shade of the sheltering paim 
when it was arranged that ore of them should climb the tree to 
detach dates, while the other stood below to catch what fell. It 
chanced, however, that the boy in the tree lost his hold and it 
was he and not the dates which fell upon the boy below, hurting 
him greviously. The mother of the fallee, so to speak, hastened 
to the Cadi, demanding reparation. After hearing the com- 
plaint the Cadi decided that the plaintiff had a case, and decreed 
that her son, the original fallee, should climb the tree and, letting 
go, fall upon the other boy, the original faller, who was required 
to place himself in a suitable and receptive attitude on the 
ground and await what might happen to him. As I remember, 
the case was subsequently settled out of court. 

This kind of Cadi justice is what the speaker at a dinner may 
expect who undertakes to have fun with the toastmaster. One 
who may speak as often as he likes and avails himself of this 
privilege by speaking a great deal oftener than other people like, 
has an unfair advantage. Much the better plan for the aggrieved 
speaker is to follow the excellent example of Brer Rabbit and 
“lay low” until things come his way. At some dinner at which 
I shall preside I shall send him a flattering invitation to attend 
-and respond to a toast—and if he is prudent he will decline. 

When such an invitation reached me I was told that my toast 
this evening would be “ The technical end of the daily press.” 
That was easy. There is no such end. I now learn that it is 

_“ Electricity and the daily press.” That is another matter. 
However, the speaker on an occasion like this who is hampered 
by the metes and bounds of his toast, has much to learn about 
acceptable after-dinner oratory. When an expert is through 
with it, the fate of a toast should recall that of the fox who was 
found dead near Montclair the day after a meet of the Essex 
County Hunt, and was shown by the autopsy to have died from 
fatty degeneration of the tissues due to sedentary habits and lack 
of exercise. 

The daily press does not aim to be technical. It deals with 
facts, and is quite content to leave to those for whom, like my 
esteemed friends of the technical press a daily is much too sud- 
den, the leisurely consideration of the reasons for things which 
the public has forgotten. The qualifications of the technical 
journalist may not, as some have unkindly assumed, consist in 
the breadth of his misconception or the comprehensiveness of 
his misinformation, but he certainly knows a great many things 


126. LIBRARY DINNER. (Feb. 9 


that are not so, and delights to share his possessions with the 
credulous reader, assuming, of course, that what he writes is 
read. Considering that-all he knows of what is going on in the 
world he learns from the daily papers, the patronizing way in 
which he points out and corrects unimportant and accidental 
errors, chiefly in the use of an arbitrary and wholly artificial 
terminology, which have found their way into the hot stereotypes 
from which newspapers are printed, is very impressive, no doubt, 
but it suggests the boy at the grade crossing making faces at the 
express train. Before the boy has screwed his features into the 


contortion which he deems most expressive of the fact that he 


doesn’t want to go anywhere, and would not ride on a train if he 
could, the express is a mile away, and the passengers really know 
nothing about it. The dailies have to generalize very quickly 
and do not claim to be incrrant; but they do get the news, 
and that never was and never will be the function of the tech- 
nical journal. It has quite another purpose. 

Judge Key, of Chattanooga, while Postmaster General in the 
Cabinet of President Hayes, invented a phrase which has out- 
' lived his other official service. It was that in which publications 
of a certain class are described as “‘ primarily for purposes of 
advertising.” This recalls a little story which I should not have 
had the heart to tell at a dinner presided over by a technical 
. editor, had that gentleman been less indiscreetly facetious in his 
own remarks. } 


One day a gentleman Gen Texas visited New York and in the - 


course of his rambles through the streets he chanced upon an organ 
grinder with amonkey. (I beg, Mr. Chairman, that you at least 
will believe that my anecdote is divested of all trace of personal- 
ity.) The organ was covered with green baize, and on this sat 
the sad-faced Simian, waiting for what might eventuate. The 
habit of a lifetime had taught our Texan friend to associate a 
level surface covered with green cloth with some sort of.a game 
of chance, so he marched up to the instrument and laid down a 
five dollar bill. The monkey promptly appropriated it, doffing 
his cap in the perfunctory fashion of his kind. The Texan 
shrugged his shoulders, remarked that one could not expect to 
win every time, and laid down another bill. This the monkey 


promptly pouched in turn, while the delighted musician turned - 


the barrel of his organ as if it was coupled direct to a Parsons 
turbine. The Texan was not lacking in sporting blood, but he 
knew when he had had enough, and turned away remarking that 


ie oy 


1903.] LIBRARY DINNER. 127 


while he did not understand this particular gambling proposition 
1@ did not remember ever having been in a game in which the 
advantage seemed to be so largely with the dealer. 

If Iam reminded of this when I see the quantities of advertising 
the technical papers carry, it is of course because the association 
of ideas will sometimes bring unrelated suggestions into irrelevant 
juxtoposition. Of course they don’t get much for it—but that, 
as Kipling would say, is another story. 

The relation of electricity to the daily press is really much 
more intimate than might appear at first glance. To cable and 
land telegraphs we are indebted for a deluge of stuff, and the 
enormous expense attending its getting by the hundred agencics 
employed in collection and transmission leaves so little for the 
employment of writers of large experience and ripe judgment that 
we who belong in that classification have to struggle along on 
beggarly salaries of ten or twenty thousand dollars a year, 
Now, gentlemen, I ask you as man to man, what can you expect 
when literary talent is thus starved that bloated monopolies like 
the Anglo-American and the Western Union may bleed us as 
they do? Our hope is in Marconi’s cent-a-word promise, and 
may he live until he ‘“‘ makes good.” 

For the ephemeral and sensational features of the daily press 
the electrician is to blame. — For its influence for good, its incal- 
culable power in shaping public opinion along right lines and its 
beneficient function in the upbuilding and safeguarding of civiliza- 
tion, the journalist who is proud of the fact that he knows no 
more about electricity than a cat knows about pearls, is entitled 
to the credit. When he disappears from the scene of action and 
leaves the world to regulate itself, anarchy will succeed order and 
chaos cosmos. 

The characteristic and penne modesty of this statement 
will, I am sure, commend itself to your appreciation like the per- 
fume of the violet or the bashful pendulosity of the ae of the 
valley. - 

It has been the pleasure éf many writers, and among them 
none more charmingly than the late Charles Kingslcy, to tell us 
how the hoarded sunshine of the early world, locked up in the 
lush vegetation of the carboniferous period, flashes forth again as 
light and heat when the carbon atoms of coal upon the fire rush 

to the embrace of the oxygen atoms they parted from whea the — 
world was young. We trace this perennial miracle in all the 
phenomena of combustion, and wonder at it. How much more 


128 Kaen LIBRARY DINNER. - [Feb. 9 


startling the transformation when the carbon of printers’ ink is 
mingled with thought and, fired by the Promethian’ spark of 
inspiration, as light and power flashes from the printed page to 
illuminate the world and dtive the wheels of industry with con- 
stantly accelerating speed. This is what happens when the clang 
of the press produces a daily paper. 

But of the technical journals— Well, some of us may at times 
find ourselves repeating the sage remark of the little girl, ““ Mam- 
ma, I do love my donkey, but he’d be ever so much nicer if he 
wouldn’t donk.” 

ToaSTMASTER Martin :—While I sat here just now, a message 
came up from the floor that there were five or six excellent jokes 
to be had fora dollarandahalf. I was trying to locate a possible 
purchaser at this board. Since I heard Bayles, my own mind 
is satisfied on the subject. But one word in parting. I prom- 
ised our friend, Mr. Weaver, who is sick at home to-night, to 
bring with me one message from him, and that was if you happen 
to know a millionaire would you not please catch him and get 
something from him on behalf of the library; but you want to be 
sure of your millionaire. I remember a little incident in this city, 
at least it was in the daily papers, and therefore I give it due 
credit, with regard to an attempt made to collect a million dollars 
form a somewhat cold-blooded millionaire whose name, perhaps, 
it would not be sage to mention. The gentleman who had this 
loan in mind started out with a little dynamite in a handbag in 
order that, with its assistance, he might be able to dislodge the 
rocks. The dynamite was used with an explosion which left the 
vicinity of Trinity Churchyard something like a section of the 
New York subway. The millionaire emerged from the scene 
with his shirt front and his bank balance intact, but as for the 
would-be collector, from that day to this he has not been able to 
collect even himself. Other and more successful attempts have 
been made and there are those who have found a touch of our 
friend Weaver absolutely irresistible. There is no one whose 
Benerosity has been more deeply appreciated than that of Mr. 
Edward D. Adams, who is with us at this table to-night. 

And now, ladies and gentlemen, with this word of advice, 
encouragement and good cheer, from our Chairman of the 
Library Committee, I have the honor to declare the ‘‘ Second 
Annual Dinner ”’ ended. 


A paper read at the 173d Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, Feb- 
ruary 27th, 1903. 


RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. 


INTRODUCTION BY PRESIDENT SCOTT. 


A gentleman whose whitened hair indicated that he has passed 
his three-score years and ten, recently gave mea most interesting 
account of his wedding journey some fifty years ago from Western 
Pennsylvania to Philadelphia. It was a story of travel on stage 
coaches and-canal boats for nearly a week. The particularly 
impressive point was the change which has taken place in the 
mode of travel, not only in speed but in comfort and convenience. 
We take it as a matter of course that our trains are not only to be 
comfortable and convenient in their various appointments, but 
that they are to be replete with the luxuries of the drawing-room 
and the parlor, the dining room and the sleeping apartment. 
Those of us who are in early or middle life may know nothing of 
the stage coach, but we can easily recall some of the earlier condi- 
tions of train equipment, for it has been only a few years since 
three or four oil lamps which did little more than make visible 
the outlines of the interior of a car, were replaced by systems of 
gas lighting. 

The electric light is in many respects the ideal light for train 
illumination. The light is brilliant, it may be generously dis- 
tributed in small units, it contributes little to the heating and 
nothing to the vitiation of the air, it is under easy control and in 
emergency or accident there is not the liability to cause fires that 
is possessed by oil or gas. 

"The electric problem is in one sense a very simple one—a small 

* number of lamps such as are found in an ordinary residence or 

office is to be supplied by current. On the other hand, the prob- 

lem of supplying the necessary current to these lamps is a pecu- 
‘ 129 


130 ; SCOTT: RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


liarly intricate and difficult one. The only practical source of 
current is a generator from which the current must come either 
directly or through a storage battery. The simplest equipment 
is probably the storage battery located upon each car, which is 
charged or replaced at stations or lay-over points. The arrange- 
ment is comparable to the electric automobile except that the 
demands upon the train battery are not subject to the severe and 
irregular service which falls to the lot of the automobile battery. 
The arrangements for the charging of the batteries are apt to be, 
to say the least, somewhat inconvenient and expensive and the 
battery itself may be of a considerable weight, if it is to be in 
service for long periods without recharging. 

If an engine-driven generator be placed upon the train, it may 
receive steam from the locomotive, or the engine may have its own 
fuel supply. Dependence upon steam supply from a locomotive 
is not easily practicable if a continuous supply of current is to be 
obtained, nor does a generating plant upon a single car of a train, 
even if it have its own fuel supply, allow the ready shifting of cars 
and making up of trains, unless there be a storage battery 
auxiliary. A generating unit upon each car is apt to be expensive 
and add to the general complication of the equipment. 

A generator driven from the car axle by the motion of the train 
involves the operation of an essentially constant voltage machine 
from a variable speed drive having wide and irregular variations, 
as well as periods of rest. The problem, therefore, is a most diffi- 
cult one as the supplying of a small amount of energy to a few 
lamps cannot by our present methods of converting energy be 
conveniently effected from any available source. 

The fact that current for train lighting is obtained by one 
means or another demonstrates the facility which inventors and 
engineers possess for overcoming difficult problems, and it also 
emphasizes the value attached to electric light. The funda- 
mental difficulty lies in the fact that the available methods of 
transforming energy and of storing electrical energy are so 
cumbersome and inadequate. The very difficulties are an appeal 
for new methods, for simple and efficient methods of transforming 
energy from its abundant and convenient sources into the desired 
form of electrical current. The motion energy of the train is 
almost infinite compared with the meagre amount of energy 
required for a few glow lamps, but apparatus for transforming, 
regulating and storing that energy is complicated and costly. 
The chemical energy contained in a few pounds of coal would be 


1903.] SCOTT: RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. 131 


ample for the evening lighting of a whole train, could it be 
efficiently transformed into. electrical energy. An ice machine 
by which the heat in a pail of water could be abstracted in the 
form of electrical energy, would illuminate a car during a long 
journey as a lump of ice was being frozen. 

The problem of train lighting is of general interest, aside from 
the specific interest which there is in following the details of 
systems by which the illumination may now be accomplished. 
It indicates the admirable adaptation of electricity through the 
incandescent lamp for contributing to the safety, the convenience 
and the luxury of travel. It presents most peculiar and exacting 
conditions with respect to the supplying of current which do not 
render our present sources of current readily applicable. And it 
further shows the inadequacy and the limitations of our present 
methods of transforming energy and the possibilities which await 
scientific investigation, discovery and invention in unexplored 
fields. 


—— 


ee ee 


— ss. = = 
. 


A paper presented at the 173d Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, February 27th, 1903. 


AN ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING SYSTEM. 


BY W. L. BLISS 


A description of an axle-driven electric car 
lighting system in which the generator is 
located on the truck frame, the armature 
being rotated by means of a single reduc- 
tion gearing. Explanation of the mechan- 
ical construction of the generating ap- 
paratus and the method of controlling 
the electrical energy under all conditions 
of railway service. 


In presenting this paper, the author assumes that the members 
of the INsTITUTE are generally familiar with the subject of train 
lighting from the axle, and that no allusion to the previous state 
of the art, or the many failures and disappointments along this 
line of engineering is necessary or desirable. The admirable 
papers of Brown, Bauer, Blodgett and others have familiarized 
the members of the InsTITUTE with the work that has been done 
in the past and the degree of success that has been attained. It 
is with this thought in mind that the author will present for your 
consideration a modern method of train lighting from the axle 
that is reliable in its operation, and which has passed beyond the 
experimental to the commercial stage, and is becoming standard 
railway equipment. 

This system consists essentially of the following elements: 

1.—A dynamo electric machine or generator located on the 
car, or, as is the common practice in this country, directly on the 
truck frame, and so arranged that its armature is caused to rotate 
by means of a mechanica] connection with the axle. 

2.—Translating devices within the car, consisting in general of 
incandescent lamps and fan motors, and which utilize the 
electrical energy developed in the generator. 

133 


134 BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


3.—A storage battery carried on the car, whose special function 
is to supply the electrical energy necessary to operate the lamps 
whenever the armature of the generator revolves at a speed too 
low to render the same operative, or when the armature ceases to 
rotate, which condition is obviously attained when the car is at 
rest. 

4.—Auxiliary automatic apparatus, which, acting in conjunc- 
tion with the above, will render the operation of the entire system 
automatic, safe and reliable. 


THE PROBLEM. 

In attempting to attain the results indicated above, a multi- 
tude of difficulties present themselves which may be classified 
into two primary groups: (a) those which are purely mechanical 
and are concerned with the motive power, and which must be 
overcome before the generator can be operated successfully; and 
(b) those which appertain to the control of the electrical energy 
after it is developed and which are principally of an electrical 
nature, although involving no small application of mechanics. 

The difficulties under group (a) arise from the peculiar char- 
acter of the source of power, the location of the generator and 
the conditions under which the latter must operate. 

As the generator in this system is located on the truck frame 
there must first be provided a machine mounting, and axle con- 
nection which shall withstand the injury and abuse coincident 
with the most exposed position in which a piece of electrical 
apparatus can be placed. Secondly, there must be provided an 
axle connection which shall not necessitate any change in the 
manufacture of standard railway axles. Such axles are rough, 
tapered and out of true, and no connection which contemplates 
the use of keys, set-screws, etc., or which requires turning, true- 
ng or machining the axle in any way will be permitted by railway 
officials. The reasons for this are obvious and require no further 
comment. (See Fig. 1.) 


Metuop or Drivinc. 

In this system the generator and driving mechanism are 
modeled somewhat on the lines of the modern street railway 
motor, such modifications and additions being introduced as to 
adapt the apparatus to the special work in hand. A single 
reduction, gear-driven generator has been adopted, but, unlike 
the ordinary street-car motor, the entire weight of the machine 
is carried on the truck frame, it not being possible to journal on 
the axle, for the latter, as previously indicated, is not, nor will 
present railway practice permit it to be suitably prepared. 


p 
F 


1903.] BIBS Se LE OTR Gs GAR bl GiH LING 135 


Instead of journaling the axle in bearings attached to the frame 
of generator, two large brackets are carried out from the frame 


or casing of the generator and are adapted to receive and support 
a hollow shaft, which runs on roller bearings, and upon which the 


Gan 


136 BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [Repsay, 


split gear which meshes with the armature pinion is mounted. 
The hollow shaft, as well as the brackets, is divided longitudi- 
nally, in order to permit assembling on the car truck. The car 
axle extends through the hollow shaft, a clearance of nearly two 
inches all around the axle, and between it and the hollow shaft 
being provided. (See Fig. 2.) 


AO RS 


This clearance permits the axle to take all manner of mo‘ions 
and positions (within certain limits), with reference to the hollow 
shaft. Only one component of the axle’s motion is transmitted 
to the hollow shaft, this component being that of rotation. Ail 
other motions, the horizontal, vertical and end shake, being pro- 


Fic. 2, 


1903.} BLISS: ELECTRIC*CAR LIGHTING: 137 


vided for in a positive though flexible connection between the 
axle and the hollow shaft. This consists of a two-armed dog 
clamped on by four bolts securely upon the axle, and four specially 
constructed driving-springs which are attached by means of 
ball-and-socket fastenings to the two ends of the dog, and tothe 
two arms of the hollow shaft. 

The driving-springs are of the “ keg’ or helical type, wound 
with tapered ends, and are mounted in shallow cups, through 
which are screwed ball-ended bolts, which form a part of the ball- 
and-socket fastening referred to. Inside the springs, the bolts 
are threaded and provided with nuts and conical washers which 
fit the inside of the tapered ends of the springs. The nuts are set 
up with a spanner wrench and locked with spring cotters. An 
opening is cast in each end of the dog, through the jaws or sidcs 
of which a bolt passes, and in this opening and secured by the 
bolt is a socket-casting split in a vertical plane. The casting 
projects on each side of the dog and is hollowed out at each end 
like a bullet mould, thus-forming two spherical seats or sockets, 
into which the ball-ended bolts of the driving-springs fit. The 
two halves of this socket-casting are fastened together by four 
#” bolts, to prevent their opening and allowing the balls to wear 
on the joint between them. Similar socket-castings are secured 
to the two arms or cranks of the hollow shaft by means of bolts or 
studs which act as crank-pins. All these castings and fittings are 
interchangeable. Each driving-spring is connected by means of 
the ball-ended bolts to a socket-casting on the dog, and one on the 
hollow-shaft arm. The springs are, initially, neither in com- 
pression nor extension, which feature greatly facilitates assem- 
bling. The ball-and-socket joints not only admit of the springs 
assuming all possible angles and positions, but enable them to act 
either in compression or tension while driving. Two diametri- 
cally opposite springs are in compression, while the other pair are 
in tension, and vice versa, depending on the direction of rotation 
of the axle and hollow shaft. (See Fig. 3.) 

The dog need not run true, and no special care need be exercised 
in mounting it on the axle,it being quite as effective when not so 
true as when nicely adjusted. The dog is made of malleable iron 
and cast to fit the taper of the axle. Thereisa positive advantage 
in not carrying any of the weight of the generator on the car axle. 
Supported as the generator is, entirely on the truck frame, it is 
free from the shock, vibration and pounding which would be 
communicated to it were it journaled on the axle, as in a street 


138 BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


railway motor. It is very easy with this construction to put the 
generator out of operation by simply taking the dog off the axle. 
But the greatest advantage which results from this construction 
is the absence of necessity for trueing up anything in installing the 
machine. An approximate centering of the axle in the hollow 
shaft, and the coarsest kind of work in mounting the dogon the 
axle, are all that are necessary. All the trueing and lining up are 
done in the shop, and no knowledge of machine workis required 
of those who install the machine. 

All parts of the mechanism which require it are thoroughly 


Fig. 3. 


encased or otherwise protected. Automatic and profuse lubri- 
cation of the shaft bearings is provided. A cut steel gear on the 
hollow shaft drives a fibre pinion on the armature shaft. In con- 
sequence, these are run dry withou: lubrication of any kind, 
which conduces much to the cleanliness of the apparatus. See 
Fig. 4. 

THE GENERATOR. 


The generator is of the ironclad type, having four internal 
radial salient poles. The poles are placed at an angle of 45°, 
with the horizontal, two poles being in the upper, and two in the 
lower half of the generator, which is divided longitudinally in a 


. 1903.] BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. 139 


aA. 


horizontal plane. The casing which forms the yoke of the fields, 
; is extended parallel with the axis of the shaft and is then turned 
in at right angles thus forming ends, so to speak. These ends are 


yw 


eee ey eee eee 


—a-  . 


a 1 = Te ae 


— 


bored out and have fitted into them round head-like castings 
which hold the armature-shaft bearings and oil-wells. When 
these heads are in place, the generator is almost hermetically 


| 
q 


Fia. 4. 


140 BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


sealed, and is absolutely dust and water proof. Suitable hand- 
holes or doors are provided in the generator casing for purposes 
of inspection, etc. The two heads which carry the armature 
bearings are each held in place by four bolts, two of which are 
tapped into the upper half of the generator casing and two into 


the lower. Dy this construction the lower half of the generator 
may be removed, leaving the armature in the upper half, or the 
armature may be removed with the lower half. The heads being 
nicely fitted to the casing, ensure the perfect alignment of the 
armature shaft, no steady pins or other trueing devices being 


Fie, 5, 


' ed oh ee 


1903.] BLISS ELECT RIG CAR LIGHTING. 141 


required. By removing the head-casting at the commutator end 
of the generator, and detaching the flexible cables from their 
respective brush-holders, the entire brush mechanism, to be 
described later on, may be removed without disturbing any of 
the working parts. See Fig. 5. 

The armature is of the 4-pole drum type, having a two-circuit 
singly re-entrant drum-winding of the straight-cut or barrel type. 
The coils are wound on formers and afterward placed on the 
armature, thus providing a perfectly balanced winding both 


Fic. 6. 


electrically and mechanically. The core of the armature consists 
of the usual annular stampings, slotted to receive the coils, and 
mounted on a ventilated spider. The central portion of the 
spider forms a sleeve which is extended at one end to support the 
commutator. The sleeve is bored out to take the armature 
shaft, which is suitably keyed and otherwise secured. This 
arrangement permits the armature and commutator to be quickly 
taken off the shaft without disturbing the windings, thus affording 
a ready means for making repairs either to the shaft or to the 


142 BLISS: ELEGL RIG“ CARMEN GHRING: [Feb. 27 


armature itself. The construction of the armature, shaft and 
commutator is extremely substantial. All the running parts are 
heavily proportioned, and are designed to resist the heaviest 
shocks and stresses. The generator is connected as a plain 
shunt-wound machine and is self-exciting. Hence, there is but a 
single winding on the field, each pole being excited by one coil. 
See Fig. 6. 

The armature winding, being of the two-circuit type, requires 
but a single pair of brushes to take the current from the com- 
mutator, but, for purposes hereinafter explained, two pairs of 
brushes are employed. 

GENERATION AND CONTROL OF THE CURRENT. 

The problems under group (b), as previously stated, are prin- 
cipally of an electrical nature. Being provided with a generator 
driven by the car axle which will supply the required electrical 
energy to operate the lamps and charge the storage battery, 
there are four conditions which must be electrically and mechani- 
cally provided for, and the operations they entail automatically 
performed, before the system can be declared operative. 


THE PoLE CHANGER AND AuTomaTic Brusu MECHANISM. 

First.—Provision must be made for the fact, that the direc- 
tion of travel of the car will be reversed, and hence the direction of 
rotation of the armature of the generator will suffer a reversal. 
This would render a self-excited generator inoperative, or would 
cause a reversal in the polarity of the brushes or terminals of a 
separately excited machine. It being highly improper to 
attempt to charge the storage battery with a reversed current, 
and for other reasons, means must be provided whereby the 
polarity of the generator terminals is preserved, no matter which 
way the car may chance to travel. In this system, the polarity 
of the terminals is preserved in the following manner: The 
brush-holders are mounted on a carrier, which is supported on 
anti-friction bearings, which enable it to rotate freely within the 
casing of the generator. The friction between the brushes and 
the commutator is sufficient to cause the former, and with them 
the carrier, to be dragged around as the commutator revolves. 
The angular motion of the carrier is arrested by means of a stop. 
When the armature revolves in a right-hand direction, the 
brushes and carrier are rotated to the right and arrested by the 
stop in the correct position for commutation. When the arma- 
ture revolves in a left-hand direction, the brushes and carrier 
are rotated to the left into a position also correct for commuta- 


1903.) BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. 143 


tion, but a position such that the polarity of the brushes would 
have been reversed, had not a reversal of rotation in the armature 
taken place simultaneously. But the cotation of the armature 
having been reversed, and also the position of the brushes, the 
actual polarity of the latter is preserved. It will be apparent 
that the angular motion of the brush carrier need be but 90° in a 
four-pole generator, such as is employed in this system. 

The stop which arrests the motion of the carrier is removable, 
in order that, for inspection purposes and the renewal of brushes, 
the carrier may be turned completely around, and all the brushes 
and holders brought opposite the hand-holes in the generator 
casing. 

-As before mentioned, a single pair of brushes would suffice to 
take the current from the commutator, but by using four brushes, 
ur two pairs, a shorter commutator is possible, a more symmetri- 
cal disposition of the brushes is secured, and the adequate friction 
between the brushes and the commutator is obtained, without 
undue pressure on a single brush. The brushes of similar 
polarity are connected together in the usual manner, while 
flexible cables, which are readily detachable, convey the current 
from the brushes to the stationary terminals of the generator. 
Thus it will be seen that in this system the preservation of the 
polarity of the brushes is secured mechanically, and yet no con- 
tacts, switch-blades or other devices, which break or interfere 
with the continuity of the circuit, are employed. The friction 
between the brushes and the commutator cannot be avoided, and 
in this system is utilized to advantage. 

Tue AuTOMATIC GENERATOR SWITCH. 

Second.—lIt is necessary to provide an automatic switch which 
will complete the circuit between the generator and the storage 
battery whenever the speed of the former, and consequently its 
voltage, is equal to or greater than that of the battery. On the 
other hand, this switch must likewise break that circuit whenever 
the voltage of the generator is less than that of the storage bat- 
tery, by virtue of a reduced or zero speed. The object of this is 
apparent. The automatic generator switch opens and closes 
the circuit between the generator and the storage battery 
electrically, and is controlled directly by the generator voltage. 
It consists of a rectangular iron frame, which forms the magnetic 
circuit of the solenoid and supports the insulated contacts. 
Within the frame are two concentric coils, constituting the 
solenoid. They are made entirely separate, to facilitate con- 


144 BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


struction and repairs, and are held in place by a central tube. 
The inside, or lifting coil, is wound with fine wire, and is con- 
nected as a shunt across the terminals of the generator. ‘ The 
outside, or releasing coil, is wound with heavy’ wire and con- 
nected in series with the generator and storage battery. Within 
the central tube, and free to work in a vertical direction, is a soft- 
iron plunger, attached to and insulated from which is a laminated 
metal brush. When the generator develops its normal voltage 
of 64 volts, the fine wire or lifting coil will raise the plunger, thus 
causing the metal brush to make connection between two metallic 
contacts. Ifthe generator voltage is increased, current will flow 
from the same through the contacts, brush, and series coil, and 
through the battery, the series coil being wound in such a direc- 
tion that this current aids the shunt coil in holding up the 
plunger and brush, maintaining a better contact for increasing 
current. When, however, the voltage of the generator becomes 
less than that of the battery, current will flow from the battery 
in a reverse direction through the series coil and generator and 
oppose the action of the shunt coil. The weight of the plunger 
and brush is now sufficient to cause the opening of the switch by: 
gravity. No springs are used to secure the adjustment. Ad- 
justment is made by varying the length of the air-gap, and when 
once made is permanent. Carbon contacts, on which the final 
break takes place, protect the metallic parts against injury by 
arcing. See Fig. 7: 

Upon the top of the iron frame of the automatic generator 
switch is mounted a triple contact, consisting of a three-part 
segmental socket and a conical plug fitting the same. The plug 
is raised and lowered by means. of a tail-rod attached to the 
plunger of the switch. When the plunger is down and the 
generator switch open, the plug connects the three segments 
together. When the plunger and plug are raised by the lifting 
coil, the triple contact is broken. The plug is insulated from the 
tail-rod and a flexible conductor permanently connects the plug 
with an insulated terminal, also mounted on the iron frame. 
One lead of a resistance coil, located in the upper part of the 
switch-box, is connected to this insulated terminal, and the other 
lead is connected to the front segment of the triple contact. The 
negative lead of the generator is also connected to this segment. 
The leads of the lifting coil are connected, respectively, to the 
positive of the generator and the terminal to which the flexible 
conductor is attached. Thus it will be seen that when the plug 


1903.] BLISS; ELECTRIC GAR LIGHTING. ° 145 


establishes the triple contact, it also short-circuits the resistance 
coil. When the plug is raised, it throws the resistance into series 
with the lifting coil. 


? 


ate near the bucker to simplify the 


o 
LJ Fi 
 ¢ 
ar 4 
i a 
. S g 
Ronee: ae 
3 e sae ffoeftae Es 
° 3 ie ete 
O % x ise 
a haf 
pak oO ae) 
GE), obs : 
S ® : 
c = 
uw a ac 
a ae 
Fs pause 
E 6 
| s 


GENERATOR 
diagram and avoid a confusion of wires 


FIELD RESISTANCE 
GENERATOR 
FIELD 


9 
< 


DIAGRAM or APPARATUS 
anD CONNECTIONS 


ud 
z 
LJ 
O 


Fic. 7.—There is but one triple contact. 


The resistance is thrown into series with the lifting coil: (1) 
To reduce the current and consequent heating in the coil, which 
would otherwise change its resistance and alter the adjustment 
of the switch; (2) to reduce the magnetizing effect of the coil, so 


14¢ BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LICHUTING. [Feb. 27 


that less discharge current will be required in the releasing coil 
to open the switch, as above explained. 

The function of the triple contact is to short-circuit the lamp 
bucker and series field, to be described later, thus avoiding the 
drop that would otherwise take place in the lamp circuit when 
the battery was discharging, and to render the bucker inoperative 


Fig. 8. 


at speeds below 20 m.p.h., when the generator switch is open. 
At the top of the switch-box are shown two pilot-lamps, con- 
nected in series across the generator terminals. The lighting of 
these lamps affords a visual indication that the generator is in 
operation. 
‘Fig. 8 represents the switch-box and switches complete The 
cast-iron cover being removed, exposing the automatic generator 


19U3., BLISS: ELECTRIC GAR LIGHTING. 147 


switch, with its triple contact and resistance coil. Below are seen 
the hand switch and air switch. 

REGULATING THE GENERATOR FOR VARYING TRAIN SPEEDS. 

Third.—It is desirable to have the generator develop its normal 
voltage, equal to that of the battery, at as low a speed as possible, 
consistent with economic design, in order that the electrical 
energy developed by the generator may be available during as 
long a proportion of the car’s travel as possible. In this system, 
using 32 cells of battery having a normal voltage of 64 volts, the 
generator is so designed and so geared to the axle that, when 
running at 500 r.p.m., corresponding with a train speed of about 
20 miles per hour, it generates 64 volts. If, now, the train 
should increase its speed until it reached about 60 miles per hour, 
the armature of the generator would be making about 1,500 
r.p.m. All other conditions remaining the same, the voltage of 
the generator would, of course, be proportional to its speed, and 
hence the voltage at its terminals would rise to about 192 volts. 
As a matter of fact it will be sufficient to have the generator 
increase its voltage to 80 volts at maximum speed, as this will be 
approximately 2.5 volts per cell, whichis ample to force the full 
charging current through the battery. If the generator voltage 
is not in some way prevented from rising above the predetermined 
value of 80 volts, great overloading of the generator, batteries 
and wires will result. In fact, such increase must be positively 
prevented, and the provision of means therefor constitute one of 
the distinctive features of this system. 

The method of regulation consists in generating, by independ- 
ent means, a counter e.m.f. in the field circuit of the generator, 
which increases in proportion to its speed and voltage, and hence 
reduces the field current of the generator, and prevents excessive 
output. The details of this arrangement are described under the 
heading of the bucker and its operation. 

Constant Lamp VOLTAGE. 

Fourth.—As above pointed out, the fundamental object of the 
storage battery is to maintain the supply of electrical energy for 
the lamps whenever the generator is inoperative. Hence it is 
customary to keep the lighting mains permanently connected to 
the terminals of the battery. (A hand switch placed in these 
mains serves to connect the lamps with the battery at will). The 
lamps are generally operated in parallel, and in this system are 
60 or 65 volt lamps. When the battery, consisting of 32 cells, is 
freshly charged, its voltage is approximately 2 volts per cell, 


148 BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [Febu27, 


giving a total voltage of 64 volts across the lamp mains. As the 
battery is discharged, this voltage will decrease, but should never 
be allowed to fall below 60 volts. On the other hand, it must 
never be allowed to exceed 64 volts. 

If the train is brought to a speed such that the generator 
develops, say, 72 volts, sufficient to force about half the charging 
current through the battery, and the automatic generator switch 
be closed, the voltage at the terminals of the battery, and hence 
that impressed on the lamps, is 72 volts. This is an increase of 
124 per cent. in lamp voltage, an obviously excessive variation, 
while at 80 volts, which is necessary to force the full charging 
current through the battery, the variation in lamp voltage would 
be 25 per cent., which would probably be followed by destructive 
effects. In order that the voltage may remain constant at the 
lamps, irrespective of the rise of voltage at the battery terminals 
coincident with charging the same, it is necessary to resort to 
some form of artificial regulation. 

In other words, a variable drop must be taken up in the lamp 
circuit, cither by a variable resistance or rheostat, or by a 
variable counter e.m.f., to compensate for the rise of voltage at 
the terminals of the battery. But as the current in the lamp 
circuit may vary, due to a change in the number of lamps, a 
rheostat must change its resistance, not only to compensate for 
the rise in e.m.f. at the terminals of the battery, but also to meet 
the variation in the number of lamps in use. This requires a 
double variation of resistance, which, to be automatically per- 
formed, is very difficult. Hence a device having no resistance, 
but capable of developing a variable counter e.m.f., is far prefer- 
able; and a low-resistance armature, revolving at constant speed 
in a field which varies as the rise in e.m.f. at the terminals of the 
battery, is independent of the variation in the lamp current due 
to changes in the number of lamps, and constitutes such a device. 

All the currents and e.m.f.’s developed in an axle-driven car 
lighting system are variables, and are functions of the train speed. 
There is, however, one rectilinear relation that exists among these 
quantities that can be utilized to produce a constant lamp 
voltage. It is an observed fact that the current that may be 
forced through a storage battery is almost directly proportional 
to the e.m.f. applied at its terminals, less the counter e.m.f. of the 
battery itself. In other words, the current forced through the 
battery (charging) is proportional to the increase in e.m.f. at its 
terminals. This is true over the greater range of the battery’s 


1903.] BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. £49 


capacity. As the battery is charged, its counter e.m. rises 
slightly, and hence, when the battery is fully charged, the lamps 
will be brighter than if the battery were exhausted. 

This relation between the charging current and the rise in 
_ voltage at the terminals of the battery is utilized in a manner 
extremely simple, theoretically perfect, and in practice so nearly 
so, that it requires the use of a good voltmeter to detect the 
changes in voltage on the lamps, no matter how many be in use or 
what the speed of the train may be. 

THE “BUCKER.” 

A separate auxiliary and self-contained machine whichis called 
a “bucker,” is bolted to the bottom of the car in any convenient 
place. This machine contains a revolving shaft on which are 
mounted two armature cores. One of these armatures with its 
commutator and field, constitutes a plain shunt motor which 
takes its power from the generator mains and whose sole function 
is to rotate the shaft. It is obvious that this motor runs only 
when the generator is in operation. The other armature has two 
windings and two commutators, and revolves ina field excited by 
the current flowing through the battery. This double-wound 
armature, with its two commutators and field, constitutes the 
“bucker’” proper. The motor simply drives it. The winding 
connected in the lamp circuit is called the ‘lamp bucker,” and the 
winding connected in the field circuit of the generator the “‘ field 
bucker.’’ The field of the ‘‘ bucker”’ is referred to as the series field, 
that of the motor as the motor field. 

Fig. 9 represents the ‘‘ bucker’”’ complete.- As will be seen, it is 
entirely enclosed, and hence is dust and water-proof. It is 
impossible for any one to tamper with it, and it contains no 
delicate or complicated parts. 

Fig. 10 shows the internal construction of the ‘‘ bucker,’’ it 
being similar to that of the generator, in being longitudinally 
divided in a horizontal plane. 

The motor and “ bucker”’ armatures are drum-wound for bipolar 
fields. They are built up of slotted annular punchings, and 
mounted, together with their commutators, on a sleeve which is 
fitted and keyed to the shaft. The construction is very similar, 
to, and possesses all the advantages of that employed in the 
generator armature previously described. There is no pulley or 
external mechanical connection to this machine, 

The field is of the bipolar, ironclad type. Each armature core 
revolves between two salient pole-pieces, which are bolted into 


150 BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [Fbe. 27 


the casing, and consist of a pole-shoe and core. Upon each core 
is placed a heavily taped and painted coil. The pole-pieces are 
placed in a vertical line, so that one pole and coil for each arma- 
ture core is in the upper, and one in the lower part of the machine. 

The brush-holders are mounted rigidly in the upper half of the 
machine. Their springs, fingers and cams are interchangeable 
with those of the generator. In taking off the bottom half of the 
casing, or in removing the armature, no wire connections need 
be disturbed, beyond disconnecting the two lower field leads, and 
the two leads connecting the fields. 

The head-castings, containing the armature-shaft bearings, are 
secured to the casing by four bolts in each, thus permitting the 


Fig. 9. 


lowering of the bottom half of the casing with or without the 
armature. The armature is shown entirely removed, together 
with the head-castings and armature-shaft bearings. The 
separate parts of this machine are light enough to be easily 
handled, no jacks or lifting devices being necessary. By referring 
to the cuts, it will be seen that hand-hole covers are provided 
over each brush-holder, thus affording, by their removal, easy 
access to all the internal parts. 
OPERATION OF THE “ BUCKER.” 

When no current flows through the battery, none Jows through 

the series field, and hence noe.m.f.is generatedin the “ bucker’’:; but 


1903.] BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. 151 


when current flows through this series field e.m.f’s are generated 


in the “bucker,” and in almost exact proportion to the strength of 
the field. (After the clos 


osing of the automatic generator switch, 
the motor runs at almost constant speed, its slight acceleration 
as the generator voltage rises from 64 to 80 volts, being an 
advantage, as it compensates for the droo 
zation in the series field.) See Fig. 7. 
- No current will flow through the series field un 
conditions: 


Ist. When the generator is inoperative, automatic generator 


switch open, and no lamps lighted, e.g., car standing still in day 
time. 


ping curve of magneti- 


der the following 


fe ee ee ae a ee i i aa 


ivi 


Fig. 10. 


2d. When the generator is operative, automatic generator 
switch closed, no lamps lighted and the generator voltage equal 
to the battery voltage, ¢.g., running 20’miles per hour in day- 
time. 

3d. When the generator is operative, automatic generator 
switch closed, lamps lighted and batteries discharging, carrying 
all or a portion of the lamp load, e.g., running 20 to 25 miles per 
hour at night, lamps lighted. Current would, in this case, flow 
backward through the series field, as the battery is discharging, 
were it not prevented from so doing. : ; 

4th. When the generator is operative, automatic generator 

7 


152 BLISS: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


switch closed, lamps lighted, and generator just carrying the 
lamp load, batteries neither charging nor discharging, ¢.g., 
running 25 miles per hour at night, lamps lighted. 

Under these conditions, no regulation of generator or lamps is 
necessary. 

Only one condition obtains when regulation is necessary, and 
that is: 

5th. When the generator speed and voltage have risen and the 
battery is being charged, e.g., running above 25 miles per hour, 
day or night. Then the voitage at the lamps rises, and it must 
be kept constant, whether the lamps are lighted or not. 

The voltage at the terminals of battery rises about in propor- 
tion to the current forced through them. The magnetism of the 
series field increases in proportion to this current. The e.m.f’s of 
the ‘‘bucker”’ (its speed being nearly constant) increase in propor- 
tion to its field magnetism. Hence, the e.m.f’s. of the ‘“‘bucker”’ 
increase in proportion to the rise of e.m.f. at the battery ter- 
minals. If the winding connected in the lamp circuit be pro- 
portioned correctly, its e.m.f. can be made equal at all times to 
the increase of e.m.f. at the battery, and so if this winding be 
connected inversely in series with the lamps, it will produce a 
counter e.m.f. in the lamp circuit always equal to the excess 
e.m.f. necessary to impress on the batteries to charge them. The 
result will be a constant lamp voltage, independent of the 
number of lamps in use, or the speed of the train, since the latter 
now affects the charging current only. 

REGULATION OF THE GENERATOR. 

The other winding of the ‘‘ bucker” is connected inversely in 
series with the field of the generator, and generates a counter 
e.m.f. which weakens the field of the latter to such a degree 
that the e.m.f. of the generator is just sufficient at the maxi- 
mum train speed to force the maximum predetermined current 
through the battery and series field. The regulation tends to 
maintain constant current through the battery and series field 
at a given train speed. The lamp load is carried by the gene- 
rator precisely as in the case of a constant potential machine 
and does not affect the charging current flowing through the 
battery. 

Since the “‘ bucker”’ receives or absorbs energy from the lamp 
circuit and the field circuit of the generator, such energy is trans- 
formed into mechanical power and tends to revolve the shaft and 
thus relieve the motor of that work. In fact, when the apparatus 
is fully loaded, the motor becomes a generator and puts back 


1903.] BLISS BLECTRIC GAR LIGHTING. 153 


into the system about 60 per cent. of the energy consumed by the 
“bucker”’ in effecting regulation. 

Under (3) no regulation for holding down the lamp voltage or 
generator output is necessary, but since, under such conditions, 
the battery would discharge and current would flow from the 
battery through the lamps, ‘‘lamp bucker,”’ and backward through 
the series field, the polarity of the ‘‘bucker’” would be reversed, 
and the latter would become a booster and tend to raise the lamp 
voltage and increase the generator output by strengthening the 
field of same. This tendency of the ‘‘bucker”’ to ‘‘ boost” when 
the battery discharges through the series-field, while the generator 
switch is closed and the triple contact open, as already explained, 
is prevented by causing the current which flows from the gener- 
ator through the motor to return through the series field in a 
direction opposite to that of the battery current discharging 

‘through the lamps and series-field. This motor current increases 
with the tendency of the ‘‘bucker’”’ to “‘boost”’, which tendency 
is proportional to the lamp load at this time, for the more 
heavily the ‘‘bucker”’ (now a booster) is loaded the greater the 
motor current required to drive it. As these two currents 
cannot flow through the same field at the same time in opposite 
directions, their resultant, which in this case is their difference, 
is the current which actually flows; and such resultant can, by 
proper design, be made approximately zero; or, at least, the 
tendency to ‘‘ boost”’ can be practically eliminated. 

_ ArR-OPERATED FIELD SWITCH. 

In addition to the difficulties to be overcome to render the 
electrical operation of the system perfect, there is one other point 
which requires attention, although not absolutely vital. For 
the sake of simplicity, a self-excited generator is usually em- 

‘ployed, although it is not uncommon to separately excite the 
field of the generator by means of current from the storage 
battery. If such current be used to excite said field, provision 
must be made to discontinue it after the car goes out of service; 
otherwise, a useless discharge of the battery willtake place. Itis 
desirable to provide some form of separate excitation, as the 
generator may fail to excite or “ pick up” at the proper speed 
through loss of residual magnetism, imperfect contact of brushes, 
etc. 

In this system, the generator remains connected as a self- 
exciting machine, and eventually furnishes the strong current in 
its field required to produce 64 volts at the low speed of 20 miles 
per hour. Separate excitation for the field of the generator, and 


“e 


154 BLISS: ELEGIRIG CAR LIGA AING, [Feb. 27 


also for the field of the motor which drives the ‘‘ bucker,’’ thus en- 
abling the motor to start readily, is supplied by means of current 
from the storage battery, which current is limited to a small 
value by the field resistance. The circuit from the storage 
battery through the field resistance is controlled by 
an automatic device called the air switch. This consists of a 
cylinder, to the lower end of which a branch from the signal pipe 
of the car is connected. An ordinary gas-cock, included in this 
branch pipe, serves to cut off the supply of air,.so that the 
cylinder may be opened or disconnected without venting the 
signal line. Within the cylinder is a cup-shaped piston, to 
which arodis attached. The latter extends through the cylinder 
head and carries an insulated contact disk. The piston is held 
in its normal position by means of a helical spring surrounding 
the piston rod, and engaging with the inside of the cup-shaped 
piston and the under side of the cylinder head. When the piston 
is forced upward by air pressure, the rim of the cup is pressed 
against the gasket, which packs the cylinder head, thus sealing 
the cylinder and preventing escape of air. This construction 
permits the use of a loose-fitting piston, which ensures freedom 
from possible sticking. At the same time the contact disk on 
the piston-rod establishes connection between the two spring 
contacts mounted upon and insulated from the cylinder head, 
and which are secured by the same bolts that hold the latter in 
place. The heads of these bolts form binding-posts for the 
reception of the circuit wires. A bonnet or hood protects the 
contact parts. See Fig. 8. 

When the locomotive is coupled to the train and the hose ~ 
couplings are connected, pressure is at once applied to the air- 
switch and the circuit is closed. When the locomotive is 
uncoupled, the pressure in the signal pipe rapidly falls, opening 
the air-switch immediately, or within a few minutes. Reduction 
of pressure, caused by giving signals, does not open the switch, 
and even if it did, no harm would result, as the switch may be 
opened with impunity as soon as the generator has developed a 
stable voltage of about 15 volts. When the automatic generator 
switch closes, it short-circuits the air-switch, in addition to its 
other functions. After the disconnection of the locomotive, 
the conductors’ valve may be used to open all the switches 
on a train simultaneously, in case the pressure in the signal pipe 
is retained. The leaks in the hose couplings are sufficient to 
cause a rapid falling in pressure and a quick opening of the air- 
switch 


a” we 


lt de top ee ele ee ee 


A paper read at the 173d mecting of the American 
Institute of Electrical, Engineers, New York, 
Feb. 27, 1903. 


AXLE-LIGHTING. 


BY ELMER A. SPERRY. 


A historical view of electric train 
lighting; a statement of some of the 
problems cncountered; a criticism of 
some of the methods employed in solv- 
ing these problems, and an announce- 
ment concerning a new system of axle- 
lighting. 


The persistence of methods casually considered as ‘“ good 
enough ”’ is well illustrated by a review of the small advances of 
the past decade in car lighting. When the series of trains known 
as The Pennsylvania Limited, had then been electrically illumi- 
nated throughout for more than five years, an author of ability 
started his excellent work by denominating this subject a ‘‘ burn- 
ing question.” This was twelve years ago. Oils and naphtha 
and their products was the burden of his message, and yet, to-day 
we are confronted by all too frequent reminders that it has not, as 
yet, emerged from this class. 

That the confines of this ‘‘ burning question ” lamentably is 
not limited to illumination, is illustrated by the periodic firing of 
solidly steam-heated trains in state of wreck, 

Oil, gas, carbonated-air gas generators and acetylene are 
employed, some very extensively; some, if not most of them, 
combustible and inflammable to a superlative degree and neces- 
sarily in close proximity to combustible linings and trimmings. 

The mass of work that has been done as exhibited by the 
elaborate details which have been perfected in many of these 
systems, emphasizes the importance of a perfect system of car 
and train illumination. 

Electricity has been proposed from the very first. When the 
early platinum filament gave forth its prophecy, its adaptability 


155 


156 SPERRY: AXLE-LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


to car lighting was at once seen, and a great future was pre- 
dicted for this form of illumination for trains. 

Among its points of superiority, should not be overlooked the 
fact that it is cleaner, more pleasing than any other, and lends 
itself more rvadily to decorative effects. It can be divided into 
smailer units than any other and can thus be distributed and 
placed in more advantageous positions; its familiar use as 
reading lights, or berth lights, serves to illustrate this point. 
Also the heat emitted is negligible. It is absolutely unaffected 
by draughts; it maintains its original candle-power better on 
the whole than any other light, and is less dependent for its exist- 
ence on the faithful care of the trainmen. Its safety is beyond 
question. From it no oil can drip, no odor or smoke can be 
emitted, and there is entire absence of odor in the stations. 
Many important stations are rendered almost unbearable by 
the pungent and poisonous odor of compressed gas. 

Electrical car lighting in America will attain its majority 
within the present year. In August, 1882, the Pennsylvania 
Railroad Company electrically equipped car No. 397 with Faure 
Accumulators imported from France for the purpose. Not only 
is this the earliest application of electricity to car lighting in this 
country, but in fact one of the earliest in the world. Again, it 
was this same enterprising road that promoted the first installa- 
tion of the solid electrically illuminated trains or series of trains, 
the Pennsylvania Limited, between New York and Chicago. 
These equipments were installed in the middle eighties and are 
still in continuous service; all are direct-connected sets in thé 
baggage compartment, selene the lamps, together with 
batteries ‘under each car. ; 

Meanwhile, English railways were active in the same line, their 
first installations being axle-driven. The London, Brighton and 
South Coast’ Railway, in 1883, put on its first axle-driven equip- 
ment, which furnished a few lamps throughout the entire train, 
not many more than was supplied to a single Pullman car in this 
country. In 1885 the Mechanical Superintendent of this road, 
Mr. Stroudley, described this system in detail before the justine 
tion of Civil Engineers in London. 

This was quickly followed by the Great Northern and the 
Midland roads, each of which in 1886 developed similar equip- 
ment, one using the old Brush dynamo, both dynamo and bat 
teries in the ‘“‘ guard’s van,” similar in this particular to the 
Brighton and South Coast road. The difficulty of leaving the 
cars in total darkness on ree up the train was later obviated 


”? 


— SS 


1903.] SPERRY : AXLE-LIGHTING. 157 


in the Midland equipment by distributing the batteries under 
each car, as was practised in the Pullman equipment in this 
country. Many of these early installations are still in service. 

The writer has recently had opportunity personally to inspect 
some of the oldest of these equipments, and can testify to their 
marvelous state of preservation, especially considering the 
service they have seen. It should be stated in passing that 
these old equipments are of extreme value in throwing light upon 
the one great unknown factor in ascertaining the cost of opera- 
tion; namely, deterioration. The experience of these roads 
allows us to establish a sinking fund which it is believed can be 
depended upon to take care of this portion of the cost of operation 
the other factor, being: more easily determined. 

In passing from the old to the new, it is interesting to note the 
transformation which we have all noted in the new Manhattan 
Elevated cars in New York City, which have been electrically 
equipped. Nothing could better illustrate the comparative 
merits in point both of candle power and practical “‘ visual units,” 
and of distribution, than the marked contrast between this sys- 
tem and that of the old steam-hauled trains, both of which re- 
cently could have been seen constantly passing in the busy hours. 

In calculating the electrical power consumption of a car 
illuminated in a highly satisfactory manner, one is struck with 
the smallness of the amount required for maintaining the lights. 
This, when properly adjusted, is found to sink into insignificance 
as compared with the power required to haul the train, or the 
particular portion of such power represented in the individual 
car. 

In our modern service the locomotive represents, really, a 
power station of no mean dimensions, developing, as it does, from 
one thousand to fourteen hundred horse power and even, at 
times, a power in excess of this amount. The illumination of the 
entire train represents not far from one per cent. of this, and with 
a proper combination of generating units and accumulators, 
considerably less. In view. of modern practice, in other 
lines, it is found that even with a light battery a gen- 
erator may be employed during a part only of the day period and 
thus reduce considerably the maximum power required at any 
one time, say at the time of the heaviest load. Thus, as a part 
of every train, there is at hdnd a power station of large dimensions 
from which should be drawn the insignificzs% amount of energy 
required for illuminating purposes, if the equipment is properly 
suited to the conditions. 


158 SPERRY: AXLE-LIGHTING. [Feb: 27 


A perfect system requires that every car shall be entirely inde- 
pendent of every other, and shall maintain its lights perfectly. 
after the train is broken up. Many efforts have been made to 
perfect devices to accomplish this purpose, and they operate 
more or less successfully. It was my privilege to be called upon 
recently to investigate the systems that have been offered, with a 
view to ascertaining the practicability, the reliability, the close- 
ness of regulation and other features of their operation. 
Much ingenuity and some good engineering is displayed in and 
about these systems. A criticism might be made that some of 
the engineering has evidently been done by the electrician rather 
than by the trained engineer. Some systems employ belt drives 
as a means of mechanically coupling the generator to the axle. 
Some of our present fast trains that are thus equipped have 
come through repeatedly with every belt on the train gone. 
Again, in some of these equipments, the generator is mounted on 
the car body with no means of codérdinating its lines with the 
constantly changing alignment of the axle within the swivelling 
truck. Some are mounted upon the trucks themselves, but so 
hung that the truck-springs over the axle boxes are required to 
be re-inforced upon this end of the truck, owing to the overloaded 
condition. thus imposed. In one of these equipments hand 
regulation is in a large measure depended upon, causing the 
reliability of the system to turn on the faithfulness and intelli- 
gence of the trainmen. 

It is certain that the system of the future must be one that is 
thoroughly automatic throughout, especially in view of the 
modern trend and perfection of electrical and mechanical appli- 
ances. Systems employing slip frictional driving devices for 
regulation, are open to serious objection in point of power 
absorption. This problem, at best, is a difficult one. The 
generator is asked to take on its load at say twenty miles an 
hour and to continue while the car often reaches a speed of 
eighty miles per hour. There are instances where the generator is 
expected to assume its load at even lower speeds, as at fifteen or 
seventeen miles per hour. This gives a speed variation of four 
or fivetoone, It is manifestly undesirable to operate a generator 
that is large enough to carry its entire load say at 500 r.p.m. at a 
speed five times as great. Not only does the serious matter of 
commutation arise, but also a complication of other electric 
difficulties. Mechanically, it is difficult to build and guarantee a 
machine undey these conditions. Thus it is that slipping 


«> . Mt iid Be eed Stel 


1903.] SPERRY: AXLE-LIGHTING. 159 


friction devices have been suggested that they may inter- 
vene and save the generator. The peripheral velocity in this 
2ase, however, has increased four or five times while constantly 
delivering the large torque strain that was required at the 
lowest speed limit. The other three-fourths or four-fifths of the 
power, which is positively developed and delivered under these 
conditions, passes into heat which has to be dissipated, often 
proving a serious problem, burning and destroying the belts, 
and other frictional devices employed: 

Such waste as this should certainly be avoided, notwithstand- 
ing the large capacity of the source of supply. Again, other 
systems introduce commutating difficulties at the higher speeds. 
A generator required to assume its load at say sixteen miles per 
hour must commutate the same load at four and one-half to five 
times thisspeed. An increase of heating results from the increase 
in speed of rotation, arising from hysteresis and other core losses 
in the armature. 

A system has been devised whereby the excess of current 
developed is neutralized by an elaborate mechanism, which is re- 
quired to be maintained and operated constantly from the battery 
circuit and requiring power whenever the equipment is in service. 
It would seem, from an engineering standpoint, that it would be 
far better not to call upon the generator for either excessive 
currents requiring dissipation or upon the car and axle for any 
more power than is actually required for economically handling 
the service proposed, and further, not even upon the generator 
for more speed of rotation than is actually necessary to maintain 
its load or potentials perfectly constant under the varying con- 
ditions. 

Another important feature, and one which must always be 
reckoned with primarily in the car lighting system is perfect and 
constant control. Here a number of factors are encountered 
which must be so dealt with as to overcome entirely other 
influences. Among these are the reversal in direction of rotation, 
the irregularity and spasmodic magnitude of the variation in 
speed, the variation in the charging and the discharging e.m.f. of 
the battery, the jar and tremor of the car or truck on which the 
apparatus is mounted, and the variation in the load or number 
of lamps in the circuit. 

All that have ridden on cars with axle-driven equipments have 
noted to what degree this matter of regulation is carried out. 
Fairiy good regulationis not good enough for the lighting of com- 


160 SPERRY: AXLE-LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


partments under constant use and criticism of the changing pub- 
lic. A dimming light will disgust and a brightening light will 
surprise 4 passenger who can always be counted upon as over- 
hasty in judgment and hypercritical. It is perfectly apparent 
that to compass perfect regulation ponderable masses must be 
employed and controlled with great precision to keep pace with 
the erratic changes in speed. To accomplish this it is apparent 
that the control of such devices and masses cannot be attempted 
directly by the slight changes in the voltage at command, though 
they must be perfectly responsive to such changes. Devices that 
cannot be considered as delicate or be criticised as being other 
than practical, and which operate within one-half of one per cent. 
have been found efficient and reliable for control under these 
conditions. 

Announcement is hereby made of the design of a new system 
of axle lighting. With these regulating devices we have now 
had six or eight years of experience in continuous and heavy 
service and the features of its operation have become familiar and 
its reliability established. The sensitive moving part may be 
statically balanced, freeing them entirely from any response to 
the vibrations, jerk and jar of the car and rendering them 
entirely independent thereof. This device may be relied upon 
thoroughly to regulate not only the potential as delivered to the 
lighting circuit under varying conditions of load and battery 
pressure, but also to handle the generator under all possible - 
conditions of speed variation, reversal and change of load: 
Furthermore, it has been found that a number of valuable 
features, having an important bearing on this particular subject, 
and which have never before been introduced as factors, may Le 
employed with perfect success with this system of control and 
regulation. Not the least of these is a constant speed generator 
the use of which cuts down the torque delivery from the axle and 
thus the power absorbed from the axle, in exact accord with the 
demand for electricity at the time from the generator. When 
the battery is nearly charged, this current should be largely 
reduced, and its e.m.f. slightly and gradually increased. Any 
device which will take from a moving train only the power that 
is at that instant required to be developed and as the demand 
falls off will release all overplus of power to the train is certainly 
desirable if not positively necessary to the success of the coming 
train-lighting equipment. Especially is this true in view of the 
fact that by this device a large amount of power now wasted is 


i i i. eee 


1903.] SPERRY HAXLE-LIGHTING. 161 


not only saved but left available for traction purposes to the 
locomotive, which is already taxed to its utmost to meet the 
modern demand for high speeds of heavy equipment. Moreover 

by this system the weight of battery and generators may be 
reduced, and the whole system rendered simple in the extreme. 
Nothing is found necessary to the installation inside the car 
except the ordinary switch-panel for controlling the lamps of the 
car. In some instances, such as private and wild-cat cars, it 
might be advisable to install a voltmeter and ammeter or a com- 
bined single instrument which has been designed. Again, in 
this particular style of equipment, there has been included 
apparatus designed primarily to reinforce the battery when such 
a car is required to stand idle on a siding for a considerable 
length of time. This equipment allows the batteries to be 
charged from the ordinary 110 volt a.c. as well as d.c. service, 
Such service is to be had in almost any station whenever the 
necessity arises, thus furnishing an element of the system 
not met in equipment heretofore offered. In this in- 
stance, the constant speed machine does not require to take on 
its load at lower than its normal speed. Therefore, it is of 
minimum weight and size. The generator is suspended interior 
to the truck and no belts or other than toothed wheels are 
employed in driving. All parts are housed in dust-proof cases 
and automatically oiled, and designed to operate for long periods 
without attention. The generator itself is sealed and can work in 
snow, wet or dry with equal reliability. The heating factor is 
low and radiation ample to keep the temperature well within 
prescribed limits. The air-wash still further reduces the liability 
to overheat. 

The whole question’of car lighting turns on practicability ,—can 
the system be made reliable in independent units and at the 
same time can it compete in point of cost per unit of light? It is 
true that it does not need to equal the other systems in point of 
cost per light-unit, owing to the superiority of distribution and 
its many apparent advantages. It is, therefore, with consider- 
able gratification that the writer is prepared to state that upon 
this all-important question of cost this system, as a matter of fact, 
can compete successfully. 

Taking the items of deterioration and up-keep, as developed 
by the plants which have been longest in operation and including 
interest and all essential factors, it can be stated that a candle- 
power-hour can be produced for about 68 per cent. of the cost of 


tes SPERRY: AXLE-LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


compressed gas, and that such gas, as now used, costs in the 
neighborhood of 46 per cent. more than an equal illumination in 
candle-power by the present axle-driven equipment. When calcu- 
lated in visual units, which includes the distribution factor, com- 
pressed gas is in excess of 50 per cent. more expensive than 
electric illumination, a result upon which it is believed the 
electrical fraternity should be congratulated, and which should 
open up a large field for the use of electric apparatus. 


wt] 7 Beatin 


ata Py VOR” PY TEN NOP 


‘ chi ee a ee ee NE ae Le ER INCE PAN ARF E ee NET 
ee. ew ee eee ee oe z on 3 ; ib 5 
in — : . & . 
' r 


A paper read atthe 173d Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
Feb. 27, 1°03. 


a a ee ee 


AN AXLE-LIGHT SYSTEM OF TRAIN LIGHTING. 


BY ARTHUR J. FARNSWORTH. 


Reasons why axle-systems of electric 
train lighting have theoretical possi- 
bilities of meeting the exacting require- 
ments of the problem better than 
other systems. A description of an 
axle-lighting system and its operation. 


It is now generally admitted that electricity is destined to be 
as universally adopted for the lighting of passenger cars on steam 
railroads as it has been for the interior illumination of buildings. 
In addition to the well-known advantages it offers as a source of 
artificial illumination, it is the only light that can be located 
satisfactorily in any other place than the deck of railway cars, 
owing to their peculiar construction, and above all, there is the: 
vital argument of safety. 

The problem of electrically lighting steam railroad cars natur- 
ally presents greater difficulties than are met with in stationary 
lighting installations. In addition to furnishing the current and 
maintaining the pressure within satisfactory limits, the system 
must assure a reliable and continuous lighting service; perx:it of 
the cars being assigned to any run on their own or foreign roads; 
have a negligible effect upon the hauling capacity of the loco- 


motive and compare favorably as to cost of installation and 


operation with other systems. 
For the generation of electricity for train lighting it is possible 
to make use of power developed in a stationary plant and stored 


in electric storage batteries; to utilize small independent steam 


motors, operated by live steam from the locomotive; or to 
generate the power directly and economically in the. large 


163 


164 FARNSWORTH: AXLE-LIGHT [Feb. 27 


locomotive cylinders and transmit it through the car axles of the 
train. 

The first two of these can only be made use ot in special service 
confined to certain territory and runs. It is the axle system 
alone that has an unlimited field of operation. This generating 
car unit system, therefore, possesses an inherent advantage that 
should bring it into universal use, provided the apparatus is con- 
structed to fulfil the severe duty imposed upon it. Each car 
thus equipped contains its own complete electric lighting plant 
with economical power available and independent of any service 
and all other equipment. 


Ire. 1. 


The essential requirements of an axle electric lighting system 
are reliability, automatic operation, close control of voltage at all 
times, negligible drag upon the locomotive and small total cost 
of operation. 

There are several axle electric lighting systemsin use. The main 
differences between these are in the transmission of power from 
the revolving car axle to the generator; the means employed 
to maintain a constant voltage at the lamps at all speeds, and the 
design of the apparatus, so as to make it as automatic as possible 
and at the same time so simple that it can us readily understood 
and taken care of by cheap labor. 


1903] SYSTEM OF TRAIN LIGHTING. 165 


The problem of transmitting the power is difficult, for several 
reasons. The plan of installing the generator in a manner similar 
to that in which street car motors are mounted is not to-day 
considered feasible. Railway mechanical officials have adopted 
the taper axle almost universally, and will not consider any 
proposition to turn thereon the necessary straight bearings for 
the generator suspension. Consequently the dynamo must be 
- located independent of the axle, and the drive must provide for a 
vertical and lateral motion of the latter and a variable distance 
between centers. 

It is also absolutely essential that the drive shall possess the” 
utmost simplicity and be accessible, so that truckmen can 
easily remove and replace it when changing car wheels. Simple 
as the matter at first appears, this requirement has proved to be a 
serious obstacle. 

For the transmission of power, a large number of devices have 
been tried, including gears, sprocket chains, friction pulleys 
and belts. At the present time belts appear to be in greatest. 
favor, and are used on probably more than 90 per cent. of 
existing axle lighting devices throughout the world to-day. 
They have a certain elasticity that is lacking with gears, and 
vibration and shock are not transmitted by them to any great 
extent. They do not require lubrication, and if the belt drive is 
properly designed will run a long time and pull the load. 

The second difficult problem is the satisfactory regulation 
of voltage. As the speed of a railway train is constantly chang- 
ing, it is necessary to employ means to counteract the tendency 
to voltage variation. For this purpose various forms of differ- 
ential winding have been used with some success; and a crude 
method of accomplishing the result very imperfectly is to depend 
upon the belt slipping when an abnormal load has been reached. 

The principle upon which the system here described is 
based, is to control the output of the generator and keep 
it constant by varying the resistance in the field circuit 
to correspond to the train speed. The regulating mechanism 
which accomplishes this is thrown into action when- 
ever the generator current varies from normal. It is 
designed: first, to maintain a constant output of the genera- 
tor at all train speeds above the “critical speed,’ or the 
speed at which it becomes operative; and, secondly, to maintain 
a constant voltage at the lamps, whether they are being fed from 
the battery alone, or whether they are connected in multiple with 


166 FARNSWORTH: AXLE-LIGHT [Feb! 27 


both the generator and battery at speeds above the critical 
speed. 

The equipment of this system consists essentially of a generator 
installed upon the truck of the car and driven from the axle by 
means of a belt; a regulator installed in any convenient loca- 
tion in the interior of the car, and a storage battery hung in a 
suitable box from the car body. 

The generator (Fig. 2) is a bi-polar, laminated field, shunt- 
wound machine. It is ironclad and provided with self-oiling and 
self-aligning bearings. It is completely enclosed with dust- 


tight covers which may be easily removed for purposes of” 


inspection. It is installed on suspension-irons hung on the truck 


Prewe: 


timbers, one method being shown in Fig. 1, and is pivoted parallel 
with the axle, on adjustable pivot-shoes to provide for perfect 
alignment. A tension rod and spring maintain the proper ten- 
sion on the belt, the machine being free to swing on its pivot so 


that any movement of the axle from its normal position will not» 


affect the belt tension. The generator is provided with a flanged 
crown pulley and on the axle is clamped a flat-face flanged driving 
pulley, the two being belted together with a rubber belt. The ar- 
mature shaft carries a worm operating a gear and cylindrical cam, 
which throws a switch when the direction of rotation of the arma- 
ture is reversed. The polarity of the generator is thus maintained 
correct, independent of the direction in which the train is moving. 


~ ) Wks ee ee 
’ 


1903.] SYSTEM OF TRAIN LIGHTING. 167 


Carbon brushes are used and the design and proportions are such 
that. if the machine is maintained in good condition it will run 
cool and sparkless under any ordinary conditions of service. 
The laminated fields contain a few sheets of hard steel, which 
retain sufficient residual magnetism to cause the generator to 
build up its voltage promptly at low speeds. The machine is 
constructed throughout to meet the severe requirements of 
railway service and to operate successfully with a minimum 
amount of care and attention. 

The regulator (Fig. 3) contains a solenoid with spring-balanced 
plunger to control its operation; the generator field rheostat; a 
small electric motor connected by means of worm.gear and 
ratchet mechanism to the rheostat to operate it; an automatic 
switch for automatically switching the generator in multiple 
with the lamps and battery at the critical speed when the speed 


_ is rising, and for cutting it out at the same speed when the speed 


is, falling; and a variable lamp resistance operated by the same 
mechanism that works the field rheostat. 

All the operations of the regulator are automatic. The motor 
is provided with self-oiling bearings, and requires only occasional 
attention. - Re- -adjustment of the regulator, when it is once 
properly set, is seldom necessary. 

The battery used is admirably adapted for this class of ser- 
vice, requiring little attention and not subject to rapid deprecia- 
tion. It is usually proportioned to provide for about ten hours’ 
continuous burning of all the lamps, although in the case of cars 
subject to long lay-overs this capacity may be increased. Cur- 
rent for the lamps is thus insured under all ordinary circum- 
stances arising in practice. 

The automatic switch or cut-out has four bobbins, as shown 
in the upper right hand corner of Fig. 3. The lower two are 
wound with fine wire, and the upper two have a winding of heavy 
wire to carry the main generator current. The lower bobbins 
always remain connected across the generator terminals through 
the field fuse and main fuse in series, as shown on the wiring 
diagram at F, Fig. 4. 

As the train accelerates and the generator voltage builds up, 
current flows through the fine wire winding of the lower coils of 
the automatic switch and their cores become magnetized in pro- 
portion to the rise in voltage. When the voltage of the generator 
reaches the point where it about equals thai of the battery, the 
magnetic pull of these coils overcomes their weight and that of 


168 FARNSWORTH: AXLE-LIGHT [Feb. 27 


the lever and resistance of the opposing spring, and the switch 
goes in and connects the generator in multiple with the battery 
and lamps. The main dynamo circuit is then complete from the 
generator, G, Fig. 4, and fuse, F) through the solenoid, s; through 
the two coarse wire coils of the ‘‘ automatic switch,” c (in multi- 
ple), contacts HJ, through the battery, B, and back tothe negative 
terminal of the generator, c. If the lamp circuits are turned on 
the current divides part going to the battery and part through the 
lamp resistance, E, to the lamps, L. As the speed of the train in- 
creases above the critical speed, z.e. the speed where the cut-out 
goes in, the generator current increases in proportion until it 


Fic. 3. 
reaches the point where the magnetic pull on the solenoid core 
balances the pull of its opposing spring. 

Any further increase of train speed, tending to increase the cur- 
rent generated, will cause the solenoid spring to be over-bal- 
anced, throw into gear the ratchet mechanism and move the 
generator field rheostat arm through one or more contacts until 
the current is cut down to the proper amount and the solenoid 
plunger is again in equilibrium. A still further increase of speed 


1903.] SYSTEM OF TRAIN LIGHTING. : 169 


will act in the same manner. A decrease of speed will cause 
the mechanism to act in a similar manner and cut out resistance 
from the field circuit of the generator. The generator current 
is thus maintained nearly constant at all speeds above the critical 
speed. 


| a 
d 
i 


iN 


4 
— | 
pd Pi ae | A 
; : | S =| Te 
ey ho ———— 


rT 


OO 2 ONO Or 07 0 
; Zz 


Fic. 4, 


iii 


8 


Details of the ratchet mechanism are shown in Fig. 5, where a 
is the generator field rheostat shaft, upon which are secured the 
ratchet wheels w and w’. The vertical link H, a portion of 
which is shown, is worked directly by the main solenoid plunger 
(see Fig. 3). It is provided with two arms upon which slide 


170 FARNSWORTH: AXLE-LIGHT [Feb. 27 


bosses cast upon the two pawls. When the «lynamo is generating 
the proper current the position of H is such that neither pawl can 
engage its wheel. Any displacement of H up or down due toa 
variation of the dynamo current will throw into gear the upper 
or lower pawl, as the case may be. It is obviously impossible 
for both pawls to be thrown into gear at the same time. 2 

The rocking piece K has a bearing upon the shaft a between the 
two ratchet wheels, and is moved by a rod and eccentric N driven 
by shaft. Tt. The small motor shown in the lower right hand 
corner of Fig. 3, drives the shaft tT through a worm gear. The 
motor is always connected to the generator terminals, as shown 
in Fig. 4, and therefore runs when the train is running. 


At high train speeds, when the battery is being charged, the 
potential difference between its terminals necessarily increases; 
and to maintain the voltage at the lamps constant it is necessary 
to insert in series with the lamp circuits a resistance proportional 
to the increase in voltage of the battery above its normal dis- 
charge voltage. There is, therefore, provided a variable resist- 
ance shown in the lower left hand corner of Fig. 3. By means of 
a reach rod engaging ihrough a roller, a circular cam upon the 
rheostat shaft a (not shown in the cuts) resistance begins to be 


thrown in the lamp circuits at the same time it is first thrown in - 


the generator field. 


1903.] SYSTEM OF TRAIN LIGHTING. 171 


The regulator is adjusted in each case for the average run of the 
car, so that it shall maintain the generator output sufficient to 
keep the battery charged without excessively overcharging it. 
As will be noticed on the wiring diagram, Fig. 4, the series 
solenoid may be partially short-circuited by means of the 
same switch that turns on the lamp circuits. In this manner, 
during the daylight run of the car the generator output is main- 
tained at a small amount, but as soon as the lamps are lighted 
the output instantly increases, each value of the output being 
maintained constant. 

To make the solenoid adjustment it is necessary to determine 
the average number of ampere-hours required per day for the 
lighting service, and to put into the system a certain percentage 
in excess of what is taken out, in order to take care of the various 


Srila 
Lamps and |Battery _/ 


o 7000 7500 
tp.m of Armature, 


Fic. 6. 

losses’ that occur. It is wise, too, to figure generously in this 
respect to take care of possible emergencies, and if this is done, 
there will be a certain time each day when the battery will be 
slightly overcharging. This does no harm, if not carried to excess, 
as the overcharging breaks up the sulphate that tends to form 
at times upon the plates. It is only continual overcharging 
or charging at a high rate that is injurious, and neither of these 
things can happen with the equipment. under discussion, if the 
apparatus is properly adjusted in the: first place and not 
changed thereafter, except to provide for new conditions in the 
run or service. 

The curves shown in Fig. 6 represent a shop test of this appar- 
atus. There was, however, no effort made to make the adjust- 


172 FARNSWORTH: AXLE-LIGHT [Feb. 27 


ments with unusual care and the battery at the time was pretty 
well discharged. The jumps in the lamp curve just after the 
generator has “ cut in,” are due to the lamp resistance being 
inserted. This effect could, of course, be reduced by splitting 
up the resistance into a larger number of steps... The variation in 
the light, however, is very slight, and ordinarily is not complained. 
of. : 

Except for those few moments when the lamp resistance is. 
being inserted the voltage variation at the lamps can easily be 
kept within 4 or 5 per cent., which is very close for this class of 
service. The close regulation of voltage is also demonstrated 
by the fact that the lamps ordinarily furnished with these equip- 
ments are of very high efficiency, consuming only two and one- 
half watts per candle-power. 

The power required to operate this system varies with the 
equipment of the car and the number of lamps it contains and 
varies from one to two h.p. per car. It is, therefore, insignificant 
compared with the power developed by a modern passenger 
locomotive. There is, moreover, no drag on the locomotive 
when startmg, or until the critical speed has been reached, which 
on through trains is from twelve to fifteen miles per hour. 
Under this speed the armature is simply revolving with no other 
than frictional resistance. 

The following table gives approximate data of the equipment: 


EQUIPMENT. CAPACITY. SPACE OCCUPIED. ‘WRIGHT. 
Re STREON od 6 beets oe neeiaiedelalerete | 75 &8c.p. lamps. Sore LA x Se 500 lbs 
Regulator ......:0s-esseceeerers 75 8 c.p. lamps. 17” x 19” x'94”" Yam BS 
9E ret (angie) 
amps for 10 hours ........ 160 amp. hours. 54” x 20” x 21” 865 “ 
13 Pe tih sf ‘pinge) | : 
6 lamps for 10 hours ........ 240 amp. hours. 72” x 20” x 22” 12 “ 
9E oo Srl : * . =o 
amps for 10 hours. .......- 320 amp. hours. 85% ix 20% 21277 i 
13 E Rattery (Double) | - = . cs set 
72 lamps for 10 hours ........ | 480 amp. hours. 91” x 20” x 36” 2560" = 


A paper read at the 173d Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
February 27th, 1908. 


SOME OF THE PROBLEMS OF ELECTRIC 
TRAIN LIGHTING. 


BY GEO. D. SHEPARDSON. 


The use of electric light in transportation isnonewthing. The 
first commercial plant sold by the Edison Company to be operated 
by outside parties was installed on the steamship Columbia in 
1879 at Chester, Pa., and began operation in May, 1880. Another 
of the very early isolated plants was used for lighting the shops 
of the Manhattan Railroad, beginning in the fall of 1881. At 
about the same time a plant was installed in the Baldwin Loco- 
motive Works. The first Edison central station started at 
Appleton, Wisconsin, about August 20, 1882, and the larger 
_ Pearl Street station in New York City started on September 4, 
1882, were antedated nearly a year by the application of electric 
lights to a Pullman sleeper running between London and Brigh- 
ton, England, in October, 1881. The latter had 12 small lamps 
supplied from 32 Faure cells. _This was so successful that by 
December of the same year the whole train of eight cars was 
equipped with 29 Edison lamps of 9 to 10 candle-power, supplied 
from 80 cells of storage battery. An electric headlight operated 
by steam engine and dynamo mounted on the locomotive was 
used on the Kronprinz-Rudolf-Bahn on the night of March 19-20, 
1881, and was followed in December of the same year by others 
in France. As early as 1879, Hinkefus and Wesel took out a 
German patent on a train lighting system in which a dynamo 
driven from the car axle operated ineandescent lamps. Even 
before the Pearl Street station was in operation, the Pennsylvania 
Railroad began experimenting with incandescent lamps operated 
‘by storage batteries under the cars, importing Faure cells from 


live 


174 SHEPARDSON: ELECTRIC TRAIN LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


France in the spring of 1882, and installing them on a car in 
August of the same year. Although this experiment was not a 
conspicuous success, the company renewed its experiments in 
1884, and in the following year began the regular operation of 
electric lighted cars. From this beginning, the company has 
continually increased its electrical equipment, until recently it 
has adopted the electric light as standard for all passenger service. 

From the standpoint of the railroad men, the requirements for 
a system for train lighting are reliability, safety, freedom from 
features objectionable to passengers, cheapness in first cost and 
low cost of maintenance. All of these requirements are matters 
of degree. For absolute safety from fire and explosion, nothing 
can equal the incandescent electric lamp when installed and 
maintained in accordance with established practice. The volt- 
ages used on trains are invariably low and well within the limits 
of danger or even discomfort to persons who might by some 
unusual way come into contact with the conductors. That the 
service may be made reliable is attested by the fact that many 
cars provided with no auxiliary light whatever are in use on such 
roads as the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul, which has been 
using electric lights since 1890. The Pennsylvania road, which 
was the first in America to experiment with electric lights for car 
lighting, is now equipping all of its cars west of Pittsburg with 
electric lights, and is reported to be throwing out all auxiliary 
lights. The incandescent electric light is free from the smoke, 
smell, vitiation of atmosphere and the possibility of fire and 
explosion common to all competitors, and it yields such a 
modcrate amount of heat that it may be said to be absolutely free 
from features objectionable to passengers, except those of ocea- 
sional dimness or of infrequent unsteadiness. Furthermore, the 
advantage of adaptability to local and decorative lighting, such 
as dining table or berth lighting, and the possibility of advertising 
tail transparencies, the convenience of electric fan ventilation 
and of electric heaters, make the electrically equipped train the 
choice of fastidious travelers. In the matter of cost, electric 
lights compare favorably with others when quality and quantity 
are considered. 

The application of electricity to train lighting is now over 
twenty-one years old, and may be said to have reached its 
maturity. It has not ceased to develop and improve but it has 
reached the age of responsibility and reliability. Like other 
adults, it still meets problems to be solved and looks forward toa 
bright future. 


:: 
ie 
‘ 
‘a 

: 


1903.] SHEPARDSON: FLECTRIC TRAIN LIGHTING. 175 


All of the various systems of car lighting which have been put 
into practical application have adopted constant potential direct 
current as the only satisfactory source of supply. The voltage 
varies from 30 to 110. The number and strength of lights varies 
through wide limits, some advocating 10 to 80 8-candle lamps 
per car, or 80 to 600 40-candle-power per car, some cars having as 
high as 26 50-candle lamps or 1300 candle-power per car. Tests 
made by. the writer in 1900 showed an illumination in different 
cars varying from 0.008 to 7.5 candle feet. The stronger illumin- 
ation is not only more pleasing to patrons and a conspicuous 
advertising agency, but further the flood of light effectually 


' masks ordinary variations due to imperfect regulation. 


The various plans for the supply of power for electric lights on 
cars may be classified as battery, dynamo and combination. 
The dynamo may be driven by an independent engine in the 
baggage car or on the locomotive, or it may be driven from the 
car axle. It may-supply the lights directly, it may charge 
storage batteries or may combine the two. The battery may be 
large enough to supply all the lights through a single run or 
through a round trip, it may carry all the lights for only. a few 
hours, or it may carry only part of the lights a short time for 
occasional use. Each of the various systems meets its own 
problems of mechanical, electrical and financial natures. 

_ Battery Troubles.—When a battery is used without any dynamo 
on the train, it should have sufficient capacity to carry the load 
through the entire run without falling below normal voltage, a 
difficult task on long winter nights without excessive weight. 
Fortunately, the greatest amount of light is usually required 
when the car first leaves the charging station and when its voltage 
is highest; as the battery gives up its charge, the load generally 
lessens, and allows the voltage to remain fairly constant through 
the night. When properly proportioned to the load, the per- 
formance is excellent. For example, some of the Pennsy!- 
vania cars running between Chicago and Jersey City and charged 
only at Chicago, make the round trip with 32 to 24 volts at start 
and with 30 volts upon return. As the cells become old, however, 
their capacity decreases, and the battery lighted cars sometimes 
give unsatisfactory service toward the end of the run. For 
trans-continental service the unaided storage battery seems 
impracticable. The short time allowable for charging at ter- 
minal stations often involves excessively high rates of charging, 
ar.d rapid lewering of the electrolyte. The difficulty of close and 


176 SHEPARDSON: ELECTRIC TRAIN LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


thorough inspection of cells often results in no inspection until 
failure is reported. The difficulty of allowing good ventilation 
of the battery boxes while keeping out the dust and other dirt, 
involves difficulty from low insulation and from decay of the 
battery trays and boxes. Injury to car body and to battery 
boxes is minimized by liberal use of insulating paint, but seems 
difficult to avoid entirely. The shaking of the cells incident to 
railway usage causes somewhat more. rapid deterioration than in 
corresponding stationary service. Sloppiag of the electrolyte 
is avoided by using deep jars with or without covers; the space 
is so fully occupied by the elements that there is comparatively 
little liability to slopping except in case of unusually violent 
handling of the cars. The weight of battery, including boxes, 
etc., on a car with “full battery ’’’ equipment is about 3,000 
pounds; which is not a very large proportion of the total 91,000 
pounds weight of a coach or the 116,000 pounds weight of a 
sleeper. The first cost of about $600 per car for “‘ full battery ”’ 
equipment, in addition to $300 to $400 for wiring, is not great in 
comparison with $8,000 to $10,000, the cost of a coach, or in 
comparison with $16,000 to $20,000, expended for a sleeper. 

When the battery is charged during the run, there is more or 
less loss and deterioration due to the overcharging necessary to 
reduce the liability to failure on account. of incomplete charging. 
The excessive charging and occasional over-discharging causes a 
more or less rapid deposition of mud at the bottom of the jars, 
which is liable to r2ach to the plates and so cause short-circuiting. 
The corrosion of connections due to the spray is frequently the 
cause of local action. 

Engine Troubles.—On systems supplied from dynamos driven 
by steam engines, trouble is sometimes experienced from break- 
ing of the flexible connection between the baggage car and the 
locomotive. It is common to use either the Moran ball-and- 
socket flexible joint or rubber hose strengthened by steel wire or 
expanded metal. The life of rubber hose varies from a few 
hours to several months. A blown-out hose can be renewed in a 
few minutes at the first stop of the train. There is sometimes 
trouble in disposing of the exhaust from the engine, which gener- 
ally passes through the roof; when a good muffler is used, the 
grease is retained for the most part and is led through the bleeder 
through the car to the track, so that it is not carried back and 
deposited on windows and sides of cars. Sometimes in winter the 
condensed steam collects on the bellows of the car vestibules 


1903.] SHEPARDSON: ELECTRIC TRAIN LIGHTING.. LG 


to such an extent as actually to break the end of the car by 
the motion of the train. The reciprocating parts of the engines 
commonly used cause some vibration of the baggage car, which is 
transmitted through the couplings and may be felt to the ex- 
treme end of the train when in stations. The skill of the engineer 
in stopping the train is a large factor in the extent to which the 
vibration is felt through the train, it being least when there is a 
medium amount of slack. The adoption of the steam turbine 
may remove this difficulty.. When the train is lighted from a 
dynamo and engine, some auxiliary source of light is necessary 
for the short intervals caused by changing locomotives, such relay 
being a storage battery or gas or oil lamps. The small engines 
use an excessive amount of steam per horse-power hour. The 
labor cost is not great; for example, on the Chicago, Milwaukee 
and St. Paul road each train on a run of 400 miles between Min- 
neapolis and Chicago is allotted four baggage men who receive 
$10.00 per month additional wages on account of attending to the 
electrical equipment, making a cost of $1.33 for wages for 400 
miles. On the Northern Pacific road, the baggage man has more 
than one man can handle, and an electrician goes with the train 
to attend to the engine and aah and to help the baggage man 
when necessary. 

Axle System Troubles—One of the greatest difficulties has 
been to secure satisfactory mechanical connection between the 
car axle and the dynamo. Gearing, belting and friction drives 
have been attempted with some degree of success. The latitude 
of motion of the car axle in three dimensions 1 imposes upon the 
dynamo drive very difficult conditions. This with the difficulty 
encountered from the dirt and stones thrown up by the motion of 
the train and from the steam and snow or rain which may freeze 
upon the belt, imposes a problem whose satisfactory solution has 
required great ingenuity and expensive experimenting. That 
the axle systems are being adopted extensively is a etetaa 
indeed. Lirect gearing similar to that used in electric railway 
practice has attracted many minds, the danger from a hot box or 
defective sear on a railway train drawn by a locomotive of sev- 
eral hundred horse-power is a very different thing from a similar 
defect on a car moved by the geared motor itself, which is pro- 
tected by fuses and circuit breakers. The next great trouble is 
the wide range of speeds met in train operation and the necessity 
for maintaining constant voltage from the time when the train 
is standing, through the point where the dynamo cuts in and 


178 SHEPARDSON: ELECTRIC TRAIN LIGHTING.  [Feb. 27 


takes the load, to the highest speed attainable. The problem ot 
regulation under such circumstances is one of no mean magnitude, 
and many are the ingenious plans proposed for its solution. Not 
only must the regulation take care of the varying speed of the 
train, but the battery voltage changes according to the state of 
charge, so that resistance or its equivalent must be inserted 
between the lamps and the dynamo or battery according to cir- 
cumstances in order to keep the lamps at normal voltage. When 
one watches the operation of an axle lighting system which is so 
carefully designed and adjusted that no perceptible change occurs 
in the brightness of the lights between standstill and full speed, 
between the time when the battery is discharging and when it is 
charging, one can not but admire the success of the engineers in 
charge. 

Financial Considerations —A\I sorts of figures are given in con- 
nection with the cost of electric train lighting systems, some 
showing that each electric system is more expensive than any 
other, others showing that some particular electric system is the 
cheapest. The real eost varies greatly, according to the intelli- 
gence with which the whole plant is operated, this intelligence 
including both that of the*engineer in immediate charge and that 
of officers of the road, who limit his facilities for proper handling 
of the equipment. In any case, the entire cost of maintaining 
the electric lighting system is a very small proportion of the entire 
cost of running the train, including not only the “ operating 
expenses ”’ but also that part of the general expenses chargeable 
to the particular train. The latter part of the cost, which is no 
inconsiderable part, is not usually obtainable. From the cost of 
operating the electric lights should be deducted the net profit 
from the added traffic which is attracted from other roads or 
which is created by the improved luxury of travel on electric 
lighted cars. These data are difficult, if not impossible to obtain 
with accuracy. If the added revenue created by the electric 
‘features of a train bears to the entire revenue from the train as. 
great as or greater proportion than added cost of electric light, 
above other forms of light bears to the entire cost of running the 
train, then the electric light pays for itself. 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 179 


Discussion. 

PRESIDENT ScotT:—The subject is now open for general dis- 
cussion. 

Pror. Caruart:—lIf I am allowed to speak at all, I shall have 
to speak asa free lance, especially as I know nothing about the 
subject in hand this evening. I have been a little impressed in 
listening to the papers read here with the fact that I have been 
uncertain part of the time whether the expert was giving the 
prior art or whether he was telling us about present practice. 
I think there was rather too much of the prior art in some of the 
papers, if you will allow the criticism. I was also interested in 
Prof. Shepardson’s paper in speaking of the low voltage used in 
train lighting, which feature is very desirable because it avoids 
any accident in case a passenger comes in contact with the con- 
ductor. I have known cases on the Pullman cars where the 
passengers came in contact with two conductors at once; and my 
friend, Mr. Smith, says they may come in contact with three, 
the other two and the electrical conductor, and so I suppose 
that would be a three-wire system. 

The thought occurred to me while we were hearing about these 
elaborate systems to secure constant voltage, and certainly they 
are ingenious—I admire greatly the ingenuity displayed in these 
two systems for securing constant potential—the thought came to 
me, why is it not possible to use the mercury vapor lamp which 
does not require a constant potential. Mr. Steinmetz tells us in a 
recent paper that the mercury vapor lamps will work between a 
very wide range of potential without any particular difference in 
the light given out. If that is so, we do not need these elaborate 
devices for maintaining constant potential. Mr. President, I 
am not able to contribute anything else to this subject, because 
I have not studied it. 

PRESIDENT Scott:—The subject is open for general discussion. 

Mr. Lamar Lynpon:—Some of the papers read _ this 
evening have seemed to assume that speeds of sixty miles an 
hour are sufficient. We have been informed by certain railway 
men that there are times when speeds of eighty-five miles an hour 
are attained for short stretches. No matter how short these 
stretches may be, the car lighters must be designed to take care 
of such excessive speed. Then, in regard to the battery end, 
there seems to bea disposition on the part of designers to take it for 
granted that a battery will maintain about two volts. It will not. 
A battery will require, in order that it shall be properly taken 
care of, a charging current that will run as high as 23 volts. It 
must be discharged down to 1.8 volts. That is a variation of .7 
volts, or about 30.5 per cent., taking 2 volts as the normal. These 
systems mostly assume that a constant current will flow into the 
battery, and that with variations of current we have variations 
of electromotive force, at the terminals, which is true; but we 
have further variations of electromotive force at the terminal due 
to the changing condition of the battery, and any system based on 


180 RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


charging with a constant current or maintaining a constant 
current through the battery cannot maintain the batteries in good 
condition. The proper way to charge the battery is that the 
current shall go in rapidly, when the battery is fully discharged, 
and that the current shall gradually be reduced until the battery 
rises to its maximum voltage, and in order to do that the gener- 
ator must raise its voltage continuously with that of the bat- 
tery, but not in such manner as to cause a constant current to 
flow through. A proper system must contemplate such a con- 
tinuous rise in the voltage, that when the battery is fully charged, 
practically no current will flow through it; and those constant 
current systems, or systems which assume a constant current, 
will not maintain the battery in good condition. It must be 
what is technically known as ‘boiled ”’ at times, or overcharged. 

Mr. Farnsworth has stated that about 90 per cent. of the sys- 
tems throughout the world use a belt drive. That is true, be- 
eause they were originally developed abroad where the systems 
are very small and the lighting of a small English or German 
passenger carriage, and the equipment required, are by no means 
comparable to the lighting of a Pullman car in this country; 
and it is a difficult matter to drive such a generator with a belt, 
or take care of the generator or regulate it by belt slippage. I 
know of one system which was originally used in England and the 
patent rights for its use in this country were purchased here, and 
after the system was brougltt here it had to be totally re-designed 
for American service, and it took three years to get if in proper 
shape. 

I would like to ask Mr. Bliss if he will please explain more fully 
the triple-contact employed in his system. 

Mr. Buiss:—I do not think I can explain it in any more 
concise form than to read the description of it in the text. 

PRESIDENT Scott:—If the matter is fully described in the 
text of your paper it is hardly worth while to take time to read it. 

Mr. Buiss:—I will make this explanation, however. The 
triple contact shown in the diagram, Fig. 7, is drawn in dupli- 
cate which makes it appear as if there were two such contacts. 
Asa matter of fact there is only one. It has been transferred 
from its true position as a part of the generator switch, to a posi- 
tion near the bucker simply to show more clearly what the con- 
tact is for,and how it is connected. Ifthe wires leading to it 
were carried across the diagram there would be some confusion 
with a number of crossings, and it would be more difficult to 
understand. We call it a triple contact, because there are three 
things connected together by the plug. The three segments 
shown are connected respectively to the negative lamp main,,. 
the negative of the generator and the negative of the storage 
battery. You can see that when the batteries discharge, cur- 
rent will flow from the positive pole through the lamps, lamp 
bucker and backward through the series field to the negative 
pole of the batteries. There is a little drop through the lamp 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 181 


bucker and series ficld, and it is desirable to short circuit these 
parts by connecting the negative lamp main directly to the 
negative of the battery. Such a short circuit would, however, 
convert the lamp bucker and series field into a local short cir- 
cuited series dynamo, in which a heavy local current would cir- 
culate. To prevent this the negative of the generator is con- 
nected to the third segment of the triple contact, which short 
circuits both series field and lamp bucker, thus rendering same 
absolutely inoperative. The plug connects the three segments 
together just before the generator switch opens. Thus, at 
speeds below 20 miles per hour, during which the generator is 
disconnected from the system and the services of the bucker 
are not required, the latter is completely cut out or short cir- 
cuited. 

When the generator has attained a speea corresponding 
to 20 miles per hour, the generator switch closes, and at 
the same time breaks the triple contact. The parts of 
the bucker are now free to act as soon as current flows 
through the series field in the charging direction. As explained 
in the text the bucker is prevented from becoming a booster 
when current flows in the wrong direction through the series 
field by causing the motor armature current to return to the 
generator through the series field, but in a direction opposite to 
such improper discharge current. The simplest way to connect 
the motor would be directly across the generator mains, but as 
pointed out it is more advantageous to connect it as shown. 
The triple contact also serves to cut resistance in and out of 
the circuit of the lifting coil of the generator switch as de- 
scribed in the text. This arrangement also makes it possible to 
reduce the size of the switch and its cost of manufacture. 

PRESIDENT Scotr:—The Secretary has received a telegram 
reading as follows: “ Please invite in the local Philadelphia Com- 
mittee’s name, Messrs. Bliss, Farnsworth and Sperry, to present 
abstract of their papers at local meeting, March 9th. W.C. L. 
Eglin.” 

“The Philadelphia Local Branch is to inaugurate its work on 
March 9th, at the rooms of the Engineers’ Club at Philadelphia. 
I extend an invitation to the gentlemen named to be present at 
that time and ask them kindly to communicate with the Secretary 
whether they can be there or not. I would say to the other 
members of the INsTITUTE who can conveniently be in Philadel- 
phia at that time, that I am sure.the Philadelphia members will 
appreciate very much your attendance at their meeting. 

Mention has been made of the mercury vapor lamp. At the 
meeting of the Pittsburg Branch recently, at which the subject 
of illumination was discussed, a short paper was presented upon — 
the Hewitt lamp by Dr. von Recklinghausen. He is with us this 
evening, and will, I think, give us a few remarks upon that lamp. 

Dr. Max Von RECKLINGHAUSEN :—A few of the gentlemen have 
mentioned the mercury vapor lamp to-night in connection with 


182 RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


its possible use for train lighting. I am afraid they will be up 
against the same problem that we of the Cooper-Hewitt Company 
are up against in trying to persuade the public, especially the 
ladies, to consider the mercury vapor lamp a nice light. As to 
the lamp being put to such use under the varying voltages which 
are met with in train lighting, that is a thing I cannot say very 
much about, practically nothing, except that it is a very ticklish 
question and not at all as simple as it may seem to be from 
a recent publication. I do not think we are in a position to say 
anything about the vapor converter just now. 

PresIDENT Scott:—A gentleman who can talk on this subject, 
not from a theoretical standpoint, but as the result of large 
practical experience, is Mr. George W. Blodgett, of Boston. I 
believe he is present and we should like to hear from him. 

Mr. Biopcett:—I had some experience quite a number 
of years ago in lighting cars electrically by the use of 
storage batteries. The Boston & Albany Railroad fitted up 
two trains running between Boston and New York, and for 
two years lighted them entirely by the Julien storage battery 
system, a battery being placed in each car. At first the bat- 
teries were charged only at one end of the line; but when it 
was found unsatisfactory to attempt to make a round trip with 
only one charging, arrangements were made to charge the battery 
at each end of the line. A switch was placed in each car 
which, thrown in one position, put all the cells in_ series. 
There were two batteries, one on each side of the car, which were 
put in series for charging, and also connected to a pair of dynamo 
terminals under the car on each side, and it was then only necessary 
to insert a pair of plugs in these terminals, which were of different 
size, so the poles from the generator could never be misplaced 
and the battery be discharged instead of charged. This was 
connected to an arc light direct-current circuit, which was the 
only means available for charging the batteries. Throwing the 
main switch in the car into the opposite position, put the two 
batteries in multiple and connected them to the lighting 
circuits, the lamps being turned on by a snap switch such as 
are employed in other lighting circuits. Had the storage bat- 
teries then used been of as durable quality as are now manu- 
factured, I am not sure but the trains would be running to-day; 
but the deterioration of the batteries was a source of very great 
expense, renewals requiring to be made constantly so that 
the battery gave rather unsatisfactory service. The reason for 
discontinuing the lighting of these trains by electricity at the 
moment when it was done, was the shutting down of the electric 
lighting plants in New York City for a time, which prevented the 
batteries being charged at that end of the line; and it was neces- 
sary, therefore, to stop the electric lighting. 

Some interesting things were found out about the lighting of 
cars with storage batteries, and it was a very instructive 
experiment I think I am correct in saying that these were the 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW. YORK. 183 


first trains ever equipped for being lighted entirely by electricity. 
J am open to correction if I am wrong, but I believe that is the 
case. I hardly think there are any more facts of importance to 
communicate, unless some one has a question to ask. 

A Memser:—In what year did this experiment take place? 
ree BLopGEtTT :—The experiment began in 1887 and ended in 

PRESIDENT Scotr:—The subject is now open for further dis- 
cussion. 

Mr. C. W. Hocan, Harrison, N. J.—Mr. Farnsworth stated in 
his paper that the voltage variation can be kept within 4 or 5 
per cent. I think in central station arrangements the variation 
is 2 per cent., or thereabouts, that is, with lamps requiring from 
3.1 to 3.5 watts per candle. In train lighting, where they use 
such an efficiency as Mr. Farnsworth states, 2.5 watts per candle 
such a variation would bring the lamps to 2. watts per candle, 
and would have an appreciable effect on the life of a lamp. 
on its maintenance of candle power, and its general appear- 
ance in the car. I think if this system of train lighting is to 
become a success, that this variation of 4 or 5 per cent. will have 
to be materially improved, from the standpoint of the life and 
maintenance of the candle power of the lamps. 

Mr. FarnswortH:—lIn regard to the point just brought up, 
the voltage of the lamp plays a very important part. For 
stance, a low voltage lamp, 30 volt lamp, has astronger filament 
and is not so delicate as a higher voltage lamp, of the same 
candle power and efficiency; and although the life of the lamp is 
not particularly long, it is sufficiently long. 

Mr. Locxwoop, Detroit.—Is the discussion open to others 
than members of the INstiTUTE? 

PRESIDENT Scott:--We would be pleased to hear from you. 

Mr. Locxwoop:—I have listened with a good deal of interest 
to the papers read to-night, and noted in Mr. Sperry’s paper 
the statement that ‘‘ A perfect system rquires that every car 
shall be entirely independent of every other, and shall maintain 
its lights perfectly after the train is broken up.” It seems to me 
there should be added to that—and should be as simple and with 
as few moving parts as possible. On that point I would menticn 
it is but a week since that one of the manufacturers of steam 
turbines informed me that his company had orders for a 
number of steam turbines to drive generators for use in train 
lighting. I note the title of the subject under discussion 1s 
“Railway Train Lighting,” but the three different papers have 
simply described systems pertaining only to axle-driven 
machinery. If something could be heard about what has been 
accomplished with steam-driven machines, and also from the 
railway standpoint how the two systems are viewed compara- 
tively, it would be interesting; because with the axle-driven 
machines, on the average train of from six to twelve cars, it 
means six to twelve equipments, with the necessary multiplica- 


184 RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


tion of parts, while with the steam-driven equipment but one would 
be needed for each train. It seems to me that simplicity is the 
most important point unless experience has proved it to be a 
failure. : 

Mr. Buiss:—We have with us to-night a gentleman who, I 
think you will agree with me, has probably had more experience 
on this subject than any of the rest of us here present, and 
that is the electrical engineer of the Pullman Palace Car Com- 
pany, Mr. J. R Sloan. 

Mr. SLoan:—Mr. President and Gentlemen :—I regret exceed- 
ingly that my position and the Company’s are such that it is not 
considered desirable I should take part in this discussion. I 
thank you very much for the invitation. 

PRESIDENT Scott:—There is another system of train lighting 
which has barely been mentioned, but not commented on to-night 
A brief reference was made at one time to the stage coach, with 
horses furnishing the motive power, and nothing but a candle 
light to supply a little illumination. Later we come to the rail- 
way trains, driven by steam engines and lighted by oil lamps. 
When we try to transform part of this latter equipment and 
furnish electric current for illumination, various difficulties 
appear. Instead of doing part of the work with electricity, why 
not do it all? Let electricity take the place of the horse and the 
candle and also of the steam engine and the dynamo and the 
battery, and let us run the car and do the lighting by the same 
agent, and see how simple it will be. Mr. Henry G. Stott, 
electrical engineer of the Manhattan Railway Company, is run- 
ning a system of that kind, and we would be pleased to hear from 
him. 

Mr. Stotr:—I was thinking how easily we could solve the 
problem in the way you indicated just now, Mr. President, taking 
the whole car and applying electricity to it in its entirety instead 
of toa partof it. I have been interested in the papers presented 
to-night. They have been as much a revelation to me as were 
the papers which we heard on the electric brake, two months ago. 
It is apparent that much work has been done in a quiet way in 
the most scientific manner, to solve the problem of train lighting 
difficulties. Those engaged in what might be called heavy 
electrical engineering perhaps neglect these points, and I think it 
is an extremely interesting development of the subject to find 
there are so many by-ways in electrical engineering of which the 
general profession hears nothing at all until the reading of a series 
of papers such as we have had to-night on this subject, and the 
papers on the subject of electric braking which were previously 
presented. 

In Mr. Sperry’s paper, reference is made to a new system. 
That is all we have heard in a definite way, and I would like te 
have a little further information on that point. The papers pre- 
sented by Mr. Farnsworth and Mr. Bliss are so able in them- 
selves as to be beyond criticism, Mr. Bliss’ paper especially 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 185 


shows us what can be done, not only in maintaining constant 
potential in lighting trains, but I think can be applied in many 
cases to obtain constant potential where we have variable 
sources of power, such as water power. I think in such cases the 
application would be a very similar one. 

PRESIDENT ScoTtT:—lIs there any one present who is able to 
give Mr. Stott the information he asks for? 

Mr. SpeRRyY:—In reply to our President’s remarks and those 
of Mr. Stott I find myself in the position of one having accepted an 
invitation to present a paper and at last moment finding that 
Hamlet had to be omitted, but the author not released. At no 
distant date will I be able to answer Mr. Stott fully, but the one 
who is responsible for a large part of the work that I have 
attempted to describe is here with us, and I should like to hear 
him say something with reference to the details asked for by Mr. 
Stott. I refer to Mr. Lyndon. 

Mr. Lynpon:—I should like very much to say all that I can 
about this system which has kept Mr. Sperry and myself very 
much engaged for the past eighteen months, but we were told 
to-day by our attorneys that we could not do it; and, therefore, I 
think that Mr. Sperry’s suggestion that I should speak to you 
on this matter is getting even with me for something I never did. 

PRESIDENT ScoTT:—The attorneys must be respected, but we 
are glad to know, in a general way, the information which you 
have given about the system. 

Mr..Lynpon:—I think in explanation, Mr. President, that I 
should say that when we agreed to present this paper it was 
supposed our arrangements would be completed before the paper 
would be presented. We did not intend simply to give a general 
paper to the InstiTuTE, but to go into more specific details. We 
have, however, lately been informed that the arrangements were 
such we could not give any more than we have. 

PresipeNT Scotr:—lIs there any further contribution to the 
discussion ? 

Mr. W. N. Smitu:—As one of the recent speakers remarked, 
nearly all of the subject matter of the discussion to-night has been 
on axle-driven systems. The ingenuity the members have 
displayed is truly remarkable. At the same time, quite a little 
car-lighting is done by the old-fashioned steam engine driving a 
direct coupled generator in the baggage car. None of the gentle- 
men have stated how long or on how many trains their respective 
systems have been in successful operation, and it seems to me 
that a little information as to what the commercial results have 
been, would be fitting in this discussion. I believe the system 
that I have in mind with a high speed engine and generator in the 
baggage car, receiving steam from the locomotive, is applied to 
most of the finest and fastest electrically lighted express trains 
on quite a number of the principal railroads of this country, like 
the New York Central; Lake Shore; Chicago and Northwestern; 
Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul; Northern Pacific, and several 


‘ 


186 RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


others. It would be very interesting, indeed, if we could hear 
upon what railroads these axle-driven systems have been ap- 
plied, and how many of them have been accepted and are in 
daily use on the prominent railroads of the country. 

Mr. Burss:—I regret that Mr. Sloan cannot tell us something 
about the lighting on the Pennsylvania Limited, of which he has 
immediate and direct charge, but as he seems to be reluctant 
about doing so, I will venture a few remarks on that subject 
myself, and stand correction from him or anyone else if I am in 
error. 

The system of lighting on the Pennsylvania Limited which is 
probably the most celebrated train in the country, consists sim- 
ply of an engine and generator in the baggage car, train lines 
through the train and storage batteries on the cars: For many 
years they have employed a Brotherhood three-cylinder engine, 
directly connected to an Eickmeyer generator, running at 800 
r.p.m. The system is not complete. At best, these generators 
could furnish just about enough current to charge the storage 
batteries alone or else light the lamps alone. When charging 
the batteries, it was not safe to use the lamps on account of the 
high voltage, but as a matter of fact there was not sufficient 
power in the engines to perform both operations at once. When 
the Brotherhood engine was in good condition, it developed a 
horse-power-hour with something like 80 lbs. of steam, but I have 
heard that nearly 500 lbs. of steam have been consumed per horse- 
power-hour in actual test. Within the last few months, there has 
been installed a De Laval steam turbine driving a generator at 
2,000 r.p.m. The apparatus runs very satisfactorily and shows a 
good steam economy, about 25 lbs. of steam per horse-power- 
hour. This new equipment takes up more room than the origi- 
nal plant, and requires the constant care of an engineer. It 
occupies practically one-quarter of the space devoted to baggage, 
the car being a combined parlor smoker and baggage car. There 
is ample power in this plant to charge the batteries and light the 
lamps. The machines run smoothly and without vibration, but 
make a great deal of noise by reason of the gears, which operate 
at such high speed. The noise cannot be heard outside of the 
baggage compartment and no vibration is communicated to the 
train, as was observable, for instance, on the Lake Shore Limited, 
where the knuckle in the coupler in the rear car could be seen 
shaking when the train was standing at a station with the engine 
and generator in operation. As a system, the turbine set is no 
better, except in economy, and greater capacity than the original 
plant, which it has replaced. The difficulty still to be overcome 
is that the storage batteries cannot be charged and the lamps 
lighted at the same time and the batteries on this train, with its 
turbine generator and up to date equipment, still have to be 
charged at Jersey City and Chicago as of old. A number of 
devices have been suggested whereby resistance or something 
equivalent could be thrown into the lamp circuit to maintain 


1993.] DISCUSSION. AT NEW YORK. 187 


proper voltage on same, while the batteries are being charged; 
but these devices, if automatic, are difficult to make, and if the 
porters are to be depended upon :o operate them, they will be 
unreliable. It seems to me that a system is necessary whereby 
the lighting of the lamps and the charging of the storage batteries 
can be carried on simultaneously without any rise in voltage on 
the lamp circuits. Thus we see to-day, on the best-lighted train 
in America, the Pennsylvania Limited, the system of lighting is 
very far from being perfect and in fact as a system it is not much 
better than it was fifteen years ago. 

Mr. SPERRY:—I would correct a statement of the next to the 
last speaker, that the fast trains are all fitted with dynamo sets. 
As I understand, that is not true. The Twentieth Century 
Limited, and all that series of trains, have axle-driven equip- 
ments, and there are some other fast trains with axle-driven 
equipments as against the system of einploying a single generator 
for the entire train. The want of discussion on this type is, I 
think, owing to the fact that in this case, employing the single 
generator in the train, we have conditions similar to those of a 
central station with its coupled lamps. It entails no special 
problem, and the discussion to-night has been on the special 
problems which are presented in axle power, and which have 
been overcome in such meritorious ways as we have heard 
described. 

With reference to the detail of the system, which I was invited 
to describe and which at one time was described in my paper and 
afterwards expunged, I would say that the generator is simply a 
constant speed machine. The item of regulation is reduced to a 
very simple and straightforward mechanism, which is introduced 
between the driving axle and the dynamo, in which it differs 
from the present types of car lighters, which are variable speed 
machines and which must have the variable voltage compensated 
for in the electrical system. The load comes on at 1,200 revolu- 
tions, which corresponds to 18 miles an hour train speed. When 
the car runs at 80 or 85 miles per hour, the 1200 revolutions are 
still maintained, thus eliminating the more complex problems 
involved in the electrical control and some of the complexities 
which exist in the other systems. One of the special points 
sought is the handling of the batteries in accordance with the 
best practice of charging storage batteries, not utilizing a small 
portion only of the range, but utilizing the battery throughout its 
whole range of possible operation, and maintaining the voltage 
of lamps within one half of one per cent., instead of the large 
percentage of variation that we have heard discussed to-night. 
This permits of the use of more delicate lamps—higher efficiency 
jamps, I might say. These features are among the essential 
points of difference between this and the other axle systems 
about which we have had the pleasure of hearing to-night. 
‘Another essential is the automatic charging with lowering current 
when battery is nearly charged, and still another is the utilizing 


188 RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. (Feb. 27 


of measurably 100 per cent. of the normal capacity of the cells, 
thus keeping them in a healthy state, and requiring only a 
comparatively small weight of battery aboard. 

I referred in the paper to a series of investigations that were 
conducted where I had an opportunity of observing the operation 
of the systems; a peculiar phenomenon in the case of one of. 
Bliss’ equipments came under my notice, which I think we 
would be interested in hearing Mr. Bliss explain; and that was 
the almost inexplicable fact that upon the accidental or other 
opening of the battery circuit, instead of putting the lights out, 
or cutting down the voltage at the lamps, all of the lamps in the 
car went up and out; and the voltage rising until the lamps and 
filaments were exploded. I have looked through the diagram 
and paper which Mr. Bliss presented to-night, but fail to see any 
reason given why this should have occurred, possibly he will 
explain it for us. 

Mr. Briss:—In answer to some of Mr. Sperry’s remarks, I 
would say, in regard to the transmission of power from the axle 
to the generator, it seems to me that the problem is much like 
that in a street railway motor, and we can be guided in dealing 
with it by the experience of those who have worked that system 
out to perfection. When Mr. Sperry speaks of a. constant speed 
generator, it pre-supposes that there must be something in the 
transmission that secures the constant speed. It seems to me 
simpler to allow the speed of the generator to run wherever it 
will and take care of it electrically which can be done more 
easily than it can be mechanically. 

In regard to the other point which Mr. Sperry brings up. If 
the storage battery circuit is broken, what will happen? If the 
battery circuit opens, the regulating current through the series 
field is interrupted and the voltage of the generator will rise 
abnormally and may result in great damage. We do not fur- 
nish the storage batteries and are not responsible for them. Is 
it, however, incumbent upon the storage battery people and the 
railroad companies to see that the lugs and connections of the 
storage battery are properly made and installed. We have in- 
troduced a device which I have not touched upon to-night, not 
because my attorneys have advised me not to, but simply 
because I have not so chosen. I am free to speak to you of this 
device, whereby the destructive effects of excessive voltage are 
avoided. This device was made necessary principally through 
the repeated breaking of the storage battery lugs, for which we 
are not responsible, but which, nevertheless, reflects upon us. 
This device is simple in its construction and will act in two ways. 
It will prevent an abnormal rise in voltage in case the storage 
battery circuit opens and it will also operate to discontinue the 
charging of the batteries, when the latter have become fully 
charged. 

One other point Mr. Sperry brought up. He said that a train 
equipped with an engine, generator train lines and storage bat- 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK: 189 


teries was simply a small central station and introduced no new 
problems to solve. But the problem has not been solved at all. 
As a system it is incomplete and it is not even a self-supporting 
central station in the sense that it is independent of outside 
power. Terminal charging still has to be dependéd upon. The 
engine and generator in the baggage car will not maintain light 
in the passenger cars in the present state of development of this 
system. 

Mr. James F. McE.Lroy:—I did not intend to take part in 
the discussion on this subject, but since entering the room the 
Secretary has requested me to say something about the system 
of axle lighting with which I have been experimenting for several 
years, and I may wish the privilege of publishing, in the report 
of this meeting, a short article descriptive of that system, if it is 
in conformity with the rules of the INsTITUTE. 

PRESIDENT ScoTT:—That will be satisfactory. 

Mr. McErroy:—lI will say that in my experiments, I have 
tested almost every conceivable apparatus for driving from the 
axle. My first experiments included the use of belts made of 
leather of single and double thickness; part of these were wide 
belts and part narrow. I have also used rawhide belts, the 
so-called camels’ hair belt, rubber belts, link belts, and I have 
lost so many belts that I have called the line between Albany 
and Montreal, where my apparatus was in use, “ the belt line.” 
I employed a tension device to maintain the proper tension upon 
the belt. In one set of experiments I attached the generator to 
the bottom of the car and undertook to drive direct from the 
pulley on the axle. I also made another device in which the 
dynamo was capable of a side motion so as to maintain a parallel 
position between the dynamo shaft and the car axle. I found 
that whilst certain difficulties could be removed, other difficulties 
persisted throughout my experiments and caused me to abandon 
the use of belts. For example, I found that a belt which would 

‘tun all right when dry would not run satisfactorily in wet 
weather; or belts that operated when the thermometer stood at 
40 or 50 degrees above zero would not act properly when the 
thermometer fell to 20 degrees below zero. The heating appar- 
atus on the car, discharging the water of condensation, may have 
been in a measure responsible for the formation of ice over the 
pulleys and for the consequent lack of adhesion between the 
pulley and belt. ; 

I remember leaving Albany on the sleeper one night at 11 
o'clock, bound for Montreal. The next morning, as we approac’ied 
Montreal, I stepped into the car just ahead, which was equipped 
with my lighting apparatus. The lights were running all right, 
but when the train stopped I noticed that the pulley on the axle 
had a half inch thickness of ice upon its surface between the belt 
and the pulley. You must admit that such conditions are not 
favorable to the use of belts. 

Now, there are some peculiar difficulties in the use of belts for 


190 RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


this apparatus. The question of adhesion between the driving 
pulley and belt is by no means the only one.. I believe that the 
question of alignment introduces some very serious complica- 
tions. I have found that an axle on a straight track does not 
maintain a position perpendicular to the line of the rails or to the 
line of the car. It is well known that the tread on a car wheel 
has a larger diameter near the flange of the wheel than it has at 
the outer edge. There is a play of fully half an inch between the 
flanges of the wheels and the rail. The result is that when one 
flange crowds up against the rail, that wheel runs on a larger 
diameter than the opposite wheel on the same axle. The first 
wheel, therefore, moves forward more rapidly than the opposite 
wheel, and this motion then crowds the flange of the opposite 
wheel against the rail, when it in turn drives forward more 
rapidly. The result of this peculiar action is a see-sawing of the 
car axle. in which it moves so as to bring alternate flanges in con- 
tact with the rail and at the same time the axle is given a to and 
fro motion, lengthwise of the axle. This complicated motion 
introduces difficuities when you attempt to drive a dynamo with 
a belt on a pulley on the axle, as it causes the belt to see-saw 
across the face of the pulley, striking the flanges on both s'd:s and. 
causing the tension to be thrown first upon one edge of th? belt 
and then upon the other. This action results in stretching the 
belt along its edges. 

The axle also has another motion which is especially noticed 
when the air brake is applied, which pushes the axle towards the 
king-bolt and thus increases or decreases tension upon the belt, | 
depending upon which side of the axle the dynamo is supported. 

Another difficulty in the use of belts is caused by the spring 
used to maintain tension upon the belts. When an engine backs 
on to a train so that a shock is given to the car, a severe blow is 
given, which causes a sudden increase of tension upon the belt; 
or if the blow is in the opposite direction, causes the tension 
suddenly to release, when the spring device will then pull the 
dynamo back quickly, when it strikes with heavy force within the 
belt. As a result, belts are often broken in the making up of 
trains at the station 

I feel quite at liberty, Mr. President, to speak of my experi- 
ence with belts, since my experiments in car lighting have carried 
me to a point where belts are entirely discarded. I have no 
reason to believe that my experiments with belts in lighting 
apparatus were any more unsatisfactory than the experience of 
other companies in the use of belts. I believe that the experience 
of all companies attempting to operate lights from the axle by 
means of be'ts, is that the belts have been short-lived, unreliable 
and unsatisfactory. 

In my own apparatus I now use a gear and pinion somewhat 
resembling the arrangement as used on the electric cars. The 
gears are noiseless, giving a positive drive, and the wear for the 
last year indicates that the gears and pinions can be furnished at 
a cost not exceeding $5 per year. 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 193 


Reference has been made by two of the members in thie dis- 
cussion of the storage battery and the fact that the storage battery 
when nearly depleted should receive current at the maximum 
charging rate, and that as the charging operation proceeds, the 
rate should be gradually reduced so that by the time the battery 
begins to gas at the completion of the charge, the flow of current 
through the battery should be reduced to a minimum. I fully 
agree with that statement as to the proper method of charging a 
storage battery, and I desire to say that I invented and have had 
in use for a number of years a method of control which enables 
me to charge a storage battery precisely in accordance with the 
formula as laid down by storage battery makers. In other 
words, when the battery is depleted, the charging rate is at its 
maximum, but still within bounds The charging rate gradually 
tapers as it approaches complete charge, when the sudden rise of 
voltage, due to gasing of the battery, after the completion of the 
charge reduces the current to zero. This result is accomplished 
in the regulator by the use of a peculiarly constructed suction 
coil. The plunger of the suction coil is drawn out by a spring 
under constant tension. The pull of the suction coil then con- 
sists of two parts—the charging part, due to a shunt coil and the 
other, a minor part, due to a small series coil, which is placed 
preferably in the storage battery circuit. The total of the pull 
of the shunt and series coils is equal to the tension of the reacting 
spring. The result is that the voltage maintained in the charging 
of the storage battery is a modified constant potential, being 
lower when the battery is depleted than when the battery becomes 
fully charged. The greater flow of current to the battery, when 
depleted through the series coil, is accompanied by a smaller pull 
on the part of the shunt coil. As the counter electromotive force 
of the battery increases, the decreased flow to the battery through 
the series coil causes an increase in the pull of the shunt coil, due 
to the rise of voltage. 

The result is that by adjusting the number of turns of the 
series coil, the rate of charging a storage battery may be brought 
absolutely under control, in accordance with any prescribed 
formula. I will say that whilst this method is patented, it may 
be of interest to you to know how this problem has been worked 
out. 

PRESIDENT Scott:—A sentence in the paper submitted by 
Prof. Shepardson is well worthy of repetition, as we all agree that 
it is the sentiment of the whole trend of the evening. He says, 
‘* When one watches the operation of an axle lighting which 1s so 
carefully designed and adjusted that no perceptible change 
occurs in the brightness of the lights between standstill and full- 
speed, between the time when the battery is discharged and when 
it is charged, one cannot but admire the success of the engineers 
in charge.” The whole discussion this evening has been a 
~ demonstration of the manner in which electrical engineers have 
attacked and solved some very difficult problems. I think the 


192 RAILWAY TRAIN LIGHTING. [Feb. 27 


great value of a meeting of this kind, with papers of the type 
which we have had, and with discussions and debates embracing 
experiences such as have been presented to us to-night, lies in 
this—that it presents the problem definitely to others and deters 
them from going over the same ground and making the same 
mistakes. Train lighting is a very attractive subject. As soon 
as one comes to understand a few of the difficulties which have 
- confronted inventors in this and other lines of work, we begin 
to appreciate the effort which lies behind what are apparently 
simple inventions. A young man just beginning to try his 
intellect in an inventive way is apt to contrive some little device 
which will overcome some difficulty and then he thinks he has 
solved the whole problem; but this, as we know, is not often the 
case. If such a young man has been here this evening or will 
read the proceedings of this meeting, he will get a good deal of 
light on these lines. It will show him that many practical 
problems, simple as they may seem in themselves, really involve 
a great deal. Whole series of problems arise and if one attempts 
to investigate them-and does so in ignorance of what others 
have done before him, he is apt to subject himself to an indefinite 
number of disappointments until he properly appreciates the 
fulness of the problem, in a manner such as we have appre- 
ciated the difficulties of train car lighting presented in the dis- 
cussion this evening. If there is no further business, the meeting 
stands adjourned. 
(Adjourned.) 


1903.] COMMUNICATION. 193 


{CONTRIBUTED AFTER ADJOURNMENT OF THE FEBRUARY 27TH 
MERTING, BY J. R. BIBBINS. | 

“Considering the subject of train lighting by electricity in its 
broadest aspect, it is necessary to reduce all methods to an 
unbiased competitive level, determined almost entirely by com- 
mercial considerations of: 1. First cost. 2. Cost of operation 
and maintenance. 3. Results to be obtained. There is no 
doubt but that the multiple-unit or axle-light system is the most 
attractive of the several méthods advanced for train lighting, 
and the ingenuity displayed in some of the present apparatus 
worthy of highest commendation, by reason of the almost 
insuperable difficulties encountered; but the question of cost 
and results obtained are nevertheless paramount in the mind of 
the unbiased purchaser. 

The following comparative table cites briefly the advantages 
and disadvantages of the two prevailing systems. 


ELECTRIC TRAIN LIGHTING. 


Multiple-Unit. 
Axle-Lighting Outfit. 


Single-Unit. 
Engine-Generator Unit. 


Advantages: Advantages: 
Independent car illumina- Concentration of many small 
tion. units under one control. 


Standard and efficient appar- 
atus. 


Power obtained from locomo- 
tive without intermediary 


connections. Uniform rotation and volt- 
No attendance required en age. 
route. Adequate potential regula- 
Disadvantages: tion. 


Erratic current generation. 

Commutation difficulties. 

Small and inefficient units. 

Increased hysteresis loss at 
high speeds. 

Reversal in rotation. 

Storage batteries essential. 

Inefficient power transforma- 
tion. 

Apparatus exposed and sub- 
4eCt tO! jar. 

High depreciation and main- 
tenance. 

High initial investment. 


Absence of mechanical com- 
plexity. 
Apparatus protected and in 

full view. 
Higher gross efficiency. 
Small total weight. 
Low initial investment. 
Minimum depreciation and 
maintenance. 


Disadvantages: 


Valuable space consumed. 

Flexible conductor between 
cars necessary. 

Attendance required en 
route. 

Storage batteries required 
during disconnection of 
locomotives. 


In directing attention to the single-unit system, it is not the 
in.cntion to advocate any particular class of apparatus for ful - 


194 COMMUNICATION. [Feb. 27 


filling the required conditions, but to emphasize the many 
important and vital features of the system in distinction to those 
of other systems so abl.” and exclusively championed at the last 
meeting of the INSTITUTE. 

The single unit system is at the present time in successful 
operation upon a number of important roads running fast lim- 
ited service of the highest character. The usual equipment 
consists of a 25 or 30 h.p. vertical two-cylinder engine, direct 
connected to a 173 or 20 k.w., 125-volt D.c. multipolar generator, 
both mounted upon a common bed-plate, and installed in a small 
compartment in the forward part of the baggage car, directly 
over the forward truck. The engine receives steam at 100 Ibs. 
pressure from the locomotive through a flexible hose connection. 
It exhausts through the roof, a suitable muffler being inserted 
for retaining oil and condensation and deadening the exhaust. 
The few meters, switches and simple wiring required are mounted 
upon the side of the car. The train-line between cars is estab- 
lished by means of a flexible cable with special lugs, which may 
be quickly connected during the make-up of the train. Storage 
batteries may or may not be employed, according to the nature 
of the train service, and are not essential to the operation of the 
entire electrical equipment. It is customary, however, to insert 
a small battery under the baggage car for furnishing current 
during change of locomotives. This procedure may extend to 
other parts of the train, such as dining cars and sleepers, which 
are to be disconnected from the train at stations en route. 

The generating outfit weighs approximately 7,000 Ibs., thus 
averaging but 1,000 lbs. per car in a seven-car train. This is but 
30 to 60 per cent, of the weight of present multiple-unit systems 
percar. The unit stands 5 ft. high over all, and requires 25 sq. 
ft. of floor space. It may be conveniently installed crosswise of 
the car, in a compartment 6 ft. long, thus consuming from 9 to 10 
per cent. of the baggage car room, or it may be left unhoused 
when this floor space may be somewhat encroached upon. The 
steam consumption of the engine averages 35 lbs. per i.h.p. hour 
by actual test and the efficiency of the generator is 90 per cent., 
at full load. Assuming the combined efficiency at 76 per cent., 
the net steam consumption at the locomotive approximates 
45 8/10 Ibs. per h.p., delivered at the generator terminals. 

For purposes of incidental comparison with the multiple-unit 
or axle-lighting system, we may assume the steam consumption 
of an express locomotive to be 22 Ibs. per i-h.p., its mechanical 
efficiency 85 per cent., and the corresponding figures of efficiency 
of car truck, mechanical drive, and small generator 90 per cent., 
75 per cent. and 83 per cent. respectively. Upon this basis, 
the steam consumption of the multiple-unit system becomes 46.3 
Ibs. at the boiler. These latter figures are of course only tenta- 
tive, but may serve partially to refute the popular argument 
that this system derives its power directly from the locomotive 
with no appreciable loss, by calling attention to the fact that 


* 


1903. J COMMUNICATION. ' 195 


there are six distinct transformations of energy involved, as 
against two in the single-unit system. The figure 75 per cent. 
would probably be exceeded in properly designed gear trans- 
mission, but not in belt transmission, and especially not in appar- 
atus involving slippage of friction discs, rollers or belts. Ac_ 
cording to present quotations, which may not be given here, the 
cost of a single-unit equipment ranges from 15 to 25 per cent. of 
that of a multiple-unit outfit, for a seven-coach train, together 
with the necessary batteries. The introduction of an auxiliary 
battery in the former system reduces this difference proportion- 
ately. 

Maintenance and depreciation of the single-unit is evidently 
a much less important factor in cost of operation than that of the 
multiple-unit system. On one railroad, one of the single units 
has run successfully for 5} years, averaging 12 hours per trip, 
while the particular type of engine used has to its credit a record 
run of 13 months, 8 days without stop, and a repair account 
during 12 years of operation amounting to 2 per cent. per 
annum of the first cost. The attendance required upon one of 
the roads above cited is furnished by the baggage-man, who 
receives $1.52 per day extra wages for the service, amounting to 
22c. per car day or about $80 per car year. The cost of supplies 
and maintenance for the generating unit seldom exceeds $25 per 
year. The entire cost of operation, exclusive of the battery, 
thus totals considerably under $100 per car year. May it not be 
barely possible that the single-unit system, with all its faults, 
will successfully compete with its ingenious rivals on the score 
of reliability, durability and non-complexity, as well as that of 
low cost of investment and maintenance? 


A paper read at the 2d Meeting of the Boston 
Branch of the American Institute of Electrical 
Exgineers, March 26, 1903. 

ee ee ee 


A SYSTEM OF ELECTRIC LIGHTING FOR CARS. 
BY JAMES F. McELROY, 


A modified constant-potential system of 
car lighting, emploving an axle-driven dy- 
namo which is capable of operation by motion 
in cither direction. 


There is a wide variation in load which axle-driven apparatus 
is called upon to carry in actual service. If a car is operated 
wholly in day time, just sufficient current should be generated 
to maintain full charge in the battery or to supply battery losses; 
more than this amount is needless and wasteful and may be 
harmful to the battery-plates. On the other hand, if a car is 
operated only at night and must be lighted for some time before 
it begins its run, or has long and frequent stops, a very different 
problem presents itself. The battery should then receive its 
charge at a high rate and at the same time current must be 
generated for operating the lamps. In this case the current 
generated by the dynamo should be at a rate about twice that 
required for lamps alone. The actual demand upon lighting 
‘apparatus varies between the two extremes here referred to and 
consequently the lighting apparatus must provide automatically 
for correspondingly wide variations in load. 

Incandescent lamps and storage batteries require constant 
voltage in the supply circuit. If a variable load is called for, 
it is evident that we cannot have a regulator controlled by the 
current in the mains as in that case there will be produced a 
constant current at a constant voltage, which will give a constant 
load. The variable load required must evidently be obtained by 
means of a constant voltage and variable current. These con- 
siderations should guide us as to the method of regulation to be 
selected. 

The system of lighting cars which I will describe may be called 
a modified constant potential system. It employs~an axle- 
driven dynamo which is capable of operation by motion in either 

197 


198 McELROY: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [March 26 


direction. Fig. 1 presents a view of the dynamo. It will be seen 
that the dynamo rests, at one end, upon bearings on the car-axle, 
while it is supported by easy-riding springs under the dynamo 
body. These springs rest upon curved supporting bars which are 
attached at one end over the car-axle bearings, and at the other 
end swing from pendulum supports to a cross-bar which rests 
upon the truck-frame. The dynamo is therefore free to move 
with the car-axle. The curved bar-supports facilitate the 
removal of the axle and wheels, when that is necessary, by dro5- 
ping down out of the truck-frame in the usual manner. They 
also make it easy to open the dynamo as shown in Fig. 2 without 


ETGwi: 


in any way releasing the dynamo from its supports. The 
dynamo is driven by means of gear and pinion in a manner 
somewhat similar to that employed on motors of trolley cars. A 
wrought-iron gear-case incloses the gear and pinion and is made 
dust-proof with leather packing. 

All doors admitting to parts of the dynamo requiring inspec- 
tion, as well as the doors for supplying oil and waste to the axle- 
bearings, close upon leather or felt packing and are held firmly 
in place by strong spring-latches of flat steel. All doors are in 
this way made dust-proof. 


1903.) McELROY: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. 199 


The compartment containing the reversing switch is shown 
at the left and in advance of the armature bearing. This switch 
is operated by the armature-shaft and reverses the connections of 
the armature to the mains. A door easily accessible admits to 
this chamber for purposes of inspection. 

A storage battery is employed for supplying the lamps during 
stops. The battery receives its charge at all times when the 
dynamo is in operation, and the battery is below the point of full 
charge. The flow of current to the storage battery and the 
generation of current by the dynamo are regulated, through the 


Fia@, 2. 


widest variations of speed, by means of the regulator shown in 
Fig. 3. In this regulator a motor, through worm and gear con- 
nections, ‘operates a rheostat which is connected in series with 
the dynamo fields. The motor is controlled by a compound 
solenoid and plunger, the plunger being connected with an arm 
carrying carbon contacts by which the current is directed through 
the motor for changing its direction of motion. To insure the 
workings of the regulator under all conditions, it is necessary that 
the motor should be wound for large torque and low speed and 
be capable of operating at a voltage as low as the lowest voltage 


200 McELROY: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [March 26 


ever carried upon a battery. It is also necessary that the 
changes in position of the rheostat should be made at a rate not 
greater than the rate at which the corresponding changes will 
take place in the field-magnets of the dynamo, otherwise the 
phenomenon of racing will cause a disturbance in the lights. To 
prevent racing, we use a centrifugal governor by means of which 
the circuit through the motor is completed between two station- 
ary rings which surround the motor-shaft. Contact is mace 


— 
Oe = 
eo 
oan 
=e 
Seow 
pores 
an 
ee 
2 
as 
OSE 
Spun 
—— 
—- 
— 
ce 
re 
enn 
er. 
— 
—— 
— 
= 
~~ 
—- 
— 
— 
—— 
iy 
— 
—_ 
—_=— 


| 


Fie. 3. 


between these two rings by means of weighted arms which on 
the starting of the motor, immediately throw out and break the 
circuit. The result is that the governor gives to the motor a 
fixed rate of motion and this rate of motion is not increased or 
decreased within the limits of voltage at whichthe motor operates. 

The centrifugal governor is mounted above the motor and 
within the perforated hood at the top of the regulator. 


1903.] MCELROY: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. 201 


VESTIBULE LAMP 


>= 


ScromeKonene 


| bESTIBULE LAMP 


TS 


é ae 


S 
= 


i 


DIAGRAM OF WIRINS 


ew ee wer ee ee 


202 McELROY: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [March 26 


In the construction of this regulator the compound solenoid is 
placed inside an iron envelope which receives its support from 
the metal framework to which ail of the working parts of the 
regulator are attached. The iron envelope increases the puil of 
the solenoid more than two times by furnishing a covering 
through which the magnetic flux is conducted back outside 
of the coil. At the ends the iron envelope is kept back from 
the plunger a distance of nearly three-eighths of an inch, to prevent 
the envelope from creating a side-pull upon the iron plunger. 


\ 
WOES ae 
Posfeae| el) 02) SEH ee 
BESS SEs 
VSB ee Ns ese See 
HEEENEEEE 
AEN 
Seite [aise 


0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 980 
TIME IN MINUTES FROM BEGINNING OF GHARGE 


AMPERES 


CURVE OF CURRENT DURING A RECHARGE’ 
AT CONSTANT POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE 
Fig, 5. 


Longitudinal ribs are cast on the iron casing for the purpose of 
furnishing a path in the direction of the magnetic flux and at the 
same time for increasing the surface of the iron casing to permit 
of the ready escape of heat that may be generated in the solenoid. 

The increased pull upon the plunger, due to the improved path 
for the magnetic flux, and the fact that the regulation is effected 
both by means of change of voltage and change of current to the 


battery, renders the apparatus very sensitive and positive in its 
action. 


1903.] McELROY: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. 203 


The switch for disconnecting the dynamo from the storage- 
battery is operated by the motor which drives the rheostat. The 
return of the rheostat to the home position when field-resistance 
is all out opens the switch and disconnects the dynamo. In 
starting the dynamo, when the dynamo voltage equals the lamp 
voltage, the first motion of the rheostat closes the switch and 
connects the dynamo and storage-battery. together. A further 
rise of voltage causes the lamp-resistance to be inserted step by 
step between the battery and lamps and the battery begins to 
receive its charge. 

The lamp-resistance is snown more clearly in diagram of con- 
nections in Fig. 4. The sections of this resistance are inserted as 


VOLTS PER CELL 


CURVE OF POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE SURINT 
A RECHARGE AT CONSTANT CURRENT 


Fic. 6, 


the voltage of the dynamo rises, causing motion of the rheostat- 
arm from its home position. The proper fall in voltage from that 
required for the storage-battery to the lamp-voltage is thus 
obtained. The lamp-voltage is that which the storage battery is 
capable of maintaining when the dynamo is not in operation. As 
the lamps are divided into two circuits, each circuit has its own 
lamp-resistance, which is inserted step by step by the rheostat- 
arm. 

Vestibule-lamps are provided so as to give an abundance of 
light upon the steps and in the vestibules of a car when the train 
comes to a standstill. These lamps are preferably connected 
across the cut-out switch separating the dynamo from the storage- 
battery. The current for the vestibule-lamps therefore tlows 


204 McELROY: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [March 26 


from the storage battery through the dynamo and lamps in 
series. These lamps are lighted solely by the difference of the 
electromotive force of the dynamo and storage-battery. They 
are, therefore, lighted automatically when the speed of the train 
drops below twelve miles per hour, and come to full intensity at 
very low speeds and during stops. As these lamps do not draw 
upon the lighting apparatus during long runs, they can be made 
of ample intensity to furnish an abundance of light over the 
steps of a car at the time when the steps are in use, and at the 
same time do not draw upon the lighting apparatus at times 
when the lights in the vestibules are not needed. 

The motor of this regulator performs a series of operations in a 
pre-arranged order. In the act of stopping a train, the rheostat 


0 ' 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 


TIME IN HOURS. 
CURVE OF CURRENT DURING A RECHARGE OF STORAGE BATTERY UNDER A 
MODIFIED CONSTANT POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE, 


Fic. 7, 


moves to its home position and cuts out the resistance in scries 
with the field-coils of the dynamo. As it approaches the home 
position it cuts out the lamp-resistance and automatically 
changes the tension of the regulator-spring to change the adjust- 

ment of the regulator from the voltage of the dynamo when 
charging the battery to the voltage of the lamps. When the 
dynamo voltage reaches the lamp voltage, the motor opens the 
switch between'the motor and storage-battery. Afurther move- 
ment of the motor opens up its own circuit so that when the car 
is at a standstill there is no circuit through any part of the regu- 
lator or dynamo through which the current of the storage battery 
is ‘vasted. However, all parts of the regulator are then in proper 
posit’on, so that when the dynamo current picks up and excites. 


1903.] McELROV: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. 205 


the solenoid, the effect upon the plunger is: first, to re-establish 
the circuit through the motor which is done at the carbon con- 
tacts; secondly, to close the circuit between the dynamo ard 
storage-battery and then thirdly, upon a further rise of voltage of 
the dynamo, to cause the regulator to insert resistance in series 
with the larmps and in series with the field-coils of the dynamo. 
In this regulator no motion of any of its parts takes place 
except when necessary to meet some change in the conditions 
of the lighting system. When the train is running at a constant 
speed the regulator is motionless. When speed increases, a 
slight motion takes place just sufficient to introduce the proper 
Tesistance in series with the dynamo fields to maintain the volt- 
age constant. In this way we obtain the smallest wear of mov- 


DIAGRAM FOR BATTERY OF TWENTY EIGHT CELLS. 


Shenae 
BRnWN 


eer etet ct 
le tehehel: ab \ 


2 
SOS Oe eae SaaS eRe 
expense ato esa Siete tod he Pepe t lp Ley 
DM See eos sh eal See SPER 
eae ere eet tet orale er 
oa 2 3 + 5 6 7 8 


TIME IN HOURS. 
APPROKIMATE CURVE OF, MODIFIED CONSTANT POTENTIAL, 


Fie. 8. 


ing parts and the least possible care is required to keep the 
mechanism in order. 

I have already referred to the fact that the regulator is con- 
trolled by a compound solenoid. I will now explain more in 
detail the construction and connections of the compound solenoid 
and the reasons for its use. By reference to Fig. 4 it will be seen 
that the compound ‘solenoid is made up of two coils, one a large 
shunt-wound coil connected between the dynamo mains, and the 
other a small series-coil which is connected between the main and 
the storage-battery. These two coils act in conjunction when 
the dynamo is supplying current to the storage-battery and are 
opposed to each other when the storage-battery is giving out 
current. The compound solenoid draws the plunger against the 
tension of a spring. A motion of the motor always takes place 


206 McELROY: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. [March 26 


when the pull of either the solenoid or the spring predominates 
and causes the carbon contacts to close the circuit through the 
motor. The total of the effects of the two coils upon the plunger 
is equivalent to the tension upon the resisting spring. 

Now, it must be evident that when the storage-battery is 
nearly depleted the rush of the charging current into it through 
the series-coil will cause the series-coil to increase its pull upon 
the plunger and hence reduce the voltage at the terminals of 
the shunt-coil. In this way the excessive flow of current into 
a depleted battery is prevented. However, as the charging 
operation proceeds and the counter-electromotive force of the 
battery increases, the decreased flow through the series-coil to 
the battery will decrease the magnetic effect of the series-coil 
and the voltage at the terminals of the shunt-coil will correspond- 
ingly increase. As the counter-electromotive force of the battery 
continues to increase, the decrease in the flow to the battery will 
slowly but gradually cause a rise in the voltage on the mains. 
When the battery begins to gas and the voltage of the battery 
rises abruptly, the shunt-coil will assume almost the entire con- 
trol over the regulator and the current through the series-coil to 
the battery will diminish to not over 5 to 10 per cent. of the origi- 
nal charging rate, this being deemed just sufficient to cause the 
battery to gas slowly and replace battery losses or leakages. In 
this condition the apparatus may be used on a car having a 
daylight-run and with practically no load upon the dynamo after 
the battery has become fully charged. It is also used, without 
re-adjustment, upon cars operated wholly at night with all lights 
in use. It will be seen that with this simple device the charging 
of the storage-battery is made automatic and by proportioning 
the number of ampere-turns of the series and the shunt-coils the 
charging rate may be made to follow any formule that the bat- 
tery-maker may prescribe. It will also be seen that with this 
method of regulation, we avoid the dangers of both the shunt 
and the series methods of regulating the charge to the storage- 
battery. 

To show what these dangers are, I reproduce from a work on 
storage batteries by E. J. Wade, a curve of the current to a 
storage battery under constant potential-difference. (See Fig. 5). 
The heavy and destructive rush of current to the depleted bat- 
tery is followed by such a reduction in flow as to render the com- 
pletion of the charge difficult. Evidently the trouble here is too 
great a rush of current to the depleted battery and not suffi- 
cient current as the battery approaches full charge. 


. 1903.] McELROY: ELECTRIC CAR LIGHTING. 207 


I here reproduce from the same book a curve of the potential- 
difference of a battery charging with a constant current. (See 
Fig. 6.) You will here notice the abrupt rise of voltage as the 
battery becomes fully charged. This is so abrupt that it would 
be dangerous to operate incandescent lamps on the same cir- 
cuit. In Fig. 7 you will find a curve of current to a storage- 
battery as supplied by the apparatus described in this paper. In 
Fig. 8 the extent to which the constant potential is modified is 
alsoshown. In this apparatus, we avoid the danger of the shunt 
method by reducing the charging rate to the depleted battery 
and by increasing the charging rate as we approach complete 
charge. We avoid the danger of the series or current method of 
regulating the charge to the storage-battery by giving the largest 
rate of current when the battery is depleted and by avoiding the 
too-high charging rate of the series method when the battery 
charge approaches completion. When the battery begins to gas, 
we also avoid the abrupt rise in voltage of the charging current. 
We also avoid the danger of continuously charging a battery at a 
normal rate long after the charge of the battery has been com- 
pleted. 


208 — BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


Discussion AT MINNEAPOLIS, Marcu 6, 1903. 

During the reading of the paper on ‘‘ Some of the Problems of 
Electric Train Lighting,’ Mr. Shepardson described the Gould 
system of axle-lighting, which had not been represented in the 
papers, noting its development from the Stone system, which is 
largely used in Europe. The dynamo is thrown into or out of 
circuit by a centrifugal governor on the armature shaft, which 
operates at a definite speed. Regulation is obtained by mechani- 
cal means, the adjustment of the belt being such that it.delivers 
any desired torque to the armature shaft and slips if the periph- 
eral speed of the driving pulley exceeds that of the driven 
pulley, which would cause the armature to develop more than 
the desired current at the desired voltage. Careful selection of 
materials for the belt and the pulleys secures the unusual result 
that the slipping occurs on the larger driving pulley rather than 
on the smaller armature pulley, thus localizing the heat developed 
from slipping at the car-axle pulley, where there is a large surface 
for cooling. Adjustment for any desired strength of current is 
secured by changing the tension on the belt. In practice there is 
found to be considerable variation in the belt tension when the 
car is rounding curves, for the dynamo is mounted on the car 
body and its spring suspension does not entirely prevent wide 
variations in belt tension when the car-truck swings. These 
variations in the current are absorbed by the storage battery, so 
that the voltage is sensibly constant. 

Attention was called to tests upon the Muskowitz system 
formerly used on the Santa Fé road, in which the dynamos had a 
triple field-winding; a high resistance connected across the bat- 
tery for the purpose of insuring prompt excitation, a second 
winding connected in shunt with the armature terminals, and a 
third winding in series with the armature, but connected so as to 
oppose the two shunt windings. The combination of the three 
windings was supposed to secure constant current and constant 
voltage for any train speed above that at which the dynamo was 
thrown into service. A series of tests by students of the Univer- 
sity of Minnesota developed the fact that close regulation was 
actually secured by slipping of the belt as well as by the differ- 
ential winding, thus classifying it in principle with the Stone 
system. 

Discussing the costs of various methods of lighting, data were 
quoted from the records of one of the large railroads which had 
had long experience with different systems, showing the cost of 
lighting a 60-foot coach with 262 candlepower 5 hours per day 
and 365 days per year, to be as follows: 


07) Pars ener ey Ok Rye ee ee a $113.43 
Acetylene, gas generated on the car.................. 236.05 
Pintsch gas, equipment bought, gasmade by R.R...... 262.04 
Pintsch gas, equipment bought, gas bought............ 246.35 


Pintsch gas, equipment rented, gas bought................ 309.75 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 209 


Storage battery, charged at terminal stations... 256..87 
Dyzramo and engine, full storage battery auxiliary... 254.68 
Dynamo and engine, Pintsch gas auxiliary 0 315_.29 
Dynamo and engine, oil lamp auxiliary 00 194.51 
eOlesc over nOnatmaliarys |. 2s acs i 268..70 


Another large road which has alargernumber of axle-lighting 
equipments in service, reports an expense of 18 cents daily for 
labor, which with 5 per cent. interest and 5 per cent. depreciation 
and $4.00 per month for power, makes a total of $13.00 per month 
or $156.00 per annum for the axle system. If longer experience 
justifies the latter figures,,the axle systems can compete with 
every other lighting system, except possibly oil, on the basis of 
economy. Considerations of safety, independence, convenience, 
comfort and absence of disagreeable features should leave little 
doubt as to the best system of lighting. 


—— 


Discussion AT PHILADELPHIA, Marcu 9, 1903. 


CHAIRMAN Cart HeErinc:—As the three papers on Train 
Lighting are very much alike, I think it would be better if we had 
all of them read before beginning the discussion. This is the 
method usually practised at the New York meetings of the 
INsTITUTE; unless there are objections, I shall call upon Mr. 
Bliss to present his paper first. 

Mr. Bliss then read his paper. (See page 133. ) 

CHAIRMAN HeErinG:—In the absence of the other two authors, 
Mr. W. C. L. Eglin has been so kind as to abstract their papers. 
Mr. Eglin will please present these abstracts. 

Mr. Eglin read abstracts of the papers by Messrs. Farnsworth 
and Sperry. 

CHAIRMAN HeErinG:—The matter is now open for general 
discussion. There are some gentlemen here who have had ex- 
perience with these systems. We would be very glad to hear. 
from them. May I ask Dr. Dudley to say a few words. 

Dr. DupLey:—I am as deeply interested, I think, as any one 
can be in the successful lighting of railway cars by electricity. I 
worked very hard at it in connection with the Brush Company and 
their expert during 1882 and tollowing. 1am frank to say to you, 
however, as a result of a good deal of hard work and some failure, 
that I am just a bit skeptical even yet as to whether we will be 
able to solve this problem. I don’t want to be a wet blanket in 
any shape, but the difficulties have been discussed before, some- 
what, and in talking with Mr. Wood, electrician of the road, a few 
days ago, I found that though he, like most electricians and like 
most others who are dealing with nature, was very enthusiastic 
. a year or two ago, he is less enthusiastic to-day, Three plans for 


210 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


railway car lighting have been mentioned as feasible. First, 
storage batteries alone. That is what we used in 1882. We 
called it the transfer system. We used two batteries; one off, 
the other on the car, and each battery large enough to light the 
car for a definite period of time. We charged one at the 
station, while the other was used on the car. Since that 
time we have been charging a battery at Jersey City and one 
at Chicago. At one time we were inclined to believe that this 
plan would be entirely successful, because it is possible to fit a car 
with enough battery power to light it for any given run between 
Jersey City and Chicago, and then take it out and put another 
battery in its place, and so operate continuously. The storage 
battery has progressed materially since the day we began, but, I 
think that any man who has to do with it will wish it was a better 
apparatus. So much for the storage battery. The second plan 
is the generation of electric current by the movement of the car. 
That has already been discussed and we are hoping for a great 
deal from the device described. The third plan is a system now 
and for quite a time past in use on the New York and Chicago 
Limited, namely; an engine in the baggage car operated by 
steam from the locomotive, a dynamo in the car and storage bat- 
tery under the car. A fourth system is also being studied; that 
is, putting some sort of generator on the locomotive. A generator 
operated by a steam turbine has been suggested and is now being 
experimented with at Albany. Some years ago we used to say 
that a car must be self-contained for three things: For its light, 
for its heat and for its ventilation. As you doubtless know, in 
the progress of time the heating has been made a train unit. In 
other words, we heat, cars by steam taken from the locomotive, 
and the independent car heater has been superseded. It is 
possible that we may make the car self-contained so far as lighting 
is concerned by an axle-driven device. Besides experimenting 
with axle-driven devices, the tendency is toward making the 
train the unit, generating the current on the locomotive itself. I 
am sorry not to have any positive data to give you regarding the 
operation of some of the axle-driven devices. You are doubtless 
all familiar with the very serious difficulty of trying to operate 
by means of belts. As far as experience goes, that is almost 
insurmountable. The device Mr. Bliss described we regard as 
the best we have ever seen and the best we have ever experi- 
mented with. 

I noticed in Mr. Sperry’s paper something in regard to costs. 
If I have read it rightly, Mr. Sperry makes out that the electrical 
lighting of the train is considerably cheaper than other methods 
of lighting. Now, it is desirable to make a distinction. We do 
not calculate the cost for lighting by the same method that he 
calculates it. It is a question of lighting the car and not a ques- 
tion of cost per candle power per hour. If you light a car with 
an arc lamp you can generate your light per candle power per 
hour for probably a tenth of what it costs by any of the present 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 211 


systems. But the distribution of the light is an essential feature. 
and an arc lamp is hardly a good light to have in a car. Mr. 
Sperry’s figures are based on the cost per candle power per hour. 
We light our cars, approximately, with gas, giving a total illu- 
mination of one hundred and fifty candles, and with electricity 
possibly two hundred to two hundred and fifty—maybe more— 
Pullman cars a good deal more. If we consider candle power per 
hour, electricity comes out ahead. If we consider car lighting 
per hour, we find the gas system a good deal cheaper. We had 
a long discussion over this some months ago and I might have 
brought some figures showing the relative cost of lighting a car 
an hour by different systems; but as my memory serves me, it 
costs considerably more to light a car per hour with a fairly 
satisfactory light—not all the same candle power, mark you— 
but with a very satisfactory light, by means of electrical devices, 
than by gas. 

CHAIRMAN HERiING:—I would like to ask Dr. Dudley whether 
the unit is the same in the two cases? You say it costs more to 
light by electricity than by gas. Do you base that on the num- 
ber of candles being the same? 

Dr. DupLEY:—No, you can’t do that. I tried to make that 
clear. 

CHAIRMAN HeErinG:—But any other comparison is unjust 

Dr. DupLEY:—Suppose you have a thousand cars to light, 
how much will be your bill for lighting? That is the problem the 
railroad man has to look at—how much for car lighting this year? 
You light your car with any kind of light that is satisfactory 
You can put in double light and the cost per unit will be cheaper 
but the total amount for car lighting will increase. 

CHAIRMAN HeErinG:—It seems to me that must necessarily 
figure out. When you light them electrically you have a great 
deal more light. 

Dr. DupLey:—We agree to that. 

Mr. Buiiss:—There is nothing at present that we know of that 
is perfect. Some things are better than others, and in bringing 
out anew thing it is simply necessary that it shall be better than 
that which it superseded. Dr. Dudley says it would be very 
cheap to produce light in acar from an arc lamp, per candle 
power per hour, but that the distribution is a question that 
cannot be lost sight of. That is admittedly true, but it is 
not perfect distribution that we have to compete with. We 
simply have to compete with gas, and we all know that the 
distribution of light in a car by gas is anything but ideal. The 
eaves and flies of the car, to use a theatrical term, are pretty 
well lighted, but the space occupied by the passengers is not 
well lighted, and the distribution, while its value cannot be 
reckoned in dollars and cents, nevertheless exists; and 
when electric light is produced even at a greater total cost 
than gas, it still has to be borne in mind that the value 
of the distribution that has been introduced tends to re- 
duce the actual cost of the light per unit. In a Pullman 


212 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


twelve section sleeper, the maximum available candle power, 
with the largest gas outfit ever installed, isabout three hundred and 
fifteen candles. This is taking gas at twelve candles per 
cubic foot, which is rather high, or sixty candles per five cubic 
feet, which is the standard with the gas makers. But three 
hundred and fifteen candle power is not sufficient to light a 
sleeper or parlor car. With such a system as we have at- 
tempted to develop, the available candle power is about six 
hundred and forty. Not only is the candle power more than 
double, but the distribution should, in a measure, tend to reduce 
“the actual cost of the lighting, if the quality of the light is a 
factor. It is very difficult to build this electrical apparatus 
small enough,so that when fully loaded it will give little enough 
light to be comparable with gas. The conditions of operation 
and the dimensions and construction of the truck make it 
rather difficult to build a very small machine. 

To light a coach as it is lighted at present, a machine ought to 
be about one-third of the size of our generator, consequently the 
machine we turn out to-day is really too large for a coach, 
if that coach is not to be lighted any better than it is by gas. 
As a matter of fact, a coach can be lighted so brilliantly that it 
will look absurdly different from the gas-lighted coaches in the 
same train, and make an unfavorable contrast, and it may be, for 
this reason, that the railroad people may not wish to put so much 
light in a coach. We could not build a generator on the lines 
we have adopted, very much cheaper if it was designed simply to 
do less work.’ There are certain dimensions that fix the size of 
the machine. For instance, the driving gear is dependent upon 
the size of the axle, and this fixes the other dimensions. 

Mr. Popr:—Would we not meet Dr. Dudley’s contention by 
distributing the light over more cars. I think Dr. Dudley sug- 
gested in the early part of his remarks that possibly the axle 
system might take the place of the single generator in the baggage 
car? Can you light two or more cars from the generator as it is 
now? 

Dr. DupLEy:—I will only say that if we were perfectly satis- 
fied with the present gas system we would not go into a new 
device. We are not satisfied; we want a good deal better light and 
we expect to pay for it. In answer to Mr. Pope, the idea of having 
every car lighted from the generator is absurd, if he will excuse 
me for saying so. The car has got to be a car. It has got to 
have certain things self-contaired in it. We cannot often make 
up trains as we like. I have seen local trains going out made 
up of four combination cars. You understand what a combina- 
tion car is. It was simply impossible to get the other cars in 
in time to make schedule. Every car must have its own light 
or whatever is essential for its production and operation. 

CuairMAN Herine:—If Dr. Dudley will favor the Secretary 
with the data covering his experiment, he will be very glad to 
publish it. 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 213 


Mr. Pope:—I wish to explain, Mr. Chairman, that my re- 
marks are due to Dr. Dudley’s statement, that originally a car 
was self-contained, as regards its heating, ventilation and light. 
But we had got beyond that. The train was the unit now, and 
therefore the lighting system might be installed in a baggage car. 
For that reason I asked whether this was a possible develop 
ment. 

Dr. Duptey:—I see the point. The only train equipped with 
the lighting system in the baggage car is the Jew York and 
Chicago ‘.mited. Its cars are alwavs kept together in the same 
train With the ordinary passenger coach that is not true, 
and the main line of the Pennsylvania is not operated that 
way. The car must be available for various kinds of passenger 
service, especially in local traffic. We cannot have, transporta- 
tion officers tell us, certain cars assigned to certain trains. There 
are a few run between Broad Street and Jersey City that are 
made up of the same cars and come back the following day, but 
for the bulk of the local traffic we have to use any car that is 
available when a car is wanted. 

Mr. Pope:—I was not alluding to your electric lighting of 
Incal trains. I don’t think I shall live long enough to see that. 
’ Any old thing will do as far as that goes. 

CHAIRMAN Herine:—Are there any storage battery engineers 
here to-night? Is Mr. Lesley here, of the Storage Battery Com- 
pany? Perhaps Mr. Lesley will tell us about storage batteries. 

Mr. LesLEY:—We are probably the firmest kind of believers 
in the storage battery car lighting used since 1882. We have had 
personal contact with them since 1888. We feel that the battery 
is now a thoroughly commercial article, and used in connection 
with the Bliss system, I think that the railroad people wiil find 
them all that can be desired. Batteries used in trai. lighting 
see very much more severe service than those used in stationary 
work. I believe the railway people thoroughly understand that 
and make the necessary allowances. The batteries used for 
train lighting are especially designed for that kind of work. I 
do not know that I can say any more. I am ready to answer 
any questions. 

CHAIRMAN HeErinc:—Have you any data concerning the life 
of batteries used in this way? 

Mr. Lestey:—That depends very greatly on the use of the 
system. We have batteries in use on the Atchison Road which 
have been in four years, if not five. The boxes are not in so 
good repair as they might be. Out in Arizona the temperature 
gets up to one hundred and thirty. We all know that high tem- 
peratures are not conducive to the best service from a storage 


battery. 
CHarRMAN Hertine:—What system is used in that line you 


speak of? 
Mr. Lestey:—The consolidated system. It has been in use 


now since 1894 or 1895. 


214 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS 


CHAIRMAN Herinc:—Is that an axle-drive system? 

Mr. Lestey:—Yes; the axle-drive system with controlling 
devices, slightly modified from those originally used. They had 
two batteries in service alternately, now they have one battery. 

CHarRMAN Herinc:—Is Mr. Woodward of the Storage Bat- 
tery Company here? 

Mr. Woopwarp:—I think there is hardly anything I can say 
of interest on this subject to-night. My work is largely on the 
other side. I do not know that there is anything I can add at 
all to what Mr. Lesley says. If there is any question I could 
answer in any way I would be very glad to do it. 

Mr. Hewitt:—What kind of plate do you use now? 

Mr. Woopwarp:—For car lighting the plate used now is 
Manchester type of positive—somewhat similar to stationary 
battery work. 

Mr. Hewitt:—Has that road made any comparison between 
gas and electricity? 

Mr. Woopwarp:—That I don’t know. 

Mr. Hewitt:—What is the size of those plates? 

Mr. Woopwarp:—About seven inches square. 

Mr. Hewirt:—What is the weight? : 

Mr. Woopwarp:—That depends. There are two or three 
sets of batteries used for that equipment—nine, eleven and 
fifteen plate cells. -I do not know the exact weight. 

Dr. DupLEey:—It might be interesting to ask some of the 
storage battery people if they would be willing to guarantee the 
life of storage batteries. The duration of the battery is quite a 
large element in the cost. In our calculations the rapid deteri- 
oration of the battery was quite an important item. We will 
assume that the train arrives at Altoona and has more cars 
than passengers over the next division; then it is deemed ad- 
visable, for transportation reasons, to take a car out and it is 
put on a side track. Some of these cars may stand idle for 
quite a period of time; they may stand two weeks without 
getting into a train at all. Now, the deterioration under those 
conditions is somewhat greater than in daily service; yet it is 
an essential condition that a car must necessarily stand. The 
battery undoubtedly has been improved very greatly by the 
efforts of men here to-night, within the last five or six years. In 
our first work the life of a battery was very short. A year was 
about as good as we could get, even with an old Brush battery. 
It would be interesting to know the guarantee that could be used 
as a safe figure in estimating on the cost of car lighting where the 
battery is the element. 

Mr. Briss:—A storage battery is really not a bad thing. We 
have all been interested in the anriouncements that Mr. Edison 
has made from time to time of what heis going to do in the battery 
line. But even he is on record as having once said, when he was 
asked what he thought of the storage battery, “‘Well, the damned 
thing is wet,” That is the greatest drawback—being wet. It 


BRANCH DISCUSSIGNS. 215 


does slop a good deal, which not only produces deterioration in 
itself, but produces a good deal of deterioration in other things 
~——principally the metal work of the containing boxes in which 
the batteries are held, men’s clothing and their anatomy. But 
a storage battery, when properly installed on a car and covered 
(and the cover need not be especially tight fitting to keep down the 
little slopping that may occur) does not give very much trouble; 
but where batteries are handled, as Dr Dudley described in the 
transfer system, there is a great deal of trouble. At Jersey 
City, in the yards of the Pullman Company, where batteries 
are handled continually, the continued slopping and shaking of 
the batteries, as they are carried over tracks from the bat~- 
tery house to the cars, produces deterioration inthe battery 
which is really excessive. It seems to me it can easily be avoided. 
In some kinds of work, a storage battery gives a great deal 
longer life and a great deal more satisfaction than in others 
I presume the most severe service to which a storage battery is 
ever subjected is that on an automobile, where the radius of 
action is guaranteed at fifty miles, say, and the owner is glad 
when he gets twenty-five. The storage battery is loaded up and 
then it is drained down, which means a very severe service; and 
this, combined with the jolting and vibration, and the non- 
professional care it oft-times receives, runs up the depreciation. 

We all know that the central station battery does not depre- 
ciate, for two reasons: First, *ecause it stands still, and is not 
allowed to slop about; and secondly, it is never charged to its 
utmost capacity and never drained out clear tothe bottom. The 
same is doubtless true in car lighting. A car is not such an 
extremely rough place to carry a battery as you might suppose. 
I have seen storage batteries on railroad cars that are continually 
covered with railroad dust, where the presence of a drop of acid © 
would be instantly noticed, yet those batteries would be just as 
dry as a chip for months and months. No particular trouble 
from slopping was discernible, and if batteries are used—not as 
- straight storage batteries, being charged to the utmost and dis- 
charged to the limit, as in an automobile, but are operated in 
connection with some kind of generating system, either a steam 
engine and generator in the baggage car, or an axle system, 
provided the axle systein holds together and does its work— 
the batveries will give satisfaction and show very good life. 

I can relate one specific incident that will illustrate this point. I 
was operating a car on the Congressional Limited, the battery 
_ being furnished by-the Pullman Company. Unknown to me, 

Mr. Sloan, the electrician of the Company, found it advantageous 
one day to appropriate this battery for use on another car. Not to 
leave me in the lurch, he improvised a battery made up from 
material that had been condemned and thrown on the scrap 
heap, and put it on the car I was trying to operate. I didn’t 
notice it until about two months after, when he came to me one 
_day and said: ‘I played a trick on you not long ago, giving you 


216 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


this scrap. I have examined it and I see you have formed it up 
into pretty good shape. I shall iet it stay.” Raslroad service 
is not hard, provided the batteries are not subjected either to 
rough handling or too excessive discharging or overcharging, 
and, above all, are kept dry and clean. 

Mr. Ecrin:—I have listened to Mr. Bliss’ paper with a great 
deal of interest, particularly as four years ago I had occasion to 
investigate axle-lighting systems. At that time Mr. Bliss’ system 
had not been produced. In going into details I found that over 
90 per cent. of the trouble encountered was in the drive. In the 
early days a belt drive was used, the belt being driven on two 
flange pulleys; the theory being that the flanges would keep the 
belt on. Asa matter of fact, however, the flanges seemed to be 
the source of trouble, as the belt would ride up on the flange and 
tear. After abandoning the flange pulleys, we had better results. 

The records on the road that I was interested in investigating 
covered a period of more than a year at that time, and they had 

‘tried every conceivable form of belt without success. On every 
trip on this particular train at least one belt had to be renewed. 
The life of a belt was about six weeks or less. They carried a 
man on the train to look after the repairs, but his principal job 

_was to put on belts. The comments of Messrs. Sperry and Bliss 
on the storage battery, applied at that time, too, because some 
batteries were old and useless. It seemed that their only func- 
tion was that of acting as regulators. This particular system did 
not use boosters; it used rheostats. The field built up so 
quickly they had to have an artificial load to keep down the rise 
in voltage. I tried every conceivable way to upset the scheme 
in the electrical part. It worked perfectly except when the 
battery was cut out, when the e.m.f. jumped up to a hundred 
volts. It is evident that the battery is not the important part 
of the system. 

The most important part of the axle system is in the driving 
and this seems to have received careful attention by Mr. Bliss. 
The question of electrical efficiency of the generator storage 
battery and electrical device is of secondary importance. The 
advantage of using boosters in place of rheostats for this class of 
work will not materially change the total efficiency, because the 
total power used per car is very small, and that. is one of the 
important features—that it does not require any power at the 
time the train is being accelerated, as the generator runs free 
until the train attains a speed of eighteen to twenty-five miles 
per hour. The system of axle-lighting upon each car seems to 
me ideal, and would best fulfil the conditions of railroad service 
as each car is a complete unit and can be put into any train for 
any service. On the other hand, the locomotive is also a neces- 
sary unit to every train, so that the generator set could be made 
small enough to Le put on the locomotive and be of such character 
as to require very little attention; for example, a steam-turbine 
set. The power for the lighting of the entire train to be supplied 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. | 217 


from these generators, and batteries being installed in each 
individual car to supply the lights when the engines are being 
changed. This would place the minimum amount of work upon 
the batteries and place the electric generator and its drive in a 
much more accessible position and in a location where it would 
receive reasonable attention. With the developments of the 
steam-turbine which are now taking place, I think that this 
system should at least be given a trial. 

The mechanical conditions of driving a generator under a car 
are exceptionally severe. First, on account of the danger of the 
ballast interfering with the belts—there are a number of cases 
on record where stone ballast has been raised from the roadbed 
and located between the belt and the pulley, cutting the belt. 
Secondly, on account of the large range of temperature through 
which a train may pass on a single trip, ice forming on the pulleys 
causing the belts to break or throw off. The cost of power of 
operating the train-lighting from the axle system has been de- 
monstrated, the most important item being the cost of mainten- 
ance. The expenses could be divided into three heads: interest, 
depreciation and maintenance. The first is easily determined, and 
the second and third depend upon the care and forethought that 
have been exercised in designing apparatus destined to withstand 
so severe a condition of service. In the operation of 104 cars 
provided with the axle system, sixteen men were constantly em- 
ployed in maintaining the system. It is evident that the entire 
cost was in this maintenance account. As almost two-thirds 
of this force was employed almost continuously in maintaining 
the driving device it is evident that if a suitable drive could be 
provided, either frictional or gearing, the cost of operating such 
a system can be materially reduced. At the time I made these 
investigations, proper allowance was made for maintenance 
account, and the cost.compared very favorably with the lighting 
per car—not with the unit of candle power—which was charged at 
that time by the Pintsch Gas Company. These figures were based 
on throwing out a belt-drive and substituting a more satisfactory 
method. The question which Dr. Dudley stated, that the tail- 
road company wanted an improved light seems to me a rational 
one. The old oil light was not discarded because gas was 
cheaper, but because gas gave a better light, and the Pintsch gas 
was substituted for the same reason. i 

The electric lighting of cars meets all the conditions from a 
lighting standpoint required by the railroad company. First, it 
is not affected by air current or changes in temperature; it can 
be placed in any location desired, and the current can be used. 
for heating purposes or for motors. It is impossible to install 
gas berth-lights on account of the dangers of fire, and it is 
impracticable to operate fans with gas motors. The berth-light 
is an added luxury, and is much appreciated. Persons would 
rather ride on a train lighted by electricity than one lighted by 
gas. The question of actual cost of lighting would not deter a 


218 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


railroad company from using an electrical system, provided they 
could place some reasonable value on the cost of maintenance. 

The cost of maintenance of an axle-lighting system has been 
very heavy, but the railroad company has had no means of 
properly determining this as the manufacturer has generally 
maintained his own system. Considering that this system 1s 
twenty years old and until recently not fully developed, one 

cannot blame the railroad companies for moving cautiously. It 
is particularly gratifying this evening to see how far and how 
completely the mechanical features have been worked out, and I 
hope Mr. Bliss will have the success he deserves. 

Dr. DupLey:—There is one point I don’t want to get away 
from, since we have storage battery people here. Is it, or is it 
not true that a storage battery, standing and not in use, loses 
current at such a rate that if it stands a considerable length of 
time the battery will deteriorate? Of all the passenger coaches 
that a railroad has, almost all of them are in maximum service for 
about seven or eight months in the year; three or four months 
in the year the equipment is not all used. What are we going to 
po with the batteries in those cars? With the gas system, if 
you leave the gas out a little bit you put more gas in and your 
system undergoes no deterioration, but if your battery is badly 
sulphated where are you? 

CHAIRMAN Herinc:—Will Mr. Lesley favor us with an 
answer? 

Mr. LesLey:—Allowing that a battery is in reasonably good 
condition—and the batteries used in the axle-lighting system, as 
they are to-day, would come in in practically a charged state— 
it can stand a month without any serious amount of sulphating. 
lf a battery is in the house longer than that, I would consider 
it advisable to have it charged at the end of the month, and I 
should think that could be easily arranged for in the shops. It 
is not absolutely essential, but advisable. 

CHAIRMAN Herinc:—Mr. Reed has had considerable experi- 
ence with batteries; perhaps he will favor us with some remarks. 

Mr. Reep:—I have never had any experience with train 
lighting. I have done some experimenting with the storage 
battery for many years. , I have never vet run across a battery 
like that described by Mr. Lesley, which is all that could be 
desired. In fact, my experience with batteries has been just 
the reverse. If I could find a battery of that kind, I should be 
strongly tempted to try to infringe on it without having to pay 
damages. My opinion is that the point which Dr. Dudley makes 
in regard to batteries standing is pretty well taken. I think 
that a battery treated in that way does deteriorate. I gave up 
the idea some years ago of ever being able to get a battery 
that was all that couid be desired, and since then I have been 
trying to get a battery that was very cheap so that it could 
be renewed at very little cost, paying less attention to trying to 
make it last a very long time; but so far I have not succeeded in 
getting a battery that inspired confidence. 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 219 


CHAIRMAN HERING:—Mr. Eglin promised to give us an abstract 
of the discussion held in New York. 

Mr. EGLin:—Mr. Chairman, the discussion this evening has 
covered most of the points that were brought out at the New 
York meeting, and I feel a repetition of them would not be of 
special interest, but there was one point brought out at the 
New York meeting which has not been touched on, which was 
that the best solution for the train lighting was to operate elec- 
trically the entire road; that is, if you are going to supply the 
lights electrically, why not operate the road electrically? This 
is a question for the future to discuss, and I did not think it be- 
longs in this discussion. : 

Mr. Buiss:—Of course electrifying the road and obtaining 
the light directly appeals to everybody as the ultimate solu- 
tion; but if we gave a light that in any way compared with that 
of Brooklyn Rapid Transit, we would be requested to remove our 
apparatus. 

Mr. SpALDING:—I understand that on some railroads they use 
electric headlights. I think there is a unit of some kind placed on 
the engine back of the headlight, and the power is obtained from 
the engine itself. 

CuHarrmMan Herinc:—Can you say anything about that, Dr. 
Dudley? ‘ 

Dr. DupLEey:—I never experimented except on lines east of 
Pittsburg. In many places the road is so crooked that if we had 
a million candle headlight it would not do any good, and so a 
headlight is regarded as a good sort of thing on a straight but not 
good on a crooked road that has many cuts. I have never seen 
them tried. 

Mr. Kiumpp:—The light spoken of by Mr. Spalding is a small 
generator and steam-turbine placed in front of the smokestack; 
the whole apparatus is not more than fifteen inches square. 

Dr. DupLeEY:—Where is that used? 

Mr. Kitumpp:—On several roads. It was written about in 
several papers lately. I do not know whether it is in the experi- 
mental stage or on the market now. 

There being no further discussion, the meeting adjourned. 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS: PITTSBURG. 


i) 
bo 
Oo 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


Discussion AT PirtsBurG, Marcu 12, 1903. 

Programme :— 

The meeting was called to order by Chairman P. M Lincoln, 
at 8.15 P. M. 

The following papers were presented: 

1. ‘‘ An Electric Car Lighting System,” by Wm. L. Bliss. 
abstracted by N. W. Storer. 

2. ‘‘ Axle Lighting,’’ by Elmer A. Sperry, abstracted by B. 
B. Abry. 

3. ‘ An Axle Light System of Train Lighting,” by Arthur 
J. Farnsworth, abstracted by S. M. Kier. 

4. Resumé of New York Discussion, by Miles Walker. 


The discussion was participated in by Messrs. P. M. Linco!n, 
J..S, Peck; Ne W2 Storer, A. H.> Masters BoB? Abryay aM 
Campbell. 

Mr. Lincotn'—I note that Mr. Walker, in classifying the 
papers discussed at the New York meeting, divides them in two 
classes: Class 1, did not know anything about it; and Class 2, 
knew all about it but said nothing. I suppose if we were classi- 
fied we would come under the first class. 

Mr. Pecx:—I think, after striving to follow through the dia- 
grams of connection before us, we feel with Mr. Lockwood that 
no complicated system can live. I understand that Mr. Storer 
has a system which is extremely simple as compared with these, 
and if Mr. Storer is not in the hands of his attorneys we should 
like to have him explain his system.° 

Mr. STorER:—It is a great surprise to me to be called on in 
this way, but as my attorneys have not commanded silence I 
will give a brief description of a generator which I once designed 
for a train lighting system. It is, of course. in common with all 
the other systems that have been presented to-night, much 
better than anything else that was ever proposed. 

The systems which have been presented here to-night remind 
me very strongly of the time I attempted to study out the con- 
nections of a well-known multiple-unit control system. There 
was such a maze of wires, connections, solenoids, etc., as almost 
to make one’s head swim. This, of course, does not necessarily 
mean that the system would not work, for there is no doubt that 
a system, whether of control or train lighting, may work satis- 
factorily and still be extremely complicated; but it is an un- 
doubted fact that the more parts there are in any system, the 
more likelihood there is for that system giving trouble. The great 
criticism which everyone must make on the systems which have 
been presented to-night is that they are very complicated. In 
this as in other branches of electrical engineering every endeavor 
should be made to simplify and reduce the number of parts. 

The generator which I designed some eight or ten years ago 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS: PITTSB URG. 221 


was a small 4-pole machine, designed to give a constant current 
of approximately 20 amperes and an electromotive force of 
approximately 50 volts over a wide range of speed, correspond- 
ing to a train speed of from 20 to 60 or more miles per hour. It 
was designed for gearing direct to the axle like an ordinary street 
car motor. The regulation of the machine was obtained in the 
same way as the regulation of the Westinghouse direct current 
arc generator system, which was introduced at that time. The 
field was separately excited and the armature reaction was so 
proportioned as to keep the current practically constant over a 
wide range of voltage, if run at constant speed; or a constant 
current over a wide range of speed if run at a constant voltage. 
The machine being connected to the battery terminals, the 
voltage was practically fixed and therefore the speed might 
change from the minimum at which the machine will give the 
battery voltage, to the maximum speed that the car will run, 
and the generator would still deliver 20 amperes. I may say 
that this system was never entirely worked out, as it was not 
thought advisable by the company with which I was connected 
to go into the train lighting business, at that time Consequently 
the matter was dropped. But the advantages which I could 
claim for this system are the inherent regulation of the generator, 
which I believe would obviate much the larger part of the auto- 
matic apparatus which is found in the systems which have thus 
far been presented. The fluctuations in voltage would certainly 
be very much reduced, as from the time the generator is cut into 
the circuit until it is cut out again, it will deliver a constant 
current. The minimum voltage would therefore be supplied 
when the generator is cut out of circuit and the battery deliver- 
ing the entire current required. The maximum voltage on the 
lamps would be obtained when the load is reduced to a single 
lamp, and the remainder of the current used in charging the 
battery. 

In any well-regulated system, the generator should not furnish 
much more current than that required for operating the lamps, 
motors, etc., which form its load. The battery should be 
charged, for the most part, at times when the load is off. Con- 
sequently, there need not be such wide fluctuations of voltage on 
the system, and there would be no use for the “* bucker ” or the 
series resistance. __ 

The system described by Mr. Bliss is admirably worked out 
and will doubtless give excellent results over the range of speed 
for which it is adjusted, but there is too much apparatus. The 
system employing the series resistance must be placed in much 
the same class. Until Mr. Sperry’s system is placed in operation, 
we must take his word for it that it is a perfect system. Per- 
sonally, the lighting of the train from a single generating unit 
placed in the baggage car or on the locomotive appeals to me 
most strongly. The system is extremely simple and the appar- 
atus is at all times under the control of an expert attendant. All 


o 


222 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS: PITTSBURG. 

of the apparatus but the storage battery is removed from the 
car; the battery must be used to supply the lights when the car 
is cut off from the generator. 

Mr. Masters:—I am familiar with the system of car lighting 
adopted several years ago by the Consolidated Car Heating Com- 
pany, of Albany, N. Y. No mention has been made of it, to= 
night, possibly for commercial reasons. At that time this com- 
pany had cars in operation between Albany and Montreal, on 
which they were experimenting. They took the same stand 
that has been taken here,—that complicated systems are not at 
all likely to succeed, and less likely from a commercial point of 
view than from any other. 

There seem to be diverse opinions regarding automatic quali- 
fications for the successful operation of an axle system. Viewing 
it commercially, I understand the Consolidated Car Heating 
Company to maintain that an equipment costing more than $700 
or $800 would be objectionable to railway interests. They 
stated that so far as they were able to observe, the road for 
which they were then experimenting would approve any system 
that would not cost more than $800 per equipment. Compli- 
cated systems, involving many automatic principles, are, it seems 
to me, so expensive that they would probably not be considered 
at all. 

Speaking about storage batteries, I think the same remarks 
hold good, not only in the equipment but in the maintenance of 
these batteries. Many arguments are advanced by the electric 
storage battery companies that their batteries are giving good 
life. My experience with storage batteries in the past has been 
that they do very well at start, but when you work them for 
transportation purposes, troubles arise which runs up the ex- 
pense of maintenance very materially. 

Mr. Asry:—I have been very much interested in the discus- 
sion of train lighting this evening. A comparison of the axle- 
lighting system with other systems and the disadvantages, 
particularly of the axle-lighting system, recall to my mind some 
difficulties we had to overcome in the measurement of speeds 
in some tests that we made on the Union Traction Company of 
Indiana. For measuring the speed, we employed a magneto- 
generator which was driven from the axle of the car by means of 
a belt. The magneto was first placed on a small platform, 
bolted to and extending directly out under the car from the yoke 
of the truck. This inclined the belt at about an angle of 45°. 
The results obtained were not very satisfactory. Finally, we 
suspended the magneto on a bracket still bolted to the yoke, but 
so arranged that the travel of the belt was nearly parallel to the 
track. We calculated the size of pulley needed on the car axle 
to give the required speed of the generator; this pulley was 
turned with a small flange and with a face slightly wider than the 
width of the belt, which was cne inch. Upon making a trial run 
under these conditions, we soon found difficulty in keeping the 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS: PITTSBURG. 223 


belt in place, and, as Mr. Walker said, there were belts all along 
the line. We found there was a latera: play in the car axle of 
two inches, more or less, besides the vertica! motion due to irregu- 
larities in the track. The belt would not stay on. There was a 
continual tendency to climb over the flange of the pulley when- 
ever the side play of the car axle became excessive. 

We also had trouble at first with moisture softening the cement 
and the belt coming apart. We overcame the difficulty incident 
to the belt jumping by having a new pulley made with a flange 
about an inch in height, and the face of the pulley about twice as 
wide as the belt itself. After properly aligning the apparatus 
and mounting the magneto on springs, we finally obtained fairly 
satisfactory results. 

The simple experiment of measuring speed on an interurban 
car seems to me to point very conclusively to the disadvantages 
of an axle-lighting system. I have observed on three of the 
principal roads of the West, the C. M. & St. P., the C. B. & Q., 
and I think the Santa Fe, the use of the system which is employed 
on the Pennsylvania Limited trains: viz., a generating unit with 
auxiliary batteries. In view of this fact, that system certainly 
must have some good features. 

Mr. CAMPBELL :—In general, it might be a good deal better to 
have a separate engine and generator in the baggage car, but 
what about lines where you have only a few cars electrically 
lighted? It would be out of the question to equip every baggage 
car or every passenger engine with a generator outfit of a capacity 
large enough to supply any combination of cars that may be 
attached to a train, for the sake of a few cars electrically lighted 
that may from time to time be used. Axle lighting is also 
preferable for a class of cars known as private cars or official 
cars, of which there are notafew. These frequently leave the 
home road-and therefore should be self-contained, as it is not 
likely that all lighting systems would have the same voltage. On 
one road running out of Pittsburg they have the system discussed 
in Mr. Farnsworth’s paper and the generator works very well. 
We had trouble for awhile with belts not staying on; they would 
get loose and slippy. That trouble was very largely overcome 
by changing the belt from a flat one to a V-shaped, short lengths 
of V-shaped pieces of leather are fastened to a flat belt and fit 
into V-shaped pulleys. These belts work well. We have had 
them last as long as a year, which seems a reasonable time. We 
found one trouble with the system; the adjustment of the main 
solenoid seemed somewhat delicate, but after being once set 
would maintain a nearly constant current. On cars running 
from 20 to 70 miles per hour, I have seen the current remain at 
about 32 amperes. The voltage does not remain altogether con- 
stant; it appears to vary more than 5 per cent. The resistance 
marked ‘E,” in the diagram, seems to be too limited.in extent, 
as a very short motion of the regulator cuts al! this resistance 
in or out, with a consequent noticeable change in the lights. 


224 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS: SCHENECTADY. 


Mr. Lrxcotn:—In discussing one paper, the question of 
expense was referred to, it being said that these systems would. 
be too expensive. It seems to me that the public demands that 
trains should be electrically lighted, especially well-equipped 
trains. The fact that these complicated systems outlined here 
on the board have not only been proposed, but have been actually 
used, is the very best evidence that expense is not being con- 
sidered. 


BY 


Discussion AT SCHENECTADY, Marcu 17, 1903. 
Programme :— 

The meeting was called to order by Past-President C. P. Stein- 
metz. The report of the Committee on Organization was read 
and adopted, after which the following papers were presented: 

1. ‘‘ Axle Lighting,” by E. A. Sperry, read by H. G. Reist. 

2. “ An Electric Car Lighting System,” by W. L. Bliss, read 
by W. I. Slichter. 

3. ‘An Axle Light System of Train Lighting,” by A. J. 
Farnsworth, read by A. H. Armstrong. 

4. ‘“ Electric Train Lighting Problems,’ by George D. Shep- 
ardson, read by R. Neil Williams. 

Prominent part was taken in the discussion by W. I. Slichter, 
A. H. Armstrong and C. P. Steinmetz. A communication after 
adjournment was submitted by R. Neil Williams. 

Mr. A. H. Armstrone:—In the attempt to perfect the car 
lighting system, I believe many of the inventors have lost sight 
of the broad issue involved. I think that President Scott has 
touched on the right thing in proposing the substitution of 
electric locomotives for steam locomotives. By doing this the 
train lig’iting question is solved to the satisfaction of everybody. 
Many of our larger steam railway systems are seriously con- 
sidering the electrical equipment of their lines, for local service at 
least, and in the east this local service extends over a considerable 
distance. In fact, the eastern travel consists of a series of local 
runs, and when once the question is taken up, it will not be too 
much to expect that the limits of local travel of neighboring 
cities should overlap and form a continuous electrified railway 
system, say from New York to Albany or from Jersey City to 
Washington. 

_ All the papers read to-night advocate the car unit system 
involving some form of axle-driven generator and making each 
car independent of the composition of the rest of the train. This 
pre-supposes that the train will be composed of mixed Pullman 
and day coaches, the latter not being necessarily lighted elec- 
trically. Such trains, however, are more or less local in character 
and will be taken care of within a few years electrically, both for 
lighting and motive power. The through trains composed of 
similar units could either be lighted from third-rail shoes bearing 


- 


SALTER 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS: SCHENECTADY. 225 


on third rail provided for local service, although hauled by 
steam locomotive, or else by a steam-driven unit in the baggage 
car or on the locomotive. This system is simpler and gets rid of» 
the many complicated, even if ingenious, mechanisms. proposed 
with the axle driven independent units. 

.To succeed in railway work a piece of apparatus should be 
capable of standing considerable abuse, infrequent attention, 
and should consist of as simple and few parts as possible. A 
steam turbine driven generator feeding a floating storage battery 
installed on each car sufficient to give light during times at 
station when train is broken up for a short time is much simpler, 
easicr to take care of and possesses more promise of ultimate suc- 
cess than the complicated individual systems proposed. More- 
over, it is in line with the future progress of steam railroad 
systems which are bound ultimately to equip their local traffic 
electrically, at least in the east. 

Mr. C. P. Ste1nmetz:—While the papers read have been very 
interesting, I think it is to be regretted that no accurate informa- 
tion has been given about the extent to which such systems of 
axle lighting are being used: nor have we heard how many 
installations there are of a system of a separate constant speed 
engine driving a generator in the baggage car or on the loco- 
motive. The phrasing of some of the papers rather leads to the 
suspicion that the systems described are somewhat experimental 
and have not yet stood the test of long-continued service. 

After all, the amount of power required for train lighting is 
so insignificant compared with the power of the locomotive, that 
efficiency appears of very secondary consideration compared 
with simplicity and reliability. Any system starting from a 
source of power of such variable speed as that of the car axle 
necessarily requires a large amount of controlling apparatus to 
connect and disconnect generator storage batteries, etc., and can 
not possibly be as reliable as a plain constant speed, constant 
potential engine-driven generator. 

I was very much pleased to find from the discussion that the 
only objection which fourteen years’ experience had brought 
out against an old friend of mine, the Eickemeyer dynamo driven 
by a Brotherhood engine, was its large steam consumption. 
When a reciprocating steam engine running at 800 r.p.m., is left 
to the tender mercies of a baggage man for fourteen years and 
develops no other fault than high steam consumption «it cer- 
tainly represents a remarkable performance. Regarding all 
these here explained ingenious axle-driven systems, I ques- 
tion what would be left of any of them in practical operation under 
similar conditions. 

' W.I. Sticuter —In the system proposed by Mr. Bliss the 
voltage of the generator is kept constant at a greatly increased 
speed by interposing a counter e.m.f. in the shunt field circuit. 
Thus, we may have three times full load speed, full load. voltage, 
which would mean one-third field excitation, and there would be 


226 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS: SCHENECTADY. 


4 


a great tendency to spark. To obviate this, the dynamo must 
be either very large for its purpose or of a special design. 

The low voltages used in all these systems is no doubt an aid 
to the long life of the lamps, since a low voltage lamp of a given 
candlepower can stand a greater variation in voltage in per cent. 
than a high voltage lamp. 

On a general application of these systems, we know that the 
direct connected unit is used on one of the trains of the New York 
Central and the Gould system, in which an axle-driven generator 
charges alternately two sets of storage batteries, one of which is 
connected to the lamps while the other is being charged. 


(CoMMUNICATION AFTER ADJOURNMENT OF SCHENECTADY MEET- 
Inc, BY R. Nery WILLIAMS. 

In reading the papers on Railroad Train Lighting, discussed 
at the March meeting of the InstiTuTE, I notice that it seems to 
be generally taken for a foregone conclusion that no system of 
electric train lighting is possible that does not entail the use of a 
storage battery. The experience we have had in the past with 
stationery storage batteries has not been such as to warrant our 
making them the all-essential feature of a train lighting system, 
where the continual shaking and jolting must shorten the life and 
reduce the reliability of the most up-to-date battery. 

It is also difficult to see what advantages axle-lighting systems 
have over the large unit steam dynamo or preferably turbine- 
dynamo on the locomotive, where it properly belongs. In the 
former case we have as many units as the train has cars and we 
have all kinds of difficulties in transmitting our power from 
locomotive through drawbars to axles and from these to the 
dynamos, where further complicated devices are required to 
regulate voltage or speed under widely varying conditions. A 
simple flexible connection from car to car is certainly cheaper 
and gives the right power whether train is standing or moving. 

Furthermore, the jar from a comparatively small collision 
would probably be sufficient to demolish any storage battery, 
whereas, even though all the cars should be completely demolished 
and only the locomotive left intact, or partly intact, it would be 

‘ easy to rig up temporary lights from the engine. The following 
arrangement contains nothing new in the way of engineering 
features, but at the same time has not been brought out, as far 
as I know, as a possible and very simple solution of the problem 
and one which avoids entirely the use of storage battery. 

This would be simply to have the cars wired as they are on 
any electric railroad, but without regulating devices of any 
description. The tracks would be used for return circuit and 
power led into the car and from car to car by a flexible coupling, 
energy being supplied from turbine-dynamo set on the loco- 
motive. This would give light at all times except when the 
locomotive was uncoupled from the train, which, though occur- 
ring frequently is never at any other place than where there are 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS: SCHENECTADY. 227 


stations or at least switches and sidings of some kind. If, wher- 
ever there is a switch or siding of any kind, in fact at any place 
where there could ever be any object in the locomotive being 
uncoupled, a third rail were provided of very modest dimensions 
and each locomotive as well as each car were provided with a 
simple shoe, then whether coupled or uncoupled the engine 
would itself feed the third rail and from it the cars would receive 
their energy at the same voltage they had been receiving and 
under exactly the same conditions. There is no apparent reason 
why cars should be lighted until sometime before the trains are 
ready to start and then there will always be a locomotive in the 
neighborhood. Of course, with Pullman sleepers which take on 
their passengers in the early part of the evening long before the 
train is ready to leave, it might occur that there was no locomo- 
tive in the vicinity. In this case.itamight be necessary to have a 
stationary storage battery at such points floating on the third 
rail, but this would be the exceptional case, and even here the 
storage battery would not be jolted to pieces. The expense of 
this third rail, even if it were laid at every switch and siding from 
New York to San Francisco, and of the one shoe per car and 
locomotive, would be extremely small, compared with the ex- 
pense of the storage battery and the divers regulating devices 
required, if we were to attempt to light all our cars by the axle 
system. 

At this stage of engineering advance in America, it is a poor 
showing that the railroads make with their flickering gas light 
and continually re-occurring fires, and it would seem as though 
the time were ripe for revolutionary changes. 


; A oe ah re 
ee el 
a 


A paper read at the 174th Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical hngineers, 
New York, March 27, 1903. 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION LINES. 


INTRODUCTION BY PRESIDENT SCOTT. 


The invention of the steam engine underlies the progress of the 
nineteenth century. Cheap and abundant mechanical power 
has been a prime factor in that advancement. The railroad, the 
steamship, the machine shop, the factory, the rolling mill, the 
modern printing press and the mine hoist are developments which 
are based upon the steam engine. If the coal supply be shut off, 
the whole mechanism of our modern civilization comes to a 
standstill. There have been two lines of development; one of the 
engine for producing power, the other of machines and appliances 
for utilizing power. On the one hand, the development has 
been toward engines of large output to secure highest efficiency, 
and on the other hand, its load of innumerable tools and machines ~ 
has sprung up demanding power often in small units and 
sometimes at varying speed. The development of the engine and 
_ of the machines for utilizing power has been much more rapid 
than that of the appliances for transmitting and distributing 
power from the source to the consumption. All of the various 
agencies; shafting, belting and various types of mechanical, 
pneumatic and hydraulic transmission—the primitive methods 
of transmission—found their ready limitations in efficiency, in 
capacity or in distance. It was because it supplied this missing 
link so effectively that the electric motor and electric power 
distribution has had so phenomenal a development. Electric 
distribution is so far superior in point of flexibility, efficiency and 
effectiveness to other methods that it has superseded them 
except in the most limited fields. But the transcendent charac- 
teristic of electric transmission ‘s its application to long dis- 

229 


230 SCOTT: HIGH-TENSION LINES. _[March 27 


tances. Compared with preceding methods of transmission 
electric distances are infinite. 

Electric transmission in its unique and infinitesimal form has 
replaced the speaking tube by the telephone, and has given new 
possibilities to human speech. So, also, it has given to power 
development—the vital element in the industrial and commercial 
progress of the past century—possibilities of anew order. It not 
only transmits and conveys, but it has made available a new 
source of power—not beds of stored energy, but waterfalls of 
wasting energy. 

The relation between distance and voltage is well known. The 
past ten or a dozen years have witnessed a steady advance in the 
voltages in commercial use. Additions from the experimental 
and undeveloped regions of high voltage have been conquered 
and brought into the domain of commercial service. The line 
between that which is practicable, and that which is indefinite 
and uncertain, has continually advanced. Each increase in 
voltage introduces new problems, reveals new classes of phe- 
nomena and presents difficulties more complex. Problems 
in construction and design and installation of apparatus; 
problems in insulators and line construction; problems in switch- 
ing, controlling and measuring current; problems in lightning and 
static’ protection have been presented and solved with each 
advance in voltage. It has not been so many years since 100 or 
200 k.w. to be transmitted 20 or 30 miles at 10,000 volts, was 
considered a somewhat remarkable undertaking. 

The changes from the conditions of ten years ago to those of 
to-day have been, step by step, along the lines of scientific and 
engineering progress. The advance has been an evolution. The 
problems in transmission have been engineering problems, they 
have been far-reaching problems. Electrica) theory, mathe: 
matical formule, the brilliant inventor, the skillful designer, the 
careful experimenter and the intelligent operator have all con: 
tributed to the continuous solution. Prime factors in the 
advance have been experience and the ability to interpret 
experience and make it the foundation for further advance. The 
purpose of the Transmission Committee of THe AMERICAN 
InstTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS is to utilize experienc-. 
Mistakes have been made; they have been overcome. Experi. 
ence has demonstrated what is successful. There is no credit to 
the electrical engineering profession in reducing the efficiency of 
electrical enterprises by repeating mistakes. The responsibilities 


1903.] SCOTT: HIGH-TENSION LINES. 231 


which rest upon the profession call for the most efficient coépera- 
tion for the elimination of inadequate methods: We must crys- 
tallize through present practice that which should be made 
standard practice. We must make definite the steps already 
taken and lay the foundation for the future. 

The progress in high tension transmission is indicated by the 
transformer statistics of one of the large manufacturing com- 
panies. Transformers for 10,000 volts and over have been built 
during the past twelve years. Units recently built have three 
times the output of the largest transformers of five years ago. 
The aggregate output has been over a million kilowatts. The 
average kilowatt output per month during the past year is equal 
to the total output during the first seven years. The output of 
the past two years has exceeded that of the preceding ten years. 

I repeat that the transmission problem is an engineering prob- 
lem. Itisnotasimple one. It is difficult; it is comprehensive; 
it is not a one man problem to be solved by some individual with 
apeculiarscheme. It is a problem for the engineering profession. 
It is one to which the engineers who operate plants, who use 
apparatus as well as those who invent and design must con- 
tribute. Wemustcodperate. After we have helped one another 
all we can there are still problems which will tax the most able 
and most active. 


Pee 8 en 


A paper read at the 174th Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engmeers, New York, 
March 27, 1903. 


Se Se eee eee 


MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS OF A PROPOSED 
STANDARD INSULATOR PIN. 


BY RALPH D. MERSHON. 


A mathematical consideration of the fibre 
stresses in wooden insulator pins and a recom- 
mendation as regards standard dimensions 


and methods of construction. 

At present no general standard exists in the matter of Insulator 
Pins. As aresult, there is often confusion and dissatisfaction in 
ordering and obtaining pins. This discussion of a proposed 
standard pin is intended to lead up to a general specification 
covering wooden pins, and, so far as it may, metal ones. 

Theory.—The expression for the extreme fibre stress at any 
point of a beam of circular section fixed at one end and loaded at 


the other, as in Fig. 1 is 


S 
SS 
SS 
S 

S 
S 
S 


234 MERSHON: STANDARD INSULATOR PIN. [March 27 


where (assuming inches and pounds as our units) P is the pull or 
weight in pounds; x is the distance in inches from the point of 
application of P to any point a of the beam; dis the diameter in 
inches at the point a; s is the extreme fibre stress in pounds per 
square inch, 7.e., s is the stress on the extreme fibres at che top 
and bottom of the beam at the point a. 

This equation shows that for a given pull P the fibre stress at 
any point a at a distance x from the point of application of P 
varics directly as x and inverselv as the cube of d. It is possible, 
therefore, to design a beam of circular section whose diameter in 
passing from the point of application of P to the point of support 
shall vary in such a way that s will have the same value all the 
way along the beam. Such a beam will be of uniform strength 
throughout its length. The value which, in such a beam, d must 
have at any point distant x from the outer end may be found by 
assuming s and P constant in Equation (1) and solving for d in 
terms of x. This gives 


det (ieee) seniors ree: 
= (caoers) can > 


where K is a constant whose value must be determined frora the 
extreme fibre stress allowable with a given pull P. Equation (2) 
shows that in order to have the beam of uniform strength through- 
out its length, its diameter must vary as the cube root of the 
distance from the point of application of its load. 

An insulator pin is the case of a beam of circular section fixed 
at one end and with a load (any side pull which may come upon 
it) applied at or near the otherend. There is no object in having 
an insulator pin any stronger at any one point than at another. 
It should, therefore, in its capacity as a beam, be tapered as 
nearly as practicable in such a way that s will be constant 
throughout; that is, so that equation (2) will apply to it. 

The point where pins usually break, their weakest point, is 
just at the cross-arm. The wooden pin most generally in use is 
one having a diameter of about 14 inches in the cross-arm and a 
length such that the wire is from 5 to 6 inches from the cross-arm. 
Let us obtain the value of K in (2) on the assumption of d = 14” 
and x = 5”. This gives the value of K as .877, so that, substi- 
tuting, (2) becomes 


d = 87728 Pees 


1903.] MERSHON: STANDARD INSULATOR PIN. 235 


From (3) we may find the diameter required at any point in 
any length of pin, the pin to be of uniform strength throughout. 
Substituting various value of x we have the following: 


x (inches) d (inches) 
i 184d 
2 1.106 
3 1. 263 
4 1.395 
5 a5) 

6 1-592 
ia 1.678 
8 1.754 
9 1.825 
10 1.888 
11 1.95 
13 2.06 
15 Bk 
17 D0. 
19 | 2.34 
21 | 2.42 


This table shows that for a pin having upon it a pull one inch 
above the cross arm, the diameter at the cross-arm must be .877 
inches; that one having a pull upon it 10 inches above the cross- 
arm must have a diameter at the cross-arm of 1.88 inches, etc. 


Fig. 2 is a sketch of such a theoretieal pin drawn by platting the 
above values to a scale one-quarter of full size. Fig. 2 repre- 
sents all sizes of pins up to and including one the pull upon 
which is applied 21 inches above the cross-arm. That is, if we 
want a theoretical 6 inch pin we must cut 6 inches off the end of 
Fig. 2 and use that; for a 10 inch pin we must cut off 10 inches, 


etc. 


236 MERSHON: STANDARD INSULATOR PIN. [March 27 


The practical pin must be a modification of the theoretical pin. 
The end must be square and a portion of the smallend must bs 
threaded. The pin must also have a shoulder just above the 
cross-arm. It will be noticed that,except near the end, the sides 
of the theoretical pin, are practically straight. It will suffice, 
therefore, if in designing a pin we fix the diameter at the lower 
end of the thread portion and the diameter just above the 
cross-arm and make the contour between these points a straight 
line. 

Threaded End.—It is proposed to make the diameter of the 
small end of the pin 1 inch; the length of the threaded portion 
24 inches; and the diameter at the lower end of the threaded 
portion 1.25 inches,so that the threaded portion will taper from 
1.25 inches to 1 inch in a length of 24 inches. The threaded 
portion of the insulator should have the same dimensions and 
taper as that of the pin. 

Shoulder.—It is proposed to make the shoulder 3/16 inch on 
all pins. That is, the diameter of the pin just above the cross- 
arm will be # inch greater than the nominal diameter of that 
portion of the pin in the cross-arm; it is proposed to carry this 
diameter } inch above the cross-arm before tapering the pin. 

Dimensions in Cross-Arm.—lIt is proposed to make the diame- 
ter of that portion of the pin in the cross-arm, just below the 
shoulder, 1/32 inch less than the diameter of the hole in the cross- 
arm and at the lower end of the pin 1/16 less than the diameter 
of the hole in the cross-arm. It is proposed, also, to designate 
this portion of the pin as having a nominal diameter equal to that 
of the hole in the cross-arm into which the pin fits. Therefore, 
that portion of a pin which is to fit a 14 inch hole in a cross-arm 
will have a nominal diameter of 14 inch but will have an actual 
diameter just below the shoulder of 1-15/32 inch, and at the 
lower end of the pin of 1-7/16 inch. 


Thread.—It is proposed to use on all pins a thread having a 
pitch of } inch or 4 threads to the inch, the form of thread to be 
that shown in Fig. 3 (scale three times full size). As there shown 


1903.] MERSHON: STANDARD INSULATOR PIN. 237 


the angle between the faces of the thread is 90° and the top of the 
thread is flattencd by cutting off, from the form the thread 
would have if not flattened, one-fourth its unflattened depth. 
The form of the thread in the insulator should be the same as 
that on the pin. If this is done it will insure the bearing surface 
being always on the sides of the threads and never on the edges. 

Designation.—It is proposed to designate that portion of the 
pin above the cross-arm as the ‘“‘stem”’ of the pin. That por- 
tion in the cross-arm as the ‘‘ shank ”’ of the pin.» It is proposed 
to designate a pin by the length of its stem, 7.¢., a pin whose stem 
is 5 inches long will be designated as a ‘‘5”’ inch pin, one 6 
inches long as a ‘‘ 6 ’’ inch pin, etc. 

Dimensions of Standard Pins.—In accordance with the above 
the following table has been prepared, giving a number of sizes 
of pins, and their dimensions, which it is proposed to make 
standard. The diameter of the shank has in each case been fixed 
by making it approximately equal to (slightly larger than) the 
diameter of the theoretical pin corresponding to the length of the 
stem of the pin in question. The headings of the columns of the 
table refer to the lettering of Fig. 4. 


4 


<---F---> 


1 i) 


hap ea eee es oe Be ee eee he eee 
FIG. 4. 
Size of C Cc 5 
Pineal BN Actual Dip oa Cheer Ces 
inal ual 

bie 43” 4 14” 143” 175" 1}” ne f" 13” 23" 
rae 4} 12 | 132 | 145 a a S 23 ez 
a) iB = ii 
9 Pee ie eather ah Rb 
iS) o © ie) 

n mn © 
erie ste oe ith. hiss | 8. | gt | 28 |. 8 
2 G wi a 
(o a — os! a 
14g 4p) ee ys [ee | S |S |S f+ 8 
2) © o Oo 
Pier eee | 2 |e le | ar] g 
WN Ua NM DM 
49° | 18% | 5e 7] 22 1 2H -| Oye 21 


A paper read at the 174th Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
March 27, 1903. 


THE TESTING OF INSULATORS. 


BY F. 0. BLACKWELL. 


A statement of the requirements for satis- 
factory insulators and recommendations as 
to apparatus and methods of carrying on in- 
sulator tests. 


An electric power transmission cannot be successful unless it 
is able to deliver uninterrupted power. 

Continuous operation, so far as the transmission line is con- 
cerned, depends largely upon the effectiveness of the insulator 
which is employed. Insulators must, therefore, be obtained 
which will not fail in service and this can only be assured by the 
thorough testing of each one that goes on the electric lines. 

The potential that can be employed safely for the transmission 
of power is now limited by the pressure the insulators will bear, as 
transformers that are reliable and not excessive in cost can 
be built for twice the voltage that any line yet constructed will 
withstand. 

As the distance over which power can be transmitted with a 
fixed cost of conductor varies with the potential, the length of 
transmission lines is to a great extent ltmited by the insulator. 

Lhe design of new and improved types of insulators is, there- 
fore, most, important, and these can only be developed by experi- 
ment with adequate testing facilities. In order to ascertain the 
value of such insulators, no method of testing can equal a practi- 
cal trial under conditions of actual service. Placing new insu- 
lators on power transmission lines in commercial operation is 
impracticable in most cases and should only be permitted after 
they have successfully withstood tests to demonstrate their 


239 


240 BLACKWELL: TESTING OF INSULATORS. [March 27 


ability to stand operating conditions. These tests should dupli- 
cate as nearly as possible the electrical and mechanical strains 
set up in the insulators under the most severe conditions that 
would ever be met with on a transmission line. 

There are certain facts which must be considered if correct 
deductions are to be made from insulator tests. For instance, 
we cannot test each insulator with a given number of volts con- 
tinuously as it would bein service. As is well known, all insulat- 
ing materials are most apt to break down on long applied electric 
stress. The prepared cloth wrappings used on the windings of 
electrical machinery will stand instantaneously two or three 
times the potential that they will carry continuously. Glass and 
porcelain are not affected by time to the same extent as organic 
materials, but we know that both kinds of insulators have been 
punctured by long continued applications of lower pressures 
than those which they have withstood in tests of short duration. 

The shape of the potential wave also has a pronounced effect 
in breaking down insulation. A wave may be either flat topped 
or peaked, so that the maximum instantaneous potential is much 
less or greater than that of a sine wave of the same square root of 
the mean square potential. We might have for the same poten- 
tial as read by the voltmeter, maximum instantaneous potentials 
which differ as much as two to one. 

In air, the maximum point of the wave determines the distance 
which the current will jump. Different generators or even the 
same generator under different conditions of load will show 
widely varying arcing distances for the same potential. 

Insulating materials being more affected by time than air, 
show in their ability to resist puncture that the average potential 
of the wave is more important than the maximum. 

It is not safe to assume the potential either by the voltmeter or 
air gap as the true potential for determining the insulating 
value, as it is somewhere between the two. Moisture in the atmos- 
phere also effects the arcing distance. In steam, a given potential 
will jump twice as far and in a fog 25 per cent. farther than under 
ordinary conditions. Of course, if the altitude is high and the 
air more rarified, the are will also jump a greater distance. 

I would like to call attention to the characteristics of the 
apparatus required for testing insulators. 

The alternators generally used for long-distance transmission 
plants give very nearly a sine wave and therefore the testing gen- - 
erator should be one which will give a sine wave under all 


1903.] BLACKWELL: TESTING OF INSULATORS. 241 


conditions. It is not sufficient to do so at full potential and no 
load, as tests are made with all degrees of excitation and with 
both leading and lagging currents. 

The armature reaction should be as small as possible, which 
means that the generator should be much larger than would 
ordinarily be thought necessary. It is also desirable to have a 
high reluctance in the magnetic circuit to secure stability when 
running with weak fields and permit of control with a reasonable 
amount of field resistance. 

There should be but one transformer used to step up to the 
highest potential required and its reactance should be as low as 
possible. A number of transformers in series is particularly 
bad, as it gives poor regulation and leads to great uncertainty 
as to the actual potential to which an insulator is being subjected. 

I have known testing sets with transformers in series and a 
generator of poor regulation to vary widely in the relation of 
the generator volts and the length of the spark gap due to change 
of wave form with different magnetic saturations of the appar- 
atus and different numbers of insulators and consequently 
various capacities on the testing circuit. The only certain way to 
determine the real potential is to have a step-down instrument 
transformer on the high potential circuit. 

Assuming that insulators are to be passed upon for a specific 
transmission plant, they should first be inspected to see that they 
are free from cracks, bubbles or pits that will impair their strength 
or in which moisttire can lodge. If of porcelain, the glaze should 
cover all the outer surfaces. The glaze is of no insulating value 
in itself, but dirt sticks to unglazed surfaces. 

Experience has shown that porcelain insulators which are not 
absolutely non-absorbent are worthless. The best porcelain 
shows a polished fracture like glass. If there is any doubt about 
the quality of the porcelain in this respect, it should be broken 
into small pieces, kept in a hot dry place for some time, weighed, 
and immersed in water fora day. When taken out of the water 
the weight should be the same asatfirst. A puncture test should 
be made by setting the insulator in a cup of salt water, filling the 
pin-hole also with water and slowly increasing the potential 
between the top and bottom until the desired test potential is 
reached or the insulator either punctures or arcs over the sur- 
face. 

If an insulator is built up of several parts, each part should be 
able to withstand a pressure greater than it will have to sustain 


242 BLACKWELL: TESTING OF INSULATORS. [March 27 


when the complete insulator is tested. If it is to be tested for 
100,000 volts and is made in two parts, each part might, for in- 
stance, be tested with 70,000 volts. The object of this is to have 
the weak parts rejected before they are assembled. A fair punc- 
ture test for an insulator is twice the potential for which it is to 
be employed, applied between the head and the interior for one 
minute. For example, the insulators for a 50,000 volt line 
should each stand 100,000 volts. As the potential from any wire 
to ground on a 5000 volt three-phase system would only be about 
30,000 volts, a 100,000 volt test gives a factor of safety of nearly 
three and one-half to one. If one branch were grounded, as 
sometimes occurs in practice, the factor of safety would be but 
two toone. A one-minute test is not so severe as a continuous 
application of an equal potential, but insulators that have 
passed this test stand up well in service. 

New types of insulators should be mounted on iron pins and 
tested both wet and dry, to determine the potentials which will 
arc over them. The dry test is of little value, as the potential 
at which the are jumps from the head to the pin can be pre- 
determined by measuring the shortest distance between them and 
referring to a curve of arcing distances in air. In a wet arcing 
test, a stream of water from a sprinkler-nozzle under a pressure 
of at least 50 pounds to the inch should be played on the insula- 
tor at anangle of say 30 degrees from the horizontal. This wilt 

be similar to the condition which exists in a rain and wind 
storm. ‘The insulator should not arc over from the wire to the 
pin at less than the potential which will exist in service between 
any two conductors. 

In no case should wooden pins be relied on for insulation, as 
their value is only temporary. All wooden pins in time become 
dirty, absorb moisture and eventually burn off unless the 
insulator is good enough to be used with an iron pin. If an 
insulator is going to fail, it is better to have it do so at the 
start and not interrupt the service by breaking down perhaps 
years afterwards. 

In addition to the electrical tests, it is well (if the insulator is of 
a type that seems to require it), to try samples for mechanical 
strength. When mounted on pins the insulator should stand a 
side strain of at least ten times the pressure exerted by the air 
on the conductor with a wind velocity of, say, 100 miles an hour. 

It should also be able to slip the conductor through the ee 
should the former break. 


1903.] BLACKWELL: TESTING OF INSULA TORS 243 


These tests are particularly desirable with built-up insulators 
in order to be certain that the parts will not separate. With 
such insulators, it would also be well to test them in tension 
along the axis of the pin, as in transmission lines crossing de- 
pressions such an upward pull is not infrequently exerted on 
the insulator. 

The above notes and suggestions are the result of the writer’s 
tests of insulators, and observations of high potential lines. 
There are many members of the Institute whose experience 
has been wider and who have doubtless given the matter much 
thought. 

It is the purpose of this paper only to touch briefly upon an 
important subject in order to open a discussion which it is hoped 
will bring out much valuable information. 


. 
' 

- 
a 


V9 


A paper read at the 174th Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
March 27, 1903. 


TRANSPOSITION AND RELATIVE LOCATION OF POWER 
AND TELEPHONE WIRES. 


BY P. M. LINCOLN. 


A consideration of the causes of elec- 
trical disturbances in telephone lines 
which parallel high-tension lines, and 
of means for reducing these disturb- 
ances. 


(1) The extraordinary sensitiveness of the telephone receiver 
makes this instrument peculiarly susceptible to electrical dis- 
turbances. One authority states that the energy used in a six- 
teen candle power incandescent lamp is sufficient to produce an 
audible sound in thirty billion receivers. The methods, therefore 
of shielding telephone wires from the inductive effects of neigh- 
boring wires become important. Particularly is this true in the 
case of a telephone line paralleling a high-tension transmission 
line, where the inductive disturbances are apt to be large, and 
uninterrupted service on the telephone line important. 

(2) The remarks and discussion in this “ Introduction to Dis- 
cussion ”’ apply particularly to telephone lines paralleling high- 
tension lines, but comments hereon need not be restricted to such 
cases. 

_ (3) There are three ways in which disturbing current in tele- 
phone circuits may be caused by the high-tension circuit. 
(1) Electromagnetic induction. 
(2) Electrostatic induction. 
(3) Leakage. 

It is the first two causes of disturbances which will claim par- 

ticular attention in the following discussion. 


245 


246 LINCOLN: TRANSPOSITION OF WIRES. [March 27 


(4) Electromagnetic induction may be briefly described as a 
transformer action. In Fig. 1 let a. b and ¢ be the conductors of 
a three-phase line, and m and n the two wires of a paralleling 
telephone circuit. a and b may then be regarded as the primary 
and m and n as the secondary of a transformer. The e.m-f. in 
circuit mn willdepend, among other things, upon the amount and 
frequency of the current in the inducing circuit. By transposing 
m and n in the well-known manner, the e.m.f.’s set up in one part 
of the telephone circuit will be neutralized by equal and opposite 
e.m.f.’s set up in other parts. Thus, the electromagnetic 
effects between m and n may be entirely neutralized by trans- 


posing the telephone wires only, regardless of whether the trans- 
mission wires are transposed or not. It may be well to note, 
however, that while the e.m.f. between the two telephone wires 
may be reduced to zero by properly transposing the telephone 
wires only, the e.m.f. between the two telephone conductors con- 
sidered as one side of a circuit and the earth as the other, can be 
reduced to zero only by transposing the power wires. This point 
is of little importance, however, as any electromagnetic e.m.f. 
between the telephone wires and ground is entirely overshadowed 
‘by the electrostatic which will be considered later. 

<5) Electrostatic effects will also take place in m, n, due to 
iransmission circuit a, b, c. If conductor a has a minus charge 


1903.] LINCOLN: TRANSPOSITION OF WIRES. 247 


for instance, it will induce a certain plus charge on m and a 
smaller plus charge on 1, on account of ’s greater distance from 
a. Ifnow the minus charge be removed from a, current will flow 
from m to n, proportional to the difference in the amounts of these 
charges. The electrostatic influence of b, being oppoite a in 
sign, will reinforce the action of a. Transposition of the tele- 
phone wires will have the effect of neutralizing this tendency of 
setting up electrostatic currents between m and 1. It is impor- 
tant to note that a system of transpositions designed to correct 
electromagnetic induction between the wires will also be correct 
for electrostatic induction. 

(6) Considering the comparative electromagnetic and electro- 
static disturbances in a section of untransposed telephone line, it 
may be interesting to observe that the first is in the nature of a 
constant potential effect and the second of a constant current 
effect. It is evident that induced electromagnetic e.mf. is 
constant as long as the inducing current is constant. As for the 
electrostatic effect, it is evident that the amounts of the induced 
charges on m and m, and therefore the electrostatically induced 
current between them, will not become appreciably reduced until 
the current flowing between m and 1 makes a difference of poten- 
tial between them appreciable, compared with the inducing differ- 
ence of potential. With telephone receivers of varying resist- 
ancs, therefore, the ampere-turns in the receiver due to electro- 
magnetic induction are practically constant, while those due to 
electrostatic induction increase with number of turns and there- 
fore the resistance of receiver. The electrostatic and electro- 
magnetic effect become roughly equal with an arrangement 
shown in Fig. 1, when a, b, cis a line carrying 50 amperes at 20,000 
volts, and the telephone circuit contains a total resistance of 
1,000 ohms, including receivers. 


Fig2 
(7) The bridged telephone has almost universally taken the 
place of the series instrument for all telephone work. The series 
telephone is particularly objectionable for use on a circuit in 
“which static induction takes place to any great extent. The 
reason for this is seen by an inspection of Fig. 2. The telephone 


248 LINCOLN: TRANSPOSITION OF WIRES. [March 27 


wire m has between A and B a plus charge induced and between 
BandCaminuscharge. There is, therefore, at the transposition 
point B a flow of current from one section of m to the other. If 
now a series telephone be placed in series with m-at B, it not only 
gets the benefit of this charging current between the two sections 
of m, but it also creates a difference of potential and, therefore, 
disturbing currents in telephones at A and C as well. 

(8) Although a proper system of transposition will prevent the 
establishment of an induced e.m.f. between the two telephone 
wires, it does not necessarily prevent the two wires from assum- 
ing a potential which differs from that of the earth. In a prop- 
erly transposed system, each telephone wire is the same average 
distance from each power wire. The potential, therefore, which 
the telephone system tends to assume from the static induction 
of the power wires is that of the neutral point of the power sys- 
tem. By neutral point is meant that point between which and 
each of the power wires the average e.m.f. is the same. Under 
normal conditions this neutral point is at ground potential. If, 
however, leakage takes place from one of the power conductors 
to ground, this neutral point will differ in potential from the 
ground and the amount of this difference becomes greater as the 
resistance of the leak becomes less. In a three-phase system, 
when the resistance of this leak becomes zero, the maximum 
difference of potential between the neutral point and ground 
occurs, and is 58 per cent. of the power circuit voltage. Ina 
20,000 volt system, for instance, there may exist a potiential of 
nearly 12 000 volts between the neutral point and ground. When 
the neutral point of the power line differs in potential from the 
ground, an electrostatic difference of potential tends to exist 
between the telephone wires and earth, and will exist if the insu- 
lation of the telephone circuit is perfect. 

(9) The amount of this electrostatic potential between the 
telephone circuit and the earth will depend upon the relative 
capacities between power and telephone lines on one hand and 
between telephone line and earth on the other. The power and 
telephone lines may be considered as opposite plates of one-con- 
denser and the telephone line and ground as opposite plates of 
another condenser. These two condensers being in series, they 
will distribute the total e.m.f. in inverse ratio to their capacities. . 
With usual construction, the capacity between telephone line and 
ground will not be less than that between telephone and power 
wires, so that the potential of the telephone wires above ground 


1903.] LINCOLN: TRANSPOSITION OF WIRES. 249 


will be equal to at least one-half the potential of the power line 
neutral point above ground. A grounded power line may thus 
cause a potential between the telephone wires and ground which 
will reach well into thousands of volts and even a bad insulator 
may cause such an e.m.f. measured by hunderds of volts. In 
this connection it is significant to note that in the great majority 
of cases the telephones become inoperative when a ground occurs 
on the power lines. Is it any wonder? How many telephone 
lines are built to stand up under a strain of even 1,000 volts, let 
alone 5,000 or 10,000 volts to ground? It is hardly necessary to 
point out the path of the disturbing currents. The first voltage 
strain comes not between telephone wires, but between the two 
wires and ground. <A break down of its insulation, either partial 
or complete, occurs at some point, and the wire to which the 
break occurs discharges to ground either partially or completely 
and the other wire must discharge through the telephones to ° 
ground. ‘ 

(10) The points, therefore, which deserve careful consideration 
in the installation and operation of a telephone line when it is to 
be operated in proximity to a high-tension transmission line are 
the following: 

(1) Insulation. 
(2) Transpositions. 
(3) Use of bridge telephones instead of series telephones. 
(4) Making static capacity of telephone wires to ground 
as great as possible, and capacity to power wires as 
small as possible. : 
(1) Insulation. 

(11) Insulation is put first as being the point of first import- 
ance. A ground on the transmission line is going to cause either 
volts or trouble on the telephone line. There is no reason why 
the telephone wires will not transmit speech properly, even if it 
does differ in potential from the ground. But to obtain this 
result, disturbing ‘currents from the line to earth must be pre- 
vented by perfect insulation. When it is realized that the poten- 
tial between the telephone line and ground may be as high as 30 
per cent. of the potential between power wires, the importance of 
insulation is better understood. By insulation, too, is meant the 
snsulation throughout the entire line. There is little use in pro- 
viding glass insulators for pole supports capable of standing a 
voltage of 15,000 or 20,000 and then, inside buildings, attaching 
the telephone wires directly to woodwork which may be damp, or 


250 LINCOLN: TRANSPOSITION OF WIRES. [March 27 


to an instrument mounted on a damp brick wall. Above all, 

there is no use in putting up a line which may be able to stand a 

test of 15,000 or 20,000 volts, and then attach to this same line 

a lightning arrester which will break down at 300 volts, as the 

standard telephone lightning arrester is expected to do. 

(12) When providing high tension insulation for the telephone 
line, the insulation of the man using it should not be forgotten. 
This insulation of the telephone user is advisable, not only to 
protect him from the induced voltage but also to protect him 
in case of a cross with the power line. The induced voltage 
is not so dangerous as its amount would indicate because the 
current is limited to that of a condenser consisting of power 
line as one plate and the telephone line as the other. It may be 
noted that the telephone insulation is subjected to high strains 
only when the power line is grounded or heavily unbalanced 
statically. This is just the time, however, that uninterrupted 
service of the telephone line is apt to be of the utmost importance. 
(2) Trans positions. ’ 

(13) The necessity of transposing the telephone line is almost 
sO apparent as not to need comment. Otherwise continuous 
disturbances will exist, due both to electromagnetic and electro- 
static effects. So far as the telephone line is concerned, transpo- 
sition of the power wires is not soimportant. An untransposed 
power line cannot induce either electrostatic or electromagnetic 
effects between two transposed telephone wires, but only between 
these two wires and ground. The amount the statically balanced 
untransposed power line can elevate the telephone wires above 
the ground potential is small compared to the effect of the power 
line when statically unbalanced, whether transposed or untrans- 
posed. If the telephone line is insulated to meet the worst con- 
ditions, it will be ample to meet the normal condition of an 
untransposed power line. 

(3) Use of Bridge Instead of Series Telephones. 

(14) This point is one which need only be mentioned. The ad- 
vantages of the bridged over the series telephone are so well 
known that the reason before mentioned for using a bridged 
instead of a series instrument is simply throwing another shovel- 
ful of earth on the grave of the series instrument. 

(4) Making Capacity of Telephone Wires to Earth as Great as 
Possible, and Telephone Wires to Power Wires as Small as 
Possible. 

(15) In Montana there is a line in operation at 50,000 volts. 


1903.] LINCOLN: TRANSPOSITION OF WIRES. 251 


Other lines are projected as high as 60,000 to 80,000 volts, and 
there is a possibility of going higher. When one realizes that with 
the usual construction as shown in Fig. 1, there may be in such 
cases an elevation in the potential of the telephone wires of 20,000 
to 25,000 volts above ground he begins to cast about for some 
method of reducing this potential. The total voltage between 
the neutral point of the power wires and ground may be con- 
sidered as taken up across two condensers, one consisting of the 
power and telephone wires, and the other the telephone wires and 
earth. To decrease the possible potential of the telephone wires 
to ground, therefore, one must either decrease the capacity of the 
power wire—telephone wire condenser, or increase the capacity 
of the telephone wire—earth condenser, or both. This may be 
accomplished by increasing the distance between power and 
telephone wires, and decreasing the distance between telephone 
wires andearth. Ifthe same supporting structure be used, there 
is a limit to which this can be carried, at which the possible 
voltage between telephone wires and earth may be still prohibi- 
tive. The capacity of the telephone wire-earth condenser, 
may be still further increased by bringing the earth to the tele- 
phone wires, instead of the telephone wires toearth. That is, one 
or more ground wires may be run in close proximity to the tele- 
phone wires, thereby increasing the capacity of the telephone 
wire-earth condenser, to almost any desired limit. By this 
means the possible potential between telephone wires and earth 
may be brought within limits where it may be taken care of with 
safety. 

(16) In conclusion, the writer asks for the freest comments on 
the foregoing remarks, particularly from those who have had ex- 
perience in operating a telephone line paralleling high-tension 
_wires. If such can agree with the writer in his remarks, he will 
be pleased to knowit. Imfthey cannot agree, he will be still more 
pleased to find out wherein he is wrong. 


A paper read at the t7gth Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, New York, March 27th, 
I9Q}. 


BURNING OF WOODEN PINS ON HIGH-TENSION 
TRANSMISSION LINES. 


BY C. C. CHESNEY. 


Facts concerning a number of examples of 
the burning of wooden insulators pins and a 
recommendation as to the use of iron pins. 


In this country it has keen almost the uniform practice in 
high-tension pole line construction to use wooden pins. The 
reason for their use has been the belief that because they were 
made of wood they strengthened the entire insulation of the pole 
line system, and were in consequence additional safeguards. 
These pins have generally been made of locust, oak or eucaliptus; 
and in order that the insulation might not deteriorate from the 
action of the weather, they have usually been treated carefully 
with hot asphaltum, paraffine or linseed oil. The temperature 
and character of the treating liquid have depended more or less 
upon the whim of the constructing or designing engineer. Al- 
though there has been no uniform method followed and although 
the materials used in the treatment have differed greatly, the 
results have been universally the same. Wood pins when used 
with glass or well vitrified porcelain insulators, have given very 
good service on potentials as high as 25,000 or 30,000 volts. 
There have been no unusual pin troubles at these voltages which 
could not readily be explained by porous or cracked insulators 
or by some peculiar climatic conditions. In my opinion, the 
success secured in the operation of the great majority of these 
lines is due to good insulation of the insulator, and the insulation 
of the pin has in reality contributed very little to that success. 
For 40,000 volts and for higher potentials, the insulators offered 
by all manufacturers do not have the same factors of satety as 

253 


~ 


254 CHESNEY: BURNING OF PINS. [March 27 


the insulators for lower voltages offered by the same manu- 
facturers. The difference is not so much in the thickness or 
in the quality of the glass or porcelain used; it is more particularly 
in the general shape of the insulator and in the dimensions of the 
insulating surfaces and petticoats. For this reason, even under 
severe local surroundings, the 10,000, 15,000, 20,000 or 30,000 
volt insulators have shown very little surface leakage and in 
consequence there has been comparatively little pin burning at 
these voltages. It is true that in localities of salt storms, of 


Riga: 


heavy sea fogs or chemical factories, there has been more or less 
pin burning without regard to the type of insulator used, or to 
the potential of the system. The writer has been informed that a 
certain plant using only 440 volts has at times great trouble from 
the burning of pins, although 10,000 volt insulators are used. 
This trouble is due entirely to the deposit on the insulators from 
a neighboring chemical factory, and as might be expected their 
period of no-burning is during the rainy season. These instances 


1903.] CHESNEY: BURNING OF PINS. 255 


however, are rare, and when the cause is apparent, the remedy is 
usually at hand. The pin burning on 40,000 and 50,000 volt 
lines is somewhat different. Eliminating all causes due to 
broken or defective insulators, the actual flow of current over the 
surfaces and through the body of the pin is probably very small. 
On the lines from which the writer has secured burned pins two 
used 11-inch Locke insulators, as shown in Figs. 1 and 2; the 
third used the Redlands type, Fig. 3. The first two lines were 
operated at a potential between 45,000 and 50,000 volts, and the id 


Gees 


third at about 33,000 volts. The pins shown were taken from 
perfect insulators and in some cases the insulators were immedi- 
ately put back on the line. Pins shown in Figs. 1 and 2 were 
made of eucaliptus and boiled in linseed oil. The line using pin 
shown in Fig. 2 also used a porcelain sleeve covering the base of 
-the pin. Fig. 3 shows the well-known Locke iron-pin with porce- 
lain base andoak thread. Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show three pins all of 
the type shown in Fig. 1. These pins were taken from the same 


256 CHESNEY: BURNING OF PINS. [March 27 


pole and occupied the relative positions as shown inthe cuts. The 
burned sides stood towards the damp winds from the ocean. Fig. 
6 shows a burned pin of the type shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 7 is the 
Locke iron-pin with porcelain base (Fig. 3) taken from a 33,006 
volt line. The striking feature is the burning of the wooden 
thread to the iron pin. The writer has been informed by the 
general superintendent of this plant that every pin that has been 
examined on this line is burned in exactly the same way, yet 


Yj 


Fic. 3. : 


there has been comparatively few punctured insulators and no 
cross-arms burned from the current leaking over the surface of _ 
the insulators. Fig. 8 shows the pin taken from the same 50,000 
volt line as those shown in Fig. 4. This pin is shown sawed in, 
sections in Fig. 9. The noticeable feature is that the burned 
section is entirely in the upper part of the pin about 13” below 
the thread. The outside surface and the centre of the pin below 
this point shows no charring. It would appear that at least in 
this instance the burned section was the point of highest resist- 
ance of the pin, and that the lower part of the pin was a good 


1903.] CHESNEY: BURNING OF PINS. 257 


«PUREE EUEBLYPTOS FIPS O71 POLE UPIBER, A440 
CAPLLA LINE BETOELA CRIN LOVER AID COPEL 
LE STOO TONAL OV IP NID E CPOSS APTOS BOT: 
5 Dar (OLN TLS POMER OO * 


BPI FOU HIG Si BE WSUS 
BOPE SS GIEME TEEN ibtd BOLT. 


Wi 


d Ai Oe Ree Pm CEPTER LIE 
phen ee ee TIED ADEE 


258 CHESNEY; BURNING OF PINS. [Murch 27 


THAEE LUCHLYPTUE PUNS OM POLE HUPIBER, 4 
COPPER LINE BETHLEN PORTH TOVER AMD y 
BUANT SIDE STOOD TOWARD DASTP VHDL CROSS Ai 

BAY COUNTIES POWER C0, ; 


UPILE PRI. & PUL FOUND WARENG IP IMSULKTOR x 
SEVETIAL PLAT IBOYE POLE THE Bikes ABOTE if 
HORTA SWRA =COPPER LIE, 

LAY COUNSIZ SE LOE 


Fic..4 


1903.] CHESNEY: BURNING OF PINS. 259 


Fig 


ns RL ci 


260 CHESNEY: BURNING OF PINS. [March 27 


enough conductor to permit the small current which leaked over 
the surface of the insulator to flow without any special generation 
of heat in that section of the pin. The reduced insulation of the 
pin and insulator was no doubt due to the dust and fog. The 
upper portion of the pin, being better protected by the insulator 
from fog and dust, had in consequence higher surface resistance. 
The dark spot shown on the right hand edges of the lower section 
of Fig. 9 is the sap section of the wood and has been discolored by 
the linseed oil boiling which the pin originally had. This section 
has been in no way affected by the current. In Fig. 9 is. illus- 
trated a peculiar action which is occasionally found on high 
tension transmission lines, and which, for a better name, has been 
called ‘‘ digesting the thread of the pin.” The thread of the pin 
softens while in service and may be rubbed off with the fingers. 
This soft wood has a sour taste and reseinbles digested wood 
pulp. This action is not necessarily accompanied by the burning 
of any portion of the pin. 

The evidence here presented, while not conclusive, still points 
to the advisability of using iron pins with modern insulators 
properly chosen for the line potential. 


A paper read at the 174th Meeting of the Americar 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
March 27th, 1903. 


MODEL SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTROMOTIVE 
FORCE AND CURRENT ALONG A SINGLE PHASE 
ALTERNATING CURRENT TRANSMISSION LINE. 


BY W. S. FRANKLIN. 


A helical line drawn on the surface of a transparent cylinder 
and set rotating about its axis would appear to an observer 
looking at it from one side as a wave-line traveling along the axis. 
The direction of travel of this wave-line would be one way or the 
other, according as the helix is right or left-handed. 

A rotating right-handed helix would represent the electro- 
motive force waves (or the current waves) traveling outwards 
from a generating station along a transmission line having 
inductance and capacity, but having neither resistance nor 
leakage. 

A left-handed helix rotating in the same direction about the 
same axis would represent the electromotive force waves (or the 
current waves) reflected back from the receiver. A compound 
helix of which the radius-vector at each point along the axisis the 
sum of the radii vectores of the two simple helices would, if set 
rotating, represent the actual distribution of electromotive force 
(or current) along the transmission line. 

The effect of line resistance and line leakage is to cause the’ 
waves of electromotive force and current to diminish in ampli- 
tude as they travel along the line. 

Imagine a helix-like line drawn about an ‘axis, the radius- 
vector of this helix-like line at a point along the axis being pro- 
portional to e* where ¢ is the Naperian base and x is distance 
measured along the axis from one end. If this helix-like line is set 
rotating about the axis. it will appear to an observer looking at it 

261 


262 FRANKLIN: DISTRIBUTION OF E.M.F. [March 27 


from one side as a wave-line traveling along the axis and diminish- 
ing in amplitude as it travels along. 

A rotating, right-handed helix-like line of the kind just speci- 
fied would represent. the electromotive force waves (or the cur- 
rent waves) traveling outwards from a generating station along a 
transmission line having inductance, capacity, resistance and 
leakage. 

A left-handed helix-like line rotating in the same direction 
about the same axis would represent the electromotive force 
waves (or the current waves) which are reflected back from 
the receiver. | 

A compound helix-like line of which the radius-vector at each 
point along the axis is the vector sum of the radii vectores of the 
two single helix-like lines, would, if set rotating, represent the 
actual distribution of electromotive force (or current) along the 
transmission line. 

The model which is herewith exhibited contains: (a), Two 
simple and one compound helix-like lines, which represent out- 
going, reflected, and resultant electromotive force waves respec- 
tively; and (B), Two simple and one compound helix-like lines 
which represent outgoing, reflected, and resultant current waves 
respectively. 

This model was calculated and constructed by Messrs. J. H. 
Flory and C. W. Startsman, as a graduating thesis in electrical 
cngineering, at Lehigh University in 1901. 

The calculations were based upon the following data: 

Length of line, 200 miles. 

Resistance of line one ohm per mile. 

Reactance of line due to inductance four ohms per mile. 

Leakage conductance of line, 0.00002 mho’s per mile. 

Capacity susceptance of line, 0.0002 mho’s per mile. 

Receiver is a condenser having a reactance value of 100 ohms. 

The actual value of electromotive force (or current) is not 
essential to the interpretatich of the model but as a matter of 
fact the voltage at the terminals of the receiving circuit was 
taken to be 10,000 volts and the current, of course, 100 amperes. 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 2638 


DISCUSSION. 

PRESIDENT Scott:—The subject of the meeting this evening is 
Power Transmission on High-Tension Lines. 

There are a number of different subjects to be presented; these 
have been prepared by the members of the Transmission Com- 
mittee as introductions to discussions, not as complete, formal 
and exhaustive papers in themselves, but written with the intent 
of calling attention to and introducing a number of points on the 
several subjects which would lead to contributions from others. 
Mr. Mershon and I think that the best method of con- 
ducting the meeting this evening would be to take up each 
subject in turn and to devote a specified time to it, so 
that some attention could be given to all. The gentlemen 
having the subjects in charge will have a certain amount of time 
at their disposal. They can present the written material first 
and then the subject will be open to general discussion for the 
remainder of the half hour which will be allotted to each of the 
subjects. The first topic is ‘‘ Mechanical Specifications for a 
Proposed Standard Insulator Pin,’ by Ralph D. Mershon. 

Mr. Ratpu D. MersHon:—Before the discussion is begun, I 
_ wish to state that my object in writing this introduction was to 

get a discussion sufficiently full to form the basis of recommenda- 
tion to the Standardization Committee. 

There are anumber of written contributions which I shall read. 
The first is from Mr. M. H. Gerry, Jr., of the Missouri River 
Power Co. 

Mr. M. H.Gerry, JR.—It is tooearly in the development of high- 
tension transmission to attempt to make standard the details of 
construction. Such action at this time by the Institute would 


FIG.1 FIG.2 


result not only in failure, but in a tendency to prevent advance- 
ment in this line. However, a full discussion by the member- 
_ ship cannot fail to be of great.advantage and profit.. 


Mr. Mershon has suggested the adoption as standard of-certain 
forms of wooden pins, the designs of which conform to common 


264 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March £7 


construction. Most engineers of experience, however, would be 
in favor of a diameter greater than one inch at the top of the pin, 
- and a greater length of thread than two and one-half inches. 
Wooden threads most frequently fail by shearing, and the 
strength in this particular is greatly increased by a larger diame- 
ter of pin, and a greater length of thread. The longer thread is 


M4 
See 
‘“ ” ” 
fate 


Wi | JM Wp» YY G 


60 
FIG.3 


an advan‘age also in preventing the insulator from tipping out 
of line, when the fittiny is loose between the thread of the pin and 
that of the insulator. 

The shoulder of the pin, as suggested by Mr. Mershon, has 
certain disadvantages for heavy construction. On account of 
the rounding off of the top of the cross-arm, this form of shoulder 


Sen 


uw 


does not bear well, as shown in sketch, Fig. No. 1, and the sharp 
corner at the point of greatest strain, introduces an element of 
weakness. In Fig. No. 2, a form of shoulder is shown which has 
been used by the writer with considerable success. This shoulder 
tapers at an angle of 60°, and fits into a counter-bore in the top 
of the cross-arm. With this design the pins may be driven to a 
in| 
Wey 


1 es 


SDEPTH Mey" obs 
ROUNDED Sat) 


FIG.5 


firm bearing at the top of the cross-arm, which has the effect of 
steadying them and increasing the strength of the construction 
at this point. . 

In lieu of the form of thread proposed by Mr Mershon, the 
writer suggests that shown by sketch, Fig. No 3. In this design 


———— 2°... 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 265 


the square top of the thread is as wide as the groove, resulting 
in increased area of wood to withstand shearing strains. The 
threads of the insulators are always stronger than those of the 
pins, and for this reason the form of thread as proposed has con- 
siderable advantage. This form of thread may also be easily 
cut, in either seasoned or unseasoned wood, and the denth not 
being so great the pin is stronger at the bottom of the thread. 


Eres 6 


Figs. No. 4 and No. 5 are drawings of the high-tension pins now 
used by the Missouri River Power Company. They show the 
form of the thread and of the shoulder as described above, and 
also give the general dimensions of the pins. The upper shoulder 
as shown by the drawings is for the support of a glass sleeve, 
which is used to protect the pin from the weather. Fig. No. 6 is 
from a photograph of the 50,000 volt line insulator assembled on 


one of the pins. 


266 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 


Mr. Mersuon:—The next written contribution is by Mr. 
William R.C. Corson, Electrical Engineer, of Hartford, Conn. 

Mr. Wittram R. C. Corson:—lI believe I am only concurring 
with the general feeling in expressing my pleasure that our 
Committee on High-Tension Transmission has seen fit to com- 
mence its work by an effort to standardize an essential element 
of construction, and in hoping that this line of effort may be con- 
tinued and result in recognized and approved standards for all 
other items capable of a general determination. 

Mr. Mershon’s method of developing the table of dimensions of 
the proposed pin is so rational that criticism of it is difficult. 
Briefly stated, of course, this method assumes the pin in general 
use as'a basis, and mathematically determines the diameters of 
pins of differing length, which shall be capable of sustaining the 
same tension at their extremity as will this pin. In other words, 
the safe load that may be applied at the top of the proposed pins 
is of constant value in all. This value is not discussed in the 
‘“‘ Introduction,” and feeling that its determination would be of 
interest to me, and might prove of value, I have made a series of 
tests in a Sellers’ machine to ascertain the value of s in 
equation (1,) for the ordinary locust pins, under the actual 
conditions of support suggested. 

Six standard locust wood pins were selected at random from a 
supply at hand. The larger diameter of the shank varied from 
1 7/16 inches to 14 inches, while the smaller diameter was uni- 
formly 111/32 inches. These were supported in a 14 inch hole in 
a hard wood block, and the measured tension applied about 44 
inches from the block, the exact distance of the point of applica- 
tion being measured. 

The load was very gradually applied in increments of a few 
pounds, and the amount noted when the first separation of the 
fibre appeared. Most of the specimens showed distress at from 
700 to 750 lbs., with maximum strength of about 10 per cent. 
above this. One specimen, however, showed a crack at 600 
lbs., and an ultimate strength of 1083lbs. The average value of 
s determined from the tension at which the first fibre separation 
appeared was 11,130 lbs. per sq. inch, and the average value 
calculated from the maximum loads sustained was 13,623. The 
value of s, calculated for the specimen crackling at 600 lbs., was 
9,280. While this is somewhat below the average due to an 
apparent defect in the wood, it is probably best to assume that 
for a maximum load, s should not be greater than 9,000. Assum- 
ing this value, the maximum load that may be applied to the 
proposed pins at a distance from the cross-arm equal to the 
designation of size, would be as follows: 


Size of Pin. Value of P. Size of Pin. Value of P. 
5 in. 557 13 in. 621 
Ge: 639 Tore 694 
g ‘ 615 Ay fe 670 


11“ 610 1056 700 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. Pay | 


Of course these values of P would be identical but for the 
difference between the actual diameter selected and that of the 
theoretical pin. The average value is 636 lbs., which may be 
considered the maximum load that the standard pins will sus- 
tain at the point designated. 

Even with very generous factors of safety, it would oppear that 
the pins suggested would prove of ample strength to withstand 
the side strains to which they may be subjected. For heavy 
work and for end poles, an insulator carrying the wire at some 
distance below the top of the pin would, of course, increase the 
strength of the construction. A table of standard insulators 
could perhaps with advantage be prepared so proportioned 
between groove and bottom of threaded bore as to maintain the 
stress on the pin within the allowable safe values for the various 
tensions applied. 

_I would call attention to one seeming error in the table of the 
dimensions of the proposed pins. In the paragraph headed 
“* Designation,” the following appears: ‘‘ It is proposed to desig- 
nate that portion of the pin above the cross-arm as the ‘ stem ’ 
of the pin,’ and further, ‘‘ It is proposed to designate a pin by 
the length of its stem.’’ From this definition the stem of the 
pin would have a length equal to the sum of the dimensions A 
and G of the table.. For the five-inch pin shown in the table 
this would be 54 inches, and thus is not equal tothe designation. 

Mr. Mersuon:—Another written contribution to this discus- 
sion is by Mr. C. L. Cory, of San Francisco. 

Mr. C. L. Cory:—The mechanical strength of insulator pins for 
use on long distance transmission lines has been given much con- 
sideration by electrical engineers in California during the past 
six years. For the most part the insulator pins in use are wood. 
On the 33,000 volt, 83 mile, double circuit, three-phase trans- 
mission line of the Edison Electric Co., from their Santa Ana 
power house to the city of Los Angeles, iron pins with porcelain 
sleeves are used. This transmission is the most notable system 
in California at the present time using insulator pins other than 
wood. * 

Eucalyptus has been found to be perhaps the best wood to use 
for insulator pins. After being turned up and threaded, they are 
usually treated with hot linseed oil. This treatment is desirable 
more on account of the protection which such treatment gives 
the pin against weather than on account of the insulating quali- 
ties of the oil or oil treatment. 

It should be understood in this connection that an insulator- 
pin should be depended upon only to support the insulator. The 
insulator in turn should be depended upon to provide the neces- 
sary insulation for the line wires. No pin after being in use for a 
few years on a pole line can maintain to any marked degree the 
insulating qualities originally existing, due to such oil or paraffin 
treatment. 

The tests outlined below were made in the electrical laboratory 
of the University of California, for the purpose of determining 


268 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


how near the pins generally in use in California conform to the 
proposed standard pins suggested by Mr. Mershon. In the test 
twenty-two pins were broken. These were not selected particu- 
larly for the test, but were taken at random from a large lot of 
such pins which were to be used in construction work. Of these, 
twelve were of the size generally in use on transmission lines 
where the voltage does not exceed 30,000 volts. These pins are 
114 inches long, including shank and stem, the latter being 6% 
inches in length. The other ten pins tested were of the size used 
on the lines of what has been known as the Bay Counties Power’ 
Co., now the California Gas & Electric Corporation, and the 
Standard Eiectric Co. The line voltage in each of these trans- 
mission systems is from 40,000 to 60,000 volts. These pins are 


15? inches long, including shank and stem, the latter being 104 
inches long. All of the dimensions of the pins tested are given in 
Figs. 1 and 2. 

These pins do not exactly conform in size or length of stem 
with any of the proposed standard pins. Below, however, is 
given the comparative dimensions of the two samples of pins 
tested and the nearest sizes of the corresponding proposed pins. 
For sake of comparison, a 7-inch pin, as proposed, is contrasted 
with the 6 inch tested pin, and the 11 inch proposed pin is con- 
trasted with the 10} inch tested pin. The above dimensions. 
refer to the length of the stem of the pin, as suggested by. Mr 
Mershon. 


COMPARISON OF PROPOSED PIN AND PINS TESTED. 


Size Cee 
of | AY Bo iNom-iAct- |.) | Hel BPG eel er 
Pin. inal] ual 
Proposed Pin. YW 1.0" | 4h) 12) 15) 143) 12) 1” fo 4 | 2k 24 
Pin Tested, Gy | 65 | 43 | 1g | 1h | 16) 18) 13) — |] 2" 1 8 
Proposed Pin. Ld| 11 $42) 2 [etgg abs de a" | 2 | 23) ee 
Pin Tested 103) 105) 53 | 2yy) 24 | Vee Bk | 14] 4 | Bt | QE 


In general, it will be seen that the dimensions of the proposed 
and tested pin agree fairly well. The most marked difference is 
in the diameter of the portion of the pin which is threaded to 


T9034 DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 3 269 


receive the insulator. It seems evident that one inch is not a 
sufficient diameter for the thread of the pin for all sizes. If 
there is any burning of the pin just below the insulator, the 
inevitable result will be breaking at the bottom portion of the 
thread. Such a break will usually leave the pin, except the 
threaded portion, standing in the cross-arm, while the insulator 
with the threaded portion of the pin inside, will hang suspended 
on the line wire. This sort of break has often been ‘observed 
on high-voltage transmission lines. 


The method of testing the pins is clearly shown in the accom- 
panying photograph. It was impossible to mount the cross-arm 
in the testing machine so that the strain on the pin would be at 
right angles to its axis. The variation from a right angle, how- 
ever, is small and to a certain degree conforms with the direction 
of the strain on the pin, due to the sag in the line wire. The 
‘‘ breaking load,” as given in the tables below, refers to the strain 
in the direction of the cable, while the ‘“‘ real breaking load ” is 
the component of this strain at right angles to the axis of the 


pin. 


——————————————— a neal La aan 


Real Real 
Breaking | Breaking ' | Breaking | Breaking 

No. Loads) Load No. Load. Load. 

ale 1010 950 1 2250 2120 

2 1090 1035 2 3140 2960 

3 1450 1360 3 2380 2240 

+ 1360 1280 4 2010 1890 

5 920 865 6 2780 2620 

6 1220 1150 7 2280 - 2140 

a 1350 1270 8 1570 1475 

8 940 875 9 2390 2250 

9 1360 1280 10 3390 3190 

10 1360 1280 Average. 2465 2310 
iil ‘750 705 
aoull? 1060 1010 
Average. 1155 1085 


UW eee SS ee. 


The average results, referring to the “ real breaking load,” 
of the tests of the two pins are respectively, 1085 pounds for the 
6% inch pin.and 2310 pounds for the 104inch pin. The character 


270 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


of break in the two pins, however, is not the same. Almost 
without exception, the 6% inch pins were broken approximately 
square off at the cross-arm. The larger pins, however, split in 
the stem, the beginning of the split being just at the bottom of 
the thread. An inspection of the photographs clearly shows the 
difference in the character of break in the two pins. 


Method of Mounting Cross-Arms, Pins and Insul 


ators in Testing Machine. 


It seems from the tests that the shank is the weakest part in 
the 6% inch pins, while the stem, and particularly the upper 


nortion of the stem, or thread, is the weakest part of the 102 inch 
pins 


pith 


NS eee hy 


Ne SOR Ne Pe ee ee eee UNG 


eR 


dark 


OEE LOC E NN Fee ee peL eR 


Re ne RT EN NRCS oe ee wee ECP uE AL ciecie eeten whee 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 271 


The variation of the “real breaking load” for the different 
64 inch pins tested is from 705 pounds minimum to 1360 pounds 
maximum. For the 104 inch pins, this variation is from 1475 
pounds minimum to 3190 pounds maximum. 

During the progress of the test, it was observed that the 
“‘ allowable breaking load ”’ was least when the pin was turned in 
the cross-arm, so that the strain was across the grain of the pin, 
while the greatest allowable ‘‘breaking load” corresponded with the 
position of the pin in the cross-arm, so that the strain was parallel 
to the grain of the pin. In the tests made, no particular care 
was taken to turn the pins in any fixed position relative to the 
grain of the pin and the direction of the strain applied. 

For good construction on lines using 30,000 to 60,000 volts 
the larger pin must be used. It does not seem, however, that any 
good reason exists for a great number of different sizes of pins, as 
it would seem probable that the two sizes tested might be used 
to fulfil almost every requirement for transmission work where 
wooden pins are at all allowable. 

In many respects an iron pin is better than one of wood. In 
the first place, to secure sufficient strength in the shank, the 
wooden pin must be of such a large diameter that the size of the 
cross-arm is necessarily increased. In addition, using an iron 
pin, the insulator can be held down on poles or supports where 
the tendency of the line wire is to raise or pull the pin out of the 
cross-arm. In using wooden pins, this is usually prevented by 
driving a nail through the cross-arm into the shank of the pin. 

An iron insulator pin, possessing many desirable features, has 
been designed for use on the extensive transmission lines 
of the Vancouver Power Co., of Vancouver, British Columbia, 
the design being due to Mr. Wynn Meredith, of San Francisco. 
In general, the pin consists of a steel bolt approximately 12 
inches long. A cast iron sleeve 44 inches long, and fitting closely 
to the cross-arm, fills the space between the thread, and corres- 
ponds to the stem of the ordinary wooden pin. The thread of the 
pin is made of lead, this lead thread being cast upon the end of 
the steel bolt, the steel bolt being first chopped or made ragged, 
so that the lead is held firmly to the steel bolt after being cast. 

The tests upon this form of pin have not as yet been com- 
pleted, but as soon as possible the results will be presented to the 
INSTITUTE. 

Mr. Mersuon:—The fourth and last written contribution to 
this part of the subject is by Mr. D. L. Huntington, electrical 


‘engineer of the Washington Power Company, Spokane, Wash. 


Mr. D. L. Huntincton:—Wooden pins are subject to so 
many uncertainties when used in connection with very high 
voltages, especially where the atmosphere contaits salt, smoke 
or dust, that it seems desirable to abandon their use for such 
purposes wherever possible, and to substitute a metallic pin. 
The construction of a long distance line for 60,000 volts, led the 
writer to make some investigation as to what could be done in 


this direction, without excessive cost. 


272 ~ HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


It was decided that a drop-forged or a turned steel pin would 
be so expensive.as to exclude it, even if the time at our dis- 
posal would have permitted us to wait for its delivery. _ ; 

Experiments were made with a cast-iron pin almost identical 
in dimensions to that shown in Fig. 2 of Mr. Chesney’s paper, 
except that it was cored out internally so as to make its weight 
about 10 pounds. The diameter of the shank was 2% inches. 
This pin, before fracturing, sustained a load slightly in excess of 
3,000 pounds, suspended from near the end of the threaded 
portion. 

Fear was felt, however, as to what might occur under the sud- 
den strain of a line parting in winter time, with the possibility 


1’Dia. 


NAN 
| Cut Eccentric in Bolt 
\ Cutter 


“ 
1655 


Composite Pin 
for 
High Tension Insulator 


uy 


54%— 


uu 


ip Z, 
iA 
Ze 4 


of the fracture of several pins at a time due to the sudden shock. 


To avoid this, several designs were made of pins cut from: 


round steel bars of 1 inch and 14 inch diameter. The difficulty 
in obtaining a satisfactory shoulder for the pin at the cross-arm 
proved serious, Furthermore, it was feared that with a pin of 
that small diameter, the cross-arm would be likely to burn out at 
the pin-hole, as the interior surface of the hole would be com- 
paratively small for distributing the leakage currents to the 
cross-arm. Moreover, actual experience with wooden pins has 
shown more or less conclusively that with a shank diameter of 


3 
3 
s 
a 
é 
; 
q 
4 
> 
3 
4 
; 
; 
4 
3 
: 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 273 


two inches or greater, there is little or nothing to fear from this 
trouble. 

As a result of these several difficulties we have designed and 
adopted a pin (see Fig. 1) eighteen inches long; made of 1} inch 
round mild steel bar, and having a shoulder and shank cast upon 
it as shown. This pin we find will begin to bend when loaded 
with about 1,009 pounds at the upper end, the shank being 
rigidly supported. This is much lower than the results obtained 
by the cast iron pin referred to above, but it is believed that it is 
more reliable and that it is sufficient for nearly all ordinary work. 
In addition, the steel bar will not snap off under sudden shock, 
but will support the insulator and line safely even when badly 
bent. We were unable, in the time at our disposal, to investi- 
gate what could be done in the way of malleable castings of a 
design somewhat similar to the cast-iron pin mentioned above, 
but it is the writer’s opinion that it would prove a fruitful line of 
investigation. 

High freight rates of the west and a higher initial cost will 
doubtless make some of those in charge of the construction of such 
lines hesitate at the extra expenditure (in our case it was about 
double the cost of eusalyptus pins), but it is in the line of safe 
and conservative engineering and certainly strengthens the 
weakest link in our high-voltage chain, our lines. 

Mr. W.N.SmitH:—It seems tome that the dimensions given are 
all very well for a pin carrying a certain weight of wire, but it does 
not seem to me that a single standard table of dimensions could 
be laid down to cover anything like all the conditions of various 
power transmission lines, all the way from a line of 5,000 or 6,000 
volts, with, say, No. 4 wire, up to one like the Niagara Falls 
power transmission line, which is of 300,000 c.m. cable. The 
scheme of the tabulation should be enlarged and gone over care- 
fully, so as to have a separate tabulation for a reasonably small 
range of weights of copper wire to cable;. that is, one table for 
sizes from No. 6 to No. 3, another No. 3 to No. 0, another from 
No. 0 to No. 0000, and another from No. 0000 up. In this way 
the design of a standard pin would more nearly meet the varying 
conditions of transmission line construction. I remember read- 
ing Mr. Stillwell’s paper a year or more ago on the Niagara Falls 
transmission plant, in which, if I remember correctly, he stated 
that the principal trouble with pins was their breaking at the 
root of the thread. I do not see that this point has been covered 
in Mr. Mershon’s discussion, although it was referred to in Mr. 
Gerry’s contribution. I should think it a matter of considerable 
importance in the design of the pin. I further agree with Mr. 
Gerry in his opinion that the top of the pin is rather small, cer- 
tainly, for the very heavy insulators that would be required for a 
transmission above 30,000 volts. 

Mr. P. H. Tuomas,:—It would be a great gain to those who 
hope to get information from the report of the committee, if the 
characteristics of the different types of wood commonly used 


274 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION, [March 27 


could be discussed, ¢.g., oak, eucalyptus and locust. It is to be 
hoped that in the local sections this question will be very fully 
discussed. Also, something should be said about the method of 
treating pins, which is one of the most important questions in 
the insulation of the line. The treating of pins to make them 
waterproof, without injuring the mechanical strength, is a difficult 
matter. : 

In putting up an insulator, where the pin comes to a bearing 
on its end inside of the insulatoi, expansion of the pin or contrac- 
tion of the insulator may crack cff the top of the insulator, 
especially with glass. To amend this difficulty, a shoulder might 
be arranged so that the pin would not touch the top of the insu- 
lator. 

Mr. Mersuon:—As to the question of the size of the pin, it 
may be desirable to have a pin larger at the top, perhaps, but I 
do not think the reason which has been given for this holds very 
well. In the Pak place, an insulator properly designed will not 
tip. If the insulator is designed so that the side pull of the line 
on it is transmitted directly to the pin, instead of being all the 
way from an inch and a half to two inches above the top of the 
pin, as in the case of most insulators, it will not tip. If it does, 
that is a fault in the design of the insulator and not in the dimen- 
sions of the pin. Mr. Gerry has criticized the shearing strength 
of the thread. I doub*+ if the thread of the pin proposed by Mr. 
Gerry will have a greater shearing strength than the thread of 
the pin referred to in the paper. The question of the shearing 
strength is not so important. A well-designed line will not have 
much up-strain. A line with much up-strain is not laid out as 
it should be. You cannot prevent some up-strain on some 
insulators, but it may be made so light that the shearing 
strength of the thread will not be of much importance. 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON :—If there is no further discussion, 
we will proceed to the next paper. Do you ware to make any 
closing remarks, Mr. Mershon? 

Mr. MersHon:—There was a further remark made by Mr. 
Gerry to the effect that it is too early to adopt a standard pin. I 
think if we adopted a standard and changed it from year to year, 
we should not be any worse off than we are now, when we have 
no standard. There are as many standards as there are manu- 
facturers of pins and designers of pole lines. The only way now 
to get a pin to fit an insulator is to send the insulator to the pin 
manufacturer and in that way have the pins made so that they will 
fit. If you buy a pin from one manufacturer and the insulator 
from another, they may fit, or they may not fit. 

V1CE-PRESIDENT SHELDON.:—We will now proceed to the dis- 
cussion of the paper by Mr. F. O. Blackwell on ‘‘ The Testing of 
Insulators.’’ As Mr. Blackwell is not present and has not dele- 
gated any one to present his paper, I will call upon Mr. Mershon 
to present the introduction. 

Mr. Mersuon:—If there is no objection, I will pursue the 
same course in regard to Mr. Blackwell's introduction as with 


a" eA 


BTQa yg eee ee 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 275 


my own. I will omit reading his introduction and read the con- 
tributions to it. I think they take up most of the main points 
and will serve as a basis for the discussion this evening. The 
first contribution is by Mr. M. H. Gerry, Jr. It is as follows: 

Me. M. H. Gerry, Jr.—Mr. Blackwell has ably discussed a 
number of important matters in connection with the testing of 
high-voltage insulators. There are, however, a number of addi- 
tional points which have not been touched upon. 

Insulators are tested for two purposes: first, to determine the 
design, shape, material and dimensions best suited for a given 
voltage and set of conditions; secondly, insulators are tested as 
a matter of routine, to determine whether manufacturers have 


~ complied with specifications regarding material and workman- 


ship. 

There can be no complete set of tests to cover the first purpose, 
as it is not only a matter of experiment, but of skill and judg- 
ment in properly interpreting the results of many tests, in rela- 
tion to service conditions. The testing of insulators for the 
second purpose is comparatively simple. For glass insulators it 
is usually sufficient to inspect them for physical defects, such as 
cracks, bubbles and incorrect dimensions. A certain percentage 
of the insulators should also be tested for proper annealing, and 
for mechanical strength. A chemical analysis of the glass of a 
few of the insulators is also desirable. Electrical tests of glass © 
insulators are unnecessary, as the physical inspection will reveal 
everything that can be found by an electrical test. Porcelain 
insulators are more difficult to test than are glass insulators, on 
account of many defects being covered by the glaze. For very 
high voltages, porcelain insulators should be tested electrically, 
and should also be carefully inspected during the process of manu- 
facture, and before the glaze is applied. This is especially 
desirable with insulators built up of several parts and cemented 
together by glaze or other material. Defects in insulators of 
this type are difficult to detect, even by clectrical tests, unless 
they are pronounced. 

Mr. Blackwell has indicated the proper method of making 
electrical tests of insulators. The puncture test mentioned by 
him, of twice the potential between wires, is usually sufficient, 
but a higher test is desirable where the insulators are to be 
exposed to severe lightning strains. 

Mr. MersHon:—1 would like to speak in regard to the follow- 
ing sentence in the contribution of Mr. Gerry, which has just 
been read. ‘‘ The puncture test mentioned by him (Mr. Black- 
well), of twice the potential between wires, is usually sufficient, 
but a higher test is desirable where the insulators are to be 
exposed to severe lightning strains.’ I have never personally 
known or heard of a case of insulators having been punctured 
where the puncture could be laid to lightning. It seems to me 
the lightning would flash around most insulators rather than 


puncture them. 


216 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


Then as to the question of the chemical analysis of glass 
insulators. I have never had any reason to think that the 
chemical composition of the glass made any difference in the 
behavior of glass insulators. I have made tests for difference in 
behavior due to composition on both insulators and tubes of 
glass, but never succeeded in finding any. 

VicrE-PRESIDENT SHELDON :—The subject is open for general 
discussfon. 

Mr. P. M. Lincotn:—I would take issue with Mr. Gerry, 
who made a statement that glass insulators did not need testing 
beyond visual inspection. I know of a certain line, the insulators 
of which were not given a voltage test, but were simply tapped 
with a mallet in order to eliminate, if possible, any which had 
undue internal strains. After the insulators were up and the 
normal voltage applied, quite a number of them broke down in 
actual service, which probably would not have occurred if they 
had been tested with voltage before being erected. 

Another point, in regard to lightning, which Mr. Mershon 
speaks of—it is a fact that rain usually accompanies lightning 
storms, and that, of course, will give you a wet surface on the 
insulator. This wet surface is a very good conductor of the 
sudden surges which occur in lightning storms, so that lightning 
strains will be very apt to go over the surface rather than through 
the insulator. I do not think there is much danger of breaking 
lown of an insulator from lightning strains, after a test of double 
normal potential has been applied. 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON :—Is there any more discussion? 

Mr. W. N. SmitH:—While the subject its before the Insti- 
TUTE, I think it would be quite interesting if any members 
present would state their preferences between porcelain and 
glass for high-tension insulators. It is a question that comes 
up every now and then, and no doubt there are members present 
who may have a very strong leaning toward one or the other 
material for high-tension transmission. 

Mr. Mersuon:—As between glass and porcelain, it seems to 
me about the only advantage, other things being equal, that 
porcelain has over glass for transmission work is that of mechani- 
cal strength. Sometimes it has that advantage and sometimes 
it has not. It is a fact, however, that in some forms of insulator 
—in some complex forms—it is possible to get the porcelain 
insulator cheaper than the glass one. I have found this true, to 
miy surprise, in one or two cases. When the insulator is large, so 
that it takes the form of a very heavy central portion of glass, 
with long, thin petticoats, it seems to be almost impossible to 
make it of glass and have it symmetrical. The thinner portions 
cool first, and when the insulator is taken from the mold the 
weight of the outer portions distort the inner portion of the 
insulator, which is still hot. An advantage has also been 
claimed for porcelain over glass because of the lesser hygroscopic 
effects, but I think in most power transmissions the small amount 
of power necessary to dry up whatever moisture will get on the 


CTR TE SE Sey nt CANOE g On a 


il ee, bo 


=a 
E 
es 
: 

C 
E 
“ 
3 
Z 
. 
E 
3 
a 
; 
’ 
4 
a 
4 
4 
4 
1 
: 
a 


1903.] DISC UOSSTON TAT WNEW— V ORK PLETE 


surface of the insulator in that way would not be serious. As a 
matter of fact, in any meas'trement I have ever made, no differ: 
ence could be detected between porcelain and glass in the matter 
of losses over their surfaces at high voltages. 

Mr. T. W. SuHocx:—I had the pleasure of building a line this 


‘last year in the State of Pennsylvania, in which I used an insu- 


lator which tested for 75,000 volts. The ordinary pressure will 
be 24,000 volts—that gives a factor of safety of over two. I 
think I agree with Mr. Blackwell,that in testing insulators for 
a line of high pressure the testing pressure should be at least two 
and possibly three times the ordinary line pressure. My idea in 
adopting that style of insulator is due tothe fact that it was built 
for a line on the Pacific coast, for 40,000 volts, and I adopted it 
to give me an extra factor of safety. I madethe test at a pres- 
sure of 75,000 volts. I think the insulator will give us very 
good satisfaction. 

_ Mr. F. N. Warterman:—Mr. Blackwell's reference to test-’ 
ing a double insulator—an insulator primarily of two parts— 


Broken 10%” pins (Stem.) Total Length, 15?” Showing How Pins Split. 


requiring that each part should be separately tested, seems 
to me practically to bar out. double insulators and does not 
seem to be logically founded. He says, “‘ if it is to be tested for 
100,000 volts and is made in two parts, each part might, for 
instance, be tested with 70,000 volts. The object of this is to 
have the weak parts rejected before they are assembled.” The 
objection to that, from a practical standpoint of course, is evi- 
dent; but there is a further objection, not so evident, and that 
is, as I understand the porcelain people, in tne baking or 
vitrifying of the two parts it is not desirable to take the entire | 
shrinkage out on the first heat. Consequently, if the insulators 
are to be tested before, being filled with glaze and re-vitrified, 
they are not tested at all in their final condition. Furthermore, 
I think it is illogical for the reason that it is a well-known fact 
that if we get porcelain in thin parts, we have a very much more 
than equal chance of getting sound porcelain. That i8,ci£-the 
same insulators were made in one part they would only have our 
final test. while the double insulator with much greater initial 


278 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


chance of being sound is required to be tested twice. The test 
peculiarly required by the double insulator is the mechanical 
test, and as far as my observation goes—I have tested a good 
many of them—if they are substantially free from large air 
spaces, they will stand up under the final electrical test. It 
seems to me that the requirement of a double test is unfair and 
unnecessary. 

Mr. Tuomas:—Mr. Gerry, Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Mershon have 
referred to one point in the testing of glass insulators that de- 
serves a good deal more consideration, and that is the initial 
strains left in the manufacture and annealing of the glass. The 
breakage of glass insulators on the line during service may more 
often be due to too much sun on one side of a poorly annealed 
insulator than to electrical strain. I do not know of any test 
which has been suggested to determine whether glass has been 
properly annealed or not, but I do not doubt that some test could 
“be gotten up, and I make the suggestion to the committee that 
they consider this point carefully. A successful test would save 
a great deal of trouble in high-tension lines after the insulators 


Iron-Pin Insulator. 


are installed. There is one rather old point which should be 
mentioned in the testing of porcelain insulators—not only should 
they be tested with salt water, but the regulator should soak 
a certain definite time; the Standardization Committee might 
determine how long. 

Mr. C. C. CuesNey:—A glass insulator, if it is not properly 
and uniformly annealed, has unequal strains in the different parts 
of the glass. I have known a number of such insulators after a 
cool night to break when the sun struck them in the morning. 
The side towards the sun cracks off. Aside from this feature, 
I believe a glass insulator will give as good satisfaction as a 
porcelain one. 

Mr. MersHon:—I cannot entirely agree with the author in 
regard to the use of one transformer for testing purposes. A 
series of transformers need not have a bad regulation or seriously 
distort the wave form, and such a testing set. has a very great 
advantage that a transformer breakdown is much less serious 
than in the case of a single testing transformer. The knowledge 


ae Tete 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 279 


of this fact gives one more confidence in testing, especially in 
experimental testing. -For very accurate results in any case a 
step-down voltmeter transformer is desirable. 

Neither can I agree that insulators should necessarily be tested 
on iron pins. As I have stated before, an iron pin is likely to be 
the means of putting upon the insulator a mechanical stress all 
out of proportion to any which it would meet in practice if 
installed upon a wooden pin. For instance, if the insulator be 
screwed down tight upon a metal pin there will result stresses 
in the head tending to force the top of it off either at one of 


_the threads or at the bottom of the pin-hole, or tending to 


burst the head. In either case there is a resulting mechani- 
cal strain in the substance of the insulator inviting puncture 
perpendicular to the lines of stress. An insulator that will 
stand up well under a salt water test, will often break down 
quickly when tested on a metal pin. While I do not believe in 
depending upon the wooden pin for insulation, I see no good 
reason for condemning it in general where there will be no 


Parts of Iron-Pin Insulator. 


trouble from burning. The author says that wooden pins burn 
off eventually unless the insulator be good enough to be used 
with an iron pin. If the insulator be good enough to prevent 
burning of the wooden pin, why not use the wooden pin unless 
there be some mechanical requirement which it cannot meet. 

I agree thoroughly that any new type of insulator should be 
given a rain test; that is, a voitage test while water is being 
sprayed upon the insulator in imitation of rain. Ifa wooden pin 
is used in this test, it should be covered with tin-foil from a point 
inside the petticoat nearest the pin to a point two or three inches 
below. The voltage should be applied between the foil and a 
wire around the neck of the insulator, or, preferably, between the 
foil and apiece of wire representing the line wire and tied to 
the insulator as it will be in practice. The recommendations 
of the Introduction as regards the angle at which water should be 
sprayed, is all right, if this angle be uniformly adopted in testing ; 
but some definite angle should be adopted, as the angle makes 
considerable difference in the voltage at which the current will 


arc from the line wire to the pin, The recommendations in 


280, HIGH-TENSION .TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


regard to the spray are not, however, so specific as could be 
desired. The amount of water sprayed, as well as the angle, 
makes a difference in the arcing voltage. Some time ago I 
endeavored to obtain from the United States Weather Bureaw 
information as to the most violent precipitation on record in this 
country. The record sent me showed the most violent down- 
pour as being about .8 of an inch in fiv> minutes. 
The maximum rate of downpours during that time may, of 
course, have been greater than this. It has been my practice 
to endeavor to adjust the spray for a precipitation of one inch in 
five minutes. This can be most conveniently done by placing 
under the insulator a suitable pan and collecting in it the water 
for five minutes. Care must be taken that in placing the pan it 
does not receive water from any part of the cross-arm other than 
that just over it. The question of the method of obtaining the 
spray is one which it is well to consider. It is no easy thing 
properly to adjust the spray from an ordinary garden spray-nozzie 
or rose-spray and it is no wonder that uniform results are not 


Parts of Iron-Pin Insulator. 


easily obtainable. It is desirable, if possible, to have some 
special form of spray-nozzle which will give a uniformly dis- 
tributed spray. This might perhaps be in the form of a very 
large rose-spray of a foot or more in diameter. 

It is desirable that if possible we arrive at some definite decision 
this evening on the points mentioned in regard to the methods of 
testing insulators, so that recommendations can be made on this 
subject to the Standardization Committee. 

Vicr-PRESIDENT SHELDON :—There is a written contribution on 
this subject from Mr. W. L. Waters, of Milwaukee, Wis. 

Mr. W. L. Waters:—The form of potential wave given by 
modern alternators differs very little from a sine wave. The 
worst case commonly met with is that of a three-phase alternator 
wound for high voltages. These machines have usually three 
slots per pole, and the wave form shows pronounced harmonics 
of five and seven times the fundamental frequency, but the 
effect _of this distortion on breakdown voltage of an insulator is 


inappreciable. The only commercial machines that have wave 


vee CNS Cee pe ae 


Ne weal ha 


‘ 


Tip al iat 


Newer 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 281 


forms which would affect the accuracy of the results to any extent 
are the old single-phase revolving armature machines with pro- 
jecting poles on the armature, which show a pronounced third 
harmonic. But these machines are seldom met with now. The 
charging current in a test on insulators or an overhead line 
generally conforms more or less to the potential wave form of the 
alternator, and whether the current is lagging or leading the 
distorting effect on the wave form is slight, and with all ordinary 
excitation and loads on the alternator the effect on the insulator 
test will be inappreciable. 

Generally speaking, an insulator will stand momentarily a volt- 
age strain which, if continued long enough, will break it down; 


1. Pin Split in Shank and Broken 2. Pin Broken at Upper Part of 
at Cross-Arm. Shank at Cross-Arm. 


3. Pin Broken at Upper Part of 4. Pin Broken at Upper Part of 
Shank at Cross-Arm. Shank at Cross-Arm. 


and this time effect is most marked in solid insulators. A 
gas such as air does not show this. When air is going to break 
down under a given strain, it will do so almost as soon as it 1s 
applied, except where the insulation of the air 1s subsequently 
weakened by a violent brush discharge. Solids show this effect 
to the greatest extent, and liquids such as oil to a lesser extent, 
-And I have found that in insulating materials where this effect 
ig most marked, differences in wave form have little effect upon 
the breakdown voltage; it seems to be the mean voltage or 
possibly the r.m.s. voltage which decides the breakdown. | In 
air the wave form has quite an appreciable effect, and the differ- 
ence between a peaked wave and a flat wave may be as much a3 


282 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


20 per cent. of the sparking distance. Porcelain insulators show 
very markedly this time effect; they will stand a much higher 
potential if applied instantaneously than they will if applied 
continuously, and. as far as can be seen from the experiments I 
have made, they appear to conform -with the rule mentioned 
above, and are practically unaffected by wave form. The 
sparking distance in air, on the other hand, being considerably 
affected by wave form, shows at once the unsuitableness of using 
a spark gap as a voltmeter if there is any doubt about the wave 
form. And I have found that unless it was in the hands of a very 
careful and experienced man, a spark gap was not of very much 
use in accurate work. Using needles as electrodes, the voltage 
seems to vary so much with the condition of the points, the state 
of the atmosphere, the proximity of other high tension conductors 
etc., that consistent results cannot be obtained in ordinary work. 
Using amalgamated brass balls, one inch in diameter, gave better 
results, but they are far from satisfactory. I think there is only 
one really satisfactory way of measuring high voltages, and 
that is by means of a voltmeter transformer connected straight 
across the insulator being tested. This method is accurate and 
is direct reading, and there is no chance of mistake and no con- 
tinual trouble fixing and adjusting your spark gap. Reliable 
voltmeter transformers can be made for all ordinary voltages for 
a few hundred dollars, and the use of one would save its cost in 
worry and hard work in a very short time. 

The above remarks are, strictly, only applicable to voltages up 
to 50,000, as I have had no experience with higher voltages. But 
I think that with slight changes they will apply to the highest 
voltages at present in use. 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON:—We will now take up the paper 
by Mr. P. M. Lincoln, entitled, ‘‘ Transposition and Relative 
Location of Power and Telephone Wires.” 

Mr. Lincoln read his introduction (see page 245), and the fol- 
lowing contribution by Mr. M. H. Gerry, Jr. 

Mr. M. H. Gerry, Jr.:—Mr. Lincoln has discussed the most 
important requirements of telephone construction in connection 
with high-tension transmission lines. There is no especial diffi- 
culty in installing a successful telephone circuit which will give 
satisfactory service and reasonable safety in operation on a pole 
line carrying from 50,000 to 60,000 volts. 

Mr. Lincoln has mentioned the principal requisites of successful 
design, which are a proper adjustment of the capacity, a mainte- 
nance of high insulation from ground, and a complete transposi- 
tion of the telephone wires in reference to each other, to the power 
circuit and to the ground. In addition, might be added the use 
of certain safety devices, which reduce the danger in handling 
telephones connected with circuits on high tension pole lines. 

In regard to transpositions: Mr. Lincoln advocates the trans- 
position of the telephone wires only, but it is desirable also to 
transpose the main power circuits, in order to reduce to a mini- 


A ie 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT, NEW YORK: 283 


mum the voltage to ground on the telephone circuits. But few 
transpositions of the power circuit are required, and the service 
as a rule is materially improved thereby. Where there is con- 
siderable lightning, arresters should be installed on the telephone 
circuits of a design similar to those used on lighting circuits. 
The ordinary telephone lightning arrester is an undesirable and 
unsafe piece of apparatus for this purpose. Fig. No. 7 is a 
sketch of a telephone arrangement devised by the writer, which 
will give excellent results in service. Especial attention is called 
to the short gaps across the line, to the location of the lightning 


REPEATING 
COIL FUSE 


SHORT GAP 5 LIGHTNING 


“TELEPHONE See aa 


SHORT | GAP 


GROUND GROUND 


arresters, and to the repeating-coils, which should be insulated 
for at least 5,000 volts, and may be immersed in small glass jars 
containing transformer oil. 

The Missouri River Power Company, with which the writer is 
connected, regularly maintains a very satisfactory telephone 
service on its 50,000 volt transmission lines between Canyon 
Ferry and Butte, a distance of sixty-four miles, and this service 
is rarely interrupted, even during the most severe lightning 
disturbances. | Under normal conditions, there is no potential 
on this telepone line, and only the slightest hum can be detected. 

Mr. Lincotn:—There is one point upon which possibly my 
discussion is not quite clear, and that is in regard to the trans- 
position of the power circuits. I have stated that it is not of 
very great importance. My reason possibly is not very clear in 
the paper, and it is this—a telephone line ought to be so made 
that it will at all times operate, even if one leg of the power line 
js dead grounded. If it is made to operate under these conditions 
it will operate under the normal conditions of an untransposed 
power line, because the normal static potential induced in the 
telephone line by an untransposed power line is vastly less than 
that which will be induced in the telephone line by grounding 
the power line; so that if the telephone line is installed so as to 
run under grounded conditicns, that is, with the power line 
grounded, it will certainly ran with an untransposed power line. 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON :—The subject is now open for 
general discussion. 
> Mr. Ratpo D. MersHon:—The truth of the observations of 
paragraph (6) is not clearly evident to me. The relation between 
the telephone circuit and the power ‘ircuit is, as stated in para- 
graph (4) such that in their electromagnetic relations they con- 


284 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 
j : 


stitute a transformer—an air-core transformer and one having 
very poor regulation. This transformer has in its primary —the 
power wires—a current unaffected in value by any current in the 
telephone wires and which may therefore for any given condition 
of power load be considered as a constant current. If the tele- 
phones took any appreciable amount of current, an amount 
comparable to the power current, we should have a tendency 
toward constant current in the telephones. If, as is the case, the 
telephones take a current very much less than the power current, 
we will have a tendency for constant voltaze. 

Electrostatically, each telephone wire is a plate of a condenser, 
the power wires being the other plate. These two condensers 
are in series through the telephones and have impressed upon 
them a constant e.m.f. The condition here is similar to that for 
the electromagnetic action, in that if the current in the tele- 
phones be such as will convey a charge approximating that which 
the impressed e.m.f. can impose upon the condensers, there will 
be a tendency toward constant current; if not, as seemsto me is 
. usually the case, there will be a tendency towards constant volt- 
age. In short, it seems to me that the conditions are about the 
same in the case of the electromagnetic and electrostatic dis- 
turbances. This is on the assumption that the reactance of the 
telephone is low relative to its resistance. If this is not +he 
case, and the reactance is comparable to the condensance con- 
cerned in the telephone circuit, then the current conditions may 
be almost anything, depending upon the relations between these 
two quantities Further, if by telephones of various resistances 
it is meant to designate telephones of various numbers of turns 
in the transmitter, then it seems to me the statement in regard 
to the disturbing ampere-turns is incorrect. The resistance of a 
coil varies as the square of the number of turns (assuming the 
same space available in each case for copper). The ampere-turns 
on constant e.m.f. vary, therefore, inversely as the square root of 
the resistance. It would seem, therefore, that if, as stated above, 
the electromagnetic and electrostatic effects are constant poten- 
tial in their nature, telephones should be wound for as high resist- 
ance as possible. This seems reasonable, as it is equivalent to 
saying that the telephonic e.m.f. should be kept as high as possi- 
ble, which in turn is equivalent to saying that the disturbing 
e.m.f. should be as small a percentage of the telephonic e.m.f. as. 
possible. In order to solve some of these questions, it is neces- 
sary to know the current and e.m.f. of telephones. I have no. 
such data and have not been able so far to obtain them. 

(7) It does not seem as though the objection given for the use 
of the series telephone were a valid one, since one ought not to 
introduce a telephone at B, Fig. 2, any more than one would 
connect a bridging telephone at this point. In other words, 
telephones, whether series or shunt instruments, should be con- 
nected at even transpositions in order to obtain the best results. 

(14) It is not quite clear to me why the series telephone should 


— Ve Pay ae 


1 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW” YORK. 28% 


not be a satisfactory instrument. As has already been stated, 
the reason mentioned in (7) seems hardly a valid one for con- 
demning it. 

(15) There is another method of accomplishing this desired 
end of having the telephone lines as nearly as possible at the 
same potential as the earth, which seems preferable for the use 
of a grounded wire; first, on the score of simplicity, and secondly, 
because it may also be a means of protection against loss of life 
or fire. This method is that of using autotransformers con- . 
nected across the telephone line at a number of points, preferably 
at each of the telephone stations, each having its middle point 
connected to ground. [Each transformer should be designed so 
as to take a very small amount of the telephonic current, but 
should have wires sufficiently heavy to enable it-to take, in case 
of a cross with a high voltage wire, a current heavy enough to 
operate the circuit-opening devices in the power station or else 
to blow a suitable fuse in the telephone circuit itself. Such a 
device would protect the users of the telephones from disagreable 
or dangerous shocks, whether due to crosses, leakage or 
electrostatic induction, and would also help to minimize disturb- 
ances due to grounds, etc. . 

Mr. P. H. THomas:—I think that the subject of tele- 
phones on long distance power transmission lines is perhaps 
the most important subject we have to-night. Mr. Lincoln has 
given a very good statement of the fundamental principles 
underlying the difficulties that have been found in many cases. 
By exchanging experiences and making suggestions, we can 
probably base on these fundamental principles improved methods 
by which the present service can be very much benefitted. As 
Mr. Lincoln concludes, I think there is no doubt that the trouble 
is chiefly due to the electrostatic induction from the normal 
voltage which tends to raise both telephone wires above the 
earth, either positively or negatively. There will also be a 
momentary disturbance whenever we have a charge of a light- 
ning arrester, or any static discharge, in the neighborhood, but 


- that will not give much trouble as regards clearness of commu- 


nication, because it is over quickly. The transposition of the 
transmission line is, I think, an important point practically in 
high-voltage transmission. As Mr. Lincoln states, a telephone 
circuit should be built to work under all conditions; for instance, 
when one line is dead grounded. But if it is impossible to make 
it work at such times, and if you can make it work smoothly 
when not grounded by transposing the power line, you had better 


transpose it, and that is the actual condition of practice. 


Assuming both telephone wires are going to reach high poten- 


tial above the earth, there is only one thing to do to get service 
at all times, and that is to eliminate the baneful effects of the high 


potential. 
I will make a suggestion for accomplishing this purpose, which 


may not have much practical value, but should be worth trying. 


286 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


I hope that some of the engineers who have opportunities for 
experimenting at hand will try it for their own and the general 
good. For instance, it is possible we may be able to insulate the 
telephone wires, perhaps for 30,000 or 40,000 volts in an extreme 
case, and at the end of the line put the primary of a transformer 
and connect the telephone to the secondary, thus making very 
high insulation between the primary and secondary. By this 
means it would be possible to protect the operator, and since 
static disturbances do not induce potential between the two 
wires, it should not disturb the speech. The same result may 
possibly be accomplished with condensers, by connecting two 
condensers in series between the two pair of wires and putting the 
telephone in between the condensers, not connected with the 
line. In this case it will probably be necessary to put a choke- 
coil between the condensers and ground its middle point. The 
charging current of the condensers will be neutralized by going 
through the two halves of the coil in opposite directions and a 
telephone winding could be taken from the same core. 

Mr. Lincoln suggested carrying ground wires in close proximity 
to the telephone wires. This should help much and would be a 
good method to try, but it would probably be necessary to use 
insulated wire for the telephone circuit, otherwise there would be 
trouble from repeated grounding. One method, which would be 
effective, but perhaps not practicable, would be to use for each 
side of the telephone wire a twisted pair; one wire of the pair for 
the telephone circuit and the other of the pair grounded. This 
method would make a large capacity between the telephone wire 
and ground, but would not actually ground the telephone wire 
itself. 

There is another interesting possibility for those who like to 
speculate. Can we not use the power transmission wires them- 
selves for sending signals? If not for telephoning, at least for 
general signaling. For instance, as a suggestion, we might con- 
nect a high resistance between each wire and a common point, 
and connect this point to ground, and similarly at the other end; 
then put a high frequency generator between the ground and the 
common connection at one end of the line, and some kind of 
receiving apparatus in the other. The high frequency would 
prevent the transformers from taking too much current, and 
you might be able to signal when power was on the lines. The 
same thing might be done with condensers or choke-coils. The 
advantage of using all the wires in parallel for signaling is that if 
you have three or four wires burnt off, there might yet be one 
wire you could signal through. a 

Another point is, it would be possible to make temporary 
arrangements for signaling in times of shut-down, until the 
powercomes. That is, when voltages go off, it would be possible 
to use the dead wires to make arrangements to start up again. 
Things are in a critical state when the power is off, and the tele- 
phone lines down, and such a system of signaling might easily be 
arranged. 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 287 


Another thing is very important, and that is the protection of 
the man using the telephone. One or two fatal accidents have 
recently occurred to operators on the telephone circuits. They 
should either be insulated in a booth, or the circuits should be 
dead grounded, or protected through an air-gap small enougl to 
be safe for the operators. 

In regard to Mr. Lincoln’s statement that telephone wires may 
reach as high a voltage as 20,000 volts. It occurs to me that as 
perhaps his statement is based on theoretical considerations, I 
can emphasize it by stating that I have seen this voltage in fact, 
in Mr. Gerry’s plant. I have seen sparks from telephone line 
to ground which were something like half an inch long, indicating 
perhaps 20,000 volts, perhaps higher than that. The possibility 
which Mr. Lincoln describes is not at all imaginary; it is very 
real. 

Mr. C. E. Sxinner:—I wish to emphasize the last point 
made by Mr. Thomas, that is, the protection of the work- 
man. The insulation of the instruments in the building 
has been mentioned by Mr. Lincoln. The insulation of the 
workman is even more important, and it is not difficult to make 
arrangements so that he will be well enough insulated, so that even 
across between a high potential line and a telephone line will not 
do serious harm. It is usually painful to receive a shock of this 
character, but not particularly dangerous. It has been my 
observation that men handling telephones on high-tension trans- 
mission lines, soon learn to be very cautious and are usually 
compelled to watch the surrounding material, walls, etc., when 
telephoning. This could be easily avoided by proper arrange- 
ments, so that the man need not touch anything which would 
connect him to the ground. 

Mr. C. O. Marttoux:—I would like to mention a _ phe- 
nomenon in connection with the charging of lines which, 
while not exactly within the scope of this paper, is still interest- 
ing, especially as it is a phenomenon which has puzzled me and 
which has puzzled others to whom I have mentioned it. I have 
observed the fact that the transmission line will become spon- 
taneously charged electrostatically without being connected to 
any generating machinery. About a year ago, in Arizona, we 
repeatedly observed that the three wires of a 25 or 26 mile line 
would become charged spontaneously to a considerable potential 
under various atmospheric conditions. In Phcenix, Ariz., at 
this time of the year, the weather is very much the same as it 
would be here in June of July, except that there isnorain. The 
weather is usually very pleasant, quite warm in the day time— 
one can wear summer clothes—and it cools but very little in the 
evenin:. There are occasionally slight winds, especially over the 
deserts, over a portion of which the line runs. I have repeatedly 
observed, but during the day time only, or until early evening, 
that the three lines became charged electrostatically.. They 
could be discharged by making a connection to earth, but if left 


288 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


alone they would soon charge again (in 10 to 15 seconds). The 
three wires would always charge at approximately the same 
potential with respect to earth, but this potential varied, as 
might be expected. It depended on the weather apparently, 
and varied, of course, with the length of time allowed for re- 
charging. On one occasion, when there was a heavy wind pre- 
ceding a rain, the potential was so high that we got sparks an inch 

and a half between the lines and the ground, through spark gaps. 
- T have repeatedly observed cases where the spark was 1/16 to 
of an inch between sparking points. There were no indications 
of lightning or storm. There have been cases where the phe- 
nomenon was observed when it was raining, (at the distant 
end, which is near the mountains, Where it rains occa- 
sionally), or shortly after it had rained; but the phenomenon 
was never so marked at such times; it was repeatedly observed 
when there was no indication of rain whatsoever, the sun shining 
brightly, but there was then always some wind or slight breeze 
somewhere along the line. My own theory was that the charge 
was either caused or translated by the wind, and taken up by the 
wire surfaces acting as condensers. Ihave mentioned the matter 
to several physicists, but my theory was rejected, as moisture in 
the air is considered indispensable, and it was lacking in this case. 
I have not succeeded in getting any satisfactory explanation. 
I hope there is someone here this evening who may be able to 
give it: 

Another interesting phenomenon which I have observed in the 
same climate is the fact that the lightning arrester, which is 
located at each end of the line, has generally a tendency to frying 
discharge, which is more pronounced’ between the lightning 
arrester gap of one line than of the others. It was not always 
the same line, but changed from one line to another. I could not 
determine with the facilities we had what that was due to, but I 
was tempted to ascribe it to some sort of electrostatic action. 
The three line wires were systematically transposed in building 
this line, so as to bring an equal length of each of the three wires 
in the same relation with the surface of the ground. 

Mr. Lincotn:—The point has been brought up about the use 
of series telephone versus the bridge telephone. I know by 
bitter experience that the series telephone does not give very 
good satisfaction, I once had charge of a line on the poles of 
which was run a.teiephone line, and on that telephone line we had 
about fifty series phones scattered along over twenty-five miles, 
about half a mile apart. We were never able to get successful 
service fromthat system. I ascribed most of the difficulty to the 
fact that the talking current had to go through so many loose 
contacts, so many jacks, and it is almost impossible to keep so 
many contacts in good shape. With the bridge ’phone it is 
necessary for the speaking current to go through only one pair 
of loose contacts or jacks at each phone. That constitutes one 
great advantage of the bridge over the seriés telephone. 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 289 


The suggestion has been made that the potential between 
telephone wires and ground can be reduced by introducing be- 
tween them autotransformers or condensers or resistances and 
connecting the middle points of these autotransformers, etc., 
to ground. 

The objection to that method, it occurs to me, is that it takes 
off the charging current at concentrated points. The current is 
induced in these telephone wires as a distributed effect, distrib- 
uted along the whole length; and if you try to take it off at 
bunched points, there will be a flow of current in the telephone 
wires which will introduce an e.m.f. and probably make dis- 
turbance in the telephone. The remedy: which I proposed is to 
run a ground wire along the whole length of the telephone wire, 
producing a distributed capacity which will take care of the dis- 
tributed induced effect most efficiently. 

Mr. MersHon:—With regard to the use of condensers on 
telephone lines, it seems to me we want to keep the capacity of: 
the telephone lines as low as possible to get good operation of the 
telephone. 

If any one wanted to signal with the power lines, it would be 
better to signal from neutral to ground, and receive messages 
at the corresponding place at the end of the line. 

Ido not think the objection Mr. Lincoln makes, relative to 
the use of autotransformers on telephone lines, that the current 
would be drawn off at certain points, whereas it is introduced 
uniformly along the telephone line, would hold, as the current 
is flowing in the same direction in both telephone wires, and the 
effects of the two currents will neutralize each other so far as 
the telephones are concerned. 

VICE-PRESIDENT SHELDON :—We will now proceed to the con- 
sideration of the paper on “ Burning of Wooden Pins on High 
Tension Transmission Lines,” by Mr. C. C. Chesney. 

Mr. Chesney presented his paper (see page 253) and read the 
following contribution by Mr. M. H. Gerry, Jr. 

Mr. M. H. Gerry, Jr.:—Ona certain number of high-tension 
transmission lines there has been burning of the wooden pins. 
On other transmission lines of high voltage, there has been no 
such burning. Where burning has occurred, it has been due to 
leakage of current from the surface of the insulators, coupled 
with resistance conditions in the pin, such that sufficient heat 
was developed to char the wood. 

When thoroughly dry, wood is one of the best of insulat- 
ing materials, and one of the poorest when containing sap or 
moisture. The greatest objection to it is its unreliability, due to 
the difficulty of removing the last traces of sap or moisture. A 
thoroughly dry wooden pin, fifteen inches in length, will stand 
indefinitely 100,000 volts pressure, while a green pin of the 
same length, containing sap, will break down very quickly under 
1,000 volts pressure. Paraffining the pins on the outside, or 
coating with asphaltum or linseed oil, is of no value. If the pins 


290 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


are thoroughly dry, the material in which they are dipped can be 
made to impregnate the entire body of the wood, thus producing 
a pin of high insulation. Such a pin is of value, as it reduces the 
static strains on the insulator and decreases the amount of 
leakage to ground. 

In order to prevent burning of pins they should have either 
very high or very low resistance. With insulators having a 
large amount of surface leakage, such as those illustrated by Mr. 
Chesney, an iron pin is perhaps the only solution of the difficulty. 
' There is nothing especially mysterious about the burning of 
wooden pins on high-tension lines, as it is merely a matter of total 
resistance to ground and the relative resistances of the insulators, 
pins, cross-arms and poles. Wherever burning occurs, it can be 
remedied by altering the design, material or dimensions of the 
insulators and improving the quality of the pins. 

Mr. H. W. Bucx:—Referring to the point which Mr. Chesney 
spoke of in regard to the so-called ‘‘ digesting ’’ of pins, I have 
seen many pins taken from the Niagara-Buffalo transmission 
line where such disintegration had occurred, the top of the pins 
having crumbled into a white powder. We have recently had 
some of this powder analyzed by a chemist and it was found to 
be a nitrate salt. This would look as if nitric acid had been 
formed in the presence of a static discharge inside of the insulator 
by the well-known atmospheric reaction and had attacked the 
wood, forming the nitrogen salt in combination with the vege- 
table matter of the pin. 

In this connection I would like to say that about six months 
ago we built an experimental single-phase line at Niagara, about 
two miles in length, and operated it continuously for nearly four 
months at approximately 75,000 volts. The conductors of this 
line were galvanized iron wire, tied to the insulators with copper 
tie wires. At the end of the experimental run, the galvanized 
iron wire had turned black to a considerable depth throughout 
its length. The copper tie wires had also been attacked, though 
not somuchastheiron. This surface disintegration was not due 
to general atmospiieric influence, for iron wire in the same place 
but not charged electrically retained its original bright condi- 
tion. I believe that this action is also due in some way to the 
influence of nitric acid formed by the brush discharge around the 
conductor. It indicates that some trouble may be experienced 
at such excessively high voltages where static discharge from the 
line is active. This discharge probably causes a combination of © 
the oxygen and nitrogen of the air which, with the moisture of 
the atmosphere, forms a film of dilute nitric acid surrounding 
and attacking the metallic conductor. 3 oe 

Mr. Lincotn —Mention has been made by Mr. Chesney and 
in the communication of Mr. Gerry as to the treatment of pins. 
I think the treatment of pins should be with a view to making 
them durable rather than making them good insulators. The 
pins should not be relied upon as a part of the insulation. As 


1903,] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 291 


long as they are dry and as long as the weather is perfectly dry, 
they may be most perfect insulators, but as soon as rain comes. 
and the pins are wet on the surface even, they become practically 
useless as insulators and the entire insulation, strain on the line 
falls on the insulators. We should treat the pins, therefore, with 
a view to preserving them rather than making insulators of them. 

Mr. MersHOoN:—it does not seem that, as Mr. Lincoln stated 
a few minutes ago, when the arms and pins get wet, the insula- 
tion is all in the insulators; because if this,were the case, I do not 
quite see how the sides of the pins next to the sea should 
be burned, and the sides away from the sea should not 
be burned. It seems to me it would be the other way. If the 
insulator controls the current, the lower the resistance of the pin, 
the less burning, and when the pin is charred all over there should 
be less heat generated on the surface, and consequently less ten- 
dency to burn. But if the pin does to some extent control the 
current, the lower the resistance the greater the current over the 
surface, and the more likely it is to burn, especially over any 
part of it which has had its resistance lowered. 

The path of the leakage current from wire to wire of a 
power transmission line may be considered as a high resistance 
electric circuit, derived from a constant potential source. The 
total resistance of this derived circuit is the series of the resistance 
of the three elements, insulators, pins and cross-arms. The 
resistance of each of these elements is that resulting from two 
resistances in multiple; namely, the resistance of the element 
through its substance and the resistance over its surface. The 
substance resistance of all the elements is usually high, so high 
in a well constructed line that it need not be considered. 

The surface resistance of the three elements may or may not 
be high, depending upon the surface conditions as regards 
moisture, dust, dirt or other deposits’: Suppose the surface con- 
ditions of all the elements is such as to allow considerable 
leakage. No harm will result to the insulator unless the leakage 
becomes great enough to start an arc. This is not the case, 
however, with the cross-arms and pins. The leakage over their 
surfaces, if great enough, will char all the surface over which it 
passes. Pins are more likely to char than cross-arms, since their 
surface is less and their surface resistance, therefore, higher than 
the cross-arms; the result being, for a given leakage current, 
more loss per unit area of pin surface than of cross-arm surface. 
Any protected portion of the pin is especially liable to charring. 
For, if the cross-arms and pins have their exposed surfaces pretty . 
thoroughly wet or dirty, so that the current passes over them with 
little resistance, the wet or dirty portions may be little affected; 
but if in the course of its path the current encounters any small 
portion of the pin which is not wet or which for any reason has a 
higher resistance per unit of length, the wood may be charred at 
this point. Now, this is what happens when the pins burn. The 
ins dator, the lower part of the pin, and the cross-arm have their 


. 


292 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


surface resistance lowered by moisture or otherwise, but the 
upper part of the pin being protected by the insulator does not 
have its surface resistance so much decreased; the consequence 
is burning of the protected surface. In some cases the inner 
surface of the insulator next the pin and the pin itself are so well 
protected by the insulator that the current, instead of leaking 
over the surface of the insulator until it reaches a point where the 
insulator and pin are in contact, jumps in a brush-discharge from 
the edge of the petticoat to the pin rather than follow the higher 
resistance of the protected surface. Asa result, the pin is burnt 
at the point where the brush discharge strikes it instead of at or 
near the thread. There are apparent three possible remedies 
for the trouble due to charring pins. 

1. Make the design and size of the insulator such that for all 
conditions its surface resistance will be so high as to control the 
leakage and keep it below a point which can harm the pin. 

2. Make the pins fireproof, but non-conducting. 

3. Make the pins conducting. 

The remedy recommended in the introduction to this discus- 
‘sion is (3). It is recommended that an iron pin be used. This 
certainly would do away with the trouble of charring pins, but 
whether of not it will introduce other and more serious trouble 
remains to be seen. It seems to me there is a very likely chance 
of trouble from the use of iron pins, due to the unyielding charac- 
ter of both iron and porcelain or glass and their widely different 
coefficients of expansion. Insulating material under mechanical 
stress will generally break down under a lower voltage than when 
not strained. An insulator or an iron pin might, when in- 
stalled, be put under a considerable mechanical stress or one 
which when first installed has comparatively little stress upon it 
may, due to changes of temperature, be much strained; the 
result in either case is increased liability to puncture. 

The endeavor may be made to get around this trouble by 
using a wooden thread upon the iron pins, but as shown by one 
of the cuts in the introduction, the charring trouble may still 
remain if this course is adopted. If a wooden cross-arm is used 
with the iron pin, the seat of the charring trouble may be trans- 
ferred to the cross-arm unless the pins be connected by a con- 
ductor. It would seem better to adopt the first remedy and- 
make the design of the insulator such as to protect the pins. 

Mr. pE Muratt:—It may possibly interest you to know that 
while the general practice in America is evidently to use wooden 
pins, in Europe it is just the opposite. Practically all the high 
potential installations use iron pins, and more than that, while 
here very often the whole pole is treated with as little iron as 
possible, in Europe there are quite frequently poles constructed 
entirely of iron, with iron cross-arms and iron pins, and the only 
insulation relied upon is the insulation proper. I believe this 
does away with the burning of pins, cross-arms and poles. I do 
not think there is very much difficulty in the way of avoiding 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. . 293 


mechanical strains, which have been alluded to several times 
to-night, with regard to fixing the insulator in the pin. One way 
to get around that is to fix the pin into the insulator by means of 
a cement which will take up any such strain, and in a great many 
installations that I know of a cement made of a mixture of 
litharge and glycerine has been used with, as far as I know, very 
good results. It seems to me that it is a very fair scheme thus 
to lay the entire insulation into the insulator, and then let the 
rest of the pole take care of itself. I know of one installation, 
where they are operating at 26,000 volts, using American glass 
insulators and iron pins and iron poles; and of another one which 
is using 25,000 volts, and has porcelain insulators, with iron pins 
on wooden poles part of the way, and iron pins in walls and on 
any kind of a support on the other portion of the road. Neither 
of these installations has given any trouble whatsoever and they 
are amongst some of the best high-voltage installations in 
Europe. 

Mr. Puitip Torcuio:—I want to suggest an explanation of 
the burning of the wood between the iron pin and the porcelain 
base in the Locke insulator shown in Fig. 3 of Mr. Chesney’s 
paper. I wish to call attention to the fact that, if two plates 
are maintained at a certain difference of potential, acting as 
condensers and spaced at such a distance that there will be no 
discharge between the plates, but set near the limit at which the 
discharge would begin and then there is inserted in the middle a 
plate of vulcanized rubber, which has a higher dielectric resist- 
ance than air, right away the discharge takes place between the 
plates. Now, that is contrary to what might have been ex- 
pected. The explanation is that before the insertion of the, 
vulcanized rubber plate the fall of potential between the two 
plates of the condenser is a uniform straight line, but when we 
introduce the vulcanized rubber plate we alter the conditions, 
as we have then three condensers in series, which will distribute 
the total fall of e.m.f. in inverse ratio to their capacities. There- 
fore, this plate of vulcanized rubber acting as a condenser with a 
larger capacity than the same amount of air which it displaces 
will be charged at a smaller fall of e.m.f. between its faces than 
existed before, and the e.m.f. between the outer condensers 
will be increased and then the discharge begins. Now, it seems 
to me that in the Locke insulator, with double porcelain petti- 
coats and an oak thread between iron pin and porcelain, there 
are present the conditions of several condensers in series which 
might give rise to a lack of uniformity in the distribution of 
e.m.f. between line wire and iron pin and cause the charring of 
the wood at the base of the insulator. 

Me. C. E. SxinnErR:—I understand that the pins used on one 
transmission line were selected with the utmost care, and were 
most carefully treated, and that they have had practically no 
trouble whatever in more than a year’s run with a potential of 
over 50,000 volts. These pins are protected from the weather 


. 294 ‘ HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. [March 27 


by glass sleeves. We should keep in mind that this is in a 
different climate from many other installations, and that a cure 
for these troubles in one climate may not be a cure in other 
climates. - 

Mr. W. N. Smitru:—In the matter of wood and iron pins, it 
seems to me that along with various other elements the question 
of cost will govern. Iron poles in this country at this time cost 
anywhere from $30 up, and a wooden pole of suitable size runs 
from perhaps $7 to $20, according to size and where it can be 
obtained. The size of cross-arms may be governed to some 
extent by the size selected for the butt of the pin. If you deter- 
mine first on the size of the shank of the pin that enters into the 
cross-arm, that in a measure determines the thickness of the 
cross-arm, if of wood and larger than usual. That may mean 
quite an additional percentage to the number of feet of lumber to 
be bought to provide cross-arms for a long pole line. Lumber is 
higher than it used to be, so that there are considerations, com- 
mercial as well as techincal, that these various elements of design 
all enter into. The cost of selecting some particular pin because 
it looks a little better may thus run into some thousands of 
dollars on a long pole line. 

VicgE-PRESIDENT SHELDON:—We will now give Mr. Chesney 
an opportunity to close the discussion on his paper. 

Mr. CuEesNEy:—I was particularly interested in Mr. Buck’s 
information concerning the cause of the ‘‘ digesting ”’ of the pin. 
This has bothered me on a number of transmission lines. I 
attributed this trouble to the formation of ozone. If it is due 
to the formation of nitric acid, I am glad to know it. As far 
as I know, on the particular line on which the Locke iron pins 
with wooden threads were used, the burning was not serious. 
The thread was punctured at one point but was in no other way 
injured. In order to relieve the mechanical strain between the 
iron pin and the insulator, I think it is quite possible to use a lead 
thread. Litharge and glycerine have been used to some extent in 
this country to cement. iron pins in porcelain insulators, but 
lately Portland cement has been used with quite as good results. 
I understand that one of the largest new transmission lines in 
Mexico is to be built with iron pins and porcelain insulators. 
The pins will be cemented in the insulators with Portland cement. 
Instead of iron poles, iron towers will be used, placed 400 or 500 
feet apart. 

VicE-PRESIDENT SHELDON:—We will now close the meeting 
by having a paper from Professor W. 5. Franklin, entitled,‘‘Model 
Showing Distribution of Electromotive Force and Current along 
a Single Phase Alternating Current Transmission Line.” (See 
page 261.) 

Proressor FRANKLIN:—I feel like apologizing to you for tak- 
ing up your time at this late hour, so I will not take the time to 
read the statement given in the paper, but will simply exhibit the 
model itself. 


1903.] COMMUNICATION. 295 


(Prof.. Franklin then exhibited and briefly described the 
model.) 
The meeting then adjourned. 


A Note on Line Insutation ror Hicu Voutace. 
[COMMUNICATED BY M. H. GERRY, JR.] 

The maximum practicable limit of pressure on transmission 
lines has been frequently stated as fixed at a certain voltage, but 
this limit has as frequently been extended, with good results. 
At the present time, no considerable difficulty should be experi- 
enced with 100,000 volts, and there is no good reason to fix the 
limit at that figure. 

The problems of insulation are becoming better understood, but 
there is still much to learn. The capacity and the surface effects 
of line insulators have received but little attention from engineers 
and many of the failures are due to this fact. The form of the 
insulator and the material have not, in general, received the 
proper treatment. A desirable insulator for high-tension is not 
merely a piece of glass or porcelain arranged to shed rain, and of 
sufficient thickness to resist puncture. 

The materials for construction of insulators are not so limited 
as assumed in the past. Glass and porcelain have been used 
almost exclusively, but from the experiments of the writer the 
material of greatest promise for high-tension insulators is pre- 
pared paper. Organic material, such as paper, has great advan- 
tage and is well suited for this purpose. Compound insulators 
in which the petticoats and water-sheds are made of metal, and 
the core of glass, porcelain, paper or other insulating material, are 
also feasible. 

For moderate tensions, up to perhaps 30,000 volts, insulators 
having metal tops and outer petticoats are n6t only perfectly 
feasible, but are very desirable, and can be made very strong and 
practically indestructible, and much superior to the common 
glass or porcelain types nowinuse. For high voltages, the entire 
insulator can be made of prepared paper, or of a combination of 
paper with glass, porcelain or other insulating materials. Insu- 
lators on these lines may be designed for almost any desired 
pressure obtainable with commercial transformers, provided that 
all the conditions are properly understood in advance. 

The writer has tested and experimented with nearly every 
type of insulator manufactured and with many special forms and 
constructions, and his conclusions, as stated above, are based on 
this experience, coupled with that gained from the practical 
operation of the highest voltage transmission in commercial 
service to-day. 


[COMMUNICATION AFTER ADJOURNMENT BY W. N. SmirTu.] 


An important matter that has not been touched upon in this 
discussion is the design of the pole-top pin, which, on a single 
three-phase transmission line, is of equal importance with tne 
cross-arm pins. As in other details of line construction a variety 


296 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION. 


of methods has been followed, of which some are doubtless better 
than others as regards their mechanical features. In the con- 
struction that has come under my observation, either the top of 
the pole has a hole bored vertically to receive a bolt or the shank 
of a wooden pin, or else a so-called “ ridge iron’”’ has been lag- 
bolted to the pole top, with the usual wood or porcelain fittings 
for carrying the insulator. Sometimes an ordinary oak bracket 
is framed into the top of the pole, the roof of which is shaped to 
accommodate it. 

Without entering into a discussion of the relative merits of 
these or other methods, it seems to me that there is enough 
difference between all the methods in vogue to warrant an 
attempt at standardization. This subject would, therefore, 
seem to be a proper one for the careful consideration of the 
Committee on High-Tension Transmission. 

[COMMUNICATION AFTER ADJOURNMENT By J. R. ARMSTRONG.] 

Relative to the discussion on ‘‘ Insulator Pins for High-Tension 
' Transmission Lines,” the iron pin seemed to be spoken of favor- 
ably by a great many present, but to me this iron pin has one 
great disadvantage (leaving the difference of coefficients of 
expansion of glass and iron out of the question)—nearly every 
pin has a burr on the end, due to the way in which the ordinary 
pin is manufactured. 

Now, there is a tendency to a continual discharge between the 
line and this burr or sharp point on the other end of the pin. 
This, after a time, cuts through the glazed finish of the insulator, 
and consequently causes the breaking down of the insulator. 

Also in thé same discussion, one of the objections raised to the 
use of wooden pins was that of the corroding at the ends and 
sides. 

I would just like to raise the question: if nitric acid is formed 
as was suggested, could not some base be used, which would form 
a neutral salt with nitric acid, the pin being treated in some way 
with this base. 

[COMMUNICATION AFTER ADJOURNMENT By F. S. Woopwarp.] 

During the discussion relative to the breaking down of insu- 
lators and the burning of high-tension insulator pins, one possible 
cause of the trouble was not stated. It may sometimes be due 
to the method of fastening the tie-wire to the insulator. In 
many cases I have known linemen in making what is known as 
a pigtail tie, after the wire was finally twisted, to bend down the 
end of this pigtail so that it came in contact with the surface of 
the insulator at a point near the lower rim; the distance between 
the edge of the rim on the insulator and the end of the tie, depend- 
ing, of course, upon the tie’s length. This would reduce the 
amount of creepage surface between the pin and the tie-wire, 
which partakes of the line potential. In this connection it might 
be well to state that in some eases spun-yarn, thoroughly satu- 
rated in tar or asphalt or in P. & B. paint, makes a good sub- 
stitute for tie-wire, the coating practically protecting the spun- 


COMMUNICATION. 207 


yarn against weather effects. It might not, however, be service- 
able upon a line under the conditions of voltage as described by 
Mr. Buck, where the surface of the line wire and of the ties 
showed signs of reaction due to the formation of nitric acid, 
which would probably affect the vegetable fibre of the spun yarn 
in the manner indicated in the case of the thread of the insulator 
pin. I regret that Mr. Buck did not state the size of the iron wire 
used on their experimental 75,000 volt line. I recall the paper 
published in the TRANSACTIONS on the “ Dielectric Strength of Air,” 
by Mr. Chas. P. Steinmetz, in which he gave an account of a 
number of experiments on the sparking distance between sharp 
points, between spheres of various sizes and cylinders of various 
sizes. The lower portions of the curves, as I recall, departed 
more and more from the straight line effect as the voltage was 
reduced and radius increased. It would be interesting, in this 
connection, to follow out these experiments and see whether a 
change in the diameter of the wire (practically being a con- 
tinuous cylinder) would stop sparking or brush discharge at the 
desired voltage. For instance, if the wire in Mr. Buck’s experi- 
ment was a No. 8 and the wire in the second experiment was a 
No. 1 or a No. 2, if the increased radius would so modify the 
curve that the brush discharge and the probable formation of 
nitrogen would be prevented. 

As a sequel to the discussion on pins and insulators, it would 
be a very desirable thing to take up and standardize the cross- 
arm to which these pins are attached. Also that the distance 
between wires and the most desirable method of spacing same 
should be outlined in the report of the Transmission Committee. 


COMMUNICATION AFTER ADJOURNMENT BY HENrRy FLoy. 


Fearing that the remarks of some of the speakers may have left 
an erroneous impression as to the potential of telephone circuits 
carried on the poles of high-tension transmission lines, I desire to 
state that some measurements made by a Weston voltmeter 
between the conductors of a telephone circuit placed five feet 
below the conductors of a 25,000 volt overhead circuit and ground, 
showed the potential to be only from 140 to 160 volts. _ Similar 
measurements on a telephone circuit three feet below a 10,000 
volt line showed only about 95 volts to ground and, naturally, 
no difference of potential between the telephone conductors. It 
seems to me that the voltage of a telephone circuit given as 
20,000 by Mr. Thomas cannot be such potential as would be indi- 
cated by a voltmeter or such as would cause particular damage, 
being, I assume, simply static potential. Oe 

Referring to the suggestions made as to signaling in case of 
partial breakdown of the telephone system, it has occurred to me 
that as a relay to the telephone circuit, a system of wireless 
telegraphy could be installed without large expense, which might 
advantageously be used in transmitting signals in case of trouble 
with the telephone circuit. 


298 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


Discussion AT MINNEAPOLIS, MINN., APRIL 3, 1903. 


The Minnesota Branch held its 11th regular meeting Friday, 
April 3d, at the Electrical Building at the State University. Six 
members and 18 visitors attended. 

The meeting was devoted to the four papers of the Transmission 
Committee. The papers were read, and produced considerable 
discussion. Prof. D. C. Jackson, of Wisconsin State University, 
and Dean F. S. Jones, of the Engineering Department of Min- 
nesota State University, were present. The opinion of the mem- 
bers regarding the papers and new ideas brought forth were: 

lst. That the proposed standardization of pins and pole con- 
struction must consider not only the transmission voltage, but 
particularly such local conditions as mist and dampness at inland 
lakes and from the ocean, of salt storms, the amount of lightning, 
etc. 

2d. Regarding wooden pins, that trouble from same must be 
expected in time, say after fifteen years’ service, when the pins 
have weakened mechanically. An iron pin would seem to be 
more permanent. 

3d. That wooden pins should not have a shoulder just above 
the cross-arm. The use of a shoulder produces additional me- 
chanical strains in the pin at the cross-arm or shoulder not con- 
sidered in the formula or theoretical basis given’ by Mr. Mershon. 
The shoulder was considered a relic from telephone lines and not 
necessary or advisable where there are heavy mechanical strains. 

4th. That in service, the great majority of the insulator failures 
were mechanical and were due to strains produced by a poor fit 
between the pin and the insulator. Manufacturers of porcelain 
and glass insulators in the States produced excellent insulation, 
but the threads were not of uniform size in each and every insu- 
lator, as in those made by foreign manufacturers. The best work- 
manship is also desired in cutting the iron or wooden threads of the 
pin. é 

5th. That transmission lines as a whole—the pole, arm, pins, 
insulators and power circuits—have many weak links, in a long 
line. It is advisable where there are two or more companies, 
possibly competing for the power business of a city, to have con- 
necting circuits and even to operate their lines in parallel. A 
somewhat similar arrangement is common among steam railways. 
‘\ competing road gives the use of its tracks toa rival during tem- 
porary trouble to roadbed or at a burned-out bridge. A working 
arrangement of this nature, 7.e., to assist each other as far as 
possible in times of trouble, would help the reputation of power 
transmissions, 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 299 


Discussion AT SCHENECTADY, ApRIL 7, 1903. 

Dr. F. A. C. PERRINE:—There is so much in these:papers, that 
it is hard to enter upon a discussion of them. In regard to the 
paper by Mr. Mershon, I believe that there is one element in the 
strength of the pin which he has altogether neglected, which how- 
ever, may possibly be neglected on account of the roofing or 
rounding of the cross-arm. I refer to the element of strength in 
the shoulder. The pin is discussed as a beam fixed at one end, 
and in consequence the ordinary parabolic section of the beam is 
brought out, because the fibers of the pin are considered to be in 
tension or compression. Now, asa matter of fact, if the shoulder 
is made pronounced and firmly fixed on the cross-arm, the pin is 

- very much increased in strength; because there is an element of 
the stress applied to the end of the pin, which is transmitted 
parallel to the side of the pin and against the cross-arm. 

Mr. Mershon says that usually pins break off at the shank. 
This is generally the case where pins do not bear on their shoulder 
in the cross-arm. In some experiments made in the West with a 
number of pins, I found that if the pins were given a proper 
shoulder and made to bear in the cross-arm, they did not 
break at the shank, but broke diagonally from a point about at 
the end of the thread crossing the pin. The pins that were tested 
were approximately the same locust pins that were mentioned in 
the discussion. By giving these pins a proper bearing, the 
strength was found to be increased from 700 Ibs. to 900 or 1,200 
Ibs., with approximately the same pin. 

I notice that the pins designed by Mr. Mershon correspond very 
closely to the pin in Fig. lin Mr. Chesney’s paper. Furthermore, 
I see that the pin in Fig.1 in Mr. Chesney’s paper is not givena 
bearing in the cross-arm, as the shoulder is filleted so that it does 
not come down to a solid bearing. The other pin in Fig. 2 is 
given a solid bearing, and this pin is very much stouter than the 
pin in Mr. Mershon’s paper or the pin in Fig. 1. As you will no- 
tice, these pins are both for the same insulator. The pin in Fig. 1 
is the pin used on the Standard Company’s lines and in Fig. 2 the 
pin used on the Bay Counties lines. Mr. Hancock of the Bay 
Counties Company designed this pin after testing a number of 
pins and insulators. He found that the pin in Fig. 1 would 
almost invariably break before the insulator; that the pin in Fig. 
2 would practically never break before the insulator, this pin 
havin. practically the same strength as the insulator. The ma- 
terial is eucalyptus. Since the discussion, Mr. Hancock has 
reported that the strength of this eucalyptus pin compared with a 
steel wagon-axle. The axle was broken at a strain that would not 
break the insulator, although the wood pin was of approximately 
the same strength as the insulator. 

The observation made in the discussion that Mr. Mershon’s 
pin is based on a uniform stress applied to the insulator, and that 
this is not a reasonable specification for the standard pin, isa 
point that is very well taken. With lines such as are proposed 


300 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


now, with sparis cf five or six hundred feet, the transverse stress 
on a wire from one-half to three-quarters of an inch in diameter, 
will be in excess of 600 lbs. With oak or locust, as specified by 
Mr. Mershon, the pin will not have a strength much in excess c* 
600 lbs. With ecualyptus, it would have a greater strength, 
eucalyptus having approximately the strength of good hickory. 
In such spans of five or six hundred feet it would be necessary to 
install more than one of Mr. Mershon’s pins to stand the strain 
from heavy cables. 

In regard to the testing of glass insulators, so far as I am 
aware,having had experience with a good many thousands of 
glass insulators, the puncture of glass insulators by reason of 
breakage after the insulator had been inspected visually and 
tapped with a mallet, is very unimportant. The point that Mr.. 
Blackwell makes of glass insulators breaking down, due to lack . 
of annealing is, on the contrary, an exceedingly important one. 
One of the lines in California installed a type of glass insulator 
that had been well tried, but apparently it received a batch of 
unannealed insulators, for before the end of the year a large num- 
ber of their insulators separated and broke down; the head 
of the insulator cracked off and let the wires drop. Such occur- 
rences with glass insulators, are far more important and more 
likely to happen than punctures. A glass that will puncture at 
all, I believe to be a glass that is so bad that you could see the 
defects. No insulator should be installed which has a bubble 
between the wire and the pin, because these bubbles are vacuums, 
and you might as well have just so much metal in the insulator, 

Mr. Lincoln's paper, is I think, the first approaching a complete 
discussion of the telephone line transposition problem, and it is sc 
complete that I cannot sit down without commending it, without 
saying that in my belief it contains the elements of the entire 
solution of this very important and difficult problem. Had this. 
paper been printed four years ago, I believe that I know of more 
than one man’s life-that would have been saved by it. A very 
sad accident happened about a year ago: A patrolman starting 
out to work, went to the closed telephone box to report. In con- 
necting this telephone to the line, he was killed. I believe the 
power line was grounded, but not to the telephone line. Since 
that, the company has observed the rule of seeing that the 
operator is insulate as well as the line. 

The question of potential to earth is the only thing that Mr. 
Lincoln has not given an absolute statement of, and I am inclined: 
to think that that is because there is something in it that we don’t 
yet know. Mr. Lincoln writes of the difference of potential, but 
says that that repres nts so small a current as to be inappreciable 
If the surface of the condenser that is produced by the power line 
and the telephone line and the condenser of the telephone line and 
the earth is caléulated, where the line is one or two hundred 
miles long, the amount of current that is transmitted will not be 
by any means inappreciab!e, and will be enough to give a great 


; BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 301 


deal of trouble. This is the only criticism that I would have te 
offer to this most excellent paper of Mr. Lincoln’s. 

This model of Prof. Franklin’s is a piece of education to all of 
us, not simply as a model of electromotive force, but because it 
‘represents the effects that take place where we have a line of one 
-complete wave length. 


Discussion AT PHILADELPHIA, APRIL 6, 1903. 

Mr. Hovces:—A few items of particular interest were brought 
out in the discussion at New York, so I will quote from that dis- 
cussion. 

Mr. Hopces:—Mr. Gerry wrote,‘ Thereis no special difficulty in 
installing a successful telephone circuit, which will give satistac- 
tory service and reasonable safety in operation, on a pole line 
carrying from 50,000 to 60,000 volts.’ With this I heartily 
agree, and many would undertake to install a successful system 
in connection with any present high-tension transmission line 
without the slightest doubt of success. It simply amounts to 
taking the necessary precautions to have the line properly bal- 
lanced, insulated and protected. But I cannot agree with Mr. 
Gerry that “the ordinary telephone lightning arrester is an 
undesirable and unsafe piece of apparatus for this purpose,” 
—referring to a location ‘‘ where there is considerable lightning.” 
Of course, he says ordinary arrester, and this brings up the ques- 
tion to what arrester does Mr. Gerry refer? I have had con- 
siderable experience with different types of arresters and I have 
found that under the conditions mentioned by Mr. Gerry, some 
arresters are better than others. Unfortunately, we do not know 
just how a lightning discharge will act in every case. Lightning 
discharges are freakish, but a properly constructed telephone 
system will be as safe as anything possibly can be. Of course, 
the ordinary telephone lightning arrester would not be sufficient 


in extraordinary cases. 
Mr. Mershon stated that the truth of the observations of para- 


302 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


graph (6) of Mr. Lincoln’s paper was not apparent to him. Re- 
ferring to the first portion of this paragraph, in which Mr. 
Lincoln says that comparing the electromagnetic and the electro- 
static disturbances in the section of untransposed telephone 
lines, the first is in the nature of constant potential effect, and 
the second in the nature of constant current effect. 

Mr. Mershon agrees that the electromagnetic disturbance is in 
the nature of constant potential effect, but does not agree that the 
electrostatic disturbance is in the nature of constant current 
effect, excepting only when the static charge carried by the tele- 
phone circuit approximates that which the power line can im- 
press statically upon the telephone lines. This is not actually 
the case in practice, so the electrostatic disturbance is also in the 
nature of constant potential effect. . Therefore both effeets are of 
the same nature, ‘‘ that of constant voltage under actual condi- 
tions.” 

Mr. Lincoln’s view of this matter seems to me to be that as the 
electrostatic charge on the two telephone wires is not independent 
of the resistance of the telephone circuit, an increase in the resist- 
ance of the circuit will increase the electrostatic charge to the 
telephone wires, and this increase of charge will tend to overcome 
the increased resistance and maintain a constant current effect. 

However, in any particular instance the resistance will remain 
constant, and I agree with Mr. Mershon that both the electro- 
magnetic and electrostatic disturbances would be in the nature 
of constant voltage effect. 

Mr. Mershon further said that the statement of Mr. Lincoln’s 
with respect to the disturbing ampere-turns was incorrect, “‘ if, by 
telephones of various resistances, it is meant to designate tele- 
phones of various number of turns, assuming the same space 
available for copper in each case.’’ Mr. Lincoln says that ‘‘ with 
telephone receivers of varying resistance, the ampere-turns in the 
receiver due to electromagnetic induction, are particularly con- 
stant, while those due to electrostatic induction increase with 
the number of turns and, therefore, with the resistance of the 
receiver.” 

Mr. Mershon’s objection is that with constant poltential the 
ampere-turns are not constant as the resistance increases, as the 
ampere-turns vary inversely as the square root of the resistance. 
I agree with Mr. Mershon in this, but perhaps Mr. Lincoln does 
not refer to the increase in ampere-turns under the assumption 
that only the same space in each case is available for copper. 

I would say, however, that while the electromagnetic induced 
e.m.f. is independent of the resistance and the electrostatic 
induced e.m.f. is dependent upon the resistance, the effect of both 
upon the receiver is dependent upon the number of turns of the 
receiver; the electromagnetic induction by reason of the number 
of turns and the resistance, and the electrostatic induction for the 
same reasons and also because of the effect upon the electrostatic 
e.m.f. by the change in resistance, when the resistance is low 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 303 


And so, comparatively, the electromagnetic disturbance in 
general is more greatly reduced by an increase in the resistance of 
the receiver on a similar coil, than the electrostatic disturbance. 

Mr. Mershon said that from the above conditions it would seem 
advisaole to wind the receivers to as high a resistance as possible, 
in order to overcome the electromagnetic and electrostatic dis- 
turbances. This is evident; but assuming that the ordinary 
telephone receiver for various reasons is as large as desired, there 
is a mechanical limit to the increasing of the resistance. 

It has been supposed throughout that the receiver is connected 
in the line direct. This, however, is rarely the case. Most often 
the receiver is connected to one side of a transformer (or “‘repeat- 
ing coil,’ as we term it), and the other side of the transformer is 
connected in the line. This transformer could be built to any 
desirable size and resistance, particularly as it is advantageous to 
raise the potential in transmitting, and therefore the number of 
turns of the winding connected to the line may be large. 

Mr. Mershon said that the objection given for the use of the 
series telephone by Mr. Lincoln does not seem a valid one, as no 
one would connect either a series or bridging telephone at a tran-. 
position point. In his paper Mr. Lincoln has only taken the 
worst point as a sort of ‘‘ horrible example.”’ ; 

I would say, however, that from consideration of the static 
disturbance, which is twenty times or more greater than the 
induced current disturbance, a series instrument could not be con- 
nected in the line without throwing the system out, except at 
certain points; and these points ate the ones from which no 
induced charge is flowing towards a transposition point. Moving 
the instrument from these neutral points towards the transposi- 
tion points, would simply be going from good, through bad, to 
worse. An instrument’ bridged across the line would not be dis- 
turbed to any extent as a path of least resistance would be toward 
the transposition point, and not through the coils of the instru- 
ment. 

In the discussion, Mr. Lincoln attributes his trouble with series 
instruments largely to the points of contact. This could easily 
be a cause, but the principle trouble would come from the above- 
mentioned static disturbance. Mr. Mershon suggested a method 
of accomplishing the desired end of having the telephone lines as 
nearly as possible at the same potential as the earth, which, he 
says, seems preferable to the use of a ground wire suggested by 
Mr. Lincoln in paragraph (15). Mr. Mershon’s method is that of 
using auto-transformers connected across the telephone line at a 
number of points, preferably at each of the telephone stations, 
each having its middle point connected to ground. He goes on to 
say that each transformer should be designed so as to take up a 
small amount of telephonic current, but should have wires of 
sufficient size to enable it to take, in case of a cross with a high 
voltage wire, a current heavy enough to operate the circuit-open- 
ing devices in the power'stations, or else to blow a suitable fuse in 


304 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


the telephone circuit itself. If the transformer designed to allow 
a passage of sufficient current to blow a fuse would also prevent 
the passage of the telephonic current, it appears to me that the 
idea is a good one. But, referring to the case where the power 
circuit is of high frequency, the transformer coil which would 
prevent the passage of the telephonic current would also retard 


the passage of the power current, and it would be necessary to __ 


protect the telephone user and open the line by other means. 

Mr. Thomas suggested that probably the increasing of the 
capacity between the ground and telephone wires might best be 
accomplished by using a twisted pair, one side of which is con- 
nected to the ground, “for each side of the telephone circuit; and 
having this properly insulated would prevent the danger of a 
cross such as would be likely to occur. Mr. Lincoln’s scheme is 
that a wire connected to the ground be run in proximity to the 
telephone wires, all of which, presumably, would be bare. Mr. 
Thomas’s idea would be carried out at less expense by using 
triple conductor-wire. Of course, if a lead-covered cable would 
be used, the grounding of the sheath would carry out Mr. Lin- 

‘coln’s idea completely. This, however, would increase the ex- 
pense of the line considerably. 

All these methods of bringing the ground near the telephone 
wires would make it much more liable for a workman to ground 
the telephone wires through his body, and therefore, as suggested 
‘by Mr. Thomas, he should be protected by having, between the 
telephone circuit and ground, an air gap small enough to make 
it safe. 

Mr. Lincoln’s objections to the introducing of transformers, 
condensers, resistances, etc., between the telephone wires and 
ground are recognized by all who are particularly interested in 
having the telephone system work as well as it possibly can. The 
line should have as little leakage as possible and the capacity of 
the telephone lines should be kept as low as may be. Therefore, 
to obtain the best transmission with the greatest safety, it would 
seem that the following points should be carefully considered. 

First:—Both power and telephone lines should be properly 
transposed. And this transposing is not altogether so simple a 
matter as it is generally supposed, as it would be possible to 
arrange the transpositioning so that the power and telephone 
wires would neutralize each other. 

Second :—The insulation of the telephone lines should be high, 
and of course the line should be strongly constructed. 

Third:—At each telephone station the instrument. circuit 
should be connected to the secondary of a transformer. This 
transformer should have a high resistance primary with a great 
number of turns, and the insulation between the primary and 
secondary should be high. The middle point of the primary 
should be connected to ground through a retardation or choke- 
coil. In each side of the telephone line circuit, at each station, 
there should be a so-called “ lightning gap ” arranged, designed 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 305 


so as to discharge when the potential of the telephone wires 
should approximate that which would break down the insulation - 
of the line. 

In the connection to ground of this lightning arrester, there 
should be placed an electromagnet of low resistance and low 
retardation; so arranged that by its operation it will open the 
telephone line between the arrester and transformer and connect 
the ground side of the lightning arrester with the ground direct. 

This method of construction removes the objection that a 
workman would come in close proximity with the ground while 
working on the telephone circuit. And also it provides neces- 
sary protection for the telephone user without allowing a path 
for leakage of the telephone current, or affecting the transmission 
by increase of capacity. 

Mr. Lincotn:—In reference to the telephone business, it has 
been the general experience that as long as no trouble occurred on 
the main transmission line paralleling the telephone line (or 
rather which the telephone line parallels) the service on the tele- 
phone line can be carried on with practically no difficulty. As 
soon as the main line gets into trouble by grounding, and so on, 
there is difficulty on the telephone line—it becomes very noisy 
and practically inoperative. That is just the time when the tele- 
phone line is most important; when there is trouble, you want to 
use the telephone line. 

CHAIRMAN HERING:—We would be glad to hear from some of 
the insurance men. 

WASHINGTON DEVEREUX :—Naturally, insurance people are not 
in favor of high-tension currents beyond five hundred volts. 
High-tension has come to stay. In the early days I think the 
electric light people frightened the insurance people very much. 
The subject is now in safe hands and being considered in con- 
junction with the Cenimittees of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
ELEecTRICAL Encineers and the National Board of Fire Under- 
writers, and I think very soon there will be rules formulated per- 
mitting sixty thousand volts. Those rules have not yet been 
published, and what they are I don’t care to say. 

CHAIRMAN HeEriNG:—I wish to call attention to a limitation of 
the formula of Mr. Mershon, which is, I believe, the well-known 
formula for beams. While it is correct, it should be understood 
that it applies only to the case in which the cross-section does not 
change abruptly. For instance, if in a thick horizontal project- 
ing beam a vertical saw-cut is made, say half way through it, the 
beam will not be so strong as a smaller beam having a uniform 
cross-section equal to the remaining half. In other words, a 
beam of small but uniform or uniformly varying cross-section 
may be stronger than one of larger but abruptly changing cross- 
section. The shoulder of the proposed standard pin is a case of 
this kind, in which the cross-section changes abruptly and this 
changes the internal stresses in such a way that the pin may be 
subjected to much greater strain than this formula would give, 


306 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


unless the bracing action of this shoulder more than compensates 
for the abrupt change of cross-section. 

Mr. Mershon proposes to cut off the tops of the screw thread, a. 
shown in his illustration; why does he not also fill up the bottoms 
of those V-shaped screw thread cuts, as is done in the standard 
thread? This would make the pin much stronger, as there is then 
a less abrupt change of cross-section. It would also be interesting 
to know why he used an angle of 90° instead of 60°, asinstandard 
threads. 

CuarLes Hewitt:—I notice that in this pin, which I believe 
is one of Mr. Mershon’s, the bottom of the groove is flattened. It 
seems to be flattened just as Mr. Hering says. 

CHAIRMAN HeEerinc:—We have a number of models here that 
have been sent to us by the manufacturers. Mr. Sanville will 
tell us something about them. 

(Exhibition of specimens of insulators and pins.) 

Mr. Hurcuins:—I would like to ask if anyone here has had 
experience with benefits derived from using a dark color over a 
white porcelain. I have heard it said that the white porcelains 
make a very good target, while the darlx ones are not so conspicu- 
ous. 

CHAIRMAN HEertInG:—Someone remarked that the insulators 
would be liable to crack when the sun shines on them. It seems 
to me that the dark one would be much more liable to crack from 
the sun than would the light one. ‘ 

Mr. Lincotn:—I think the porcelain insulators will stand the 
strain due to heating much better than the glass. As far as 
shooting is concerned, I think the brown insulators were adopted 
at Niagara on the last installation there for the purpose of being 
less conspicuous, although we had no very great trouble there. 

Mr. Hopces:—The question of shooting insluators is of great 
concern to the telephone people. A small boy seeing the insula- 
tor shoots at it and puts shots through the erial cable, which 
very much disturbs the erial cable. At Niagara it seems that 
small boys throw hoops over the wires, short-circuiting them and 
causing “‘ fireworks.” 

Mr. LincoLn :—Shooting insulators reminds me of a story in 
reference to the lines running into the City of Mexico. They 
have a great deal of trouble there from the fact that the natives 
throw the leaves of a plant called the megalia, which is a plant 
consisting of ninety-nine per cent. water, over the lines, and they 
cause a great deal of trouble, so much that they had to get the 
Governor to detail a cavalry guard. One day they caught a 
native throwing leaves. They took him to court, proved the 
case against him and the judge sentenced him to a year in jail. 
He suspended sentence, however, until the next case of malicious 
interference, no matter who caused it. 

Mr. Hewitt:—In Mr. Sanville’s abstract of the New York 
discussion he spoke of the“ digested wood”’ as being fine nitrogen 
salts, I would like to ask whether there was any explanation as 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 307 


to how these nitrogenous salts were formed, whether the air in 
the neighborhood was combined with the air forming nitric acid, 
or how that combination came about. 

Mr. SANVILLE:—As I understand Mr. Buck’s description of 
this, he seems to take for granted that we all know that a static 
discharge in moist air produces nitric acid. It seems to be a fact 
he is aware of. 
~ Mr. Hewittr:—I have learned something new. I was not 
_ aware that nitrogen and oxygen in the air could be combined to 

make nitric acid. 

CHAIRMAN HERING:—There is a plant in operation at Niagara 
Falls where nitrogen and oxygen are combined, forming nitrous 
oxide gas from which nitric acid is made. 

Mr. Hewitr:—There is one other point in the discussion in 
which it says ecualyptus pins are found the best. Naturally that 
would be the case in California as there are no others in the state. 
But it is hardly just to claim that it would be better than the 
locust or the oak. 

Mr. THos. SPENCER:—In regard to the formation of nitric 
acid, even an arc, in a confined space in the presence of water will 
form nitrous acid. Take an enclosed lamp after burning a short 
time and shut it off and after a while open the cylinder; you 

-would get a very decided nitrous acid smell. That is probably 
what Mr. Buck referred to. ; 

CHAIRMAN HERING:—It seems rather a difficult thing to do to 
combine the oxygen and nitrogeninthe air. It seems a peculiar 
case in which it is done unknowingly or unintentionally. 

The meeting then adjourned. 


Discussion AT CuHicaGco, APRIL 7, 1903. 


The meeting was called to order at 8.20 Pp. M., with Secretary 
Pierce in the Chair and about 100 members and guests present. 

The first paper, ‘“‘ Mechanical Specifications of a Proposed 
Standard Insulator Pin,’’ by Ralph D. Mershon, was presented 
by Mr. W. G. Carlton. 

At the conclusion of the reading of the paper, Mr. Carlton also 
read a discussion which had been presented in New York, by Mr. 
C. L. Cory, of San Francisco, and D. L. Huntington, of Spokane, 
Washington. 

The second paper, “ The Testing of Insulators,” by F. O- 
Blackwell, was presented by Mr. James Lyman. 

At the conclusion of the reading of this paper, Mr. Lyman read 
a portion of the discussion which had been presented in New 
York, from Mr. M. H. Gerry, Mr. P. M. Lincoln, Mr. W. N. Smith 
and Mr. C. C. Chesney 

Mr. CarLton:—I remember a test made on a lot of 5,000 
_ glass insulators, at 50,000 volts; out of that lot a very small 
number broke down—in the neighborhood of five, I think—and 
a part of the defects in the five could have been detected by ex- 


308 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


amination. Of this lot of 5,000 insulators which were put in 
service on a 33,000 volt line only a few have broken down, and 
they were probably injured at the time they were installed. 

Mr. GonzENBACH:—I think the matter of glass versus porce- 
lain insulators has been agitated for a good many years. 

Mr. Carlton seems to be in favor of glass insulators, and in the 
particular instance that he refers to, I would like to ask if the 
glass insulator had been tested at the factory or on the ground 
before being put in service? : 

Mr. CarLton:—I do not know about that; I simply remember 
the results that we obtained. 

Mr. GonzENBACH:—I have had that question before me for 
about eight years, and in every plant I have been connected with 
this question has come up, whether glass or porcelain insulators 
should be used. 

I was at one time connected with the building of a small 
municipal plant in the east—in Vermont. Every purchase was 
passed upon by an assembly of voters of the town, and it was 
interesting to hear those old farmers discuss whether glass or 


porcelain insulators were the better, there were some red hot . 


arguments on both sides, but I do not know that Iam any nearer 
a decision to-day than I was at that time. I think the disrepute 
of glass is very largely due to the manufacturers of it. I can 
only say that so long as power is transmitted over glass insulators 
at between 40,000 and 50,000 volts glass insulators must be 
considered as competitors of porcelain. 

Mr. Blackwell mentions a factor of safety of about 3$ to 1, in 
connection with the very high pressure test, and a maximum test 
pressure of double the service pressure. I cannot understand 
why we should go quite so high. As a matter of fact I under- 
stand that Nunn Bros.,in their Telluride, Utah, installation, using 
40,000 volts transmission pressure, give their insulators a test not 
exceeding 50,000 or 55,000 volts, and are obtaining good results. 

The third paper, “‘ Transposition and Relative Location of 
Power and Telephone Wires,”’ by P. M. Lincoln, was presented by 
Mr H.-H. Wait. y 

At the conclusion of the reading of this paper the discussion 
which had been presented in New York by Mr. M. H. Gerry, 
Mr. Ralph Mershon and Mr. Thomas, was read. : 

Mr. Wait:—Mr. A. S. Hatch, City Electrician of Detroit, has 
had trouble on account of induction on their telephone lines, 
which are run on the same poles, in a good many cases, as their 
series arc-lighting lines. These arc-lighting lines are, of course, 
not of the very high potential character which we have been 
talking about, but the fact that they are constant current and 
have varying resistance in the circuit, brings up a little different 
problem. He has sent a communication and I will read some 
parts which will perhaps be of interest. 

Mr. Hatcu:—I have been greatly interested in the introduc- 
tion for discussion of disturbing currents in telephone lines par- 


BRANGH DISCUSSIONS 309 


ticularly on account of my own experience during the past year 
with series alternating arc lamps supplied from circuits run, in 
places, on the same poles with fire alarm and police telephone 
systems. 

When the plant of the Public Lighting Commission of Detroit, 
Mich., was installed, it consisted of direct-current open arc lamp, 
burning in circuits of 100. Two years ago in order to meet the 
demand for new lamp locations, it was decided to install the- 
series alternating arc system, and the first installation was in the 
western part of the city, consisting of about 380 lamps supplied 
by six circuits from a substation which received the current from 
the main station by means of a two-phase feeder, thus giving 
three circuits in multiple on each phase, each circuit being con- 
trolled by a reactance coil. The old direct current circuits were 
not changed except to cut them into the substation, reduce them 
to 60 lamps capacity and double all single wire loops. Where 
convenient, at the time of installation, the lighting commission, 
fire alarm telegraph and police signal systems were run on the 
same poles. About one-half of this combined construction con- 
sists of a six-pin arm with the arc circuits occupying the middle 
pins and the fire and police wires on the outside, the remainder 
being the commission wires on an arm below the fire and police. 
The combination of any particular arc an‘ fire or police circuits 
is only for short distances, one or the other circuit frequently 
leaving its neighbors on it~ own poles and if coming back again 
it may be to meet another arc circuit of a different phase. The 
six circuits are designated by letters. The least induction is 
produced when the circuits a, B and c are of one phase and D, E 
and F of the other, although they are so arranged that any circuit 
can be run with either phase. However, if c and F are cut off, the 
telephone lines are almost silent, showing that where the fire and 
police lines parallel the other four circuits, they balance them- 
selves. This made the first problem to balance the telephone 
lines for circuits c and E and, at the same time, not disturb the 
balance already established in connection with the other four. 

Having accomplished this, cleared the telephone lines from 
electromagnetic induction, but a change in the electrostatic 
capacity of any circuit would alter the conditions entirely. The 
alteration of the electrostatic induction is produced in three ways: 
first, by the leakage of both the arc and telephone circuits, due 
principally to dampness; secondly, by varying resistances par- 
ticularly in the arc circuit; thirdly, by the disturbance due to inde- 
pendent parallel lines. The arc circuits, when running, will vary 
in insulation from 500 to 150,000 ohms between wires and ground, 
yet, on battery test the next day will measure over a megohm, 
I am satisfied from tests conducted so far that the increased 
induction caused by this variation can be eliminated by the 
proper use of condensers and inductances. The second varia- 
tion, that due to a variation of the resistance of the arc circuit is 


entirely a lamp variation and will be corrected in the lamp, 


310 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


The third disturbance, that due to independent parallel lines, is 
the most serious one to overcome. By independent parallel 
lines, I mean any wire paralleling an arc circuit and constituting 
in itself, a closed circuit. My attention was first called to this 
about three years ago. The arc circuits are grounded at the 
switchboard during the daytime, so constituting a closed circuit 
grounded at one point. If the circuit parallels an alternating 
line, it becomes the secondary of a transformer. In testing this 
circuit during the day, the ground would be taken off and the 
circuit opened at the switchboard. While measuring to ground 
I would frequently get a spark at the jack which could not be 
attributed to the testing battery. I have sent patrolmen out to 
find an imaginary cross with live wires, but two or three fruitless 
searches led me to realize the cause. The accompanying sketch 
shows this effect on telephone lines. A fire alarm wire, a police 
telephone line and an arc circuit are on the same cross-arm for a 
short distance, the fire alarm wire finally leaves the Commission’s 
poles, and later, is carried for some distance on police poles 


Wr rhe 
i CODE i fs 
~ PIE JC. {I if 
1 eesesees TELE PHONE it | 
| -—~-—-.F/RE ALARM i i 
’ C.3 802 i 
t i 
{ 
i 
| i 
: 33 


thus paralleling a telephone line which also parallels the same 
or another arc circuit. Ordinarily, the fire alarm wire is a closed 
low resistance circuit and so acts as the secondary of a trans- 
former of which the are wire is the primary, and this secondary 
current induces a tertiary one in the telephone wire which is out 
of phase with the secondary current induced by the arc current 
in the same line. This may be obviated by neutralizing the cur- 
rent in the fire alarm wire, although probably the easiest way is a 
new line of poles. ; 

In paragraph 9 of Mr. Lincoln’s paper he speaks of considering 
two condensers, one between the power wires and the telephone 
line and the other between the telephone line and ground. I 
should think the third condenser, that between the power line and 
ground, should be considered also, for this reason; the first con- 
denser is practically constant, for if there is a variation of poten- 
tial (especially that caused by leakage) in this condenser, the 
same variation is caused in the other two, so the relative inductive 
effect is practically constant; but either of the other two con- 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 311 


densers will vary from one-half the potential between the power 
wires to zero. For this reason, I should think the ground wires 
should be so wired that their condensance can be easily altered or 
condensers placed at definite places, so they can be varied at will. 

The next paper, “‘ The Burning of Wooden Pins on High-Ten- 
sion Transmission Lines,’’ by Mr. C. C. Chesney, was presented 
by Mr. J. R. Cravath. 

At the conclusion of the reading of this paper, Mr. Cravath 
read discussion which had been presented in New York, by Mr. 
M. H. Gerry, Jr., H. W. Buck, Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Mershon. 

Mr. CravaTH:—It would seem to me that in the first place it 
is a question of getting an insulator that will not allow enough 
leakage of current over its surface to burn its pin; or, if you 
cannot fully accomplish this, of using a construction that will 
permit of the readiest repair in case the insulator does break 
down. Of course the use of iron poles in this country is prac- 
tically out of the question on account of expense, but from the 
standpoint of quick and easy repair they are excellent.’ If you 
have to renew the insulator only you can do it quickly, but if 
you have to renew the whole cross-arm or whole pole, it is quite 
an undertaking. If you use iron pins, of course it is only re- 
moving the trouble one step farther away, for then if your 
insulator leaks the burning occurs somewhere else. 

Mention has been made of a line in Mexico which is to use steel 
towers instead of a wooden pole line. The towers are to be about 
440 feet apart, the idea, of course, being to cut down both the cost 
for poles and the number of insulators. Of course the steel tower 
line is a much more permanent construction than any wooden 
pole line could be in the matter of burning, and reduces the num- 
ber of points at which insulator leakage may occur. 

The trouble from burned pins near the sea is sometimes very 
serious. I happen to know a case where they could not even 
maintain a 2000 volt line at times. The mist and fog would blow 
in and collect on the insulators together with dust, and after a 
long dry spell when a rain storm came there would be a dis- 
heartening number of breakdowns from burning of the pins. 
They overcame the trouble by putting on some protectors or 
boxes simply to keep the dust and mist from drifting under the 
petticoat of the insulator. This box does not come up to the 
wire or touch the insulator, but rests on the cross-arm and 
protects the lower part of the insulator from dust. 


4 


312 ert ERANCH DISCUSSIONS. ren 


Discussion AT PittsBuRG, APRIL 9, 1903. 
Progranime. 


The meeting was called to order by Chairman P. M. Lincoln. 

1. Introductory Remarks.—President C. F. Scott. 

2. “‘ Mechanical Specifications for Proposed Standard Insu- 
lator Pin,” by Ralph D. Mershon, read by W. K. Dunlap. 

3. ‘‘ The Testing .of Insulators,’ by F. O. Blackwell, read by 
* C. E. Skinner: 

4, ‘‘ Transposition and Relative Location of Power and 
Telephone Wires, by P. M. Lincoln. 

5. ‘‘ Burning of Wooden Pins on High-Tension Transmission 
Lines,”’ by C. C. Chesney, read by E. M. Tingley. 

The discussion was participated in by C. E. Skinner, S. P. 
Grace, P. M. Lincoln, H. Etheridge, C. W. Rice, Mr. Bedell, P. H. 
Thomas, B. Frankenfield, J. S. Peck and President C. F. Scott. 

Mr. SKINNER:—I have always been under the impression that 
for glass insulators a potash glass would give better results than a 
lead glass. This impression has not been thoroughly proved by 
test. Mr. Blackwell says that the striking distance of a given 
e.m.f. is greater at high altitudes than at low altitudes. If the 
striking distance is to be used by the INSTITUTE as a measure of 
the e.m.f., some figures should be obtained showing the variation 
of striking distances with the variation in the height of the 
barometer. 

In early high-tension work the question of surface leakage over 
the insulator was considered of very great importance, and many 
of the earlier designs of insulators included an oil cup underneath 
to give a higher surface resistance. As far as I am aware, this 
construction has not been used on any of the long-distance trans- 
mission lines in the United States, and later practice has proved 
that such a device is entirely unnecessary. It is objectionable 
because it is soon filled with foreign substances and defeats the 
object for which it was designed. 


The method of regulating the voltage of the testing trans-. 


former should receive consideration. There are three methods 
which have been followed, viz: first, by varying the field of the 
generator; secondly, by the use of a resistance in series with the 
low-tension side of the testing transformer; thirdly, by varying 
the voltage on the low-tension side of the transformer by means 
of a regulator dial connected to a suitable regulating transformer 
with a number of taps brought out from its secondary winding. 
The first method can be used only where a generator is provided 
exclusively for this work. In the second method a water rheo- 
stat is usually employed. This gives a very smooth variation in 
e.m.f., and while unwieldly and requiring constant attention 
during the test, it is capable of giving very good results. The 
third method requires that the voltage on the high-tension side 
be changed by comparatively small steps, which may be done 
with proper regulating dials without opening the circuit. Steps 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 313 


even as great as 5 per cent. are not considered particularly harm- 
ful in the testing of insulators. ; 

I am pleased to be able to show you an exhibit of insulators 
intended for high-tension work. This exhibit is not complete 
by any means, but shows a number of types which are in use at 
the present time. Most of these insulators have been given a test 
which may be briefly described as follows: the insulators were 
placed on the standard-size pin, the pin being wrapped with tin- 


foil. A photograph of the insulators (Fig. 1) as they appeared 
on the testing rack after a snow storm is submitted as part of this 
discussion. The test was made by applying the high potential 
from a testing transformer, the voltage of which was regulated by 
means of a regulator dial giving very small steps. The testing 
voltage was applied between a “‘ tie ” made in the ordinary 
manner and the tin-foil coating of the pin and the test was made 
under different weather conditions. The breakdown test was 
repeated at intervals for a period of some months, beginning about 
the middle of February and ending about the first of July. 

In no instance did a breakdown occur through the insulator 


314 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS 


itself, the break in every case being over the surface. The maxi- 
mum testing voltage available was approximately 90,000 volts. 
In some instances, when the insulator was dry, no breakdown 
over the surface could be obtained. The following are the results 
of tests on certain characteristic insulators, as shown in the accom- 


panying photographs. (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). 
No. 1—Porcelain, brown glaze: 


Diameterat base, 22 occot sce <cec te apndeee Se eee eee 10” 

we Height ss yeas os Ge nee ace miaile, Seem ere Geneon ae eee SP 
wurface distance from wire td pinowo2 aoe ae ee 223” 
whortest-breaking distances .<,<c:sy enieen ane aan 12” 
When dry. and clean) stoed* A: ames aes 91,000 volts. 
During heavy, dry-snow storm, stood........... 90,000“ 
During moderate rain storm, broke down at ....86,400 “ 
When covered with ice and snow, broke down at.52,200 ‘“ 
When drys. stood for 4 tir i.) i. aoe ee eee 71,500 * 


TG ele 


During the last test the snow was piled on the cross-arm almost 


to the lower petticoat. 


No. 2—Porcelain, brown glaze: 


Diameterat Base 7 writ cele ee ek, 2 ee ee 74” 
Fleight foo acpa ence ees baht 2th wey eee ee oe a 
Surface distance from wire to pin.....7............... 134” 
shottest. breaking distance’. aes. a. ee ee an 93” 
Whenrdrytand clean: stood jakieics Be elas 92,000 volts. 
During dry-snow storm, broke down at......... 87,300 “ 
Covered with wet snow, broke down at..........62,100 “ 
During moderate rain storm, broke down at ....68,400 ‘“ 
Whretiadry-stood forak hours ied cae eee 66,000 “ 
No, 3—Porcelain, brown glaze: 

Diameter at basey< i cds) pect eee eae ee ee 62” 
ELSTON tS i-< ess beet sus kee ents an ete ee 4y” 
Surface distance from, wire to pidiae.. nce beeen ae 13” 


Shortest breaking distance 


An WOe & S05 ERE AS 6 Dele ie ue Eat a ie. comicsine he 


BRANCH DICCUSSIONS. 


Wihtemeatyratia clean) stood 2... 2k sb. sce. 
During dry-snow storm, broke down at..... . 
During moderate rain storm, broke down at ... 
Covered with wet snow, broke down at..... : 
Wie tbary ~StOOd Of a2 OUT seers Sue oe yee 


No. 4—Porcelain, brown glaze: 
WiMevelMVts ASO ee sie rs Hacrns cen oes = fe oh 
LE ay hy oo a ee on ee ee 
Surface distance from wite to pin .......... ..- 
DP IOrescepreaking CIStanCe:...¢.be.. nn. ee 


When dry and clean, broke down at ........... 
During dry-snow storm, broke down at......... 
During moderate rain storm, broke down at ... 
When coveted with wet snow, broke down at .. 
BVinenrdey. StOGU LOL eNOUL scien Se tee ne ks ss 


315 


..91,000 volts. 


§378:750 ¢ 
48,600 “ 
54,000 “ 
64,400 “ 
Coe: 64” 
cueer 43” 
ites 8” 
eda 6” 


73,890 volts. 
re soa at be oa 


.53,400 “ 
Reno ee 


55,000; 


aCe 


No. 5—Porcelain, white glaze: 
Piaricterateoase eee ea. sae ae ee eles 


Heme os ee ee ree pee Nc rete te 
Surface distance from wire to pin............-.- 


Shortest breaking distance........0i 2-1... s +s 


When dry and clean, broke down at ........... 


74,700 volts. 


During dry-snow storm, broke fete nig sk) een ee a 70,200: 
During moderate rain storm, broke down at ....70,400° * 
When covered with wet snow, broke down at .. 742,800. 
When dry, stood for $ hour.........-+++++++:- 52,500 “ 
No. 7—Glass: 

Diamcteriat DaSChe 6 cee cele oe RUT te tine vite os ie 
ey iain Pama met ai Poetics ai ta oe DEB Penk Sore soe » 6” 
Surface distance from wire to pin.........-. +25. e+ sees 154” 
Shortest breaking distance.........-- 66ers reece e ree 7} 


316 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 
When dry and clean, broke down at ........... 74,700 volts 
During dry-snow storm, broke down at......... 73,800 “ 
During moderate rain storm,broke down at..... 52.800 i 
When “covered with wet snow, broke down at ...51,100 “ 
When dry, stood for} hour 00 iivee ee eee 55,000 “ 

eis S—Glass: : 
Diameter: at. base 2.0.0 des. «a ee eee ieee 74” 
Height 22) Sawn p tes Bee se eee 54” 
Surface distance from‘ wire 10 pil.o. 2. o-e uci 12” 
Shortest breaking distance.. .............. ree ¢ 1” 
When dry and’ clean “stood "2.0 .e ease ce 91,800 volts. 
During dry-snow storm, broke down at......... 87-3002 
During moderate rain storm, broke down at ....62,700 “ 
When covered with wet snow, broke down at ...58,800 “ 
When ‘dry. stood ‘for 4 Dour fc. ss eee o.., 63 OOOS 


Fie. 3: 


After the insulators had been up for some months and were 
well coated with dirt and soot they were given a time test on a dry 
day. The time test was made by applying ? of the maximum 
test voltage for 4 hour. The figures are given under the last 
heading in each set of tests. All the insulators stood this test 
without any evidence of trouble, except a considerable static 
discharge over some of those with the thinner sections. 

I think that the burning of pins is caused in many cases by the 
static discharges which appear at the wire and at the pin. If the 
material can be made thick enough, so that these discharges will 
not appear, the burning of the pins will probably be decreased to 
a very considerable extent. I think the final solution of the pin- 
burning question would be to discard the wooden pin altogether 
and substitute a metal pin properly cushioned to take undue 
local.strains off the insulator itself. 

Mr. Grace called attention to the trouble which the telephone 

ompanies have had from electrostatic effects. As fast as one 
difficulty has been overcome another is encountered, to overcome 
which new methods must be devised. 

The system of transposing wires in order to overcome the induc- 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 317 


tive effects of one circuit upon another was devised by the tele- 
phone engineers and first used on the long-distance circuit be- 
tween New York and Philadelphia. 

‘The necessity of keeping telephone circuits in absolute balance 
was mentioned and a number of instances were given where an 
extremely small amount of unbalancing was sufficient to produce 
serious disturbances. 

Mr. Grace said that Mr. Lincoln’s paper treated only of tele- 
phone circuits upon the same poles with the power circuit, 
whereas in commercial telephone service there were many thou- 
sands of circuits and it is manifestly impossible to insulate them 
to so high a degree as where there is but a single telephone circuit. 
He thought that representatives from the telegraph, tele- 
phone, and power-transmission companies should convene and 
devise suitable means for crossing the different lines where it is 
necessary.: Ps 

Mr. Frankenfield commented on the effect of grounding the 
neutral poirt of a transmission system. He also commented on 
the burning of insulator pins. 

Mr. Bedell recounted his experiences while testing insulators. 
His general conclusions were that the question of dielectric 
’ strength of glass and porcelain had been satisfactorily settled, as 
insulators almost never broke through the dielectric but over the 
surface. 

Mr. Lincotn:—One interesting statement made by Mr. 
Grace was that the arc circuits of the “ tub system,” so-called, 
is one of the hardest things the telephone people have to con- 
tend with. This sustains one of the arguments made in my 
discussion—that the static induction gives more trouble than the 
electromagnetic. The conductor in such an are system is apt to 
be at a considerable difference of potential from the earth, and 
usually in the arc circuit the equal and opposite potential is not 
present to neutralize its effect as is the case with a statically 
balanced transmission line. I should imagine the arc circuit 
would be harder to contend with, though its potential is not so 
high as that of the usual accompanying transmission line. I 
should like to have Mr. Grace explain what he calls a retardation 


coil. 
Mr. Grace:—lIt is an electric choke-coil and we speak of it as 


a retardation coil. 

Mr. ErHeripcEe:—I wish to refer particularly to the necessity 
of studying every detail of a transmission line, with the view of 
applying the latest and best possible forms of construction to 
insure the stability of the medium between the step-up and the 
distant step-down transformer. 

Estimates are carefully prepared and the best engineering skill 
applied to the erection of central plants and substations, but the 
transmission line, which is subjected to the worst possible me- 
chanical and electrical strains and conditions, is, generally speak- 
ing, the least considered and provided for. 


318 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


The building of a transmission line is purely a mechanical prob- 
lem, and must receive as much care and skill as the remainder of 
the system, if stability of action—which is the keynote of engin- 
eering success—is to characterize its operation. 

The average transmission line suffers from comparison with the 
modern power house and substation equipment, and as the sys- 
tem is strongest only at its weakest point greater care and skill 
must be applied to that part of the system whichis found outside 
the buildings, where the most adverse mechanical and electrical 
conditions are encountered. 

Our worst experience in the operation of transmission lines has 
been due to mechanical weakness of some of the details of the 
line; particularly wooden pins and faulty mechanical design of 
some of the insulators. The angles and guys have also given us 
trouble on account of their inadequacy for the heavy strains put 
upon them. I can safely say that electrical troubles of our line 
have been entirely absent. To overcome the mechanical trou- 
bles of pins and insulators, we were compelled to design and 
adopt a form of pin and insulator a sample of which you will find 
on exhibition here this evening, and in which the greatest 
mechanical strength and other features are embodied. 

Having solved the question of weak pins and insulators, we 
next turned our attention to the angles of our line and to proper 
guying with the result of developing a rigid and successful form 
of construction. In these angles we have adopted poles of 13” 
and 14” tops, 4” x 5” double oak cross-arms with 3” ring bolts and 
washers. The braces are 3”X14” and 30” long, bolted with 
4” X }” bolts and washers in cross-arms and through the poles, 
respectively. The cross-arms are bolted together with }” bolts 
and washers with the usual making-up piece between them. The 
pin-holes in the cross-arms are 14” diameter, thereby maintaining 
the strength of the arm. Great care is also exercised in placing 
the arms Ciagonally across the angle so as equally to distribute 
the strain on each pin and insulator. 

The “ wet-rot ”’ of our poles at the butt received our next atten- 
tion, as it became evident to us that in seven to ten years our 
entire pole line would have to be rebuilt; a feat fraught with great 
danger, expense, and interruption in our service, if it did not 
threaten absolute shut-down. 

I developed and adopted a remedy against this ‘‘ wet-rot ” of 
our poles. This consisicd in cementing about one-third of the pole 
flush to and extending about 3” above the ground line, and then 
placing a fillet of pitch, asphaltum, or some such moisture-proof 
material to a depth of about 8” between the pole and cement of 
the ground-line, so as to separate or seal the pole from contact 
with the moisture in the earth at the ground-line. This very 
effectually prevents ‘‘ wet-rot ’’ of wooden poles and oxidation of 
steel poles at the ground-line. The additional expense of pre- 
paring and treating our poles in this manner is very trifling com- 
pared with the great expense of replacing them. 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 319 


Mr. Scott has well said that ‘‘ development of detail in elec- 
trical machinery has made possible very reliable forms of appar- 
atus,’’ and the same reasoning and skill must be applied to our 
transmission line before the idea! electrical transmission will be 
attained. 

At the request of Mr. Lincoln I will expiain the features of the 
pin and insulator which it was my pleasure to develop. It con- 
sists of a malleable iron tube 1%,” outside diameter and 1}” inside 
diameter. On the outside of this tube-pin is cast a shoulder on 
which it rests when placed in the cross-arm. To lock this tube- 
pin to the cross-arm a flat high-carbon steel spring—on each end 
of which if formed a gib—is driven through the pin until the 
bottom end springs out over the bottom end of the pin and cross- 
arm. 

The insulator, which has a plain hole to receive the pin, and a 
recess at the bottom of the hole to receive the top gib of the 
spring, is then forced down over the pin until the top gib springs 
out into the recess in the insulator. This combination very 
securely locks the insulator to the pin and the pin to the cross- 
arm; to unlock, place a screw-driver between the lower gib and 
the pin, force the gib back and drive the spring out through the 
pin again. 

The features of this form of pin and insulator are: 

(1) Simplicity and durability. 

(2) The presenting of a plain surface, so as equally to distribute 
the wire pressure between the contact or bearing surface of the 
pin and insulator. 

(3) Secure locking to the cross-arm and ease of removal there- 
from. ; 

(4) Freedom of insulator to turn in either direction on pin and 
act as a sheave to the wire when used in angles. 

(5) Looseness of the insulator on the pin, avoiding the break- 
ing of insulators frorn expansion or contraction. 

(6) Locking the insulator to the pin and cross-arm, yet pre- 
serving looseness and freedom on the pin. 

(7) The placing of the wire groove in insulator so as to relieve 
the insulator from any wire leverage and any stress other than one 
tending to crush the glass or porcelain, etc. 

Our telephone system is erected on the same poles and is 

‘bracketed about 5 feet below the lower cross-arm, These lines 
are absolutely quiet; the electromagnetic and electrostatic 
influence being overcome by using twisted pairs of wires. 

(For illustrations of pins described by Mr. Etheridge, see New 
York Discussion, March 27th, 1903.) ; 

Mr. Tuomas:—As Mr. Etheridge has said, the greatest practi- 
cal difficulty in the operation of high-tension transmission lines 
arises from mechanical defects rather thar electrical ones. 
Broken pins, broken cross-arms, broken insulators and injuries 
to the line from external causes vastiy outnumber the electrical 
failures. As is easily seen, the pin is the weakest mechanical link 


820 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


of the system and when of wood of good insulating quality it is 
liable to be weak. I wish to call your attention to a plant install- 
ing at Mexico, which marks an improvement in pole-line con- 
struction from a mechanical point of view. Five hundred foot 
spans are used, which is approximately five times the length of 
span usually employed elsewhere, and instead of the usual 
wooden poles there are built-up steel towers. The cross-arms 
and pins, I understand, are of steei, the insulators of porcelain. 
This construction if well designed assures excellent mechanical 
qualities, and should be watched with great interest. On account 
of the small number of poles a much larger pin can be economi- 
cally used for each one. 

Ground. wires, such as Mr. Lincoln has recommended for 
protecting the telephone circuit on a transmission line, might be 
used on tclephone trunk lines, parallelling transmission lines, 
close to the telephone line but between it and the power line. It 
is probable that a very great reduction of the static induction 
from the high-tension would be obtained by the use of even a few 
grounded wires as a screen. I make this suggestion to Mr. Grace. 

The question of lightning arresters for telephones, and the fact 
that they are ordinarily adjusted to discharge at about 300 volts, 
suggests the mention of a point in the operation on the telephone 
lines and power circuits by which in some cases the service has 
been very much improved. Ina good many power transmission 
systems where the standard telephone arrester is used on the 
telephone circuit, it has been found that there is at almost all 
times a sufficient unbalance of the high-tension voltage so that a 
frequent discharge to ground occurs over these arresters, the 
result being a leaky line and more or less continuous rattle of the 
telephone. The construction of an air gap in place of the light- 
ning arrester very much reduces the number of such discharges to 
ground and entirely prevents the high resistance leak which 
usually occurs in a telephone arrester. The result is a great im- 
provement in the speech. 

Some of the telphone engineers here have referred to the preb- 
lem of making satisfactory cross-overs between two lines. From 
their point cf view the transmission line is a telephone line. The 
problem is broader, however, and should include the crossing of 
two high-tension lines. The National Board of Fire Under- 
writers has recently adopted recommendations as to methods of - 
such cross-overs. They suggest three methods, but preference 
is expressed for crossing by means of a pole common to the two 
lines. This pole should, of course, have extra strength and extra 
height, the highest tension line being carried at the top. Extra 
long cross-arms are used and the difference in the height of the 
poles of the upper and lower lines will ordinarily prevent any- 
thing which falls from the upper wire to the ground from touch- 
ing the lower wires. To prevent a wire breaking at the farther 
end of one of the adjacent spans of the higher line from falling 
against the lower line, a guard wire mounted on the line, prefer- 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 321 


obly insulated, should be installed outside of the extreme wire ot 
the lower line. 

A wooden pin is burned by leakage current because either its 
resistance is too high to transmit the current without excessive 
heating, or because its insulation is too low to prevent the leakage. 
In most cases either a better or a worse pin would not be injured. 
A comparatively few per cent. improvement of the pin would in 
many cases be sufficient to prevent destructive heating. There- 
fore, the method used by Mr. Gerry for protecting the pin which 
has been put in first-class condition, from moisture and dirt, by 
means of a sleeve, is an excellent one, since it will certainly give a 
considerable protection to the pin and render it oftentimes safe 
where an unprotected pin will conduct enough to become charred. 
Mr. Gerry’s freedom from trouble from burned pin referred to by 
Mr. Skinner is probably due to the fact that his pins are protected 
by glass sleeves, but also it must be admitted that his line is yet | 
young and the clirnatic conditions are not severe. San Francisco 
is probably one of the hardest places in the country on pins and I 
think no wooden pins would be able to stand indefinitely there 
without burning. 

Since the difficulty of operating a telephone line on an unbal- 
anced high-tension power line results from the tendency for a 
high-potential to ground—equally on both telephone. wires. 
provided the telephone line be transposed—it may be possible to 
solve the difficulty by insulating the telephone line highly and 
allowing it to assume its neutral potential, and transm:tting the 
speech through a raising and lowering transformer at either end. 
The low-tension windings of these transformers may then be 
grounded, and with good insulation between the high and low- 
tension windings the operation may be made very secure. 

I would like to ask Mr. Grace whether it is feasible to use such a 
transformer for transmitting telephonic speech. 

The same sort of result might be attained by the use of con- 
densers, two in series with middle grounded, connected between 
the wires of the insulated telephone line, the telephone receiver 
or transmitter being connected between the ground plates of the 
twocondensers. For this purpose it would probably be necessary 
to use a double winding, either on telephone-spool or choke-coil, 
so that the charging current to the condensers would have its 
effect on the telephone circuit neutralized. 

Mr. Grace:—The use of the transformer, as suggested by Mr. 
Thomas, is feasible. 

Mr. Pecx:—In his paper on the testing of insulators, Mr. 
Blackwell says: ‘‘ There should be but one transformer used to 
step up to the highest potential required and its reactance should 
be as low as possible. A number of transformers in series is 
particularly bad, as it gives poor regulation and leads to great 
uncertainty as to the actual potential to which an insulator is 


being subjected.”’ 
In the discussion at New York, Mr. Mershon called attention to 


399 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


044 


the advantages obtained by the use of a number of transformers 
in series for obtaining a high voltage, saying that it was possible 
to obtain such’a series having a good regulation; and great point 
in its favor was that in case of accident to one transformer of a 
series, the remaining transformers could be used to deliver a some 
what lower potential. ; 

There is an idea more or less generally prevalent that it is 
possible to obtain without danger a high voltage by connecting in 
Series a number of transformers wound and insulated for a low 
voltage, as long as cases are insulated from each other and from 
the ground. Fig. 1 shows such an arrangement, where three 
10,000 volt transformers are connected with high-tension winding 
in series for giving 30,000 volts. 

It will be at once seen that there is a strain of 30,000 volts at 
the two points (A) and (B). The normal strain for one trans- 
former is 10,000 volts, so that the outside transformers of the 
series are subjected to three times normal voltage strain be- 


Low Voltage 


);000-V> 


Pigs 


tween primary and secondary windings. If there were ten 
10,000 volt transformers connected in series for 100,000 volts, the 
strain across the outer transformers of the series would be 100,000 
volts, ten times normal. 

In the operation of a number of transformers in series for ob- 
taining a high voltage, there are much more severe internal 
strains introduced than where the transformers are used for a 
low voltage. This strain occurs between turns and layers and 
comes principally on the outside coils of the outside transformers 
of the series. In designing transformers for connecting in series 
it is therefore necessary to insulate each transformer not only 
between high-tension and low-tension windings, but between 
turns and layers of each winding, in the same manner that would 
be required were the transformers to furnish alone the full voltage 
of the series. 

On account of the large amount of insulating material de- 


manded between high-tension and low-tension windings, it is ° 


\ BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 323 


extremely difficult to make these transformers with good regula- 
tion on inductive loads. 

The cost of small transformers for very high-voltage work is, 
within certain limits, almost independent of the capacity; so the 
difference in cost between one transformer of the series and a 
ee transformer wound for the total capacity would be very 
small. 

It is true that the outer transformers of a series may be more 
heavily insulated than the others, making a reduction in cost on 
the inside transformers, but this affects the interchangeability 
of the transformers and the extra cost of manufacturing trans- 
formers which differ slightly from each other will probably more 
than counterbalance the saving in insulation. 

The question of a spare unit is undoubtedly of importance, but 
I believe that in general it will be cheaper to purchase two trans- 
formers, each wound for the full testing voltage, than to buy a 
large number of transformers which are to be connected in series 
for giving the desired voltage. Where two transformers, each 
wound for the full testing voltage, are purchased, one will of 
course be held as a spare and may be used as a voltmeter trans- 

. former for obtaining the exact voltage applied to the apparatus 
on test. 

When a number of transformers are in series, the voltage 
meesured across the high-tension winding of one transformer will 
not be an accurate indication of the total voltage on the series. 

Mr. Rice called attention to the importance of uninterrupted 
service and to time tests on insulators. He predicted that the 
highest transmission voltage would very soon be generated 
directly by the dynamos, without the use of raising transformers. 
He also thought that the shoulder on the proposed pin was too 
small as the side strain would cause the shoulder to cut into the 
cross-arm, thus enlarging the hole so that the pin would finally 
pull out. 

Mr. Scotr:—I recall my first experiments on the relation 
between the telephone and a high voltage. In the laboratory a 
telephone was connected in circuit between a high-tension ter- 
minal and a short length of wire. It gave a vigorous sound which 
was attributed to the flow of current to the wire acting as a con- 
denser. The wire was disconnected and the telephone still 
responded. The wire was then disconnected from the telephone 
circuit and was connected to the insulated magnet. The tele- 
phone still responded. 

Some measurements upon the potential generated on an insu- 
lated wire not far from a high-tension circuit which were made 
by Mr. Tingley, who is here this evening, are reported in a paper 
on High-Voltage Transmission presented before the INsTITUTE 
by me in 1898. These experiments show that a single insulated 
‘wire not far from a high-tension wire may have a potential suffi- 
cient to cause a spark to jump over a considerable gap to the 
earth, 


324 bRANCH DISCUSSIONS. Smee Sea } 


I had an opportunity a few years ago to inspect the burning 
of pins and cross-arms on a 10,000 volt transmission line on the 
Pacific Coast, which ran for some distance close to the shore. 
Large holes were burned in some of the cross-arms and poles. 
The burning was particularly apt to occur at the ends of the iron 
braces between the pole and the cross-arm. There was little 
doubt but that particles of sea water as “ fog ”’ were carried by the 
wind and deposited salt upon the poles and cross-arms. I under- 
stand that this difficulty has been avoided by placing wooden 
frames over the insulators on the ocean side. 

Mr. I. Sternefeld of Mexico has called my attention to the 
deterioration of copper wire due to the salt air from the ocean 
He says that he has found a satisfactory remedy in an insulated 
coating consisting simply of cotton dipped in a solution of minium 
_and linseed oil. 

It is notable that megohms, which used to be considered of 
prime importance in the testing of electrical apparatus, has not 
been mentioned in the discussion this evening. The problem in 
line construction is primarily to prevent disruptive and disastrous 
breakdown. It is not the ohms but the volts which are of first 
importance. 

The collection of insulators before us this evening, containing 
some early ferms as well as recent ones, small insulators as well as 
big ones, indicates the evolution which has taken place in insu- 
lator construction, both in materials and form during the last ten 
years. 

The insulator problem, as presented in the discussion this even- 
ing, is at the present time primarily a mechanical problern. 
Electrically, it is partly one of materials and partly one or geom- 
etry. There is an intimate relation between geometry and volt- 
age in insulator design. There is also the commercial problem. 

High-tension tests upon apparatus, particularly transformers, 
is an important matter. The conditions prevailing at high volt- 
ages are to my mind different from those at lower voltages.. Low- 
voltage apparatus may probably be tested at several times its 
operating pressure. The margin between the normal pressure 
and the test will be but a few thousand volts. If, however, trans- 
formers for 40,000 or 50,000 volts be tested at double pressure the 
margir is also 40,000 or 50,000 volts. The purpose of making a 
test of this kind is to determine first whether the design is satis- 
factory in giving sufficient surface distance and the like, and 
second to detect flaws in material ov in construction. A moment- 
ary or short test is in general sufficient to determine these points. 
The prolonged test may have a deleterious effect upon the insulat- 
ing materials by weakening them. The test may result in a 
breakdown due to conditions entirely abnormal to,service. On 
the other hand, although there may be no breakdown the ma- 
terials may be left in a condition weaker than tney would haves 
been if the test had not been prolonged. 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 825 


Mr. Bupp FRANKENFIELD:—Speaking of the dependence of 
transmission systems on the telephone in time of emergency, 
recalls an incident that came under my observation on the coast. 
It belongs in the category with the somewhat disastrous accidents 
that sometimes occur when too great reliance is placed on auto- 
matic devices. 

_A fire occurred in a city that received power from a long- 
distance transmission system. The fire caused havoc in the 
secondary network, and the substation attendant pulled all his 
switches in the emergency, without first notifying the power 
house. At the power house the governors happened to be off 
duty and the impulse wheels took on speed. Instead of taking 
recourse to the ‘‘ Armstrong system’ and shutting down the 
plant as he might have done, the power station attendant ran to 
his telephone booth to call up the substation. 

He never got into communication; for there was a crash which 
brought him out of the booth to gaze in open-eyed wonder at the 
roof above—the fly wheel had gone soaring heavenward and it 
left a great hole in its wake. Here is an instance where it had 
become so natural to use the telephone in every emergency that, 
what is ordinarily a blessing, proved a source of danger. The 
moral is to use ‘“‘ horse sense ’’ even when surrounded by modern 
conveniences. 

In regard to the suggestion that the ground be brought near 
the telephone line by means of an earthed conductor placed in 
proximity, I would like to recall the fact that grounding the 
neutral of a Y. connected transformer system has this effect, as 
stated in the paper, that the telephone line tends to assume the 
potential of the neutral point of the transmission system; and 
the grounding of this point will virtually bring the telephone line 
to the potential of the earth. It seems to me a method worthy 
of careful consideration. 

It has been suggested that by using an iron insulator pin burn- 
ing would be avoided because of the low resistance of the pin; 
and it has been urged in opposition, that the wooden pin hes 
some give to it and is less likely to break insulators. Why not 
combine all the good qualities in one pin, a wooden pin with a 
metallic coating? Cover it with foil, paint it with a metallic 
paint, electroplate it if need be—do anything to make it a good 
conductor. A study of the Redlands type of pin, which is said 
to have shown deterioration only at the wooden thread and 
which is said to have caused no burning of cross-arms, is an indi- 
cation of the result to be expected with a metal-coated pin—no 


burning at all. 


A paper read at a meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, and the 
American Electrochemical Society, New York, 
April 17, 1903. 


RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES. 


INTRODUCTION BY PRESIDENT SCOTT. 

We are pleased to have with us as guests this evening the mem- 
bers of the American Electrochemical Society. This Society by 
its name indicates the intimate connection between two branches 
of science and of industry. Electricity and chemistry in many 
of their aspects may have little in common; but the mystery of 
electricity and the secret of chemical affinity are not far apart. 
There is an overlapping field in which there is a new science, a 
new industry and a new society. 

The secrets of nature are discovered as individual and usually 
as isolated facts. These are classified and their generalization 
results in laws—the laws of nature. This is the field of the 
scientist. These laws are then applied to direct the forces or 
mould the materials of nature to accomplish useful purposes. 
This is the domain of the inventor and the engineer. Scientific 
and engineering advancement are closely related and their proper 
equilibrium is essential to advancing civilization. if there: be 
too great generalization from inadequate data or inaccurately 
observed phenomena, or, on the other hand, if there be meagre 
ability to apply properly deduced laws to new conditions, the 
results are of little moment. The nota’le scientific advancement 
of the past century has been based upon the fact that men have 
sought to observe phenomena and obtain definite data before 
drawing their conclusions instead of speculating upon vague or 
hypothetical conditions. Along with this development has come 
aiso facility in inventing and in applying and utilizing the 
deductions of science. Toillustrate: In the early part of the last 


327 


328 SCOTT: RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES. [Feb. 17 


century men were seeking to discover facts to demonstrate the 
sugsested interrelation between electricity and magnetism. 
Faraday and Henry independently and almost simultaneously 
determined by experiment that electricity can be produced by 
magnetism. These facts were amplified by other facts and led 
to generalizations and laws, and later to dynamos and motors. 
The dynamo and motor had a very slow development, as it 
seems to us now. Years were required before the machines 
began to have an extended application. Later on, develop- 
rents have been rapid and extensions have been marvelous. ° 

Compare this development reaching over the span of a lifetime 
with a recent development—that following the announcement of 
the discovery of the X-ray by Prof. Roentgen. Immediately in 
laboratories all over the world elaborate experiments and inves- 
tigations were begun, apparatus was forthcoming for practical 
use and within a twelvemonth the X-ray was an important 
adjunct in many a hospital. 

There has been a change in the method of doing things, in the 
method of scientific observation and of scientific generalization 
on the one hand, and in the ability of the inventor and the engi- 
néer to develope and utilize the new material which is put at 
their disposal. We must add to this as a factor in modern 
development the attitude of the public at large. The scientific 
observer and the inventor are no longer wizards to be shunned 
or executed. Science and engineering have done so much in the 
past that there has come to be a wonderful faith in the future. 

Sometimes, it is true, the zeal of the promoter has overweighed 
the judgment of scientist and engineer, and disappointment has 
followed the exploitation of schemes which are fundamentally 
impossible. 

It is difficult to foresee the future. Again and again experi- 
ments and facts which seem of most trivial consequence have led 
to far-reaching results in fields least expected. 

A simple experiment, the discovery for example of the relation 
between electricity and magnetism, is the basis of new systems, 
for the instantaneous transmission of intelligence and the efficient 
transmission of power. 

The discovery of a new property is the opening of a new field 
of possibility to the scientist, the. inventor and the engineer. 
Hence the value of research. The advanced investigator and 
the research laboratory are not to be ridiculed if they do not 
produce full-fledged new methods and new processes superior to 


1903.] SCOTT: RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES. 329 
those which have undergone years of development. Fortunate 
are they if they discover new properties of matter or new rela- 
tions and combinations which may be the source from which new 
developments may cpring. 

On the one hand, we marvel at the advance which has been 
made in science; invention and engineering. On the other hand, 
we find that in every direction we have only entered upon the 
fields of mature which lie before us promising and unexplored. 
In the production of light and mechanical energy, for example, 
we are wonderfully in advance of our forefathers, but our present 
methods are crude and inefficient compared with what we know 
to be theoretically possible in the transformation of energy, if we 
‘ had'but the means. 

‘It is therefore with a peculiar interest that we direct our atten- 
tion to an unfamiliar subject; that we learn the wonderful 
| properties of a rare element; that we direct our thoughts to a 
new field laden with great possibilities. 


“SAyOOS YworAUDYyS0 
a1ojaq oinyoo7q s 


er re 


JSUT UROTIOUTY 91; 


S 


aUIT} OY} 4B , YIOK MON JO AzD 9} JO asaTJo9,, 943 Jo JadeyD oy} ul suryyjosg a8e1G 


Ipe}q] Wvoaury oy} pue sisouIsUg [eoLOeTq Jo ayn 
Jouey ‘f WeryIIM “II Jo 


Wise: inion cist wa 


44 


A Leciure delivered at a meeting of the Amer- 
tcan Institute of Electrical Engineers and 
the American Electrochemical Society, New 
York, April 17th, 1903. 


RADIUM AND OTHER RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES 
WITH A CONSIDERATION OF PHOSPHORESCENT 
AND FLUORESCENT SUBSTANCES. THE PROP- 
ERTIES AND APPLICATIONS OF SELENIUM AND 
THE TREATMENT OF DISEASE BY THE ULTRA 
VIOLET LIGHT. 


BY WILLIAM J. HAMMER. 


The author of this paper has endeavored to 
exemplify certain fundamental principles con- 
nected with the phenomena upon which he has 
treated; and in considering these subjects, all of 
which may be said to be on the borderland of sci- 
ence, to bring out by means of experiments, lan- 
tern slides and illustrations which accompany the 
paper, the practical and commercial side. He 
entertains the hope that the matter herewith 
submitted will prove of intefest to the members of 
the societies before whom he has the honor of 
appearing, and miay serve in some slight degree 
to stimulate investigations in these most promis- 
ing fields. 


FLUORESCENCE AND PHOSPHORESCENCE. 


Sir George Stokes has given the name of “ Fluorescence ’’ to 
the phenomena which certain substances present in altering the 
very short waves of ultra-violet light, which are invisible, and 
transforming them into waves of longer length so that they 
become visible to our eyes. 

In electrical parlance a fluerescent substance might be termed 
a step-down transformer or perhaps more correctly a frequency 
changer for light waves. Stokes, as a result of his inves- 
tigations, framed this law, “‘ When the refrangibility of 
light is changed by fluorescence it is always lowered and never 
raised ’—in other words, the waves emitted during fluorescence 
are always longer than those which are absorbed, thus causing 
fluorescence. There are, in fact, cases where the frequency of 


331 


332 HAMMER: FLUORESCENCE. {Apr. 17 


the radiations is increased; but where there is such an exception . 
to Stokes’ law some sort of chemical reaction occurs. 

The lowering of the frequency of certain ultra-violet radia- 
tions, so as to render them visible, was known to Brewster in 
1833 and Herschel in 1848, the former terming it internal and the 
latter surface dispersion; but it was first explained and the name 
given to it by Stokes in 1852, after a form of fluorspar. 

In the case of fluorescence, the emission of the light lasts only 
so long as the substance is stimulated by the incident beam; but 
in the case of the phosphorescence, the emission of light con- 
tinues or persists after the stimulation has ceased, or the original 
source has been removed. The word phosphorescence is from 
the Greek ‘‘ phésphoros,”’ meaning light bearer. 

Prof. E. Wiedemann has suggested the name “ luminescence,” 
to cover fluorescence, phosphorescence and phenomena of that 
character possessed by many substances whose light emissions. 
are unaccompanied by flame or by the temperature of ordinary 
light waves: but this term can hardly be made to cover the 
Becqueral rays emitting from radioactive substances. 

I have here to-night a collection of tubes containing fluorescent. 
liquids, such as petroleum, quinine, Magdala red, eosine, uraninc, 
saffronine, paviine, zsculine, amidophthalic acid, fluorescine, 
rhodamin, etc., all of which show most beautiful changes in 
color when viewed by direct and transmitted light. 

I also have some of the fluorescent hydrocarbon “ thalleen,”’ 
prepared by the late Prof. Henry Morton, and some of those most 
beautiful fluorescent substances, resorcorufin and resorcin blue, 
for which I am indebted to Dr. Geyer of Steven’s Institute. 
Fluorescent substances are particularly beautiful in the ultra- 
violet light; for instance: The yellow fluorescene tecomes a most. 
beautiful green; the orange colored cosine becomes gamboge;. 
the crimson color of Magdala red a bright scarlet; the straw 
colored sesculine becomes a pale blue; the transparent and color- 
less quinine gives its characteristic blue surface tint; the paraffin 
oil a beautiful blue; and the various other substances giving a 
beautiful surface color quite different from that of the interior of 
the solution. 

Sniall pieces of horse-chestnut bark or bark of the ash tree 
placed in a dilute ammoniacal solution produce a most beautiiul 
fluorescent effect, as the dyeing material descends slowly througn 
the liquid. 

Flowers painted with these fluorescent substances on card- 


1903.] HAMMER: PHOSPHORESCENCE. 3383 


board produce a most beautiful effect when light screened by 
dark blue or violet glass is thrown upon them. 

Sodium vapor fluoresces brilliantly in sunlight. 

I also have here samples of tungstate of calcium, platino- 
barium cyanide, sulphide of zinc, and similar preparations which 
have been extensively used in the fluorescent screens for X-ray 
work. 

Here is a specimen of Willemite which when exposed to the 
ultra-violet light produced by the bright snappy condenser spark 
between these iron electrodes shows a magnificent fluorescence. 

Here is a card with words written with a solution of platino- 
barium cyanide which fluoresces beautifully when exposed to 
the ultra-violet light of the iron arc, especially when shielded by 
the accompanying colored glass plates. 

I have also one of Prof. R. W. Wood’s interesting ultra-violet 
screens, consisting of four plates of cobalt glass between which 
are gelatine films containing nitroso-dimethyl-analine with cop- 
per oxide, which screen when employed in front of the arc lamp 
renders beautifully fluorescent a lump of uranium nitrate held in 
the focus of the invisible rays. 

Through the courtesy of Dr. Von Recklinghausen, I am 
enabled to show you a Cooper-Hewitt tube which is enclosed ina 
screen soaked in rhodamin, the best substance which thus far 
has been found which is fluorescent in the light of the mercury arc. 

It is well known that many bodies become red hot at a tem- 
perature of between four and five hundred degrees Centigrade, 
and to make them white hot a temperature of between eight 
hundred and a thousand degrees is necessary; but there are 
many substances which are phosphorescent and which possess 
the property of giving off considerable light without sensible 
heat. 

I have here some samples of two phosphorescent substances 
which have been known for many years—one of them a sulphide 
of barium or Bolonese phosphorus, and the other a sulphide of 
calcium or Canton’s phosphorus. The former was discovered 
in 1602 by Casciarlo, a shoemaker in the city of Bologna who 
prepared it by the partial calcination of a certain powdered heavy 
spar mixed with a little flour meal, which he roasted in the 
furnace; and found afterwards that when exposed to sunlight 
it would shine in the dark. This preparation was succeeded by 
the discovery of John Canton, who calcined oyster shells with 
charcoal and meal in a closed crucible, thus producing a brilliant 
phosphorescent substance called after his name. 


334 HAMMER: PHOSPHORESCENCE. [Aprely: 


Phosphorescence by insolation—or exposure to sunlight—has 
been extensively investigated by Prof. A. E. Becquerel and Dr. 
John W. Draper. 

Practically all substances in nature are phosphorescent, and 
although some of them remain phosphorescent for only one ten- 
thousandth of a second, others retain their phosphorescence for 
hours. 

One may expose sulphide of calcium to sunlight, and after 
placing it in a dark room for six weeks it will still affect a photo- 
graph plate. 

Phosphorescence may be stimulated in many Wways—by com- 
bustion, pounding, rending, friction, by the vibrations from 
sources of heat, light or electricity; and these various phosphor- 
escent substances are very susceptible to temperature changes. 

Various substances also phosphoresce while undergoing crys- 
tallization. 

I have here a large sheet of cardboard which has been prepared 
for me by Messrs. Devoe & Company, which is covered with 
seven coats of Balmain’s Luminous Paint or poly-sulphide of 
calcium, with perhaps a trace of bismuth and mixed with aerated 
varnish; and it has been put through hot calender rollers. You 
will note that this phosphoresces most beautifully when ex- 
cited by burning this piece of magnesium wire before it, or by 
focusing the arc light upon it. This phosphorescence soon dies 
out, however; but upon placing my hand against the sheet, the 
heat of my hand has caused the card to brilliantly phosphoresce. 
A cold object placed against the cardboard will very much lessen 
the phosphorescence at that point. 

When I place this bust of Franklin between the arc light and 
the phosphorescent cardboard, you will note I can thus produce 
a fine silhouette of that distinguished philosopher. 

I have prepared for your consideration a number of objects 
coated with phosphorescent substances. When I burn this 
piece of magnesium wire in front of this card, or hold it before 
the arc light, you will note the initials of the A. I. E. E. and the 
A. E. S., the two societies before which I have the honor of 
appearing to-night, shine out brightly. I also have a number | 
of incandescent lamp bulbs, coated internally and  ex- 
ternally with phosphorescent substances, which you will note 
give considerable light when stimulated by the burning mag- 
nesium; or by turning on the electricity supplying certain of the 
lamps. . 

I remember nearly twenty years ago having cut out tiny stars 


1903.] HAMMER: PHOSPHORESCENCE. 335 


from cardboard and painted them with luminous paint, and 
arranged them on the ceiling of my bed room to represent certain 
of the principal constellations in the heavens. These stars 
would absorb the light during the day time, and at night would 
represent an appearance as though the roof had been removed 
and one was looking at the stars in the sky. 

I have here a philosophical toy which I made years ago, with 
which I can show the varying phases of the moon. I have taken 
a 25 cent globe, and painted half of it with black Japan, as 
representing the dark side of the moon which is never seen, the 
other half I have painted with a number of coats of luminous 
paint; and by exciting the phosphorescence of this half by the 
burning magnesium, you will see that by slowly turning the 
globe around, a perfect representation of the varying phases of 
the moon occurs. 

IT hold in my hand here a long tube coated inside with sulphide 
of calcium, which makes a beautiful wand, which an orchestra 
leader might use in a dark scene. I remember years ago fixing 
up a vacuum tube and coil for use as a baton in the dark scene 
in Gilbert & Sullivan’s Opera of Ruddigore, and fearing lest 
the complaisant leader be some day knocked off his stool by the 
8-inch coil. 

Here are a couple of postal cards which I secured in Europe 
showing the Blue Grotto at Capri. They are printed with phos- 
phorescent paints; and on exposiug them to the light, you will 
see they are exceedingly pretty. 

Prof. Dewar has shown that egg shells, feathers, ivory and 
paper become brilliantly phosphorescent if they are cooled to 
about 200 degrees below zero by use of liquid air, and then 
exposed to light. Many bodies seem to possess this power of 
absorbing energy at low temperatures and giving off light at 
higher temperatures. In fact, Dewar has observed that at a 
temperature approximately that of the boiling point of oxygen 
(184° C) all bodies, even living tissues, become phosphorescent. 

I have here a collection of forty or more glass tubes containing 
_ various phosphorescent substances which, when I burn this 
magnesium before them, you will note become brilliantly 
phosphorescent, showing red, yellow, green, blue, and in 
fact, all the colors of the spectrum. The sulphrdes of calcium, 
barium, strontium, zinc, etc., largely enter into their composition. 
I also have here some fine particles of fluorspar. which, when 
scattered on this hot plate, glisten like fire flies. 


*- = 
\ + ee 


336 HAMMER: PHOSPHORESCENCE. [Apr.i7 


A similar effect may be produced by quinia or its sulphate 
which when spread on a sheet of paper and laid on a hot metal 
plate in a dark room, shows a remarkable phosphorescence 
which develops at the edges and spreads to the centre. 

Boraciec acid fused and allowed to cool breaks into small 
pieces, and along the cracks phosphorescent light appears. 
‘Potassium sulphide fused with cream of tartar shows the same 
phenomenon. 

Phosphorescent ether may be prepared by digesting phos- 
phorus in ether for some days in a tightly corked bottle, and when 
a lump of sugar is dipped into this and dropped into a glass of 
water, the surface appears quite luminous. 

The stream of particles, so thoroughly investigated by Prof. 
Crookes, was given the name of “‘ Cathode rays ”’ by the Germans, 
as a protest against Crookes’ theory of molecular streams pro- 
pounded by him at the British Association meeting of 1879; 
Lord Kelvin has told us that the smallest particle which can be 
observed by the most powerful microscope contains 18 to 20 
million atoms, and although until recently the smallest particle 
we could conceive of was the atom of hydrogen, this being the 
lightest of gases, Prof. J. J. Thomson has now shown us that 
these atoms may constitute a thousand fragments, or as he calls 
them, “' corpuscles,’’ and Crookes showed us, and Villard of Paris 
recently demonstrated conclusively that the Cathode rays con- 
sist of a'stream of these hydrogen corpuscles negatively charged 
and moving at a speed approximating 70,000 miles per second; 
and as illustrating the complexity of an atom, Iam reminded by 
Prof. Hallock that the late Prof. Henry Rowland once said that 
a Steinway grand piano was a comparatively simple piece of 
mechanism compared with an iron atom. 

Prof. Crookes has shown many notable experiments in which 
substances have been caused to phosphoresce inside of the 
Crookes’ tube by the molecular bombardment of ‘‘ Cathode 
rays '’, and I have here some fine Crookes’ tubes containing red 
and white coral, rubies, calcite, lava, etc., which you will note 
phosphoresce finely. (I am indebted to Messrs. Queen & Co. 
for certain of these. 

Prof. Crookes has made a diamond so phosphorescent inside of 
a Crookes’ tube, as to give a full candle power of light. Rubies, 
emeralds, corals, fluorspar, lime and many other substances 
similarly phosphoresce in the Crookes’ tube. 

I have here a Crookes’ tube containing calcined sea shells, 


1903.] HAMMER: PHOSPHORESCENCE. 337 


which, on connecting to the induction coil, is caused to give off a 
most brilliant light, and the globe and contents to phosphoresce 
long after the current is shut off. 

Here again I have a tube containing four separately exhausted 
sections, which are filled with phosphorescent substances, and a 
tiny tube passing through all of the partitions of the tubes, and 
being connected with the electrodes at the end. On connecting 
this to the induction coil a luminous gaseous stream is seen in 
the tiny tube, and the discharge accompanying it affects power- 
fully the phosphorescent substances which, you will note, are 
colored green, yellow, and blue, after the current is shut 
off. 

I have here also a Crookes’ “‘ radiometer,’’ the vanes of which 
are painted with phosphorescent substances, and on connecting 
the radiometer to the coil the electricity rotates the vanes and 
causes them to become highly phosphorescent. 

At a meeting of the INsTITUTE on January 3, 1902, through 
the courtesy of Mr. Edison, I was enabled to present some of 
Mr. Edison’s tungstate of calcium lamps which have sometimes 
been called Edison X-ray lamps. These lamps were Crookes’ 
tubes, the interior walls of which were coated with fused crystals 
of tungstate of calcium, which were caused to phosphoresce 
most dazzlingly when they were connected to an induction 
coil. Through an accident to my large coil, I was unable to show 
these tubes working as perfectly as I should have liked, and 
to-night I will show you as an evidence of good faith some of 
them operating as they should operate, and giving a most power- 
ful light. Incidentally, I am going to show you that this cannot 
properly be called an X-ray lamp although a form of X-ray tube 
is employed, as it is not the X-rays outside but the cathode 
rays inside of the tube which produce the phosphorescence. 
This tube which I have here and which I have coated with 
tungstate of calcium and platino-barium-cyanide on the 
outside, I will now place underneath an ordinary Crookes’ 
tube, that it may be exposed to the X or Roentgen rays, and 
you will see that while the coated surface fluoresces, as any 
fluorescent screen will when exposed to Roentgen rays, the 
moment these rays cease there is absolutely no phosphorescent 
effect, there being no persistence of the luminescence. 

Now, another thing which I think I can show you is that, 
while cathode rays produce by their action on the interior wall 
of the glass tube a secondary effect of ether pulsations on the 


338 HAMMER. PHOSPHORESCENCE. [Apr 


exterior which are Roentgen or X-rays, I can now produce the 
converse of this by bombarding the outside of the Edison tube 
by the Roentgen rays from the Crookes’ tube, and you will see 
then that I have caused cathode rays to be stimulated in the 
interior of the tube which is merely held near it, causing the 
tungstate of calcium to become brightly phosphorescent; and 
you will note that I can deflect the cathode rays with a mag- 
net. I believe this is the first time this conversion of Roentgen 
rays into cathode rays has been accomplished and is rendered 
possible by this form of tube. 

There’are many commercial applications which may be made 
of this curious. property of phosphorescence. Life buoys have 
been painted that they may be seen when thrown overboard; 
sheets of cardboard, such as I have shown you, have been used to 
give light in powder magazines. I have also suggested painting 
projectiles with luminous paint for use at night; phosphorescent 
clock and watch dials have been made in large numbers, and it 
has been suggested to make house numbers, door knobs and 
escutcheons for key holes of such materials, cover the walls with 
luminous paper, and even paint the houses with luminous paint. 

The taps or keys of incandescent lamp sockets and switches 
might be made of glass containing phosphorescent material, or 
the cases painted as I have here done, so that they could 
readily be seen in the dark; and doubtless certain phosphorescent 
substances might be used to considerable advantage in connec- 
tion with various types of vacuum tube lighting and for vacuum 
tubes used in connection with wireless telegraphy. 

I hold in my hand a tiny tube which I secured in Paris, which 
contains what is perhaps the most brilliant phosphorescent sub- 
stance that has yet been discovered. It is a special preparation 
of sulphide of zinc. Here is a second tube containing some of 
the sulphide of zinc, which also has mixed with it some radium. 

A tube of this mixture may be put away in the dark for years, 
and the radium will act on the zinc, causing it to phosphoresce 
brilliantly. , 

Who will say that we shall not some day find a substance 
which will be so powerfully acted upon by the emanations from 
radium that it may be used as a source of light ? 

Here I have a tube which I have made on the suggestion of 
Prof. Curie, consisting of two bulbs with a stop cock between, 
in one of which may be placed sulphide of zinc, or similar sub- 
stances, and in the other radium; and in this manner the radio- 
activity of various substances may thus be investivated. 


\ 


eae tye Peet ve 


bh \ alt b Se 
Nor 


1903.] HAMMER: PHOSPHORESCENCE. 3389 


A tube containing chloride or bromide of silicon and exhausted 
to 12 or 15 mm., and sealed, will when rubbed briskly with silk 
glow in one case a rose color and in the other a greenish yellow. 

I hold in my hand here two Geisler tubes, each containing an 
inner tube with beaded surfaces. In each of the outer tubes 
is a small amount of quicksilver; and in one tube nitrogen gas, 
and in the other carbonic acid gas. .By shaking these tubes 
rapidly the friction of the quicksilver against the glass produces 


.electricity, which causes the gas to hecome luminescent. 


Various other gases may be thus employed, producing different 
color effects. 

It has been suggested that life buoys could be equipped with a 
number of mercury tubes, circular or otherwise, and set in differ- 
ent positions, so that the rolling of the buoy in the sea would 
constantly agitate the mercury and render the tubes luminous. 

Here is a tube containing mercurial salts, which changes 
greatly the color of its phosphorescence by heating the tube in 
alcohol flame. 

In this box I have a large spiral glass tube which is expanded 
into bulbs at various points throughout its length. This tube, 
for which I am indebted to my friend Dr. Geyer, contains sul- 
phuric anhydride; and you will note when I connect this to the 
induction coil and send a discharge of electricity through it that 
the gas inside of the tube becomes phosphorescent and remains 
so for a considerable period after the electricity is cut off. 

I have here a bottle containing phosphorus and olive oil, which 
you will see becomes most brilliantly phosphorescent when I 
withdraw the stopper, and allow the air to enter the bottle. The 
phosphorescence in this case is due to combustion, or to the 
oxidation of the liquid. I can also write phosphorescent chaa + 
acters on this ground yvlass plate wet in hot water with this stick 
of phorphorus. ther forms of phosphorescence are caused by 
chemical changes or the slow combustion of decaying vegetable 
matter or decaying fish. 

Occasionally clouds show a phosphorescent light at night; 
snow is phosphorescent after exposure to sunlight, and no doubt 
many substances retain during the night the phosphorescent 
light imparted by the sun’s rays during the day. 

There are also many insects, such as fire flies and glow worms, 
and many deep sea fishes which have the properties of producing 


phosphorescence. Phosphorescence is exhibited among other 
animals by the infusorian noctiluca, marine radiates, polyps, etc., 


which are the principal causes of phosphorescence of the sea. 


340 HAMMER PHOSPHORESCENCE. [Apr. 17 


In Fig. 1, is shown an illustration of the ‘“‘ Pyrophorus Noc- 
tilucus.”’ This tropical beetle has been most carefully studied 
by Prof. S. P. Langley and F. W. Very, and the efficiency ot the 
light given off tested by the Langley bolometer; and they have 
demonstrated tltat practically all the energy which its phosphor- 
escence represents, appears as light, and the light given off by 
this insect is the most efficient light known, it being produced at 
about one four-hundredth part of the cost of the energy which is 
expended in the candle flame*. 

Sir Oliver Lodge says if the secret of the firefly were known, a 
boy turning a crank could furnish sufficient energy to light an 
entire electric circuit. 

And Prof. Langley says, ‘‘ There seems to be no reascn why 
we are forbidden to hope that we may yet discover a method 
(since such a orie certainly exists and is in use on the small scale) 


Fic. 1.—‘Pyrophorus Noctilucus ” ‘life size), the Producer ofthe 
Cheapest Form of Light Known. 


of obtaining an enormously greater result than we now do from 
our present means of producing light.” 

Langley believes the light of these insects is due to chemical 
action, as it is decreased by nitrogen which checks combustion, 
and is increased by oxygen which increases combustion, and 
furthermore, the product is apparently carbon dioxide. 

We also may produce phosphorescence by rubbing crystals 
together, or by friction of other bodies, or by cleavage, such as 
fracture of lump sugar in the dark. 

Among plants, phosphorescence was first recorded by A. Lin- 
nzus, whose daughter discovered it in the nasturtium. Phosphor- 


* ‘On the Cheapest Form of Light,’’ by S. P. Langley and F. W. Very, 
No. 1258 Smithsonian Misc. Coll. ; 


WSDL an 3 


i | 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 341 


escence or flashes or light are often observed, especially just after 
sunset, in the common red and yellow marigold, the tuberose. 
sunflower, poke weed, martagon-lily and the poppy. The root stock 
of khus-khus grass and the sap of certain tropical vines and subter- 
ranean plants, some liverworts, ferns, mosses, fungi and alga, 
and the mycellum of fungi in decaying wood phosphoresce. 
This phosphorescence is said to be due to slow decav and oxi- 
dation, cither in the mycelia or fructifications of the fungi. Heat 
and dryness soon dissipate it. 

Having considered certain of the phenomena of phosphor- 
escence and fluorescence, I wish now to call your attention to 
these remarkable substances which have recently been dis- 
covered, which give off light the moment they are created, with- 
out having to be stimulated by any form of heat, light, electrical 
or other vibrations, so far as we are at present cognizant of, and 
these substances are attracting a great deal of attention, and are 
likely to teach us more about the constitution of matter, and the 
co-relation of the vital and physical forces, than any substances 
which have been created since the world began. I refer to 
“ Radium, Polonium, Actinium and Thorium.”’ 


RADIUM AND OTHER RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES. 


To the discovery of M. 
Henri Becquerel, member of 
the Institute of France, in 
1896, of those remarkable 
radiations emanating from 
uranium, the science, if we 
may so term it, of radioac- 
tivity, owes its foundation 

Great importance must, 
however, be attached to the 
previous investigations into 
the phenomena produced on 
the interior and exterior cf 
vacuum tubes of various 
kinds by such men as Varley, 

Pror. Henri BEcQUEREL. Hittorf, Crookes, Lenard, 

From a portrait presented to the author. Roentgen, Hertz, J. n | .Thom- 
son, Goldstein, Schmidt, Ebert, Wiechert, Geissler, Kaufmann, 
Puluj, Perrin, Villard, Wien, Wiedemann Majorana, Birkland, 
veslandres, Poincaré, Edison, Tesla, Rowland, Michelson, 


342 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


E. Thomson, Moore, Rollins, Campbell-Swinton, and others, 
which investigations had already wrested from Nature so many 
secrets bearing upon the constitution of matter and paved the 
way for the Becquerel rays 

Two important links in the chain were supplied by the experi- 
ments of M. Henry! and M. Niewenglowski’?. The former showed 
that phosphorescent sulphide of zinc penetrated black paper and 
affected a photograph plate, similar to Roentgen rays; and the 
latter in his experiment replaced the usual cover of a loaded 
photographic plate holder by a thin sheet of aluminum; on top 
of this he placed four glass squares sprinkled over with sulphide 
of calcium rendered phosphorescent by exposure to sunlight. A 
jeweller’s glass bell jar was put over each plate, and the whole 
apparatus was then placed in a dark room for twenty-three hours. 
On developing the negative, the plate showed an excellent image 
of the squares of glass and the bell glass covers which had been 
made through the aluminum, a substance heretofore supposed 
to be entirely opaque to light, the white line shown bordering the 
squares of glass (where the plate had not been affected) indicated 
that the rays had here been bent or refracted in passing through 
the edge of the glass, demonstrating that he was only dealing 
with ordinary light rays. 

Subsequently, Prof. Becquerel investigated the effect of phos- 
phorescent substances on photographic plates covered with 
black paper, such as is used for covering X-ray plates; and which 
while transparent to X-rays is impervious to ordinary light waves 
(a plate so protected may be left in the sunlight for twenty-four 
hours); and he exposed various uranium salts to sunlight to try 
their effect, at times placing an aluminum, copper or glass plate 
between the paper and the photograph plate or film. On one 
occasion after he had placed some double sulphate of uranium 
and potassium on a photographic plate, the weather became 
stormy, and he placed his plate with the uranium salts 
upon it in a drawer, where it remained for several days on 
account of continuance of the cloudy weather. It then occurred 
to him to develop the plate; and much to his surprise he found a 
well-defined impression upon the plate, and this caused without 
any effect of phosphorescence due to exposure to sunlight. This 


1. Comptes Rendus, Feb. 10, 1896. Vol. cxxii., p. 312. 
2. Ibid, cxxii., p. 386. 


“) ala 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 343 


led to his discovery and investigation of the remarkable radia- 
tions which have since been known by his name*. 

I have here some samples of the first substances employed by 
Becquerel, consisting of double sulphate of uranium and potas- 
sium and double sulphate of uranium and ammonium, for which 
I am indebted to the courtesy of Dr. C. F. Chandler, of Columbia 
University. 

Peligot in 1840 succeeded in isolating metallic uranium from 
the chloride. Well known forms of it are also uranium arsenate, 
uranium carbonate, uranium niobate, uranium phosphate, 
uranium silicate and uranium sulphate. Uranium was first 
discovered in 1789 by the German chemist Klaproth, he naming 
it after the planet “‘ Uranus.”’ I have here various forms of this 
uranium and also some metallic uranium prepared in the elec 
tric furnace by Moissan, which is more powerful than any other 
form of uranium. 

Uranium, although widely distributed, is never found in large 
amounts, and forms several minerals. The commonest of these 


‘is ‘‘ uraninite,’”’ commonly known as “ pitchblende,”’ which is a 
-compound oxide containing 81} per cent. of uranium, 4 per cent. 


of lead and 4 per cent. of iron with oxygen and water, and some- 
times magnesia, manganese or silica. 

The pitchblende which contains the largest percentage of 
radioactive material which has thus far been discovered is the 
Bohemian pitchblende. It is also found in Saxony in small 
pockets, and a distinct vein of it has been found in Cornwall 
England. Prof. Curie informed the writer that he had secured 
some excellent radioactive pitchblende from the United States 
(Colorado). 

The ore as mined in Cornwall yields 18 per cent. to 20 per cent. 
of the metal, this being the most important source, and this is 
usually put on the market in the form of uranium sesqui-oxide, 
and is largely used for giving porcelains a velvety black when 
heated in the annealing fire, and to some extent for imparting a 
greenish yellow fluorescence to glass. It has also been suggested 
to utilize it on account of its high resistance in connection with 
incandescent lighting. 

Following the original discovery of the Becquerel radiations in 
1896, came the discovery in 1898 of “‘ Polonium,” by Prof. Pierre 


Curie and Mme. Sklodowska Curie, who in investigating Becquerel 
i le EE ee ea ae sae ae 
*Comptes Rendus, Feb. 24, 1896, Vol. cxxii., p. 420. 


ee 


344 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


radiations from uranium found some samples of pitchblende, 
from which the uranium is extracted, which was much more 
p-werful than any uranium they had found, being four times the 
radioactivity of metallic uranium. Concluding naturally that 
the Becquerel radiations were due to some unknown substance in 
the pitchblende they commenced a most painstaking search 
for it, and discovered a substance associated with bismuth, 
which it resembled very much in its chemical characteristics, to 
which Mme. Curie gave the name “‘ Polonium,” after her native 
land, Poland. 

I have here perhaps the only sample in this country at present 
of metallic polonium, which in color resembles somewhat the 
particles of nickel. Here also is some sub-nitrate of polonium. 

Where substances are referred to as possessing a certain “ ra- 
dioactivity,’’ for instance 300, it means that the radiations are 
300 times as powerful as the original radiations emanating from 
uranium, which were discovered by Becquerel, and which are 
taken as a standard of comparison. 

The two tubes which I have here to-night are of the sub-nitrate 
and metallic form, and possess a radio-activity of only about 500. 
The sub-nitrate form is a white powder, and the metailic, as said, 
resembles in appearance particles of nickel. 

Polonium is precipitated by hydrogen sulphide. 

Polonium apparently loses its power much more rapidly than 
radium; and the Curies have not been able to prepare any in 
which the rays have been deviable, although Giesel has prepared 
a form possessing both deviable and non-deviable rays. And 
Elster states that when polonium is placed in a vacuum, the rays 
may be deviated by a magnet to a greater extent than those of 
radium. 

Polonium passes more rays through aluminum than do the rays 
from uranium; but Crookes has shown that they do not penetrate 
glass, as in the cases of radium, and they are readily absorbed by 
minerals, and readily cut off by thin paper. They are readily 
absorbed by quartz, fluoride and mica, whereas these substances 
are freely penetrated by both radium and uranium. 

In the same year in which polonium was discovered, those 
remarkable investigators, M. and Mme. Curie and M. Bemont, 
succeeded in isolating a second substance found in pitchblende 
which was associated with barium and possessed many of the 
chemical and other characteristics of that substance, and to this 
they gave the name “‘ Radium.’’ Of this we shall treat later. 


345 


. 


HAMMER: RADIUM 


1903.] 


‘sqgouvysqng sATjOROIpey—'Z ‘DIT 


oa syutuedy 


“alqVvaLxXa- qv SaINVISENS 3AV- nave 


SSH 1 HOIHM WOHS SIVAGNIW NIVIdad ONY WHINVAD 
ONY AMIS OH WTIND De WOVe 40 SWHO4 SOLE YA 


2002 % 000€ — 000) —0+% —ooi — 04 — Ob” wee ; 
LIALW-OIUYN-ONIMOTIOS MOHS $aGA1 3SSHy tO Nee renter 


CWOIWYG Hui oa vidassy wee 30 see EINE (ag ixo) 


WO! (avs — : Uy , EB ISO 


WAINWO 
DAitviviaw 
aN 


ALININVEA, 
Sond GHOLIG 


346 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


In 1899 was discovered the third substance in pitchblende, 
which possessed the chemical and other characteristics of thorium 
with which it was associated, and to this Debierne gave the name 
“ Actinium.’ It is precipitated by ammonium sulph-hydrate. 
Crookes states that actinium is identical with the substance 
which he had isolated from -1ranium and to which he gave the 
name ‘uranium X.”’ The rays from actinium are deviable. 

Of the three substances to which I have referred, radium is by 
far the most important and is of extraordinary interest. It is 
doubtful whether any substance has been discovered in the his- 
tory of the world of such stupendous interest and importance and 
possessing such puzzling characteristics as radium, which seems 
so at variance with well-established scientific theories as to the 
constitution of matter. 

In Fig. 2 are shown in consecutive order from left to right, 
a tube containing pitchblende, or uraninite, from which radium, 
polonium and actinum as well as uranium are extracted; a tube 
containing metallic uranium made in the electric furnace by 
Moissan; two flasks containing double sulphate of uranium and 
potassium, and double sulphate of uranium and ammonium, 
these being the original salts of uranium with which Becquerel 
experimented when he discovered the Becquerel rays ; a tube 
containing thorium, the most tadioactive substance next to 
radium; two tubes of polonium and bismuth, one tube of 
metallic polonium and the other sub-nitrate of polonium ; 
seven tubes of chloride of radium associated with barium rang- 
ing in radioactivity from 40 to 7,000; a tube containing radium 
and phosphorscent sulphide of zine; and a tube containing 
carnotite, which, together with the samples shown of uraninite, 
autunite, torbernite, gummite and fergusonite, are among the 
mineral substances which are rich in radioactive materials. 
Other active minerals are orangite, euxenite, broggerite, cleveite, 
monazite, samarskite, xenotime, eschynite, niobite, arrhenite, 
hielmite, sipilite, chalcolite, etc. 

In Fig. 3 the two tubes of polonium and the seven tubes of 
radium are shown about two-thirds their natural size. 

Radium actinium and polonium, Prof. Curie states, possess 
an activity which is a million times that of uranium. Prof. 
Curie says radium emits exactly the same quantity of 
Becquerel rays when in the liquid air as it does at normal tem- 
perature of the atmosphere. The luminosity of the chloride of 
radium is stronger in the liquid air than in the atmosphere at a 
normal temperature. 


347 


M. 


, 
J 


ADIL 


MMER: R 


HA 


J 


1903 


jos 


(‘azIs [BInN}CU SpITYy}-OM} JnNoqy) 
aqn} UdAVS pu ‘YINUISIg pue UINTUOIO_ jo 9} 


ol Ae ae Se 


Meg Seer 


‘1oyyne oy} Jo uotssassod oy} UL UMTIeg pue uINIpey jo spuo0jyg 
eIpluqns pue yynusig pue wniuojog oN[eJPW JO soqn} om} SurmoyS—'e 


Whiove ONY WAINDIOd | 


“OL 


a 


348 HAMMER: RADIUM. fApr. 17 


My friend, Mr. R. R. Bowker, whom I met in Paris last Fall, 
told the writer that he had shortly before that been dining seatcd 
between Lord Kelvin and Prof. Becquerel, and that Lord Kelvin 
had turned to him and said, that the discovery of Becquerel 
radiations had placed the first question mark against the principle 
of conservation of energy which had been placed against it since 
that principle was enunciated. 

Within the past month great interest has been attracted by the 
statement made by Profs.Curie and Laborde that radium maintains 
its own temperature at 1.5 Centigrade above its surroundings, this 
being equivalent to stating that half a pound of radium salt would 
evolve in one hour sufficient heat to equal that caused by the 
burning of one-third of a cubic foot of hydrogen gas; and that the 
heat evolved from pure radium salt is sufficient to melt more than 
its own weight of ice every hour. This evolution of heat, it is 
claimed, is going on constantly for indefinite periods and leaving 
the radium at the end of months of activity as potent as it was 
at the beginning. The problem therefore confronts the world of 
solving how radium can constantly throw off heat without com- 
bustion or without chemical change, as Prof. Curie says it does. 

Messrs. Curie and Laborde employed a thermo-electric couple 
of iron and constantin, one of whose junctions is surrounded 
by radioactive barium chloride and the other by pure barium , 
chloride. They used two small bulbs of the same dimensions, 
one containing one gramme of radiferous barium chloride con- 
taining about one-sixth of its weight in radium chloride and 
the other bulb containing one gramme of pure barium chloride. 

The junctions of the thermo-electric couple are respectively 
placed in the center of each bulb, surrounded by the substances. 
The bulbs are isolated in air within the center of two small 
identical enclosures, surrounded in turn by a third, which is 
thermally insulated, and maintains itself ata practically uniform 
temperature, and under these conditions variations in the sur- 
rounding temperature are felt in the sam2 manner at both 
junctions and do not affect the indications of the couple. Messrs. 
Curie and Laborde both thus observed a difference of tempera- 
ture of 1.5 degrees C. between the radiferous barium chloride 
and the pure barium chloride, the former having the higher 
temperature. (Comptes rendus, March 16, 1903). 

In a letter recently received by the author from Prof, Curie 
bearing upon the question of heat given off by radium Prof. 
Curie writes as follows: “‘ Since the time I had the L.onor to see 


Ye 


1903.] ° HAMMER: RADIUM. 34 


© 


you at our School of Physics aad Chemistry I have continued 
to investigate into the radioactivity induced by radium and the 
way that radioactivity is disappearing in the course of time. 

“Tn a study of another kind (in collaboration with M. 
Laborde) I found that the radium is setting off heat continually 
and in a very large amount; each gramme of the radium is set- 
ting off in each hour 100 small calories, or in other words it is 
setting off heat enough to melt in each hour its own weight in ice. 

‘Where is the source of this energy? Both Mme. Curie and 
myself are not able to go beyond some hypotheses; one of these 
consists in supposing the atoms of radium evolving and trans- 
forming into another simple body, and despite the extrem eslow- 
ness of that transformation which cannot be located during a 
year the amount of energy involved in that transformation 
is tremendous. 

‘The second hypothesis consists in the supposition that 
radium is capable of capturing and utilizing some radiations of 
unknown nature which cross the space without our knowledge.” 

Profs. J. J. Thomson and Rutherford advance the theory that 
there is a succession of chemical changes going on causing the 
spontaneous projection of larger masses of material at enor- 
mous velocities, and that while certain portions are constantly 
dying out and becoming inert other portions are constantly in- 
creasing in strength and power. 

Someone has remarked that for years we have been extracting 
uranium oxides, and pouring down the waste pipes and into the 
dust bins the more interesting and precious radioactive sub- 
stances. 

Although radium, polonium and actinium have been termed 
new elements, in the case of polonium and actinium they have as 
yet not been found in sufficiently pure state and in sufficient quan- 
tity to give a spectrum, and to prove conclusively that they are | 
new elements. Prof. Curie has, however, stated emphatically 
that there is now no doubt of radium being a new element. 

The tiny brown bulb which | hold in my hand is the duplicate | 
of the one which Prof. Curie showed me at his laboratory last 
fall, which contained the only sample of chemically pure radium 
in the world, this being between two and three one-hundredths of 
a gramme; and it was the spectrum of that sample, showing only 
the lines characteristic of radium, as tested by Demarcay, which 
demonstrated it to be a new element. And with that sample, 
also, the atomic weight for radium of 225 was determined... The 


\ < e | wa? 
+ en’ hg P ae 
° * 


350 HAMMER: RADIUM. Berek iE 


atomic weight of the barium heretofore always associated with 
radium, but which in this sample had been eliminated, is but 157. 

In answer to my inquiry as to its value, Prof. Curie said that 
100,000 francs ($20,000) could not purchase this tiny sample. 

I was enabled through the courtesy of Prof. Curie tosecure from 
the Societé Centrale des Produits Chimique of Paris, some nine 
different preparations of radium and two of polonium, which I 
have here for your consideration. I was unable to secure any 
actinium; in fact, but a trace of this substance has thus far been 
secured. 

If the lights are extinguished, and you will sit for a few mo- 
ments in the dark, I will pass chese tubes about the room that 
you may observe the bright light given off by certain of them. 
These samples which I have range from forty times the radio- 
activity of uranium (which is taken as a standard), up te 7,000. 

The laboratory, where-these substances are prepared, is under 
the control of Prof. Curie; and up to recent date, all radium of 
higher radio-activity than 7,000 has been retained for the 
experiments of M. and Mme. Curie and their associates; but I 
received a letter recently from Director P. Boulay of the Societé 
Centrale, in which I was informed that they will shortly put 
upon the market a preparation of radium, chemically pure or 
nearly so, at a cost of 30,000 francs ($6,000) per gramme or 
about $2,721,555.90 per pound. 

Radium, while it has been spoken of as a metal, has never 
been secured in a metallic form, the usual form being as a 
chloride or bromide. 

Prof. Curie told the writer that the result of all the work done 
in Germany and France in the past three years had only resulted 
in the securing of about one pound of radium; this including all 
grades or qualities. Prof. J. I. Thomson says there is far more 
gold in sea water than there is radium, polonium and actinium 
in pitchblende. 

Prof. Curie took this ring which I have on my hand, which 
contains a small diamond, into his dark room and holding near 
it a small pill box containing about a gramme of radium, caused 
the stone to phosphoresce most beautifully. It was as if a 
lightened candle had been brought near to it. Prof Curie 
remarked that this showed that the stone was a genuine diamond; 
and if it had been paste there would have been no effect produced, 
and that radium therefore constituted an excellent means for 
testing the genuineness of diamonds. 


1903.) . HAMMER: RADIUM. 351 


According to M. and Mme. Curie, radium rays act in many ways 
like light. They reduce silver salts, peroxide of iron and bi- 
chromate of potash in presence of organic substances; they 
also color glass, porcelain and white paper, and they transform 
greenish yellow platino-cyanide of barium into a brown variety. 

Giesel had prepared platino-cyanide of barium with a trace of 
radium. This spontaneously became brown, and it then polar- 
ized light like tourmaline. He also found that this colored rock 
salt just as cathode rays do, or the vapors of alkaline metals, and 
furthermore showed that radium salts, brought near the temples 
or to the closed eyes, produced a sensation of light. 

M. Becquerel, referring to the chemical action of radium rays, 
‘says that radium and uranium rays act upon silver gelatino- 
bromide, but produce no effect upon Daguerre plates, or upon 
photographic papers, and says that colorations of glass, porce- 
lain, paper and certain crystals, as well as the painful physio- 
logical effects also belong to this class of phenomena., He also 
calls attention to the transformation of white into red phosphorus 
in 24 hours, the reduction of mercuric chloride in the presence of 
oxalic acid with the precipitation of calomel, and finally the 
destruction of the germination power of seeds after long exposure. 

Becquerel also shows that radium rays possess the same power 
as the electric spark, or the prolonged action of violet or ultra- 
violet rays, of restoring the phosphorescent properties under ex- 
posure to heat of a body deprived of them by over-heating. 

Practically all the radium which has thus far reached this 
country, with the exception of that in the possession of the 
author: has been the German radium, and Prof. Curie tells the 
writer that he had tested all of the German productions, and he 
has found none of them to exceed a radioactivity of 300. 

De Haen of Seelze near Hanover, Germany, and Giesel, of 
Brunswick, also have manufactured radium. De Haen recently 
informed the writer that the preparations he puts on the market 
cost ten and thirty shillings per gramme. 

As indicative of the enormous difficulties to be encountered in 
aes this wonderful substance, it is interesting to note that 
it takes 5,000 tons of uranium residues to produce a kilo (2.2 
pounds) of radium; and the cost of handling these residues is 
$2,000 per ton. To secure the chemically pure radium is enor- 
mously expensive, and it would be impossible to dothis by chemi- 
cal analysis, therefore the far more sensitive electrical method is 
employed, and the Curies say that they can detect the presence 


es) 


352 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


of ‘a radioactive substance by the meaas of such a minute quan- 
tity that it would require 5,000 times this amount to show at all 
in the spectroscope. And it is stated that this method of elec- 
trical analysis is thousands of times more sensitive than spectrum 
analysis and millions of times more sensitive than chemical 
analysis. 

In Fig. 4 is shown the ‘‘ electrometer ’’ method with which the 
Curies have studied the radioactivity of different substances. It 
consists of two plates, A and B, on the latter of which is placed the 
radioactive substance to be tested. This makes the air a con- 
ductor of electricity between the two plates. For measuring 
this degree of conductibility, the plate B is brought to a high 
potential by connecting it to one side of the storage battery P, the 


Terre! 


Fic. 4—Anparatus employed by M. and 
Mme Curie in the study of radio- 
activity. 


other side of which is connected to the ground. If the plate a is 
brought to the potential of the ground by the wire c-p., an electric 
current begins to flow between the two plates, A and B. The 
potential of plate a is shown by the electrometer. If we cut this 
communication with the ground at c, the plate a becomes charged 
causing the electrometer to deviate. The speed deviation is 
proportionate to the intensity of the current and can serve for 
measuring it. But it is preferable to make this measurement by 
compensating the charge taken by plate a, so that the elec- 
trometer remains at zero. The charges which are extremely 
feeble can be compensated by means of a Piezo-electric quartz Q, 


a 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 353 


one armature of which is connected with the plate a, and the other 
armature grounded. The quartz plate is given a certain tension 
by weights placed on the plate u. This tension is gradually 
produced and gives a charge of a definite quantity of electricity 
which can be measured. The operation may be so regulated 
that there is a constant compensation between the quantity of 
electricity which passes through the condenser and that of the 
opposite sign furnished by the quartz. So we can measure in an 
absolute value the quantity of electricity passing through the 
condenser in a certain time. 

Doubtless some loss is caused by the rays which pass directly 
through the condenser plates. 


Fic. 5.—Curie’s Electroscope for the study of Radio-activity. 


Dolezalek has designed a very sensitive type of electrometer 
built by Bartels of Géttingen, a description of which may be 
found in Verk, der Deutsche Physik Ges., itt (1901). 

It. is well known that the leaves of a gold or aluminum foil 


- -electroscope will hold their charge in dry air indefinitely; but the 


Becquerel rays are found to dissipate the charge by ionization of 


_ the air, or rendering the air a conductor of electricity (the elec- 


troscope may also be discharged by Roentgen rays, cathode 
rays and ultra-violet light). 

In Fig. 5.is show a form of electroscope devised by the Curies 
for.the study of radioactive substances. Referring to the dia- 


*gram,to.the right, it will be noted that the electroscope consists of 


a single movable sheet of gold or aluminum foil attached to a 
stationary sheet of copper L, being supported by the insulating 


354 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


-piece1. The radioactive substance to be tested is placed on the 
lower of the disks p and p’, preferably on a removable plate. 
The radiations make the air a conductor between these two plates 
The electroscope is charged by means of a stick of ebonite rubbed 
briskly and placed near the rod 8. This deflects the sheet L’, 
from the vertical and it so remains for a very long time. When 
radioactive substances are brought near it, the gold or aluminum 
leaf is caused to lose its charge, and the leakage is observed by 
means of a stationary telescope shown in the left hand 
figure, which is provided with a micrometer scale. The time 
taken for the discharge of the electroscope is taken by means of 
a chronometer or watch. By suitable lighting, the front edge 
of the foil may be made to appear as a very fine line, and its 
position noted with great precision. 

By examining the diagram it will be noted that the upper 
condenser plate is connected with the metallic case. Detach- 
able metal cases are placed over the condenser plates and over the 
rod for charging the electroscope. Two of the sides of the case 
are of glass. : 

I have here a simple form of electroscope with leaves of alu- 
minum foil, which serves to show the ionization of the air; 
when the radium is brought near the divergent leaves lose their 
charge of negative electricity and rapidly come together. 

It is of paramount importance that the tadioactive substance 
should be kept in a room distant from the electroscope. 

At the present moment the clothes of every person in this 
room and all the walls of the room are radioactive by reason of the 
presefice of the nine preparations of radium which I have here 
this evening. 

Prof. Curie told the writer that it was often impossible for him 
to go near his instruments to make any measurements for hours, 
after being in the proximity of some radium,. and those who 
have worked with this substance have found the greatest diffi- 
culty in keeping their tools and instruments and themselves free 
from the radioactivity imparted by the radium. The energy 
represented by radium is something enormous. 

Elster and Geitel* have shown that a fine wire of any metal 
_placed.in the atmosphere and charged negatively, from some 
source of current, say of 500 volts, causes the wire itself to 
become radioactive, and this radioactivity may be scraped off 


* Phys Zeit., 1901, ii., p. 590 


Re ie it 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 355 


and will affect photograph plates, ionize the air? ete. 4 It 
cannot, however, be washed off. It is stated that light- 
ning rods and even the leaves of trees all become radioactive: 
and it has been shown that falling rain and snow are for a 
time quite powerfully radioactive; and after they have fallen, a 
Wire negatively electrified in the atmosphere has only a small 
amount of radioactivity, apparently showing that the rain and 
snow have carried the radioactive particles in the atmosphere 
down to the ground. 

McLennan has made experiments with the negatively charged 
wire in Montreal and subsequently at the foot of Niagara Falls; 
and has found the result about one-sixth as powerful in the latter 
place as in the former; and he has also shown that it was not 
necessary to electrify the wire used at Niagara Falls, as it 
received a sufficierit charge from the electricity in the atmosphere. 

McLennan found that rain caught in a vessel and immediately 
evaporated to dryness imparted radioactivity to the vessel in 
which it was evaporated, 

Ordinary water when evaporated and rain water which has 
stood for several hours before being boiled down do not yield any 
radioactivity. 

As an evidence of radioactivity imparted to another substance 
by radium, I have here some pieces of cardboard which consti- 
tuted the box which held my samples of radium for several 
months. The box becoming injured, 1 broke it up, fortunately 
saving the pieces; and six days efter the radium had been 
removed, I looked up the pieces and was surprised to find them 
luminous in the dark. Subsequently I tried. their effect 
on a photograph plate; but did not succeed in getting any 
impression. Three weeks later it occurred to me to try and 
stimulate the radioactivity of the cardboard, which had not 
been near radium for over a month, by burning magnesium wire, 
when I found I could make the cardboard brighter than it had 
been in the first place. I have also stimulated the radioactivity 
by «sparks from a coil, espectally when producing ultra-violet 
rays, by using a condenser bridged across the secondary and 
employing pure iron electrodes. I tried the burning magnesium 
with various samples of cardboard which had not been exposed 
to the radium, and there was no phosphorescence. It has already 
been stated that various substances. which become radioactive 
retain that property for a short time only, and it is interestinz to 
note its retention for such a long period of time and to note this 


356 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


ability to stimulate and make visible the imparted radioactivity. 

This experiment suggests the discovery made by Prof. E. 
Wiedemann that a mixture of sulphide of calcium with a little 
sulphate of manganese is not altered when exposed to cathode 
rays; but some time after its exposure it bursts into a vivid 
greenish glow when slightly heated; and to this phenomenon he 
has given the name “ thermo-luminescence.”’ 

Prof. S. P. Thompson also showed that fluorspar which by pro- 
longed heating has lost its luminescing power, regains the power 
of thermo-luminescence on exposure to Roentgen rays when 
reheated. 

Prof. Trowbridge also finds that this restoration is also effected 
by exposure to the electric glow discharge, but not by exposure 
to ultra-violet light. 

It is also stated that an object coated with calcium sulphide 
and exposed to the sunlight will phosphoresce about ten hours; 
and even after it has lost its luminosity, it can be caused to again 
give light by heating first by the hand, then over a water bath, 
and finally on a hot stove. 

McLennan has found a very large number of salts are brought 
into a condition by cathode rays, in which warming makes them 
radioactive for a short time, the supply of negatively charged 
particles discharged from the surface coming to an end. 

. Prof. Rutherford of Montreal, who has given a great deal of 
attention to radioactive substances, particularly to investigations 
into thorium, which next to radium is the most radioactive sub- 
stance yet discovered, has found that by electrifying a wire 
negatively with a current of 500 volts connecting the positive 
pole to the ground; and by connecting a sample of thorium to the 
earth, that the thorium particles were attracted to the negatively 
charged wire, producing a greater radio-activity than he had 
ever found in any thorium preparation which he had made. 

I have here a sample of oxide of thorium, the radioactivity 
of which was discovered independently by Schmidt and Curie. 
This-sample is between 98 and 99 per cent. purity. From 
this body Prof. Rutherford has isolated a substance which 
he calls ‘‘ ThX;‘’ and extraordinary as it may seem, it has 
been found after separation of the active constituents. repre- 
sented by the ThX from the thorium, that the ThX loses its radio- 
activity, and this is taken up by the thorium in exactly the 
amount which the other loses. 

Sir William Crookes has also separated a non-uranium residue 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 357 


from uranium, leaving the latter without radioactivity. Whilst 
the whole of the radioactivity has been concentrated in the 
residue to which the name UrX was given, Crookes, as already 
stated, claims that Actinium is but another name for his UrX. 

The only case of radioactivity induced by cathode rays in a 
neutral substance has been that of bismuth, discovered by 
Villari. 

Prof. Curie has discovered that radioactive gas emanates from 
radium, and Rutherford has discovered the gaseous emanations 
from thorium, Messrs. Rutherford and Soddy have investigated 
extensively these emanations, and they have succeeded in con- 
densing them at the temperature of liquid air. A preliminary 
account appears in the proceedings of the Chemical Society of 
London for December, and Prof. Rutherford writes me that the 
full paper will shortly appear in the Philosophical Magazine; and 
he states furthermore, that in his opinion this proves beyond 
doubt the gaseous nature of the emanations. 

The serious physiological effects of radium are well known, 
and Messrs. Giesel, Becquerel, the Curies and others, have given 
important evidence thereof. As stated in the appendix of a 
paper read by the writer at the 159th meeting of the INsTITUTE 
on Januarv 3, 1902, dealing with the subject of radioactivity, 
Prof. Curie told the writer that he would not care to trust himself 
in a room with a kilo of pure radium, as it would burn all the 
skin off his body, destroy his eyesight and probably kill him. 
The writer felt the effects for weeks of a slight burn from in- 
advertently carrying a wooden box containing cight tiny sealed 
glass tubes of radium under his arm for several hours. 

Mr. W. E. Hidden has called the attention of the writer to some 
phenomena which h2 has observed in a mine in Barringer’s Hill, 
Llano County, Texas, which mine contains yttrium, thorium and 
uranium. Pockets of ore have been found, ranging from a few 
ounces up to a capacity of 70 kilos, which were the nuclei or focal 
points of rigid lines radiating in every possible direction. These 
lines penetrating great masses of quartz and orthoclase feldspar, 
and gigantic pegmatyt, to distance often of several feet, in some 
cases of from five to eight feet, he has observed that these radial 
lines were fissures and bore no relation to the natural cleavage 
or the crystalline form of the huge rock masses in which they 
existed. Easy parting took place along these radial lines, making 
the ore quickly available. 

It is Mr. Hidden’s theory that. as these lines directed to ores 


358 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr LY. 


zich in uranium and thorium, both well known sources of radium, 
etc.; the phenomenon is due to an electric or other effect of radio- 
activity; it being untenable, he believes, to explain this phe- 
nomenon on the basis of expansion or contraction. 

The slide which I will show on the screen shows clearly a pocket 
of ore with the lines radiating therefrom in all directions. 

Eighteen years ago, while in Italy, the author visited the 
celebrated aquarium in Naples, which is probably the finest in the 
world; and while there was enabled to test the shocking abilities 
of the Electric Ray, or ‘‘ Torpedo Galvani ”’ and was astonished 
at the tremendous shock which he received; and in this connec- 
tion, it is interesting to call attention to the fact that there are 
fifty or more fishes which are known to possess this property of 
giving powerful shocks. The ‘‘ Gymnotus ” or Electric Eel, and 
the ‘‘ Torpedo Galvani ” or Electric Ray being the best known 
of these. 

It will be recollected that Faraday drew a powerful spark from 
a Gymnotus at the Polytechnicum, London, and he estimated 
the shock to be equivalent to that given by a battery of leyden 
jars of 3,500 square inches of surface. And many writers have 
referred tothe ability of these electric fishes to give powerful shock 
for a long period of time. D’Arsonval has caused them to light 
incandescent lamps and they have been known to magnetize 
needles and decompose water by the electricity they produce. 
These fishes doubtless using this faculty as a means of defence 
and also for procuring food. | My object in mentioning this is to 
state that last Fall I again visited Naples and thinking that 
perhaps an electric torpedo was on exhibition, it occurred to me_ 
to take with me some half dozen tubes of radium which I had in 
my bag, and see whether the radium had any effect upon the. 
power of the fish to give powerful shocks. The fish, as at''the 
time of my previous visit, was lying in a shallow wooden box 
containing wet sand and a small amount of water. By taking 
hold of the side of the fish and pressing with the thumb on one 
side and the fingers on the other, or by either pinching or tap- 
ping the fish, the cells with which the fish was equipped dis- 
_ charged themselves and gave a shock sufficient to twist one’s 
arm very badly. After the members of our party had each 
received a shock, and as soon as a few persons present had gone 
away, I laid the six tubes of radium on the fish (which is shaped 
very much like a flounder), leaving them there for about twenty 
minutes. I then replaced the tubes in the box, and taking hold 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM, 359 


of the fish tried for fifteen minutes to get it to give me a shock by 
tapping or pinching in the same manner as previously done when 
the fish gave off shocks, and without receiving the slightest 
shock. Now,Ilam prepared to admit that the fish might have been 
“entirely out of shocks’’; still, it is well known that these fishes will 
continue to give out shocks for a very long period of time, one 
authority reporting 360 shocks in seven minutes’ time; but after 
exposing the fish to the radium, I could get absolutely no mani- 
festation; and in this connection, it is to be remembered that the 
physiological effects of radium, such as burning, destroying 
microbic life, producing the sensation of light when a tube is held 
against the closed eye or temples (which is doubtless largely due 
to the phosphorescence of the pupil of the eye, but which may 
also affect the nerve centers), and also the electrical effects, where 
charged bodies are caused to give off their charge by the ioniza- 
tion of the air; and one must also remember the very numerous 
chemical effects and the destruction of the germinating power of 
seeds, the changing cf oxygen into ozone, and various other 
phenomena of radium which would lead one to wonder whether 
the radium did not affect the ability of the fish to give off 
electric shocks, perhaps producing a partial paralysis. 

The experiment is of some interest, and may be perhaps 
repeated by others who have better facilities than I to continue 
the investigation. I have sometimes wondered how that fish 
was getting along in Naples; though I believe the waters of the 
Mediterranean abound in them. 

Note—Since writing the above description of his own experi- 
ments, the writer has learned of the recent experiments conducted 
by Prof. Curie, in which afew milligrams of radium introduced be- 
neath the skin of a mouse near the vertebral column produced 
death by paralysis in three hours; and tubes of radium placed 
jn contact with the back of the necks of guinea pigs have killed 
or paralyzed these animals in a few hours, according to the 
length of exposure to its fatal radiations. 

As illustrating the action of radium rays upon bacteria, E. 
Aschkinass and W. Caspari speak of exposing cultures of micro- 
cocus prodigiosus to a radium preparation, and State that the 
rays killed the germs very effectively in about three hours. 

The work of Rutherford, the Curies, Becquerel and others has 
demonstrated that there are three entirely distinct types of rays 
emanating from radium (Rutherford having first pointed out 
that uranium possessed two separate types of rays, ‘‘a’’ and“ 7 


360 | HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


the former easily absorbed even by gases, whilst the latter are very 
penetrating and but little absorbed by gas). Those which con- 
stitute by far the most important class are the ‘‘a’’ rays. They 
constitute the major proportion of the rays, and are those which 
produce the greatest portion of the ionization of the gas, which 
has been observed under experimental conditions. 

These ‘‘a”’ rays possess in common certa‘n characteristics of 
Roentgen rays, and by many have been thought to be Roentgen 
rays. I shall call your attention later to certain effects which 
are identical with those produced by Roentgen or X-rays. They 
have been considered absolutely non-deviable, as X-rays have 

been held to be. 
' Rutherford has, however, recently shown that in a very 
powerful magnetic field he could deflect about 30 per cent. of the 
rays, and in experiments now being conducted with a strong 
electric field, he has been able to deflect about 45 per cent. of the 

a” rays. The ‘a’ rays are readily absorbed, and a thin 
screen of metal will serve to cut off the greater portion of 
them. 

In this connection I would state that Mr. Tesla informed the 
writer recently of an experiment he had made in which he had 
succeeded in deflecting the X-rays themselves, and M. Blondelot 
has recently claimed as the result of his experiments that X-rays 
are susceptible of polarization. If this is so, it is argued they 
may be shown to be ordinary light waves of extremely short 
wave length. 

Strutt and Crookes have suggested that the ‘‘a”’ rays consist 
of positively electrified particles, and this view Rutherford sup- 
ports, calling attention to the fact that they possess character- 
istics similar to the ‘‘ Canal Strahlen’”’ of Goldstein. These 
Goldstein rays have been shown by Wien to be positively charged 
particles, moving at high velocities. 

Rutherford, as a result of his most recent observations, con- 
siders that the ‘‘a’’ rays move at much higher velocity than the 
Goldstein rays; and he estimates that the energy of the “a 
rays is a thousand times greater than that of the “‘8”’ rays. 

Rutherford says all the radioactive substances, including 
polonium, as well as excited bodies and the emanations, give out 
Sa rays. 

The ‘‘@”’ rays are much more penetrative and much longer, 
and in every particular correspond to the characteristics of 
cathode rays. They are readily deflected by a magnet. They 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 361 


discharge electrified bodies by ionization of the air, affect photo- 
graph plates, etc. 

M. Villard, in 1899, proved that the cathode rays are negatively 
electrified corpuscles or fragments of atomic hydrogen, and these 
corpuscles, as they were named by J. J. Thomson, which he has 
shown to be one one-thousandth of the mass of the hydrogen 
atcm, are projected from the cathode at a speed approximating 
70,000 ae per second. 

The “7 ’’ rays are the rays possessing the greatest penetrative 
effect. They will excite or produce radioactivity through the 
air at a distance of three or four feet or more. 

Some recent experiments made by Rutherford show the 
relative penetration of the three classes of rays through aluminum 
sheets of varying thicknesses, before a loss is observed of half of 
the intensity, and this shows for the 

““a”’ rays a thickness of aluminum of .0005 cm. 

““@” rays a thickness of aluminum of .05 cm. 

“+” rays a thickness of aluminum of 8. cm. 

Mr. Rutherford, who has conducted most painstaking investi- 
gations into the penetrative character of the radiations from 
uranium, radium, thorium, etc., recently wrote the author in 
answer to some questions on the subject, that he had found that 
the radium rays were reduced to half value after passing through 
1 cm. of lead, 1 inch of iron and about 8 inches of water, the 
radiation being reduced to about 1 per cent. of its original value, 
after passing through 7 cm. of lead, 7 inches of iron and 56 inches 
of water. ; 

In the lantern slide thrown on the screen is an interesting 
illustration of the effect of magnetism onthe deflectable rays 
from radium. There are four large steel magnets, two being 
placed opposed to each other, and the other two so that unlike 
poles are opposite to each other, making a strong field of force 
between the two magnets. I have placed six tubes of radium a 
short distance above the magnets and ina line running across 
and between the poles of the two pairs of magnets. It will be 
seen that the magnetic rays in the case of one pair of magnets — 
have repelled the radium rays so that the negative is but 
slightly affected. Whereas, in the case of the other pair of 
magnets the radium rays have been attracted by the magnets 
affecting considerably the negative around the pole pieces. 

Prof. Curie states that half of the induced radioactivity, when 
exposed to the air, is lost in certain substances in half an hour, 


a 


362 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


but in a closed vessel, where the air has been made radioactive, 
however, this radioactivity has not lost half of its strength, even 
after four days’ time. 

It is desirable to keep radium free from moisture, preferably 
in sealed glass tubes. It readily takes up moisture, and then 
soon losés its luminosity, which may, however, be regained by 
dissolving and precipitating the substance and thoroughly drying 
it. The luminosity may also be considerably heightened by 
subjecting the radium to high temperatures. 

Polonium like uranium does not possess the power of exciting, 
radioactivity, as it does-not give off any emanations; whereas, in 
the case of radium and thorium, there is an actual emanation. 
producing radioactivity in surrounding objects by the deposit of 
radioactive matter. 

When one considers the remarkable effects produced by radium 
it would almost seem that it is matter tearing itself into tiny 
pieces, and projecting these infinitesimally small particles 
through all matter at a speed from half to even the full speed of 
light, and rendering all substances about it radioactive, and still 
without appreciable loss in weight in the original substance, and 
without disparagement of the accepted wave theory of light. one 
naturally “harks back’’ to Newton’s corpuscular theory of 
light. 

While various theories have been advanced to account for the 
phenomena of radium, there remain many things which have not 
been satisfactorily accounted for; and perhaps the subject which 
has been most widely discussed is the loss in weight of radio- 
active substances. 

At the British Association meeting last summer, Prof. i id Bs 
Thomson is reported to have stated that if a square centimeter 
of surface were covered with pure radium, it would only lose in 
weight one thousandth of a milligram in a million years. This is 
in accordance with the previous statements made by Becquerel. 

Later in the year, A. Heydweiller, of the Royal University, 
Munster, Germany, stated that he had been testing a sample of 
De Haen’s preparation of radium, and found that it lost in weight 
two one-hundredths of a milligram per day for fifty days, and a 
whole milligram in that period. (Phys, Zeit, Oct. 15, 1902.) 

The great discrepancy in the statements on this important 
subject, led the writer to enter into correspondence with Profs. 
J. J. Thomson, Henri Becquerel, Lord Kelvin, Sir William 


Crookes, P. Curie and A. Heydweiller, which resulted in the fol- 
lowing expression of views. 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 363 


Prof. Thomson was inclined to think that from the magnitude 
of loss found by Heydweiller, it must be due to some secondary 
effect, and he stated that he could not speak with certainty 
without a greater knowledge of the details of the experiments. 
As accounting for the results he, however, drew attention to the 
well-known coloration of glass by radium, by remarking, ‘‘ One 
point, however, that ought to be attended to in these experi- 
ments is the effect of the radiation from radium on glass. Glass, 
as is well known, gets deeply colored when in contact with 
radium. It seems to me possible that the glass might be charged 
right through. If this were the case, it is possible that reactions 
might occur between the glass and the air, producing volatile 
substances and a loss of weight. I only throw this out with 
hesitation, for as I said before, I am not familiar with the details 
of the experiments.”’ 

Prof. Becquerel informed the writer that he knew nothing 
teliable regarding the experiments of Heydweiller, and called 
attention to his original paper on this subject which appeared 
in the Comptes rendus of March 26, 1900, adding, “‘ 1 believe 
I am the first to have published an estimate in this way which 
could only result from my own experiments. The loss of one 
milligram per square centimeter requires one thousand million 
years. This statement refers only to the part of the deviable 
portion of the radiation to which measurements were applied; 
but this is only a part of the total loss. The deviable radiations 
comprise rays ranging from 10’ and 3.10'° c.m_ Besides, there is 
also all the non-deviable portion, either penetrating or absorbing, 
which corresponds to a notable loss of energy; and in addition, 
if the emanation is of material importance, which seems quite 
‘probable, the loss on this account would be a thousand times 
greater. These estimates are but theoretical, for it is probable 
that at least a portion of the mass calculated or estimated as 
material is apparent and corresponds to the effects of induction.” 

In response to an expression of view from Sir William Crookes 
on a theory to satisfactorily account for the phenomena of radio- 
active substances, he wrote as follows: ‘‘ You will find them 
fully given in my address to the British Association at their 
Bristol meeting in 1898. I have not seen any special reason to 
alter the views there propounded ”’; and in writing on the sub- 
ject of Heydweiller’s experiments, Prof. Crookes says, ‘‘ I do not 
think the experiments of Heydweiller have been corroborated 
by other observers; and there are many sources of error in his 


364 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


experiments which I should like to see discussed before giving 
credence to it. Personally, I find no loss of weight in a rich 
sample of radium compound during continuous weighings ex- 
tending over many months. I should be inclined to agree with 
Becquerel and J. J. Thomson.”’ 

Lord Kelvin wrote that he was sorry not to have been able to: 
make any experiments on radioactive substances which could. 
allow him to offer any opinion that would be helpful on the 
subject, and added, ‘‘ What you tell me regarding radium and 
your correspondence with Prof. J. J. Thomson is very interesting.’” 

On this point Prof. Curie recently wrote me as follows: “I 
never did believe in the exactness of Mr. Heydweiller’s experi- 
ments; and I always thought he did not take care enough to 
avoid some source of errors. In fact, with a substance consider- 
ably stronger than his own I only obtained a reduction in weight 
of 1-10 of a milligram in four months for several decigrams of 
substance, and as the tubes were used at the same time in sev- 
eral experiments, that loss of weight does not aliow me to affirm 
that radium is losing weight spontaneously. I believe, mean- 
while, as does Mr. Heydweiller, that the question cannot be an- 
swered in any other than an experimental way, and that all 
speculative theories are of small interest. I have published my 
recent researches in the Comptes Rendus del’ Acadamie des Sci- 
ences de Parts.” 

As regards the published statements of Prof. Heydweiller’s. 
experiments, the writer can state that he is most reliably informed. 
that a mishap occurred during his experiments which resulted in. 
one of the tubes becoming cracked, which was not observed until. 
later; and that this practically nullified the results published; 
and, in fact, they have not been confirmed by subsequent tests;. 
but, on the other hand, they tend to corroborate the experiments. 
of Becquerel and the statements made by him, Sir William. 
Crookes, J. J. Thomson and others. The writer is also informed. 
that Prof. Heydweiller is continuing further experiments, the 
results of which will doubtless be published when his investiga- 
tions are complete. 

As bearing upon the coloration of glass already referred to, L 
hold in my hand a flask which I secured at the laboratory in Paris, 
which has contained radium, and has been most beautifully 
colored a deep violet. I also have several tubes in which radium 
has been kept, which are similarly colored, and in this connection 
I would call attention to the fact that X-ray tubes which have 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 365 


been in use for a considerable time become similarly colored, 
forming another link between the Roentgen rays and radium 
rays. 

I also have here a tiny bulb of glass which is colored a deep 
brown. I have seen only one other piece of glass colored in this 
way, this being due to the difference in the chemical constituents 
of the glass (though in some cases the glass subsequently turns a 
violet color). This is a duplicate of the tiny tube which Prof. 
Curie showed the writer, which contained between two and three 
one-hundredths of a gramme of chemically pure radium. 


Fic. 6.—Radiograph Made by Radium of a Disc for Testing 
Radioactivity, a Block of Rock-salt and a Lump of Pitch- 
blende. 


It is interesting to note that the Becquerel rays induce activity 
which persists, whereas that excited by Roentgen rays ceases 
immediately on the removal of the rays. ; 

As illustrating the X-ray character of radium rays I would 
call vour attention to Fig. 6, in the center of which is shown a 
block of rock salt. The original sample was about one inch 
thick, and was so transparent that a person’s features might be 
seen through it. The rock salt is not only transparent to ordin- 
ary light, but also to ultra-violet light, whereas it is very opaque 
‘to X-rays. 


i 


366 HAMMER: RADIUM. [April 17 


Mrs. Hammer, appreciating the serious physiological effects of ° 


radium, has made the interesting suggestion that radium be 
kept in boxes made of rock salt, and the author is now having 
such a receptacle made. This might be even more satisfactory 
than a lead box. It would be interesting to note the change in 
the temperature of such a box or vial which so well intercepts 
the Radium rays. 

-The illustration referred to was made by placing the rock salt 
on a photograph plate with the radium some 5 inches above it. 

To the right of the rock salt is shown a piece of uraninite (pitch- 
blende), from which radium is extracted. You will note that 
not only has the mineral been photographed by the radium above 
it, but the radium has acted on the radioactive constituents of 
the pitchblende and caused this to affect the plate. 

The disk shown at the left of the cut is one made in Paris for 
the examination of radioactive substances. I have one of these 
here, and it consists of a rim of brass, enclosing a brass washer 
with a glass disk at the center. The opposite face is covered with 
aluminum foil, and between the aluminum and the glass is placed 
some radium of 1,000 radioactivity. Substances which it is 
desired to examine are laid on this disk. It is, however, a rather 
crude piece of apparatus; but in the cut shown not only has the 
disk been photographed by the raidum 5 inches above it, but the 
radium inside of the disk has penetrated through the aluminum 
and fogged the plate. 

In Fig. 7 are shown some interesting effects of the radium 
rays in affecting a photograph negative after passing through 
lenses. The lenses ‘‘ A” and ‘‘ B ”’ are plano-convex condensing 
lenses, one being placed with the flat surface down, and the 
other with the convex surface down. ‘‘C” is a double convex 
lens of crystal. ‘‘ D”’ is a plano-convex lens of uranium glass and 
“E” represents an ordinary glass prism. 

It is stated that radium rays cannot be reflected, refracted or 
polarized. Those familiar with the phenomena of light will, I 
feel sure, be interested in the above photograph. 

In Fig. 8 is shown another illustration of the penetrative char- 
acter of the rays, it being a thick lead box containing six tubes of 
radium, ranging from, a radioactivity of 40 to 7,000; this box 
being laid upon a large steel magnet ? of an inch thick. You will 
note the degree of penetration of both the lead and the steel 
varies according to the radioactivity of the radium in the various 
tubes. The exposure was made in twenty-two hours. 


_ 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 36 


Fic. 7. Radiographs of Various Types of Lenses Made by Radium. 


Fic. 8.—Radiograph showing Degrees of Penetration of 
a thick sheet of Lead and a Steel Magnet by Tubes 
of Radium of Different Radioactivities. 


368 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


Fig. 9 illustrates the penetration of the rays through black 
paper, the steel tool shown having been laid on the plate covered 
with two thicknesses of heavy black paper, such as used for 


Fic, 9.—Radiograph of Steel Tool made by Radium Acting 
Through Two Thick X-ray Plate Envelopes. 


wrapping X-ray plates; a Single sheet of which is entirely im- 
pervious to light. The exposure was made in twenty-four hours. 

Fig. 10 shows a mouse which was radiographed in twenty-four 
hours by laying it directly on a plate, which was, as in the case of 


Fic. 10.—Radiograph of. a Mouse Made by Radium in Twenty- 
four Hours, 


other experiments, placed in the bottom of a trunk, the trays 
being replaced and the trunk wrapped in three thick rugs, and 
kept in a dark room for twenty-four hours. 

The radiograph of the mouse shown in Fig. 11 represents a 
mouse caught on another occasion, in which I placed the mouse, 
trap and all on the plate, leaving it there for three days. The 
trap was an ordinary 6 cent trap; and it will be noted that the 
metal parts of the trap are shown opaque, whereas the portion of 
the wood nearest to the radium is shown absolutely transparent, 
as if it had been exposed to X-rays. In the original photograph 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 369 


the mouse is also shown somewhat transparent, indicating 
slightly the bones. 

I also show you in Fig. 12 and upon the screen a slide which I 
have made of a radiograph of a human hand. This was exposed 
for eight days, and bears resemblance to an X-ray picture which 
has been overexposed. In making a faint print of this, a slight 
trace of the bones is shown and the embalming material em- 
ployed is brought out strongly. This is, perhaps, the first pic- 
ture made of the human hand by means of radium: and it 
would not have been possible, of course, to have exposed a living 
person to these rays for even a small percentage of this length 


Piev(1,- Radiograph of Mouse Caughtin Trap and Exposed to 
Tube of Radium for Three Days. (Note Transparency of 
Wood, as with X-rays). 


of time. Perhaps subsequent experiments will bring out much 
more strongly the bone structure (the irregularity in the fingers 
is due'to their being somewhat cramped). 

As X-rays will excite phosphorescence in many substances, one 
would naturally wonder whether there were any X-ray charac- 
teristics in phosphorescent substances. 

An interesting experiment is shown in Figs. 13 and 14. In the 
‘former experiment, I have placed strips of various metals, such as 
brass, iron, copper, tin, lead, tin foil, aluminum, platinum, magne- 
sium, etc’ and strips of carbon, vulcanite, glass, mica and celluloid. 


370 HAMMER: RADIUM. [Apr. 17 


Sacer 


satis 


BOS 

¢: 

¥ 

; 

f 

; 

. 
4 M4 
AG 

4 


~ 


Npeex 


Fic. 13.—Photograph Made by: Phosphorescent Sulphide ox 
Calcium of Iron, Brass, Copper, Tin, Lead, Aluminum, Pla- 
tinum, Tinfoil, Magnesium, Carbon, Glass, Mica, Celluloid, 
Vulcanite, etc., and Strip of Black Paper. (See Fig. 14.) 


1903.] HAMMER: RADIUM. 371 


Across the middle of the plate I have placed a strip of thick black 
paper cut from an X-ray plate envelope. Ithensprinkled over the 
entire plate by means of a sieve sulphide of calcium, which I had 
made brilliantly phosphorescent by exposure to burning mag- 
nesium ribbon. Tlie only substances which allowed the light to 
pass through at all were the glass, mica and celluloid, the other 
substances, including the paper, being very opaque, showing 
apparently only the presence of ordinary light rays. This plate 
was placed for twenty-four hours in a dark room. 


Fic. 14.—Radiograph Made by Radium of Same Substances as 
in Fig.9. Note Black Paper is Transparent, as are Certain 
of the Other Substances especially those directly below the 
Radium. 


In Fig. 14 are shown some substances similarly arranged, but 
exposed to a tiny tube of radium of 7,000 radioactivity, which 
was placed 3 inches above the plate and near the center. The 
exposure was made for twenty-five hours; and it will be noted 
that the strip of black paper has entirely disappeared, and the 
various substances underneath it have been penetrated to a 
greater or less degree; particularly, those nearest to the radium, 

A bibliography of ‘‘Radio-Activity,’’ even at this early date, 


372 HAMMER: SELENIUM. fApr. 17 


would be very extensive, among the publications containing the 
most important contributions are The Phil. Mag., Comptes Ren- 
' dus, Ann. der Physik, Revue Gen des Sciences, Nature, Jour. de 
Phys., Soc. Francaise Phys. Bulietin, Chem. News, Phys. Ges. 
Verk., Phys. Zeit, Science Abstracts, Wied, Ann., Prec. Royal 
Soc , etc. 


Tue PROPERTIES AND APPLICATIONS OF SELENIUM. 

The extraordinary property which selenium possesses of vary- 
ing its electrical resistance on exposure to light is a phenomenon 
which has been known for along time: but the commercial appli- 
cations of this peculiar property possessed by selenium have not 
been properly appreciated up to the present time. 

It is my purpose to invite your attention this evening to a 
number of applications of selenium which the writer believes will 
prove of no small interest to the electrical engineering profession, 
and perhaps stimulate investigations in this most promising field. 

-The Swedish scientist, Berzelius, discovered selenium in 1817, 
as a by-product from the distillation of sulphuric acid from iron 
pyrites. . The proximity of the earth and moon suggested to 
Berzelius the name ‘‘ Selenium”’ after the Greek ‘‘ selene’ 
(moon); this being the result also of the striking similarity of the 
properties of selenium with those of tellurium, which is a term 
derived from the Latin ‘‘ Tellus,’ (earth.) Its atomic weight is 
79.5; specific gravity when crystalized, 4.788; its observed 
vapor specific gravity at 2588° F. 5.68. It is a non-metallic 
element, which possesses characteristics similar to phosphorus, 
sulphur and tellurium. When melted at 212° Centigrade and 
allowed to cool rapidly, it forms a brown amorphous mass of 
conchoidal fracture. In this condition it is a high class insulator. 
It has been said that a small piece of it would represent the resist- 
ance of a wire stretched from the earth to the sun. When heated 
for quite a time at a temperature of 100° Centigrade, selenium 
becoraes a conductor of electricity to a limited degree, this 
increasing with an increase of current and varying according to 
the direction. Selenium has neither taste nor smell. 

The red vapor rising from selenium when subject to intense 
heat is exceedingly poisonous, and care should therefore be taken 
when experimenting with selenium in liquid form. 

Selenium is usually supplied commercially in a vitreous form. 
Here are some samples of it, and you will note that it is as 
structureless as glass and resembles black sealing wax. I also 


1903.] HAMMER: SELENIUM. 373 


have here some amorphous selenium in which form it is a finely 
divided brick-red powder. This changes into vitreous selenium 
when exposed to a temperature of from 80° to 100° Centigrade. 
In order to obtain crystalline selenium, in which form it is useful 
for selenium cells, it must be kept, as already stated, at from 100° 
to 200° Centigrade for some time, the black mass being changed 
into a hard slate-colored metallic looking substance. In this 
form even the thinnest films are opaque to light, whereas in the 
vitreous form the film would be transparent and ruby red in 
color. I have some of these films here for your examination. 

Selenium is to-day employed to a considerable extent for the 
coloration of glass. 

In 1851 Hittorf first discovered the effects of temperature on 
selenium; but it was not until February 12, 1873, that Mr. 
Willoughby Smith sent a communication to President Latimer 
Clark, of the Society of Telegraph Engineers of London, calling 
attention to the effect of light in reducing the resistance of 
selenium. An assistant of Mr. Willoughby Smith, a Mr. May, 
who was a telegraph clerk at Valencia, called attention to the 
fact that some pencils of selenium which had been used to give 
a high resistance in connection with some of the cable testing 
work conducted by Mr. Willoughby Smith, showed a marked 
change in resistance when the sliding cover of the box which held 
the selenium was removed, and the selenium was exposed to 
sunlight. These selenium pencils varied in length from 5 to 10 
centimeters, and were 1 to 14 mm. in diameter; they were her- 
metically sealed in glass tubes with connecting wires of platinum 
ateachend. Little credence was given to the original announce- 
ment; it was only after Earl Ross verified this statement, 
and proved that the action was due solely. to light, and showed 
the effects of the light of different portions of the spectrum, 
that it met with serious consideration. Since that time much 
work has been done in investigating the properties of selenium, 
especially by Messrs. Shelford Bidwell, J. W. Giltay, Lord 
Ross and Sale, Draper and Moss, Hittorf, Adams and Day, 
Ayrton and Perry, Sir W. C. Siemens, Werner Siemens, Mercadier 
Fritts, Minchin, Ruhmer, Webb, Bell and Tainter, and many 
others. 

Alexander Graham Bell some twenty years ago made some 
interesting experiments with his radiophone, a diagram of which 
is shown in Fig. 15, in which a mica or glass diaphragm. covered 
with a silvered foil was used to reflect a powerful beam of light 
upon a selenium cell placed in the focus of a silvered reflector. 


374 HAMMER: SELENIUM. [Apr. 17 


To the selenium cell were connected a pair of telephones and a 
battery. At the back of the silvered diaphragm was a flexible 
tube and mouth piece into which words were spoken. The 
sound waves causing the diaphragm to vibrate sent pulsations of 
the reflected light upon the selenium cell, producing correspond- 
ing variations in its resistance and reproducing audible sounds 
in the telephone. Prof. Bell used this over very short dis- 
tances only. 

In 18 8 Prof. H. T. Simon of the University of Gottingen, dis- 
covered that an arc lamp, the circuit of which was in proximity 
to a telephone circuit, was caused to vibrate very perceptibly 
and he devised his interesting speaking arc by means of which 
he superimposed the sound waves produced by the telephone 
upon the circuit in which the arc was placed. He connected 
the lamp circuit with the secondary winding of an induction coil, 


Fig. 15.—Prof. Bell’s Radiophone. 


the primary circuit being connected with the carbon transmitter, 
and a battery. The sounds thus produced originally were very 
weak; but by employing a suitable carbon microphone the 
sound was reproduced to large audiences. Conversely, the arc 
could also be used in conjunction with telephone receivers to 
receive sounds. 

It is also found that the transmitter battery may be omitted, 
and a shunt taken from the arc circuit may be used with the 
transmitter and a suitable resistance. Again, this resistance 
may be displaced by storage batteries; and in this case to 
secure the most satisfactory results, self-induction (‘‘ reaction 
coils ’’) should be placed in the circuit of the arc lamp, allowing 
the direct current to pass without obstruction, but offering ex- 
tremely high resistance to the alternating currents produced by 
the carbon transmitter. By compensating in this way, any 


disadvantage in the use of the shunt is done away with. 
e 


1903.] HAMMER: SELENIUM. ' 3875 


The transmitter may also be placed in shunt with the reaction 
coil instead of in shunt connection with the arc lamp, and this 
has the advantage that the rheostat used with the storage 
batteries may be omitted, provided the windings of the reaction 
coil are suitable for use as a resistance. By this arrangement, 
the lack of self-induction in the transmitter circuit permits of a 
very clear and distinct reproduction, sufficient to be heard by 
large audiences. 

Mr. W. Duddeil, of England, has made some most succesful 
talking arcs, which the writer had the privilege of seeing in Lon- 
don over two years ago. In his arrangement in the secondary 
circuit is placed a condenser, which prevents the lamp current 
entering the induction coil; but allows the induction current in 
the transmitter circuit to pass without obstruction; and this 
arrangement has the effect of greatly increasing the sound. By 
employing a condenser of from three to five microfarads, he 
compensates for the difference of phase produced by the self- 
induction in the circuit, thus producing the highest effect in the 
arc. ; 

When Duddell uses the arc for transmitting sound waves, he 
employs in the shunt circuit to the arc a condenser and receiving 
telephone. It is advisable to employ as long an arc as possible. 
It has also been found that the Moore vacuum tube and the 
various types of mercury arc, such as Arons, Hewitt and 
Weintraub, are very suitable for this class of work, as well as 
the carbon arc; and where the latter is employed, either cored or 
treated carbons are advisable. 

The theory advanced te account for the phenomena of the 
peaking arc, is that variations in temperature of the are are pro- 
luced by the variations of the current, and the change in the 
,oule effect produces a corresponding variation in the volume of 

the conductive gases in the arc. 

The most successful and most extensive experiments which 
have been made with the speaking arc are those of Mr. Ernest 
Ruhmer, of Berlin, Germany, who has employed it in conjunction 
with his selenium cells for wireless telephony and with remark- 
able success. In Fig. 16 is shewn the apparatus employed by Mr. 
Ruhmer, with which he has succeeded in transmitting speech 
over a beam of light 44 mi'es in length*. Mr. Ruhmer’s ap- 
paratus is shown in the illustrations thrown upon the screen, 


* Mr. Ruhmer has recently written the author that he has succeeded 
in talking over a beam of light a distance of over ten: miles. 


376 HAMMER: SELENIUM. ‘ [Apr. 17 


andin Fig. 17. In his experiments he employed an arc lamp with 
a flaring arc 6 to 10 mm. long, using an e.m.f. of 220 volts; the 
current varied from 4 to 5 amperes at 1 to 2k.m., 8 to 10 amperes 
for 3 to 4 k.m., and 12 to 16 amperes for 5 to 7 k.m., and the © 
resistance of his selenium cell was 120,000 ohms in the dark, this 
falling to 600 ohms in full sunlight. For the transmitting end, 
Mr. Ruhmer employs a carbon transmitter and a battery super- 
imposing waves on the arc light circuit; and the beam of light is 
reflected to some distant point, where it is received by a para- 
bolic reflector; in the focus of which is placed a selenium cell con- 
nected with a battery and a pair of very sensitive telephone 
receivers. 


Fic. 16.—Ruhmezx’s Apparatus tor Long Distance Telephony 
over a Beam of Light. 


Mr. Ruhmer has conducted extensive experiments both by 
night and by day, and even during fog and rain on the Wannsee, 
near Berlin. On the screen you will see an illustration of his 
apparatus in actual work at night. (Fig. 17.) 

Some time ago I suggested to Mr. Ruhmer the employment of 
Edison’s tasimeter, the extraordinary sensitiveness of which is 
well known. He informed me that he had tried this; but had 
found it too “ lazy’; and stated that he has secured most prom- 
ising results by the employment of the thermopile; and with this 
heexpects to be able to transmit sound over many miles. 


1903.] HAMMER: SELENIUM. BIT 


Mr. Ruhmer is about to commence extensive experiments 
under the direction of the German Government in connection 
with the Imperial fleet in the Baltic Sea. : 

Mr. Ruhmer has also suggested the employment of his photo- 
graphophone, which I shall describe later, as a means of record- 
ing messages received at a distance. 

Doubtless many present remember the interesting experiments 
made by Mr. Hayes at the Electrical Exhibition held in Madison 
Square Garden in May, 1899, in which music was transmitted 
over a beam of light. At one end of the garden was placed a 
telephone, before which a cornet was played, causing waves of 


Fic. 17——Ruhmer’s Wireless Telephone Receiving Station at 
Wannsee, Berlin (taken at night). 


current in the telephone circuit to be superimposed upon those in 
a neighboring arc light circuit. The light rays from this arc 
lamp were reflected across the Garden, where they were received 
in a parabolic reflector in the focus of which was a glass bulb con- 
taining filiments of carbon. This bulb was connected to a pair 
of ordinary phonograph listening tubes. The varying light 
which fell upon the carbon caused variations of temperature 
inside of the glass bulb which produced the original sounds in the 
listener’s ear. A bulb simply coated with lamp black and con- 
taining nothing but air, would answer the purpose just as well. 
Selenium cells may vary in resistance from 2,000 ohms to 
500,000 ohms or more in the dark; and certain cells may be five 


378 HAMMER: SELENIUM. [Apr. 17 


to twenty times as good conductors of electricity in light as in the 
dark; and in the case of other cells, notably that of the Fritts’ 
vell, which I have here this evening, and that of the Ruhmer cell 
used in his Wannsee experiments, will have two hundred times 
the conductivity in light that it has in the darkness; and the 
ratio may be even higher. They are usually made by winding 
carefully two separate lengths of wire, either of copper, brass, 
German silver or platinum, equidistant throughout their entire 
length upon such substances as slate, glass, mica or porcelain. 
The selenium is then spread thinly over the wires forming an 
insulation between the two windings. This form of cell was 
invented by Mr. Shelford Pidwell, F.R.S. No small amount of 
skill is necessary to wind these fine wires evenly and equidistant, 
and to cover successfully these wires with the selenium coating. 
One way of coating frequently employed is to warm the cell on 
a metal plate or sand bath heated bya Bunsen burner. Whenthe 
stick of selenium laid on the plate shows evidence of melting, 
which takes place at about 120° Centigrade, it is drawn slowly 
over the wires, coating the same thinly and evenly. A steel 
spatula or a strip of mica can be used with advantage. 

Or the strip of material on which the wires have been wound 
would be laid upon a brass plate covered by a strip of this mica, 
this being placed upon a tripod with a Bunsen burner underneath. 
Powdered vitreous selenium may thus be spread evenly over the 
wires, and the seleniumi will shortly melt; and where the portions 
of it crystallize, forming hard lumps, it will be necessary to con- 
tinue the heating until these disappear. Then the selenium may 
be spread uniformly with a piece of steel, or better still, a strip of 
mica, care being taken to cover up the edges. Mr. Bidwell states 
that the temperature should be carefully regulated, as when it is 
too low hard crystalline lumps will form, and when too high the 
surface tension causes the selenium to form in drops, and it is 
then as difficuit to spread as if it were mercury. The proper 
temperature should be only just above 217° Centigrade; and 
then the selenium is in a plastic semi-fluid condition and can be 
easily manipulated. When a satisfactory surface is secured, the 
cell should be placed upon a thick copper plate to cool quickly, 
when the selenium becomes black and lustrous. The Bunsen 
flame should then be turned down to give a temperature of about 
120°, and the cell is then placed upon the hot plate; and shortly, 
the whole surface of these turns to a dull gray color. The tem- 
perature is then cautiously raised until signs of melting begin to 


1903.) HAMMER: SELENIUM. 379 


appear, generally near one of the edges. When this occurs, the 
‘burner is instantly withdrawn and the flame lowered. The dark 
‘spot recrystallizes in the course of a few seconds, and the burner 
is then replaced and left for four or five hours, during which time 
the Se should be only a few degrees below the melting point. 
‘The coil should then be gradually cooled by lowering the flame 
gradually for an hour. This process of long heating and slow 
cooling is generally spoken of as “‘ annealing.’”’ 


In Fig. 18 is shown an illustration of a number of types of ~ 
selenium cells, including the Bidwell, Ruhmer, Giltay, Webb 


. Fic. 18.—Types of Selenium Cells. 


‘Clausen & Bronck, Mercadier and Fritts, which I have brought 
with me for your consideration. . 

The two cells to the extreme right and left are modifications of 
Mr. Shelford Bidwell’s cells, the original form of which consisted 
-of two fine copper wires wound side by side on oblong strips of 
mica with melted selenium spread over the surface, the one to the 
Jeft being manufactured by Ernest Ruhmer, of Berlin, and by 
“Messrs. Clausen and Bronck, which consists of copper wire wound 
on slate. The one to the right is manufactured by Mr. J. W. 
Giltay of Delft, Holland, and consists of platinum wire wound 
on slate and covered with selenium. The four tiny cells shown 
against the white background are made by Mr. Hartwell W. 


380 HAMMER: SELENIUM. [Apr. 17 


Webb, of New York City, and consist of German silver wire 
wound on slate. The cell to the right is placed in a sealed flat 
glass tube. The two lower Webb cells are incased in ebonite. 
The small round cell is a tiny Mercadier cell made by Mr. Webb. 
The method of making the Mercadier cell is to use two narrow 
ribbons of sheet brass or foil, separated by a ribbon of parchment. 
paper rolled up like a spiral spring. This is held between wooden 
clamps, one surface being ground and polished off smoothly, and. 
a thin layer of selenium being spread over it. An excellent idea 
of this cell may be had by noting Fig. 19, which shows the 
standard form. 

In the center of the picture is shown a cell of Mr. C. E. Fritts, 
of New York City, for which I am indebted to my friend 
Prof.Geo. F.Barker. in the Fritts cell a very thin layer of selen- 
ium from one one-thousandth to one five-thousandth of an inch 


Fic. 19.—Mercadier’s cell (block and dotted lines represent the 
two ribbons of brass). 


in thickness is spread upon a plate of metal, generally zinc or 
brass. The selenium and metal plate form a chemical combina- 
tion sufficient at least to cause the selenium to adhere and make 
good electrical connection. The upper surface of the selenium 
is then covered by a transparent conductor of electricity, prefer- 
ably a thin film of gold leaf. Platinum or silver may also be 
employed. Thus the two surfaces of the selenium are covered 
by a metal and are connected to the two ends of the circuit. 
The upper or gold leaf surface, however, permits the light to 
pass through and affect the resistance of the selenium beneath. 

The tall cell in the lamp socket shown is the latest form of Mr. 
Ruhmer’s cell, and this type represents, I believe, the most im- 
portant. development which has been made in the selenium cell, 
and it has now become most stable and responds most rapidly 
to variations in illumination. He employs two copper wires, 


1903.] HAMMER: SELENIUM. 381 


wound spirally side by sidu around a cylinder of porcelain, 
which, after the wires have been covered with selenium, is 
placed inside of a globe, from which the air is exhausted and 
it is mounted with a butt similar to an Edison incandescent 
lamp, and resembles a candelabra lamp. This makes a most 
convenient method of handling the cell; and by keepmg it 
from the air the disadvantages inherent in all cells heretofore 
have been very largely done away with. 

Another form of Ruhmer cell consists of two fine platinum 
wires wound on a glass cylinder 1} inches long and # of an inch 
in diameter; the wires which are 1/32 of an inch apart are coated 
with selenium. 

Selenium Cells are very susceptible to moisture, and it is largely 
this taking up of moisture which produces the electrolytic effect 
in the cell, enabling one to connect it with a galvanometer and 
produce a current by merely focusing the light upon the cell. 
This phenomenon gave rise to the designation of the photo- 
electric cell. 

Those who have worked with selenium cells know that hereto- 
fore they have been most unreliable, ~arying their resistances 
from time to time enormously; and in the case where copper 
wires are employed, there is a selenide of copper formed, which 
often renders the cells inoperative in a comparatively short time. 

To some extent, the cells made originally have been protected 
by covering them with mica or lacquer or varnish; but placing 
them in an exhausted receptacle and mounting them in the 
manner devised by Mr. Ruhmer is, it seems to the writer, a most 
important step in the commercial development of the selenium 
cell. 

Prof. Bell has made a number of types of selenium cells, his 
standard form consisting of alternate disks of brass and mica, 
with the mica disks slightly smaller than the brass, forming a 
recess for holding the selenium, which is spread over the surface. 
All the evenly matched disks are connected to one end of the cir- 
cuit; and all the old disks to the other end. The cylindrical 
form of the cell enables it to be acted upon from all directions, 
when placed lengthwise in the focus of a parabolic reflector. 
This is also of great advantage in the Ruhmer type of cell. 

Selenium cells possess the remarkable property of recovering 
the original resistances upon the removal of the source of light. 

It is well known that in the case of the radiophone, if a beam of 
sunlight be thus intercepted by a blackened perforated revolving 


382 HAMMER: SELENIUM. [Apr. 17 


disk, a musical note, varying in pitch with the speed of the disk, 
will be produced in a rubber tube held at the opposite side of 
the disk. I have here one of the original forms of radiophones. 

A piece of apparatus has been devised consisting of a disk with 
slits near the edge. which is placed near an incandescent lamp, 
and a selenium cell. If the selenium cell is connected to a tele- 
phone and battery, and the disk is rapidly revolved, a musical 
note will be produced in the telephone, the pitch of which will 
correspond to the speed of the revolving disk. 

Mr. Giltay has recently written me suggesting a very pretty . 
experiment in this line, in which a double vaned Crookes’ radio- 
_ meter is placed between aselenium cell and an arc light shielded by 
an alum cell. The light from the arclamp causes the radiometer to 
revolve intermittently screening the selenium cell and producing 
a musical note in the telephone attached thereto, the pitch of 
which is in accordance with the speed of revolution of the radi- 
ometer. 

I have here to-night two forms of flame telephone trans- 
mitters, one of which was presented to me by Mr. Ruhmer, 
and the other I have purchased from Mr. Giltay, which 
I have mounted as you see it here and as illustrated 
in Fig. 20 (about 24 volts are required, depending upon the 
selenium cell). In each case you will note that I have 
an acetylene generator which conveys gas to the interior of an 
otherwise empty telephone transmitter. The diaphragm of 
these transmitters is made of pig-skin, or a similar material. A 
tiny pipe runs from the back of the transmitter, and ends in one 
case to a single acetylene jet, and in the other case to three acety- 
lene jets. By talking against the pig-skin diaphragm, the gas. 
inside is made to vibrate and produces a manometric flame. 
This flame throws its light upon a selenium cell, to which is con- 
nected a battery and a pair of very sensitive telephones between 
100 and 200 ohms for each cell of battery, in which the sounds. 
spoken into the transmitter are most perfectly reproduced. A 
thin sheet of paper inserted between the flame and the selenium 
cell serves to cut off all sound. It is self-evident that these 
telephone receivers might be at any distant point. I have worked 
them over considerable distances. 

In Fig. 21 areshown a number of most interesting applications of 
the selenium cell in conjunction with a battery and relay, used 
for starting a motor, ringing a bell, firing a cannon, blowing a 
horn, and lighting incandescent lamps, all of which experiments 


1903.] HAMMER: SELENIUM. 383 


I shall hope to show you in actual operation, as I have had them 
working most successfully in my laboratory. You will see 
that by merely passing my hand before the selenium cell, I can 
start and stop the motor, turn the light on and off, and ring the 
bell and blow the horn, or I can fire this cannon, start my phono- 
graph talking, etc. I am indebted to the courtesy of the Marconi 
Co. for the large relay used in certain of these experiments. 

I have here also a 3 h.p. motor, driving a 1} k.w. generator and 


Fic. 20.—Manometric Acetylene Flame Transmitter with 
Selenium Cell, etc. —(a battery of about 24 volts employed.) 


supplying these lamps which have been courteously supplied by 
the General Electric Co.; and by means of this selenium cell, 
relay, battery and a motor'starter, for which I am indebted to 
the Cutler-Hammer Co., I hope to be enabled to start and 
stop the motor by merely passing my hand before the selenium 


cell. 
In Figure 22 is shown a portion of the stage setting at the 


—*"¥ 


(por uoUULO & puv payesodo A]IUTTUNIS OSTe eTOM JOyeIOUNZ) PUP IOIOW ‘d’H €§ V) ‘Woy pur sojow ‘Jog ‘durey oypo91q 
‘Su'yeradg roy Aroyjeg pue skvpoy ‘[JeD wUNtuspeg JowMyNY ‘snyeieddy owe[y oue[AjaoyY— TZ “IY 


[Apr. 17 


SELENIUM. 


RE 


HAMM 


384 


« 
a 


1903.] HAMMER: SELENIUM. 385 


lecture, and shows in the foreground the three horse-power _ 
motor and generator which supplied a bank of lamps, and 
which plant was started and stopped many times when the au- 
thor passed his hand between the acetylene flame and a selenium 
cell. The frontispiece is a general view of the stage setting in 
the College of the City of New York, and was taken shortly be- 
fore Mr. Hammer’s lecture. 

In 1886 the writer attended a convention of the Edison Asso- 
ciation of Illuminating Companies at Rochester, New York, and 


Fic. 22.—Three H. P. Motor and Generator supplying Bank of Lamps 
and operated by shielding with the hand a Selenium cell from 
an Acetylene Flame. 


during a discussion of contract systems versus meter systems, he 
gave his experience as chief inspector of central stations of the 
Edison Company, in dealing with the difficulties met with in 
supplying light by contract; and he then described a prac- 
ticable method of utilizing selenium cells to control relays and 
magnets which would throw off the electric lights on the approach 
of day and on again at night, thus solving the difficulty of street . 
lighting, and other circuits intended to operate only at night. 

On February 12, 1890, in a paper on some experiments with 


386 HAMMER: SELENIUM. [Apr. 17 


selenium cells, Mr. Shelford Bidwell showed a relay operated by a 
selenium cell, which threw on an electric lamp and rang a bell; 
and he suggested the protection of safes and strong rooms by 
selenium cells, which would be affected by the light from a 
burglar’s lantern, thus giving an alarm. He also spoke of their 
being used to give notice of the extinction of railway signal lamps 
and ship lights, and stated the following: “But I do not at 
present attach any serious importance to such practical applica- 
tions of these devices. I regard them simply as offering some- 
what attractive illustrations of the effect of light upon the resist- 
ance of selenium.”’ 

This is an important statement from the greatest authority on 
the subject of selenium, but to-day it will not hold good. 

I hold in my hand a small vial containing some “ thermit,”’ 
which was discovered by Dr. Goldschmidt. It consists of oxide 
of iron,such as one would get off of a blacksmith’s anvil, orfrom 
the rolls of a rolling mill, and is mixed with powdered metallic 
aluminum. A red hot iron or molten cast iron poured into this 
mixture produces no effect; but if a little barium preparation or 
magnesium powder be placed on top of this mixture and touched 
off by a match, an extraordinary reaction takes place, producing 
a temperature of about 3000° C., and the mechanical equiva- 
lent of a kilo (2.2 lbs.) of thermit is about 1,730 horsepower sec- 
onds or 1,273 kilowatt seconds. 

I have seen some very interesting experiments made in welding 
girder rails, pipes, etc., by this process, and have here some inter- 
esting samples of manganese, chromium, ferro-titanium and other 
metals prepared in this way. 

I have also seen steel safes in which enormous holes had 
been burned by employing thermit; and it would be possible 
for a burglar to carry some thermit in his pocket and burn a hole - 
in a safe large enough to insert his arm and extract the valuables. 

I also saw in Germany last summef a substance called “ anti- 
thermit,’’ which it is interded to place in the lining of safes to 
prevent the reaction taking place, thus protecting the safe. But 
a simple plan would be to place a selenium cell in or near the 
safe, so that the moment the reaction was started, a signal would 
be given to the police in a similar manner, as suggested by Mr. 
Bidwell in the case of the burglar’s bull’s-eye lantern. 

An important commercial application of the selenium cell has 
recently been made by Mr. Ernest Ruhmer in connection with his 
eiectrically controlled buoy illustrated in Fig. 23. 


1 1903.] HAMMER: SELENIUM. 387 


Pintsch has constructed a large number of buoys containing 
compressed gas, which would last from one month to upwards of 
a year; but it was heretofore necessary to burn these lights day 
and night, it being often impracticable by reason of distance at 
which they were placed, and frequency of storms, etc., to 
switch off the gas so that it would not burn during the day time. 

Mr. Ruhmer has placed one of his selenium cells in the 
top of such a buoy connected with a switching device 
which, as soon'as the sun rises in the morning, causes the 
selenium cell to reduce its resistance, this causing the switching 
device to turn off the gas, which is again turned on upon the 


Fic. 23.—Pintsch Gas Buoy Controlled Fic. 24.—Diagram of Circuits 
by a Ruhmer Selenium Cell, Battery of ‘‘ Selenium ” Buoy. 
and Switch Mechanism. 


increase of resistance of the selenium cell by the approach of 
night-fall, or if desired in the case of a storm coming up. A buoy 
containing sufficient gas for one month could thus be made to 
answer without recharge for from three to five months. 

The arrangements of the circuits as originally devised by Mr. 
Ruhmer is shown in Fig. 24. The voltmeter needle has been 
teplaced by a relay, and the apparatus simplified. A single dry 
cell is interpolated in the selenium cell circuit, as usually em- 
ployed on the buoy; and this cell will last a year or more; and 
with the relay, it is placed in the bottom of the buoy and ar- 
ranged to be absolutely waterproof. , 


338 HAMMER: SELENIUM [Apr. 17 


When I was in Berlin last August, one of these buoys had been 
in operation since the previous October, turning the light on and 
off every night and morning; and Mr. Ruhmer has recently 
written me that it is still operating successfully, as are others 
which he has placed near Hamburg and in the Baltic Sea. 

Mr. Ruhmer has also constructed an apparatus employing the 
selenium cell to which he has given the name “ photographo- 
phone,” which is one of the most remarkable pieces of scientific 
apparatus that it has ever been my pleasure tosee. Figs. 25, 26 


fro 25.—Ernest Ruhmer’s Photographophone, Showing Ex- 
erior View, together with Telephone Transmitter and A... 
Lamp. 


and 27 illustrate the general construction of the apparatus, 
which I shall further illustrate by accompanying lantern 
slides. In Fig. 28 the apparatus is shown diagramatically and 
in Fig. 27 the inventor is shown listening to the photograph- 
ophone reproducing speech and music. It consists of a 
box containing a gelatine or celluloid film, such as employed 
in moving picture machines, which is driven at high speed 
by means of an electric motor. In the front face of the box is set 
a cylindrical lens about the size of one’s little finger. A short 


1903.] HAMMER: SELENIUM. 389 


distance away from the box is placed an arc lamp anda telephone. 
Words spoken or sung into the telephone superimpose the waves 
in the telephone circuit upon the current flowing in the arc light 
circuit, and cause a corresponding variation in the light of the 
arc. The rays from the arc lamp pass through the cylindrical 
lens already referred to, and are caused to fall in sharp white 
lines on the moving sensitive film. This film, upon being taken 
out of the box and developed, shows a series of perpendicular stri- 
ations parallel to one another, which are realiy a photographic rec- 
ord of the sound waves originally entering the telephone transmit- 
ter. Where the striations are fine and close together, the pitch is 
high, but where they are broader and farther apart the pitch is 
low. Strips ofthe filmsor photograms are shown in Fig. 29. The 
developed film is next placed back into the box and the motor 
again started. The arc lamp remains in its original position, but 


Fic. 26.—Showing Interior of Ruhmer’s Photographophone. 


burns steadily as the telephone is not operated. . The rays from the 
arc lamp passing through the lens are therefore quite uniform, and 
the moving gelatine strip acts as a screen to cut off these rays,allow- 
ing the light intermittently to fall upon the selenium cell at the 
back of the box, producing a variation in its resistance and a 
corresponding effect in the telephone receivers connected thereto. 
A battery is also interpolated in the circuit with the selenium 
cells and the telephones. By holding these telephones to the ear, 
the reproduction of the sound is perfect, as I can vouch for from 
personal experience with the apparatus. 

Mr. Ruhmer contemplates utilizing this photographophone as 
a receiving instrument with its wireless telephone system, in 
which he employs a beam of light, as already described. 


390 HAMMER: SELENIUM. [Apri 


Mr. Shelford Bidwell has also made a device for producing 
pictures or writing at a distance by combining the properties of 
selenium with the chemical telegraph. 

Various inventors have endeavored to solve the problem of 
seeing what goes on at a distance by employing selenuim. 
Among these are Perosino, Senlecq, de Paioa, Cary, Sawyer, Lar- 
roque, Nipkow, Gemmill, Liesegang, Heinzerling, Edison,Stern, Jan 
Szczepanik, Dussaud, Otto von Bronk, von St. Schneider, Ayrton 

and Perry, Korn, and others, who have proposed various methods 
employing images thrown on ground glass or through a photo- 
graph negative, or upon mirrors swinging synchronously, by or 


Fic. 27.—Mr. Ernest Ruhmer Listening to his Photographo- 
phone. 


using revolving perforated screens, for cutting off the beams of 
light, multiple selenium cells which would be affected by high 
lights and low lights of the original picture, etc., these devices 
affecting some method of illumination at the receiving end or 
producing an electrochemical action such as is produced by the 
usual chemical telegraph systems, or controlling an electro- 
pantograph system such as Gray‘stelautograph. These various 
inventions have been termed the telescope, telephote, telectro- 
scope and the telephotograph. But these devices have thus far 
reached little further than descriptive matter, drawings and 
crude experiments. 

Various people have suggested the use of selenium cells for 
photometric purposes; and it is interesting to note that Mr. 


1903.] HAMMER: SELENIUM. 391 


Latimer Clark suggested this application the evening in which Mr. 
Willoughby- Smith first brought to public notice the phenomena 
of variation in resistance of selenium when exposed to light, to 
which I have already referred. 

Mr. Fritts has suggested making a form of photomoter which 
would be sensitive to lights of different color, as well as of varying 
candle power, by employing as a film on the surface of his cell a 
gold foil which transmits green rays, a silver foil the blue rays, 
and so on; and suggests that a solid transparent conducting film 
which would transmit all of the rays would be far better and thus 
remove the color stumbling block in photometric work. 

Sir William Crookes has constructed an exceedingly interesting 
type of radiometer, in which he has coated the revolving vanes on 
one side with selenium, and on the other with chromic acid. He 


Fic. 28.—Showing General Arrangement of Coat of Ruhmer’ s 
Photographophone. 


found that the white light from a sperm candle repelled the 
selenium, while the yellower light of the wax candle repelled the 
chrome, thus indicating the relative absorptive powers of the 
different substances for rays of different refrangibility, resulting 
in mechanical motion; just as the same selective capacity 
operates in photography as chemical action. 

In 1891 Prof. Barnard of Lick Observatory employed a 
selenium cell as a device for automatically detecting comets, and 
Minchin has employed the selenium cell quite extensively in his 
astronomical investigations. 

In Fig. 30 is shown a curve which Mr. Ruhmer recently sent me 
which shows some observations made by means of his selenium 
cell during an eclipse, these being the only observations which 
anyone was enabled to make at that time, on account of stormy 
weather. Mr. Ruhmer has prepared an interesting paper bearing 
on this and other applications of the selenium cell to meteorology. 
He made his observations on October 31, 1902. 


392 HAMMER: SELENIUM. [Apr. 17 


Selenium is found in Vesuvian lava, and in natural sulphur as a 
sulphur selenide in the Lispari Islands. It is also found in 
Norway and other iron pyrites. It occurs in meteoric iron and 
in such rare metals as eucarite as a selenide of silver and copper 
in Sweden and Chili; crooksite, a selenide of copper and thallium 
with a little silver, from Norway; as clausthalite, a selenide of 
lead in the Hartz Mountains, from Zinken and Clausthal, in 
Inverg, Rheinberg, Saxony, Rio Tinto, Spain, Mendoza, South 
America; as riolite at Culebras, Mexico; as Lehrbachite, a 


| 6. Bb. 6. b. 8.8. 


= 


Fic. 29.—Photogram as used in Ruhmer’s Photographophone 
(High Pitch Tones above, Low Pitch below). 


selenide of mercury and lead from the Hartz Mountains; as 
zorgite, a selenide of copper and lead from Glasbach in the Hartz 
Mountains. Selenium, although widely distributed over the 
globe, occurs only in small quantities and in some instances 
is found in native state. 

Selenium is placed among the rare metals. Chemically pure 
crystalline selenium costs about $1.00 per gramme, and the 
ordinary commercial article about 10 cents per gramme 

The Bibliography of selenium is quite extensive. Those interested 
in the subject will find an excellent paper by Mr. A. P. Saunders 


1903.] HAMMER: ULTRA-VIOLET RAYS. 393 


in the Jour. of Chem. for June, 1900. The paper contains many 
references, and is entitled ‘‘ Allotropic Forms of Selenium.” 


Lux 


X Curve observed 
during eclipse | 


Maximum i= 
Ko) 


6.54 A.M. 


“4s IN 
deviation log 
| 4 
H ~ Time 


ALE£E./ 
Fic. 30.—Curve Taken with Ruhmer Cell During Eclipse, Oct. 
31, 1902. 


fue TREATMENT OF DISEASE BY ULTRA-VIOLET Rays. 


Some professional matters 
detainedthe writer in Copen- 
hagen last summer for several 
weeks, and during his stay in 
that city he had the privilege 
of visiting the Finsen Light 
Institute at Rosenvaengat, a 
suburb of Copenhagen, and 
was enabled to investigate 
the system for the treatment 
of disease by light, inaugu- 
rated by Dr. Niels R. Finsen. 
In Figs. 31 and 32, are shown 
views of the operating room 
at the Finsen Institute, where 
a large number of patients 
ere east INeSy, from various parts of Europe 


were undergoing treatment at the time of my visit, 
Dr. Finsen has conducted very extensive and most painstaking 


394 HAMMER: ULTRA-VIOLET RAYS. [Apr. 17 
researches into the bacteriacidal effects of light, and he has 
found the violet end of the spectrum to possess remarkable 
curative powers, and he has also found that by. utilizing 
the blue, violet and ultra-violet rays of the spectrum, those 
loathsome diseases of tuberculosis of the skin and lupus, diseases 
which have baffled surgical skill heretofore, have been success- 
fully combatted. . 

It has recently been stated that in New York City alone there 
are annually 20,000 cases of tuberculosis, with 8,000 deaths; and 
there is probably no disease with which mankind is afflicted 
which compares in deadly character to tuberculosis. 

In affecting certain of the internal organs, it is known as con- 
sumption, and appearing externally, attacking the skin and 
underlying tissues, it is known as lupus vulgaris. As a rule, it 
appears in single patches, most frequently attacking the face, 
especially the nose, cheek and mouth. It may, however, attack 
the extremities or, in fact, any portion of the body and even 
mucus membranes. Fortunately, lupus is rather rare in this 
country, although very common in Europe. 

Koch and others have fully demonstrated that tuberculosis is 
due to the presence of specific organisms named “ tubercle 
bacillus,’ which have been found to be present in both the internal 
and cutaneous forms of the disease. 

Doubtless many present remember the “ blue glass craze,”’ 
which swept over the country in 1876, or thereabouts. 

I have with me here a copy of General A. J. Pleasonton's book 
entitled, ‘‘ Blue and Sunlights, Their Influence upon Life and 
Disease,’’ which I picked up in a second-hand book store some 
years ago; and I would commend the examination of this book 
to all who are interested in the subject. General Pleasonton and 
his system were condemned to both abuse and ridicule. Dr. 
Finsen, however, says, ‘‘ The General was absolutely on the right 
track.” 

For a considerable time Finsen’s work received little credence 
and no encouragement; but he persisted in his investigations, 
and the results secured by him finally bore fruit, and to-day the 
world rings with his praises. In all parts of the civilized world 
his work is being taken up, and institutes are being founded for 
the treatment of disease by light rays—particularly the ultra- 
violet light. In England the initiative was taken by Queen 
Alexandra, and in Russia by her sister, the Czarina, they both 
investigating the system while visiting their father, the King of 


1903.] HAMMER: ULTRA-VIOLET. RAYS. 


Fic. 31.—Showing Main Operating Room, Finsen Institute, 


Copenhagen. 


Fic. 32.—Showing 
at One Time. 


Arc Lamp and Four FinsenTubes in Use 


396 HAMMER: ULTRA-VIOLET RAYS. [Apr. 17 


Denmark. Muchhasalsoalready been done in the United States. 

It will be remembered that during Queen Elizabeth’s reign a 
certain court physician recommended strongly that patients 
suffering from small-pox should be kept in a room, the decora- 
tions of which, including the hangings, bed draperies, etc., 
should be red in color, claiming that the red light had a 
soothing effect upon the irritated portions of the skin, lessening 
the severity of the disease. Little importance was attached to 
this method, and the originator of it was branded as'a Charlatan. 

Prof. Finsen, has, however, found that this method of treat- 
ment of small-pox is of paramount importance. He has placed 
patients in a room into which the sun’s rays could only penetrate 
through sheets of red glass, just as they would penetrate a 
photographic dark room; and he has found that patients placed 
in such a room prior to the most painful and most dangerous 
suppuration stage setting in, that suppuration has been entirely 
prevented and that the scarring has been in nearly all cases abso- 
lutely prevented, and in the few cases where there was any scar- 
ring, it was hardly perceptible. The disease has been in a much 
milder form, the fever usually accompanying the erupticn dis- 
appearing, and the temperature remaining normal.* 

He has found that the use of ultra-violet light on these pa- 
tients very much aggravated the disease, and even in cases where 
patients were almost cured and they have been allowed to go out 
into the sunlight, the disease has at once been aggravated. 

In connection with his investigations into the effects of light 
Finsen made some interesting and ingenious experiments upon 
earth-worms placed in a box, one-half of which was covered with 
red glass and the other half blue glass; and he found the blue 
light irritated the worms so they invariably crawled under the 
red glass, and a chameleon, placed with its body midway between 
the glasses, turned almost jet black under the influence of the 
blue rays, while that portion under the red glass remained nearly 
white, which Prof. Finsen says showed that the chameleon was 
altering its pigment cells to lessen the irritating effects of the 
blue light. 

The ultra-violet end of the spectrum contains the most re- 
frangible rays, and it is these rays which are so harmful in cases 
of smallpox; and it is also these actinic rays which produce sun- 


* Prof. Finsen has recently written the author that placing the patients 
in a dark room is fully as efficacious as placing them in a room lighted 
with red rays only, the important thing being to keep the patient from 
=xposure to the actinic rays. 


1903.] HAMMER: ULTRA-VIOLET RAYS. 397 


burning, which one often experiences in the Alps, or any high 
altitude where the temperature may be considerably below 
zero; and there are doubtless many present who have experi- 
enced considerable effect similar to sunburning by working in 
close proximity to arc lamps. 

While these ultra-violet rays are so harmful in the case of 
smallpox, they are of the precise nature which is most desirable 
in the treatment of such diseases as tuberculosis of the skin or 
lupus vulgaris. These rays not only destroy the bacilli, but they 
excite and stimulate nutrition and excite activity in granulation, 
thus assisting very greatly in the rapid recovery from the disease. 

Doubtless the rays emanating from the sun are very rich in 
blue, violet and ultra-violet light; but the atmosphere readily 
absorbs these rays, and while Prof. Finsen for a time used the 
sun’s rays in the treatment of tuberculosis of the skin and lupus 
he found that by employing the arc light the same effect could 
be produced in a very much shorter space of time; and that he 
was in this way, also, independent of weather conditions. 

The arc light is much richer in ultra-violet rays than the sun- 
light; and Broca and Chatin of Paris have found that by placing 
an iron core inside of the positive carbon electrode, this arc was 
still richer in ultra-violet light, and Gérl of Erlangen, has con- 
structed a form of aluminum arc, in which four arcs were formed 
between five aluminum electrodes. I have here a modification 
of Gérl’s lamps constructed by Messrs. Waite & Bartlett of this 
city, in which there are four iron electrodes forming three iron 
arcs in series, which produce an intense source of ultra-violet 
light, which I shall presently show in operation. 

Bang and others have also made arc lamps employing ter- 
minals of iron. 

It is claimed that by employing the iron arc the same results 
which take an hour and ten minutes by means of the carbon arc 
can be accomplished in twenty minutes to half an hour; and also 
that so intense are these ultra-violet rays it is not necessary to 
use pressure to drive the blood away from the diseased part, and 
it is also unnecessary to use water to cool the rays.* 

Drs. Piffard and Jamieson have suggested the use of suprarenal 
extract in the form of adrenalin chloride, which the former 
prefers to introduce into the skin around the diseased spot 


pe eee 
* Prof. Finsen has recently written the author emphatically asserting 
that iron electrodes are not as efficacious as carbon electrodes as the rays 
from the iron arc, he claims, do not penetrate as deeply as the rays from 
the carbon arc. 


° 


398 HAMMER: ULTRA-VIOLET RAYS. [Apr. 17 


by cataphorisis, thus producing a whitened area from which 
the blood has been withdrawn, which enables the treatment of 
this portion by the ultra-violet light, without pressure being ap- 
plied, and the blood does not return for half an hour or more. 
The cataphoric electrode is covered with a thickness of lentine 
saturated with adrenalin connected with a positive pole of the 
battery, using a current of from three to four milli-amperes, the 
bleaching taking from four to five minutes’ time. 

The Roentgen rays have been found very effective in the 
treatment of certain diseases, especially where hard tubes are 
employed, and as we are considering particularly the treatment 
of lupus vulgaris, I would call attention to Fig. 33, which repre- 


Fic. 33.—Lupus Vulgaris Cured by X-rays. 


sents a patient treated by my friend, Dr. William H. King of this 
city, in which the X-Rays successfully cured a case of lupus 
vulgaris brought on by the patient’s pricking a tiny boil on the’ 
side of his nose with a pin taken from the lapel of the coat of a 
friend who was suffering from tuberculosis (consumption). The 
rapid progress of the disease is shown in the illustration and was 
taken three weeks after using the pin, and was largely aug- 
mented by the man’s age (45), and his being in poor health (a 
chronic rheumatic). Two bacterialogical examinations showed 
conclusive evidence of the presence of tubercle bacilli. 

In Fig. 34 is shown the original blue lens used by Finsen when 
employing sunlight. It consists of a flask full of light blue 
ammoniacal sulphate of copper. The bottle with its contents 


1903.] HAMMER: ULTRA-VIOLET RAYS. 399 


makes a plano-convex lens. The sunlight passing through this 
is found to work very well; but it was too slow, and the sun was 
frequently obscured. Finsen later used plain water, finding that 
the blue water cut off most of the ultra-violet rays and he found 
the clear water very largely absorbed the ultra-red rays 
which caused the heat. 

In Fig. 35 is shown a form of telescope which is now adapted in 
standard practice at the Finsen 
Institute. It contains four rock 
crystal lenses, which act to cut 
off considerable of the heat rays‘ 
but allows the ultra-violet light 
to pass through it. 

It will be remembered that 
ordinary glass cuts off almost 
all of the ultra-violet rays, where- 
as a block of rock crystal 4.4mm. 
thick will allow 60 per cent. of the 
ultra-violet to pass through it. 

A part of the heat is also ab- 
sorbed by the distilled water 
which is contained inside of the 
telescope. In order to keep this 
water cool, there is an outside 
jacket on the telescope, through 
which circulating water may be 
passed for this purpose. In Fig. 
36 is shown the method of 
arrangement of the telescope 
and the arc lamp; and in Fig. 
32 is shown a set of four of 

Fic. 34.—Finsen’s Original these telescopes arranged around 
Blue Lens for Use with Sunlight. the arc lamp and in actual 
operation. The arc lamp uses 

from 40 to 80 amperes and operates at 45 to 50 volts. 

Blood is opaque to ultra-violet light, and it is therefore neces- 
sary to drive the blood away from the diseased portion which is 
to be treated. ‘This is accomplished by what is known as a pres- 
sure glass shown in Fig. 37. It consists of a plano-convex lens of 
rock crystal kept cool by circulating water—the glass acting to 
focus the light on the diseased portion, and also to exert con- 


siderable pressure there. 


400 HAMMER: ULTRA-VIOLET RAYS. [Apr. 17 


The patient does not suffer from exposure to the rays; but 
after the treatment, which is usually an hour and ten minutes © 
per day, he appears to be considerably sunburned. He is then 
allowed to recuperate until the next day, and the treatment is 
then repeated. After a series of these treatments, the patient 
is sent away apparently cured. Sometimes he does not return; 
but more often he must come back for a second or third, and 
even more series of treatments, due to the fact that certain of the 


Fic. 86.—Showing Arrangement of Arc Lamp and Finsen Tubes. 


microbes which have been deep-seated have worked their way to 
the surface, the disease having started anew. 

It is said that out of over 600 cases treated at Copenhagen, 
there have been only 1 to 2% of failures due tofault in the treat- 
ment; but there have been cases where the disease has been in 
such an advanced stage and for such a very long period that it 
has not yielded successfully. But I was informed that in the 
majority of cases after very few treatments, the patients are dis- 
missed absolutely cured. In order that you may’ properly 


tae PALM itch tli yh 


a te 


Fic. 38.—Showing Lupus Vulgaris Patients Before and After 
Treatment with Ultra Violet Light at the Finsen Institute, 
Copenhagen. 


401 


402 HAMMER: ULTRA-VIOLET RAYS. [Apr. 17 


appreciate the remarkable results which have been secured by 
Prof. Finsen; and the stupendous importance which his successful 
combatting of these loathsome forms of disease represents to 
many of the most sorely afflicted people of this world, I have 
inserted in my paper several photographs, see Fig. 38, which I 
secured at the Finsen Institute; of patients afflicted with lupus 
-vulgaris—these pictures showing them before and after the 
treatment with the ultra-violet rays produced by the arc light 
I feel that their presentation in this paper requires no apology, 
on the contrary, electrical engineers should feel a sense of pride 
that in the use of the arc light in this remarkable advance in 
medicine and surgery, their profession has contributed in no 
small degree. 

Those caring to look up these and similar cases, will find full 
descriptions in English in ‘‘ Phototherapy after Finsen’s Meth- 
ods,” by Valdemar Bie, M.D., Prof. Finsen’s Assistant (published 


Fic. 37.—Pressure Lens: 


by Lippincott), or Die Bekampfung des Lupus Vulgaris von Niels 
R. Finsen (Gustav Fischer Jena), and Die Finsen Therapie und 
ihr gegenwartigen stand in des Dermatolo-gie, von Dr. Forch- 
hammer 1. Cohen’s Buchdruckereien Kopenhagen). 

The little cut of Prof. Finsen which heads this article is 
from an autograph portrait which Prof. Finsen presented to 
the writer, and it is sad to contemplate that this man who has 
conferred such a priceless boon upon humanity is himself an 
invalid, suffering from an incurable disease, and one which has 
made it at times well nigh impossible for him to prosecute his 
work. 

The Finsen Institute was established in 1896, through the 
munificence of Copenhagen’s public-spirited citizens, and through 
a gift by the city of the property on which it was erected. 


Pe oes SL AMEE Dan chet a TL ea) 

The lecturer desires to express his appreciation of the services rendered 
by his assistants, Messrs. Varley, Lawton, Brown, Webb, Scheerer and 
Dow, and also to acknowledge the courtesies extended by the New York 
Edison Co. 


A paper read at the 176th meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
New York, April 24th, 1903. 


TENDENCIES OF CENTRAL STATION DEVELOPMENT. 


INTRODUCTION By PRESIDENT Scort. 


If we were to go back to its very beginning, we should 
probably find that there were two elements which marked the 
dawn of civilized life, and which may be traced through all its 
development. One of these was the use of implements—prob- 
ably a club and a sharp stone were the earliest tools. The other 
was cooperation for a common purpose—probably protection 
against a common enemy was the first incentive. 

These two elements: namely, the use of tools, or more particu- 
larly the adaptation of the materials and forces of nature to ac- 
complish results beyond the power of the individual: second, 
coéperation followed by specialization, in which individuals of 
different abilities act together, each one doing the share for which 
he is best qualified, may be traced through the various stages of 
development, prehistoric, ancient, and modern. The develop- 
ment along these lines has been especially marked during the past 
century and notably the past generation. The interrelation 
between these two elements is notable. The use of tools and of 
machinery, together with the generation and the application of 
mechanical power have brought about a new order of things in, 
the relations between individuals and the relations between 
nations. Manufacture and commerce have passed through a 
wonderful evolution. Social conditions have changed. The 
whole United States is scarcely larger as measured by the time- 
table for travel or the rates for transportation of freight than was 
the little island of England a century ago. In the time of Dr. 
Johnson the mind of one man was presumed to be able to encom- 
pass the whole of human learning. The change which has taken 
place in learning is indicative of the broadening and the special- 

403 


404 SCOTT: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


izing which characterizes every department of modern life— 
intellectual, industrial, commercial, social. 

Society is not a mere aggregation of individuals; it is not 
simply a mass of men, but it is a vast unit. Men are not inde- 
pendent; they are correlated and interdependent. The funda- 
mental condition for such a state is material. Just as a factory 

‘is essential for workmen who are to build dynamos or locomo- 
tives, so do the material facilities of our modern cities—their 
buildings, their street cars and elevators, their telephones, their 
water supply and sewage systems, their lighting and power sys- 
tems—constitute the factory, the tools, the mechanism which 
makes our modern life larger and more effective than that of the 
olden time. 

I think of no institution which is so completely representative 
of the modern development of those early beginnings of civiliza- 
tion whose development we have been tracing, than is found in 
the Central Station. In it is found an application of natural 
forces on a most comprehensive and diversified scale. Its very 
existence is dependent upon social coéperation; and in turn it 
contributes to the convenience and the comfort and the effective- 
ness of a whole community. a 

Electricity is a unifying agent. Asa science its theory prom- 
ises to be the secret which will bring together the mysteries of 
chemical affinity, of magnetism, of light, of gravitation. As an 
engineering force it is on most intimate terms with every branch 
of engineering, aiding, unifying and simplifying. I repeat an 
illustration which I once used before the INSTITUTE: 

‘ A generation ago it would have defied the imagination 
to discover any natural connection between such widely 
different agents as horses pulling street cars, locomotives 
drawing elevated trains, gas lighting houses and streets, 
water operating elevators, stoves heating and cooking, and 
engines of every sort and class doing a hundred kinds of 
work. But all of these and many others are in common 
being superseded by the electric current, which does not 
merely replace but develops, expands and transforms. It 
is notable that all of this varied service . . .. could be 
supplied with current from a common universal system.” 

The Central Station system in itself is typically representative 
of codperation and combination in design and construction, in 
the combustion of coal and the production of steam, the opera- 
tion of engines and condensers, of dynamos and switches, of indi- 


1903.] SCOMmMmACMN DT RAyeSdeA PIONS: 405 


cating instruments and safety devices, of conductors and cables, 
and the operation of apparatus in substations and on the prem- 
ises of a thousand customers. Each element is in a measure 
dependent upon all the others. The reliability of the Central 
Station commends in highest terms the ability and success of the 
modern engineer. 

The following ‘statement has been given me to-day: ‘‘ The 
Edison system in New York City as a whole has never been with- 
out current. There have been several accidents, including the 
fire at the old Pearl street station in 1890, which have tempo- 
rarily affected a district, but since 1893 there have been no 
interruptions of service on the system. On March 31, 1903, the 
New York Edison Company, on Manhattan Island, was supply- 
ing current to 26,000 customers a total equivalent in 16-candle 
power lamps of 2,391,431.” 

The Central Station system is an evolution—an evolution as 
a whole—an evolution in its elements. In 15 or 20 years many 
of its elements have come into existence, while others have under- 
gone most radical changes—boilers, engines, generators, switch- 
boards, cables, safety devices, rotary converters, lamps and 
motors—and in addition to the apparatus there has been the 
growth of the great system by which they constitute a single 
whole. 

Progress has not ceased—its acceleration continues. The 
Central station will in itself increase its extent and its effective- 
ness. As electric power distribution in the factory has revolu- 
tionized methods and led to increased output and reduced cost of 
products, so electric power distribution in the city revolutionizes 9 
the customs of the people, and is a vital factor in advancing 
civilization. 


£ paper read at the 176th Meeting of the American Y 
nstitute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
_ipril 24, 1903. 


ECONOMICAL AND SAFE LIMITS IN THE SIZE OF 
CENTRAL STATIONS. 


BY KH. A. LARDNER. 


Some of the considerations which induce 
companies to erect large central stations. The 
probable effect of steam turbine development 
on the size of generating units. Advantages 
and disadvantages of large central stations. 
Where several small stations replace one 
large plant the necessity for excessive engin- 
eering refinement ceases to exist. 


In this day of gigantic engineering enterprises, one would be 
very conservative indeed if he placed any limit on the possible 
size of modern central stations. From the plans for extending 
some of the well-known plants, the engineers of the companies 
owning them apparently think they have not reached the limit 
either from the point of economy or of safety. I shall certainly 
not attempt to place any limits on the size of power stations, for 
each case must naturally be considered as a separate problem. 
However, I may call to your attention some of the considerations 
which induce companics to erect large stations, and give an 
opinion of the objections and disadvantages which attend their 
operation. There are many subjects which have an important 
bearing on the question and some of them will be discussed. 

TERRITORY TO BE SERVED. 

If the territory is large and the system is to serve several 
villages or small cities with power for lighting or for railway pur- 
poses, one large station located conveniently for coal and water 
has a decided advantage, owing to economy in labor, lower 


cost of fuel, water and first cost. 
407 


408 LARDNER: CENTRAL STATIONS. [Apr. 24 


Frequently the business in the individual towns would not be 
large enough to permit of an independent plant in each, and any 
risk of interruption to service is put up with because it is the best 
kind of service that such a community can support. 

In fact, until the class of territory approaches that of our 
largest cities, the question of lower first cost and economy of 
operation must in general rule; for the size of station is not large 
enough to minimize those advantages or to demand-the advan- 
tages of a service supplied by several stations, harmoniously 
designed and operated. 

When the territory becomes similar to New York, Chicago, 
Brooklyn, Boston, etc., the large station has many claims for ' 
consideration. As the central stations now built in this class of 
territory are so much larger than those which have been erected 
elsewhere, we may confine our discussion to stations for the 

' larger cities. 

We may also exclude water power stations, as they must of 
necessity be located at the point of development or waterfall, 
and it is seldom the case that sevezal plants can be built, each 
large enough to secure the maximum advantages of low cost and 
low operating expenses, as at Niagara. 


SystEM OF DISTRIBUTION. 

The system of distribution which must be used, frequently has 
a direct bearing on the demand for a large station. Where the 
distribution pressure is low as in Edison three-wire 120-240 volt 
systems, there are few if any cities wherc a sufficient load can be 
found for a very large station without exceeding the limited 
zone of economical distribution at this pressure. 

Where this system is in operation we find that the stations are 
generally of high first cost and too small to be operated economi- 
cally. The location is necessarily chosen without regard to the 
water or coal supply, and the load factor is generally very bad, 
which adds to the expense of operation. As a temporary expe- 
dient at least, rotary converters, transformers and high pressure 
cables have found a place for connecting together the direct 
current stations and thus enabling them to exchange power and 
considerably improve their load factors. 

For instance, in New York City the Duane Street Station of the 
New York Edison Company, with its heavy day load of motors 
and early evening load of office buildings, has a very different 
shaped load curve from the 26th Street station or the generating 
stations formerly located in 39th Street and 53d Street, which 


1903.] LARDNER GEND RAs. ALIONS: 409 


delivered their principal service during the evening. However, 
the double conversion results in losses which should be saved, 
and still continues the use of uneconomical small stations. 

The next step is to establish a large well-located alternating 
current station and feed the rotaries from the machines there 
installed. This method permits the use of the largest size of 
generating units, gives their attendant economies, and the de- 
mands of the various sections of a city coming at different hours 
of the day produces a better load factor. 

The generating apparatus installed in the distributing or sub- 
stations, as they may now be called, can be operated if desirable 
for one or two watches during the heaviest loads in their par- 
ticular sections, and the combination undoubtedly results in 
greater economy. The existence of these substations with gen- 
erating apparatus provides a certain amount of reserve or 
emergency power which can be called upon, and the danger of 
concentrating all the generating apparatus in one station is in a 
measure avoided. The fact of their existence also acts as an 
incentive to keep down the number of new generating stations 
and to build one alternating station large enough to meet the 
entire demands of the system, no matter how large that may be. 

The use of the 240 volt incandescent lamp is much more com- 
mon abroad than with us,and while I am not able to comment 
on the relative merits of the lamps made at home and abroad I 
do believe that a more insistant demand for a 240 volt lamp 
would be met by our manufacturers and result advantageously. 

By the use of a three-wire system and 240 volt lamps, the 
advantages of 500 volt distribution in copper economy can be 
obtained, and the zones which can be served from any one 
station very considerably increased. It is an open question 
whether with this system of distribution the stations can be made 
large enough to be built for a fairly low first cost and operated at 
practically a minimum expense. There is a case in point in 
Boston, where the Boston Elevated Railway Company has a 
number of stations ranging from 1,500 to 4,000 k.w. and the 
results of operation are reported to be very low and comparable 
to the best results which have been shown in much larger stations. 

The alternating current system of distribution with primary 
voltage of 2,200 volts and over, has the ability to serve a very 
extended territory. With this system of distribution, the ques- 
tion of one large station should not be so important, as the load 
can probably be divided between two or three stations, each 


410 LARDNER: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


large enough to be economical, and by the use of trunk cables 
they may aid one another in handling the load and add materially 
to the safety and continuity of the service. 


Sizz or Unit ror Most Economical OPERATION AND FLOOR 
SPACE. 


From the compilation of Mr. C. D. Gray in the Journal of the _ 


Franklin Institute, October, 1901, I give the results of tests on 
compound Corliss condensing engines. The best results pub- 
lished, and one near the average, are given for several different 
sizes. 

Pressure. Vac.  1.H.P. 


mM 
co 
o 
0) 
B 


Authority. 


155 1950 12.5 Thurston; Science, Oct. 1, 1897. 
150 26.9 yal; 12.3 Barrus; ‘‘ Engine Tests.” 
123 25.6 1592 13.5 Thurston; A.S.M.E., 15-839. 
133 25.2 1539 14.1. Barrus; ‘‘ Engine Tests.” 
126 27.0 1107 14.1 + Barrus; ‘‘ Engine Tests.” 
120 1018 13.3  Barrus; A.S.M.E., 15-839. 
Tiley 1001 16.3 Sibley Journal, 8-393. 
151 997 12.8 Barrus; A. S.M. E., 14-1340. 
ipl 709 rity Stone & Webster; S.R.F.,Aug.,1898. 
144 25.2 741 13.2  Barrus; ‘‘ Engine Tests.” 
159 25.4 595 12.7 Dean; A.S.M.E., 16-169. 
90 548 13.5 Thurston; Elect.World, Jan. 5, 1901. 


It will thus be seen that under proper conditions of design and 
operation, very good comparative results can be secured with 
units much smaller than those installed in the large stations in 
New York. 

The published guarantees for the Steam consumption are as 
follows, in these stations: 


Station. Pressure Vac. I.H.P. Steam. 
The New York Edisoniisc. sci wie ce 175 27 5500 12.5 
Manhattan Railway .jcsi ss 90200 150 26 8000 13.0 
Metropolitan Street Railway ...... 160 4500 13.14 


That part of the cost of labor for engine operation, which 
varies with the size, amounts to but a small portion of the total 
operating expenses; and although the larger the unit, the 
smaller the item becomes per h.p. hour, it is relatively of littie 
importan¢ée, except in very small units. 

The question of floor space required for reciprocating engines 
of different sizes demands the largest units practicable. 

The vertical space required by an engine is provided more 
cheaply than the floor space, and as the requirements are of three 
dimensions the floor area should not increase proportionally 


1903.] IDA) Ni erik CBN ALR Aon SA TION S., 411 


with the size of the unit. Again, the aisle space must be prac- 
tically the same for engines differing in size by large percent- 
ages. 

In spite of these facts, the floor space in engine rooms per h.p. 
appears to be affected more by the type of engine used and the 
judgment of the designer than by the size of the unit. The 
Edison station, with engines of 5,500 h.p. normal rating, requires 
only about one-third of a square foot per h.p. and the Metro- 
politan, with 4,500 h.p. units, one-half of a square foot per h.p. 
against the 8,0C0 h.p. units in the Manhattan station, with an 
area of .55 of a square foot per h.p. 

It therefore appears that economy of operation and in floor 
space may be made entirely too much of in discussing the advan- 
tages of large units, although with similar design and type of 
machinery the large units undoubtedly have some advantages, 
provided the station is large enough to require a sufficient num- 
ber of units to permit of economical loading. 

The following table will give some published data about the 
engines in the New York Edison, Manhattan Railway and 
Metropolitan stations: 


Engines. Metropolitan. Manhattan. Edison. 

Niaairi' 1 ate ak hoe ie ieee chek bere eet es 11 8 8 installed 

16 ultimate 
Heps each nonmal-stating .. are. - 4,500 8,000 5,500 
HP. each maximum rating ....... 6,600 12,500 8,000 
Aggregate PAT COU E RD tae Retreats te ite 49,500 64,000 88,000 
Aggregate maximum) Ee Po ku... 72,600 100,000 128,000 


From the large number of units, we may assume that these are 
the largest machines the manufacturers cared to produce. 

Larger engines have been built for use aboard ocean liners, and 
as conditions are in inany ways much more severe aboard ship 
than on land, it should be possible to have still larger units if 
central station engineers really demanded them. The following 
characteristics are given of the engines of the Kaiser Wilhelm der 
Grosse: 

Two engines, triple expansion, four cylinders; diameters 52, 
89.7, 96.4, 96.4 ins.; stroke, 68.8 ins., piston speed, 885 ft. per 
minute; revolutions, 77+ ; steam pressure, 178 1b. ;rated “bh. p. of 
each engine, 15,000. 

The steam turbine has now been perfected so that many 
plants are ordering them, and in a year or so a great.many will 


doubtless be in operation. 


412 LARDNER: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


The turbine presents scme characteristics which will, I believe, 
affect our decision in regard to the arrangement and number of 
stations for a given system. Although much has been written 
of them lately, they may be briefly alluded to here. 

This type of prime mover has decided advantages over recip- 
rocating engines for driving many classes of electrical machines, 
as it gives ideal conditions for the parallel operation of alter- 
nators and synchronous apparatus on account of its uniformity 
of angular velocity. We are assured that steam turbines run 
together in parallel with the same facility as hydraulic turbines 
have always done. It is well known that many difficulties in 
the operation of 60 cycle apparatus disappear when the supply 
of power is from water wheels, and if the steam turbines are to 
help us in this respect it will be a great point in their favor. 

There is every reason to believe that the use of superheated 
steam with turbines will be a comparatively simple matter, as the 
turbines will have no internal rubbing surfaces or cylinder oil. 
Exhaust steam from turbines, being free from oil, may be con- 
densed and returned to the boilers, anc tnis will be an important 
consideration in many plants now purchasing city water for 
boiler feed and which find the extraction of oil too difficult and 
expensive to permit the water being used a second time. 

Due to the high speed at which turbines are operated, direct 
current machines seem to be ruled out on account of commutator 
troubles. 

Perhaps the greatest advantage of the turbine is its economy of 
floor space. In the paper presented by Mr. Sniffin, before the 
American Street Railway Association of last year, the statement 
is made that the Westinghouse-Parsons turbine requires about 
80 per cent. of the space needed for the vertical and not over 
40 per cent. of that wanted for the horizontal engine. This state- 
ment is based on a station layout with a clear space of seven feet 
in all directions between machines. This type of turbine being 
horizontal, requires less head room and consequently a cheaper 
building by a considerable amount than the vertical engine. Mr. 
Sniffin’s curves place the required building capacity for turbines 
at about 50 per cent. of that for vertical engines. 

The Curtiss turbine of the General Electric Company is of the 
vertical shaft type and while it requires more head room than the 
Westinghouse-Parsons machine, is very economical of floor 
space. The following table gives the principal dimensions of 
some of the sizes which are now being built. 


1903] LARDNER: CENTRAL STATIONS. 413 


CurTIss TURBINES AND GENERATORS. 


Size. Height. Diameter. Floor Space. RPMs 
500 k.w. 5 Ea the ea 46.2 sq. ft. 1800 
1500 k.w. NG ZolO” 10’ Rae 900 
3000 k.w. 2 14’ 154. ce 600 
5000 k.w. 277 14’ 10” 175. 500 
WESTINGHOUSE-PARSONS TURBINES AND GENERATORS. 
Size. Height. Dimensions. Floor Space. 
400 k.w. 76" 19365! 95 sq. ft. 
1000 k.w. 8’ 43’ 8’ 344. 
5500 k.w. 15’ 50’ x12’ (XG 


For comparison, the following is the floor space required by the 
vertical cross-compound condensing engines of a well known 
maker. The figures include the space required for an alternating 
current generator between the frames. 


Size. Dimensions. Floor Space. RepeMe 
500 k.w. 15’ X22’ SSUES LU EEL ZO 
1000 k.w. ~ 21’x24’ 504 110 
1500 k.w. 22’ X28" OK er 100 
2500 k.w. 23’ X32’ eG te 90 
3000 k.w. 237X347 82 sae 75 


The height would in all sizes exceed that of a similar size of 
vertical turbine. 

The steam consumption guaranteed for the above mentioned 
Curtiss turbines are attractive, especially at light loads. The 
figures are given in dry steam per k.w. hour; and for purposes of 
comparison with results per i.h.p. they have been reduced by 
assuming an efficiency for generator and turbine of 85. 


Steam per k.w.h Lb. per 
Size. Pressure. Vacuum. Full Load. Half Load. tates 
Full Load. 
500 150 aS) 204 23 13 
1500 150 28 204 22 13 
3000 150 28 204 PANN e5) 13 
5000 150 28 204 21 13 


The simplicity of the turbine leads us to believe that the high 
efficiency will not decrease with use nor by reason of lack of 
adjustment. The method of guaranteeing the efficiency of 
generators and engines together will permit this guarantee to 
be checked more closely than has ever been possible with large 
engines and generators, on which separate guarantees have been 
given. 

I believe that the cost of labor for engine operation will be con- 
siderably cheapened with the turbine, and this and the other 
advantages shown should greatly ‘reduce the necessity for very 


414 LARDNER: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


large units. If, therefore, steam turbines are to make the opera- 
tion of smaller stations (with a suitable number of units to handle 
the load economically) equal in efficiency to some of the largest 
plants now installed, it will be advantageous in many cases to 
install several stations in place of one, and obtain all the saving 
in distribution and safety against shut-downs that go with such 
.an arrangement. 

There are, of course, certain cases where a location cannot be 
secured convenient to coal and water in more than one place, 
but these cases are rare. Boston, New York, Chicago and nearly 
all our largest cities afford opportunities for securing a number 
of sites, all practically of equal desirability so far as facilities for 
getting supplies are concerned. 


ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF LARGE CENTRAL STATIONS. 


The advantages may be summed up from what has been pre- 
viously said, and consist mainly of the following: 

The location of the station on the one most suitable site for the 
coal and water supply. 

The reduction of floor space by the use of large units. 

The economy of fuel secured by the use of large generators and 
engines. 

The economy of labor and general superintendence secured by 
the use of large units in one building. 

The saving in first cost effected by the installation of a large 
station with large units. 

The economy of operation secured by serving many sections 
of a city with different hours of maximum demand from one 
station, due to the better load-factor obtained. 

The installation of a large station presupposes supplying a very 
large territory from one source, and in order that the coal and 
water supply may be convenient the chosen location is generally 
much farther from the load than when it is divided among 
seveial plants. This involves a greater expense for a distribu- 
tion system, although this may be minimized by the installation 
of high-potential current or by local conditions. 

The economy of floor space by the use of large units will always 
be an important consideration where land is valuable, but the 
economy in this direction with the steam turbine may lead the 
designer of the future to give less consideration to this point. 

The added economy of fuel, labor and general supervision in 
large units will also be reduced somewhat even with the large 


tee ® |. 


1903.] ID AURIOINGE Ree © HINGE De Siete ONS, 415 


turbine units, and the first cost of the machines themselves will 
undoubtedly decrease per unit capacity with increase of size. 
However, the reduction in cost of turbine generator installation 
from the prices now paid for generators and slow speed recipro- 
cating engines should be considerable and permit smaller units 
than are now feasible. This will undoubtedly be true after 
development charges have been cared for. 

It is a question whether there is any saving in the first cost in 
the installation of very large stations, except in prime movers 
and generators. The construction of double and triple decked 
boiler rooms, long coal handling apparatus and coal pockets high 
above the ground, involves heavy expenditures without com- 
pensating advantages. It is probable in the case of some large 
stations in this city that they could have been built to half their 
capacity as cheaply per unit as to the ultimate size. The size of 
the units in either case would probably have been the same. 

The principal disadvantage of the very large station is the 
danger to a system if the disabling of the station leaves the com- 
pany without a source of power, or takes away a larger portion of 
its supply than can be cared for by overloading the remaining 
plants. It is with this point in view that I have attempted to 
bring out. all the points which may make smaller stations worthy 
of more consideration than they frequently get. 

_The stations in this city are wonderful examples of good design 
in all features which tend to make them reliable and free from 
dangers of serious breakdown and interruption of service. As 
one designer said in describing his station, it was built to with- 
stand anything but an earthquake or a bombardment. While it 
may be possible to build such a station, I do not believe that there 
has been a single station built, and I do not look to see one, which 
is free from weak points capable of causing interruptions. These 
features are apparently unavoidable; and while accidents due to 
them may not do any serious or expensive damage, they may 
render the building untenantable to employees or to enough of 
them to cause an interruption to the service. 

The recent breakdown at the station of the Niagara Falls 
Power Company is an instance in point, and while such occur- 
rences have been rare, the one in question left Buffalo without 
Niagara power for eighteen hours, and part of the Niagara Falls 
district was without power for nearly as long. I do not think 
an officer of a large company will look on a like condition without 
considerable apprehension. The trouble at Niagara is reported 


416 LARDNER: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


to have been started by a lightning storm which resulted in 
destroying the cables leading across the bridge from the generator 
room to the transformer house. Now that it is over, engineers 
say that there should have been two routes for these important 
cables, and a number of suggestions may be made to avoid a 
repetition of the difficulty. 

Shut-downs have occurred in some other large stations during 
the experimental periods of their operation, and while these were 
doubtless due to poor material or workmanship that had not been 
weeded out, the failure of material or errors of employees may 
occur after years of use, and the results are likely to be the same. 

Instances occur in this city where cables may be damaged by 
one cause or another, and the results would not be very different 
from the Niagara breakdown. Rheostats for the fields of gen- 
erators may be the weak point in another station; switchboards 
exposed to flying pieces in another. These weak points can gen- 
erally be corrected, but the fact is that they now exist and are in 
my opinion possible sources of trouble. 

“I do not wish to go on record as advocating a greater refine- 
ment than is commercially justifiable, and perhaps this point has 
been reached by the designers of the large stations. The point I 
do wish to make is that smaller stations need not lack many of 
the advantages of the large ones, and with a number of them in 
place of one large plant, the necessity for excessive refinement 
ceases to exist. 


A paper read at the 176th Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 


April 24, 1903. 
—_—_—_—— rrr 8 ee 


SAFETY DEVICES IN CENTRAL STATIONS AND SUB- 
STATIONS. 


BY PHILIP TORCHIO. 


A review of general principles followed 
in the design and arrangement of electrical 
apparatus of generating stations, trans- 
mission lines and sub-stations and a list of 
safeguards against breakdowns and de- 
vices for localizing and clearing faulty 
elements of the system. Advantages of 
storage and reserve supply to ensure con- 
tinuity of service to customers. 


The importance attached by central station managers and con- 
sumers to the reliability of service has been brought to bear so 
strongly upon the designing engineers and manufacturers of high- 
tension apparatus that the problem of safety has received, and 
is still receiving, even in its details, the study of every engineer 
identified with high-tension central station work. This applies 
not only to the designing but also to the installing and operating 
of central station apparatus. 

What has been achieved is therefore the work of many men, of 
many experiments, often failures and costly trials and worries; 
and even now it cannot be said that the problem has found its 
final and general solution. Therefore I,shall approach the sub- 
ject along broad lines, so as to invite discussion and suggestions 
on the characteristic features aiming to increase the factor of 
safety or to insure continuity of service. 

High-tension transmission systems may be overhead or under- 
ground, or composite overhead and underground. For moderately 
high voltages, up to 15,000 volts, the transmitted current can be 
generated directly or can be obtained from step-up transformers. 
For higher voltages, step-up current only has been used up to the 
present time. All these different conditions create special 

417 


418 TORCHIO: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


requirements for each individual system. In this brief review 
no attempt has been made to enter into special details particular 
to any individual case. What follows applies more or less 
generally to all systems. 

Mechanical Reliability—In this connection no attempt has 
been made to deal with the feature of mechanical reliability of 
the generating systems, though it is as important for the 
mechanical equipment to be safe and reliable as it is for the elec- 
trical equipment to be so. In fact the general principle of sub- 
division and independence of different generating units may be 
considered to find its application throughout,—from coal supply 
at the boilers, through the mechanical and electrical equipment 
at station and transmitting lines, to the receiving substations. 

Electrical Reliability.—Proceeding from the generating station 
to the transmission line and receiving substations, we find the fol- 
lowing characteristic features more or less generally adopted or 
considered desirable from the aspect of reliability of service, 
Some of the safeguards given in the list appear perhaps as un- 
necessary and expensive refinements, and probably they would 
be so for a large number of cases where continuity of service may 
not be considered absolutely essential. In a large situation, for 
instance, the lighting and power of a large city, the conditions 
are different; and if for these conditions safety cannot be ob- 
tained in any other manner, these refinements become of para- 
mount importance. 

GENERATING STATION. 

1. Installation of storage battery on field-exciter bus, at gen- 
erating station. 

2. Equipment of reverse-current relays and circuit-breakers on 
exciter generators. 

3. Equipment of overload relays with time limit and circuit- 

. breakers, on motors of motor-generator exciter sets. 

4, Separation and mechanical protection of generator leads of 
different generators. Also proper insulation and protec- 
tion against capacity discharges cf cable leads. 

5. Connection of each generator to bus-bars by means of two 
oil switches in series. preferably urranged to close inde- 
pendently and open at the same instant. 

6. Sub-division of bus-bars, in different sections, enabling 
operation of generators in different groups. Also selector 
switches on each generator, enabling the same to be oper- 
ated on at least two sections of bus-bars. 


1903.] PORCHIO® CENTRAL STATIONS. 419 


tp 


ahs 


14. 


15. 


16. 


ive 


18. 


Tie-connections between different sections of bus-bars, 
enabling us to make, if desired, combinations of different 
sections or even one common bus-bar. 


. Overload and reverse-current relays on generator switches, 


these being connected to signal lamps until they have 
proved their reliability for actual tripping of maim 
switches. 


. Selector switches on feeders providing means of connecting 


each feeder to at least two sections of bus-bars. 


. Duplication of oil switches on each feeder circuit, preferably 


arranged to close independently and open at same time. 


. Overload relays on each feeder, with a variable time limit, in 


inverse proportion to the amount of current. 


. Separation of all wiring and busses inside the station by 


means of ducts, fireproof septums and grooves in walls, and 
proper protection against capacity discharges, by the use 
of good glass or porcelain insulators. 

In connection with very high voltage step-up transformers, 
provide low-tension synchronizing busses for generators 
and switches on the 1.t. side of step-up transformers, 
thereby avoiding synchronizing on the h.t. side of trans- 
formers, or closing of h.t. switches on dead transformers. 

Avoid installation of single pole main switches for each 
phase of the circuit, and also synchronizing with one pole 
switch closed and synchronizing transformer across the 
gap of the other pole switch. 

TRANSMISSION LINE. 

Duplication of transmitting lines to important centers of 
distribution, selecting if possible different subway routes, 
or independent transmission lines. 

Mounting of suitable end boxes on ends of cables at all ter- 
minals. Also possible equipment of spark arresters on 
each end of underground cables. 

Protection of underground cables in ducts by the use of 
good fire-proof material. 

Protection of cables in manholes, using preferably separate 
manholes for high-tension cables, with asbestos or iron 
covers on each cable, etc. 


. Protection of lead sheath of cables against electrolysis, either 


by laying cables in vitrified ducts and rubber cushioned 
racks in manholes, thereby making the cable insulated 
from ground along its route, or laying heavy bare copper 


420 TORCHIO: CENTRAL STATIONS. {April 24 


wires along the route of cables and connecting solidly to 

their lead covers in each manhole, these wires providing a 

secure metallic path for the current, which leaves the 

cable sheaths to return to the grounded bus at the railway © 
station via the wires suitably connected to the railway 
return feeders. 

. 20. Protection of transmitting and receiving stations operating 
overhead transmitting lines by improved lightning ar- 
resters. 

21. Grounding of neutral of three-phase transmission lines for 
very high voltages. (General practice in the California 
transmission plants.) In the case of very high voltages, 
this grounding seems a necessity. 

22. Possibly grounding of neutral for lower voltages and under- 
ground cables. (This is done in several places, as for in- 
stance, in Chicago, on the 2200 volt 3-phase, 4-wire, 60 
cycle system, as well as on the 9000 volt, 3-phase, 25 cycle 
star-connected system). From the point of view of 
reducing strains on insulation, this grounding of neutral 
seems unnecessary for moderate voltages, though it could 
be made use of for locating accidental grounds on the 
system, and in indicating and eventually disconnecting 
the affected feeder, which would be troublesome to locate 
on a system without grounded neutral and operating 
several feeders from same bus-bars. 

23. Avoid operation of high-tension lines at different frequencies 
when lines are mounted on same pole line. This to avoid 
doubling of strain on insulators when two wires of difter- 
ent lines become crossed. 

SUBSTATIONS. 

24. Separate lines entering substations should preferably be 
operated independently, laying out independent h.t.. 
busses and transforming apparatus on each line, the 
transformed current being delivered either to a com- 
mon set of bus-bars or to independent sets of bus-bars, 
if the service will allow of this subdivision. In rotary 
substations, while the rotaries operate in parallel on 
the d.c. side, they can be fed from independent h.t, 
lines not operated in synchronism, This allows feed- 
ing each stbstation from different groups of generators at 
the generating station, or even from different generating 
stations. In the case of a.c. stations with transformers 


-1903.] 


TORCHIO: CENTRAL STATIONS. 421 


feeding into a common secondary set of bus-bars, the 
primary iines must necessarily be operated in parallel, and 
therefore from same bus-bars at the generating station. 
This prevents us from attaining the advantages of dupli- 
cate lines and independent sources of supply, as in the 
case of rotary substations. For this reason, in a.c. sys- 
tems of secondary distribution, as extensively used in 
waterpower plants, the adoption of independent groups 
of generators and independent feeding lines to important 
centers of distribution is not common. In important cases 
it may be advantageous to subdivide the customers’ supply 
on different circuits fed from independent lines and trans- 
formers operated from different sources of supply. The 
New York Edison Company operates at present the gene- 
rators at its Waterside station in two independent groups 
and whenever a substation has more than one rotary con- 
verter in service, the several rotaries are divided among 
different feeders, fed from different groups of generators 
at the generating station. The rotary converters being 


-operated in parallel on the d.c. side, the distribution of 


loads between different feeders and consequently between 
groups of generators is easily and perfectly accomplished. 
‘rhis distribution is regulated by the system operator at 
the station, who instructs each substation how to sub- 
divide theloadsamongtherotaries. Thesystemislaid out 
to still further subdivide the groups of generators, if 
the further addition of generators will make it desirable. 


25. Receiving lines should be equipped with oil switches and 


overload relays with variable time limit in inverse pro- 
portion to amount of current. When more than one line 
is feeding a common h.t. bus or independent transforming 
apparatus operating in parallel on the 1.t. side (for in- 
stance, rotary converters), each line should also be 
equipped with reverse-current relays, with variable time 
limit in inverse proportion to the amount of current, the 
time limit for these relays being a fraction of the time 
for the overload relay. Reverse-current relays without 
time limit are too sensitive to momentary irregularities 
on h.t. system and cause trouble on this account. 


26. Inside the substations all h.t. wiring and construction 


should be laid out along the saric lines mentioned in case 
of generating station. Also, the low-tension apparatus 


TORCHIO: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24: 


a 
bo 
bo 


and connections should be properly laid out, avoiding 
crowding and crossing of cables, keeping cables of different 

- polarities separate, and protecting them by means of 
ducts, septums and pipes as much as possible. 

26a. On very high voltage receiving stations, the closing of h.t. 
switches on transformers subjects them to heavy strains 
which can, in most cases, be avoided by making alive the 
transformer from the low-tension side, if the common bus- 
bars are already fed from another set of transformers. In 
case of a single set of transformers, it may be advisable 
to leave the high-tension side of transformer closed all the 
time, especially in water-power plants. 

27. For protection of lines from overloads or short-circuits on 
transforming apparatus of large capacities, oil-switches 
with overload’ relays should be considered preferable to 
h.t. fuses. The switches should be of proper capacity and 
should be equipped with locking relays for overloads, ex- 
ceeding the safe breaking capacity to avoid blowing up 
the oil-switch. The breaking capacity of an oil-switch 
will to a great extent depend not only on the character of 
load, but also on the amount of power back of the short- 
circuit. 

28. Compound-wound rotary converters and eventually also 
plain shunt-wound rotary converters operated in parallel 
onacommon d.c. bus should be protected by some speed 
limit device to trip the a.c. and d.c. circuit-breakers on the 
rotary, when speed exceeds the normal by a certain fixed 
percentage. The sample here shown is a speed limit de- 
vice developed by the company with which the writer is 
connected, in conjunction with a firm which manufactures 
measuring instruments, adopting their standard mechan- 
ism for speed indicators. 

29. It is desirable to protect the d.c. side of all rotary converters 
with circuit-breakers to operate in connection with the 
speed limit device above mentioned, and also in connec- 
tion with a reverse-current relay on the d.c. side of the 
rotary. This reverse-current relay should be equipped 
with a variable time element in inverse proportion to the 
amount of reverse current; d.c. overload relays seem 
to be unnecessary? 

30. All relays at different points of the system and their time 
elements must be properly adjusted, to operate the differ- 


1903.] TORCHIO“GENTRAL STATIONS. 423 


ent circuit-breakers in the propcr order, so that if a 
trouble is once cleared by the opening of certain circuit- 
breakers, the other relays reset themselves in the normal 
position, leaving the rest of the system in operation. 

31. Emergency connections between different generating sta- 
tions are considered desirable and have found favor in 
connecting different water-power plants and also in con- 
necting large generating stations in the same city, as in 
New York. 

32. Of first importance in a lighting situation in a large city is the 
equipment of storage-batteries at every substation. One 
large New York company, for instance, has installed 
or under contract twenty-two 8,000 ampere-hour, 135 volt 
batteries, and more may be installed in the future. 

33. In closing this list of safeguards, it may be added that in all 
high-tension work, great care should be used in applying 
tests to the apparatus, especially in making insulation 
tests on generators, cables, line and transforming appar- 
atus. Breakdown tests can be made on samples, but it is 
unwise to strain unnecessarily the insulation of the com- 
plete plant near the breakdown point. Close inspection 
of the installation will finally give more satisfactory 
results than loose inspection and severe tests. 


Notre.—During the reading of his paper, Mr. Torchio referred to a 
type of lightning arrester tested in Europe and designated as a lightning 
arrester of the series type. The description of this lightning arrester 
was presented at the meeting of the Italian Electrotechnical Society on 
January 20, 1902. The theory of the lightning arrester is not clearly cx- 
plained by the inventor, although seemingly the apparatus gives good 
results. It is claimed that the presence of this apparatus on lines 
equipped with standard lightning arresters causes the latter arresters to 
czase discharge at any slight atmospheric disturbance as noticed previous 
to the installation of the series type lightning arrester. 

This is an important feature, from the fact that the lightning 
arrester does not wear out on account of slight static discharges which 
are always present on transmission lines, and which wear out the appar- 
atus if kept in constant use. By freeing the lightning arresters from 
this constant wear they would be in better condition to do the work 


when the emergency arises. 


A paper read at the 176th Meeting of the American 
Ins.itute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
April 24, 1903. 


MULTIPLE VERSUS INDEPENDENT OPERATION OF 
UNITS AND CENTRAL STATIONS. 


~ 


BY PETER-JUNKERSFELD. 


e 

Practical difficulties encountered in the opera- 
tion of central station systems. A statement of 
the troubles that beset the electrical engineer 
on the many different links between coal-pile 
and translating device. An argument for in- 
dependent or sectional operation of every central 
station system. 


The tremendous development in the application of electricity 
has opened immense fields, which to central station men are 
continually presenting new problems and graver,responsibilities. 
In all centers of human activity the extended use of electricity 
is closely associated with the success, well-being and comfort of 
the public, as well as of individuals. The home, club and hotel; 
the office, factory and mercantile establishment; the church, 
theatre and public place; the streets at night, and the great 
transportation systems,—all these are thrown into confusion and 
disorder on even a slight interruption in the supply of electrical 
energy. 

All members of the Inst1TUTE are more or less familiar with 
central station systems, the principal features of which, in the 
larger cities at least, have been developed along fairly uniform 
lines. The many practical difficulties of operation, largely 
influenced by local conditions, are matters of vital importance 
from both commercial and engineering standpoints. The object 
of this paper is to call attention to some of these difficulties, with 
the hope that this will result in a full and profitable discussion. 

The direct current systems of generation and distribution for 

425 


426 JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


lighting and general power, and for street railway work, are 
inherently somewhat elastic. Satisfactory multiple operation of 
generating units, thus giving a high average station economy, 
was early accomplished. In large cities the adjacent systems 
supplied from different stations were gradually tied together, 
and resulted usually in a large network of interconnected mains 
supplied at points of greatest density of load by feeders from the 
nearest genérating stations. The equalizing effect between 
different points of network greatly increased the stability of such 
systems, which are often further improved by the use of storage 
batteries properly distributed. 

The quality and continuity of direct current service with this 
arrangement, has, in most cases, been very satisfactory. How- 
ever, on account of the heavy fixed charges and losses in operating 
a large number of small generating staticns—many with neces- 
sarily poor economy—the limitations in reducing cost of produc- 
tion were very serious indeed. ar 

In the largest cities, having a rapidly increasing load, operating 
costs have been considerably reduced by alternating current 
generation, high potential transmission, and rotary converter 
substations. While these transmission and conversion systems 
have been developed and fairly well standardized as to general 
features, there is often still much to be desired in their operation. 
Systems operating with synchronous generating and converting 
apparatus and delivering current to the more elastic direct current 
network, are especially sensitive to any irregularity in the opera- 
tion of the prime mover itself or in any of the transmission or 
conversion units. It is not to be understood that the central 
station service in large cities is less reliable than before, but that 
a peculiarly unfortunate feature has been introduced. This 
temporary disadvantage has in most cases been more than offset 
by decided improvements and safeguards affecting the continuity 
of central station service. 

The primary cause of trouble may usually be traced to the 
failure or unsatisfactory performance of apparatus; the mistakes 
or the inattention of men handling apparatus; or mechanical 
injury and interference from some exterior source. Troubles of 
one kind or another, even with the best modern systems, are 
always possible on the many different links between coal-pile and 
translating device. In a large central station system supplying 
direct current, these links might be enumerated and troubles 
classified as follows :— 


1393%] JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. A427 


Mains and services. 

Low tension feeders. 

Substation apparatus. 

High tension transmission lines. 

Generator, prime mover and auxiliaries. 

Steam supply. 

Troubles in wiring or translating devices on consumer's prem- 
ises are usually more directly under the control of the consumer 
than of the central station. 

These different classes of central station troubles are all more 
or less liable to occur, but the prevalence of any one class or 
number of classes of trouble depends upon the character of the 
different installations, and on local operating conditions. In the 
discussion of these different classes of trouble the writer would, 
as a matter of illustration, refer to conditions in Chicago where 
all 25 cycle high potential transmission and direct current dis- 
tribution is underground. In the outlying districts the 4 wire, 3 
phase, 60 cycle distribution is overhead. 

Mains and Services.—Formerly, Edison tube was principally 
used for all underground mains. The more recent practice has 
been to use, largely, cables in conduit giving less trouble than the 
Edison tube, which is true also of services. However, miles and 
miles of the old tube mains are in service to-day, and must 
necessarily remain in service for years to come. 

Any trouble, either on mains or services, is usually confined to 
a comparatively small area by the blowing of strips in the feeder 
junction boxes. The total amount of current that could be 
‘pumped ”’ into such a short circuit is limited by the drop in 
mains and feeders, at least back to the substation bus-bars. 
Obviously, the duration of such a short circuit depends on the 
condition and relative carrying capacity of the ‘‘ short ’’ and the 
fuse strips back of it. The drop in mains may be such that it is 
impossible to deliver enough current to burn off the trouble or 
blow the fuse strips. These cases, while rare, are very annoying. 
Sometimes they will ‘‘ clear’ only to start again at an unexpected 
time, occasionally even making it necessary to remove junction 
box strips and thus cut out the troublesome section until perma- 
nent repairs can be made. 

Low-Tension Feeders —On account of the larger carrying 
capacity the energy delivered on short circuit is very much 
greater in feeders than in mains. The total length of conductor 
in feeders being much less than in mains, the number of troubles 


\ 


428 JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


with equally good construction are correspondingly less. Fur- 
thermore, instead of tubes, cables have been very generally used 
for several years. This improved construction also makes the 
actual number of feeder troubles less. Serious trouble on feeders, 
when it does occur, however, obviously affects a much larger area 
than trouble in mains. The extent of area affected depends also 
on the arrangement of bus-bars and class of apparatus in station 
or substation. 

Substation Apparatus.—In substations supplying direct cur- 
rent, rotary converters with their accompanying step-down 
transformers and potential regulators are used almost exclu- 
sively. The direct current ends of these rotary converters are 
often worked in multiple with an old generating station, at least 
during the peak hours of one or two months in the early winter. 
A storage-battery with end cell switches for discharging or two or 
sometimes three different potentials is an important adjunct toa 
substation. The batteries in all substations are often discharged 
simultaneously at time of peak on principal generating station, 
or in an emergency; at all other times they are allowed to float 
on system. They are charged either by using a booster or direct 
from a rotary converter equipped with sufficient regulator and 
transformer capacity for working at the higher voltage necessary 
for charging. 

Even in a substation having a storage battery and a subsidiary 
steam plant, all of the annual k.w-h output, except a few per 
cent., is supplied to distribution system through the rotary 
converter. Special precautions are necessary to guard against 
interruption of service, as the radius of possible transmission of 
large powers in case of trouble is very much greater than in the 
case of services, mains or feeders 

The characteristics of a rotary converter are such that it will 
carry an enormous overload with very little drop in voltage. 
Serious troubles or short-circuits, whether they occur in the 
rotary converter and accessories, in the d.c. connections or in the 
a.c. connections, will be violent and are liable to be destructive 
unless the damaged unit can be quickly and effectually discon- 
nected, both from the a.c. transmission and the d.c. distribution 
systems. The localizing of trouble and the effectiveness of dis- 
connecting depends on the arrangement of the a.c. bus-bars and 
the automatic safety devices. 

The practice of operating practically all units on a single set of 
bus-bars, at least during long-hour light-load period in the direct 


1903.] JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. 429 


current generating stations, undoubtedly had some influence on 
the earlier substation bus-bar arrangements. In many large 
substations all rotaries are operated from one set of bus-bars; in 
others they can be operated on either one of two sets of bus-bars. 
Another arrangement consists in running all rotaries from a 
single bus-bar arranged with disconnective knife-switches, so that 
each rotary or group of rotaries could be operated independently 
from its own transmission lines. An improvement consists in 
replacing the disconnective knife-switches with remotely con- 
trolled oil-switches. 

With the latter arrangement, each rotary or group of rotaries 
can be operated all in multiple if necessary or advisable, and be 
quickly sectionalized in case of trouble on any one transmission or 
conversion unit. An example is shown in Fig. 1, which gives the 
scheme of principal connections in a substation that was put into 
service about one year ago. There are twelve 500 k.w. rotary 
converters arranged in three groups of four, each group supplied 
from its own high-tension line and delivering current to its own 
section of the direct current bus-bars.. The incoming lines, 
apparatus, cable connections and switchboards, and the low- 
tension feeders to street, are all located and arranged to prevent 
a bad burnout spreading from one group to another. 

On each rotary converter there is mounted a direct current 
circuit-breaker operated only by means of a 125 volt trip-coil. 
A centrifugal speed limit device on shaft closes the trip-coil 
circuit, thus disconnecting the rotary converter from d.c. bus- 
bars, and preventing its running away, the causes of which are 
well known. A reverse-current device also trips this circuit- 
breaker in any case of trouble that would draw more than a pre- 
determined amount of energy from the d.c. bus-bars. 

The oil-switches on each individual rotary converter outfit, 
~ and those used for tie-switches, are all equipped with overload 
attachments, which are so adjusted that they will open only in 
ease of serious trouble. The tie-switches should also be equipped 
with interlocking devices, so that these tie-switches between lines 

can be closed only when the two sources of e.m.f. are in synchron- 
ism. The low-tension feeders in most of the large Edison systems 
are provided with very heavy fuses and often with solid links. 
The adjustment of overload attachments on oil-switches must, 
therefore, also be made for heavy loads and with due considera- 
tion for the particular conditions involved in each individual case. 

Transmission Systems—In most of the larger cities the 25 


—_— semmmear”” J 


. 


wourig wed ee 


‘Sevorzy bw10bing 


‘Sng “Ss Fives 


a ee 


ME WO CPLwENRdO DITF 
ANBWLYYSHOD NDI, 


PA] Acces buiwosn, 


SIWDLING LA's 'S 
aIITed WHY Aw vion 


WE Wo OFLvYz/O “D27Z 
LnawiwvdoD ~oIeg 


DwI7 A Ccob baiwooN] 


PITA ooo, brimosay/ 


AB GA ds’ 
tp 


taenbiys 


woLIMS 


ELIS VILYIANOD Awwioy 
47M OSE — WW OCOS-* 


Mow met wi ~7IGwD LH 


SRnrs. IMO LO~e Ss 


wrorsy Onw Aweioy —I— ah 


MINTHL Mi ~FIGHD LW 


MOlLVLE BNS ¥ I SNOILDINNOD WHADNYS 42 WA SWIge 


MOMEYL ~~ TITY DLW 


ed 
ll 


: wotimnS 70 
ese eer tee 


+ poooh wrewe 


osiszewe> & 255 
OPLDBNNOD YF lee 
i a & 


| | =. 


+r 


=O0DI== 


' 

( : 

r {fit 
| td 
a {lee 
FY a> 
E Uisis 
e 313 
1 uit 

; H 
Pye 
aia 
Rise 
ee 

Sait 

: 


erties 


w+ 


j 


ut 


es 


Sx2072y bW/ObLNO 


wzo27y 7 burobsno— 


45v78 wie M4 SEI-E 


wos bay 
MorkL2On) MH SF 


| Shure POLWTITIOD Of 
it 


Ain 
Lg 

N 

t 

i 


w2setawes swe tow 
LFF <n OSE Mw coe 


\ o¥ee Wwe eoNsY Twe 
Aw2ew 2 BeerAee Ce 


+ <r rt207wes NO HEwO 


eeOCL =e 


™ A 
[ 
| 

z 


wt a eeseg amnzerD 


— 


Unc wriewave> tut ey 
twine ASE! Mm SOF 


Seng ug wide os an f 
MONT aL MI BRIBED 
F oares ar~Sr78V2 47 — | [ 
frHoue Awwdoy ou ( 


7 
one usr ‘ 
us He7OOKNEYy 2 uso worVooKery 
é 
& 
oy 43 
io 2e 
' 'G 
ef ue ag wear 
es 35 sezorsy twrobing 
a iy 
g x 
eng Fewtney. y 5 
b] a 


oe 
MENIML NI ~ ZIT D LN 


MOM Be LM ~DIGYD LH 


1903.] JUNKERSFELD; CENTRAL STATIONS. 431 


vycle transmission systems are operated at voltages varying from 
6,600 to 13,000 volts. Much higher voltages have been success- 
fully used on through trunk lines in several other cities. This, 
however, is obviously a very different condition. The large 
transmission systems with their multiplicity of lines, cable 
terminals and oil-switch connections have grown into networks 
that are continually becoming more complex. As each and 
every case of serious trouble anywhere on a system having almost 
exclusively synchronous apparatus necessarily affects every part 
of the system, the possible chances for trouble affecting any one 
of the thousands of customers, are also continually increasing 
Commercially, this is a very serious matter indeed, especially 
when we consider that with many of the more desirable custo- 
. mers the greatest possible security for continuous service is of 
first importance. 

Realizing this fact, many central station engineers have taken 
extraordinary pains with high-tension cable work and in some 
cases have succeeded in making the transmission network in 
itself one of the most reliable parts of the central station system, 
except in so far that inherently this high-tension network with 
its synchronous apparatus is lacking in elasticity. 

This has been the experience in Chicago, where a 2,250 volt, 
25 cycle transmission line supplying rotary converters, was first 
put into service about six yearsago. Since then the transmission 
voltage has twice been doubled. The first line, three and one- 
half miles long, supplied one substation having 200 k.w. capacity 
in rotary converters. The resulting high-tension system, shown 
in Fig. 2, will, by next fall, aggregate about 60 miles, supplying 
nineteen substations with approximately 24,000 k.w. installed in 
rotary converters and 4,000 k.w. in frequency-changing motor- 
generator sets. : 

About twelve months ago the potential was raised to 9,000 
volts. The previous and subsequent experience indicated many 
desirable improvements. Until this time the system was sup- 
plied only through delta-connected step-up transformers from 
double current generators. 

The capacity effect of lines was found to be such that in event 
of slight ground on one phase, it might result in an excessive 
rise of potential and very severe strain, if not an actual break- 
down, on some part of the system. The grounding of the neutral 
on this high-tension system has been attended thus far with very 
satisfactory vesults. As star-wound 9,000 volt alternators were 


JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATI ONS. [April 24 


W.DIVISION ST 


ROCKWELL ST, 


W. MADISON ST, 


DIAGRAM OF 9000 VOLT, 25 CYCLE, TRANSMISSION SYSTEM. 


CHICAGO EDISON COMPANY. 
COMMONWEALTH ELECTRIC COMPANY, 


1903, 


@ GENERATING STATIONS 
© SvuB- STATIONS. 
STORAGE BATTERIES, 


FISK ST. STATION, 


SEDGWICK ST. 


L)N.CLARK ST. 


oO 
ILLINOIS ST,, 


HARRISON ST, 
STATION, 


state sth 


w 22” ST, 


Finite: 


1903.] JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. 433 


A 
installed, the common point of winding was in cach case con- 
nected to ground. Practically all high-tension transmission 
cable installed during the past two years consists of No. 4/00 
three-conductor paper and lead-covered cable. The thickness of 
paper wall un each ae ues is 6/32 inch, over all is 4/32 
inch, and lead wall is 4 inch. 

The arrangement Ne installation of terminal appliances is 
obviously of great importance. All forms of fuses and air-break 
switches have been abandoned, so that at present the main cir- 
cuits are made and broken only under oil. Various forms and 
methods of making up joints and cable-heads were tried. These 
are now made up in parts, so that the lead sleeve or cylindrical 
part of head is put in place after the individual joints ave been 
made and insulated with paper tape. The sleeve or cable-head is 
then filled with a special compound, which is a non-absorbent 
of moisture and has a much higher dielectric strength than the 
paraffin which was formerly used. The process of filling is such 
that every minute particle of moisture is expelled. 

The selection of routes for transmission cable is made with a 
view to provide two or more lines on different streets if possible, 
at least in different grouns of conduit for each substation. The 
cables are isolated and mechanically protected, so that the spread- 
ing of a bad “ burnout ” in either high or low-tension cables will 
be prevented as much as possible. A well-designed and con- 
structed conduit and manhole system is therefore essential. 
Overhead connections to an extensive high-tension underground 
network are a source of trouble to be avoided, if possible. When 
unavoidable, these overhead taps should be isolated by means of 
transformers. 

Generator, Prime Mover and Auatlaries—The necessity for 
operating all units in multiple for long hour periods in order to 
obtain good station economy, still exists to a very large degree. 
During the past ten years the sizes of units in the largest stations 
have been increased from 800 and 1,500 k.w. to 3.500 and 5,000 
k.w. The number of units, however, in any one station has often 
been decreased, making multiple operation of at least a large 
portion of plant more necessary than before, and also placing 
much greater dependence on any one unit. Such stations have 
been and are still passing through a critical transition period. 
Every case of serious trouble on gerferator, engine or auxiliaries 
affects the entire system; but it frequently happens that the 
system cannot be sectionalized even into two parts without 


434 JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


serious sacrifice in engine economy. The gradaal increase in 
number of units will oniy partially relieve this situation. 

The enginc-driven unit is ordinarily one of the most uncertain 
elements in the central station system. Duplicate units are 
often installed and operated side by side under apparently the 
same conditions, and one, for a time at least, will prove much 
more reliable than the other. There is so much fitting, so many 
fine adjustments and valve settings, all of which must be done 
with great care, precision and patience. Much depends also on 
the faithfulness and the skill of the men in immediate charge of 
the apparatus. This is true of any similar apparatus, but par- 
ticularly of the large engine-driven units operating in multiple on 
transmission systems. 

With an arrangement of bus-bars, high-tension lines and sub- 
station apparatus similar to that shown in Tig. 3, generating 
units can be operated independently, and a certain amount of 
sifting of load can be done at the larger substations having four 
or more units in service. Rotaries can be shut down one at a 
time, transferred to another generating unit or another station 
and again put on load. During peak-hours there would be 
shifting which would introduce some additional chances of 
trouble due to possible mistakes of men handling apparatus, 
which, in that case, would partly offset some of the advantages of 
sectionalizing. _ 

In this respect, a very decided advance would be the use of a 
prime mover giving practically a straight line economy, such as 
the steam turbine. The differences between one-half load and 
full load performance for short hour periods will not be great 
enough to warrant much shifting. The auxiliary apparatus, 
particularly the condensing plant, is frequently a cause of 
trouble. The ‘ sticking”? of pumps, ‘“‘ dropping ’’ of vacuum, 
and similar reports, are heard occasionally in every steam plant. 
The arrangement should be such that the condensing plant and 
auxiliary apparatus and the excitation of any one unit are 
simple and positive in operation and normally independent of 
every other unit. 

Steam Supply.—Practically every steam plant has its own 
peculiarities in piping and arrangement of boilers, but in most 
cases all boilers are in oneroom. The bursting of a steam-pipc or 
boiler-tube fills the entire room with steam instantly, making it 
impossible to close a valve in the ordinary way. The location of 
boilers in two or three different rooms or floors and the providing 


1903.] JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. 435 


of means for closing valves from inside of engine room has 
lessened the danger of a shut-down. The placing in separate 
rooms, as far as circumstances will permit of the boilers and 
piping corresponding to each generating unit and connecting only 


FIGURE 8. 


SIAGRAM oF gck De bea aeoner ato Baas ovetem 
through fairly quick-acting remotely controlled valves will fur- 
ther lessen this danger. 

With careful operation, customers’ troubles (bad or inter- 
rupted service) that are chargeable to the boiler room are few 
while those of the central station manager are many. . Investiga- 


436 JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


tions, experiments and some improvements have been made from 
year to year, Lut the buying and economical handling of coal and 
making of steam still involve problems that are worthy of the 
very best attention, both as to the cost of operation and reliability 
of service rendered. These problems are especially important 
when we consider large stations which consume 2,500 or 3,000 
tons daily, and the many possible chances of delay and inter- 
ruption between the coal mine and the boiler room. 


GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS. 

A survey of the various classes of trouble between coal pile and 
customers’ service indicates at once the unfortunate feature of 
large modern transmission systems. True, as has been done in 
some cases, induction motor-generators might be used instead of 
rotary converters. The substation apparatus would then be 
much less sensitive to sudden fluctuations in engine speed, or to 
line disturbances due to short-circuit on some other part of 
the system. 

The first cost of motor-generators of 500 k.w. and 1,000 k.w. — 
capacity installed complete is, however, from 15 to 25 per cent. 
greater than for rotary converters with accessories. Under 
ordinary operating conditions there is a difference of from 3 to 5 
per cent. in efficiency in favor of rotary converters. The power- 
factor of the rotary converter is obviously much better than that 
of the induction motor. The characteristics of a rotary con- 
verter are often a practical advantage in cases of trouble on low- 
tension feeders or mains. 

In some cases, for instance where it is necessary to run a large 
number of converting units from a long transmission line which 
itself is subject to heavy fluctuations in potential and frequent in- 
terruptions, it may be advisable to use motor-generator sets. In 
the large majority of cases, liowever, in both lighting and railway 
work, the rotary converter has been found the best and most 
economical. If the objectionable features thus introduced 
into large systems cannot be overcome, the result can at least 
be minimized by judicious sectionalizing. 

The electrostatic capacity of these large high-tension cable 
systems is such that there is necessarily a practical limit to the 
mileage of cable that can safely be operated as an interconnected 
network. In the 60 miles of 9,000 volt, three-phase, 25 cycle 
lines previously mentioned, the charging current as calculated 
will be about 16 amperes. At the present rate of increase in mileage 
the condenser effects will soon be troublesome and possibly pro- 


1903.] JUNK ERSF ELD: CHENPRAL STATIONS. 437 


hibitive, as troubles may occur which will result in building up a 
potential at some point and breaking down insulation on appar- 
atus that was comparatively safe on the smaller system. In that 
event, and with several very large units all in multiple, the 
amount of power delivered on short circuit would probably be so 
great that it could not safely be interrupted by any oil-switch thus 
far built. 

In a rapidly growing system provision for a reasonable amount 
of sectionalizing can easily be made. The investment in the 
portion of central station system between coal pile and custo- 
mers’ service most directly involved, is, under most conditions, 
divided approximately as follows: 


Station real estate, building and generating appar- 


Ga Mince cae ae genet peti hvid Hany oor RNS wien die bere ele 35% to 45% 
Transmission system cables and conduit .......... 38% to 6% 
Substation real estate, building and converting 
Pr EaUGl Oly trae eet Ap cath wire Ber Nini lal «cordon wi ot eaors?s 10% to 15% 


Feeders and mains cables, conduit and Edison tube 40% to 48% 


These percentages are greatly influenced by local conditions, 
such as average and maximum density of load; value per duct 
foot of underground conduit; average length and voltage of 
transmission; cost of real estate and character of buildings. In 
railway plants,;the investment in substations and that corres- 
ponding to feeders and mains will be less, while the investment 
in transmission lines will be somewhat greater. A considerable 
capacity in storage batteries will, under load conditions obtaining 
in most large systems, decrease slightly the investment in the 
first three, but would not affect that in feeders and mains. 

The provision for sectionalizing will not increase the invest- 
ment or operating costs, either in substations or in feeders and 
mains. In the transmission system it may, under some condi- 
tions, slightly increase the total mileage of lines; but such an 
increase in the 3 to 6 per cent. thus involved is a very small 
increase in the total investment-in entre system. 

A review of power houses indicates that there is a wide differ- 
ence in cost of station buildings. This difference is a matter 
partly of enginéering and partly of management. Taking the 
total cubical contents of six of the large modern station buildings, 
we find that from 6 to 10 per cent. is devoted to coal storage and 
that the complete buildings vary from 100 to 240 cubic feet, and 
from .95 to 2.5 square feet per k.w. rated generating capacity. 


438 JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


The boiler room portion of the same stations vary in total net 
cubical contents from 65 to 130 cubic feet per rated boiler horse- 
power, while the engine room portions vary from 40 to 90 cubic 
feet per rated engine horse-power. As practically the same types 
of boilers are used, the former depends almost entirely upon the 
design and arrangement; but the latter depends largely upon the 
type of generating unit adopted. In the case of vertical turbine- 
driven units, the figure for this portion of plant can be reduced 

by at least one-half. . 

The tendency, however, in power house design is toward a 
much more liberal allowance for space for all equipment. The 
high-voltage generators of large capacity and multiplicity of lines 
demand extraordinary switching apparatus which requires con- 
siderable space. A suitable arrangement and reasonable isola- 
tion of switching apparatus and connections need not require 
any additional space and should preferably be much simpler than 
that in many existing stations. 

It would seem, therefore, that in the large modern power house, 
sectionalizing and even entirely independent operation of units 
can be provided for with very little, if any, additional investment 
in the generating station or in any other part of the system. 

While the independent operation of generating units would 
tend to minimize the effect on cutsomers of many central station 
troubles and thus increase the coefficient of reliability, there will 
also be some disadvantages. A heavy overload or perhaps short- 
circuit coming entirely on one unit or group of lines might trip 
the oil circuit-breaking switches on lines, and the sudden release 
from load severely strain the prime mover. This cause would 
be improbable if, as indicated in Fig. 3, each generating unit sup- 
plies at least two different substations and when only part of the 
load would be thus released on any one generating unit. 

If a short-circuit occurs on a feeder supplied by a small group 
of rotaries the percentage of overload is larger, and after one 
rotary trips the others will quickly follow. This might 
not have occurred with a larger group, when the percentage of 
overload would have been correspondingly less. All trans- 
ynission lines should be equipped so that oil circuit-breakers at 
both ends of line open automatically in case of trouble, whether 
the entire system is operated in multiple or independently. 

In the latter event, if time limit attachments are used with 
overload devices at the station, the amount of energy’ delivered 
at the point of breakdown might not only slow down the engine 


1903.] JUNKERSFELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. 439 


but draw enough energy from network to trip the circuit-breakers 
on all rotaries supplied from the particular generating unit. If 
operated as shown in Fig. 3, this would mean, under full condi- 
tions, an overload of 50 per cent. on the remaining rotaries in each 
substation supplied from three different generating units; 100 
per cent. overload on those supplied from two, and a total shut- 
down of such small substations as are supplied exclusively from 
the particular unit in trouble. Usual result: low pressure on part 
of direct current system; no trouble elsewhere. 

In event of multiple operation of the entire system, with 
several units in service, a large amount of energy from the station 
bus-bars would be delivered until time limit overload devices at 
the station and reverse-current devices at the substation cut out 
the troublesome line. Usual result: heavy fluctuations in pres- 
sure on entire system, until line is opened at both ends, several 
machines shut down and sometimes a total shut-down of trans- 
mission system. 

During the hours of light toad the transmission system would 
naturally be divided into fewer parts or perhaps all in multiple. 
In event of a shut-down during these hours, “the capacity of 
storage batteries would be so much greater in proportion to 
load that the drop in pressure would not be so serious. 

The successful operation of large systems necessitates the 
maintaining of a well-organized operating force of competent and 
experienced men. Every operation involving the starting .or 
shutting down of a generator, line or substation unit should be 
carefully regulated and checked to reduce to a minimum the 
possibility of a mistake. In one of the large stations now under 
construction provision is made for a LOAD DESPATCHER, whose 
office will be convenient to the operating switchboard and who 
can control absolutely the transferring of load between all 
generating, transmitting and converting units, with the same 
implicit confidence and accuracy of judgment and action as can 
the train despatcher on an important railroad system. His 
office should be a clearing house for all orders concerning opera- 
tion of system. 

After considering some of the advantages and deed ena: 
of multiple and independent operation in large underground 
transmission systems, it might be of interest to consider small 
overhead systems. The latter are operated independently, in 
very many cases with satisfactory results as to reliability of serv. 
ice rendered. In order to secure more economical engine per- 


440 JUNKERSFIELD: CENTRAL STATIONS. April 24 


formance, it was necessary to adopt large units operating in 
multiple. This step also improved the reliability of service 
rendered, particularly where each feeder emanating from the 
bus-bars continued to supply its own independent system. If 
these small systems of taps radiating from a center of distribu- 
tion at feeder ends had been arranged into one interconnected 
overhead network covering a large area, the coefficient of relia- 
bility with the same character of construction would undoubtedly 
have been decreased. These systems, usually supplying current 
for induction motors and for lighting, are fairly elastic; but on 
account of the higher potential, usually 2000 volts or more, a 
short-circuit obviously affects a very large area and often the 
entire system. The matter of regulation being comparatively 
easy, there is, therefore, a distinct advantage in operating inde- 
pendently the different feeders instead of on an interconnected 
network. With an overhead system exposed to the elements 
and so many chances of interference from an exterior source, a 
modern station is usually the more reliable part of such a system, 
and therefore there is little necessity of sectionalizing the station. 
As a precautionary measure, however, and to facilitate future 
extensions and repairs, stations should be designed so that this 
can be done. 

In conclusion, it might be said that considering responsibility 
for the business and return on investment, every central station 
system should be designed, if not for independent, at least for 
sectional operation. In the very large stations, the independent 
units from coal pile to distributing network, or to rails, should be 
effectively isolated to make a total shut-down practically impos- 
sible. The matter of independent, sectional or multiple opera- 
tion at different hours of the day or days of the year is entirely 
one of local conditions, which may change frequently. Great 
care and constant attention is needed to maintain a fairly uniform 
and consistent coefficient of reliability on every part of the 
central station system. Independent and even sectional opera- 
tion will mean a small sacrifice in operating costs. With a 
system properly designed, this matter, then, becomes to the 
central station management a plain business consideration; to 
take the risk of inferior service and possible shut-down, or to 
pay a premium in the form of very slight sacrifice in operating 
costs and thus obtain an additional safeguard for superior service 
to all or such groups of customers as business requirements may 
demand. 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 441 


DISCUSSION. 

PRESIDENT ScoTt:—We take up to-night a number of papers 
dealing specifically with different combinations in the system of 
distribution, and the first paper will be that on ‘‘Economical and 
Safe Limits in the Size of Central Stations,’ by Mr. H. A. 
Lardner, of New York City. 

Mr. Lardner read the paper. (See page 407.) 

PRESIDENT ScotT:—The next paper is on “ Safety Devices in 
Central Stations and Substations,’ by Mr. Philip Torchio, 
engineer of the New York Edison Company. 

Mr. Torchio read the paper. (See page 417.) 

PRESIDENT ScoTT:—We are fortunate this evening to have 
among those who are to present papers, two gentiemen con- 
nected with large and important companies. We have just 
heard from the engineer of one of the larger companies in New 
York, the large lighting company, and the company which pro- 
vides power for general distribution. We also have with us a 
gentleman from Chicago, one of the other large cities of the 
country, who represents one of the most notable plants of the 
country. Mr. Peter Junkersfeld, engineer of the Chicago Edison 
Company, will now present his paper on “‘ Multiple versus Inde- 
pendent Operation of Units and Central Stations.” 

Mr. Junkersfeld read the paper. (See page 425.) 

PRESIDENT Scott:—The papers which we have had this 
evening are of exceptional value on account of their particular 
character. In dealing with the subject of central station prac- - 
tice, they have not gone into generalities, they have not dealt 
with matters in a theoretical way, but we have had in the last 
two papers, in particular, what we might call heart-to-heart talks 
from the men who have becn operating large stations for a con- 
siderable time. The burden of the papers, particularly of the 
last two is notable—it is not the general theory of the interrela- 
tion of parts, not on the characteristics of engines or dynamos, 
of efficiency or regulation, nor do the papers refer to those 
elements which come up in connection with the design of the 
station beforehand, but they have more to do with the opera- 
tion of the station, with the things which affect the man who 
runs the station They have to do more particularly with the 
emergency conditions, with safety devices, and through all the 
papers we have this sentiment—how shall we protect the station 
against emergencies and interruption of service? We might 
be led to think that these papers are chapters from experience, 
and one might almost conclude that Mr. Torchio has given us 
the results of thirty-three accidents and shut-downs in his system, 
but we fortunately have already been assured that this is not 
entirely the case, by Mr. Lieb’s statement incorporated in my 
introductory remarks—that this same system has been running 
since its beginning, always with some current on tts lines, and 
for some ten years with no interruption of the service. 

We are in debt this evening especially to one of the mem- 


442 CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


bers of the Committee on Papers, who has had this meeting 
in special charge. He is the superintendent of motive power 
of what was the Manhattan Railway Company, and is now 
a part of the Interborough Rapid Transit Company, of this city. 
He has given me a list of some gentlemen whom he suggests I 
call on for discussion this evening, and I will reverse the order in 
which he has placed the names, and begin with the signature at 
the bottom and call upon Mr. Henry G. Stott. 

Mr. Storr:—It seems to me that to-night is a good time for us 
to look back. We have been told a good deal about modern 
tendencies. History seems to repeat itself. We started out 
fifteen years ago with one machine and one circuit all the way 
through; a little later it became a question of adopting two or 
three circuits, and having them so divided as to suit the size of 
the units. A little later the size of the units was increased, and 
also the size of the feeders which they supplied. Then it became 
a problem of combinations, how to adapt the feeders to the size 
of the machines. At that time everything was run, practically, 
with high-speed engines and high-speed belted generators. Fol- 
lowing that came the period of slow-speed engines, and we began 
to look then into the possibilities of multiple operation. Multiple 
operation meant, instead of running five, six or eight small units 
on perhaps 50 per cent. load for the greater part of the time, for 
the service to be combined on one or more machines, thus pro- 
ducing a fair load factor. Then as soon as multiple operation 

‘came, with low speed engines, we began to look around for some 
further development; and there seems to be at the present time 
a tendency to go back to the higher speed generator, such as with 
the steam turbine. 

The steam turbine is practically an unknown quantity 
to most of us, and while some results have been published, 
yet it has not been in use long enough to justify a pre- 
diction that it will displace reciprocating engines. Recipro- 
cating engines to-day are built with higher steam economy than 
is claimed for the turbine. I understand that tests with the 
Sulzer engine in the Moabite station show a consumption of 8.97 
lbs., of steam per indicated horse-power. The larger units in 
operation in New York to-day are all approximately consuming 
about 13 lbs. of steam per indicated horse-power. That corres- 

- ponds approximately to 19 lbs. per kilowatt hour. The best of 
actual records of the steam turbine is just about that. By going 
into triple expansion engines, a step which seems obvious for 
railway power or lighting plants, we can get down 20 per cent. 
lower than that, without any trouble at all. I had a message from 
the Boston Edison Company to-day, in which they advised me 
that with a 1200 h.p. compound condensing engine, with 98° of 
superheat at the throttle, they got a steam consumption of 11.57 
lbs. per indicated horse power. At the present time I feel 
personally, in regard to the steam turbine, that we will have to 
return the Scotch verdict of ‘‘ Not Proven,” and wait until we 
get actual results. 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 443 


The feature of the floor plan, the space in relation to the gen- 
eral size of the plant and the unit, has been referred to. I thinka 
little consideration will show that the size of the generator unit 
has nothing to do with it. It is the size of the boiler room. If 
we can reduce the size of the boilers, we can reduce the size of the 
station, but to get an economical distribution of steam from any 
plant, we must run the boiler room parallel to the engine room. 
I believe you will find that the limiting feature in all large sta- 
tions, no matter what the size of the generator unit, you must 
have a certain size of boiler unit; and to get the best distribution 
of steam, even though the units only occupied one-fourth of the 
space claimed for the steam turbine, you would have to space the ° 
steam turbine units at approximately the same centering distance 
as you do the,steam engine, sd that the economy of floor space I 
do not think is a very important point. 

Coming to the transmission lines, the claim has been made, and 
I think it dwells in the minds of many able engineers, that the 
high-tension lines are very dangerous. I differ from that. I 
think the high-tension underground cable is the safest thing we 
have—a great deal safer than low-tension. If you have a short- 
circuit in a low-tension cable, it may burn up a thousand feet of 
the cable before you can stop it. If there is a short-circuit on a 
high-tension cable, with proper safety appliances on each end of 
it, it does not destroy more than two feet of it. We have quite a 
large capacity on the bus-bars in the Manhattan plant—over 
45,000 k.w., all in multiple—and we have had short-circuits on the 
high-tension feeders of 11,000 volts, and the result is a puncture 
such as you would get from a testing transformer, not destroying 
more than two feet of the cable, whereas with a short-circuit on a 
600-volt direct-current cable, a large amount of cable may be 
readily destroyed. é 

I think the storage battery has found its proper place as an 
assurance against shut-down and not as a’‘means of economical 
operation. That statement is probably open to discussion. It 
seems to be almost impossible to find a condition in which the 
storage battery pays for itself as an investment. I believe it is 
used essentially as an insurance, and not as an element in econom- 
ical operation. 

The idea which pervades all of these papers, namely; the re- 
turning to the single operation of units on a certain number of 
feeders, or employing a certain number of substations, without 
multiple operation, seems to be a backward step. It is a con- 
fession of weakness in our safety devices. Is it not a better 
solution to improve the safety devices and operate in multiple 
and thereby gain the maixmum economy of station operation? 
The price of coal is soaring all the time and apparently always 
will do so, and in the operation of a plant coal forms over 60 per 
cent. of the actual cost of power; and it is therefore most import- 
ant for us to do everything possible to economize. This can only 
be done by running the units as near full load as possible, and to 


444 CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


do this we must run in multiple. The separation of high-tension 
apparatus can be very easily carried out, and it seems to me that. 
by means of proper appliances as indicated in Mr. Torcluo’s. 
paper, and as actually carried out, there is no difficulty whatever 
in making a station practically safe in all kinds of operation. I 
have seen an actual short-circuit in a station with four 5,000 
kilowatt machines in multiple, and an oil switch, take care of it 
perfectly, long before the attendant could touch the switch and 
throw it out. With a switching apparatus brought down to such 
perfection as this, it seems to me that we ought to be very careful 
about reducing the efficiency of operation of our plants by going 
- into independent units or plants. I believe this covers all the 
points I had in mind to present this evening. 

Tue PRESIDENT:—We have with us this evening a gentleman 
who has been connected with central station work for some ten 
or fifteen years, Mr. Herbert A. Wagner 

Mr. WAcNER:—I can add very little to the remarks which 
have been made to-night in the papers that have been read. I 
have recently been connected with the engineering work of the 
Boston Edison Company, and there we have so far operated all 
the alternating current generators and feeders in multiple. We 
have had practically no trouble. The generating station, until 
three years ago, was used for alternating current distribution only. 
It is now used entirely for transmitting current to substations 
from which current is distributed on the three-wire direct current 
system. All these substations are equipped with motor- 
generators in place of rotary transformers, and I attribute the 
freedom from many of the troubles which other central stations 
had to the use of motor-generators in place of rotaries. A large 
proportion of the motor-generators are induction motor-gener- 
ators and therefore the troubles which are often caused by a 
great amount of synchronous apparatus are obviated. Of 
course, there is something to be said against the use of motor- 
generators. ‘The first cost is something more; the power-factor 
with induction motor-generators is lower, but with a proper 
apportioning between induction motor-generators and syn- 
chronous motor-generators that can be improved. 

The company is now building a 50,000 k.w. station, in which 
turbines in 5,000 k.w. units are to be used entirely in place of 
engines. This station will probably be operated in sections, but 
that has not yet been definitely determined. I would like to cor- 
rect the statement which Mr. Stott made; since he evidently is 
misinformed. The engine economy which he quoted in reference 
to the Boston Company, refers to the cross compound engine and 
not triple expansion. I think the German practice and experi- 
ence has shown that there is nothing to be gained by the use of 
triple expansion over compound engines, especially without super- 
heating. Theyhave carried superheating to a very much higher 
degree there than we have here, as they have used independent 
superheaters. In this country nothing over 100°, I think, has 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 445 


been reached, and that is much above the average practice, which 
is 75° to 80°. With a high degree of superheating, I think the 
cross compound can be made fully as economical as the triple 
expansion engine. Single cylinder engines, with high degree of 
superheat, have almost equalled compound triple expansion 
engines, but the difficulty of using such high degrees of superheat 
is almost insurmountable, especially with the type of engines 
used in this country. 

PRESIDENT Scotr:—lIs Mr. F. A. Waldron, here? If so, we 
would like him to participate in the discussion 

Mr. F. A. Watpron:—As I have prepared a paper, covering 
detail tests, to be presented at the June meeting of the American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, I hardly think it would be just 
to the Society to which I belong, or to myself, to anticipate 
this paper in any of the remarks which I might make this 
evening. Therefore, I will make a few general remarks, in which 
all quantities will be stated in round figures, subject to such 
modifications as more detail may develop. 

After listening to the opinions and remarks on the steam tur- 
bine, this evening, by different members, I find that my own 
feelings in relation to the turbine, two years ago, were the same 
as theirs are to-night, although, when I drew the following 
parallelism, I did not realize that so unanimous sentiment existed. » 

As a disciple of E. D. Leavitt, of reciprocating engine fame, 
my.experience with the turbine has been very much like the 
experience of the Provengal, in Balazc’s “‘ Passion in a Jungle,” 
when he discovered the blood-stained panther in the cave. 

1st.—A fear and a desire to get as far away from it as possible. 

2d.—A natural curiosity to see how the ‘“‘ animal ”’ would act 
(with a very grave doubt in my mind that it would act as I 
wanted it to.) . 

3d.—lIts graceful outline; the space occupied; the alluring 
““Hlue book” by Mr. Hodgkinson, on how little water it con- 
sumed—gradually overcame my natural temerity and I became 
more curious. 

4th.—I approached the “ animal” with the determination of 
finding out how it would act, when awake, feeling all the time 
that it would be well to keep a knife (hammers and monkey- 
wrenches) at its throat. 

5th.—To make a long story short, I have become acquainted 
with and learned to admire the “ animal,’”’ and although I have 
never laid down to sleep with it, I wanted to very badly, last 
August, when a wire in the field broke, and I did not sleep for 48 
hours, while it was being repaired. 

Personally, I regard the turbine in relatively the same light as 
the sewing-machine, and I do not think, for one minute, that the 
reciprocating engine builder need take the same stand that the 
spinster did, at the time the sewing-machine was invented, 
and petition Congress that it be suppressed. It has its.special 
field and is not, in any way, a universal power panacea or a patent 
medicine remedy for power ailments. 


446 CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


On the other hand, it is a remarkable stride toward the goal of 
economizing power distribution, and the claims made for it by 
the builders have been substantiated in every way. i have 
found tie following points in the machine that appeal most 
strongly to the business man and to the engineer in charge of the 
operation of plants at the present day: 

(a) Simplicity. 

(b) Ease of operation. 

‘(c) Economy. 

(d) Lack of multiplicity of moving parts. 

(e) Continuous or commercial efficiency. 

(7) Floor space. 

(g) Cost. 

(h) Cost of buildings. 

I have not named these in their order of importance, as one is 
almost as important as the other, and will take up, briefly, a dis- 
cussion of the points in the order above named: 


(a) SIMPLICITY. 
After the machine is properly placed, balanced and started, 
there seems to be (outside of defective materials), nothing in it 
which can give any trouble. 


(b) EASE OF OPERATION. 

Two lubricators which require filling twice each day; an occa- 
sional trying of the oil, cooling-water cocks and the small air 
cocks on top of the bearings, together with an occasional lubrica- 
tion of the collector rings, is all that the running engineer has to 
look out for, in as far as the turbine and its generator goes. 


(c) Economy. 

The Yale & Towne outfit consists of a Westinghouse-Parsons 
turbine and a 400 k.w,, 2-phase, 240-volt, 7200 alt. generator, 
driving induction motors from 4 to 40 h.p. 

This is the first plant to be operated for regular factory driving, 
outside of that the Westinghouse Company, having been in serv- 
ice since February 1, 1902. 

To be sure, this is a small plant, as compared with those men- 
tioned this evening, but it is the small plant that worries, as to 
whether it is better to put money into betterments or the coal- 
pile, since in such the line of such demarkation is very fine. 

A breakdown, due to defective forgings, occurred last January, 
on a new field which had never had a load upon it.. This has in 
no way destroyed our confidence in the machine, and a second 
unit has been ordered. 

With a 400 k.w. load, running at about 150 Ibs. pressure, per 
gauge, at the throttle, with from 10° to 15° superheat and about 
274 inches of vacuum, an economy of approximately 224 lbs. of 
water per k.w. per hour at the switchboard, has been obtained. 
This economy is the result of tests from daily running loads and 
is in no way a special test; the discharge from the surface con- 
denser determined the amount of water used, and the condenser 
was tested for leakage before the tests were made. 


to 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 447 


(d) Lack or Muttipuicity oF Movine Parts. 

This is very noticeable and impressive to one who sees the tur- 
bine for the first time, and I shall never forget my disappoint- 
ment in finding it so simple a machine. The governor and an 
oil-pump are about al! that seem to be going, when the machine 
is running. 


(e) CoNTINUOUS OR COMMERCIAL EFFICIENCY. 

By this I mean that it is inherent in the design of the machine 
to run continuously and at varying loads within certain limits, 
at its maximum economy, owing to the fact that there. are no 
cross-head slides to get out of alignment; no piston packing to 
wear and replace; no stuffiing boxes to repack; no valves to reseat 
or grind up, and no bearings to key up—all of which tend to 
reduce the daily running efficiency of any reciprocating engine 
plant. 

The effect of changing engineers in a moderate-sized plant, and 
its effect on the coal-pile, are unknown quantities in so far as 
reciprocating engines go. We all know however that when the 
new engineer comes on everything has to be readjusted; and 
where there is one that knows how to make proper adjustments, 


- there are a dozen who don’t, and asa general proposition it 1s 


safe to say that the average sized plant, in the course of ten years, 
gets more engineers that don’t know how to make proper adjust- 
ments than those who do. This is one of the chances of war 
which the reciprocating engine owner has to take and as a 
natural consequence must pay for. 

The personal equation of the engineer, and its effect on the 
coal-pile, is entirely eliminated in the steam turbine. 


_(f) Froor Space Occupiep. 

It is possible to place about three times the power, in turbo- 
generator outfits, in the same space occupied by a direct con- 
nected horizontal or vertical engine of approximately the same 
economy. 

(Cost. 

The cost of the turbine, with its accessories, ready to run, is 
from 10 to 15 per cent. less than the reciprocating engine of the 
same power, provided high-grade makes only are considered. 
You can buy a reciprocating engine equipment cheaper than you 
can aturbine; but personally I do not think that such are to be 
classed in truly competitive prices. 

Weight, complete, 33,000 lbs. 

Weight, reciprocating engine same power, with generator, 
200,009 lbs. 

(h) Cost or BurILDINGs. 

The cost of buildings in our particular case per k.w., would be 
aboute65 per cent. of the cost of buildings housing the same 
amount of power with the reciprocating engine. 

There are one or two points in the turbine, especially in the 
installation of the machine, which should be carefully watched. 


448 CENTRAL STATIONS. {April 24 


1st.—To place the turbine, with relation to condenser, so that 
there shall be plenty of chance for expansion and contraction of 
the machine itself. 

2d.—In piping up for cooling water, it is well to have two 
sources of supply; also, an eel-trap and by-pass on the inlet to 
the oil-cooling coils and the try-cock to an open drip on the outlet 
of the coils. 

The exciter outfit should never be driven by a motor or the 
turbine itself; an independent, direct-connected set is the only 
way to do the trick, unless you wish to take chances of shut-down, 
especially if you have inductive loads. 

Oil should be changed and filtered every week. 

The present construction of the turbine is such that it has one 
very weak point which the reciprocating engine has not, and I 
will mention it, briefly, before closing. The reciprocating 
engine, designed for a certain horse-power, may have its most 
economical point of cut-off from a .28 to .33 stroke in the high 
pressure cylinder. In the event of the vacuum being destroyed 
and the relief-valve to the atmosphere opening, the reciprocating 
engine naturally takes more steam and keeps the machinery up 
to speed, even though it has to carry about .7 or .8 stroke in the © 
high pressure cylinder. 

The turbine however will not do this when running from 
three-quarters to fullload. It is necessary for the engineer to be 
on hand to open the by-pass and cut out the high pressure blades, 
in order to keep the machine up to speed. This can be done, if 
the engineer is always in the same place, but he isn’t always 
there. The result is sometimes a shut-down through conditions 
which are entirely beyond the engineer’s control. 

I am informed that designs for avoiding this trouble are being 
perfected. 

The electrical end of the machine is of course the one witich 
you are probably most interested in and that end is really one 
which I am at a loss to describe, as the extent of my knowledge 
in the electrical line is always to keep one hand in my pocket 
when around any machine generating electricity. Since coming 
in actual contact with the installation and operation of a turbo- 
generator unit, the meaning of power-jactor has been drummed 
into my head by hard knocks. Should any member of the com- 
mittee who established the power-factor specifications ever want 
the position of running the Yale & Towne turbo-generator,. 
under the conditions which we have been running in the past 
vear, I think that after he had been on the job for about six 
days he would willingly admit that there are two sides to the 
power-factor question. 

I understand that a specification was established by a com- 
mittee (appointed by the American INsTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL 
ENGINEERS,) Which states that the power-factor for alternating 
current machinery specifications should be based between 90 and 
100 per cent., at the normal output of the machine. 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW VORK. 449 


If I am not mistaken, at that time these specifications were 
based on the requirements of the times, and from the best prac- 
ticé and data then obtainable. The induction motor was then 
comparatively an untried machine. Almost everything in the 
electrical way was direct current, and the alternating current was 
taking its place in long-distance transmission and lighting require- 
ments. At the present time, however, and the immediate future, 
the probable method of power transmission from central stations 
will be by the alternating current generator and the brushless 
(induction) motor. This being the case for the average sized 
plant, a power-factor of from 80 to 85 per cent. will be nearer the 
average for work of this kind than 90 to 100 per cent. The 
query then is—Does a man actually get what he thinks he is 
getting, when he buys his machine? To the electrical engineer, 
familiar with alternating current, all of this is very plain, but I 
have met many electrical engineers who have always made a 
study of direct-current work, who have been somewhat ‘‘phased”’ 
in the matter of power-factor. Let us assume, for argument, my 
own case. I place myself at the mercy of reputable builders, 
stating that I require a 400 k.w. machine. I receive a specifica- 
tion with the standard power-factor of between 90 and 100 per 
cent. incorporated therein. I purchase the machine and start 
it up, with the idea of carrying the full k.w. rating of the ma- 
chine. Upon applying the load, I find that the ammeters show 
between 25 and 334 per cent. in excess of the carrying capacity 
of the generator terminals, with proper temperature limits. I 
also find that the current required to run my exciter is in excess 
of the requirements in the specification. I further find that the 
rise of temperature in my field, to carry the load, is more than it 
should be. Under these conditions, I begin to make inquiries 
and find that. it is very seldom that a plant carrying a purely 
inductive load reaches a power factor of above 85 per cent. In 
most cases plants of moderate size, with variable loads, will 
seldom exceed 82 per cent. 

A natural answer to this is, ‘‘ Well, he ought to have known 
better.” I will admit it; but yet there are hundreds of others 
I have found since that haven’t any idea or conception of this 
bugbear, power-factor. I hope you will pardon my aggressive- 
ness in this matter, and not take it as an affront to the hospitality 
which you have extended me in suggesting that a standard speci- 
fication and rating shall be made for alternating current gene-- 
rators, running under inductive loads, with power-factors lower 
than those already specified; and in this way large manufact- 
urers would have a specification which, if read by some mechani- 
cal engineer, would not mislead him into thinking that he was 
buying a ‘‘ gold brick.’’ Some standard form of this kind would 
undoubtedly be for the mutual advantage, both of the mechani- 
cal and the electrical engineer, especially with the tendency to 
the centralization of large power plants; and, as the induction 
motor with the turbo-generator is designed to become a potent 


450 CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


factor in the future development of this centralization, it would 
seem but fair and just that the issue should be looked squarely in 
the face and met, not only from the standpoint of the expert 
electrical engineer, but also of the purchaser. 

It was only this afternoon that a mechanical engineer, in charge 
of some large mills in the east, called on me in regard to the ques- 
tion of centralizing a plant aggregating from three to four 
thousand horse-power, and using the alternating current with 
induction motors. He was looking at it through the same 
glasses that I did, when the machine was purchased, namely; that 
2 400 k.w. machine was good for 400 k.w., regardless of the 
character of load. 

In conclusion, as a general proposition, the electrical engineer 
has very thoroughly and gracefully placed the turbo-generator 
proposition up to the metallurgist and mechanical engineer, and 
it is now fairly and fully up to them to solve the problems of a 
high speed, and the ability of materials to withstand such speeds 
under continuous running conditions. 

PRESIDENT Scott:—On the list of names handed to me 
appears the name of Mr. E. H. Sniffin. We will be glad to have 
Mr. Sniffin take part in the discussion. 

Mr. SnirFin:—There is one point which occurred to me, par- 
ticularly in connection with the steam turbine, and that is the 
question of economy. I think we are all tolerably familiar with 
what the reciprocating engine will do, and it is probably a fair 
statement to say that the steam turbine will not give materially 
better results, under full load test than the best known results 
of reciprocating engines. Under light loads, of course the tur- 
bine is more economical, but I wish some one were wise 
cnough to tell us what reciprocating engines do in everyday 
service. I think as we accumulate experience we will find a dis- 
tinct difference between the inherent, commercial, everyday 
efficiency of the turbine and the reciprocating engine. This has 
been already shown by the amount of experience we have had. 
For instance, at Mr. Waldron’s plant he is getting results which 
will soon appear in his intended paper, and | think will bear out 
the remarkable commercial efficiency of his plant operated by 
the turbine. I might say, too, at Hartford, Conn., where there ~ 
is a good-sized turbine running, 1500 k.w. machine, they have 
_ found by pretty careful experiments that they develop, as I 
recall it, about 1900 k.w. with the steam turbine, as against 900 
k.w. for two Corliss engines, with the same fuel consumption. 
Possibly the engines were not in the very best condition; it may 
be the valves were not well set, or the internal condition of the 
engines not exactly as it should be. The turbine, of course, is 
direct connected, and the engines drive the generators by belting, 
and to the belt-drive we may ascribe some of the deficiencies of 
the steam engines, but certainly not all. We should not be 
misled in comparing the efficiency of two different types of 
apparatus simply by tests of them, The results obtained by 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 451 


everyday use give the correct measure. As these new plants are 
installed and we get the actual results of the commercial opera- 
tion, I think you will find in the commercial efficiency of the 
turbine a very marked improvement in general steam plant 
practice. 

PRESIDENT Scotr:—We would be pleased to have Mr. John W. 
Lieb, Jr. participate in this discussion. 

Mr. Lizs:—I will not take up much of your time, con- 
sidering the lateness of the hour, but will make one or 
two observations on the papers which have been read. Read- 
ing over Mr. Junkersfeld’s and Mr. Torchio’s paper, one 
would be almost inclined to think that Mr. Lardner had a 
great advantage from the standpoint of safety of operation in a 
considerable number of smaller stations. I think, however, that 
Mr. Lardner in his statement of the case for a multiplicity of 
smaller stations, has probably not taken into consideration the 
extremely important factor in locating such smaller stations in 
such a city as New York. I certainly do not agree with his 
statement that it is not a difficult matter to locate smaller 
stations within the district of New York City; I mean in the 
Borough of Manhattan. I think any one who has undertaken 
to operate an electric light station on Manhattan Island will 
have become very soon convinced of the great difficulties which 
attend a selection, such as the bringing of coal to the station and 
the drawing away of ashes, and the liability of annoyance to the 
people living in the neighborhood. These things are all included 
in the difficulties of securing a proper location. As the state of 
the art progressed to a point where it was possible to concentrate 
the chief generating plant, so that these objectionable features 
would be minimized, it would soon become evident that such a 
step was necessary. 

I would say also that if prospective customers of the electric 
light and power companies could read over this very formidable 
list of all kinds of automatic overload and underload relays, and 
other things tributary to the operation of a large power station, I 
am afraid the contracts which come in would be few and 
far between; as a matter of fact these requisites are rather in the 
direction of extreme refinement, necessary to secure the greatest 
regularity of service and the greatest freedom from disturbance. 

I notice in these papers a question that is linked very closely 
with the problem of whether we shall have one large station or a 
number of small stations, and that is what one of the gentlemen 
has referred to as the commercial risk. It is perhaps true that 
if an accident should happen to a large station it may possibly 
involve a larger territory and therefore a large station perhaps 
might not be as absolutely safe as a number of small ones; yet 
that safety can, by proper engineering methods and careful 
installation, be increased to a point where the risk is entirely a 
commercial one. I think that has been fairly demonstrated in 
the operation of the large central stations which have supplied 


452 CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


the larger cities where the exigencies of the services are great, 
and 1 would emphasize the absolute necessity, of an auxiliary of: 
storage batteries in such systems of distribution. I think it is 
perfectly safe to say that the experience of all large central sta- 
tions operating transmission systems to substations has shown 
that the storage battery seems an absolute necessity. 

It seems to me Mr. Lardner has made a rather formidable list 
of advantages of large stations and has cited as the principal and 
only disadvantage the possibility of current interruption; but I 
am afraid that he has not, perhaps, sufficiently emphasized the 
very large difference between operating a dozen or more small 
plants and one large plant; and I wish particularly to emphasize 
in the case of a large number of smaller plants the volume of what 
may be called unproductive labor, the people you must keep at 
the smaller plant, no matter what its output may be. While the 
various matters which have been spoken of this evening might 
seem to indicate that the service from these larger plants may 
perhaps be less reliable than the service from a multiplicity of 
smaller plants, I think the experience that has been had in that 
direction already sufficiently demonstrates that the service 
which the large plants can produce is sufficiently constant and 
reliable for the most exigent and difficult conditions. 

PresipENT ScoTt:—Mr. Lieb in his advice to central station 
designers uses the same sentiments that Mr. Carnegie employs in 
giving advice to young men—put all your eggs in one basket, 
and then watch that basket. The subject is open for general 
discussion and we would be glad to hear from any of the members 
who wish to speak upon it. 

Mr. TownsEenp Wo cortt, New York:—lIf I understand the 
theory of the steam turbine, there would not be the same advan- 
tage in the use of superheated steam in it as in the reciprocating 
engine. The superheating of steam in the ordinary engine is 
merely for the purpose of preventing condensation in the cylinder, 
for when saturated steam expands adiabatically while doing 
work, there is bound to be some condensation, owing to the 
conversion of heat into mechanical work, but, on the other hand, 
if the steam expand adiabatically without doing work, there is 
some superheating due to the expansion. Ifthe work done upon 
the piston in expansion be accurately adjusted to the equivalent 
of this superheating, there would be neither superheating nor 
condensation; the steam would remain saturated. Now, in the 
De La Val turbine, and I think to some extent in the Parsons, the 
steam is expanded without doing work upon the buckets, the 
energy being finally imparted to the buckets by the impact of 
the swiftly moving mass of steam (or water). This steam, in the 
De La Val turbine, travels at the rate of about one thousand eight 
hundred feet per second, and to obtain the highest efficiency the 
periphery of the turbine should travel at one-half this speed, or 
about the velocity of a musket ball. This is out of the question 
mechanically, so at the highest practicable velocity there is a 


1903.] DISCUSSION, AT NEW YORK. 453 


considerable portion of the kinetic energy of the steam lost in the 
exhaust or tailings. It would seem to me that the only effect of 
superheating the steam for such a turbine would be to add to the 
energy thus rejected; particularly when there may already be 
some superheating due to the expansion. 

Mr. W. S. Ruco:—Mr. Lardner has brought up the point that 

we can expect nearly the same economy in a small station as in a 
large station. This, I think, is an important point and one with 
which we are all somewhat familiar, although Mr. Lieb has also 
shown that the cost of operating a number of plants is increased 
considerably over the cost of operating a single large plant. 
_ Mr. Torchio has called our attention to the importance of 
isolating and duplicating the various parts of the distribution 
system. This is one of the directions in which most advance- 
ment has been made in central station practice during the last 
few years and one which is not as generally known and considered 
as it should be. 

Mr. Junkersfeld called attention to the importance of isolating 
a boiler plant and dividing it into several units. This is a ques- 
oe I believe which has not been considered as fully as it should 

oF 

All of these points are of great importance and it therefore sur- 
prises me somewhat that we have not heard suggested to-night a 
type of station in which all of the above advantages could be 
combined. We have yet to hear the first attempt so far as I 
know actually to lay out a multiple unit station, 7.c., a station 
made up of a number of unit stations each separated from the 
other by dividing walls but so arranged as to be operated to- 
gether. In such a station I believe we could combine nearly all 
of the advantages which have been brought out in the papers, and 
it could be so designed that the operating expenses would 
probably be very little more, if any, than the operating expenses 
of a station occupying one room. 

Mr. Aspotr:—The papers this evening are exceedingly 
important, particularly from an engineers’ standpoint, but there 
may be another side to the question; namely, the standpoint of 
the general manager. Is it not possible to consider the question 
of the necessary safety appliances and the question of sub- 
division of the central station into a number of units as an 
economic problem, and to consider whether the greater cost of 
additional appliances for safety or of sub-dividing the given 
station capacity into a number of smaller units is warranted 
when compared with the risk of injury to service by omission of 
safety appliances or concentration of a larger plant in a single 
building. One of the papers this evening referred to the Niagara 
plant and mentioned that after the recent disastrous fire some 
of the engineers were reported to have stated that there should 
have been two bridges and two sets of cables. It is easy to shut 
the door after the horse has escaped, and to point out the 
desirability of duplication of plant after the accident has oc- 


454 CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


curred; but it is very certain that the Niagara engineers in the 
original design considered a single bridge and one set of cables 
amply sufficient to meet all contingencies. 

Suppose the city of New York should be served for light and 
power from a single station, and all the machinery necessary for 
supplying the island be concentrated in a single station and a 
company should be formed to insure all customers against 
interruption of service in the same fashion that a fire insurance 
company assumes risk of loss from fire. Suppose upon the other 
hand that the necessary plant for serving Manhattan Island 
should be sub-divided into ten or more different stations. What 
would be the relative premiums for the two cases? The latter 
plant would be more expensive to construct and more expensive 
to operate, but if properly designed there would be almost no 
possibility of interruption to service, for if one station were 
incapacitated, the other nine would probably carry the extra 
duty without difficulty. With one station, even with the best 
design and most careful operation, occasional interruption to 
service, for greater or less periods of time, would be likely to occur. 
The question is whether the extra investment in sub-dividing the 
plant and the extra cost of operation would represent a capital- 
ization sufficient to pay an insurance company to underwrite 
all consumers in such a manner as to recompense them for any 
interruption. This is a business proposition. 

Now, would it not be possible for some of us to contribute to 
the general knowledge on this subject in an endeavor to show 
perhaps graphically the relation between the number of inter- 
ruptions to service in the territory served by one large plant as 
contrasted with the number of interruptions where service is 
given from several small plants. 

Mr. JUNKERSFELD:—The question seems to be one of multi- 
plicity of small stations as against one large one. Mr. Lieb 
pointed out clearly that a multiplicity of plants is impracticable, 
because the companies must locate their power stations where 
coal and water can be easily obtained. This has been found true 
in Chicago also. 

I fully agree with Mr. Stott and would rather have trouble on a 
high-tension cable than on alow-tension one, and in our experience 
in Chicago we have had very little trouble from breakdowns in 
high-tension cables. In fact, during the last year, we have 
hardly known what it was as far as the high-tension cable itself 
was concerned, except that when interconnected, disturbances 
were transmitted from one part of the system to another. 

The question of the storage battery was brought up by Mr 
Stott with the statement that as an investment he could not 
consider it economically. This is largely a question of condi- 
tions. In his situation it is possible he cannot see any great 
saving in installing storage batteries, but in the lighting business, 
with narrow peak, it is easy to see how a storage battery can be 
installed and used with profit up to a certain capacity. If you 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 455 


cut off enough of the peak so that is it more than say an hour and 
a quarter wide, the battery will not pay. With a peak of one 
hour the battery will pay better than the equivalent capacity in 
generating apparatus. 

Returning to multiple and independent operation, it has been 
shown this evening that a multiplicity of plants have some safe- 
guard over one large plant. During the past two years the work 
in Chicago has been carried on with the idea of sectionalizing the 
substations and the transmission system. As the generating 
units were quite large, very little sectional operation was possible 
on account of the great sacrifice in steam economy with recipro- 
cating engines. With the installation of the turbine units, hav- 
ing a good one-half load economy, sectionalized operation will be 
entirely possible. I was glad to know that here in New York, 
they had actually started operating their large plant in two sec- 
tions, even with reciprocating engines, and I think the fact that 
they have found this advisable will be given a good deal of con- 
sideration in other stations, because what is done in the large 
lighting stations, is usually based on thorough investigation and 
wide experience, and is a matter of interest to all stations. 

Mr. LARDNER:—No one knows better than Mr. Lieb the diffi- 
culties of operating many small stations in New York, or of 
securing locations which will insurethe company freedom from 
complaints due to the annoyance incident to such plants. 

I think I have been slightly misunderstood. I donot advocate 

a multiplicity of plants, but I do advocate sub-dividing into a few 
plants, perhaps two or three, instead of building only one large 
plant. 
- As to the difficulty of securing sites in New York City, there 
is the site at Kingsbridge, 219th Street; the 96th Street location; 
the 74th Street; the 38th Street, and the 59th Street and North 
River. Five suitable locations have therefore been found by the 
large companies and I imagine the respective engineers each 
think they have the best site. 

Mr. Torcuio:—The only stations the last speaker has men- 
tioned are high-tension stations located on the water front. I 
wish to ask him if he meant that the New York Edison Company 
should have adopted several low-tension stations on the water 
front. : 

Mr. LarDNER:—I suggested the advisability of two or three 
high-tension stations, not low-tension. 

Mr. Torcuio:—Low-tension stations would have been out of 
the question. 

I want to take issue with Mr. Stott in his statement that the 
storage battery has no standing from the standpoint of saving 
station capacity. Under special conditions as in New York 
City, for the downtown district below Eighth Street, supplying 
the business section of the city, the load of the station is very 
light during the night hours until 8 a. M., at which time the load 
increases very rapidly and reaches a maximum about 9 o'clock, 


456 CENTRAL STATIONS. [April 24 


and this load is practically maintained uniform throughout the 
day until about 5 p. M., when there is a very sharp peak caused 
by an overlapping of the motor and lighting load. This peak is 
of very short duration and shows a very sharp drop inside of the 
succeeding hour. A storage battery can be utilized advan- 
tageously at this time as capacity, in connection with the local 
low-tension steam-generating machines. Since after the load 
has gone through the sharp drop the battery is no more required 
as a reserve, thereby deriving the advantage of the battery as 
capacity without sacrificing the advantages of the battery as 
reserve during the day. 

Mr. Srorr:—At what rate do you discharge the battery? 

Mr. Torcuio:—We discharge the battery at that period of the 
day at the maximum rate, the one hour rate. Where we have a 
lighting-load peak extending for three or four hours, as in the 
other districts, the result would be different. I have in mind the 
diagram of the power station of the Milan Edison Company in 
Italy, operating a transmission line from a water power plant and 
delivering a good deal of power for industrial motors and for run- 
ning the street railway as well as lighting in the city. 

The load diagram of the power plant, as I remember, is some- 
thing like this, with a load factor of about 80 per cent. At this 
time (indicating), when they have the evening peak they dis- 
charge a very large battery, which takes care of the lighting load. 
They sell power in Milan in the neighborhood of $60 per h.p. and 
that battery, operated only for the few heavy load days of the 
year, enables the company to sell annually something like 2,000 
to 3,000 h.p. additional. 

Mr. Stern:—Has Mr. Torchio any data as to the efficiency of 
that battery? : 

Mr. Torcutio:—The efficiency of the battery is of no import- 
ance as a commercial consideration. In the Milan plant supply- 
ing energy by water power, the losses in the battery are negligible, 
as to cost. What one has to consider are the financial results 
derived from the sale of 3,000 h.p. at $60 per annum, or $180,000 
additional revenue. 

The meeting then adjourned. 


BRAN Cl DISCUSSIONS: 457 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


Discussion at Cuicaco, May 5, 1903. 
Papers presented: 

“ Bconomical and Safe Limits in the Size of Central Stations,” 
by H. A. Lardner. Abstracted by Prof. P. B, Woodworth, of 
Lewis Institute. ; 

“Safety Devices in Central Stations and Substations,” by 
eee Torchio. Read by W. G. Carlton of the Chicago Edison 

oO. 

“Multiple versus Independent Operation of Units and Central 
Stations,” by Peter Junkersfeld. Presented by the author. 

Mr. B. J. Arnotp:—I am very much interested in the 
question of the production and distribution of power, but I can- 
not comment on these papers for the reason that I have not had 
an opportunity to read them. I think, however, that in general 
for lighting work or for power distribution in large cities, | would 
incline toward the single central-station where it could be eco- 
nomically located, as it usually can be, with the power distributed 
to substations containing rotary converters and batteries. 

European practice seems to favor motor-generators rather than 
rotary converters such as we use in this country. In Frankfort, 
Germany, I saw 1,000 kilowatt motor-generators, of which the 
motors were single-phase, and the generators direct-current, run- 
ning street railways very succeésfully, in conjunction with storage 
batteries, and this was soon after I had been told there were no 
large sinlge-phase motors running anywhere. The Europeans 
claim that they get better efficiency out of their combination of 
motors and generators than we do out of our combination of 
step-down transformers, and rotary converters, for the motor- 
generators utilize the incoming alternating current at the line 
pressure, without the losses of transformation. 

When we use alternating current, however, as in railroad work, 
where we have to go across country long distances, I am in favor 
of divided power stations It has only been within the last two 
or three years that I have preferred them, but my judgment now _ 
is that we shall run our railroads with power houses of moderate 
size, generating high potential, and located approximately 20, 
30 or 40 miles apart. This eliminates a large part of the equip-~ 
ment we are now using, and brings down the first cost. It is in 
line, I think, with the recommendation of one of the papers of this 
evening. 

Mr. W. L. Assotr:—Anyone who had the responsibility of 
supplying 1,000 tons of coal a day for power houses last winter 
would naturally have made up his mind long ago as to what was 
the most important feature of central-station operation. It is to 
get the coal there. To this part of the work my attention of late 


has been principally directed. Las 
At our Harrison Street power house, which is now about ten 


458 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


years old, the facilities for receiving coal were thought to be 
ample, since the Chicago River was on one side and the Alton 
switch tracks on the other. When the power house was first 
started fuel-oil was used, but that was soon abandoned and coal 
was brought into the boiler room by wheel-barrows; the wheel- 
barrow was superseded by a horse and dump cart, and later by 
a tramway with push car. Now we have automatic coal-hand- 
ling apparatus and automatic stokers. 

The cost of handling the fuel for all the labor connected with 
the boiler room has been brought down from about 40c per ton, 
under the first method—that is, with a wheel-barrow and hand 
firing—until now it is somewhere between l5c. and 20c. a ton. 
The difference looks like a very satisfactory saving, but it is 
probably larger than it should be, and on the consumption of 600 
tons of coal a day, a saving of 10c. per ton would be very satis- 
factory. 

In the larger power houses the matter of supply fuel is a serious 
problem. Some of the power houses now built and projected 
will require 3,000 tons of coal per day, which means perhaps two 
train loads. To get this amount of coal into the power house 
regularly is difficult. Storage facilities will have to be provided 
in the city for loaded cars, and means mvst be provided for 
shifting these cars about. ‘ 

When dependence is placed on the railroads for rolling stock 
and for storage, there is continual complaint of unsatisfactory 
service. Therefore, a large power house should not only have 
storage tracks of its own, but undoubtedly rolling stock of its 
own. It should also have a large supply of stored coal nearby 
during the winter months. 

There should also be coal and ash-conveying apparatus and 
automatic stokers whereby the coal can be moved from the mine 
to the ash-dump without being touched by workmen. This not 
only for the saving of expense, but for the reducing of the number 
of unskilled employees about a power house, which, in these 
troublesome times with labor agitators, is an important matter 
only fully appreciated by those who have had to do with it. 

Where there are several power houses in one system, the eco- 
nomical way is to run only the larger one as much as possible. 
Storage battery auxiliaries are also desirable. 

It is absolutely necessary to meet promptly an increased 
demand for power caused suddenly by the formation of dark 
clouds, the breakdown of an adjacent power house or other 
similar circumstance. This is not difficult with hand-fired 
furnaces, but it is impossible with an automatic stoker. The 
latter takes its own time to get into condition for service. Most 
of the recent power houses are now supplied with blowers, which 
put an air pressure under the grates, whereby the amount of cval 
burned can be doubled or quadrupled. 

The most wasteful pieces of apparatus about a power house are 
the boiler and furnace, The waste in them, counting the two 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 459 


units together, may sometimes be as much as 50 per cent. of the 
fuel, and at least one-half of this waste is preventable. The 
operating engineer and designer should give their particular 
attention to the boiler and furnace, if great savings are to be 
secured. In a plant which is consuming two, three or four 
thousand dollars worth of fuel a day, a saving of even 5 per cent. 
ale be a matter of very great interest to those who pay the 
ills. 

Mr. JUNKERSFELD:—I was interested in Mr. Arnold’s remarks 
in connection with using a number of plants distributed twenty 
thirty or forty miles apart on a road through the country. It 
seems to me the number and distribution of such plants is depend- 
ent upon their size. For instance, if the load is heavy enough 
to require a fair-sized plant every thirty or forty miles, then 
perhaps it would be desirable to have them located about that 
distance apart. If, however, the plants are small, considerations 
of unproductive investment and unproductive labor would make 
it desirable to have them fewer and farther apart; that is, if still 
within the limits of economical high-voltage transmission, and if 
the reliability of service rendered is sufficient. 

I fully agree with Mr. Abbott that the boiler room does not 
ordinarily receive the attention it should have, either in design 
or in operation. It must be remembered that the fuel and boiler 
room expense is a very considerable part of the total generating 
cost. 

The use of forced draught to increase the generating capacity 
of the station in case of a sudden demand would often be very 
desirable. It would be the equivalent of storage battery capacity 
right in the boiler room, made available by starting the blowers. 
While this might involve either improved furnace construction or 
increased repairs to furnace and boiler setting, it would seem that 
a great deal of reserve capacity could be thus provided at a cost 
per unit of capacity less than that of storage batteries on a narrow 
peak. I donot mean that we are thus able to discount the value 
of storage batteries, which are distributed over the system and 
are, therefore, nearest the points where they can do the most 
good, but I do believe that under some conditions the use of 
auxiliary forced draught as reserve boiler capacity for sudden 
demands of {short duration will be found advisable. 4 

Mr. H. B. Gear:—I am chiefly concerned with the problems 
in connection with the 60-cycle, 2000 volt distributing system 
rather than the station and substation features of this discussion. 

The principle of sectional operation has been generally applied 
to the 60-cycle distributing system in Chicago. The feeder 
system is operated separately; that is, a feeder supplies a section 
of the primary main system which is not interconnected with the 
mains of any other feeder, and that section of the city is, there- 
fore, not affected by trouble in any other part of the city. Inthe 
same manner the secondary distributing system has been kept 
almost entirely separate. Each transformer, except in a few 


460 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


cases where the load is very heavy, supplies a separate secondary 
usually about 800 feet in length. Interconnected secondaries are 
not desirable until the load reaches a density of about 40 k.w. 
per 1000 feet of line, or more. 

Mr. W. G. Cariton:—I think practically all of the questions 
in connection with the high-tension, 25-cycle distribution system 
are treated by Mr. Torchio and I think he was wise in discussing 
only the electrical troubles and not referring to the mechanical 
ones. Considering cases of trouble occurring: Out of all the 
cases of trouble that we have had, here in Chicago on a 25-cycle 
9000-volt system, fully three-quarters (probably more) occurred 
in the generating station and were mechanical; of the other one- 
quarter that were electrica!, nearly all occurred in the generating 
station. The Chicago Edison Company has been operating at 
9000 volts for about a year, and I do not recall now a single casé 
of trouble that was due to a fault in the lines themselves, although 
one or two cases were due to the damaging of the lines by men 
working on them. 

Mr. Torchio brought out the point of the separating of the lines. 
for different substations. In accordance with this principle 
our down-town substations each have at least two lines—some 
more than two—and the machines in these substations are 
divided in two groups. In case of trouble at the generating 
station so that an engine has to be taken off and the 25-cycle 
load has to be reduced in a hurry, the operator knows exactly 
what lines to open, and in this way no one substation is shut 
down entirely. In a number of cases we have substations with 
batteries, and also with rotary transformers. In cases when it is 
necessary to reduce the load, the supply is cut off the substations. 
where there are batteries. 

There is another way that grounding the lead sheath of cables 
can be done in order to protect them from injury by stray current. 
This is by breaking the sheath at intervals, possibly every half 
mile, and grounding the sections at the middle point. 
~ Mr. Arnoitp:—I would like to ask Mr. Carlton if he has had 
any trouble with the breaking down of the insulation right where 
the cables leave the lead sheath? 

Mr. Cartton :—We have had two or three cases not particu- 
larly serious—which were due to the ends of the cables not being 
suitably protected. We have since then taken more pains with 
the ends of the cables and have had no further trouble. Very 
careful work insulating the ends of the cable is required. 

Mr. Cravatu:—In looking over the plans of several large 
steam-turbine stations which are under consideration at the 
present time, I have been impressed with the enormous amount 
of boiler room required in proportion to the turbine room. As. 
one engineer put it,‘ I do not know but that we are coming to the 
time when we shall design our stations in the form of a number 
of radial units, each unit with a turbine in the middle and boilers. 
on all sides of it.”’ This humorous remark rather serves to call 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 461 


attention to the fact that it is a nice problem in the designing of a 
steam-turbine generating station to preserve the symmetry of the 
station so it can be enlarged section by section, and at the same 
time get a large enough battery of boilers within reasonable 
piping distance of the turbine unit which they are to supply, 
without introducing objectionable features in the boiler arrange- 
ment. 

Mr. Agknotp:—When I made my previous remarks I had in 
mind heavy trains, and when you consider a train that takes 
1500 h.p. continuously you can have your stations thirty miles 
apart and have plenty of use for them if you have a number of 
these trains to pull. I should have expressed myself more 
clearly. On an ordinary interurban road with trolley cars, of 
course you would not need a power house every 20 miles, but 
when you consider the heavy trains, you will, in my judgment, 
need the segregated stations, and the complete elimination in 
the substations of step-up and step-down transformers. 


COMMUNICATION AFTER ADJOURNMENT BY CARL SCHWARTZ. 


The tendency in recent years is towards the erecting of single 
large power stations, not only supplying the growing demand for 
current, but absorbing smaller stations. It is evident that the 
arrangement of such stations must be made as perfect and safe as 
possible. 

In the large modern central stations, even partial shut-downs 
occur very seldom, but influences of any kind affecting only a 
single part of such a station may lead to its complete shut-down, 
while were the same aggregate power delivered from several 
separate stations, if one should be disabled the others would be 
able to maintain the service at least on part of the system. 

The growing demand on the central stations has required the 
use of larger and larger generator units, but a practical limit in the 
extension of central stations and the size of units is soon reached. 
For this reason it will be absolutely necessary to operate large 


systems in independent sections. 


The most serious objection which could be made against 
independent operation of the generating units and the trans-_ 
mission systems is that the load cannot always be equally 
divided between the different units, and requires, therefore, a 
larger number in operation, some with uneconomical loads. 

A suitable switching arrangement and a proper distribution of 
the feeder lines will, however, insure a reasonably economical 
load on all units, especially at time of heavy load. 

The difficulty of uneconomical load with ordinary steam 
engines loses its importance with steam turbines whose efficiency 
we are told varies only about 3 per cent. from half load to 50 per 
cent. overload. 

Independent arrangement and operation of generating units 
and transmission lines with a flexible switching arrangement. 
thus giving all the advantages of a large power station in erection, 


462 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


operation and management, without running the risk of con- 
necting these extremely large amounts of energy together con- 
tinuously, is of great importance in the further development of 
large electrical distributing systems. The extension of large 
central stations and the extension of high-tension distributing 
systems both at present limited in regard to safe operation, are 
practically unlimited with an independent arrangement. 

The question of one or several power stations, located far © 
apart from each other, but all supplying a common system, is 
often influenced by circumstances of peculiar kind and depends 
therefore in every case, on particular local considerations. 


Discussion AT PittssurG, May 11, 1903. 


The meeting was called to order by the Chairman, Mr. Lincoln, 
who introduced President Scott. 

Mr. Scott made a few remarks concerning the proposed Union 
Engineering Building, and called upon Mr. C. W. Rice, Chairman 
of the Building Committee, for a statement regarding the present 
standing of the matter. 

Mr. Rice gave a very interesting account of the efforts of the 
Committee to interest Mr. Carnegie, these efforts finally resulting 
in his offer of one million dollars for a Union Engineering Building 
Mr. Rice said that great credit was due to both Mr. Scott and Mr. 
T. C. Martin for their persistent efforts to interest Mr. Carnegie. 

Mr. Scott then opened the subject of the evening by a dis- 
cussion on “‘ Tendencies of Modern Central Station Develop- 
ment.” 

The papers presented at the New York meeting of May 24th 
were read in abstract. 

Mr. Hopcxinson:—In the paper by Mr. Lardner reference 
was made to steam turbines applied to large central stations. 
There is no doubt that steam turbines are every day establishing 
themselves as reliable units. 

The difficulty of multiple operation of alternators as pointed 
out by Mr. Lardner is entirely at an end. I know of 400 k.w. 
Westinghouse turbines at the Westinghouse Air Brake Company’s 
works having a 24 per cent. variation of speed between no load 
and full load, and whose parallel operation through all variations 
of load has never left anything to be desired. 

Some comparisons have been made of floor space occupied by 
turbines and it has been shown that the Curtis turbine, by reason 
of its main shaft being vertical, occupies less floor space than the 
Westinghouse turbine. If, however, we consider the cubical 
contents of the machine, this difference in some cases disappears 
and in others is much less in evidence. 

Another point, however, should not be lost sight of, that by 
reason of the shaft being vertical and having considerable top 
weight it would be supposed that much more massive and better 
foundations are necessary than would be the case with the shaft 
horizontal. 


BIRANGH OISGUSSIONS: 463 


A turbine and generator with horizontal shaft needs substan- 
tially no foundation at all, only something that will hold the dead 
weight of the machine. They may be placed on the upper floors 
or the roof without in any way interfering with their operation. 

The economy of steam turbines has also been well established 
and I would cite a few examples of tests on various machines 
lately taken in the Westinghouse Machine Company’s works. 


RESULTS OF TESTS ON WESTINGHOUSE PARSONS STEAM TURBINES. 


In the tables below are given boiler pressure (b.p.), brake horse power 
(b.h.p.) or electrical horse power (e.h.p.); total weight of water per hour, 
and weight of water per electrical or brake horse power. 


400 K. W. iba yos. i8ie IE 27” Vacuum. 
Total Lbs. 


BeP | Vacuum ie gsG lee Water Water Rate. 
L376 LF: 24.6 9319 , 14.92 
136.0 27 | 5 6.2 7852 1520 
138.0 27 | 290.7 6236 15.96 
144.0 27 | 6.3 COL Mar as EN Mee Seon here 


400 K. W. NAB Ie 26” Vacuum. 


BP. Vacuum. BHP Memaae Water Rate. 
143 26 623.4 9502 15.24 
144 26 508.2 7992 15.73 
144 26" 381.0 6211 16.56 
138 26 10.7 Tee pea eae 


400 K. W. ING Bh) oe 100° Superheat. 28” Vacuum. 


Total Lbs. Water Rate 
: 7am 
BrP: Superheat Vacuum. K. W. AD dati 12? Water At oe 
150.4 99.6 28.150 412.50 553.00 7498 13.55 
152.6 | 102.3 28.123 312.80 419.30 5797 13.83 
152.6 | 102.0 28.200 209.70 281.07 4140 14.73 
152.0 | 58.6 28.200 113.35 151.95 2745 18.06 


1000 K. W. IGS O) 18), 128 28” Vacuum. Moist Steam. 
Total Lbs. Water Rate 


1By, 1) Moisture Vacuum K W E.H P. Water per’ HP 
140.2 2.3 28.36 961 1288.1 20251 .0 L5e 70 
140.3 2.0 28.33 756 1015.0 16617.0 16.35 
145.0 1.6 28.30 481 645.0 11903.6 , 18.45 


145.0 1.8 28.48 250 3355.0 7656.0 22.80 


—<$<—$——— 


464 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 
1500 K. W. High Vacuum. 
Per cent. . : Total Lbs Water Rate 
a Moisture. Watioaey oe es Water. per E.H P 
148.8 i | 27 .92 1545 2065 30456 14.73 
. 149.9 2.5 28.12 935 1252 19703 15.75 
151.8 2.1 28.98 262 349.0 7392 21.80 
Same Machine. 
Total Lbs. Water Rate 
B.P Superheat | Vacuum K. W. E} HP: hate per E.H. P 
154.6 140.6 28.10 1512.0 2030 25686 .0 12.66 
149.5 138.9 28.04 904.0 1210 17042.8 14.10 
148.9 138.4 28.20 306.2 412 8108.6 19.68 


Turbines of the type mentioned above being very simple 
affairs require but little erection, and it is a simple matter for 
them to be thoroughly tested in the builder’s works. 

The advent of the steam turbine in large central stations will 
probably involve some changes of detail in the auxiliaries. The 
gains in economy due to operating with high vacuum demands a 
higher type of condenser than those ordinarily employed. The 
fact of the turbine being able to avail itself of all the advantages 
of superheat while exhibiting none of its disadvantages will 
usually make the consideration of superheaters desirable. A 
steam turbine is more economical than a reciprocating engine 
principally because it is able to make use of the expansive 
energy of steam down to lower limits than is practicable with 
reciprocating engines. The comparatively low friction losses of 
a turbine enables it to hold up its high economy over a wider 
range of load than is possible with a reciprocating engine. 

The demand for high class condensers is met by the employ- 
ment of surface condensers equipped with tandem cylinder 
rotative dry vacuum pumps for dealing with the air, and a small 
duplex independent pump for dealing with the water. This latter 
pump delivers into the hot-well from whence the feed pumps 
draw their water, which may be a sealed chamber, such that the 
steam, from leaving the boilers, to being returned to them as feed 
water, never comes into contact with the air and does not become 
erated, thus leaving the air pump little to do except taking care 
of a small unavoidable leak in the exhaust piping. 

To make a comparison of the effect of vacuum, a test on a 
1500 k.w. turbine shows the following: 

25” Vacuum = 16.5 lbs. per Electrical H.P. Hour. 

“ec “cc 


96” 6 = 15.8 “c “c ‘ic 
a7" ae me} T53 “e “ec “ce cc ce 
98" “ec ps 14.8 “é a3 a3 “ec “¢ 


with 150 lbs. boiler pressure. Moist steam, 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 465 


The effect of superheat is to increase the economy not less than 
7 per cent. for 50° superheat, 10 per cent. for 100° superheat, and 
123 per cent. for 150° superheat. 

What will be the limits of superheat that may be employed 
is hard to determine, but I imagine the limit will be reached in 
the superheater itself as soon as in the turbine. 

The reason why superheat makes such material gain in econ- 
omy is probably because it reduces the amount of water in the 
ex panded steam due to adiabatic expansion. 

It is also probable that the heat added to the steam in the 
shape of superheat is nearly all available for useful energy, which 
is not the case of the heat used in evaporating the water in the 
boiler, as but a small percentage of the latent heat is given up in 
the shape of energy in an engine. There isno doubt that the cost 
of attendance and oil with turbines will be much less than with 
reciprocating engines, and there is little doubt that steam tur- 
bines will continue to be employed more and more, 

In reply to questions by Mr. James and Mr. Lincoln, Mr. 
Hodgkinson gave the following information. 

Turbines of the Parsons type built by the Westinghouse 
Machine Company do not lend themselves well to design in very 
small powers. For that reason machines less than 200 or 300 k.w, ' 
are not encouraged. For sizes larger than that the steam con- 
sumption may generally be said to decrease with the size. 

For driving electrical machines, in which the number of poles 
and standard frequencies are of such nature that the number of 
poles being very few, the intervals between standard speeds are 
very large. For instance, with standard frequency of 60 cycles 
there is no intermediate speed between 3600 and 1800 r.p.m. 
With other periods, such as 25 cycles, which is used for power 
work exclusively, we cannot get higher speeds than 1500, which 
requires a two-pole generator. It thus happens in the design of 
turbines we get uncomfortable speeds. 

Mr. ErHertpce:—One of Mr. Lardner’s remarks did not 
favorably impress me: ae 

“ Frequently the business in the individual towns would not be 
large enough to permit of an independent plant in each, and any 
risk of interruption to service is put up with because it is the best 
kind of service that such a community can support.”’ 

That seems to me to be a reflection on the electrical engineer. 
I do not see why a small town should not have just as good service 
as a large city. It is a question only of the proper construction 
of transmission lines; a matter thoroughly discussed at the last 
meeting of the INSTITUTE. 

Mr. Ricp:—Mr. Rice spoke of the experience he had had in 
central station work when connected with the New York Edison 
Company. ‘He spoke of the excellent record of the New York | 
Edison Company for continuity of service, as in twelve years 
time current had never been entirely off their circuits. Mr. Rice 
stated that in his judgment the direct current possessed many 


466 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


advantages over alternating current for distribution in a large 
city. The two most important advantages are that it permits 
the use of storage batteries and under certain conditions is better 
for operating motors. In all of the large cities the storage bat- 
tery is used not so much as a means for carrying the peak of the 
load as an insurance against shut down. Central stations in all 
of the large cities are supplied with storage batteries of sufficient 
size to carry the entire load for short periods without assistance 
from the generating apparatus. 

A case was cited where seven 1,000,000 c.m. cables were burned 
off on account of a short-circuit, and the chart at the station 
showed a variation of but 14 volts, thus showing the great 
steadying effect of the storage battery on the system. 

‘As soon as one leaves the central station he gets into the mesh 
system of conductors, so that in case of trouble there is relief 
from every direction. At frequent intervals in New York City 
there are generating stations or rotary substations having 
storage batteries of large capacity. This insures absolute con- 
tinuity of serv.ce. 

The conditions essential to the obtaining of a high load factor 
was referred to. Attention was called to the methods of Mr. P. 
G. Gossler of Montreal, who by granting special rates on power at 
certain times of the day had created a large demand for power 
between 4 a.m. and 4 p. m., thus obtaining an extremely high 
load factor. 

The importance of safety devices for maintaining continuity 
of service was also referred to. 

Mr. Lincotn:—In confirmation of Mr. Rice’s statements in 
regard to batteries, I was talking some weeks ago with one of the 
New York Edison Company’s engineers, during which conversa- 
tion he stated that his company’s aim was never to have the 
batteries discharged. They were kept practically full all the time, 
so that in case of accident to the generating machinery, the bat- 
teries would be prepared to take the load. The batteries are 
used practically as safety devices, rather than to reduce the load 
on the generating station, for which purpose batterries are very 
often used. 

Another point, and one which Mr. Rice did not bring out, is the 
fear on the part of the operators of large low-tension systems, 
such as the one in New York, is that if power ever does get off the 
mains, it will be very difficult, if not impossible, to get 1t back on. 
The net-work of mains is fed by some ten or fifteen different sub- 
stations. A single substation would not begin to be able to carry 
the load and it would be practically impossible to have all the 
substations thrown into the system simultaneously. 

The engineer to whom’ I was talking cited a case in Milan, 
where there is also a large low-tension network. In this case he 
said that the power went off his network and the difficulty, as 
noted above, was experienced in getting the power back on to the 
network. It was necessary finally to cut the network up into 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 467 


sections, and this cutting up of the network required nearly 
three days. The power was off of parts for allthat time. Thisis 
one of the dangers to which a large low-tension system is liable 
and is what the New York Edison Company is striving to avoid 
by keeping their batteries prepared at all times to assume the 
total load independent of any generating system. 

Mr. Scotr:—I take exception to the broad statement that 
“the way to maintain continuity of service is to have safety 
devices —there may be too many. I know of a large company 
which installed a great many safety devices and had troubles at 
various times. After the plant had been running for some four 
or five years, I made a remark one day to the engineer in charge 
that most of their troubles had been due to their safety devices. 
Although the safety device is intended to prevent accidents, it is 
itself often the very source of accident and of trouble. This is 
one of the reasons why the fuses have been left out between 
alternators and bus bars. Fuses, particularly for high voltage 
or for heavy current, are disagreeable adjuncts ta a station equip- 
ment. In general it is not good practice to put in a line anything 
that can be avoided. 

Meeting adjourned. 


Discussion aT St. Louis, May 16, 1903. 


The meeting was called to order at 8.30 p. M., at the Engineers’ 
Club, W. E. Goldsborough, Chairman, presiding. 

Announcement was made by Secretary Swope of Mr. Carnegie’s 
gift of $1,000,090 to the Associated National Engineering Socie- 
ties. The Secretary spoke of a local movement for the same 
object. Mr. Goldsborough made some remarks in regard to the 
same matter, also in regard to the Institute Building and the 
better standing it would give to the profession of engineering 
throughout the country. 

Announcement for the next meeting was then made, also for 
the annual meeting at Niagara. 

The papers for the evening were: 


No. 1.—‘‘ Economical and Safe Limits in Size of Central Sta- 
tions,” read by Mr. Dyer. 
No. 2.—‘‘ Safety Devices in Central Stations and Substations,”’ 


read by Mr. Langsdorf. 

No. 3.—‘‘ Multiple versus Independent Operation of Units 
and Central Stations,”’ read by Mr. Klauder. 

The salient points of the discussion at the New York meeting 
were read by the Secretary. 

The papers were then opened for discussion, in which Mr. E. D. 
Matlack participated, whose company is now installing a 500 
kilowatt General Electric generator, connected to a Curtis 
turbine. Much discussion was brought out in regard to the 
question.of the advantage of superheating the steam. 

Mr. Borden spoke at length on the same subject. 


468 BRANCH DISCT/SSIONS. 


Mr. Welz, Director of the Word’s Fair, told of waste heat 
engines, which have been largely advanced in Germany, but not 
used in this country. He said: 

I should like to draw your attention to some new features of 
modern development of central stations brought out in Germany. 
When in Berlin last September; I visited the central stations in 
Markgrafenstrasse where a new type of engine, a so-called “sul- 
phurous anhydride waste-heat engine,’ was running. The 
reason for the construction of these machines was the low thermal 
efficiency of the steam engine which is, in the best machines, only 
about 23 per cent. The purpose of the waste-heat engine 1s to use 
the heat which is generally lost in the exhaust steam for vaporiz- 
ing a liquid with a low boiling point of which the vapors under 
the given temperature have already a very high pressure. With 
these vapors a new engine can be driven. Of all the liquids 
which can be employed for this process, the sulphurous anhy- 
dride (SO,) has proved to be the most practical. 

The general scheme of the engines is very simple. The ex- 
haust steam of the steam engine is conducted through a surface 
condenser which serves as a vaporizer of the SO, liquid. Ata 
temperature of 150° F., corresponding to the temperature of 
steam in an 80 per cent. vacuum, the sulphur dioxide vapors have 
a pressure of 156.5 lbs. per sq. in. abs. These vapors then 
enter the waste-heat engine, which is similar in construction to a 
steam engine. The sulphur dioxide vapor leaves the engine at a 
pressure of 4.8 lbs. per sq. in. abs. and passes on to a second 
surface condenser, where, by means of circulating water, it is 
again liquified. A small pump delivers the liquid sulphur 
dioxide from the condenser back into the evaporator or the 
exhaust-steam condenser, where it is ready to repeat the cycle. 
Hence, neglecting the losses through possible leakage, the work- 
ing medium is used over and over again and requires no replenish- 
ing. The only difficulty in the construction of these machines 
was to have the stuffing box of the piston-rod tight. After some 
experiments this difficulty was entirely overcome and Prof. 
Josse, the constructor of the machines assured me, when | saw 
him in Berlin, that the machines as now constructed are perfectly 
satisfactory. The waste-heat engine in the Markgrafenstrasse 
develops 175 h.p., using the exhaust steam of a 360 h.p. vertical 
compound steam engine, and thus adds 48.6 per cent. to the 
energy produced by the steam engine. The cost for such a waste- 
heat engine is about equal to that of a steam engine of the same 
size. It is therefore easily seen that in this way the efficiency 
of electric central stations can be largely increased. 

At the present time there are a great number of such waste- 
heat engines in use or under construction; as an example of the 
modern construction of these machines, I can show you a picture 
of a 200 h.p. and a 450 h.p. waste-heat engine, the first built by 
the Maschinenfabrik Sulzer the latter by the Goerlitzer Maschin- 
enbauanstalt. The waste-heat engines for the utilization of 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 469 


exhaust steam are now entirely worked out as turbines as well as 
piston engines. Trials have been made lately forthe utilization of 
flue gases of boilers, blast furnace gases, exhaust gas of gas- 
engines, etc., and these trials give satisfactory results, but the 
company which exploits these patents isnot yet ready to put the 
machines on the market. 

I should like to show you a very interesting diagram; you see 
here upon the upper side of the drawing the general disposition 
of a steam plant: boiler, steam engine and waste-heat engine; 
the diagram below shows in per cent. of the heat energy produced 
in the boiler the amount of energy developed in the steam engine 
and in the waste-heat engine and the losses which occur during 
this process. According to this, 12 per cent. of the original heat 
is utilized in the steam engine and 4 per cent. in the waste-heat 
engine; 2 per cent. is lost in the ashes, 7 per cent. by radiation 
from the boiler, 22 per cent. goes in the flue gases, where 6 per 
cent. is recovered by the economizer and 16 per cent. escapes 
through the chimney, 2 per cent. is lost in the piping from the 
boiler to the steam engine, 2 per cent. radiated from the steam 
engine, 14 per cent. in the steam piping to the vaporizer and 53} 
per cent. is lost in the cooling water. . 


Discussion AT PHILADELPHIA, May 11, 1903. 

CHAIRMAN HeErRING:—The papers are now open for general 
discussion. 

Mr. Wo. C. L. Ecrin:—There are one or two points, on 
which I differ with Mr. Torchio, particularly on the question of 
opening both the oil-switches in series. It seems to me it would 
be much better to open first one switch and if that fails open the 
second, for the reason that the arc introduced by the failure of 
the first switch will very materially reduce the load to be opened 
by the second switch. It is possible, in opening both together, 
that both might explode and form an arc which, of course, could 
not be put out under many conditions without shutting down the 
generator. : 

Mr. Lardner speaks of large versus small stations. I cannot 
agree in any way with the author of this paper in connection 
with stations for light and power. In the first place the location 
of the central station is perhaps the most important single 
feature of the system. A desirable or a perfect location is 


470 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


extremely hard to get in any large city, and it is becoming more 
difficult every year. At first 1t was generally supposed we could 
go any distance with a high tension station, but that is not true. 
Vou must be reasonably close to your load center, especially if 
you expect to use underground distribution or transmission. 
You have to depend on water facilities, coal facilities and railroad 
facilities. To take care of the requirements of such a station, 
you need an area of greater length than the ordinary city block; 
that is, you need a station which can be extended in length for 
future requirements without being cut up by streets. In my 
opinion it is essential that the entire equipment of a central 
station of this kind should be on parallel lines; that is to say, the 
boiler room, the engine room, engine room equipment, steam 
piping equipment, coal apparatus and switchboard ap»aratus 
should be in parallel lines, so that every lineal foot will give one 
lineal foot for additional requirements. That means that the 
station will be narrow and long. ‘The station that the Philadel- 
phia company has started and completed—the first section— 
has possibly a growth of fourteen hundred feet in length. That 
is possibly double the length of any other station talked of, 
although it will only have a little more capacity in that length 
than some of the other stations. 

The location of the substation is not at all as important as 
the generating station, for the reason that you have only one or 
two things to consider—one or two classes of apparatus to be 
considered. In the substation you may say you want only the 
electrical machinery. In Mr. Junkerfeld’s division of the cost 
of real estate and generating apparatus in the central station he 
gives it as 35 to 45 per cent. That is probably a little high; but 
even at 30 per cent., that would represent several millions of 
dollars, in a large city. The transmission system is from 3 to 6 
per cent., and the substations, including real estate, from 10 to 
15 per cent.; so that the substation cost is small and it is divided 
into a large number of units. The substation can be placed in 
almost any kind of building. 

The point in turbines versus engines that seems to have escaped 
the attention of the authors is the light load efficiency. It is 
well known that the steam engine efficiency is greatest at from 
80 to 100 per cent. of the full-load. With a turbine the light 
Joad efficiency is very high. In the maximum there is very 
little difference between half-load and full-load, and even a very 
high efficiency on a quarter-load. This makes the actual effi- 
ciency of the plant very much higher than with steam engines. 

The question of storage-batteries as auxiliaries depends en- 
tirely on the conditions of the service. Where maximum 
reliability and continuity of service are not necessary, astorage- 
battery can be omitted. In the case of the substation feeding 
into a low-tension network,as in the Edison station, a storage- 
battery is just as essential as the converter or any other part of 
the equipment of the substation. In the event of an accident in 
which part of the load is thrown off, the part of the load lost from- 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 471 


the substation is transferred to the next substation, making 
trouble at that point. The storage-battery will tide these diffi- 
culties over, and in a system where continuity of service is of the 
first consideration, I believe that the engineer should invariably 
specify a certain proportion of storage-battery. 

Mr. -Horatio A. Foster:—It seems to me the original 
subject that was set before this meeting has been somewhat 
changed. As I remember, the subject was to be the tendency of 
the development of the modern central station. It seems to me 
that this might be called a discussion of the central station in 
very large cities, which of course is very important. I might 
say a little something about the tendency of the development in 
the smaller stations in the hundreds of towns outside of the large 
cities, which I think is quite as important as that in the large 
cities. Of course in the large cities also we have another point, 
and that is the difficulty of defining a central station. We have 
many plants in the larger buildings which are substantially cen- 
tral stations in themselves, plants that deliver a current to a 
large and wide area far ahead of thecurrent delivered in many of 
the large central stations, so-called. 

Another point that I hardly think has been given due considera- 
tion is a comparison of the cost of current in any of these large 
cities. Take New York City, for instance, they are comparing 
the cost delivered from the new station with the cost delivered 
from stations they had previously, and not with the cost of the 
separate stations. I would like to learn the cost of current deliv- 
ered to the lamp or to the mains or to the railway network as 
developed by the modern style of single station. With the 
large amount of high-tension cable, costly conduit, and costly 
distribution in every way, as compared with that of a duplication 
of stations; that is, of a few good large stations which are located 
nearer the centres of distribution and therefore eliminate most 
of the costly distribution. 

CHAIRMAN Herinc:—I am pleased to hear what a number of 
the speakers had to say about the advantages of motor generators 
over rotary converters, because about two and a half years ago, 
in a paper read before the Institute, I called attention to this, 
but it intimated then that I was not at all in fashion, and that 
the rotary was the only proper thing to use. It seems now, 
however, that this fashion has changed. I often think there is 
altogether too much fashion in such matters, particularly in this 
country where we are too apt to follow the leaders blindly. 

Mr. Lardner says tho direct current dynamos are ruled out by 
the use of turbines. It seems to me he is not quite right in this; 
just as the turbine is the ideal engine, so the unipolar machine is 
an ideal continuous current dynamo, and the two seem to go well 
together. Unipolar machines have never been developed like 
the others, but that is no reason why they mever will be, now 
that the very high speed turbine exists. The difficulty seems 
to lie in leading the current off from the edge of a disc which has 


an enormously high peripheral velocity. 


472 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


Mr. Hewitr:—There is one point I forgot to speak of 
when on my feet before and that is the possibility of offsetting 
the economies of a station by arranging it in a disadvantageous 
way, or by placing in too many auxiliaries. In two stations 
with which I am familiar—one a non-condensing station and 
the other a condensing, with equal loads, the cost per k.w. hour 
is almost identical. The entire economy gained by condensing 
in one case is offset by the fact that it requires enough ad- 
ditional men to offset the saving in coal; so that the cost per 
kilowatt hour is the same. If you place auxiliaries in the base- 
ment or in out-of-the-way places you have got to have some man 
to operate them. For traction work, anyhow, I can speak posi- 
tively that the simpler the station is in all its parts the cheaper 
it will be to operate. 

Mr. Torcnio:—I believe that the only direct question in 
reference to my paper was the opinion expressed by Mr. Eglin 
that it was desirable not to open the two switches in series at the 
same time, reserving the second switch for hand operation, in case 
the first is blown up, as the arc would reduce the current in the 
short circuit. I differ with Mr. Eglin. I think where the first 
switch blows up and the arc is maintained across the metal of the 
oil-can, the resistance of the arc will make practically no differ- 
ence in the amount of current in the short circuit, and eRe 
necessary to open the second switch by hand, it might just as 
well open in the first place. 

Although not bearing directly on my paper, I want, while I 
am speaking, to take issue to the statement made about the 
undesirability of one central generating station in New York, in 
the case of the lighting company. The lighting company was a 
few years ago operating several low-tension stations throughout 
the city, but when it came to the point of extending them they 
found difficulties in the cost of real estate, in not being able to 
obtain condensing. water, in the question of operating steam 
stations in partly residential or business sections on account of 
complaints of neighbors objecting to noise, smoke, ashes, etc. 
To locate a direct current station along the water front was prac- 
tically an impossibility, on account of local conditions, the water 
front being one mile or over a mile away from the centre of: heavy 
distribution. ‘The operation of several stations would also have 
added to the cost of operations and also materially to the amount 
of taxes which the company would have been liable for, and otner 
reasons. 

The whole question, of course, boils down to the point that we 
want to deliver one kilowatt to the customer for the least cost, 
but in this cost we must include all items of expense, besides the 
purely production cost. I believe, however, that people not 
closely familiar with the development of these stations, have 
wrong impressions about the relative importance of the different 
factors entering into the problem, and it seems, from the remarks 
I often hear, that undue prominence is given to certain 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 473 


features of the system, and amount of losses and efficiency, and 
also cost:of transmission cables and transforming apparatus. 
For instance, Mr. Hewitt to-night placed emphasis on the high 
cost of installation for high-tension cables. In paper-insulated 
cables as generally used the cost of paper bears a small propor- 
tion to the total cost of the cables. 

In this discussion of multiplicity of stations I do not really 
follow the idea of the gentlemen advocating several low-tension 
stations. If they mean that these stations have to supply 
separate districts, it seems to me that if something serious hap- 
pened to one station it will leave that district without light. 
That the large direct current stations are open to the criticism of 
breaking down, has been proved by several shut-downs of large 
stations due to short circuits, fires, bursting of steam pipes, or 
other reasons, so that in a measure the criticisms made to one 
alternating current station applies also to the independent 
stations. 

As to the statement of Mr. Foster that rotary converters are 
the source of numerous troubles, I believe he qualified the state- 
ment when he said that it applies to high frequency rotaries. In 
all our experience with 25-cycle rotaries we have not found this 
type of apparatus to be more troublesome to operate than similar 
direct current apparatus. 

Mr. Foster has stated that in large cities the development 
of power service is somewhat handicapped on account of the 
Underwriters imposing heavy restrictions to the installation of 
proper pumping apparatus which cannot be obtained from 
electric driven pumps. I think that the electric pump can be 
operated as satisfactorily as a steam pump, and this has been 
conclusively proved by the extensive use of electric pumping in 
the California plants, where they do extensive pumping with 
practically very little attention. to the apparatus. The fact 
that in New York City there are from sixty to seventy 
thousand horse power for a great variety of commercial uses 
proves that the central stations are not very much handicapped 
in securing power customers. 

Motor generators sets have been referred to. I imagine that 
the speakers had reference to induction motor genetator sets, 
not synchronous motor generator sets. As I said before, I do not 
find any reason to pay more for this apparatus when you can 
get just as satisfactory results from rotary converters, as the 
latter is about 25% cheaper than the motor generator sets, and 
the efficiency is higher. , 

About the steam turbines with d.c. unipolar machines, I do 
not believe that this type of apparatus would be applicable in 
large cities, for many reasons. The unipolar machines are not 
capable of being designed for large quantities and commercially 
high-voltages. As far as my experience goes with the unipolar 
machines I find that it is very difficult to get rid of the heat, 


474 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


requiring forced ventilation, also it is difficult to collect the 
current by ordinary brushes. The fact also that the units 
would be of small capacity would be a handicap to the use of 
unipolar generators as I think that the steam turbine in small 
sizes does not bear the same economical advantages to the 
reciprocating engine as the large steam turbine compared with a 
large engine. When there will be a more complete line of 
development in steam turbines most probably the cost will 
diminish, but at present the small steam turbine does not hold the 
relative economical advantages compared with the reciprocating 
engines as in the case of large turbines. 

Mr. PauLt SPENCER:—I was interested in the remarks of Mr. 
Hewitt and Mr. Foster, particularly in what they had to say in 
regard to the advantages of a number of stations as compared 
with one large station. It seems to me that these papers read 
to-night were written particularly on New York plants, and the 
engineering features therein described, while perfectly applicable 
to the New York situation, do not necessarily bear on the 
development of central stations throughout the country. There 
is some danger, I think, in engineers throughout the country being 
very largely influenced by what is done in situations like New 
York, and in adopting what is done there for stations where the 
practice would not fit conditions so well. We are rather apt to 
follow fads and fashions, and an engineer, in laying out a station, 
likes to have the latest and most up-to-date appliances. In the 
smaller and more extended situations, I would agree with Mr. 
Hewitt and Mr. Foster, that more than one station generating at 
the service and voltage to be distributed would in many cases be 
cheaper in first cost and more economical in operation than one 
large station from which the current would have to be trans- 
mitted and converted before being distributed. 

Mr. Hewirr:—Perhaps I did not make myself clear in regard 
to the cost of cable. What I had in mind was in the ground 
return we eliminate one cable altogether, or at most use a piece of 
bare copper; so that in estimating the cost of high-tension cables 
for conduit work, as I stated before, the figures I have made show- 
ing the cost of the extra cable, will offset the saving in copper 
for moderate distances. 

In regard to the duplication of stations—I should have stated 
that of course it is taken for granted that these stations will be 
connected by ample tie lines. On the map the blue wafers 
represent the Philadelphia Rapid Transit Company’s plants. 
They are all connected together, either directly or indirectly by 
tie line cables, so that it is possible to shift the load from the 
lower part of the city out as far as Ogontz, if necessary. Thered 
ones are the lighting stations, and the green represent stations 
that do not belong to the Rapid Transit Company. 

Mr. Torcuio:—Do the tie lines transmit the full output of the 
station? 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 475 


Mr. Hewitt:—It might be so arranged. In this particular 
case it would not be so, although it is possible to shut down any 
particular one of the stations without affecting the cars to any 
great extent, because the more important stations have two and 
some as high as four different tie lines. One station, for instance, 
in the centre of the city is connected directly to four other 
stations and indirectly to a fifth one. 

Mr. Torcuio:—The remark I made when I was reading my 
paper is this: it must not be understood that the people in New 
York do not appreciate that conditions will determine the best 
lay-out to be made, and I wish to state that the same engineers 
that have had to do the designing in the lighting plants in New 
York have also been advising the traction company where they 
have used direct current machines to have them install large 
current machines of three thousand kilowatts. There are quite 
a number in the same station along side of alternating current 
machines, and also they added in existing stations large direct 
current units. That was only because the conditions allowed. 
They had plenty of facilities for coal, and in other distributions 
it makes that condition like Philadelphia. 


476 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


Discussion AT MINNEAPOLIS, May 1, 1903. 


The Minnesota Branch of the Institute held their 12th 
regular meeting in the Electrical Building at the State University 
May ist. Attendance 22. 

The papers on Central Stations by Messrs. Lardner, Junkers- 
feld and Torchio were read and discussed. 

It was stated in Mr. Junkersfeld’s paper that the feeders and 
mains, cables, conduit and Edison tubes require 40 to 48 per cent. 
of the totalinvestment. Suggestions were made that this invest- 
ment would be greatly reduced by the use of a higher local dis- 
tributing voltage, 220-440 volts. The alternating current sys- 
tem throughout, doing away with the rotary converter and sub- 
stations, was commended because of the smaller investment, 
lower cost of operation and the decidedly better regulation. Un- 
fortunately, our larger cities now use direct current for local dis- 
tribution and use direct current arc lamps and motors. In 
smaller cities, where an alternating current local distribution is 
used, the decreased cost of distribution and operation, and the 
better regulation are well known. 

A reasonable amount of sectionalizing is considered advisable. 
Plants and large generating units are now designed to be operated 
separately whenever it is so desired. But normally, multiple 
operation of all units and of separated power plants is always ad- 
vantageous. The total shutdown of a system would not occur 
when the time limit overload devices are perfectly proportioned. 

Referring to Mr. Lardner’s paper, the fact that the steam tur- 
bine has a relatively high efficiency at light loads commends it to 
us especially for heavy electric railway work. Here the load 
factor is very low and the power required fluctuates between wide 
limits. 

The advantages of two large stations of say 5,000 k.w. capacity 
each, compared with a single station of twice that capacity is 
recognized for long-distance heavy electric railways as well as 
for other services. The saving on real estate and installation 
with one station would be small. The difference in economy of 
fuel and labor, per k.w. hour delivered to the electric motors, 
would be very small. The two stations being connected by high 
voltage transmission lines would operate in multiple and the 
disabling of part or the whole of one station would leave the rail- 
way with a relatively larger available power. 

A heavy freight and passenger electric railway, 150 to 500 
miles long, should not depend upon one electric power plant. 
Two or more are preferable. The steam locomotive has fewer 
links between the coal and the application of power to the 
wheels and is an example of the present ideas of steam railway 
companies regarding ‘‘ The economical and safe limits in the size. 
of stations,” 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 477 


The electric power plant has a great many links to decrease the 
reliability of service, which is paramount. The use of two 5,000 
k.w. plants, separated 100 miles, would in general give a more safe 
and reliable design than one 10,000 k.w. plant. We must look 
at this problem from the standpoint of reliability of service, 
rather than from the standpoint of economy. 

By increasing the number of stations the greater refinement in 


the one station, brought out in Mr. Torchio’s paper, will celdom 
be required. ; 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


New York, May 19, 1903. 

The 177th meeting was held this date at 12 West 31st Street. 

President Charles F. Scott called the meeting to order at 8:25 
p.m. and said: 

This is our annual meeting for the transaction of Institute 
business. Proxies have been received and a Proxy Committee 
will now be appointed whose functions will be to look over and 
check up the list of proxies. The Secretary has tabulated these 
so that the duties of the Committee will be light. 1 will appoint 
as such Committee Messrs. Lardner, Nicholson and Walker. 
The Secretary will give a report of the elections held in the 
Board of Directors this afternoon for transfers from associate 
to full membership. 

As provided in the Constitution, the Board+ of Directors 
makes a report of the progress of the INSTITUTE during 
the year and of its financial affairs to the INSTITUTE at this 
time. The report is printed on long sheets which are now 
being passed about the room. This report gives a summary of 
the year’s work of the INSTITUTE as conducted under the differ- 
ent committees. The report contains a reference to the develop- 
ment of our work through local organizations, of which some 
21 are now organized. It calls attention to the fact that the 
increase in the membership is 44 per cent. during the fiscal year 
ended May Ist. The financial report shows the INSTITUTE to be 
in a healthy condition. We manage to keep a small margin 
ahead, although the increased activities of the year in the pub- 
lishing of transactions, in the publication of the monthly bulle- 
tins, and in the various operations of tne committees and con- 
duct of local organizations has materially increased the expenses. 
The InsTITUTE has a cash value, so to express it, of some $40,000. 
Most of that is in the form of the library and bonds and accounts 


receivable. 


479 


480 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS. [May 19 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR THE FiscaL YEAR ENDING 
ApriL 30, 1903. 

The Board of Directors presents herewith for the information of the 
INSTITUTE a report of its work during the past year, also of the financial 
standing of the organization. 

The Annual Convention for 1902 was held at Great Barrington, Mass., 
June 18-22, and was generally considered the most successful ever held by 
the InsTITUTE, about 250 members being in attendance. The revised 
Standardization Report was approved by this Convention, and subse- 
quently printed in the Transactions. 

The Institute has prospered during the year; work along its estab- 
lished lines has been successful, and several new departments of activity 
have been developed. The work of the INstiTuTE is in large measure 
delegated to committees reporting to the Board of Direction. <A brief 
statement regarding the work of the several standing committees and of 
the more important special committees affords a general view of the scope 
and character of the work of the INstTiTuUTE. 

At the September meeting of the Board several of the Standing Com- 
mittees were reconstituted by appointment of the incoming President. 

Commutiee on Finance.—This Committee has kept careful guard on the 
finances of the Instirute. At the beginning of the year it made estimates 
of income and obtained from the several officers and committees estimates 
of their probable expenses, and appropriations were then made to meet 
the coming demands. 

Library Committee —The Library has received numerous accessions and 
the work of binding, arranging and cataloguing has received due attention. 
The additional room available beginning at the present time will relieve 
the congested condition of the Library. 

Commuttee on Papers.—This Committee has followed the plan pursued by 
the preceding Committee, in providing several papers upon one topic fo1 
each meeting. 

Editing Committee —This Committee finds that the increased quantity 
of material has made necessary the division of the bound Transactions into 
semi-annual instead of annual volumes. The discussions of the branch 
meetings add to the volume of material and to the labors of the Editing 
Committee. . When discussions upon the same papers take place at the 
_ different branches, the same ideas are in many cases repeated, making 
a careful revision of the discussions necessary in order to prevent repeti- 
tion while retaining all that is new and valuable. 


1903.] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 481 


Board of Examiners.—This Board has found the volume of its work 
increased owing to the larger number of applications for admission to the 
INsTITUTE and for transfer to full membership. During the year it has 
recommended 825 candidates for election to the grade of Associate and 30 
Associates have been recommended for transfer. 

Commuttee on Standardization —The membership of this Committee was 
almost entirely reconstituted at the beginning of the year. The new Com- 
mittee has taken up the matter of a revision of Sections 43 and 71 of the 
Standardization Report adopted June 20, 1902, also the extension of the 
Table of Sparking Distances, the Standardization of Switchboards and 
Materials, and the Standardization of Nomenclature. 

Commutiee on National Electric Code.—This Committee largely recon- 
stituted at the beginning of the year, has performed very important service 
in modifying the proposed rules of the National Association of Fire Under- 
writers with regard to high-tension circuits. The final report of the Com- 
mittee has received the approval of most of the important national elec- 
trical associations, including the National Electric Light Association, the 
Pacific Coast Transmission Association, the Northwestern Electrical Asso- 
ciation, and the Association of Edison Illuminating Companies. 

Commuttee on Local Organization.—This Committee was appointed at 
the beginning of the year for promoting the organization of local meetings 
for an extension of the work of the Instirutr. The Committee arranged 
its plans in harmony with the general methods and purposes of the Inst1- 
TUTE, and announced general plans for the inauguration of meetings 
without much formality of organization. Local branches have been 
formed in several cities, and also in a number of Universities and 
Technical schools, in some cases under the direct supervision of the 
Instructor and in other cases in connection with an engineering society 
among the students. Local branches among InstiTuTE members are in 
some places conducted independently of other organizations; in other cases 
they are held in connection with a local engineering club or society. Dur- 
ing the year local branches have been organized at the following places: 

Allegheny, Pa. [Western University of Pennsylvania]; Ames, Iowa 
{Iowa State College]; Bethlehem, Pa. [Lehigh University]; Boston, 
Mass. [Massachusetts Institute of Technology and local members]; Cin- 

. cinnati, Ohio; Columbia, Mo. [University of Missouri]; Columbus, Ohio 
[Ohio State University]; Denver, Colo.; Ithaca, N.Y. [Cornell University]; 
Lafayette, Ind. [Purdue University]; Madison, Wis. [University of Wis- 
consin]; Philadelphia, Pa.; Pittsburg, Pa.; Schenectady, N Y. [Union 
University and local members]; St. Louis, Mo.; State College, Pa. 
[Pennsylvania State College]; Urbana, Ill. [University of Illinois] ; Wash- 
ington, D. C. [Columbian University and local members]. 

The local organizations in Chicago and in Minneapolis, the latter 
in connection with the University of Minnesota, which have 
been in existence for some time, have taken on renewed activity during 
the present year. The weak point in national organization which has long 
been recognized, is the inability of a scattered membership to participate 
in society meetings. This difficulty has been in large measure overcome 
by establishing local branch meetings at which the papers and discussions 
presented at the general meeting in New York are read in the various lo- 
cal branches. The result of the local branches as a stimulus to the growth 
of membership, is shown by the following table: 


482 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS. [May 19 


| Membership | 
Membership | and applica- 
Nov. 1, 1902 | tions now Gain. 
{on nile, 1903 
@iicagowe ee a. er 85 139 54 
Pittsburg. 55... 63 115 52 
Philadelphia ..... 65 -84 | 19 
Bostons..estece 75 164 89. 
Denver ...... =. 6 30 24 
Cincinnati .:. 5... 19 44 25 
Schenectady ..... 54 105 51 
Columbus, Ohio .. 6 15 9 
StU Ouse -neters 18 41 23 
| 391 | 737 | 346 


Students of the Institute —Closely related to the work of the local 
branches is the action of the Board of Directors, granting privileges to 
students who are pursuing electrical studies by which they may obtain the 
monthly Transactions of the InstiTuTE and other privileges at small 
expense. 

Committee on Theses.—The Board of Directors by resolution invites the 
heads of the electrical engineering departments in educational institutions 
in which local InsTITUTE meetings are held to select the thesis of each 
year’s graduating class that is of superior merit. The theses so submitted 
are referred to the InstituTE Committce on Theses which may select and 
recommend to the Board for publication those of superior excellence. 
This will give a stimulus to electrical students and will be a satisfactory 
means of giving recognition and publicity to that which is of merit. 

Commitice on Engineering Data.—After careful consideration of the 
matter, the Board has established.a Committee on Engineering Data for 
the purpose of collecting and publishing data of use in the electrical engin- 
eering profession. This Committee is proposed as a permanent Committee 
and its grade of work will be on a par in its importance and dignity with 
that of the Committee on Standardization. 

Transmission Commuittee.—This Committee was appointed at the begin- 
ning of the year for collecting data respecting the present practice in 
electric transmission at high voltage, and of presenting a report in such 
form as to be of immediate value to electrical engineers. In addition to 
the collection of data this Committee has selected a number of pertinent 
topics for discussion and has prepared short papers as introductions to 
general discussions by the members. 

Committee on Membership.—This Committee was appointed at the be- 
ginning of the year for the puprose of increasing the membership princi- 
pally through the codperation of individual members. The Committce 
has presented to the members from time to time the desirability of bring- 
ing together those who may assist the INsTITUTE, as well as those who may 
profit by being connected with it. The members have acted upon the 
suggestion of the Committee, and a notable increase in membership is the 
result. 

Committee on Affiliated Societies —This Committee has been appointed 


a o _* 


1903] REFORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 483 


for investigating the rclations which the INSTITUTE should bear to other 
organizations, such as other elcctrical bodies, local engineering societies in 
connection with local branches of the Instituts and other engineering 
bodies. This Committee enters upon a large field which may be of the 
greatest importance to the development of the electrical engineering pro- 
fession. 

Fohn Fritz Medal.—The Institute has coéperated with the other three 
general engineering societies in the establishment of the John Fritz medal, 
and in appointing members of the jury for the award of the medal. 

Comnuttee on Universal Exposition at St. Louis.—The Board has by the 
recommendation of a Committee appointed to consider the relations which 
the InstiTuTE should sustain to the Exposition and the Engineering Con- 
gresses to be held in connection therewith, a Committee on Exhibits. 
This Committee will have under its direction the collection of an historical 
and evolutionary exhibit. The Board expects to so arrange that the 
INsTITUTE will take an active part in the Congresses to be held at the time 
of the Exposition. : 

Institution of Electrical Engineers.—The invitation of this InstrTuTE to 
the Institution of Electrical Engineers to visit America in 1904, and par- 
ticipate in a joint meeting, has been accepted. It is expected that ar- 
rangements will be made to hold the joint meeting in St. Louis in con- 
nection with the Engineering Congresses. 

Union Engineering Building.—The Board has received the letter of Mr. 
Andrew Carnegie stating that he will give to the four national engineering 
socictics—Civil, Mechanical, Mining and Electrical—and the Engineers’ 
Club, one million dollars for a Union Building. The Board at its special 
meeting on May 7th, adopted resolutions endorsing the project and certain 
provisional plans of procedure, and appointed a committce to report to the 
Board the form of resolution which it should adopt in common with other 
bodies in order to participate in the Union Building. The final action of 
the Board of Directors and its recommendation to the InstiruT®E is con- 
tained in a separate report. 

Alonthly Announcement.—The meeting notices to members have taken 
the form of small pamphlets containing statements regarding the 
general meetings and the meetings of the various local branchcs. The 
Announcement also contains a Secretary’s Bullctin and statemcnt of the 
work of the various Committees, also any other mattcrs of general import- 
ance. The list of applications for admission is included in the pamphlct. 
This form of Announcement keeps the members in more intimate relation 
to the InsTITUTE work, and is believed to be valuable in awakening and 


sustaining interest therein. : 
Reception Commuittee—The Reception Committee has been in charge of 


the unofficial dinners which have been cnjoyable social features preceding 
the monthly meetings. The success of the Library Dinner on February 
9th is due to the efforts of this Committee. 

Institute Headquariers.—Owing to the growth of the Library and the 
increase of the general work of the INsTITUTE, it has been found necessary 
to rent additional space, and on May lst, the entire seventh floor of the 
White’ Building, 95 Liberty. Street, was Icased. Nearly one-half of this 
will be occupicd by the Library and the remainder by the publicatior. 


elcrical and other departments. 


484 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS. [May 19 


Membership.—The total membership at the close of last year’s 


report, was 1,549, classified as follows: ° 
Honorary Members iv. fae sels derclererneie ot a tn cee a ce cea 2 
Mamiters Wists doe he. otto ccieh oiece 0s einai yer meee as a A405 
Associates amici. bie amc eee 5 lees aoe ae eek ee eee ue ene 1,142 
TotaliMaVyilig LOO brio eke a2 era tanonensyeirie+ as cae gk ee 1,549 
16 


Elected prior to May 1, 1902, and since qualified. ....---+e--+ess00t* 
Elected May 1, 1902, to April 30 1903, and qualified .....-.-++++++5" 695 


Restored, to Mem berShip. acs scans uesine. 22sec are ao ie i 
. 2 261 

Sta. TGAEHS its mnie nits Ohl ike vis @ Oar eVeNeze lee ee ea ae ae 9 

Wm RecisMAMONS nite ce Foe wise ys byes ene Cele aa 12 
Dropped as delinquents.......-.+---eeeeereseereer rst ses AY 32 
Crantktotal Aprye: I903 cence acimriaaee seh ism airs ak aoe 2,229 

The membership Apr. 30, 1903, wes classified as follows: 
Honorary Members. oie cits aves merle eresppee (er stan a ne Sao Bie 2 
Wem borate Casters sore samucte isle we /Slaretw intense Waneret yo oer tele aie A417 ‘ 

PW ASOCIALCS Po Eee AI Aa NE sale ieio alate neo MIUN aie 2A ane ee ae ae 1,810 
Metall ceoiestiais dusles See se Rae Sa rare siee cite a ees ks oe sia 2,229 


A list of Associates elected during the year accompanies this report. 
The gain in membership during the year is 680, an increase of 44 per 
cent. As there are now applications pending and Associates elected but 
not yet qualified to the number of 391, there is animmediate prospective 
total of 2,620 members. y 


Associates Elected.—The Associates elected during the year, May 1, 
1902, to Apri] 30, 1903, and their present status is as follows: 


Qualified and now ASEOCIATES. © arches & Holersranel diorara’ a slwswleiwin S fotbieteig/ai atareler wists 695 
Died ‘before qualifications) 7. ..itca:smistetes ofele's’elearainfnwy siginlstainie's Soothe) ir ° 1 . 
Elections cancelled.......ceeeeeeeeeerecscceeneeenaremeseree ees ss 4 
Not qualified on Apr. 30......+s+eees+ seerveceesstresmetetest esse 165 
Total electiones:c velo cereie vsiate:varale'essieie's «/asslotelnia classi sinin.s gins a chle S > 865 


Resignations.—Resignations have been received.and accepted during the 
year from the following members and associates who were in good standing: 


Members.—Brown Ayres, W. E. Geyer, Henry Jackson. 


Associates.—Frank Broili, Harry A. Gillis, F. A. Greenwood, A. F. 
McKissick, H. N. Sweet, Walter Rutherford, H. Schreiter, J. C. Finney, 


Paul Bonynge. 
Deaths.—There have been the following deaths during the year: 


Members.—Charles T. Child. 


Associates._—Henry Morton, E. Rathenau, W. F. D. Crane, Max T. 
Steinle, F. J. Folk, E. A. Darling, I. D. Parsons, Sidney H. Short. 


Financial Report—The reports of the Secretary and Treasurer show in 
detail the financial standing of the INsTITUTE at the close of the fiscal 
year, together with an itemized statement of the receipts’ and disburse- 
ments during the entire year. 


1903.] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 


485 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR APRIL 30, 1903. 
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES. 
ASSETS. LIABILITIES. 
CASHES wee Cee nc oat tine ZO06c co uke Library. binge: stoke tay aan 787 .93 
U.S. Bonds, Market value .... 16,285.00 Casnemien lund fer .c.tetes pen ae 4,643.60 
DiLRATV NR, Coie ea) eon a oe 9,436.75 Building Pundeets. sba cures 1,100.00 
Transactions (volumes)........ 2,957.50 Compounded Membership Fund. 4,200.00 
Office Furniture and Fittings ... 495.30 Meserse Mund w...mecnmie tek. 10,556.68 
BadbeSay cn sleet one Lew ey. eaters 154.50 boyy 0) Seto ery ee oP ae gir aa re 19,311.48 
Catalogue Type and Cases ..... 125.00 
Congress Books': 2.500 aroae. o. 231.25 *Not including a donation of 
Accounts Receivable ......... 8,407 .64 $1,100 Wy one member and 
“8 Secretary’s ahout $1,000 by another stillin 
Petty Cash 500.00 the hands of Library Committec. 
$40, 599.69 $40,599.C9 
RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS. 
RECEIPTS. DISBURSEMENTS 
Entrance Fees .* Stenography..... Apgdhesicaar 697 .CO 
Current Dues .. Stationery and Printing . tee | S1485 15 
Past Dues..!... Ss IPOShARE ene feted 1,543.50 
Advance Dues 5 ; FEXpress. nc. << pr 346.54 
Life Membership Fund........ ; aC Ces tastiars spiscicrareismtecs: ohevs oie 619.93 
Transactions Sales F5ce sete 1,752.24 Bxpenses General. o.oo. is 667 .95 
Subscriptions .... 46326300) Certincates i. jacigc suiia evn 93 .90 
ES ULLMAN Cette Pe ors so Sree le ena ce beetle 64.63 QRMIGO INTEC Sie crteevelaw chen dee 239.60 
Advertising heim site oes 1,685.51 Salarresresocesmeas teh coeos 5,350.41 
Electrotyping and Engraving. . 23.67 Engraving and Electrotyping .. 1,778.9 
UBBdROS AS. lates erpsusie doer lara cle 783.50 Publishing Transactions....... 7,254.16 
Congress BOOKS aswewicjeleloisialeie 6 PG RMOUT Ee Rene: Hane Ai: vale sunres erates 1,688.04 
WP OSCAR ES arity crevetcsts citer talent =' LER OV On| prow NahiuCin shale cin OgaO Hoan om eo Oe 804.88 
Meeting Expenses .......... a 5.00 tain Ge earls rehire a tetas core care ayy hae fl 
ifeltergs st Rheem PRTC Can tae 496.36 | Meeting Expenses ............ 1,208 .43 
TADracy, DOnAtlomes sey cice no 1,028.23 Branch Meetings ............. 40.65 
Library, Volumes. sieves skins 242.80 Office xpenses| Pisa. bis,ceniwslels 154.27 
MertiiCabes aes ciejtjaetsqiei< systel oust 220.00 Library Expenses... «sss ie 3,994.62 
Library Fixtires: 00 .e4 8 330.00 
tC eFUtS: 4s Beeeky ate Pucks vc teustanes® 21.00 
alan Ce erm stamcctae aie siehieie tte ie 621.58 
$30,181.25 $30,181.25 
The total receipts for 1903, exclusive of doristions to 
Library Fund, were in excess of 1902............. $8,497 .83 
The total disbursements for 1903, were in excess of 1902 9, Este 61 
Due from Members account of entrance fees and dues. 7,344.07 
Watal: Cash TReCeIpt Scare mes! orces eae bicncinls, stehatere|e! ave $30,181.25 
Total Cash Disbursements... iste. «= cm yie soi or ersjee 29,559.67 
— 621.58 
Property on hand according to Inventory May 1, 1903: 
Office Furniture and Fittings .........-.2.-20e00008 495.30 
Ted See eerie eis teers ar chant tbe tease te ale tehee eco) ere nes = 154.50 
ADAM SACTIONS ests! islets Rts SEED nici Gee hare ay opacs 2,957 .50 
(QroystepgeeeMl se (a) SENS NSA Sambo es Sein Koo uno. HoorauetraD PB Ne: 
PERG MaGetialie yy crsteeiscietstelsvokeia eas sal voor slei sia a.e te 125.00 
i . Valuation for inventory purposes.......... 9 436.75 
Cia aioe r : : —— $13,400.30 
TOTAL NET ASSETS. 
(CES ol ds Se OeEeS Socis Ecos SAO Cab clay terete $2,006.75 
OTM) Secretary Petty Gash taclciets steel ee ciela * ovtyn cise. 500.00 
U.S Bonds, Market value ...0.....025ee0+ sosuee - 16,285.00 
Inventory (as AbOVE),.... cece cree cree ee eer sees 13,400.30 
: ae $32,192.05 
Total Assets last VEaT ie tie cle sts piste eield elem tole at cileiers 30,192.05 
Trereasey serie credo cioversiel al tiayeretorsiererelert-rSeys,'« $1.971.81 


PROPERTY PURCHASED DURING THE YEAR. 
(Reported as directed by the Constitution.) 
Office Furniture ...... e 
RPV PEW CST ae a oioisieneter ale 


Mailing Machine ...... : z 
feieisactionssVOlummes tee ruictee eas cowie Maptaniathte nace cassia 4 


$650.80 


Respectfully submitted, 
RALPH W. 


POPE, 
Secretary. 


486 4 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS. [May 19 


TREASURER’S REPORT. 
From Aprit 30, 1902, to May 1, 1903. 
Gerorce A. Hamitton, TREASURER, in Account with 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 
Dr. 


Balance from April 30, 1902........-2+eeeeeeeeeees $ 1,385.17 
Received from Secretary, May 1, 1902, to May 1, 1903 30.181. 25 


$31,566.42 
Gr. 


Disbursements May 1, 1902, to April 30, 1903. on war- 
rants No. 1556 to No. 1832.......-.eeeeereceves $29 559.67 
Balance to New Account May 1, 1903.......-+-++es6 , 2,006.75 


$31,566.42 
{Respectfully submitted, 
GEO. A. HAMILTON, 
Treasurer, 


The election of officers for the next year began with the sending 
out of nomination ballots in February last. The ballots which 
have been received recently have been turned over to a board 
of tellers, who have made out their report and it will be now 
presented. The officers elected now will take office on the fourth 
Friday of next September. Mr. F. W. Roller, chairman of the 
Committee of Tellers, has placed the report of the committee 
in the hands of the Secretary, who will now announce the result. 

SECRETARY Pope:—The result of the ballot for officers 
as follows: For President, B. J. Arnold, 705 votes; 8 scattering; 
for Vice-Presidents, Calvin W. Rice, 687; W. S. Barstow, 677; 
R. D Mershon, 663; with others scattering; for Managers, 
Samuel Sheldon, 683; A. H. Armstrong, 672; W.C. L. Eglin, 
644; G. F. Sever, 642, with a considerable number of scattering 
votes, the highest of which is 16 for A. E. Kennelly; for Treas- 
urer, G. A. Hamilton, 713; for Secretary, R. W. Pope, 712; T.C. 
Martin, 1; total ballots, 764; of which 51 were defective. 

PRESIDENT Scott:—The Chair declares that the following 
gentlemen have been elected the officers of the INstiruTE for 
the ensuing year: President, B. J. Arnold; Vice-Presidents, 
C. W. Rice, W. S. Bartsow, R. D. Mershon; Managers, Samuel 
Sheldon, A. H. Armstrong, W.C. L. Eglin, G. F. Sever; Treasurer 
G. A. Hamilton: Secretary, R. W. Pope. 

The Secretary suggests that the report of the Board of Di- 
rectors presented in outline by the Chair and now before you in 
written form, should be acted upon. If there is any question to 
be asked or any action to be taken on the report, now is the time 
to take it. 

Union ENGINEERING BUILDING. 

The first announcement before the INsTITUTE as a body of the 
progress which has been made toward a building for its uses can 
be made this evening. There has been for many years, since the 
foundation of the INstTiTuTE, a conviction among its leading 


ee 


1903. - UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. 487 


members that it needed a building adequate for its present and 
future needs. There has been also for years a sentiment, 
sometimes fairly prominent, at other times seemingly almost 
forgotten, calling for a Union Engineering Building, in which 
the several large engineering societies could be housed together. 
We have been in a way acting on that principle ourselves, as we 
have been coming here to the house of the American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, our brother engineers, and in common with 
them we appreciate the need of alarger house. These sentiments 
have been growing and have come to the attention from time 
to time of Mr. Carnegie. The matter of an engineering building 
has been discussed more or less informally in the past, so I think 
there has been in the mind of Mr. Carnegie a growing senti- 
ment, a growing ideai in this direction, and he has probably 
been awaiting the time when the occasion would seem to be oppor- 
tune, and when the conditions would beripe forthe materialization 
ofthis idea. Through the efforts ot Mr. Martin, whom Mr. Car- 
negie designated as ‘‘irrepressible,’”’ we had the very great privilege 
and pleasure of entertaining Mr. Carnegie at our Library dinner 
on the 9th oflast February. He seemed to enjoy himself that 
evening, entering into the spirit of things, and recognizing that he 
wasamongfriends. Herecalled the time when he wasan electrician 


himself, in a cellar in Pittsburg. He saw how electricians had 


developed and grown, saw their influence. saw their possibilities, 
and it seems that he recognized that possibly now the time had 
come when something could be done. So he called before him 
two of the electricians who were at the dinner, and they met him 
the next day to have a friendly chat on the matter. 

I need not tell the story. It has been sent to you in printed 
form in order that, as soon as the matter could properly be made 
public, you would be fully informed with regard to it. A 
meeting of three representatives from each society in con- 
ference committee has evolved a set of resolutions to be formally 
presented to the several bodies for action. These resolutions 
were brought before the Board of Directors of the INSTITUTE 
this afternoon, and with a few slight changes were passed as 
follows: 


RESOLUTIONS PASSED BY THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF 
THE RAM ERICGAN INSIIPULE OF ELECTRICAL 
ENGINEERS, MAY 19, 1908, WITH REGARD TO 
A UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. 


(1) Resolved, that the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
unite with the Amcrican Socicty of Civil Engineers, the American Society 
of Mechanical Enginecrs, the American Institute of Mining Enginccrs, 
and The Engineers’ Club or any of them, for the purpose of accepting the 
sum of $1,000,000, as a gift from Mr. Andrew Carncgic, fer the purpose of 
erecting suitable buildings for occupancy by the American Society of 
Civil Engineers, the Amcrican Society of Mechanical Enginecrs, the 
American Institute of Mining Engineers, the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 


488 UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. [May 19 


ELEcTRICAL ENGINEERS and The Engineers’ Club, on the sites secured for 
that purpose on the north side of 39th Street and south side of 40th Street, 
west of Fifth Avenue, in the City of New York, in the State of New York. 

(2) And Resolved Further, that the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELEc- 
‘TRICAL ENGINEERS, has a very high appreciation of this generous gift of 
Mr. Andrew Carnegie, and this additional evidence of his recognition of 
the engineering profession and his deep interest in the welfare of the 
American Society of Civil Engineers, the American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, the American Institute of Mining Engineers, the AMERICAN 
INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS and The Engineers’ Club. 

(3) And Resolved Further, that a site on the north side of 39th Street 
shall be purchased and held by trustees, or otherwise as shall be deter- 
“mined by the joint committee hereinafter mentioned for the American 
Society of Civil Engineers, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 
the American Institute of Mining Engineers and the AMERICAN INSTITUTE 
oF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, or by such of them as shall vote in favor of 
coming into this enterprise. 

(4) And Resolved Further, that a joint committee shall be created to 
be composed of three members of each organization that shall unite in 
accepting said gift of $1,000,000 from Mr. Andrew Carnegie; and that the 
governing body of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
shall elect three members of this organization to represent it on and be 
members of such joint committee; and that the governing body of the 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS shall have the right and 
power to remove any member of such joint committee who shall be elected 
by it and to elect any member of this organization to fill any vacancy that 
shall occur in such joint committee by reason of the death, resignation, 
refusal to act or removal of any member who shall have been elected by 
the governing body of this organization as a member of such joint com- 
mittee. 

(5) And Resolved Further, that the character and internal arrangement 
of the building to be erected on the site on 39th Street shall be determined 
upon by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of all of such of the 
members of said joint committee as shall represent the American Society 
of Civil Engineers, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, the 
American Institute of Mining Engineers and the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 
ELEcTRICAL ENGINEERS or such of them as shall vote in favor of coming 
into this enterprise, on such joint committee; that the character and 
internal arrangement of the club building to be erected on the site on 40th 
Street, shall be determined upon by the affirmative vote of all of the three 
members of such joint committee who shall represent The Engineers’ Club 
on such joint committee; and that the apportionment of funds-between 
the two buildings shall be determined by an affirmative vote of two-thirds 
of the entire joint committee. 

(6) And Resolved Further, that said joint committee shall, by the 
affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of all of the members thereto, select 
and employ an architect and such consulting engineers as may be necessary 
to prepare the plans and specifications for the building to be erected on 
the site on 39th Street and for the club building to be erected on the site 
on 40th Street; and shall also obtain proposals for the erection of both of 
such buildings; and shall have power to make and enter into such con- 


1903.] UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. 489 


.tract or contracts as shall be approved and authorized by the affirmative 
vote of at least two-thirds of all of the members of said joint committee, 
for the erection of both of such buildings; and shall have charge of the 
erection of both of such buildings. 
(7) And Resolved Further, that said joint committee shall continue in 
existence until all of the purpose set forth in these resolutions shall have 
been fully accomplished. 


By direction of the Board, the committee in charge of affairs 
has submitted these resolutions to legal counsel and has the 
opinion of Paul D. Cravath, of Guthrie, Cravath & Henderson, 
as follows: ‘“ I return resolutions, which seem to me to be in 
proper form. They have the important merit of leaving the 
committee free to work out details of the proposed plan without 
being hampered by definite instructions.” Eh he! Gee 

The Board of Directors at its meeting this afternoon, in addi- 
tion to adopting the resolutions, appointed as the permanent 
committee to represent the INsTITUTE, the present President 
of the Institute, the President-elect, Mr. Arnold, and Dr. 
Wheeler. 

That is the history of the bui!ding plan up to date. 

The attitude and views of some of the members of the Inst1- 
TUTE, among whom are many of our past Presidents, are before 
us in the form of a few letters which I am sure you will be 
pleased to hear. I will ask the Secretary to read some of these 
letters. 

Secretary Pope read the following: 


“ORANGE, N. J., May 18, 1903. 
CHARLES F. ScoTT, 
President AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, 
New York City. 

Dear Mr. Scorr:—I am delighted to note the sequel of the InstITUTE 
Library Dinner which I had the pleasure of attending last February, and 
am heartily glad to be able to congratulate you on the generous gift of 
Mr. Carnegie of one million dollars to the InstiTuTE and its sister societies. 
I have the greater pleasure, in this benefaction to the society, because it 
comes from one of ourselves, who began at the key and has shown himself 
so worthy of the great wealth that has come to him since he was a humble 
telegrapher. : 2 : 

I am convinced that all the societies concerned will feel it their duty te 
unite in the disposing of this gift so as to render it of the utmost value and 
profit to the professions they represent and to the arts and sciences in 
general. ‘ 

Faithfully yours, 
Tuomas A. Epison.” 


“CAMBRIDGE, Mass., May 14, 1903. 

Messrs. Cuas. F. Scott and T. C. Martin, 

“AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, 

New York City. Pr 

GENTLEMEN:—It gives me great pleasure to learn that it is proposed, 
with the generous aid of a world-widely known man, whose success has 
been achieved in connection with engineering development, to erect a 
useful and enduring structure of steel and stone that shall attest and per- 
petuate the essential unity of all engineers and engineering in subjugating 
nature to the rising needs of humanity. 


490 UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. [May 19 


It seems to me that no more valuable endowment could be made for 
engineering than that which will harmonize and unite the various engin- 
eering societies, bringing these bodies into one building, and building them 
into one body. It would bring into closer cooperation the branches of 
that guild whose past industry has made possible the greater coéperation 
and the grandest civilization that the world has already won. 

I sincerely hope that this proposition may duly assume outline on paper 
and speedy realization in stone. I regard it not mereiy as a lasting benefit 
to engineers, but also through their labors, and the work that they will 
carry on in the Union Engineering Building, as a distinct gain to ail the 
nations of the world. 

With every good wish for the success of this project, I remain, gentle- 
men, 

Yours very sincerely, 
A. E. KENNELLY.” 


‘“* PHILADELPHIA, Pa., May 18, 1903. 
Messrs. Cuas. F. Scott and T. C. Martin, 
New York City. 

DEAR SiRs:—Just two years ago a committee of this INsTITUTE held a 
conference with Mr. Andrew Carnegie concerning the Clark library, the 
result of which was that Mr. Carnegie, with his world-renowned generosity, 
presented the InstiTuTE with a sum of eee equal to the original cost of 
the library, to be used for its maintenance. he subject of a home for the 
InstituTE and its library was also approached at that time, and the 
parting words of Mr. Carnegie to our committee were to the effect that as 
soon as we felt able to maintain a home we should call to see him again. 

From his recent magnificent offer, Mr. Carnegie seems to consider that 
we are now able to maintain a home, even a much larger and more mag- 

‘ nificent one than was contemplated two years ago. That he did not over 
estimate our abilitics to do this, is the belicf of those of our members who 
have been most active in this effort to provide the INsTiTUTE with a much- 
needed home. It therefore becomes the duty of every loyal member 
who has the interest of the INsTITUTE at heart to assist our able and 
energetic committee and President in every possible way, in order that the 
grand project which they have planned may be successfully carried out. 

Those of our members whose fortunes have been made in the electrical 
industry and profession now have an opportunity to follow the generous 
example set to Mr. Carnegie by recognizing in a substantial way the insti- 
tution which has been such a potent factor in the marvelous development 
of an industry which has brought fortunes to many. 

This INsTITUTE is now recognized to be of national importance, and 
during the past few years its reputation and standing is beginning to be 
recognized abroad. It has no rival in its branch of engineering in this 
country. National questions are referred to it and its opinion on inter- 
national matters is respected. 

Although the youngest of the national engineering societies, it has been 
the most active in the efforts to reailze that long-cherished dream of so 
many engineers, a Union Engineering Building in the Metropovis of our 
country. We should therefore not be the last to assure Mr. Carnegie that 
he has not overestimated our abilitics to maintain the magnificent home 
which he has so generously offered us. ’ 

Very respectfully yours, 
Cart HERING, 
Past-President.”’ 


“New York, May 12, 1903. 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, 
New York City. 

GENTLEMEN :—I certainly think that it will be of the greatest advantage 
to the work of the InstiruTE if the plan respecting a Union Engineering 
Building can be carried out. The INsTITUTE must certainly have a place 
for housing its library and nothing need be said about the advantages of 


1903.] UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. 491 


bringing together the libraries of the different engineering societies. The 
advantages of such a union are self-evident. While my duties at the 
Cooper Union for the last eight years have so occupied my evenings that I 
have not been able to attend many of the meetings of the Instirutp, I 
have felt the keenest interest in its work, and I know that the papers that 
have been read and the discussions that have followed upon various sub- 
jects have helped very greatly to advance the interests of the electrical 
art, andifa building can be secured where the INSTITUTE can have per- 
manent quarters in connection with the other Engineering Societies I am. 
sure it will increase greatly the efficiency, not only of its work, but of that 
of the other societies also. 


I hope nothing will prevent a favorable action upon this matter. 
Yours very truly, 
Wo. A. AnTHony.” 


PRESIDENT ScotTr:—There is one phase of the building matter 
which I did not refer to in my remarks a few moments ago. 
When on the first afternoon the general subject was under dis- 
cussion with Mr. Carnegie and we were talking over the whole 
proposition, and he was concerned where we could get the land 
and what it would cost, we presented to him an outline of the 
present status of the various bodies; their financial standing, 
their membership, income, what they were now paying in rents, 
etc., and he at once said, ‘‘ Why, you are able to carry your- 
selves; if you can provide the land for the building and take care 
of it, I will give the building.” He seemed to think that provid- 
ing the building was the easy part, and the other was the hard 
part. In the aggregate the various organizations concerned 
are able to carry the land very well. We Electrical Engineers 
are most of us young men starting out in life, not like the mem- 
bers of the older societies, who have made their fortunes. 
Consequently, our Institution is not in the financial position 
- which the others are, and when it has now come time to go in and 
take our share in this matter we find ourselves in a different po- 
sition from the other societies. 

The estimates of the committee as reported to the Board, and 
which in general receive the sanction of the Board, though the 
Board did not go into the matter in detail, shows in a general 
way that the INstituTE should have a fund of about 
$200,000 to put it in good condition to assume its fair part in this 
new enterprise. There are various ways in which this 
money could be secured, in fact it is quite possible that in four or 
five years from now the InstiTuTE will be as able to pay the - 
interest on bonds to provide for the land as it has been in the past 
to pay rentals. But that is not what we would liketodo. The 
INSTITUTE is growing and developing; its committees go to the 
limit in expending the appropriations; nearly every committee 
could enlarge its work. Our new committee on local organiza- 
tions, which is developing the work of the INstiTUTE throughout 
the country so finely, calls foranexpenditure of more funds for the 
printing of Transactions and the like, and for the local running 
expenses of the several organizations. That is but one example. 
Every way we turn our work is costing more and more as we 


492 UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. [May 19 


expand, andmake the work more efficient, so that what we ought. 
to have is such a provision for the land as well as the building 
which will enable the current income of the InstiTuTE to be used 
for its current expenses and its technical work. 
We have made this suggestion, which I have just indicated to 
you, to a few members and we are pleased to-night to be able to 
announce a few subscriptions as a beginning to what we hope 
will continue for some time in the future to be a growing fund. 
We have the following letter from a past-President of the 


INSTITUTE: 
‘““New York, May 11, 1903. 
T. C. MaRTIN, Esoq., 
Committee on Union Engineering Building, 2 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 

My Dear Mr. MartIn:—I wish to add a word of congratulation on the 
possibilities of development assured the InstiTuTE by the magnificent 
offering of Mr. Carnegie for the erection of a Union Engineering Building 
in connection with the Engineers Club. 

Not many years have passed since the inauguration of our society, but. 
already the self-sacrificing labors and constant efforts of its officers,. 
among whom none have been more faithful to its interests than yourself,. 
coupled with the unparalleled growth in the various branches of the elec- 
trical industry have brought the InstiruTE to a position where it must. 
necessarily be more commanding in its engineering influence. 

With its growth has come the greater need of the highest professional 
equipment on the part of those composing its membership and dominating 
its councils. 

The work of the universities and technical schools, and the great 
responsibilities now involved in electrical undertakings, requires the high- 
est professional standard. The successful engineer in electrical work 
must no longer be simply an electrical engineer, but coupled with his 
specific knowledge must be mechanical and civil engineering attainments: 
of high order. On account of the diversity of work few can be expert at 
all branches, but they must at least have sufficient knowledge to fairly 
guide them in enterprises requiring the highest skill in every branch. 

These facts make it all the more essential that instead of the engineering 
societies being individualized they should be brought in closer touch so: 
that opportunities may exist for each to become better acquainted with the 
other, and to gather by intuition, as well as. by specific instruction, com- 
pleter knowledge of engineering practices, and especially to have the 
advantage that technical libraries housed and technical papers given in 
a common building may grant. 

While it is perhaps natural that such a building shall have as its principal 
attraction the technical libraries of the different societies, which should, 
under suitable restrictions, be accessible to all members, it would seem 
proper that it might also have in its equipment as a source of inspiration 
and instruction, a collection of models of the original apparatus illustrative 
of important departures in engineering practiccs. 

As a member and a past-President of the InstiruTE, I am in hearty 
accord with the general plan which has been proposed for a building to be 
occupied as a common home, and I will gladly bear some portion of the 
burden which will fall upon our particular INstiruTE, to which end I take 
pleasure in authorizing you to say that in thecvent of the proposed plan 
maturing I will subscribe $2,000 for such fund and under such conditions. 
as may be established in accordance with the general circular of May 9. 

’ Sincerely yours, 
FRANK J. SPRAGUE.” 

PRESIDENT Scott :—We have a letter from Prof. Elihu Thom-. 


son, which the Secretary will read. Inaddition to this letter, the 
Secretary also has a letter from Prof. Thomson making a con- 
tribution of $5,000 to the building fund. 


1903: ] UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. 493 


“Swampscott, Mass., May 16, : 
Messrs. Cuas. F. Scotrand T. C. Martin, peels 

GENTLEMEN :—Just fourteen years ago I had the honor and duty of 

addressing, as the representative and President of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE 
or ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, a unique gathering in the Guildhall, London, 
There were present the leading engineers of Great Britain and their 
guests, the visiting American Engineering societies, altogether about six 
hundred. Among these the electrical engineers formed but a small per- 
centage. Our art was young and our INSTITUTE very young. Our art is 
still young and so is our INsTITUTE compared with the other engineering 
bodies. But its record of creditable work is not excelled. There is in it 
plenty to awaken our members to the importance of assisting in all possible 
mays ees the new foundation upon which the future of the InsTITUTE 
will rest. 
_ It is not conceivable that any member can fail to be deeply interested 
in the new possibilities and opportunities which arise out of the munificent 
offer of Mr. Carnegie. By his most generous gift he has shown his own 
deep interest in the work and in the future codperation of our chief engin- 
eering bodies. The membership of those bodies now have the duty of 
seeing to it that the gift is largely used and in a way to redound forever 
to the credit of American engineers. 

There is no need to dwell upon the importance of the work of our 
InsTITUTE in the past. Who can doubt that with the enormously en- 
larged opportunities now to be afforded that there will be a great extension 
of its usefulness in the future. 

Respectfully yours, 
Evinu THOMSON.” 


PRESIDENT Scotr:—We will now pass from the list of our past- 
Presidents—every letter which has been read, except the first, 
from Mr. Edison, has been from a past-President—to the roll of 
our members. 

Secretary Pope read the following letter: 

a “New York, May 13, 1903. 
Mr. CHARLEs F. Scort, 
Pittsburg, Pa. 

My Dear Mr. Scort:—The proposed Union Engineering Building 
impresses me as being a magnificent project and all of the engineering fra- 
ternities are certainly indebted to Mr. Carnegie for his liberal offer. It 
will give me great pleasure indeed to contribute toward the portion of the 
fund for land which must be raised by the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELEC- 
TRICAL ENGINEERS. Toward this I shall be very glad to send you at any 
time the money is required a check for $1,000. In addition to this, I shall 
be very pleased at any time to confer with either Mr. Rice, Mr. Martin or 
yourself, regarding the matter which has been referred to this committee, 
and it will be a pleasure to me to render any assistance possible. 

Wishing you great success in your endeavors, I remain, 

Very sincerely yours. 
J. G. WHITE” 


Presipent Scorr:—I have made a memorandum on the bot- 
tom of this letter from Mr. White as follows: May 16, 1903. 
Mr. White stated to me that if the whole of the amount necessary 
be-taised by the Inst1TuTE by subscription he would increase his 
contribution by $1,500, making a total of $2,500. 

In addition to the individual contributions which have been 
mentioned, it is expected that a number of the electrical com- 
panies will take part in this enterprise. We have been consulting 
‘with gentlemen connected with a few of them. We have re- 


494 UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. [May 19 


ceived encouraging words in several quarters. Arrangements 
of that kind naturally takea little time for consummation, so that 
to-night only one can be announced. Mr. Osborne, the Fourth 
Vice-President of the Westinghouse Electric Manufacturing Com- 
pany, authorizes me to state that, with the expectation that other 
companies will join in the enterprise, the bee a Company 
will contribute $5,000 to the building fund. e have here in 
the very beginning, a number of substantial contributions toward 
this end. We want to awaken and maintain a live interest in 
this subject on the part of all who should be interested init. It 
is not a matter of begging for assistance, but it is presenting the 
matter on its merits and expecting recognition of those merits. 
I think we are justified in taking a few minutes now for an ex- 
pression of opinion on this building scheme by the gentlemen who 
are present here thisevening. As we have one of our donors here 
this evening, I am going to ask Mr. White to say a word, and to 
stand up a moment so that we can get a sight of him. 

Mr. J.G. Wuite:—I have not much toadd to the remarks con- 
tained in my letter which was read a few moments ago. I 
should particularly like to see the entire amount which must be 
provided by the INstiTuTE, raised by contributions of members 
and friends, and none of it raised by mortgage on the land which 
the INSTITUTE must acquire. I understand that it has been sug- 
gested by Mr. Carnegie himself that part of the necessary money 
may be secured by such mortgage. It seems to me that it is pos- 
sible for the INstiTUTE to secure sufficient funds to pay for its 
portion of the necessary land without resorting to such mortgage 
loan. With contributions such as just announced from the 
Westinghouse Company, Prof. Thompson and others, and with 
the many contributions which will undoubtedlv be available, it 
ought to be possible for the InstiruTeE to raise all the funds 
needed. 

If this cannot be done immediately, we must resort to a loan, 
_which should have a sinking ftind provision, by which the 
amounts borrowed will gradually be repaid leaving the land 
of the INstiTuTE free and clear of indebtedness. 

PRESIDENT Scotr:—We would like to hear from Mr. Martin, 
one of our past-Presidents, who began work as President a long 
while ago and never stopped. 

Mr. Martin :—I am obliged to you for calling upon me, Mr. 
President, but I think there has been enough said about me, I 
want to do a little more work, that is all. 

PRESIDENT Scott:—Mr. B. J. Arnold, of Chicago, has just been 
ushered into this work this afternoon, being put on the committee 
to represent the INstituTE, and I can assure him there is work 
ahead for him. © 

Mr. Arnotp:—I think the best speech I can make to-night 
will be to remain absolutely silent for I can show better by my 
actions during my term of office than my words would express 
to-night what I shall do toward making the venture now con- 
sidered a complete success. I will do all I can to that end. 


1903.] UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. 495 


Mr. Martin:—I would suggest, Mr. President, that we voice 
our gratitude to Mr. Carnegie; that we send him a cable message 
of gratitude. . 

PRESIDENT Scott:—The Board of Directors this afternoon 
authorized the sending of a cable message of thanks to Mr. 
Carnegie and asked that Mr. Mullin confer with Mr. Martin to 
draft a suitable cablegram. As Mr. Mullin does not appear to be 
present, it still looks as if all the work will fall on Mr. Martin. 

There is one man who ought to be here to-night as he is one of 
a number who have been promoters of the building idea, and to 
whom a great deal of credit is due. He has been chairman of our 
building committee which has been planning and hoping for a 
long time; but all at once the ideal has culminated in a ereat 
good fortune which is now ours. The man to whom we are so 
much indebted is Mr. Calvin W. Rice, who with the President, 
was summoned by Mr. Carnegie on the day after our annua’ 
dinner last February. 

The Board of Directors asks that the INstiTuTE pass 
the following resolution: The AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELEC- 
TRICAL ENGINEERS at its annual meeting endorses the action 
of its Board of Directors in the adoption of resolutions looking 
to the acceptance by the InstiTuUTE of the generous gift of Mr. 
Andrew Carnegie in his letter of February 14, 1903, giving 
one million dollars for the purpose of a Union building, the 
American Society of Civil Engineers, the American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, the American Institute of Mining Engin- 
eers, the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS and 
the Engineers Club. : 

Mr. J. G. White moved the adoption of the resolution, and the 
motion was unanimously carried. 

Mr. Martin:—Mr. President, the cablegram which I have 
drafted to be sent to Mr. Carnegie is as follows: 


ANDREW CARNEGIE, 
SKIBO CASTLE, SCOTLAND. 


The AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, in annual meet- 
ing assembled, accepts with gratitude and sends you hearty thanks for 
its share of your generous gift of the Union Engineering Building, and 
pledges its best efforts to render your great benefaction useful in the pro- 
motion of electrical and other engineering arts and sciences. 


Mr. Dunn moved that the cablegram be forwarded. Motion 
carried. 

SECRETARY Pope:—The committee on proxies reports a total 
of 270 proxies. Those holding the principal proxies are R. W. 
Pope, 1386; B. J. Arnold, 31; C. F. Scott, 15; R. T. Lozier, 12; 
blanks, 21; rest scattering. A quorum of 159isnecessary. 186 
proxies are held by gentlemen who are present, so that there 1s a 


quorum present. : 
PRESIDENT ScotT:—If the proxies are not called for, the vote 


on the resolution just passed will stand. 


oe 


496 UNION ENGINEERING BUILDING. [May 19 


SECRETARY Pope:—In regard to the annual report submitted 
by the Board of Directors, | would say the contribution of Mr. 
C.O. Mailloux, of about $1,100 to the library, which was reported 
about a month ago, is still in the hands of the secretary, owing to 
a question in regard to its proper investment. It does not appear 
in the report. There is also about the same amount which has 
been contributed for books by another gentleman, which is not 
yet included in the report. The valuation of the library at 
$9,436.75 is simply an inventory value at $1 per volume. The 
Library Committee is now making a report which will give the 
BRRIBIRES value more in accordance with the actual value of the 
books, 


a SS 


AA paper read at the 177th Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
May 19, 1903. 

Se Se EE eee 


THE EXPERIMENTAL BASIS FOR THE THEORY OF 
THE REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 


BY B. A. BEHREND.{ 


The presentation of this paper has been 
undertaken with a view to supplying the 
Committee on Standardization with data 
to enable them to draw uprules for the 
determination of voltage regulation, as 
Section 71 of the INstiruTE rules is, by no 
means, in accordance with fact and ob- 
servation. 


Many papers have been published by various authors on the 
theory of voltage regulation in alternating current machines, but 
their writers have been sadly in the dark as to the actual facts 
which a complete theory has to explain. This state of affairs 
is perfectly natural, as experiments on large modern machines 
are extremely difficult and costly, and few men have either the 
patience or the opportunity to carry out series of measurements 
which can be used as a foundation upon which the theory of 
regulation can be built. A theory which is not supported by 
facts is worse than none, and yet without theory it is impossible 
to design rationally and economically any kind of apparatus. 
Designers of alternating current machinery who ten years ago 
began to develop for themselves the necessary theoretical basis 
for their designs, will, no doubt, appreciate the difficulties which 
they had in obtaining a clear view of the many conditions to be 
taken into account in designing alternating current generators. 

t Papers by the Author on ‘*‘ Regulation in Alternators.” 

Electrotechnische Zeitschrift, Berlin, 1897, pages 715 and 771. _—_ Letters 
on ‘‘ Armature Reaction and Potential Drop in Alternators.”’ 


1899, No. 48, ‘‘ On Potential Dropin Alternating Current Generators.”’ 
L’Eclatrage Electrique, Paris, 1900, p. 140, ‘‘ Sur le Calcul des Alter- 


nateurs.”’ ; 
Electrical World and Engineer, New York,.1900, January 20, 27 and 


February 3. ‘‘ The Factors which Determine the Design of Single-phase 
and Multiphase Alternators..’ 
497 3 


498 BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. (May 19 


and synchronous motors. And no doubt they will remember 
that the greatest difficulty which they encountered was the ques- 
tion of how to determine the inductive drop in the armature. 

The subject matter of this paper is to supply an array of 
experimental data obtained on the most modern designs of 
alternating current generators. A somewhat empirical theory 
is given in this paper, which satisfactorily explains quantitatively 
and qualitatively the observed results; but no attempt is made 
in this theory to take into consideration the many varying fac- 
tors that would naturally have to be introduced into a complete 
theory of the phenomena of regulation. 

The presentation of this paper has been undertaken, partly, with 
a view to supplying the Committee on Standardization with data 
to enable them to draw up correct rules for the determination 
of voltage regulation, as Section 71 of the InsTITUTE rules is, by 
no means, in accordance with fact and observation. The matter 
being of extreme importance, the duty devolves upon the design- 
ing engineers, who have accumulated experimental evidence, to 
publish this evidence so as to enable consulting engineers to draw 
specifications intelligently without asking for phvsical impossi- 
bilities. 

The term “regulation” is vague and has been used very 
loosely. We understand by the regulation of an alternating 
current generator, the increase in per cent. of the terminal 
voltage consequent upon throwing off the load, the speed and 
exciting current remaining the same. Our problem consists in 
determining the terminal voltage for any current and power 
factor for various ampere turns excitation. In practice, it is 
difficult to make tests under load, especially on very large units. 
Therefore, it is necessary to have a method which enables us to 
determine the terminal voltage for any current and power factor 
from tests which can easily be performed. The first attempt to 
do this was made by Dr. Behn-Eschenburg of Oerlikon in 1502 
It is a curious coincidence that the experiments which Dr. By hn 
began and which I continued extensively at the Oerlikon Worxs 
were made on types of alternators which bore out and corrcb- 
orated Dr. Behn’s theory, although this theory does not represent 
the actual conditions on modern machines. The first experi- 
ments were made on machines of the Lauffen type, and later 
experiments were made on machines of the inductor type, both 
types of machines being carefully designed. Dr. Behn suggested 
that if the open circuit saturation curve of the generator was 


1903.||. BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 499 


known, as well as the current which the machine generated in 
short. circuit, we could obtain the apparent impedance of 
the armature by dividing, for a given excitation, the volts on 
open circuit by the amperes in short circuit for the same excita- 
tion. This theory, superficially considered, appears very 
plausible; but it is evident that it throws together, without 
explanation or justification, the armature reaction and the seif- 
inductive effects produced by the local fields in the armature. 


Keguiation Curves on 5UU0 k.w. 3-Phase Induction Generator. 


It appears plain that, for all we know, the local fields might Le 
independent of the saturation of the machine, while the effect of 
armature reaction would, of course, be dependent upon the de- 
gree of saturation. The experimental investigation was encum- 
bered by the fact that the power factor plays such an important 
part in the magnitude of the inductive drop. In order to 
simplify the conditions, we have only to consider that the drop in 
an alternator is a maximum if the power factor is a minimum. 


500 BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


It can also be readily shown that if the power factor is diminished 
below 20 per cent., the drop will practically remain unchanged, 
the error being extremely small in assuming that a power 
factor of 20 per cent. or less is equivalent to a power factor zero, 
as regards inductive drop. 

The alternating current generators built during the past ten 
years have had to operate mainly upon induction motor loads. 
‘At least this is true in regard to the generators built in the early 
nincties in Europe, as induction motors were then used there on a 
large scale. It seemed to me it was logical to demand that 
a generator should be capable of standing an induction motor load 
equal to its rated kilovolt amperes. Therefore, all my machines 
were designed so that they could give their full rated output in 
kilovolt amperes on a load of any power factor. These machines 
were tested by using, as a load, induction motors running idle, so 
as to be sure that the power factor would be below 20 per cent. 


TABLE I. 
Amperee Actual Calculated Termina! R nal ti : + 
Excitation Terminal Voltage. leas tis a5 
Voltage 
| A | B Actual A | B 
10 360 365 356 143. 140 
20 1110 | 1115 1140 41.5 41 197.7 
30 1700 1688 1840 24.1 25 14.7 
40 2100 2073 2290 16.6 18.7 7.4 
50 2230 2300 2540 Wei 2 4.35 
60 2460 \ 2431 * 2700 12.3 13.1 1.85 


In order to obtain very large currents, I used synchronous motors 
running without, or with very slight, excitation. The simplifica- 
tion thus obtained in interpreting tests and theory is worthy of 
notice. 

Fig. 1 shows the saturation curves at no load and at 96 am- 
peres load, cos g < .2, as well as the short circuit curve, of. a 
large inductor generator built six years ago at the Oerlikon 
Works. The magnetic circuit of this machine is represented in 
Fig. 2. 

Applying Dr. Behn’s method to these curves and referring to 
Fig. 3, where 0 B represents the saturation curve, and oc the 
short circuit curve, we find the apparent reactance, neglecting 
ohmic resistance, by dividing a B by ac. If we wish to 
determine the inductive drop for a current represented by DF 
equal to one-third a c, we reason, according to Dr. Behn, that as 
it takes an-e.m.f. equal to a B to drive a current equal to ac 
through the shcrt-circuited armature, it will take an e.m.f. equal 


1903.] BEHREND:-REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 501 


to D F+A C, equal to one-third a B, to drive a current D F through 
the armature. We thus obtain a point c, B c being equal to one- 
third asp. Applying the same reasoning to different excitations, 
we obtain a curveD HG, which represents the terminal voltage 
at different excitations for a constant current FD at a power 
factor zero. Applying this method to Fig. 1, we obtain the 
results compiled in Table I. 


FIG. 3 


SATURATION CURVE 
SHORT-CIRCUIT CURVE 
OPTIMISTIC CURVE 
PESSIMISTIC CURVE 


Vo. 7rg@ee 


(e) D 4 
EXC/TRTION. 


In applying the rule of paragraph 71 of the Committee on 
Standardization, we have only to remember that, referring to— 
Fig. 3, it takes an excitation corresponding to o p to produce a 
current D F in the short-circuited armature. Therefore, following 
the InstITUTE rule given in paragraph 71, in order to get the 
load saturation for a current D F on a power factor zero, we have 


502 . BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


VL 


to deduct the ampere turns 0 p from the ampere turns on open 
circuit. The result is curve D1K, the distances between this 
curve and the curve o L B measured along the abscissa being the 


same. 


of OA 


4) PE 


Regulation Curves on 500 k.w 3-Phase Generator. 


In Table I. there are placed side by side, the actual regulation 
obtained by experiment and the regulations as calculated from 
Dr. Behn’s method, and as determined by the rule of paragraph71 
‘The results obtained by the former method are given in column 
““A’”’; the results obtained by the latter method are repre- 


1903.] BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 508 


sented imacolumn “ B.”- It-is evident that method ‘‘ A.” 
gives results which are very nearly accurate, while the 
error resulting from the use of method ‘B”’ is greater than 
700 per cent. at high saturations. For the straight part of our 
saturation curve, the above methods give the same results. 


FIG 13 


Slot ae Lae" 
© Slots per Ale 
. 

FIQ 15 Slot 49°* 2.68" 

2 Stora per Fete 


FIG? 


| 
| 
| 
| 


| 


Slot 005° 452° 


Shes 18° 4 2695" 3 Slots per Pole 
DY Slots per Pale FIA. 2 


FIG. 12 


For the saturated part, method ‘‘ B ” yields in this case a regula- 
tion which is several hundred per cent. smaller than the actual 
regulation, while method “A” yields a regulation which is a few 
per cent. larger than the actual regulation. These tests were 
made on a large inductor generator with small air gap and large 


504 BEHREND. REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


pole pitch, which are the best possible conditions for good regu- 
lation. Fig. 2 shows the number and size of slots and other 
details. 

We will now apply the two methods “‘ A” and“ B” toa 500 
k.w., 3-phase generator designed with all the finesses that can be 
employed to obtain good regulation with greatest economy of 
material. The machine on which the tests were made was de- 
signed for 400 volts, 3-phase, 25 cycles and was run at 150 r.p.m. 
The load consisted of rotary converters running without excita- 
tion. 

Fig. 4 shows the observed data in the form of a curve, while 
Fig. 5 shows the magnetic circuit. Leaving it to the reader to 
check the many observed points for himself, we will refer 
to a few points to illustrate the argument. For instance, 
take the point observed at 160 amperes excitation. Here the 
e.m.f. on open circuit is 512 volts, the terminal voltage at 1200 
amperes load, cosy < .2,is 420 volts. The short circuit current 
at this excitation is 3400 amperes. According to method “ A,” 
we obtain an inductive drop equal to 1200+ 3400512 = 181 
volts; by method ‘“‘B”’ we obtain 102 amperes excitation 
as resultant excitation, which corresponds to 448 volts term- 
inal pressure. Hence the following table: 

TABLE II 
REGULATION. 


Actual. A 


22% 54.5% 14.3% 


The state of affairs in this case has become reversed, and 
method ‘“‘ A,’’ which gave approximately accurate results on the 
inductor generator, gives results which are over 200 per cent. 
too large on a well designed revolving field generator, while 
method “ B” yields a regulation which is about 50 per cent. too 
small. To adduce some further evidence to show the inherent 
errors of the two methods, there are shown in Fig. 6, the experi- 
mental curves taken on a 1600 h.p. synchrouous motor operating 
on a 3-phase system at 30 cycles and 450 r.p.m. The magnetic 
circuit of the motor is represented in Fig. 7, and a picture of the 
machine is given in Fig. 8. Method ‘“‘ A”’ gives, at 155 amperes 
excitation, 244 amperes load, a terminal voltage of 2130. Method 
“B” yields a terminal voltage of 2240 volts. The actually 


1903.) BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 505 


observed terminal pressure was 2130 volts. Now, it is clear that 
neither method “A” nor method ‘‘ B”’ yields accurate results 
in this case, but method “‘ B ”’ approaches somewhat more closely 


So S 
> 


600 
£0 


LINIAND LHOWS SUF LW L 


4 ae 
7¥IiG D 


fda 
Regulation Curves on 16U0 h.-p. 3-Phase Synchronous Motor. 


to actual facts than method ‘‘A’’ does. These curves were 
taken by running the synchronous motor as a generator. The 
tests were made by taking two machines, one running as gen- 
erator, the other as motor 


506 BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. [May 1¢ 


Returning once more to Fig. 3: Some five years ago the writer 
named the method ‘‘A,” which yielded the regulation curve 
Du G, the ‘ pessimistic method,” while he called the curve DIK 
obtained by applying method “ B,” or the INsTITUTE method, the 
‘‘ optimistic method.”’ These names have since been widely 
used in European electrical journals. There is some justification 
for using these terms as, from the standpoint of the designer, the 
application of method “ A,”’ which we will in the future call the 
‘“em.f. method,” yields terminal pressures which are much 
smaller than the ones he will actually obtain, while method “ B,” 


FIG. 8. 


which we wili call the ‘‘ ampere turn method,” yields values for 
the terminal pressure which are considerably greater than the 
ones he will actually obtain. A machine designed according to 
the ampere turn method will give less volts than required, while 
the machine designed by the e.m.f. method will give more volts 
than required. 

Again referring to Fig. 3, it is clear from the evidence so far 
adduced that the curve for the actual terminal voltage lies 
between the two curves DIK and pHG; that is, between the 
optimistic and pessimistic curves. But, further to corroborate 
this statement, there are shown regulation curves in Fig. 9, Fig. 


1903.]. BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 507 


10 and Fig. 11, Figs. 10 and 11 being reproductions of the 3- 
phase and single-phase load curves with the optimistic and 
pessimistic curves plotted in the diagrams. Fig. 9 shows also 
the e.m.f. between the open phase and either of the two terminals 
of the loaded phase. This curve will be referred to later. 

The magnetic circuit of this machine is shown in Fig. 12. 

The figure shows the shape of the poles and the shape and size 
of the slots. The curves in Figs. 9, 10, and 11 belong to a gener- 


ROW/T, 


RE7ES SvoRT Cd 


ator the normal rating of which is 200 k.w. at 13,000 volts and 
60 cycles. The load saturation was taken by running two of 
these machines together, one operating as generator, the other as 
synchronous motor. The power factor varied between 8 and 15 
percent. Fig. 10 represents a 3-phase load, while Fig. 11 repre- 
sents a single-phase load. These curves are well fitted to bear 
out the essential parts of the theory of the regulation of alter- 


508 BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


nators, as they indicate clearly that the armature ampere turns 
which are opposed to the field ampere turns are large in the 
3-phase machine and small in the single-phase machine; while the 
e.m.f. produced by local armature fields is small in the 3-phase 
machine and large in the single-phase machine. These condi- 
tions result in the load saturation curve of the single-phase 
machine lying very close to the pessimistic curve, while the load 
saturation of the 3-phase machine lies about half way between the 


optimistic and pessimistic curves. These diagrams show the 
armature reaction separated from the self-inductive effect of the 
local armature fields. The side of the triangle which is parallel 
to the abscissa represents the armature reaction, and the side 
parallel to the ordinate represents the self-inductive effect of the 
local fields. From the curves in Figs. 10 and 11 it is seen 
that by resolving the total inductive drop into such components 


=a 1 


1903.) BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 509 


results are obtained which are very closely in agreement with 
actual observation. However, there remains the difficulty of 
separating these two components. We add Fig. 12 to our 
experimental data, representing the regulation curves of a 100 
k.w., 900 r.p.m., 60 cycle, 3-phase generator, the magnetic cir- 
cuit of which is represented in Fig. 13. The curves contain a no 


_ load saturation; a saturation curve for 30 amperes 3-phase load 


of low power factor; a saturation curve for 30 amperes, single- 
phase load, low power factor; a curve giving the voltage between 
either one of the two phases operating single-phase, and finally 
the 3-phase and single-phase short circuit curves. It need 
hardly be remarked that the single-phase curves Were obtained 
by operating two phases of the Y connected machine in series. 
The curves in Fig. 12 are condensed in Table III. 


TABLE III 
100 K.W., 3-Phase Generator. 


Amperes Terminal | Terminal Vo'tagel Regulation per cent 
Excitation E.M.F. Voltage. Calculated by Calculated 
Institute Rule. | Observed. by Institute 
Rule 
16 2080 | 1050 1050 | 98 98 
20 2330 1530 1600 52.5 45.6 
24 2500 1850 1980 35.1 25.2 
28 2640 2060 2260 28.2 | 16.8 
22 2755 2250 2460 H 22.5 12 


Te 


A glance at this table shows that as soon as the saturation of 
the machine begins, the ampere-turn method, which is embodied 
in the Institute rule, gives results that fall very far from 
the mark. For instance, we observed at 28 amperes excitation 
a regulation of 28.2 per cent., while we calculated only 16.8 per 
cent. At 32 amperes excitation the case is even more striking, 
as we observed 224 per cent. regulation against 12 per cent. as 
calculated. 

In Fig. 14 are given the regulation curves of a 350 k.w., 2-phase 
generator operating at 60 cycles and 600 r.p.m. This woth also 
contains the curves for single-phase load. The magnetic circuit 


TABLE IV. 
350 K. W., 2-Phase Generator. 


_ Amperes | Terminal .| Terminal Voltage Regulation per cent. 
<citati .M.F. oltage. Calculated by Calculated 
Pee. melas y : Institute Rule. | Observed hy Institute 

—_—_|—___— Rule. 

1700 640 640 166 166 
30 3550 1440 1520 56. 2 48 
4O 2550 2030 2160 25.6 18 
50 2775 2360 2500 17.6 li 
60 2960 2600 | 2740 13.8 8.1 
70 3140 2740 \ 2920 14.6 7.55 

= EO ee 


De eg 


510 BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


of this machihe is shown in Fig. 15. I want again to call atten- 
tion to the fact that if these curves are checked by the two 
methods mentioned in this paper, we find that for 2-phase and 
3-phase machines, the curve of the terminal voltage lies between 
the two curves termed the optimistic and pessimistic curves, 
while the single-phase load curves approach very closely to the 
pessimistic curve. 


° 


Single- -Phase Repalation bane 


The data of Fig. 14 are represented in Table IV. which, after 
what has been said, requires little comment. 

This table shows conclusively that on most modern machines 
the [nstituTE rule gives results which do not at all correspond to 
actual observation. 

It has been demonstrated by the large number of tests de- 


1903.| BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. 511 


scribed in this paper that the ‘“‘ ampere turn ’’ method does not 
give satisfactory results in determining the regulation of an 
alternating current machine. The method is inherently wrong, 
as it neglects the extremely important inductive effect of local 
fields in the armature. It has also been shown that the e.m.f. 
method gives entirely misleading results. Therefore, it is 
proved conclusively that it is not possible to obtain the regulation 
of an alternating current machine by using no other character- 
istic than the saturation and short circuit curves. 

Another element is required in order to enable us to resolve all 
the effects of the armature current into two components, one com- 


ES 


k 
S 
y 
u& 
ke 
1o] 
K 
& 
BS 


on 
¥ S 


Regulation Curves on 100 k.w. 3-Phase Gencrator. 


ponent representing the demagnetizing effect of the armature, 
and the other component representing the inductive drop pro- 
duced by local armature fielus. Any theory which aims at a com- 
plete explanation of the phenomena produced by a load in the 
armature of alternating current machines must conform to actual 
observation and fact. Therefore, the two methods which have 
been criticised in this paper stand condemned. They should not 
be used for the quantitative determination of the regulation, 
because they do not explain nor express the facts. We must 

frankly admit the existing predicament that there is no simple 


512 BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


method which explains all the facts observed, although the 
designer undoubtedly creates for himself an empirical method 
by which he can, within very close limits, determine the actual 
regulation without every time actually performing the experi- 
ment. It is entirely a matter of skillful designing to reduce the 
inductive drop in a machine. It is plain that it is necessary to 
avoid any leakage from pole to pole and for that reason it is 
essential to use large pole pitches; in other words, to place the 
poles far apart from one another. This matter of field leakage is 


A 


\X 


SS 
NBN 
1% 


Vea 


\ 


Be 


z ee 


NT EF 


TION 


s 
eet 
ACT AL 
aidan 

ae 


well brought out by a comparison of the regulation curves of the 
inductor generator in Fig. 1 with the regulation curves repre- 
sented in the other figures. The poor regulation of the inductor 
generator is due to the field leakage between two inductor horns 
producing a counter e.m.f. Speaking from a large experience in 
the designing and testing of this type, I venture to assert that it is 
impossible to make these machines so that the load regulation 
curve lies very much above the pessimistic curve. While it is 
perfectly possible to build inductor generators with good regula- 


1903.| BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNA TORS. 513 


tion, this can be done only at the expense of a great deal of 
material, which fact condemns this type not only from a com- 
mercial standpoint, but especially from the point of view of the 
scientific engineer, whose aim it must be to design machines of 
excellent properties with the least expenditure of material. 

In looking at Figs. 10, 11, 12 and 14, in which the drop in the 
armature has been resolved into its two components, it is seen at 
a glance that if we want to take advantage of the high saturation 
it is essential to reduce to a minimum the local fields in the arma- 
ture, as this reduces the side of our triangle parallel to the 


yws 20 F79ki9 


Kapp’s Diagram for the Determination of the Regulation at Different 
Power Factors. 


ordinate. As a matter of design, this can be accomplished by 
using a large pole pitch, a narrow armature, and, to some 
extent, a large number of slots per pole and per phase. The large 
pole pitch which thus proves so useful has the further advantage 
of improving the ventilation of the machine, thus leading to cool 
operation. A large pole pitch makes a machine easily accessible, 
and increases the radiating surfaces, as the most effective part of 
the radiating surface of the machine lies in the armature 


faces. 


514 BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


If, for a given excitation, we have determined the drop of a 
machine for a given current and zero power factor, we can 
determine the regulation for any power factor for the same 
current, by using the vector diagram. The most elegant 
method is that represented in Fig. 16, originated by Mr. G. Kapp. 
After resolving the inductive drop into its two components, the 
armature reaction and the local fields, we can compose the 
ampere turns on the fields, o a’, with the ampere turns on the 
armature, o A, finding the resultant ampere turns 0 C. Next, 
applying the same process to the local fields, we can draw 
another diagram, making o B equal to the e.mf. produced by 
these local fields, 8 A equal to the ohmic drop in the armature, 
and o A, equal to the e.m.f. of the machine produced by the 
resultant ampere turns. We thus obtain oc, the terminal 
voltage of the machine. It can readily be seen that, by describ- 
ing the two circles with o A’ as radius, about o and 4 as centers, 
the radii-vectores drawn from o as center at an angle + ¢ or 
— g, will intersect the circle of terminal voltage in points c and F, 
so that o c and o F represent the terminal pressures at the two 
different power factors. The quadrant on the left represents a 
lag of the current, and therefore, a drop in pressure, while the 
quadrant on the right represents a lead. If the lead increases 
beyond the point of intersection of the two circles, the terminal 
pressure rises above the e.m.f. of the machine. For most 
practical purposes it is not necessary to use this diagram twice 
for the ampere turns on the armature and for the local fields, 
but it is sufficiently accurate to consider the inductive drop as an 
apparent impedance and to make o a equal to this impedance. 

It should not be overlooked that the apparent impedance is 
not only dependent upon the field excitation, but it is also 
dependent upon the armature current. This can easily be seen 
by working out a few values for the apparent impedance in Fig. 
4. It will thus be found that the impedance, while a constant at 
low saturation, increases rapidly with the increase of the arma- 
ture current at the same field excitation. 

It is interesting to study the curves giving the pressure on the 
open phase while taking out single-phase current, as this has 
important bearing on the question of regulation of 2-phase and 
3-phase machines when operating on a lighting load. It can bv 
seen from Figs. 9 and 12, which represent 3-phase machines 
% phases in series loaded, the third phase open, that for high 
saturation the curve for the pressure on the open phase between 


ak 


1903.| BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNA HONS 515 


the terminal of the open phase and either of the terminals of the 
loaded phases lies considerably higher than the curve for the 
pressure on the loaded phases. The same is true to almost the 
same extent of the 2-phase machine, the curves of which are 
represented in Fig. 14. This shows conclusively that there is 
little preference in favor of either type of machine as far as 
regulation is concerned. 


GENERAL Remarks REGARDING THE VALUE OF THE SHORT 
Circuit CHARACTERISTIC IN THE Desicn or ELEcrRIC 
GENERATORS. 

While the use of the short circuit characteristic is thus greatly 
invalidated by the difficulty of separating the effects of armature 


AMPERES SHORT CiRCLIT 
Pe 
S S s 
‘ S = R 
s 


reaction and of the local fields, it yet remains a valuable char- 
acteristic of the machine. It has been shown conclusively in 
this paper that we cannot use the saturation and short circuit 
curves alone to determine the regulation of a machine; but it 
has been indicated that, by plotting from these two curves, two 
other curves which I termed the “‘ optimistic ’’ and ‘‘ pessimistic’’ 
regulation curves, it is possible, with a certain degree of accuracy, 
to plot the actual regulation curve between these two last named 
curves. In doing this, there is, of course, much left to the 
discretion and judgment of the designer, who, nevertheless, 


516 BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


derives a great deal of help from these curves. The work of 
designing is more a work of art than a work of science. It is 
true that sound, scientific knowledge is absolutely required, but 
scientific knowledge without engineering intuition avails 
very little and leads merely to abortive designs. The great 
designers in electrical engineering have not always clearly under- 
stood why they have designed a machine in a certain way. They 
have been guided less by science than by intuition. 

The short circuit characteristic can be very usefully applied 
to the regulation of direct current generators, thus supplying a 
means of finding the ampere turns necessary to compound cr 
over compound a machine. Although somewhat foreign to our 
subject, there are shown in Fig. 17 the saturation, short circuit 
and regulation curves of a 75 k.w. direct current generator. 
There are plotted in this figure the saturation curve at no load, 
the load saturation at 410 amperes with no lead of brushes, and 
the load saturation at 410 amperes with a lead of brushes equal 
to three bars. There are also plotted two short circuit curves, 
one with no lead of brushes, and the other with a lead of three 
bars. These short circuit curves have been obtained by separ- 
ately exciting the generator and short circuiting the armature. 
The difference between the ampere turns required with lead and 
without lead of brushes at 410 amperes in the armature corres- 
ponds to the armature reaction of the machine. It will be 
found that with no lead of brushes, the distance between the no 
load and load saturations measured along the ordinate are the 
same for any saturation, while we can easily determine the load 
saturation with a lead of three bars, by combining the armature 
reaction and the ohmic drop in the armature as shown in Fig. 17. 
The short circuit test on direct current machines has the further 
advantage that it is a rather severe test for commutation, 
requiring very little power for driving. This method has been 
used by the writer for testing very large direct current machines 
which could not be operated in the testing room under full load. 
A machine which commutates satisfactorily in short circuit will 
surely commutate satisfactorily at full load. 


SUMMARY. 

To sum up the results of this paper: It has been demonstrated 
that the application of the ampere turn method, as proposed by 
the InstiTuTE rules, leads to entirely wrong results. It makes 
machines of inferior design and large leakage appear in regulation 


1903.] BEHREND: REGULATION OF ALTERNA TORS. 517 


not only equal to, but even better than, machines of careful and 
Superior design. Ina word, the method is not scientific and not 
in accordance with fact and observation. 

The ampere turn method, while very simple is inherently 
wrong, and it should, therefore, not be used, even if it is impossi- 
ble to substitute an equally simple rule forit. The desire to have 
such a simple rule should not tempt us to adopt one that is false. 
There is a tendency among engineers to neglect the element of 
uncertainty which is so prominent in all engineering questions. 

In conclusion, I wish to thank Mr. T. S. Allen, one of my 
assistants, for the pains he has taken in plotting the curves 
presented in this paper. 

PosTscRIPT. 

In my paper on ‘‘ The Experimental Basis for the Theory of 
the Regulation of Alternators,’ which I presened at the 177th 
meeting of the AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, 
New York, May 19, 1903, I gave experimental data with a view 
to checking the two most prevalent methods for predetermining 
the drop in alternators. The conclusion at which I arrived from 
my tests is that we obtain the most satisfactory agreement be- 
tween calculation and experiment if we resolve the effect of the 
armature into armature reaction and local armature fields. As 
my paper dealt only with the experimental side of my subject, 
I neglected to call attention to a valuable paper on this subject 
by Prof. A. Potier of Paris, which appeared in L’Eclairage 
Etectrique, July 28, 1900, entitled ‘“‘ Sur la Reaction D’Induit 
des Alternateurs.’’ There is an abstract of my paper before the 
InstiTuTE published in L’Eclairage of Jan. 9, 1904, in which it 
is cor.ectly pointed out that the method for determining the 
regulation at low power-factor, which seems to agree most 
clcsely with fact and observation is the method which was 
pointed out by Mr. Potier in the paper which I have quoted. 
My omission to refer to Professor Potier’s paper is all the more 
inexcusable as Professor Potier had the courtesy of sending me 
at the time a copy of his paper. I exceedingly regret my negli- 
gence in not referring to Professor Potier’s article in my paper, 
and I wish therefore to direct attention to it in this note. 


A paper read at the 177th Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
May 19, 1903. 


A STUDY OF THE HEYLAND MACHINE AS MOTOR AND 
GENERATOR. 


- BY COMFORT A. ADAMS. 


_ The Heyland motor consists essentially of an 
induction motor with short circuited secondary, 
and a commutator by means of which exciting 
current may be supplied either to the short 
circuited winding or to a separate exciting wind- 
ing. With either form, the power-factor can be 
controlled by means of the current sent in 
through the brushes. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The experimental work which forms the basis of this paper 
was carried on during the early part of last summer in connection 
with an experimental machine built by the General Electric Co., 
and kindly loaned to the writer. The work was first undertaken 
by two of the senior students in Electrical Engineering as a thesis, 
but owing to the shortness of the time at their disposal, very little 
was accomplished. The writer, having become interested, then 
undertook the work on his own account. 

The machine tested was not of the exact type advocated by 
Mr. Heyland, and consequently the results will not have the same 
directly practical value. The work was however intensely 
interesting to the writer, and if his interest in the interpretation 
of minor phenomena has carried him beyond those having prac~ 
tical value, he asks pardon and can only hope that the results 
here recorded may be of some value to those working along 
similar lines. 

Before proceeding to the discussion of the particular machine 
under consideration, it may not be out of place to review briefly 
the history and general theory of the subject. 

If any stationary closed coil direct-current armature such as a 
Gramme-Ring armature, be supplied with p syinmetrical poly- 

519 


520 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


phase currents through p brushes symmetrically placed around 
its commutator, there will be produced a magnetic field which 
revolves around the periphery of the armature with an electrical 
angular velocity equal to 2 zu, n being the frequency of the 
impressed e.m.f. If now the armature be revolved while the 
brushes remain stationary, the space velocity of the revolving 
field will remain the same, since the points at which the currents 
enter the armature are stationary. We have an exactly anala- 
gous case in every direct-current armature supplied with a con- 
tinuous current through stationary brushes, the m.m-f. of this 
current reraaining stationary in space, no matter at what speed 
the armature may revolve. 

As the space direction of the armature reaction in this latter 
case depends upon the position of the brushes, so does the 
space-phase of the revolving field in the alternating current case. 
The usefulness of this arrangement, however, depends upon the 
fact that when running at synchronism, the total reactance of 
the winding drops to a very small quantity, provided that p, the 
number of phases is relatively large, and, under the same condi- 
tions, the sparking at the brushes is very light. 

By this means it is possible to supply the exciting current of a 
polyphase motor or generator by means of the polyphase cur- 
rents delivered to or by the machine in question, without sacri- 
fice of power factor; in fact, when applied to an induction motor, 
the current taken may be made by over-excitation to lead the 
impressed e.m.f. 

The principle described above was first employed by Gérges' 
in 1891, in a polyphase series motor, the stationary part of which 
was fitted with the ordinary polyphase windings, such as used on 
an alternator armature, or on the stator of an induction motor, 
and the rotating part of which consisted cf a direct current 
armature with commucator and brushes, as above described, the 
two windings being connected in series; see Fig. 1. 

This was merely the application ot the revolving field idea to 
the old single-phase series motor, its chief advantage over the 
latter being the high power-factor and the reduction of the spark- 
ing at synchronism. 

At other speeds, however, the sparking is serious, due to the 
currents induced in the short circuited coil by the slip e.m.f., and 


1. Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, Dec. 25, 1891. The revolving brush 
motor of Le Blanc (Comptes Rendu, July 29, 1889), involves the same 
general principle, but applied in a different way, the object being to make 
t he motor self starting rather than to improve the power factor . 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 521 


as the series motor is not a constant speed motor, Gérges’ machine 
found no commercial field of usefulness. In other respects than 
those mentioned, the behavior of this machine is exactly similar 
to that of the single-phase series motor. 

The advent of the induction motor turned the attention of 
investigators from the commutator motor, and five years elapsed 
before Blondel’ described a very interesting though complicated 
combination of the commutator and induction motors. 


FIG, 1. GORGES MoToR, 


It consisted of an ordinary induction motor with short cir- 
cuited secondary and an additional closed coil direct current 
rotor winding with commutator. This latter winding was sup- 
plied with continuous current through a pair of brushes revolved 
at primary frequency by means of a synchronous motor. 

‘This motor is said to have operated perfectly without sparking, 
and with a power factor entirely within control by means of the 


Nortr 1. (L’Eclairage Electrique, Aug. 29, 1896). 


522 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


continuous exciting current. Theoretically, there is every 
reason to believe that it should so operate, owing to the long 
commutation cycle. In other respects than that of commutation 
the Blondel motor is exactly similar to one of the forms suggested 
by Heyland, in fact to that form the tests of which are recorded 
in the following pages, and so far as the compensation for watt- 
less current is concerned, the theory given below of the Heyland 
motor applies strictly to Blondel’s motor. In both motors the 
field produced by the exciting current revolves synchronously ; 
in the Blondel motor it is produced by a continuous current led in 
through synchronously revolving brushes, whereas in the Heyland 
motor it is produced by a synchronous alternating current led in 
through stationary brushes. 

The necessity for a direct-current supply, a synchronous motor 
and revolving brushes, easily explains why the Blondel motor 
was never considered commercially. 

Considering the short step from this to the Heyland motor, 
it is strange that another five years elapsed before the latter was 
announced." 

The Heyland motor consists essentially of an induction motor 
with short-circuited secondary, and a commutator by means of 
which exciting current may be supplied either to the short- 
circuited winding or to a separate exciting winding. With 
either forin, the power factor can be controlled by means of the 
current sent in through the brushes. 

The two original forms? are illustrated diagrammatically in 
Figs. 2 and 3. In both cases the primary is that of the ordin- 
ary induction motor, and the brushes are connected either to 
the supply circuit in shunt with the primary or tothe secondary 
of a step-down transformer. In Fig. 2 the secondary consists of 
a direct current closed coil winding with non-inductive resistances 
inserted between adjacent commutator bars, which resistances 
close the circuits of the individual coils and cause them to act as 
the short circuited secondary of the ordinary induction motor. 

Another important function of these resistances is to reccive 
the commutation kick of each coil as it passes a brush, and thus 
to minimize the sparking tendency. 


1. Licktrctechnische Zeitschrift, Aug. 8, 1901. 

2. Mc. Heyland is still experimenting with numerous varieties of wind- 
ings, some of which have been recently described, see E. T. Z., 1908, Jan. 
22d, Jan. 29th, Feb. 5th, March 19th. These differ, however, so materially 
from the type tested that they will not be here considered. 


1903.] LDAMS: HEYLAND MACHINz#. 523 


But these resistances have still a third function, namely that of 
distributing the exciting current in the several coils of the rotor 
in such a way as to avoid the harmonics of the three belt winding. 

Fig. 3 shows the second type, which was that tested by the 
writer. The short-circuited secondary is in this case a squirrel 
cage shown in the tops of the rotor slots, and the separately excited 
winding is shown in the bottoms of the rotor slots. The rotor 
windings are exactly similar to those of the Blondel motor. This 


Fig. & 


type has many points in common with that shown in Fig. 2, 
the chief difference being in the matter of commutation. 

Heyland also pointed out in his first communication that his 
machine would operate very satisfactorily as a self self-exciting 
alternator. 

Shortly after the announcement of the Heyland motor, M. 
Latour! described a machine just like that of Fig. 3 without the 
squirrel cage, but intended primarily as generator. The only 


1. L’Industrie Electrique, 1902, Feb. 25th, April 10th, April 25th. 


524 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. . [May 19 
difference between this and: the Gorges machine is that. in the 
former, the armature is connected in shunt, and in the latter case 
in series with the field. Although there is.no path especially 
provided for the slip current in the Latour machine, the arma- 
ture current is closed through the supply circuit, and slip currents 


do flow along this path as will be shown below. 


COMPENSATOR . 


EPONLONAR.. 


More recently Osnos! has described a machine in which the 
alternating exciting current is first commutated by means of a 
small auxiliary direct current armature on the shaft of the main 
machine, and then led into the rotor exciting winding by means 
of slip rings. 

1. (E. T. Z., Oct. 16, 1902.) 


oO 
bo 
OU 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 


REACTANCE OF ExcitinG WINDING. 

In the calculation of any such machine it is necessary to know 
what is the effective reactance of the exciting winding. This 
problem, and the one of commutation in the same class of ma- 
chines, are closely allied, and have been much analyzed by various 
writers. The solutions obtained have differed very widely. 
Accurately analyzed for an actual machine, the problem is a 
serious one, but it is not difficult to get a general view of the 
more important factors and the manner in which they enter. 

Consider first a machine without the short circuited secondary, 
such as that of Latour or Gorges, and assume that the armature 
is running at synchronism. 

The total flux linked with the armature or secondary winding, 
or any part of it, may be divided into two parts, the mutual flux 
linked with both primary and secondary and the secondary 
leakage flux. Consider first the mutual flux; in case of a large 
number of phases supplied with symmetrical, simple harmonic 
e.m.f.’s, this will consist of a sinusoidal field revolving at syn- 
chronous velocity. Therefore, since the armature is also revolv- 
ing in-synchronism, there is no relative motion between the two 
and no corresponding reactance e.m.f. If however the number 
of phases be small, as is usual, say three, then the armature will 
be a three-belt winding, and there will be introduced into the 
revolving field several prominent harmonics revolving at sub- 
multiples of the synchronous velocity. These harmonics will 
give rise to a reactive e.m.f. which decreases as the number of 
phases increases. There is another harmonic introduced by the 
teeth, but this is usually made negligible in any set of coils by the 
vernier action of the stator and rotor slots. 

Consider now the leakage flux: the corresponding reactance 
is evidently determined by the frequency of the current in the 
circuit in question; but although the average current in any indi- 
vidual coil is of slip frequency, the circuit in question is that 
between two adjacent brushes, the current in which is of primary 
frequency. 

The current variation in the coil undergoing commutation does 
not affect the reactance, since the commutation is forced and 


1. Le Blanc, L’Eclairage Electrique, Oct. 26, 1901. 
Latour, L’Eclairage Electrique, Nov. 23, 1901. 
Heyland, L’Eclairage Electrique, Nov. 30, 1901. 
Poincare, L’Eclairage Electrique, Jan. 18, 1902. 
Latour, Electrical World and Engineer, Feb. 1, 1902. Many of the 
references given elsewhere in this paper include discussions of these points. 


526 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


represents a slight increase in the energy component of the e.m.f. 
rather than in the reactive component. The leakage reactance 
is thus determined by the primary frequency. 

Commutation.—The conditions for ideal commutation are, as 
in the case of a direct current machine, that the flux linked with a 
coil should remain constant during its commutation period, and 
that the brush-contact resistance should be high relatively to that 
of the coil. 

The second condition is as easily fulfilled in the alternating as 
in the direct current machine, but not so with the first. At 
synchronism there is no relative motion between the fundamental 
field and the coil in commutation, but there is a considerable 
relative motion between this coil and the harmonic fields, which, 
in the case of a three-phase armature, is the cause of heavy cur- 
rents in the short circuited coil and sparking at the brushes. 

The tooth harmonics may also be of considerable magnitude 
in the case of a short air gap and open slots, see Fig. 4g, de- 
scribed below. The resistance to commutation offered by the 
leakage reactance is the same as in a similar direct current 
machine, but here it is not possible to neutralize this effect by 
shifting the brushes. This is however of little importance as 
compared with the first mentioned harmonics. The ordinary 
devices for the suppression of sparking will be helpful here, but 
not so effective, owing to the greater e.m.f.’s in the short-circuited 
coil. ; 

The above applies primarily to a secondary consisting simply 
of a closed-coil direct-current armature. In Heyland’s motor, 
Fig. 2, the non-inductive resistances between bars serve as a 
means of distributing the exciting current so as to eliminate the 
harmonics otherwise due to the wide phase belts, even in the case. 
of single-phase excitation. These resistances also receive the 
commutation kick due to the leakage reactance. 

The squirrel cage in Fig. 3 serves the same purpose, but not 
so perfectly. Here the field harmonics are largely eliminated 
by the damping effect of the low resistance squirrel cage, or, the 
m.m.f. harmonics due to the nature of the exciting winding are 
balanced by secondary currents in the short-circuited rotor 
winding. This in fact is the explanation of the action of the 
machine shown in Fig. 2, the induced currents and the exciting 
current combining in the same winding to produce a sinusoidal 
m.m.f. ‘distribution, whereas in the machine of Fig. 3 they are 
in separate windings. ‘The less satisfactory commutation in the 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 527 


latter case is due partly at least to the leakage between the two 
secondary windings. 

The remarks above concerning reactance and commutation 
apply only to synchronous operation. Whenever there is slip, 
there will be a slip e.m:f. and current in the short-circuited coil, 
which, in the case of the simple closed-coil winding, or in the 
machine of Fig. 3, will tend to cause sparking. In the machine 
of Fig. 2, most of the slip current will be shunted across the 
commutator bar-connections with which the brush is in parallel. 
But if the slip is large, sparking will occur even here. There wil 
also be a slip current in the main part of the exciting winding, 
which in the two first mentioned machines will flow through the 
brushes into the supply circuit. In the machine of Fig. 2, a 
large part of this slip current will be shunted through the non- 
inductive bar-connections. 

Practically the same thing takes place in No. 3, for with a given 
total slip current, most of it will flow in the low-resistance squirrel 
cage, and only a small part through the exciting winding and 
brushes. 

In either No. 2 or No. 3 when running normally, the amount of 
slip current that flows through the brushes does not add seriously 
to that otherwise necessary, especially as it is in quadrature with 
the exciting current. Neither does the slip e.m.f. in the short 
circuited coil endanger the commutation, provided the ordinary 
commutation precautions have been observed. But when start- 
ing, or running at very low speeds, both of these disturbances are 
considerable. 

The effect of the leakage reactance of the exciting winding of 
either of these Heyland machines is practically negligible. In 
No. 3 the presence of the low-resistance secondary reduces the 
apparent reactance of the exciting winding; this is shown for the 
machine tested in Figs.18 and 19, where the power factor of 
the exciting current approaches unity when the slip approaches 
zero. Inthe machine of ‘Fig. 2, the independence of the indi- 
vidual coils tends to reduce the current therein to the slip fre- 
quency. This is readily seen from the curves of Fig. 4, which 
show the current variation in single coils of the exciting winding 
of a machine without any commutator bar connections. Curves 
(a), (b) and (c) are for three different coils of a three-phase ma- 
chine at synchronism and (d), (e) and (7) for single, three and six 
phase machines respectively, each with a considerable slip. 

Fig. 4g is an oscillograph curve of the potential difference 


ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


on 
bo 
~ 


between two adjacent commutator bars of the machine tested, 
while running under full load. The long wave, only a small 
fraction of which is shown, is of slip frequency and shows the 


Fig. 4a 


Fig. 4b 


FIG. 4c. 


Ag. 4a. 


Pi¢ se. 


Fig, af 


average current; the large kinks are due to the commutation or 
the shifting of the coil in question from one phase to the next; 
and the small kinks are due to the teeth. But for the tooth 


Te 
‘ 


1903. ] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 529 


harmonic, this curve would look very much like that of Fig. 4e. 
Each of the curves d, e and f, may be considered as approxi- 
mately made up of a long slip wave, and a very prominent har- 
monic of about p times the primary frequency, where p is the 


- number of phases. If however the coil in question is more or less 


independent, as in the machine of Fig. 2, these harmonics will 
be largely damped out, leaving only the main exciting current of 
slip frequency. This is what was referred to on page 764 as the 
distributing function of the commutator-bar connections and is 
also a statement from a different point of view, of what was said 
at the bottom of page 768 regarding sinusoidal m.m.f. distribution. 


DESCRIPTION OF MACHINE TESTED. 
As the analysis given below relates primarily to the type of 
machine tested, it will be well to get that machine clearly before 
us. It was a ten h.p., three-phase, 440-volt, 60-cycle, 6-pole 


Fic. 4g. 


induction-motor (see Fig. 5), with a low-resistance squirrel 
cage in the bottom of the rotor slots, and a separate exciting 
winding in the tops of the rotor slots. 

The exciting winding was of the ordinary two-path or series 
variety, connected to a 107-bar commutator, and as there were 
54 rotor slots, one-half slot was empty. But the real number of 
bars was only 35, or about 6 per pole, since the commutator leads 
were disconnected from two of every three bars, and the three 
bars soldered together. There were thus 33 sets of three coils 
each and two sets of four coils each. 

The brushes were of copper gauze, two sets of three each, each 
set being provided with an independent rocker. After some 
preliminary tests, these rockers were graduated in electrical 
degrees with arbitrary zeros. 

The remaining dimensions are given in Fig. 5, except the 


ae 


530 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [Mze- 19 


Jeugth of core parallel to the shaft, which is five inches between 
heads. The primary is star-connected, and has a hot resistance, 


r, = .75 ohms per phase, and a leakage reactance x, = 1. ohm 
per phase. 
The squirrel cage has an equivalent hot resistance of r, = .43 


ohms per phase (reduced to primary turns), and an equivalent 


, \ 
“oe >. BS 
Coe oe 4 7a 

Bake oS rd £ c= 

} > 
— : \ sq O 
Seg et oN Gig, ns 

STATOR SLOT. ROTOR SOT. 
IIG@ CONDUCTORS NE&tl. B%oSs WOUND — @4 CON. NE 16 BMS 


SQUIRREL- BAR . 0:5 X 0.38 


FIG. 5 


leakage reactance with respect to the primary of x, = 1.88 ohms. 
x, +x, was measured at standstill and the two separated by cal- 
culation. X, is larger because the squirrel cage was concen- 
trated in the bottoms of the slots, and because of the over. 
hanging rotor teeth. 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. O31: 


The extra exciting winding, when supplied with 3-phase excita- 
tion through 3 brushes at intervals of 120 electrical degrees, is 
delta-connected and a three-belt winding, whereas the primary 
is a six-belt winding; 7.e., in the ordinary 3-phase winding there 
are six phase-belts per pair of poles, the currents in any two 
adjacent belts differing in phase by 60°, whereas in the closed-coil 
direct-current winding, there are only three phase belts, the 
currents in which differ by 120°. This is an important distinction 
since both in the generation of e.m.f. and of m.mf. by a three-belt 
winding, there is a considerable loss of effectiveness due to the 
breadth of each belt, and the consequent differential action going 
on between different parts of the same belt. The differential 
factor for a distributed six-belt winding in a sinusoidal field is 


pe = .955, that for a three-belt winding is. = .827, and 

22 2.7% 

the differential factor of the latter with respect to the former is 
V3 

ee 866. 


\ 
The actual hot resistance per delta phase of this winding was 
2.7 ohms, or reduced to star, .9 ohms. 
The equivalent resistance per star phase reduced to primary 


: Folk ms 72X16 y 2 y of 
turns and to a six belt basis is, r;=2.7 (sere i =2.9 


ohms. This is the resistance to be used in the calculation of the 
slip current in the exciting winding. The differential factor 
enters twice, since it affects both the slip e.m.f. induced in this 
winding, and the m.m-.f. value ci the resulting current as com- 
pared with the same current in the primary. This assumes a 
sinusoidal flux distribution, and neglects the resistance of the 
outside circuit through which the slip current must flow; it is 
therefore only approximate. 

The equivalent leakage reactance of this winding reduced to 
primary turns is, x, = .86. 

Its mutual leakage reactance with respect to the squirrel cave 
is only a little less than this. 

As there will be slip current in both the squirrel-cage and the 
exciting winding, it will be convenient at times to treat them as a 
single winding in which case their equivalent hot resistance and 
leakage reactance’ will be respectively (for slips within the wor 
ing range) r = .875 and x = 1.25 ohms. 


1. All the reactances are given reduccd to primary frequency. 


532 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


A rather interesting fact which has, however, no particular 
bearing on the subject of this paper, is that for low speeds, ¢.g., at 
standstill, the equivalent resistance is considerably larger, and 
the reactance smaller, than that given above. If the copper 
were uniformly distributed throughout the slot section, this 
would not be the case. 


THEORY OF OPERATION. 

As in the induction motor, the magnitude and speed of the 
revolving field are, for any given machine, practically dependent 
upon the magnitude and frequency of the impressed e.m.f. In 
the particular machine under consideration, there are three 
windings and three distinct currents, the resultant m.m.f. of 
which must be just sufficient to produce tie above-mentioned 
flux under all conditions, remembering of course that as the 
primary drop incréases with the currence, the counter e.m.f. and 
flux will decrease slightly. 

The only difference between this and the ordinary induction 
motor problem is that here we have an additional externally 
supplied current and m.m-f. to take account of, one that revolves 
with synchronous velocity, if supplied from the same source as 
that of the motor current, but one whose space-phase with 
respect to that of the primary e.m.f. depends not only upon its 
time-phase but also upon the position of the brushes. It is pos- 
sible, therefore, by means of the brushes, to give to the m.m-f. of 
this exciting current any desired space-phase with respect to the 
other m.m.fs. These relations will be more readily appreciated 
with the aid of a vector diagram. 

The familiar induction-motor diagram is shown in Fig. 11. 
All secondary constants are reduced to primary turns. @ is the 
flux common to both primary and secondary, E’,= 4.44 ®,, N, 
10-8, that part of impressed e.m.f. necessary to balance the 


counter e.m.f., —E’,; E’,= —E’,, the e.m.f. that would be induced 
in the secondary at standstill; s the slip, and s E’, the slip e.m.f. 
Si2. 


in secondary; /, = secondary current; J,’=—I,, 


Ex, 7,' +s" x,’ 
that part of primary current necessary to balance the m.m_f. of J; 
I, = the exciting current. 
LVJSr2¢u?2 = 1,2, = impedance drop in primary. 
E, = vector sum of E’, and J, Z, = primary impressed e.m.f. 
There are two distinct interpretations of this diagram, one 
according to which the directions of the vectors represent the 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 533 


telative time-phases of the several variables, and the other 
according to which the directions of the vectors represent the 
relative space-phases, in electrical degress, of the same variables. 
Clear conceptions of both interpretations are necessary to a 
thorough understanding of the problem in hand, but the latter 
will be particularly useful, since it is the space-phase of the excit- 
ing current that is determined by the brush position. 

The power aspect of the problem is also a vital one, in which 
connection the following notation will be used. 


P, = E, 1, cos @, = primary impressed power per phase. 
tame oly els COSA Ld.) 12 7 

Pi = £,’ 1 -cos 6,44, 1, cos\(E,'7,) +12 7,: 

I? r, is the primary copper loss, | 

FE’, I, cos (£’, I,) the core loss, and 

Wee a dt COS Os =i." 2 5 COs 0, 


12 2 
ip sas ee seis "es TOM 
i era aia SP eh ee ee ee 
Tae Diy Tones ee) 


Since P’, is the power transmitted across the air-gap from 
stator to rotor by the revolving field, it is a measure of the torque 
and is in fact the torque in synchronous watts. 

One of the factors of the torque is E’, which in any given case 
is directly proportional to the flux, and the other factor is /, cos 0,, 
the component of the secondary current in quadrature with the 
flux. This latter component will here be called the torque cur- 
rent, and will be designated thus: I, = I, cos 0. 

In a rough analysis, the flux and E’, may be assumed constant 
and the torque proportional to the torque current, /;. This will 
prove useful later. 

Consider now the change necessary to be made in the induction 
motor diagram in order to adapt it to the Heyland motor, par- 
ticularly to that form shown in Figs. 3 and 5. 

In addition to the slip current J,,, in the squirrel cage there 
will be a current /, in the exciting winding which results from the 
combined action of two e.m.fs., one a slip e.m.f. in phase with s EF,’ 
(in fact equal to s E’, if, as is the case, the constants of the ex- 
citing winding have been reduced to primary turns), and the 
exciting e.m.f., E,, whose relative phase is determined by the 


534 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


brush position. For convenience, this current will be looked upon 
as two separate currents, which would be produced by the above 
two e.m.fs. if acting separately. Designate the current produced 
by the slip e.m.f. by J,, and that produced by the exciting e.m.f. 
by I,. Then /,, the actual current in the exciting winding is the 
vector sum of J,, and J,. These currents are all shown on the 
right hand side of Fig. 7. The total secondary current, I,, both 
windings taken together, is then the vector sums of I>. and J,, or 
as will be found more convenient, the vector sum of J, and J,, 
where /, is the total slip current. : 

If J,, and I,, had been calculated separately for the particular 
machine under consideration, J,, would have been found to lag 
a little more than as drawn, and /., a little less, owing to the 
relatively greater resistance in the latter; but their vector sum 
would have been the same. It is quite as accurate then to con- 


Fig. 7. 
HEYLAND MOTOR. 


sider these two windings as one, so far as the slip current is con- 
cerned, and to take the corresponding constants as given on page 
773. 

I, is dependent entirely upon the exciting e.m.f. and 
the brush position. The reactance offered to this current is, 
as already explained, negligible, owing to the damping 
effect of the squirrel cage, and we may assume that J, is in phase 
with E,. 

EE, is usually in quadrature with the impressed e.m.f., or at 
least bears a practically fixed phase relation thereto, being ob- 
tained from the same source by some transforming device. 

-Denote the space-phase of J, by @, the angle which it makes 
with &’,; this is not a fixed angle with fixed brush position, but 
nearly enough so for most calculations, and is far more convenient 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 535 


than the angle between /, and J, which is fixed with fixed brush 
position. “4 

Assume now that the motor is running as an ordinary induction 
motor (see dotted lines of Fig. 7), on constant load. Then follow 
what takes place when a known exciting current J, of known 
phase, 0,, is delivered to the exciting winding. 

The guiding fact in the determination of the new phase rela- 
tions is that the torque current J, = I, cos 0, will be practically 
unchanged. If 6, is greater than 90° as in the figure, it is evident 
that J, must increase beyond its corresponding value in aregular 
induction motor, 7.¢., the slip must increase by an amount pro- 
portional to — 7, cos 0. 

It is also evident that as the phase of J, is advanced by the in- 
troduction of J,, the phase of J, will be similarly advanced, the 
amount of this advance depending upon J, sin @,. 

The exciting current has thus introduced two changes, one in 
the slip and slip current, proportional to J, cos 0,, and the other in 
the wattless component of J,, proportional to J, sin 0. 

The latter change is evidently the important one, and to make 
it a maximum is to make the other a minimum, and 0, = 90°. 

This is the usual arrangement. The effect of any change in J, 
either as to its phase or magnitude is readily followed on the 
diagram. Results of tests in which various changes were made 
will be shown on a later page. 

Of the two factors, magnetizing current and leakage drop, which 
go to introduce a wattless current in the induction motor, the 
former is approximately constant and the latter proportional to 
the load. It is thus impossible to compensate perfectly for 
primary lag at all loads, with a constant exciting current/,. If 
I, is just enough for no load compensation it will be insufficient 
at full load; if it just compensates at full load, it will over-com- 
pensate at no load and give a leading current. 

The exciting current necessary for the complete compensation 
of this machine has been calculated for several loads and plotted 
in Fig. 8. One of the intermediate values of /, will give a practi- 
cally unit p.f. over the whole range except for very light loads. 
In this curve, as in later ones, the exciting current is plotted as it 
would be measured, amperes entering at one set of brushes, the 
theoretical ratio of this to the equivalent primary current is 1.79 
and is obtained as follows: 

One ampere from the compensator divides at the brush and 


becomes pe amperes in each branch of the exciting winding. 


V3 


a pe a 


6 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 1h, 


Ko 
oo 


This must be reduced to primary turns, and then by the differen- 


tial factor, .866 é 
1 24X53.5° 1 

Sass ee SESE = , —— =.179 
ORR EEE She eae a 


This calculation assumes sinusoidal currents and sinusoidal 
flux distribution in the air gap. Observations to be given below 
show that the real ratio is about 1.68. 

Nearly all the points made in the above analysis, and some 
others, are illustrated in the tests recorded below. 


GENERAL CONDITIONS OF TEST. 


Before considering the results of these tests it will be desirable 
to point out some of the conditions under which they were made. 

The supply alternator was a General Electric 50 k.w. 3-phase 
6 pole 60 cycle revolving-field machine with two slots per pole per 
phase. It is normally connected delta for 220 volts, but was 
connected star and raised to 440 volts for these tests. Its star 
e.m.f. is shown in Fig. 9,. 

The alternator was belted to an 80 h.p. single-crank, duplex- 
compound engine. The latter was new and its valves had never 
been accurately set, which aggravated the naturally large 
angular variation of this type of engine.” This point was so forced 
upon our attention during these tests that later, when opportunity 
offered, the variation in velocity during a revolution when run- 
ning light, was measured, and found to be about 3 per cent. on 
either side of the average. 

The combined secondary resistance of the Heyland motor 
when running compensated, was so low that a very sudden change 
of 1 per cent. in the impressed frequency would have produced a 
change in the energy current amounting to about 60 per cent. of 
the full-load current. 

After allowing for the various damping links between the 
engine and motor, there still remained a very annoying kick in the 
ammeter needles. 

In addition to this rapid vibration of small amplitude, there 


1. The fuzzy appearance noticcd in this print is doubtless due to the 
warm weather and consequent fluidity of the damping oil, which allowed 
the oscillograph to inject a little of its own personality into the wave. It 
is safe to assume however that the longer kicks of larger amplitude, which 
appear in figure 4g have an entirely different origin. 


a 


2S 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 537 


was a larger swing of much longer period, due apparently to the 
sluggishness of the governor, and although the line voltage ap- 
peared to remain very constant, the exciting current as well as 
the primary motor current participated in the pumping. 

Since the exciting circuit is almost a dead resistance, this was 
somewhat of a surprise, and the writer has looked in vain for a 
satisfactory explanation. The great steadiness of the line voltage 
and the comparatively slight flucutation of the wattmeter 
needles almost forces one to set aside the idea of a change of speed 
and an interchange of power between alternator and motor, and 
to look entirely to the motor itself as the origin of the difficulty. 


Cee 
7 


6 


AMPERES 


EXCITATION CHARACTERISTICS. 


So pe 


EXCITING CUR. FoR COMPLETE een 


= l.9 


‘ 2 3 ay SS) pps <¢ 8 ) 19 ul 
TORQUE IN SYN! IKILOWATTS. 


Whatever the cause, the exciting current did surge over a con- 
siderable range, and there was undoubtedly a corresponding 
change in power factor and line current, independently of any 
variation of the energy current; although that the latter did take 
place in a lesser degree was shown by the vibration of the watt- 
meter needles. 

All these surgings decreased as the load increased, but varied 
from day to day, probably due to variations in steam pressure and 
belt tension. The latter was found by experiment to have con- 
siderable effect, but by no combination of conditions was it pos- 
sible to eliminate the difficulty entirely. Another difficulty arose 


538 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. . [May 19 


‘from the heating of the exciting winding which caused the exciting 
current to decrease under constant exciting e.m.f. It was not 
possible to keep this current constant by means of an ammeter 
and rheostat, since the current in the ammeter includes a part of 
the slip current as above explained, and the latter varies with the 
load. 

This variation of resistance was especially annoying in con- 
nection with the generator tests where the exciting current was 
necessarily much higher, and where a given change in resistance 
had a much more than proportional effect upon the terminal 
voltage. 

The large exciting currents used in the generator tests gave 
trouble on another score, that of sparking; in fact, with any 
exciting current within the working range there was some spark- 
ing, but with the larger currents the sparking was so vicious as to 
require that the commutator should be turned down after a run 


of afew hours. It is thus evident that the damping effect of the 
low resistance squirrel cage is not sufficient to warrant the use of 
copper brushes, certainly not with such a small number of com- 
mutator bars. Undoubtedly, the arrangement of Fig. 2 would 
operate much more satisfactorily in this respect. 

The motor primary was star-connected and was provided with 
taps near the centre of the star, for excitation (see Fig. 3b). 

There was also a separate star-connected compensator provided 
for the same purpose (see Fig. 3a). The latter was used in all the 
tests here described, as a much wider range of exciting e.m.fs. 
was thereby obtainable. 

In all the motor tests there was an ammetet in each motor cir- 
cuit and in each exciting circuit. Three wattmeters were used 
connected between the lines and the motor star, this arrangement 
better fitting the instruments at hand. 

A single voltmeter was used across the line to maintain the 


_1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 539 
voltage constant, but the equality of the latter in the different 
phases was checked several times. 

A single voltmeter and wattmeter were used in one of the star 
compensator circuits. 

The slip was very accurately counted by the familiar alternat- 
ing current arc lamp method. 

The load on the motor consisted of a 500 volt direct current 
motor, operated as generator, and delivering current to a 500 volt 
generator as motor, on the shaft of the same engine to which the 
alternator was belted. This arrangement made it possible to 
obtain a very constant frequency, and very easy to control the 
load, although it undoubtedly contributed to the surging above 
described. 

The instruments were frequently and carefully calibrated, and 
there is every reason to believe that the results are good for this 
class of work; but those who have had much experience in this 
line will appreciate the difficulties, especially when about twenty 
observations must be taken simultaneously by four or five ob- 
servers. In this connection, the method above described for 
loading the motor had one great advantage, that it made it possi- 
ble to keep the load perfectly steady throughout any desired 
period. — 

In all the motor tests the impressed e.m.f. was maintained at 


440 volts. 
RESULTS OF TESTS. 

Test No. 1.—The machine was run without compensation as an 
ordinary induction motor. The results are shown in Fig. 10. 

A vector diagram drawn to scale for full load of 10 h.p. is shown 
in Fig. 11. This shows more clearly than the curves the phase 
relations of the severable variables, and the relative importance 
of the constants. : 

Test No. 2.—In this test the motor had no load except its own 
friction and that of the load-generator to which it was belted ; 
the exciting e.m.f. was kept at an arbitrarily chosen value, 8.15 
volts star, and the brushes shifted around a complete electrical 
circumference; readings were taken at regular intervals, the 
object being to find the magnetizing or normal position of the 
brushes, at which the power factor is a maximum and the line 
current a minimum. . See Fig. 12. 

The observed points are marked and the solid curves are drawn 
in from approximate calculations in which the leakage reactances 
were neglected, the errors thereby introduced being compara- 


540 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


tively small. The object of the calculations is that thev 
may serve as a basis of interpretation for the observed resu!ts. 

The broken curves, where drawn, are through observed points. 
The lower scale of degrees is the arbitrary one of the brush- 
rocker, and the upper degree scale corresponds to the angle 0, of 
the diagrams. 

The variation of the several quantities involved is most readily 
followed with the aid of the diagram, Fig. 13, which is drawn to 
scale. The notation isthe same asin Fig. 7. J,, 7, and J, will 


FIG¢.lo. TesT */ 


° 
o 


® 
6 


<—— 4 oF Sue 


a RF —epn 


> 


0 CURRENT ——> 5 


a 


Q 3 *, 5 s q 8 2? 
TORQUE IN SYN" KILOWATTS -——z 


be assumed constant but J, may be shifted in phase by means of 
the brushes. The slip current is then J, = ad = I,—I, cos 0, 
which in the position shown, is negative, 7.¢., the motor is operat- 
ing above synchronism. ‘The primary current is , = dj and its 
power factor = cos 0, where 0, is the angle between d 3 and the 
horizontal. 

Of the total slip current a fixed proportion ab flows in the 
exciting winding, and theremainder b d in the squirrel cage. The 
total current delivered by the compensator is then the vector sum. 
of J, anda b,namely,o b = /,. Given the slip current the slip may 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 541 


be calculated as on page 1. It is easy now to follow the changes 
ir the several variables, as J, is made to revolve by shifting the 
brushes. The locus of the point b is shown by the inner curve in 
the diagram. 

In calculating the curves for the slip and for J,, the hot resist- 
ance of the squirrel cage was inadvertently used, whereas the 
current was so small that the squirrel cage was undoubtedly at a 
low temperature. Had the cold resistance been used, these two 
curves would have fallen nearer to the observed points. 

The somewhat erratic disposition of the 7, points is entirely 
accounted for by the change in temperature of the exciting 
windings; the points were not taken in consecutive order. 

The considerable discrepancy between the calculated and 
observed values of 7, and of the power factor, is partly due to the 
surging of the exciting current noted above, and partly to the 


§ 


FIG. tt 
Simere Inpvction Moron. 

reaction of the three-belt exciting m.m.f. upon the primary 
current which introduces wattless harmonics into the latter. 

Concerning the surging question, a consideration of Fig. 13 will 
show that when J, is in the magnetizing position (0, = 90°), a 
small change in J, will make a large percentage change in J,, and 
that if J, is oscillating about a mean value, T, will oscillate about 
a mean value; but the mean value of , does not correspond to the 
mean value of J,. If the mean value of J, is small, z.¢e., if the 
motor is under-excited, the mean value of 7, corresponds to some- 
thing less than the mean value of J,, and as the mean value of I, 
increases, it corresponds to a value of J, which is less than its 
mean by an increasing difference, until the mean of 7, is equal to 
I, sin 0), when it corresponds to the minimum value of /,. 

If then the currents are surging as above described, and each 


ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


reading recorded is the mean taken over the range of oscillation, 
the records of I will be too large, the discrepancy being most 
marked in the vicinity of the highest power factor. The larger 


& s & on Nn co 
n LINE 44a EXCITING CURRENT => 9 


n 


Fig.ia2. TEST Re, 


emits Shem cfanadregigne.| | 


Dates 


puieeyea 
ead les 


= 


J 24 eee 


ae a 
is 


Se 


<0 eae 


eS 
la | 
males || 


POS!TIOW OF BRUSHES (Etec. Des) 
<—BACKWARD FORWARD —> 


the load the less this error, since an increase in energy component 
reduces the influence of the variable wattless component. 


Concerning the wattless harmonics induced in the primary by 


the reaction of the exciting current, the sitnplest point of view is 


1 903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 543 


to assume a sinusoidal flux distribution and to remember that 
the resultant m.m.f. of all three currents must be distributed 
sinusoidally. If one of the three is forced by the nature of its 
winding to give a very far from sinusoidal m.m.f., and if this one 
happens to be carrying a much larger current than the other two 
together, as is the case in hand, there will be induced in the other 
two windings, relatively large wattless harmonic currents, which 
neutralize the undesirable part of the exciting m.m.f. 


FIG. 1S. 
CONSTRUCTION DIAGRAM FOR BRUSH-SHIF TING. 
CHARACTERISTICS AT No GAO. 


It is to be expected that most of these induced harmonics will , 
appear in the squirrel cage, but there will still remain in this case 
about one-fourth for the primary, which is sufficient to bring 
about a very material reduction of the power factor at no load 
when the primary energy is small. 

The writer much regrets an accident to the oscillograph while 
preparing to test the validity of this theory, although there can be 
little doubt that this disturbance is quite appreciable at light 
loads. 


544 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. iMay 19 


As the energy current increases, the harmonics dwindle by 
comparison, so that at full load neither of the above mentioned 
disturbances are likely to introduce any considerable error. 


FIG-.14. TEST "3 


lei 


+3 —= 
Hy elas 
cele ln | 

“2 

a ims 

= See 
” 


BRANES 


A 
3 
GANS 
& 
a 


aN | 
- Nal 


Baw 
& 


\ LINE “2 EXCITING CURRENT — > 


= POWER FACTOR —» & a 


POSITION OF BRUSHES ( Etec. Deg.) 
— BACKWARD FORWARD — 


CER ee 
Try 


The same phenomenon is very prominent in a synchronous - 
motor at light load; the shape of the induced e.m.f. wave is not 
the same as that of the impressed wave. It has been shown by 


| 


aC. 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 545 


Rosenberg, that when current and e.m.f. are in phase, the power 


factor of a synchronous motor at no load 1s sometimes as low as .4. 

The difference between the observed and calculated power 
factor and current, thus explained, appears in all the light load 
observations, sometimes more, sometimes less prominent, accord- 
ing to the amplitude of surging and the magnitude of the exciting 
current. 

Test No. 3, Fig. 14.—This test was similar to No. 2, except 
that the motor was loaded to about its normal capacity. The 
exciting current J, was a little greater than in Test No. 2. 

As in No. 2, the solid curves show the results of an approximate 
calculation and the points and broken curves the results of ob- 


Fig. 18. 
CONSTRUCTION DIAGRAM FOR BRUSH SHIFTING 
CHARACTERISTICS AT FULL oA, 


servation. The approximate diagram drawn to scale is given in 
Fig. 15, in which the variation of the several quantities can be 
easily traced. 

The slip being much greater, the slip current in the exciting 
winding, and therefore the variation in 7, will be greater. The 
slip never reaches zero in this case, since the exciting current is not 
large enough to relieve the secondary entirely of its large torque 
current, even when the former is in phase with the latter. 


ee Sariga Zen Bebal2 2/903; 


546 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


The discrepancy between the calculated and observed power 
factor and current is not nearly so great as in the no load case, for 
reasons already given, and the apparent discrepancy is due partly 
to the neglect of leakage in the calculations. 

Test No. 4, Fig. 16.—In this case the brushes were left station- 
ary throughout, in the magnetizing or quadrature position, deter- 
mined by the preceding tests. The machine was running light, 
and the excitation was varied over a widerange. The line current 
and p.f. alone were plotted. These tests were made, one with 
3-phase and the other with quarter-phase excitation. 

Power factor and current curves were calculated for the three- 
phase case and are shown in the figure. 


Fi¢.ic, Test %. 


[Ties] Tr [Sep oa 
BRE See 
44 
pte || Seal eS Sa ee 
Viel EES 
Ee ae eer 7 ree ae aa 
Ae 


CURRENT ~+—> 
e 


3 a e 


5 2 to 
ComPENSATON,GURRENT ———e 


. Comparison of the observed and calculated results shows very 
clearly the marked effect of the surging and of the wattless har- 
monics in the primary. That the latter were present in this case 
is quite certain on two accounts: first, the lowest point reached 
by the ammeter needles in their swing was not low enough to cor- 
respond to a unit power factor; secondly, because the quarter 
phase excitation gave a considerably higher p.f. than the three 
phase. This is just what would be expected, since the m.m.f. 
harmonics are much less prominent in the quarter-phase four-belt 
winding. 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 547 


Had these two tests been made on different days the above con-~ 
clusion would hardly be warranted, as the degree of surging dif- 
fered so much from day to day; but they were made at the same 
sitting, and there was no appearance of change in any of the con- 
ditions. 

Test No. 5. Fig. 17.—This was similar to the preceding, except 
that the machine was heavily loaded. Three-phase excitation 
alone was used, and the brushes were kept in the magnetizing 
position. 


1S 


CURRENT. ——r 


‘@ 


a& + So 8 19 vs 140 16 18 
L..= GOMPENSATOR 1 CURRENT —_> 


The power factor does not quite reach unity, showing even here 
a perceptible error due to the surging. It is not likely that the 
wattless harmonics have any appreciable effect upon the power 
factor in this case, when it is remembered that a power factor of 
99 corresponds to a wattless component of .14, which would here 
be more than two amperes. 

The efficiency curve in Fig. 17 shows that the copper loss in 


548 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


the exciting winding more than balances the saving in primary 
copper loss, but this is also evident from a contemplation of the 
relative resistances of the two windings. 

* The curve marked “‘ compensator power factor,” shows the p.f. 
of the current delivered to the exciting winding, and would be 
approximately unity were it not for that part of the slip current 
which flows in this circuit. This slip current is approximately 
constant in this case, and in quadrature with the exciting cur- 
rent proper. Thus, as the latter increases, the power factor will 
increase, as shown by the curve. 


stretec cere 


f000 Boom §=6S000 4000) «6000 ~ S000 Zo00 Baoo cea 19000 NOce tooo 
ToRQvVE IN “SYN" WATTS ——e 


The power factor thus gives approximately the ratio between 
the real exciting current /, and the total compensator current J; 
and since the curves of Fig. 17 are plotted against /,, the latter 
must be multiplied by the compensator power factor, in order to - 
give the real exciting current. 

A comparison of this with the calculated excitation charac- 
teristic of Fig. 8 will show a good agreement as to the exciting 
current necessary to produce the maximum power factor at this. 
particular load ; . 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 540; 


Test No. 6, Fig. 18.—Exciting voltage and brush position both 
constant, load varied. As the excitation is low the power factor 
never reaches unity. The four points in large circles were calcu- 
lated, and show that except at light loads the discrepancy is 
small. This is also true of test No. 7. In both of these cases 
there was much less surging at heavy loads than in most of the 
other tests. 

The slip is less than in the uncompensated test, No. 1, owing to 
the added conductivity of the exciting circuit closed through the 
brushes. 


<A SLIP - %orsYN 


+ 
TORQUE - SYN. K.W. -—> 


The compensator current remains practically constant despite 
‘the increase of its slip component as the load increases. This 
means that the exciting current 7, decreases, due to the heating 
of the exciting winding 
The compensator power-factor is interesting, as it shows what 
has been demonstrated theoretically above, that near synchron- 
ism the reactance of the exciting winding is negligible. It also 
shows the decrease of the power factor due to the increase of the 
slip current in quadrature with the exciting e.m. e 
Test No. 7, Fig. 19.—In this test the motor was overexcited. 
The primary current leads at light loads, the power factor grad- 


550 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


ually rising to unity and dropping a very little at the end. The 
calculated power factor points are shown again in large circles. 

Owing to the larger excitiag current, the winding heats more 
than in test No. 6, and the resulting decrease in exciting current 
more than balances the increasing slip current; thus J, decreases 
slightly with load.. 

For clearness in comparison, the current and power factor 
curves of tests numbers 1, 6, and 7 are plotted together in Fig. 20. 
A glance at the calculated power factor points of Fig. 20 will show 
that it is quite possible to maintain the power factor of such a 


TORQUE IN" SYN" KihowATTS. 


motor very nearly at unity, throughout its whole working range, * 
by means of a constant exciting voltage. But it should be re- 
membered that very nearly unity is not unity, and that a devia- 
tion of 1 per cent. therefrom means 14 per cent. of wattless cur- 
rent, about one-third as much as with a 90 per cent. power factor. 
In other words, a compensated motor may have a beautiful 
appearing power factor curve and still absorb a considerable watt- 
less current. This is probably what lead Mr. Heyland to say 
that a constant exciting current would give perfect compensation 
at all loads. 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 551 


There is thus no question as to the calculation or operation of 
this type of motor, the power factor is entirely within control and 
it can undoubtedly be made to operate sparklessly, but the ques- 
tion is, will it pay to sacrifice the beautiful simplicity of the ordin- 
ary induction motor for a little saving of wattless current, for 
there is no gain in other directions, either in efficiency or in start- 
ing torque. These are the directions in which the consumer is 
interested; he does not care much about the power factor. 

There will of course be time and places where the power factor is 
a sufficiently vital question to warrant the use of the compensated 
commutator motor, but it is the writer’s opinion that the Heyland 
machine as motor will not find a large field of usefulness in this 
country. 


THE HeYLAND MacHINE AS GENERATOR. 


If a simple induction machine while operating as motor in con- 
nection with a network, be connected mechanically to a prime 


FIGr, at 
SIMPLE INDUCTION §=GENERATOR 


mover and driven above synchronism, the slip and slip-current 
will reverse, as will the energy component of the primary current. 
The machine will then be operating as generator, but with leading 
current (see Fig.21). The amount of this lead depends upon the 
same factors upon which depends the lag in the induction motor, 
namely: the exciting current and the leakage. Such a machine 
can never be connected to a dead load but must be used where 
the wattless magnetizing current can be supplied by some syn- 
chronous machine connected with the system. 

If now the machine in question be supplied with a magnetizing 
current through a separate winding and commutator, as above 
described, the lead of the primary current may be reduced in any 


552 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


desired amount (see Fig. 22), where the current is brought into 
phase with the terminal e.m.f. Assume that while thus operat- 
ing without phase displacement the machine could be suddenly 
transferred from the network to a dead load of exactly the same 
magnitude (the exciting winding or the primary of its transformer 
being still connected to the machine terminals), it will continue 
to carry the load without change of voltage and will be a self- 
exciting shunt alternator. If now the external load resistance 
be decreased, the resulting increase of current will cause a larger 
drop, and the decrease in terminal e.m.f. will react upon itself 
through the excitation and flux, in a cycle very similar to that of 
the direct current shunt machine. 

The end of this cycle for any given change a load resistance, 
depends upon the saturation curve as in the similar direct current 


FIG. 22. 
HEYLAND MACHINE AS GENERATOR 


machine, but there is this difference: in the latter case that part of 
the drop due to armature reaction is dependent upon the brush 
position as well as upon the magnitude of the current, whereas in. 
the machine under consideration the energy component of the . 
armature reaction is balanced by the slip current, leaving a watt- 
less demagnetizing component whose magnitude, in the case of a 
non-inductive load, depends upon the magnitude of the primary 
current and of the leakage reactance of both primary and second- 
ary. This is best understood by a consideration of the diagram 
Fig. 22, where o b is a continuation of J, backwards. 

In the case of an inductive load there is the additional quad- 
rature component due to the reactance of the load. Then bc is 
approximately equal to the magnetizing component of J,, which - 
in turn is dependent upon E’,. The total magnetizing current, 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 553 


I, may then be considered as made up of two parts, bc consumed by 
the reluctance of the magnetic circuit, and ab required to balance 
the demagnetizing components of J, and/,. These demagnetizing 
components are, in the case of a non-inductive load due to the 
leakage reactance in primary and secondary; but in the case of 
inductive load there is the additional wattless component due to 
the load itself. The lagging load has the additional effect of 
causing a greater drop between the internal e.m.f., E’,, and the 
terminal e.m.f., E,, as in the case of any alternating current gen- 
erator. 

In order to simplify the problem the demagnetising component 
of the armature reaction may be reduced to an equivalent arma- 
ture reactance. Then the exciting current J, may be considered 
as acting alone to produce a corresponding flux in the magnetic 
circuit and a corresponding e.m.f. in the primary, the relaticn 
between the exciting current and this e.m.f. being given by the 
saturation curve. Of this total induced e.m.f., E,, a portion is 
consumed by the fictitious or apparent impedance of the arma- 
ture, which impedance evidently depends upon the power factor 
of the load as well as upon the constants of the machine. 

We then have in the shunt machine driven at constant speed, 

E, dependent upon 7, as shown by saturation curve. 
E, less than E, by the drop due to the apparent impedance. 
I, proportional to F,. 

For every value of J, there will be a corresponding total e.m.f. 
E, generated, and a corresponding terminal e.m-f., Fy, required to 
produce the exciting current in question, the difference between 
E, and E, being available for impedance drop, to which the cur- 
rent will be roughly proportional. With an inductive load the 
apparent impedance will be greatly increased and the corres- 
ponding current much less. 

If however the E, generated by any particular /, is less than the 
E, required to produce that value of [,, it is evident that the 
machine will not operate at that point, even at no load. 

These relations are shown more clearly in Fig. 23. The curve 
marked E, is the open circuit e.m.f. of the machine tested, plottea 
against the exciting current reduced to primary turns by the ratio 
1.68 which, it will be observed, differs from the constant 1.79 
worked out on the assumption of sinusoidal flux distribution. 
The constant, 1:68, was experimentally determined by com- 
paring the saturation curves obtained from the machine as 
motor, ani as generator on open circuit, both at 60 cycles. ° 


% 


554 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


The points marked with a circle were obtained by the former 
and those with a triangle by the latter method. The gener- 
ator points were assembled from the no-load readings of a 
number of tests taken at different times and with slightly differ- 
ent brush positions. 

The straight line, V,, = 24, has for its tangent the resistance of 
the exciting winding reduced to primary turns and to primary 
volts, when 24 turns on the secondary of the compensator were 
in use. A similar description applies to the other straight lines. 


fa [et 
EE 


“ELT f 
fe Hie 


CORE LOSS — KW 


ro 
> 


rs 
o 


—— > «EXCITING CURRENT (MAGWETIZI NG Compo WENT) 


The intersection of any one of these straight lines with the satu- 
ration curve gives the no-load e.m.f. corresponding to the exciting 
conditions represented by that line. The hot and cold resistance 
lines are given to show the great difference in terminal volts due 
to.a change of temperature of the exciting winding. 

For any given current the terminal volts will drop from the no- 
load value along the resistance line to a point b such that the 
vertical intercept bc is the impedance drop due to the given cur- 


3 
: 
; 
; 
: 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 555 


rent. The maximum current which the machine can carry for 
any given number of turns on the secondary of the compensator 
is thus determined by the maximum intercept bc, between the 
corresponding resistance line and the saturation curve. As the 
p-f. of the load decreases, the apparent impedance increases very 
tapidly, and the corresponding maximum current decreases 
accordingly. 

It is thus apparent that stable operation as a shunt machine 
cannot be secured below 600 volts, even for a small armature 
current, owing to the low densities in the magnetic circuit at 
normal pressures. The maximum densities in maxwell’s per 
square inch at the normal e.m.f. of 440 volts, are approximately 
as follows: 


2S BN EEN ce 5 lial OR 440 800 
StatoriCore’ a), saa coe. 32800 59700 
UStatorel eethy. 4 ie micak 49000 89000 
RotoriCorerws. 42.0 os 66200 120300 
Retor Leeth, arte ks pale 49000 89000 


At 800 volts, which is practically about the lowest safe running 
point as a shunt machine, the densities would be as given in the 
second column. The corresponding core loss is excessive as 
shown by the curve of Fig. 23, the natural remedy being a reduc- 
tion of the rotor core section to such a point that the maximum 
:otor core density would be about 130000 at normal voltage. 

The excessive pressures thus required in the generator tests 
were very troublesome in several respects. The correspondingly 
large exciting currents caused excessive heating of the exciting 
winding and made it practically impossible to get a complete sct 
of readings without serious change in the resistance of this wind- 
ing. The vicious sparking which accompanied the large exciting 
currents caused constant trouble at the commutator and such a 
wearing back of the brushes that, during a test of a couple of 
hours, they changed their location ten or fifteen electrical degrees. 
The condition of the commutator also affected the resistance of 
the exciting circuit. 

Under these circumstances it can be readily understood why it 
was impossible to duplicate the conditions of any given test or to 
maintain the same conditions long enough to get a consistent set 
of results. 

Fig. 24 shows four shunt characteristics the results of tests 
numbers 9, 10, 11 and 12. In each case the load was pushed to 


556 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


the unbuilding point which was considerably inside the current. 
capacity of the machine. 

In tests numbers 9 and 10, the machine was comparatively cold 
at the start and the droop of the characteristics is partly due to 
the heating of the exciting winding. 

In test No. 11 the exciting winding was allowed to heat up 
before taking the readings, and the result is very apparent, for 
although 24 turns of compensator secondary were in use, the no- 
load voltage was lower than in the case of No. 9 with only 20 
turns. 

In No. 12 the power factor was about .6, and the machine 
started warm with 24 turns on the compensator secondary. 


See 
ag 
uw 
e EA 
= 
oa 
< b.t = Jo 
5 
wl 
4 
uw 
= 


In each case the brushes were set in the magnetizing position, 
which is the same for motor and generator. 

The slip was measured in one or two instances and found to 
agree entirely with the calculations, about .11 per cent. per 
ampere of energy current at 600 volts. 

In all of these tests the machine was very unstable, and very 
sensitive to speed and to brush position, as might have been pre- 
dicted from the saturation curve. 


Compounp ExciraTIon. 


Of the two parts into which we have divided the excitation, 
that part consumed by reluctance bc, Fig. 22, is dependent upon 
the total induced e.m.f. E’,, of the primary, and is therefore 
required to increase only slightly with increase of load and con- 


ee Ve 


ren oe Se 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 557 


stant terminal e.m.f. The remaining portion, ab, due to the 
leakage, increases approximately as the square of the current, 
under non-inductive load. ; 

Thus for moderately small non-inductive loads the demand for 
increased excitation is so small that a shunt machine will main- 
tain an almost constant terminal e.m.f. over a moderate range. 
This is shown in Shunt Characteristic No. 11, Fig. 24, where the 
temperature of the exciting winding was constant. The smalier 
the leakage the farther out will the characteristics hold up. 

This was probablv what lead Mr. Heyland to say that the 


FIGS. TEST "13 
EXCITATION NECESSARY TO MAINTAIN E, = S50 VOLTS 


EXCITATION CHARACTERISTIC 


COMPENSATOR CURRENT. 


LINE CURRENT 


shunt excitation gave perfect compensation with non-inductive 
load. 

The excitation required for the complete compensation of this 
particular machine is shown in Fig. 25. The upper curve shows 
clearly the large increase made necessary by the reaction of the 
quadrature component of the lagging load current. 

Hence the requirements for compounding are much as in the 
case of a synchronous alternator, except that owing to the rela- 
tively small reluctance m.m.f. in the induction generator, the 
percentage increase for inductive loads is considerably greater. 

There are two distinctly different methods of compounding, one 


558 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


in which the shunt exciting current above considered is increased 
by some arrangement of compounding transformers, and the 
other in which the shunt excitation is left as in the simple shunt 
machine, and the armature reaction completely balanced by 
sending the armature current, or some fixed proportion of it, into 
the exciting winding through a separate set of brushes about 90° 
from the shunt brushes. 

The last mentioned arrangement is the one used by Mr. 
Ileyland and is shown in Fig. 26. 

Assuming that the ratio of transformation of the series trans- 
former is such as to produce an m.m.f. in the secondary a little 


‘Fig. Ac. 
‘Yo Lone A.8.c. = SHUNT BRUSHES, 
‘ e O.f.F. = SERIES * *% « 


Senize Ss , 
TRANSFORMS & 
* GENERATOR 7 
VOTO TT ARMATURE, . an 
TUTE rn ag 


‘ 
wan s one ene 6 wre Saka oa eveine 


larger than that of the primary, and that the brushes are so set 
that its space phase is exactly opposite to that of the primary, the 
slip-current will be supplanted, and together with the slip, will 
disappear, leaving a practically synchronous machine. The only 
function of the shunt excitation is then to supply the reluctance 
m.m.f. which is nearly constant. The slight increase in the lat- 
ter, necessary to maintain constant terminal e.m.f., may be 
obtained by shifting the series brushes backwards a very little in 
order to throw a small component of the series excitation into 
the magnetizing phase. The result is perfect compounding for 
all power factors, as illustrated in Fig. 27, where the vector sum 


a 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 559 


of the shunt and series exciting currents is designated J,, the total 
secondary current, and where the vector sum of J, and J, is a 
magnetizing current /,, which increases slightly with the load. 

The last paragraph is a statement of the theory of the method 
as ordinarily propounded, and assumes that the presence of the 
series current will not disturb the shunt current. With the ar- 
rangement employed in the tests here recorded, this assumption 
is not warranted. 

This will be best appreciated by reference to Fig. 26, where 
A, B and c are the shunt brushes connected as indicated, and set in 
the magnetizing position, 7.e., in a position such that when the 
currents entering these brushes are in phase with their respective 
e.m.f’s:,these currents will supply an m.m.f. 90° in advance 
of the terminal e.m.f. 


Ig= SHUNT &x- 
CITING GUAENT A 


HEYLANO GENERATOR. 
OIng KAM FoR COMPOUND EXCITATION. 


If the load is non-inductive and the series transformers con- 
nected to the series brushes D, E and F, as shown, the current enter- 
ing the brush p will be of the same time-phase as the potential of 
brush a. In order therefore to place the m.m.f. of the series cur- 
rent in opposition to that of the primary current the series brushes 
must be placed approximately 90° in advance of the shunt brushes, 
as shown. But this places p, e and F only 30° behind c, a and B 
respectively, and since the potentials of the latter are fixed, it is 
evident from the proximity of the two sets that there will be a 
tendency on the part of c, A and B to control the potentials of 
p, E and F, and that the nearer the two sets the greater will be 


the degree of control. 
The tendency of this control is to restrict the resultant current 


560 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


to that which would flow under the action of the shunt e.m.f. 
alone, or since the series current is fixed in phase and magnitude, 
the shunt current will tend towards a value such that the result- 
ant current will be as above described. 

It has been explained above that in order to give the series 
m.m.f. a slight magnetizing component the series brushes should 
be shifted slightly backwards from the 90° position shown in 
Fig. 26; this would separate the two sets of brushes and make the 
two excitations more independent. 

In the tests under consideration the following arrangement 
was used. The connections between the secondaries of the series 
transformers and the series brushes were reversed from those 
shown in Fig. 26, the other ends of the secondaries being con- 


Fig. 2a. 


nected to the star and the ends shown in star connection carried 
tothe brushes. This made it necessary to shift the series brushes 
180° to the position shown in Fig. 28, so that the slight additional 
backward shift brought them closer to the shunt brushes, instead 
of separating them further as in the Fig. 26. 

As the two sets of brushes were separated by a considerable 
' angle (measured in mechanical degrees), the machine having six 
poles, the electrical proximity was not appreciated at the time 
of the tests. 

It was found necessary in order to hold up the terminal e.m.f. 
under load, to give the series brushes an extra backward shift of 
from 25° to 50°, which would bring the two sets of brushes into 
practical coincidence on the two pole diagram, but always separ- 


re 


aon se ee. eT ee re 


VCtrew A Oe Re + !. ee Se oe 


ae ee ee aN ON ee 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE, 561 


ated by an appreciable resistance in the actual machine, which 
had a six pole series closed coil winding. 

The conditions were therefore such as to minimize the 
compounding effect of the series excitation. The appreciation of 
these conditions will assist materially in the interpretation of the 
experimental results. 

Test No. 14, Fig. 29.—Load non-inductive. No series trans- 
formers were used, the series brushes being connected to the inner 


Fig.29. Test “14 


é @ 


it 
aa 
Ne 


/ 


GENERATOR COMPOUNDED WiTH- 

OUT TRANSFORMS, LINE CUR 

RENT SENT IN THROUGH SER- 
¥% IES BRUSHES, Noninovc, Loan 


© 
a 
XN 
SS 
N 


® EXCITING CuR."%q VOLTAGE. ® 
MACHINE VoLTAG-&(A). 


& 4 ro) 8 10 1e 14 16 18 ao 
MAIN LING CURRENT. 


ends of the machine star. The series brushes were placed 45° 
back of the slip position and 15° back of the shunt brushes, so that 
about 71 per cent. of the series current was thrown into the mag- 
netizing position, but the resultant magnetizing current was 
nevertheless kept down by the proximity of the shunt brushes, 
Although thus restrained the compounding was sufficient to 
maintain a practically constant terminal e.m.f. up to the full 
load of 14 amperes. 


562 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


A glance at the series and shunt e.m.f. curves will show the 
influence of the latter upon the former. 

The phase relations of the several currents will be best appre- 
ciated with the aid of Fig. 30, in which are plotted to scale the 
current diagrams for three points of test No. 14... of = Ig, the 
exciting current; df =1,, the primary current, oa = I,,, the 
slip-current in the squirrel cage; “ab = Ing, the slip-current in the 
exciting winding; ac = I,, the actual shunt current; cd = I,, the 
series current; and ad = I,, the combined current in the exciting 
winding, all reduced to primary turns. 

E, was first plotted, then E’, determined by adding the pri- 
mary impedance drop. With E’,, I, was taken from the satura- 
tion and core-loss curves. To J, J, was added, or more exactly, 
subtracted. J,, was calculated from the measured slip. J, was 
plotted in its proper phase, as determined by the position of the 


Fig. 39° 
DIAGRAM FOR TEST “I+. (DRAWN To scare.) 


series brushes, and /, made to close the figure. The closing was 
somewhat forced, as was to be expected of the space composition 
of non-sinusoidal currents in a three-belt winding, reduced to a 
common basis by an uncertain reduction factor. The forcing 
however was not severe enough to lead to any doubts as to the 
general accuracy of the data. 

The vector hd = I, represents the current that would flow in 
the exciting winding under the action of the shunt e.m.f. alone, 
the phase of J, being determined by the brush position. 

The total equivalent current in the exciting winding, /,, may 
thus be considered as made up of a hypothetical shunt current J,, 
dependent upon the shunt e.m.f , a slip-current ab. and a current 
bh approximately in phase with and proportional to the series 
current, the constant of proportionality increasing with the 
electrical displacement between the two sets of brushes. When 


Ce ee ee ee Ne ee ee ee ee eee Te os 


eTown. 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 563 


the brushes of one set are just half way between those of the other, 
their currents should be practically independent of each other. 

Test No. 15, Fig. 31. —Load, non-inductive. Series trans- 
formers, ratio, 2to 1. p brush 5° behind p brush. The series 
current was thus twice as great as in test No. 14, but the greater 
proximity of the two sets of brushes reduced the proportion of 
the series current which was effective in compounding. 


Fig. St. Testr* is. 


5 a sr | 
#8 eae 4 Exd ITIN Vout 
14 700 ae 
6 eB ciadd & (A ean 
00 


eee ae 
GENERATOR CHARACTERISTIC, 


COMPOUNDED WITH SERIES TRANSFORMERS, 28 
ANG SEPARATE SERIES BRUSHES. 
(0- BRUSH 'S 5° BEHINO B-BRUSH, ) 


EXCITING CURRENT “VOLTAGE —> 3 
MACHINE VOLTAGE (4) —> 


@ 
MAIN LINE CURRENT 


At the end of this test an inductive load with a power factor of 
.9 was tried, and by shifting the series brushes farther back the 
machine was enabled to carry 3.5 amperes. This was the largest 
inductive load that was carried during any of the tests. With 
the arrangement shown in Figs. 26, and a proper transformation 
ratio, the compounding would be more satisfactory; but itis very 
doubtful if the machine would even then maintain its pressure 
with an inductive load and fixed brush position. 


564 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


With single-phase compound excitation, the series and shunt 
brushes would be 90° apart; 7.e., the series brushes would be half 
way between the shunt brushes, where the series current would 
least disturb the shunt current. This accounts for the fact 
noted by Mr. Heyland, that single-phase excitation was more 
satisfactory than three-phase excitation. 

With quarter-phase excitation the series and shunt brushes 
would be practically coincident, and compounding for inductive 
loads impossible. 

If a separate winding and commutator were provided for the 
series excitation, as described by M. Latour, the above described 
difficulty would not be experienced. 

Doubtless better results could have been obtained with the 
arrangement used, if higher shunt excitation had been employed 


Semes TIPANSFORMERS. 


EXCITATION TRANSFORM'S. 


“GENERATOR ARMATURE 


Fig 5 5a, 


so as to render the machine inherently more stable. This type 
of machine however is illy adapted to the ideal compounding 
illustrated in Fig. 27, since then the small exciting winding 
would be forced to carry the total secondary current, and the 
squirrel cage would serve no purpose except to carry the remnant. 

The other method of compounding, in which the shunt exciting 
e.m.f. is increased by an amount depending upon the phase and 
magnitude of the load, is much better suited to this particular 
machine. 

Several more or less complicated arrangements are available, 
but the only one used in these tests is that shown in Fig. 32, its 
chief recommendation being its simplicity. 

An open magnetic circuit transformer is inserted into each of 
the machine phases and its secondary connected in series with the 


EY eg Re ee ee ee ee ee ee en eae ee oe 


EXC: TING CURRENT ®VOLTAG 
rN 


a i le a DA te 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 565 


corresponding exciting phase. In order to avoid unnecessary 
complication, a single-phase machine is shown in the diagram. 
The transformer introduces into the exciting circuit an approxi- 
mately quadrature e.m.f. of magnitude proportional to the 
resultant of primary and secondary ampere-turns. At no load 
this quadrature component is in advance of the exciting current 
and is relatively large. As the load on the alternator increases, 


- the reactive e.m.f. decreases and finally reverses; meanwhile the 


Fig¢.33. Test Fre 


44 


—E —> 
~ 
~ 


Bee icey ee 
Es 


oo 


—a——_f 

ee 

aa 
Pa 


Ss) 


a> 


LINE CURRENT ee ii 


GENERATOR CHARACTERISTIC, 
ComMPOUNDED WITH OPEN MAGNETIC CIRCUIT TRANSFORM’ 


effective e.m.f. at the brushes, and therefore the exciting current, 
increases steadily and also advances in phase. 

The above assumes a non-inductive load; if however the load 
be inductive, the quadrature component of the load current will 
induce an e.m.f. in the secondary of the transformer which will be 
almost in phase with the exciting current. 

Such transformers could be easily designed to compound for 
any given power factor, but would over-compound for higher and 
under-compound for lower power factors, assuming an induction 


566 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 19 


machine of ordinary proportions. If the machine had a long air 
gap, so that the percentage increase in excitation for inductive 
load were not so great, a fair compromise might be made for all 
power factors. 

One of the drawbacks of this arrangement is that with fixed 
brush position the advance of the phase of the exciting current 


| a ee 
Persea ee 
Man eerie 
Pall eee a 
A a 

pS UR Eby 
te 


ei 
CEE aE 


fe ie 

os Te7 le tans 
Fe Rom a ine 

ies ALN SSE 


&  3<—SLlIOA Vu anit 


OPEN MAGNETIC CikCUIT TRANSFORMERS . 


CURRENT. 


Vv 
gz 
| 


GENERATOR CHARACTERISTIC. 


fd 
LINE 


owt) 
COMPOUNDED WITH 


2 


° 
& 
f<— 1N3XYND DNILIDXA & 
t *—SLIOA DNILIDXA + 


20 26 
18 18 
16 16 


causes an increase or decrease of its effectiveness according as the 
brushes were initially too far back or forward. 

If set at the best full load position the no load e.m-.f. will be low 
and vice versa. These points are shown clearly in the two non- 
inductive load characteristics of Figs. 33 and 34. 


STP ee eS 


: 
| 


1903.] ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. 567 


In the former case the brushes were set in advance in the best 
light load position and shifted backwards 15° for the last section 
of the curve. 

In test No. 17 of Fig. 34 the brushes were set at the start in thé 
best full load position, z.e., in the same position as for motor or 
shunt generator operation. 

The other curves are what were to be expected, the e.m.f. of the 
series transformer decreases to a minimum and then reverses sign. 

A small inductive load was all that the machine could carry 
with this method of compounding, for reasons already given. 

A machine compounded by the first described method operates 
practically at synchronism, whereas in the last described type of 
excitation only the magnetizing component is supplied from 
without, the slip current remaining unchanged. The frequency 
will therefore decrease with load, constant driving speed assumed. 

Several of the questions which developed during the working 
up of these tests, answers to which have been here given by de- 
duction, would have been answered by experiment had the 
machine not been previously returned to the General Electric 
Company to be remodelled. 

It would be obviously unfair to judge the Heyland machine by 
the fact of the above-described tests, but granting all that Mr. 
Heyland claims, the chief advantages of this type of alternator 
are, briefly: 

Non-synchronous, ease of paralleling ; 
Automatic compounding for all power factors. 
Short air gap, small exciting power; 
No exciter required ; 
Economy of material; 
and the disadvantages: 
Commutator, this is prohibitive in low speed machines, 
More complicated ; 
Much greater first cost per Ib. of material; 
Natural ventilation poor. 

The automatic compounding is of little value in a large central 
station, and the exciting power cannot well be reduced below that 
of good synchronous machines. 

The higher price of materials and lower price of labor in Europe 
may make a success there out of what would be very doubtful 
ere: 

The Heyland generator is naturally, for commutator reasons, a 
high speed machine with a small number of poles, and may 


568 ADAMS: HEYLAND MACHINE. [May 9 


prove useful in connection with steam turbines, although the high 
commutator velocity may be troublesome. 

In conclusion the writer wishes to thank the General Electric 
Company for the opportunity of making the tests above recorded, 
and to express his appreciation of the valuable assistance rendered 
by Messrs. Anderegg, Whiting, Snyder, Trowbridge, Burchenal 
and Willis, in connection with the taking of observations and the 
working up of the results, and by Prof. Kennelly in the final 
preparation of this paper. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

Gorges, Elekirotechnische Zeitschrift, December 25, 1891. 

Blondel, L’Eclairage Electrique, August 29, 1896. : 

Heyland, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, August 8, 1901. 

Leblanc, L’Eclatrage Electrique, October 26, 1901. 

Heyland, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, November 7, 1901. 

Latour, L’Eclairage Electrique, November 30, 1901. 

Heyland, Etectrotechnische Zeitschrift, December 12, 1901. 

Heyland, Electrotechnische Zeitschrift, January 9, 1902. 

Poincaire, L’Eclairage Electrique, Jaunary 18, 1902. 

Latour, Electrical World and Engineer, February 1, 1902. 

Latour, L’Industrie Electrique, February 25, 1902. 

Heyland, L’Eclairage Electrique, March 22, 1902. 

Latour, L’Indusirie Electrique, April 10, 1902, 

Latour, L’Industrie Electrique, April 25, 1902. 

Latour, L’Eclairage Electsique, April 12, 1902. 

Breslauer, Zeit. fur Elek., April 20, 1902. : 

Picon, L’Industrie Electrique, May 10, 1902. 

Boy de la Tour, L’ Industrie Electrique, June 10, 1902. 

Heyland, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, June 26, 1902. 

Latour, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, July 3, 1902. 

Heyland and others, Bull. Soc. Int. des Elect., July, 1902. 

Zeigenberg, Elek. Anzeiger, July 17, July 20, August 10, August Ws 
September 25, September 28, October 23, October 30. 1902. 

Elek. Verein, Discussion, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, August 21, 1902. 

Osnos, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, October 6, 1902. 

Bragstadt, Elektrotechnische Zetischrift, November 6, 1902. 

Osnos and Breslauer, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, November 27, 1902. 

Osnos, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, December 27, 1902. 

Heyland, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, January 22-29, February 5, 
March 19, 1902. 

Boy de la Tour, Electrical World and Engineer, March 14-21, 1902. 

Since this paper was completed, the following have appeared: 

Blondel, L'Eclairage Electrique, April 25, May 2.1902. 

Alexander and Fleischmann, Zeit. fur Elek., May 10, 1908. 


A paper read at the 177th Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
May 19, 1903. 

a 


THE COMPOUNDING OF SELF-EXCITED ALTERNATING 
CURRENT GENERATORS FOR VARIATION IN 
LOAD AND POWER FACTOR. 


BY A. S. GARFIELD. 


A.description of the characteristics of a poly- 
phase alternating current revolving-field genera- 
tor provided with a single closed-circuit field- 
winding and commutator. Effect of shifting 
brushes at various inductive and non-inductive 
loads, represented graphically. 


The present discussion refers to polyphase alternating current 
generators comprising a stationary armature and a revolving- 
field structure provided with a closed-circuit winding connected 
to a multi-segmental commutator. 

A description of the characteristics of the generator provided 
with a single closed-circuit field-winding and commutator will 
probably facilitate an understanding of the compounded machine. 

Fig. 1 represents a bipolar machine of the first type, comprising 
a delta-connected armature-winding T and a field structure with 
commutator’r; the ohmic resistance of the closed-circuit field- 
winding being suitably designed with reference to the induced 
voltage at the armature-terminals in order to obtain the required 
ampere-turns in the excitation circuit. 

The position of the commutator brushes relative to the arma- 
ture-terminals is represented by the angle a o a, the frequency of 
currents induced in the armature by n and the constant angular 
speed of the field structure, r, by s. 

If the machine is now run without load and with the brush 
position determined by 

Aoa=2/2wewillhaven =s 
or Aoa < z/2wewill haven <s 
or Aoa > x/2wewillhaven>s 


569 


le GARFIELD: COMPOUNDING ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


The most interesting brush position is that represented by 
aoa = 7/2, the angular speed of the field structure then being 
equal to the frequency of the induced armature currents. 

With the brushes in any position whatsoever, if the machine 
is loaded we have: 

1. A diminution in frequency of the induced armature currents. 

2. An increase cf current in the closed-circuit winding of the 
field structure R. 

Whenever load is removed with the brushes in any position 
whatsoever we have: 

1. An increase in the frequency of the induced armature cur- 
rents. 


Fig I. | 


2. A diminution of current in the closed-circuit winding of R. 

With the brushes in any position whatsoever, that is, with n<s 
or N = Sor, finally, N > s and when the machine is without load 
we find, neglecting magnetic leakage, no armature reaction for 


induced currents with unit power-factor but the usual amount of 
reaction for wattless-currents. 


If the brushes are moved: 
1. In the direction of rotation, N increases. 
2. In the opposite direction, N diminishes. 


, 
: 
4 
: 
4 


1903.] GARFIELD: COMPOUNDING ALTERNATORS. 571 

It is evident, therefore, that we can obtain for any load by a 
suitable change in position of the brushes: 

NS NGS Nine 

With the brushes in the position represented by A oa = 2/2 
at no load, we can always maintain N = s by changing the brush 
position proportionally to the variations in load. 

‘The foliowing brush positions are interesting: 

1. With the brushes placed so that aoa = 7/2 fur any load 
whatsoever, we will find n = satnoloadandn < s when loaded. 
This is the chararteristic operation of an induction generator. 

2. {ne brushes may be set in a position corresponding to 
Aoa> 7/2, so that at no load we have n > s and at full load 
N=S. 

3. The brushes may evidently be set so that we have N = s at 
any predetermined load. 

In order to avoid the short-circuiting current in those sec- 
tions of the field-winding connected to the commutator seg- 
ments covered by the brushes, it is evidently necessary con- 
stantly to change the brush position in such a manner that n 
remains equal tos. If nN =s at no load, the same relation 
will be obtained with increase in load by moving the 
brushes forward in \he direction of rotation of the revolving field. 
Under these conditions the frequency of currents induced in the 
armature will remain constant and the magnetic field fixed in 
position with reference to the inducing member. 

In any event the variations in frequency will be of the same 
magnitude as the slip in well designed induction motors. 

The graphical representation of these facts may be of interest. 


_In Fig. 2, o R represents the ampere-turns of the field-winding, 


o T those of the armature and oF the resultant ampere-turns. 
TOD =g, the phase-angle between current ande.mf. The 
brush position a oa corresponding to N = §, is represented by 
the anglepo Rof Fig.2. The magnitude of this angle evidently 
depends on the output of the machine and power-factor of the 
load, or, in other words, it varies proportionately to the inductive 
and to the non-inductive load on the machine. 

Any variation in the inductive or non-inductive load will 
evidently ieave the brushes in a defective position and if they 
were placed to give N = S we will now have N=s.__ In conse- 
quence of this an electromotive force proportionate to N—s or 
$s —N, as the case may be, will be induced in the field-circuit. 
When n = s the impressed voltage 0 a at brush terminals a b, 


572 GARFIELD: COMPOUNDING ALTERNA TORS. [May 19 


bc, orca, which is the same as the induced voltage between ter- 
minals A B, B C or C A, counterbalances the ohmic drop 0 ¢ in the 
field-circuits, including therein the drop in the brushes and brush- 
contact with the commutator. This ohmic drop is proportional 
tothe ampere-turns 0 R of the field winding. 

Referring now to Figs. 3 and 4 in which it is supposed that the 
brushes have a defective positionaoaSpDoR,the impressed 
voltage odat brush terminals will be represented in sucha 
direction that pod=aoa (either in advance of or behind the 


line o r.) This impressed voltage, od,must be equalin magnitude 
and opposite in direction to the resultant, o g, of the ohmic drop, 
0 e, in field winding, brushes and brush contacts and of the electro- 
motive force,o /, induced in the field winding as a consequence of 
the modification of the relationn = s. Ifpod < por, of, rep- 
resenting the magnitude of the voltageinducedinthe field-winding 
must be laid off, as shown in Fig. 3, and the frequency of the cur- 
rents induced inthe armature will be diminished. With pod >por, 


‘ 


4 
. 
; 
3 
, 


oT eee ee ae, 


1903.] GARFIELD: COMPOUNDING ALTERNATORS. 573 


of must be represented as in Fig. 4 and the frequency of induced 
armature-currents will be increased. Any decrease in the induc- 
tive or non-inductive load on the machine corresponds therefore 
to an increase in frequency, and an increase in non-inductive or 
inductive load brings about a diminution of the frequency of the 
armature-currents. It is evidently possible to place the brushes 
in such positions as to ensure N = s at no load, half-load, full-load 


or overload, but in all cases the above-mentioned phenomena 


San @ | 


Fic. -3: 


will be noted. Assuming the machine to work with a constant 
wattless output, and the brushes set for a certain load to give 
N = §, any variation in the load will result in the points d, and 
g of Figs. 3 and 4, remaining fixed in space, the points T and e 
being placed parallel to pp’, and the point f will be displaced 


_ along the line pp’. The machine will operate at constant ter- 


minal voltage but at variable frequency. The speed of rotation 
of the field structure has of course been assumed to be constant 


in the discussion. 


574 GARFIELD. COMPOUNDING ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


Whenever a machine of the above description is connected to.a 
network of given frequency, N, the brushes are set perma- 
nently in a fixed position, there is evidently a certain angular 
speed of rotation, N,, of the machine, inferior, equal, or superior to 
the speed N which corresponds to the non-inductive no load 
output of the machine. The machine will take on load pro- 
portionally to the increase in speed above N,, that is, to N, — Nj, 
where N, represents the speed of rotation of the machine when 


= 
Oo 


/ 
— | 


<—p»l-- ----- 


Fic. 4. 


loaded. The wattless output of the machine will remain con- 
stant for all values of N,. When it is zero, the machine oper- 
ates with unity power-factor. The brushes would usually be 
set in a position to ensure n, = Nn for the average load to be car- | 
ried by the machine. 

The machine would not be built as shown in Fig. 1, where the 
field excitation circuit is directly connected to the armature 
terminals, because of constructional difficulties consequent on the 


1903.] GARFIELD: COMPOUNDING ALTERNATORS. 575 


enforced use of fine wire, etc. Step-down transformers may be 
used to reduce the machine voltage to a value convenient for use 


’ in the excitation circuit or an auxiliary winding may be used on 


the armature to obtain the most suitable excitation voltage for 
the field-circuit. In practice the excitation is arranged for more 
than three phases. 

An alternating current generator of the above described type 
would find few applications, but it is easy to arrange for the 
compounding of this machine and it will then prove to be a very 


Fic. 5. Fic. 6. 


interesting type of alternating current machinery, especially in 


steam-turbine groups. 
Consider for a moment the machine represented by Fig. 1 


with the brushes fixed in the position corresponding to ao a 7/2. 
Place a second field-winding on the revolving-field and connect it 
to a second commutator provided with three sets of brushes con- 
nected to the armature-winding at points 120° apart, as shown in 
Fig. 5. These brushes are now to be fixed in such a position that 
the ampere-turns of this second field-winding oppose those of the 
armature, and we can arrange matters so that the armature-flux 
will be opposed by a field-flux of the same magnitude, direction 


ar hae) 


576 GARFIELD: COMPOUNDING ALTERNATORS. [May 19 


and form. A similar arrangement has been proposed by Mr. 
H. J. Ryan for continuous-current dynamo machinery. 

With a machine constructed as above and with the brushes in a’ 
fixed position, we will obtain constant frequency of induced 
armature-currents and the machine will compound for variations 
in output and power-factor of load—in one or all of the phases. 

The same result may be obtained by substituting for the second 
field winding, commutator, brushes, etc., three compounding 
transformers, one per phase, as shown in Fig. 6. 

By means of these modifications the simple machine of variable 
trequency has become a constant-frequency machine, which result 


EiGa, i 


could only be attained in the first instance by changing the posi- 
tion of the brushes for variation in non-inductive and inductive 
loads. 

A single-phase simple and compounded machine may be 
obtained by using two short-circuiting brushes placed at right- 
angles to the brushes connected to the armature-winding. The 
same arrangement with armature and field connected in series as 
shown in Fig. 7, is especially interesting in single-phase traction | 
motors, but the discussion of this line of single-phase machinery 
is reserved for a future paper. 


— ee 


~——— 


. 
| 
; 


1903.] GARFIELD: COMPOUNDING ALTERNATORS. 577 


In view of the probable objections to the use of a commutator 
in alternating current machinery, it is of interest to note that the 
commutation is perfect on all the machines which have been 
tested. Any pulsations in the magnetic flux of the machine are 
dampened by the field-winding, which is practically short-cir- 
cuited on the armature-winding by means of the brushes thus 
constituting a damping-coil. Furthermore, the currents induced 
by pulsation in the magnetic flux in those positions of the field 
winding circuit which are short-circuited under the commutator 
brushes assist energetically in dampening these pulsations. 
Machines of 50 cycles, 30 to 40 kilowatts output with twelve coils 
and six commutator segments per pole, give excellent results 
with three-phase excitation. In large machines it is better 
to use eighteen commutator segments per pole. In this case the 
excitation will be hexaphase. In low-frequency machines the 
excitation will be from seven to nine phases. The dimensions of 
the commutator may always be made small by a proper choice 
of the excitation voltage. 

The data contained in this hastily prepared paper has been 
very kindly placed at my disposal by Mr. Marius Latour, who 
has developed and designed this interesting line of alternating 
current machinery. 


aS oo 


578 INDUCTION GENERATORS. [May 19 


DISCUSSION. 
’ PresipENT Scott:—The subject for the meeting this evening 
is the general subject of Induction Generators. The main paper 
on that subject, the leading paper, unfortunately, has not been 
prepared, so that the title of the subject to be considered has 
been disregarded, and we take up several papers relating in 
general to alternators. , j 

In its simplest form the dynamo consists of an arma- 
ture and field. The field may be a permanent magnet, 
it may be an electromagnet. The great evolution in 
electrical machines came in the introduction of the electro- 
magnet as a part of the field. Ordinarily, the field is a very 
simple part of the machine excited by direct current, and the 
variations in the character of the machine, direct current or alter- 
nating current, its voltage, its phases, frequency, etc., are depend-. 
ent on the armature, but there are variations which can be 
effected in the field itself. The field may be excited by direct 
current, it may be excited by alternating current; the field mag- 
netic flux may come from the currents which flow in the arma- 
ture, coming from some auxiliary source. If the field be sup- 
plied with an alternating current, we have a new set of relations 
different from those which we have when the field is excited by 
direct current. The field alternating current may have differ- 
ent frequencies; may be of a low frequency. The alternating 
current in the field may be derived from some external source; it 
may have some synchronous relation with the main frequency. 
Here, then, we have a variety of conditions for exciting the field 
by alternating current, and derived from different sources, or by 
deriving the excitation from a current flowing in the armature 
itself, which give a new field, a new order of investigation and 
development and operation to alternating machines. 

In one of the simplest forms comes the ordinary induction 
motor, with a squirrel-cage secondary. That may be used as a 
dynamo, if the speed be a little above, instead of a little below, 
the synchronous speed. Again, in the field of an alternator, 
there may be means for compounding, for increasing the field 
strength by a current derived from the main current. This 
gives a new order of relation, so that we have a very interesting 
and somewhat complicated and intricate set of problems arising 
from field variations in alternating machines. . 

The papers this evening have in one phase or another to do 
with the general problem which I have presented in this meagre 
and brief way. The first paper of the evening is by Mr. 
Behrend, who has given much attention to the designing, prin- 
ciples, theory and testing of alternating apparatus. The subject 
of Mr. Behrend’s paper is ‘* The Experimental Basis for the 
Theory of the Regulation of Alternators.” 

Mr. Benrenp:—Midnight is drawing near and we have 
before us eighty pages of compiex and intricate matter, and I 


FER ON ee ae ey Oe ee ee ee ee NT 
= aly \ . 


ahs 


ea eT SITE Ae e 


— 


1903.1] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 579 


presume that we do not wish to extend this meeting until the 
Niagara Falls convention. In justice to the papers that will be 
read after mine, I want to be brief. I sincerely trust that this 
will meet entirely with your approval. 

(Mr. Behrend then presented an outline of his paper.) 

I want to call your attention to one or two matters which I 
have not had an opportunity to take up in my paper. The great 
importance of specifying the regulation of alternating current 
generators in regard to the size, efficiency, operation and cost of 
the machines is not at all clearly understood by consulting 
engineers. Besides, we often find specifications calling for con- 
ditions which are impossible to fulfil, as they are mutually con- 
tradictory of one another. For instance, you can find specifica- 
tions calling for a regulation of 5 per cent. on a 100 per cent. 
power-factor, and a regulation of 12 per cent. on an 80 per cent. 
power-tactor, and an increase of excitation of 10 per cent. be- 
tween normal voltage at no load and normal voltage at 80 per 
cent. power-factor. Such things are impossible. I have tried 
to take this matter up in my paper with a view to pointing out a 
method by which you can convince yourselves as to what condi- 
tions are possible to obtain. Furthermore, a regulation which 
is too good may lead to a low efficiency of the machine and a poor 
operation in parallel on account of the large cross-currents which 
would be produced with reciprocating engines. 

PRESIDENT Scotr:—I had the pleasure when in Paris last 
summer of meeting a young man about my own age, a bright, 
intelligent man, who looked not unlike an American in his. 
general make-up. He appeared to be a progressive man and 
probably possessed considerable skill as anexperimenter. Iwas 
very favorably impressed in meeting him. The gentleman to. 
whom I refer is Mr. Heyland, and the next paper relates to the 
Heyland motor. Prof. Comfort A. Adams, of Harvard Uni-. 
versity, will now present the second paper, “‘ A Study of the 
Heyland Machine as Motor and Generator.” 

Pror. Apams:—I feel considerable diffidence in bringing this. 
paper before the Institute, partly because the results obtained 
by experiments which are recorded here do not seem to be of 
very great practical importance, and partly because the volume 
of the paper might lead to unlawful expectations. Some one 
has said the paper looked very attractive. I hope that some of 
you who take pains to read it will find it attractive, but it is not a 
subject which is, in detail, probably interesting to the majority 
of the members of the INsTITUTE, but it has some practical 
bearings, and as such I hope it will be of some interest. 

PRESIDENT Scott:—We have had this peculiar alternator 
problem attacked from various points of view. First, a designer 
told us a few things he knew about the alternator, and then we 
have had a Professor who has told us what he knows about it, 
and now we have another point of view, and that is the point of 
view of the direct current man who has assumed, we may say, 


580 INDUCTION GENERATORS. iMay 19 


to know nothing about it, and yet to pronounce judgment upon 
it. The next paper is by Mr. A. S. Garteld, who writes on i Lee 
Compounding ot Self-excited Alternating Current Generators 
for Variation in Load and Power Factor.’ The writer of the 
paper is not present and it will be abstracted by one of our mem- 
bers who is an expert in the direct current business, Mr. Gano S. 
Dunn. 

Mr. Dunn:—I am sure President Scott wants this abstract 
to be short. That is why he called on me. 

Mr. Dunn then abstracted the paper. (See page 811.) 

PrEsIDENT Scotr:—I notice in the list of applicants for ad- 
mission as an associate of the InsTITUTE the name of Marius 
Latour, Paris, France, to whose apparatus mention has been 
made. 

The subject is now open for general discussion if any one is 
pleased to take part in the discussion. 

Pror. Apams:—I would add one word to Mr. Behrend’s paper 
which is very interesting to me, dealing with a subject to which 
Lhave given muchattention. I have made very careful tests on 
several large machines and on numerous small ones, of various 
types, and the results are entirely corroborative of Mr. Behrend’s 
results. The e.m.f. method gave almost invariably too poor, 
and the m.m.f. method too good a regulation. In machines of 
the inductive type, reactance plays a larger part than armature 
reaction, and here the e.m.f. method is more suitable, since it is 
essentially a reactance method: whereas with machines in which 
armature reaction predominates, as in the modern low frequency 
alternator, the m.m.f. method is more suitable; but even when 
the method is chosen to suit the type of machine, the results are 
very wild, and some compromise between the two methods must 
be employed. 

Mr. Witiram L. Waters:—Clause 71 in the Recommenda- 
tions of the Committee on Standardization, which deals with the 
regulation of alternators, is, I think, more or less of a makeshift 
and a confession on the part of the Committee of their inability 
to formulate an exact method of determining the regulation of an 
alternator from any other than a full load test. It is well known 
tc every designer that the method therein indicated gives 
results which, on certain classes of machines, are far too low. I 
do not know of any accurate method which can be substituted for 
that load. 

By far the best method in guaranteeing the regulation of an 
alternator is to guarantee it for a low power-factor. As regards 
the actual operation of the machine, this is far more satisfactory 
than guaranteeing the regulation on non-inductive load, and in 
addition it is an easier test to make. By running a test, as de- 
scribed by Mr. Behrend, with two machines, one running as a 
synchronous motor and the other as a generator, and then adjust- 
ing the excitation, a direct reading for the regulation can easily 
‘be obtained. This test can quite easily be made even on very 
large units, 


1903.] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK. 581 


As regards the advisability of having the regulation guaranteed 
for low power-factors, even in the case of alternators for running 
rotary converters, I will give an instance of trouble that occurred 
in a large station with alternators supplying power for rotaries in 
substations. A breakdown occurred on the high-tension leads of 
the alternators, causing a temporary shutdown of the plant, so 
that when the alternators were again run up, the rotaries had to 
be started from the alternating current side. As soon as the 
voltage showed up again in the substations, all the attendants 
threw on their rotaries at the same time, and the result was an 
immense lagging current, which cut down the volts so that the 
rotaries refused to start. The attendants seeing this, cut out 
their rotaries and the volts rose again. This went on two or 
three times, and in the end it was about three-quarters of an 
hour before the substations were started again. These alter- 
nators had a guaranteed regulation of 74 per cent. on power-factor 
1, and that would satisfy this guarantee if tested according to 
INSTITUTE rules, but their behavior on low power-factors can be 
imagined from the above incident. 

Coming to Mr. Behrend’s paper, he points out very well, I 
think, that the two empirical methods which he gives for deter- 
mining the regulation are neither of them accurate, and every 
designer has to modify these methods in order to obtain satis- 
factory results on his own individual machines. But I think 
Mr. Behrend begs the whole question when he uses the Kapp 
diagram to calculate the regulation on different power factors, 
assuming the regulation from power factor0. The Kapp diagram 
assumes that the self-induction of an armature remains constant 
for all phases of the armature current, that is, for all relative posi- 
tions of the armature and magnets. This is a pure assumption, 
and is in reality by no means correct. Some years ago I did 
some work on this method of obtaining the regulation of alter- 
nators, and measured the self-induction of the armatures of a 
large number of alternators for different relative positions of the 
armature and fields, the measurements being made with short- 
circuited magnet coils. I found that the self-induction varied 
very considerably according to the relative position of the arma- 
ture and magnet, and with some machines of very small air gap 
this variation was of the order of 6to 1. These measurements, 
of course, do not accurately represent the condition of things und«r 
load, but they give some idea as to the variation that may take 

lace. 
é Mr. Behrend closes his paper with an application to direct cur- 
rent machines of this short-circuit method of measuring the 
armature reaction, and gives an instance in which this gave 
pretty accurate results. This method of determining the com- 
pounding on a direct current machine is very old, and was used 
with fair success on the old smooth core armature machines. 
But in modern slotted armature machines with highly saturated 
teeth the distortion of the fields as caused by armature reaction 


582 INDUCTION GENERATORS. [May 19 


makes a large increase in ampere-turns necessary on full load in 
order to overcome the decreased permeability of the armature, 
due to this distortion. So that though this method may give 
fairly good results in a machine in which the tooth density is not 
over 125,000, it will be very inaccurate in a machine with highly 
saturated teeth, say a machine with teeth worked at 150,000. 
The compounding ampere-turns necessary in this latter case 
would probably be about double that given by the short-circuit 
method. 

Mr. BEHREND:—I was very sorry that -I had no opportunity 
to refer to Prof. Adams’ very interesting papers in the Harvard 
Engineering fournal. Prof. Adams was so kind as to send me a 
copy of his papers which, however, did not reach me until a day 
before I left Cincinnati for New York, otherwise, I should have 
taken great pleasure in referring in my paper to his work along 
the same lines, as I entirely agree with the results obtained and 
the methods in his paper. I deem it a pity that papers of such 
quality are not published in our TRANSACTIONS, but in journals 
like the Harvard Engineering Fournal, which do not, as a rule, 
come to our notice. We might add such papers to the very long 
list of the papers we have to read, but few of us can find time to 
read the journals that we already have. 

In regard to the remarks of my friend. Mr. Waters, I think he 
pointed out one of the principal weaknesses of my paper. He 
said that I arbitrarily applied the Kapp diagram to the deter- 
mination of the regulation at different power-factors. It is per- 
fectly true that this is more or less arbitrary, but, as we are con- 
tinually floundering in a maze of assumptions that are more or 
less arbitrary in regard to the conditions under which machines 
have to operate, and in determining their exact dimensions, we 
have to use engineering intuition to tell us how far we are justified 
in making such assumptions. I have pointed this out in my 
paper to-night and I have pointed it out invariably in my other 
papers treating of matters connected with electrical engineering, 
and especially in my treatise on ‘‘ The Induction Motor.”’ Elec- 
trical engineering, in my mind, is an art and not a science. As 
you cannot teach any one to make a good picture if he has 
not the aptitude,so you cannot teach a man how to design an 
electrical machine. It is a question of engineering judgment and 
intuition. If engineering methods, as set forth in my paper, fall 
into the hands of men without judgment, the results are the 
same as if you put a knife into the hands of a bungling surgeon. 


[CoMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT By J. R. ARMSTRONG. | 

In last Tuesday’s meeting, when the time came for general 
discussion of the subject, it really was so late I did not care to 
criticise some of the points brought up. However, there is just one 
point in the papers that were read which ought not to stand 
without criticism; I mean the sacrifice of regulation for effi- 
ciency. The writer of each paper seemed to consider that in the 


mys Te ee ee ee ee ee Bi ia EB 


Ne TN UA Ne ee 


1903.] COMMUNICATION AFTER ADJOURNMENT. 583 


design of an alternator the all important factor was the obtaining 
of high efficiency. To regulation they paid very little attention. 
This latter seemed to be considered a very secondary matter. 
Suppose we consider a 60,000 volt long-distance transmission 
line; one central station and two substations; one substation 
being 50 miles distant from the central station and the other 10 
miles. Now, if one of these substations, say the 10 mite one, 
should be cut off suddenly, there would be a certain rise in voltage 
at the ceritral station. This rise would be magnified greatly at 
the other end of the 50 mile line, on account of the condenser 
effect in the line. This increase in voltage would be liable to 
cause trouble at this second substation that is still running. I 


' therefore think that if designers would sacrifice a few per cent. 


efficiency in a machine and obtain better regulation, it would 
reduce a great deal of such trouble as might arise in the above- 
mentioned case. I therefore think that, in future, more import- 
ance ought to be given to regulation in the design of alternators. 


[CoMMUNICATED AFTER ADJOURNMENT BY Martus Latour.] 

In the paper of Mr. Adams read May 19th, 19038, he 
appears to recognize several distinct methods for compounding 
alternators provided with a commutated winding. In fact, 
these several methods are very similar for the simple reason that 
a compound excitation can only consist of the combination of a 
‘series and of a shunt excitation. 

The most natural method of carrying out this combination in 
practice is to arrange two circuits and two commutators on the 
rotor. But it is easy to see that the use of a compensating trans- 
former is an equivalent. 

For example, when using two circuits and two commutators, 
assume that the series excitation current is obtained from a series 
transformer K, as is shown in Fig. 1. where the series circuit is 
alone represented. It is evident that by suitably setting the 
brushes abc the armature reaction can be annihilated in both 
direction and form. 

If the self induction of each secondary of the series transformer 
K With three-phase connections is represented by /, the ohmic 
resistance of one-phase of the excitation circuit by r and the 
frequency of induced currents by w the brushes should be set in 


such a place as to give: 


7 Bnew 

Aoa= 5 x Ag ; 
In order to obtain the shunt excitation without the addition of 
a second winding, we can arrange matters in such a manner that 
the shunt currents pass through the secondaries of the transformer 
K (see Fig. 2), these circuits being now closed on the stator wind- 
ing in place of the special connection of Fig. 1. The secondaries 
of the seriestransformer K may be closed on the stator before or 


584 INDUCTION GENERATORS. [May 19 


after the primaries and in either case the secondaries of this 
transformer constitute impedances for the shunt currents. The 


l : 
currents therefore lag by an angle ¢ g* os and the machine 


behaves as if the brushes a bc were placed, for shunt excitation, 
gate ie 

* 
machine were run light all the time. The flux of the armature is 
annihilated both in direction and form at anyload. The machine 
operates practically at synchronism. 

Mr. Adams is certainly in error in saying: (1) That it is im- 
possible to compound rigorously for all loads by means of a com- 


2 : 
inthe position Aoa = — +tg tg = and as if the 
T T 


Fig. 3 


pensating transformer and, (2) That the machine could not 
induce currents at constant frequency. 

To obtain these two desiderata it suffices properly to design the 

‘transformer K, which, in any case, is of small dimensions. The 
compensating transformer is my way of compounding the shunt 
machine. 

Concerning my shunt machine working as a motor, it is of 
eee: to read the article of Mr. Bragstad, see E.7.Z., May 21st, 
1 wv. 

The commutation of alternators of my design, in which I make 
use of the ordinary winding of the continuous current armatures 


1903.] - COMMUNICATION AFTER ADJOURNMENT. 585. 


is as good with few bars on the commutator as with many. 
With a drum winding consisting of twelve coils divided into six 
slots per complete magnetic circuit (see Fig. 3), the commutation 
is perfect. The damping of harmonics is produced automatically 
not only by the short-circuiting of the rotor through the exciting 
circuit, as before indicated by myself (see Electrical World, 1902 
page 60), but also by the short-circuiting of the rotor coils 
through the brushes. 

These two ways of damping of harmonics which I have per- 
sonally discovered are more than sufficient to suppress every 
harmonic and to give a perfect commutation. 

Instead of piacing the coils in one slot only it is possible to put 
them in several slots per hole, as proposed by Mr. Fischer-Hinnen 
for continuous current dynamos. 


j 
; 


586 BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 


Discussion AT PittsBuRG, JUNE 4, 1903. 

Mr. Lrncotn:—I would like to ask Mr. Olin about one point. 
It was originally thought that since poor regulating machines do 
not have so large short circuit current they would noc raise so 
large a disturbance when short circuited. The machines at 
Niagara Falls, with which I am familiar, are not particularly good 
in regulation, but I know from experience that they can raise a 
great deal of a rumpus when short circuited. Enough current 
can come out those machines on the instant of short circuit to 
throw the cables off the brackets, with only a single machine on 
the circuit. The mechanical force required to throw the cables 
apart in the manner noted would indicate 20 to 30 times full load 
current at the instant of short circuit instead of two or three 
times, as it would be after the short circuit has been on for some 
time. 

ProressoR KARAPETOFF:—Some time ago I was interested in 
the principles of action of the Heyland motor, and I tried to find out 
for myself some simple theory of its working. You will allow me 
to occupy a few minutes of your time, to expound to you in a 
simple way some properties of the Heyland machine. The 
Heyland motor is an induction motor, which can work at a power 
factor of unity and for this purpose its rotor is provided with a 
d.c. commutator and brushes. 

The tendency during the last few years has been to get a motor, 
requiring as little attention as possible. An ordinary induction 
motor with a short circuited rotor satisfies this condition to a very 
large extent. But having attained simplicity we have deprived 
ourselves of every means of regulation of the power factor or of 
the speed. Now, if we wish to control the power factor, as in a 
synchronous motor, or its speed, as in d.c. motors, we must intro- 
duce a new part into our machine. 

In the Heyland motor the brushes can occupy different posi- 
tions on the commutator and they :onstitute the movable part by 
which the power factor of the motor can be regulated and by 
which it not only can be raised to unity, but even leading 
currents can be produced in the line, as in the case of an over- 
excited synchronous motor. 

In an ordinary induction motor the magnetizing current, 
which produces the resultant rotating flux in the air-gap, is 
supplied to the stator as a component of the primary current; 
this wattless component makes cos ¢ of such a motor less than 1, 
In the Heyland motor an additional component of the rotating 
field is produced by the currents introduced into the rotor by the 
brushes. The phase of this additional component can be regu- 
lated by changing the position of the brushes; in this way the 
total magnetizing current can be regulated both in its phase and 
value, so as to suit our purposes. 

At speeds near synchronism, at which the Heyland machine 
should be ordinarily used both as motor and as generator, the 


BRANCH DISCUSSIONS. 587 


armature can be considered almost as an ohmic resistance; this 
explains a very low-tension sufficient at the brushes and following 
a small amount of energy for magnetization. Practically this 
low-tension is produced either by special autotransformers, or 
simply by shunting leads to the brushes from a part of the stator 
windings, thus using these windings as autotransformers. 

The possibility of regulating cos g is given by a movable 
adjustment of the brushes. ; 

_ The speed of the motor can be very simply regulated by chang- 
ing the pressure at the brushes; for this purpose the auto- 
transformers can be provided with several taps. 

It is not necessary to prove that the Heyland motor can work 
as an induction generator above synchronism; it does it on the 
same principle as an ordinary induction motor. The only thing 
to be shown is that the Heyland generator can be self-exciting, 
while an ordinary induction generator always requires some 
synchronous generator working with it in parallel and supplying 
magnetizing currents for its rotating flux. 

The disadvantage of having a commutator does not seem to 
me to be very serious; the pressure at the brushes is compara- 
tively very low and the current introduced through the com- 
mutator is only a small part of the secondary current induced in 
the short circuited windings of the rotor. Mr. Heyland says in 
one of his articles, that the commutator of his machine is only 
5 per cent. of the size of the commutator of a d.c. motor of 
the same horse-power. The number of segments can also be 
made small. 

Mr. Lincotn:—Are the Heyland motors used to any large 
extent? 

PROFESSOR KarapEeToFF:—I have never seen these motors 
and am only interested in the development of the idea. 

Mr. Scumit:—European firms in Austria do not put them on 
the market as they are too complicated and require too much 
skilled attention. 23 

Mr. Lincotn:—Is there any trouble from sparking at the 
brushes? 

PROFESSOR KaraPETorrFr :—Mr. Heyland affirmsthat thereis no 
sparking at all if the resistances are properly adjusted, and points 
out that the brushes and commutator require only a small 
amount of energy. There are only eighteen segments in his 
commutator. It is not necessary to have resistance between all 
the commutator bars; it is enough to have resistance between 
some of them. 

Mr. Pecx:—I would like to ask Mr. Olin how his attempts in 
the testing room to measure the actual regulation of a machine 
compared with the calculated regulation. 

Mr. Otin:—We have made several attempts but never have 
been able to make the actual regulation check closely with the 
calculated. The calculation is merely a first approximation, 
but there is no better way known to get at it. 

Meeting adjourned. Z 


9 
q 
: 
i 
4 
y 
; 
4 
- » 


“A paper read at the 2d extra Meeting of the Schenec- 
tady Branch of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Union University, Schenectady, New 
York, May 18, 1903. 


A DISCUSSION OF SOME POINTS IN ALTERNATING 
CURRENT THEORY. 


BY W. S. FRANKLIN. 


I was bold enough to write several weeks ago to the secretary 
‘of the Schenectady Branch of the American INSTITUTE OF ELEC- 
TRICAL ENGINEERS, suggesting that arrangements be made 
‘whereby I might discuss with Mr. Steinmetz some points in 
alternating current theory with the hope of bringing about among 
writers on this subject an agreement in regard to certain points 
in method and notation which would, I think, greatly facilitate 
educational work in this field. 

I was pleased to hear promptly from Mr. Williams that my 
‘suggestion had met with the hearty approval of Mr. Steinmetz 
nd that the debate, as Mr. Williams called it, would be set for 
Monday, May 18. I wish to thank Mr. Steinmetz for his readiness 
to enter into a discussion with me and I wish to express my high 
opinion of his ability as a physicist by referring briefly to a short 
conversation I had with him several weeks ago, a conversation 
which turned to the discussion of the vacuum tube discharge 
and of the general question of the relation between temperature 
and luminous radiation. It pleased me greatly to hear Mr. 
Steinmetz say that it is a mistake to apply the notion of tempera- 
ture to thé peculiarly disturbed gas in a vacuum tube. I was 
reminded of the incredulity with which a fellow physicist received 
a statement from me some six or seven years ago, When We were 
discussing the question of the temperature of the electric arc—I 
stated that the arc has no temperature, though it cannot be de- 
nied that it is in a certain sense very hot. Mr. Steinmetz’s 
remark also reminded me of a criticism I made several years ago 
of Duhem’s large treatise on Thermodynamios. I took occasion 

589 


eo = 


590 FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. [May 18 


in reviewing this book to point out a mistaken mathematical 
development based by Duhem on the false application of the 
precise notion of temperature to a body or system not in thermal 
equilibrium. Duhem contended, largely on the basis of this 
error, that his notion of thermodynamic potential is more 
definitely usable in thermodynamic theory than the notion of 
entropy. 

Before proceeding to the details of the evening’s discussion I 
wish to state that my discussion will be very largely a discussion 
of ideas and conceptions with little reference to detailed mathe- 
matical developments. I know of only one way to carry on such 
a discussion and that is to reduce each point in the discussion to 
its simplest terms and state the result as a fact. One of the 
General Electric employees said to me some time ago that the 
trouble with Mr. Steinmetz was that he threw out his statements 
expecting them to be accepted as self-evident statements of fact. 
Truly, I cannot see how else Mr. Steinmetz could do. For my 
part I shall of course endeavor to make my statements as clear as. 
possible, nevertheless I think that the auditors are in for a very 
considerable share of the effort of the evening’s discussion. 

My primary object in opening this discussion is to state my 
position clearly on the following points: 

(a) Steinmetz’s polar-codrdinate method versus the clock- 
diagram method of representing harmonic alternating 
electromotive forces and currents. 

(b) The necessity of choosing signs, especially in polyphase 
networks, in order that the physical facts of a problem 
may be fully and unequivocally represented in the vector 
diagrams or in the complex equations which form the 
basis of the solution of the problem. 

(c) That Mr. Steinmetz’s topographical method does not differ 
in any essential respect from the vector method of 
representation, and that Mr. Steinmetz is not justified in 
his claim that the topographical method is better suited 
than the vector method to the discussion of polyphase 
problems where the consideration of algebraic signs is 
more exacting than in single-phase problems. 

(d) In regard to the physical basis of the general equations of 
the transformer and of the induction motor. 

(e) In regard to Mr. Steinmetz’s treatment of power and 
double-frequency products. 


eS Se ee eee 


eA 


1903.] FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 5901 


PoLar-Co6RDINATE vs. CLOCK-pIAGRAM METHOD. 

I think it is of the utmost practical importance, especially to. 
men engaged in educational work, that the relative advantages 
and disadvantages of these two methods be carefully considered 
and that the one or the other together with the corresponding 
convention as to sign of reactance in the complex expression for 
impedance be finally and universally adopted. 

I take it to be self-evident that a pulsating quantity such as an 
alternating electromotive force or current can be represented only 
by a thing which pulsates. We should guard ourselves carefully 
against falling into the notion that a vector represents an alter- 
nating electromotive force or current. At least at the outset 
when we are developing our method, be it Steinmetz’s polar- 
coérdinate method or the clock-diagram method, we should have 
a clear appreciation of all the machinery involved, afterwards it 
is of course allowable to say, for the sake of brevity, that a certain 
vector represents a given alternating electromotive force or cur- 
rent without describing how the representation is actually accom- 
plished. 

In case of the clock-diagram to say that a given vector £ 
represents a harmonic alternating electromotive force means that 
it is a rotating line of which the projection on a fixed line repre- 
sents the varying values of the alternating electromotive force. 

In case of Steinmetz’s polar-coérdinate diagram, to say that a 
given vector E represents a harmonic alternating electromotive 
force means that the vector stands for a circle of which it is the. 
diameter and that this circle cuts off from a rotating line a vary- 
ing segment which represents the varying values of the alternating: 
electromotive force. 

The fundamental machinery of representation being thus de- 
vised the next step in the development of either method is to 
establish the addition theorem, namely, that the sum of two 
harmonic alternating electromotive forces e’ and e” (instantane- 
ous values) is represented by the vector sum of the two lines Which 
represent the respective electromotive forces e’ and e”. 

The establishment of this theorem is an extremely simple 
matter in the clock-diagram method and although it is not a. 
serious matter in the polar-codrdinate method it must be ad- 
mitted that any junior student is likely to be overwhelmed by 
the unfamiliar mechanism involved. Stated fully, the theorem 
is as follows in the polar-codrdinate method and clock-diagram. 
method respectively: 


es 


592 FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. [May 18 


(a) Two harmonic electromotive forces e’ and e” are repre- 
sented by the varying segments cut off from one and the 
same rotating line by two fixed circles of which the diame- 
ters are the lines E’ and E”. Then the sum e’+e” is repre- 
sented by the varying segment cut off from the same 
rotating line by a fixed circle of Which the diameter is the 
vector sum of the two lines £’ and E”. 

{b) Two harmonic electromotive forces e’ and e” are repre- 
sented by the varying projections of two lines E’ and E”, 
which rotate at the same speed. Then the sum e’+e” is 
represented by the varying projection of the vector sum 
ot. Sand : 

I am convinced that neither the clock-diagram method nor 
the polar-codrdinate method has any essential advantage over 
the other except, perhaps, that the clock-diagram method is 
miore simply related to the fundamental geometrical interpreta- 
tion of the complex expotential E <¢’“‘ as a uniformly rotating 
vector of length E. 

{ am convinced that the machinery of the clock-diagram 

method is much more familiar to every one and simpler than the 

machinery of the polar-codrdinate method. 

I consider that the difference in the complex expression of an 
impedance, namely, r+7x and r—jx, which grows out of the 
differences in the machinery of the polar-codérdinate and of the 
.Clock-diagram methods is a very serious source of contusion and 
vexation. I think that We ought all to adopt the clock-diagram 
method, and the expression 7+ 7 x fortheimpedance of an induc- 
tive circuit. I think that all questions of notation are essentially 
educational questions and I therefore feel justified in taking a 
stand in this matter in apparent opposition to Mr. Steinmetz; I 
say apparent opposition because I cannot imagine that Mr. 
Steinmetz cares anything about the matter except to the extent 
that he is concerned with the business of education and to that 
extent he must, I think, agree With me. 

Before leaving this discussion of the polar-coordinate method 
and the clock-diagram method, I wish to call attention to a 
matter which, in both methods, is more or less perplexing; 
namely, the question as to the propriety of representing imped-. 
ance as a vector. In the clock-diagram, electromotive force and 
current vectors are understood to rotate, while an iinpedance 
vector, if one chooses to represent impedance by a vector, is 
stationary. It is therefore not proper to represent impedance 


1903.] FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 593 


by a vector in one and the same diagram with electromotive 
force and current. In the polar coérdinate diagram it is per- 
haps allowable to represent both impedance and electromotive 
force or current, it being kept in mind that an electromotive 
force or current vector stands for a circle and the accompanying 


_ Machinery for representing a harmonically varying quantity 


while the impedance vector does not. 


NECESSITY OF CHOoosING Signs IN CoMPLICATED Networks. 


Everyone appreicates the importance in general of representing 
the data of a problem completely and without ambiguity in the 
geometrical construction in the algebraic formula which is to be 
used in solving the problem. The choice of signs in a complex 
network is a matter which touches this general question and I 
wish to speak especially of the choice of signs in polyphase net- 
works inasmuch as I do not, so far as I see, agree with Mr. 
Steinmetz in this matter. 

In considering a single-phase alternator the electromotive 
force (or current) can be represented by a given line or by a line 
in the reverse direction according as we choose to consider the 
electromotive force as positive or negative when it acts in a given 
direction. This ambiguity, however, seldom or never leads to 
confusion in the study of single-phase circuits inasmuch as we 
quite unconsciously choose the positive direction of electro- 
motive force to coincide with the positive direction or current, 
and in the study of a single-phase circuit we are concerned only 
with the relations between the one electromotive force and the 
one current. When we come, however, to consider a polyphase 
system we are immediately confronted with the relationship of 
electromotive forces (or currents) in different circuits and an 
explicit decision as to signs is absolutely necessary. I gave 
to-day, before the students of Union College, an elementary dis- 
cussion of a number of simple problems illustrating this point; 
namely, (a) the electromotive force and current relations in a 
two-phase three-wire system. (b) The electromotive force and 
current relations in Y and A connected three-phase alternators. 
(c) The use of two wattmeters on a three-phase receiving system. 
(d) The use of two transformers for 3-phase = 3-phase step- 
down transformation, and (e), the 2-phase 3-phase transformer. 
I give the most important features of this discussion in an 
appendix to this printed discussion so as to furnish several 
examples illustrating the necessity of the choice of signs. 


594 FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. [May 18 


I think that Mr. Steinmetz is wrong in claiming any advantage 
of his so-called topographical method over the vector method in 
the clearing up of difficulties arising from the confusion of signs, 
and I think that the distinction between action and reaction, 
between impressed electromotive force and counter-electromotive 
force, although it complicates the difficulties arising from con- , 
fusion of signs, is a very different matter from that which I have 
in mind in the above discussion. 

The topographical method really contains not the least element 
of essential difference from the vector method of representation. 
The two methods differ chiefly in their appeal to the eye and I 
think that Mr. Steinmetz has been led to attribute greater power 
to the topographical method for the following reason: 

In ordinary alternating current problems we are in nearly all 
cases concerned with the addition of given partial electromotive 
forces or currents, while in many polyphase problems we are 
freauently concerned with the subtraction of given electromotive 
forces or currents. Now we are all of us accustomed to picture 
mentally the sum of two vectors as the diagonal of the parallelo- 
gram constructed on the two vectors as sides, but we are not so 
accustomed to picture the difference of two vectors as the 
distance between their termini. On the other hand, if only the 
terminal points of two vectors are indicated in a drawing the 
distance between the points is the simplest notion that can be 
associated with them. That is, the topographical method 
accentuates the notion of a difference and in fact this accentua- 
tion is not accomplished by making the notion itself more evident 
in the diagram but by making the notion of a sum less prominent. 

I am convinced that the topographical method of Mr. Stein- 
metz is essentially identical to the vector method, except in 
the way it appeals to the eye. I think that in its appeal to the 
eye the topographical method is very decidedly less intelligible 
than the vector method and I do not think even that the topo- 
graphical method permits more readily than the vector method 
of the use of a reference point or region of zero potential. I wish 
to take this occasion to say that I wholly disapprove of those 
so-called vector diagrams so frequently used by writers on alter- 
nating currents, not however including Mr. Steinmetz, in which 
the various electromotive forces or currents are represented by 
sides of triangles without arrow heads. All electromotive force 
or current vectors should be drawn from one and the same origin 
and each should have an arrow head. Uncertainty as to which 


1908.] FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 595 


end of a vector should show the arrow head simply means that 
the person who is constructing the diagram does not know 
enough about the concrete facts of his problem to represent them 
completely and unequivocally in a vector diagram. 


THE FunpDAMENTAL EQuartions oF THE TRANSFORMER AND 
OF THE INDUCTION MoTor. 

There is nothing in the teaching of physics so important as to 
develop in the student the ability to express physical conditions 
in mathematical form, geometrical or algebraic as the case may 
be; to reproduce or represent the conditions of a problem ade- 
quately as a geometrical construction or as an algebraic formula. 
Nothing, I say, is so important as this. It is the very essence of 
effective knowledge in physics, and every bit of attempted 
instruction which does not contribute directiy or indirectly to 
facility in this representation of physical fact, in terms of our 
mental tools, is, in my opinion, futile. I think that no one but a 
teacher of physics can fully appreciate the truth of these asser- 
tions and it is far from my intention to criticise Mr. Steinmetz’s 
writings for their meagreness in this respect. Mr. Steinmetz has 
a right to expect of his readers some degree of facility of the kind 
here under consideration, and I for one am always glad when I 
take up a theoretical paper which does not impose a great array 
of elementary detail upon my attention. I can stand unlimited 
preliminary statement of fact even when the style is slightiy 
obscure, but reiterate explanation I cannot endure. If anything 
in this statement be taken by my hearers as a suggestive criticism 
of Mr. Steinmetz’s papers I hasten to assure you of your mistake, 
although I must admit that Mr. Steinmetz’s style has sometimes 
seemed to me to be slightly obscure. Butlet uscometothe point. 
Mr. Steinmetz in his discussion of the general equations of the 
transformer is led by these equations to a series of propositions. 
as to the equivalence of a transformer with its secondary receiv- 
ing circuit to various series and parallel combinations of simple 
circuits. Every one of these propositions in my opinion is easily 
established by the consideration of very simple physical princi- 
ples, and I think that the general equations of the transformer 
are properly based upon these propositions which Mr. Steinmetz 
seems to think are arrived at by means of the general equations. 

If these propositions are really dependent upon the general 
equations or the transtormer I certainly do not knw where these 


596 TRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. [May 18 


general equations come from, nor on what basis of physical fact 
they stand. 

The theory of the transformer may be developed first on the 
assumption that coil resistances, magnetic leakage and magnet- 
izing current are entirely negligible. This ideal theory, if we 
may call it such, is of course very simple. The fact is that this 
ideal theory is the first term in a series of approximations. A 
second approximation may be arrived at by considering the 
effects (a) of coil resistances, (b) of magnetic leakage and (c) of 
eddy current and hysteresis losses and core reluctance, each by 
itself, the mutual effects of these three items beingignored. This 
second approximation is accurate enough to meet every demand 
hitherto made by the practical engineer. The third approxima- 
tion, which would have to be based on the consideration of the 
influence of (a) on (b), of (b) on (a), of (b) on (c), of (c) on (b), 
of (a) on (c) and of (c) on (a), had never been fully worked out so 
far as I know. 

By considering the effects of items (a), (b) and (c) separately, 
the propositions enunciated by Mr. Steinmetz are easily estab- 
lished and from these propositions the general equations of the 
transformer can be written down at once. 

The general equations may be, and usually are, modified so 
as to take account partially of the influence of items (a) and (b) 
upon item (c) by using primary induced electromotive force in- 
stead of primary impressed electromotive force in the equation 
for magnetizing current. 

The establishment of the fundamental equations of the induc- 
tion motor, single-phase, and polyphase, and of the repulsion 
motor, is, in my opinion, accomplished in much the same manner 
as the establishment of the fundamental equations of the trans- 
former; that is, by first establishing certain simple circuit equiv- 
alences by considering separately the effects of magnetic leakage, 
coil resistances, core losses, etc. 


POWER AND DousBLEeE FREQUENCY PRopuwctTs. 


The product of instantaneous values of an alternating current 
and electromotive force gives instantaneous power. This instant- 
aneous power reduces to the form 

p = a+b sin (2 wt+0) 

That is, the instantaneous power consists of a constant part 

a(= EIcos@) and a harmonic part which has a frequency 


1903.] FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 597 


twice as great as that of the given electromotive force and 
current. 

The question is, can this power p be represented by a vector 
or by the complex algebraical expression for a vector? I think 
it cannot. In the ordinary vector representation of an alternat- 
ing electromotive force three elements are involved, two of which 
appear explicitly in the vector, namely, numerical value and 
phase; and one of which, the frequency, is involved in the 
machinery for which the vector stands. Now » contains four 
elements, namely, a, b, wt and @ and it cannot be represented 
by a vector. 

It is possible by means of Hamilton’s notion of vector products 
to see the compiete representation of a+b sin (wt+@) in the 
product of the two vectors E and J, which represent electro- 
motive force and current respectively, although a difficulty arises 
in that the vector which represents b sin (wt+@) lies out of the | 
plane containing & and/. A more serious difficulty is, I think, 
that in Hamilton's system the products of the compenent unit 
vectors 1, j and # are interpreted in a manner which is iriconsistent 
with the interpretation of the product of the horizontal unit 
vector 2 and the vertical unit vector j, neg which ordinary 
complex algebra is based. f 

In forming the product of the ordinary complex expressions 
for an alternating electromotive force and an alternating current 
it is necessary to adopt a new kind oj complex algebra in order that. 
any part of the product may represent the power developed. 
The ordinary complex algebra is not available. I do not think 
that Mr. Steinmetz’s discussion of power and double-frequency 
quantities furnishes a consistent algebra for representing power 
and I do not think it is advisable or desirable to develop an 
algebra to meet the requirements of power representation. 

Aside from the fundamental impossibility of representing by 
a vector a notion involving four elements, I note in particular 
two things to which I take exception in Mr. Steinmetz’s dis- 
cussion, namely, 

(a) The fundamental equations of interpretation 


p=til 
Exy == 74 
jX1l=j] 


which, according to Mr. Steinmetz, establish an algebra which 
meets the requirements of power representation do not, I think, 
furnish the basis of any consistent system of algebra whatever. 


598 FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. [May 18 


The first of these equations seems to be suggested by the fact 
that 2 time interval or angle which represents half a cycle for a 
given frequency represents a whole cycle for double-frequency. The 
second and third seem to be suggested by the necessity of bring- 
ing into the product of two complex expressions those signs which 
are required to make one part of the product actually equal to 
the constant part of the power. 

(b) The real component of power in Mr. Steinmetz’s discussion 
. is the quantity a in the equation 

p = at+bsin (2wt+8) 
and the imaginary component is the quantity b sin (2 wi+6). I 
do not see what possible meaning can be assigned to a vector,of 
which one component is a constant and the other a harmonic 
function. 


APPENDIX. 


EXAMPLES ILLUSTRATING THE NECESSITY OF A CAREFUL CHOICE 
oF SIGNS IN PROBLEMS DEALING WITH POLYPHASE 
NETWORKS. 


SINGLE-PHASE SYSTEM. 


Fig. 1 represents a single-phase alternator with 
its terminals a and b. Suppose that at a given in- 
stant the electromotive force acts from a to bD at, 
say, its maximum value. The rotating vector 
which represents the electromotive force must, at 
the given instant, be in the position to give its 
maximum projection but whether in position to give maximum 
positive or maximum negative projection depends upon whether 
we choose to consider an electromotive force from a to b as posi- 
tive or negative. The same remarks apply to the representation 
of the current delivered by the alternator. If only we choose 
positive direction of electromotive force and positive direction of 
current the same the relative positions of the electromotive force 
vector and current vector will be independent of which direction 
is chosen as the positive direction. Therefore no ambiguity can 
exist provided the same direction is chosen as positive direction 
both of current and of electromotive force, and the interpreta- 
tion of the vector diagram is not liable to confusion. This is, 
however, not the case when we are concerned with the relations 


Fia. 1, 


1903.] FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 599 


between electromotive forces and currents existing in the separate 
windings of a polyphase generator. 


a TWO-PHASE SYSTEM. 


Fig. 2 represents a two-phase alternator with 
three-wire service mains a, b andc. (The con- 

3 fusion of signs can only occur where the two 
phases are brought into relation with one and 
the same element, be it a common main as in 
this example, a common magnetic element as in 

C the two-phase induction motor, or any other 

Fig. 2. element common to the two-phases.} 

Suppose positive signs between mains be chosen from a to b, 
from b toc andfrom atoc; and suppose that Fig. 3 is the vector 
diagram representing the two electromotive forces. Then the 

electromotive force from a toc is thesum of A 
and 6 and it is 45° ahead of B and 45° behind 

A A in phase. If positive signs between mains are 

chosen from 0 to a, from } to c and from a to ¢ 

then with precisely the same actual conditions 

Fig. 3, existing in the system the vector diagram will be 

as shown in Fig. 4 and the electromotive force from « to c, which 

D:) is of course exactly the same as before, both in 

fact and in representation, will be equalto b — A, 

- and it will be 45° ahead of B as before and 315° 

A ahead of A in phase. 

Examples of variation of vector diagram with 

Fia. 4: choice of signs along the mains could be easily 

outlined in the matter of the relations between currents in the 
mains. 


A 


B 


THREE-PHASE SYSTEM. 


T shall not take in this case the simplest examples to illustrate 
the principles under discussion, the examples namely which are 
furnished by the discussion of current and electromotive force 
relations in a three-phase three-wire system with 4-connected 
and with Y-connected armature windings; but I will take up the 
discussion of a problem which offers greater intrinsic interest; 
namely, the problem of the use of two wattmeters for measuring 
the power delivered to a three-phase receiving system. 


606 FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. [May 18 


THE USE OF TWO WATTMETERS FOR MEASURING THREE-PHASE 
POWER. 


Fig. 5 shows two watz- 
meters connected for 
measuring power Ge- 
livered to a 4-connected 
3-phase receiving system. 
In order that the reading 
of each wattmeter may 
be considered as positive 
when the power it meas- 
ures is delivered to the re- 

Fig 5. ceiving system, the nosi- 
tive signs of electromotive forces e’ and e” and of currents a 
and 6 must be properly chosen. 

There are four systems of signs which meet these requirements, 
and each of these systems is non-symmetrical with respect to the 
three receiving circuits. One of these systems of signs is shown 
in Fig. 5. The choice of sign of e’” and 7’” may be made arbi- 
trarily. 

Now, a symmetrical choice of signs in a three-phase system 
gives a symmetrical vector diagram and a non-symmetrical 
choice of signs gives a non-symmetrical vector diagram. To fix 
the vector diagram for a given non-symmetrical choice of signs 
it is.best first to choose a symmetrical system of signs, draw’ a 
symmetrical vector diagram, and then change signs as desired 
and reverse the corresponding vectors. 

Fig. 6 shows the vectors which represent the three electro- 
motive forces e’,e”, 
and e’” and tne 
three currents 1" 
a” and 7’” in con- 
formity with the 
choice of signs in 
Fig. 5. 

By inspecting 
Fig. 5 it is evident 


a — 4’ ate 
b = 1" 
Fia, 6. from which the 


vectors representing the currents a and b may be drawn as shown 
in Fig. 6. 


1903.] FRANKLIN: ALTERNATING CURRENTS. 601 


Now, wattmeter W’ indicates the average value of the product 
of e’ and a, which is equal to E’ A cos (30° — 8); and wattmeter 
W” indicates the average value of the product or e” and b which 
is equal to E” B cos (30°+ 0); where E’, E”, A and B are the 
effective values of e’, e”, a and b respectively. If the receiving 
system is balanced E’ = E” and A = B so that the two watt- 
meter readings may be written: 

W’ = k cos (30°—6) 
W” = k cos (30°+0) 

When @ = 60° we have the well-known condition in which 
W” = 0 and the wattmeter W’ measures all the power. When 
6 > 60° W” is negative and is to be subtracted from W’ to give 
the power delivered to the receiving system. 


Sold) HX. 


BUSINESS OF THE INSTITUTE. 


Annual Business Meeting, New York, May 19, 19038...........- 

Annual Dinner of the INsTITUTE at New York, February 9 1903. 
IBNAMOCROHCEU OCCLELATY: Siyon iets crys cis ethastrus sie alanine sues é en ie 
Board of Directors, RED OLe nN Sia rae oh WN oy SeRte ae 
Boston Branch, Meeting, March 26, 1903...................004 


Business Meeting, Annual, New York, May 19, 1908........... 
Chiao, leiganaiolel, itech chavs va\yovelll Ye, GRC OS) ss Aims Sea ole erg Sane 
Chicago Branch, Meeting, May 5, 1908.............. Pet eee 


Chicago Branch, Meeting, May 19, OCS Re we ee de cue Ua 
Weapviced urine tne: Veara ne cdect te nw oles Hakim Ones ake go wt ols 
Dinner AnmuatwatiNews Workwbebnruaty 9 U903 een... ceeds ay 3. 
Winners Library, ac New York, Pebruary, 911903..... 2. gan a. 6 
DineGhorsm Ne port Of OAT! Olin gue rowieters Fe ais, scythe aio) eee ape tiaas Ci 
WDisinearecimeanis ance NECEIM tse aut) sae soleicin settle cose tretewslo ® sroera ees. 
Engineering Building, LORETO ey nuchal athe ced BAL, SR rr eet cas 483, 
lincaiitunS, Receipts and Disbursementsa (6100. 0... - nc s eee es 
Dibraty Dinner at New York, February 9, 1903... ....0 2.22. 0 

Bipcech Dy Pest St OCOLL. “lattaiar ela lets Petal ew ys ey ede ven 

Speech by Andrew Carnegie. 7.2. es ee See 

Speech by SchuylerS. Wheeler... 2)... oe. St. a eee 

Specci by ROR] Bowker 0. 6. ee Te ee tees’ 

pect by J. o: Billings ae ee ee aie pee eee 

Speech by Theodore L. De Vinne.....2 0.6... cient ee ees 

Speech by James C. Bayles. .. =... 0... eee eee tees 
Meeting, Annual Business, New LVsor Kear rel GOB aint ot ath) -eooc ofc 
Meeting, Boston Branch, March 26, 1903.............-...-.554: 
Meeting, Chicago Branch, April 7, 1903..............--.----005- 
Meeting, Chicago Branch, May 5, 1908..............--..+-+0- 00+ 
Meeting, Chicago Branch, May 19, 1908............:..-..-..---- 
Meeting, Minneapolis Branch, NIHRC Gy UNSC soa eat le cece 
Meeting, Minneapolis Branch, April 3, 1903.................+.-- 
Meeting, Minneapolis Branch, May 1, 1903..................++-- 
Meeting, New York, January 23, 1908................-.+++2+05- 
Meeting, New York, February 27, 1903...........---++++++++-- 
Meeting, New York, March 27, 1903...........-.-- +2 es esse eee 
Meeting, New York, April 17, 1908...........-- yee ee eres e eee 


Meeting, New York, eo DY SOTO BY seh 5 Ge SRO EP ace ROE c re Papel CHRON Saar 
iesevelnls Nielraehoi (2) NOR ee wel RAPAY Shs cous See 


Meeting, Philadelphia 
Meeting, Philadelphia Branch, April 6, 1903..............-- 


Meeting, Philadelphia Branch, May 11, 1903..............----- 


Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, February 5, VOOR rer tee ostaccens 


Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, Mearctie leat OO Bm = enmtin e wnat <1 s)-1cteie 
Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, pra 2, V0 ei cake es oo.6 gen tng 
Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, INTE Tals BOUORS RI er asthctoc cto ancet neg eeee 
Meeting, Pittsburg Branch, June 4, 1903...........-..+-+++++55- 
Meeting, St. Louis Branch, May 16,1008 cs ce x ee ot egw ee 
Meeting, Schenectady Branch, March 17, 1903............0.++5+- 


603 


604 INDEX. 
Meeting, Schenectady Branch, April 7, 1903........--.+++-+++++- 299 
Meeting, Schenectady Branch, May 18, 1903.........-.+++++++-- 589 
Meeting, University of Illinois Branch, February 7, 19035 2, Sec . 84 
Membership, Resumé of. ...... 2-62 - even eee eee tees es 484 
Minneapolis Branch, Meeting, March 6, 1903. ...-.......++++++-- 208 
Minneapolis Branch, Meeting, April 3, 1903........--.-.-+-++++-- 298 
Minneapolis Branch, Meeting, May 1, 1903............----+++-+: 476. 
New York, Meeting, January 23, 1903..............-.---+-+++::: 1 
New York, Meeting, February 27, 1903.........-...----+--++-+:- 129: 
New York, Meeting, March 27, 1903...........-.-.+++--+s+s-+-; 229: 
New York, Meeting, April 17, 1903..........--.----+-+-+--++5:- 327 
New York, Meeting, April 24, 1903..........-+..--+--++-+--++0:- 403. 
New York, Meeting, May 19, 1903..........--.----+--5+-+s+-2- 479: 
Officers Blected isc acc ste s sic siegentess ego of terete ey geet) See 486 
Philadelphia Branch, Meeting, March 9, 1903...............+.... 209: 
Philadelphia Branch, Meeting, April 6, 1903........-..+-++++++-- 301 
Philadelphia Branch, Meeting, May 11, 1908...........-.+++-++5: 469° 
Pittsburg Branch, Meeting, February 5, 1903....-....--.++-.+--- 84 
Pittsburg Branch, Meeting, March 12, 1903.........-..+..-+----- 220: 
Pittsburg Branch, Meeting, April 9, 1903...........-.---.++-+-- 312 
Pittsburg Branch, Meeting, May 11, 1903..:............+.--++--: 462 
Pittsburg Branch, Meeting, June 4, 1903...............-.+--+.--- 586: 
Portrait of Charles F. Scott, President of the INstirtuTE 1902-1903 
“ (FRONTISPIECE) 
President Charles F. Scott, Portrait of................-- (FRONTISPIECE 
Receipts and Disbursements of the INSTITUTE... .-...-...-+++++5- 485: 
Report of Board of Directors for Year ending April 30, 1903...... 480: 
Report.of Tellers... teas Saas Bl ee Ae wi wie oe ieee 486. 
Report of Treasurer... 0. 61. AS. Sale cies p > epeleume emai nce 486. 
Registrations during Year........ 0... -+ eee se ee ee ss cee e eee eee 484 
Resumé of Membership. 3. - so) 3-8 ..5 ee ee eee ee co et aaa 
St. Louis Branch, Meeting, May 16, 1908......:......--.2%-+.5. 467 
Schenectady Branch, Meeting, March 17, 1903...-........-.-.--- 224 
Schenectady Branch, Meeting, April 7, 1908................-.---. 299° 
Schenectady Branch, Meeting, May 18, 1908............-+....-. 589: 
Scott, Charles F., President of the [nstiruTE 1902-1903, Portrait of, 
(FRONTISPIECE) 
Secretary’ s-Balance) Sheet. <2... 1.0.00. os oes Oem ae ee ee 485. 
Speech by President Chas. F. Scott, at Annual Dinner............ 97 
Speech by Andrew Carnegie...... 2.0.2... cece eee eee tee eens 105. 
Speech by Schuyler S. Wheeler... ..........- 660 e eee e eens 110: 
Speech by R. R. Bowker......... 1... e eee cece cece tenses ces 114 
Speech by J.S. Billings: . 002...) 2.05. 0 oonigsiy na epee 118. 
Speech by Theodore L. De Vinne...........-.- settee eee eee 120 
Speech by James C. Bayles........- 2. see eee cece ee eee eee eee 124 
TALEr'S ARETIOLG: vin Wine niall & OM RAD ont, foe Niel, er cneinireh aise one oat i ae ien nae 486. 
Tradsurer's! REPOLEA ce sa wuss sect ahs, eloleie Ste vile lof oy aaa Set Te fois Nena ele eles eee 486. 
Union, Engineering Building... 510.3 . A. cai. ak saat 483, 486 


University of Illinois Branch, Meeting, February 7, 1903........ 84 


Paes eee 


PAPERS AND DISCUSSIONS. 


Alternating-Current Generators, Self-Excited, Compounding of, for 
Variation in Load and Power-Factor. (Illustrated.)........ 
Alternating-Current Theory, Discussion of Some Points in. (Illus- 
UWURERHEC ceo w Gia tes cach docket aud A cage See ease I Aceeier oh an rae eae 
Alternating-Current Transmission Line, Model Showing Distribution 
of Electromotive Force and Current along a Single-Phase.... 
Alternators, Experimental Basis for the Theory of the Regulation 
foram (UU SUA UCCIN) ktener atten coRS Cae Ate itp cncccner care) lel ahsee ois s decree Oielwie 
Bncopnone ws Dhers (liustratedaya GX, PAN IL. TSIVCer. ie coe + atsle aes 
oo Telephone Operator. (lllustrated.) (Wdulliam J. Ham- 
TLE) Pa SO Ge ee i eA NON Ee ah clone NLA Sis 
PASalemibamiitata cemen CLL ICH Wan SETI Vs) Meera Wratyseemesksle Sot alee «ie! alevutall is 
Axle-Light System of Train Lighting. (Illustrated.) (Arthur J. 
IE GUASTECH ALD area oov > OOo OSE Die OES EO eae 
Burning of Wooden Pins on High-Tension Transmission Lines. 
@uilsiecateds) mes (Carr CHESIICH:) nnastttie cee ais, shatdicnt ca ainyrets ales 
tar Tiontineg System, Electric.” (Illustrated.). or... es a ee. 
Central Station Development, Tendencies of...................- 
Central Stations and Sub-stations, Safety Devicesin............. 


‘Central Stations, Economical and Safe Limits in the Size of...... 
‘Central Station, Multiple versus Independent Operation of Units 


anal,’ (ESS Renee) Vie etkbas G8 Bigs Bite ec mine neo crac crn ae rane 


‘Communication after Adjournment, Discussing Alternating-Cur- 


aime, Milam, lany [ig IRs Paeoaalinnesiloh 5 osc soho bana dee aoe bc 


Communication after Adjournment, Discussing Alternating-Current 


IVE KOIRURRES, ong MHL SKE RP IDehiGieie kn: 6 Mean nee Meo ound ome rol owe oral 


‘Communication after Adjournment, Discussing High-Tension Trans- 


PScione bit commoye [malta eAtmIStLON Gs ey i sere panel cvekee -l- 


‘Communication after Adjournment, Discussing High-Tension Trans- 


janie goral ILAKeS, levy delemay 1 lexytoooce bo nb obo udole ie on dOUr 


‘Communication after Adjournment, Discussing High-Tension Trans- 


amkiglorm INES, Lye Wii ING weer ale ouioeia o Uaegrep cee a. clo clare a 


‘Communication after Adjournment, Discussing High-Tension Trans- 


mmission! lanes byl. S. WOOdwWatd. .) 3 nee nee ee one 


‘Communication after Adjournment, Discussing Railway Train Light- 


ie, DY) Re BaD bis Wl eek. wecle sone Sree we eat ee 


Communication after Adjournment, Discussing Railway Train 


Lighting, by R. Neil Williams... ... 00. esse eee 


Communication after Adjournment, Discussing Telephony, by Sid- 


mey Hand Browne. 2d. ee nee eee tee 


‘Communication after Adjournment, Discussing Tendencies of Cen- 


tral Station Development, by Carl Schwartz................ 


‘Communication, Discussing High-Tension Transmission Lines, by M. 


TEE OS ic bei I ee nee ce 


‘Compounding of Self-Excited Alternating-Current Generators for 


Variation in Load and Power Factor. (lllustrated.) (A. S. 


GIRS oo detw Ou cig Sa AICP ke SERA OR CIO OL Ornate NOTE ays SO 


’ 


589 
261 


497 
93 


31 
155 


163 


569 
81 


589 
586 
307 


606 INDEX. 


Discussion on High-Tension Transmission Lines, at Minneapolis, 
April 3). 190332). Sass wee eect oe poe ee Shins ees 
Discussion on High-Tension Transmission Lines, at New York, 
Marclt 273 1903s. 5.27.0; cis tetera eereapa ruse tsacin teeter Renee ete ee 
Discussion on High-Tension Transmission Lines, at Philadelphia, 
April 6; 19038...) 2 EAR oon ee oe ani: etree 
Discussion on High-Tension Transmission Lines, at Pittsburg, April 
Discussion on High-Tension Transmission Lines at Schenectady, 
April 7219033 ete Pveetin he 5 aie 2 ene ay seas oe ay oe ee ee 
Discussion on Induction Generators, at New York, May 19, 1903.. 
Discussion on Railway Train Lighting, at Minneapolis, March 6, 


LOOB Myosin le Codd Sie Wie tie Spe yaams, sestitccae, Set ea tere aay en ee a 
Discussion on Railway Train Lighting, at New York, February 27, 
LOO Behe sete etswegecd vgs oes toh d 6 eee CR ey oan ae 
Discussion on Railway Train Lighting, at Philadelphia, March 9, 
LOOB. Se. eionad hadi a etuatitaatee cls na Mere eee OO oye ea ace 


Discussion on Railway Train Lighting, at Pittsburg, March 12, 1903 
esa pr on Railway Train Lighting, at Schenectady, March 17, 
GS. Os arts eae eee aA, cen ie a eek ity Sy suse: Puree AER 
Discussion on Telephony, at Pittsburg, February 5, 1903......... 
Discussion on Tendencies of Central Station Development, at Chi- 
Capo? May5; 1908. Ve.5sscis scr eos os Haase ener «coke tar cen 
Discussion on Tendencies of Central Station Development, at Minne- 
apolis; ‘May 1519035 cia. cimrstee sence) ely etek cna eee ee 
Discussion on. Tendencies of Central Station Development, at New 
Work April 245 LOOSm ee ara tee ocak leech cies io ee en 
Discussion on Tendencies of Central Station Development, at Phila- 
delptiia,, “May TU 1908) 2 Ako. canntemne toate ate hal aes ans eee 
Discussion on Tendencies of Central Station Development, at Pitts- 
‘bire, May. 11, 1O08 52... .e ucpeeteed armeieten, kta fraieeratens eae 
Discussion on Tendencies of Central Station Development, at St. 


Powis May. TGs TOQS re ites caro hee ote ci Peete ee tae 
Discussion on the Telephone Switchboard, at New York, January 
98, VOOR. sswcte = Be am One clon Tae Ree bea nen Ce 


Discussion on the Telephone Switchboard, at University of Illinois, 
Pebruarys 7; 1908 sn. ie n.odety sc ie covered DO ee ek ere an cone 
Distribtition of Electromotive Force and Current along a Single- 
Phase Alternating current Transmission Line, Model Showing. . 
Economical and Safe Limits in the Size of Central Stations. (H. A. 
LLORAMOL Viniieske gay tee Orgy Eee elect CORR RU TE oe ae) Senne 
Electric Car Lighting System. (Illustrated.) (W.L. Bliss.)..... 
Electric Lighting for Cars, System of. (Illustrated.)............ 
Electric Train-Lighting, Some of the Problems of............... 
Engineer, Telephone, Concerning the...) 95. ..% 5.0. she us ees coun 
Evolution of the Telephone Switchboard. (Illustrated.) (Thomas 
Ds LOCRWOOG:) ccsitvecg deen tus Se00s ols ects sine eae ae OR Te 
Experimental Basis for the Theory of the Regulation of Alternators. 
(Iitustrated.) -— (Bi A SBiehwends) hake 5 he tee eatin eae 
Features of Telephone Traffic and their Effect on Service........ 
Fluorescent Substances. (See Phosphorescent.).......3......... 
Heyland mee as Motor and Generator, Study of the. (Illus- 
Dg R16 ey OO aE RA Ae BNC rin ich tes ai ote de BE 
greene ie Transmission Lines. (Introduction by President 
COLT) s feAins lien) aiene atte cristae aree ties Noreen oe Jal a tens yeasts coaeyateca 
High-Tension Transmission Lines, Burning of Wooden Pins on. 
(ilustea ted) fac ecco ee ee ey SRA Se 
Induction Generatorsittic) cinoht. sates te ee eee eee 
Insulator Pin, Mechanical Specifications of a Proposed. (Illus- 
trated.) 285 tc te shies are, toeee tant tee an ewe en aca 
Insulators, Testing Of % Sy: ncts.0. eee eee no cte ee tue nee 
Lighting, an Axle Light System of Train. (Illustrated.)......... 


INDEX. 607 


EES NCI. 5 9p Bis Ne a a ee a ae 155 
Lighting, Electric, System of, for Cars. (ilitistrartecl®) eras ste nae 197 
et NCO AME We VOUL AI or Srbette Spt cS aeslowe tency le eon, 129 
Lighting, System, Electric Car. Malustrated. ji. Gea ns wie 133 
Mechanical Specifications of.a Proposed Standard Insulator Pin, 
(lustrated.).- (Ralph .D. Mershon.)....0. 0.02. foas. 06... 233 


WB, eT. Noncce e aae 261 
Multiple versus Independent Operation of Units and Central Stations 
(ilastrated )- (Peter Junkersjeld) ean ioe. Obie. .s. 425 
Operation of Units and Central Stations, Multiple versus Indepen- 
IS TES) SV RWU SEES Rea ear ee aie i I 425 
Operator, Automatic Telephone. (Illustrated.).................. 31 


Radioactive Substances with a Consideration of, (Illustrated.) 331 
Pin, Insulator, Mechanical Specifications of a Proposed.  (Illus- 


traned yas. GU SUMS Qc OES ols A ancl, ote Se ne an me ae OE 233 
Pins, Wooden, Burning of on High-Tension Transmission Lines. , 

(Milustrated.) soi. one ee eet ey ie alates. iter wireoo 
Power and Telephone Wires, Transposition and Relative Location 

Bit, ~ (CUURE HBS cL OS cin cist oh ee eee aie ae ak en en a 245. 
Power Factor, Compounding of Self-Excited Alternating-Current 

Generators for Variation in Load and. (lllustrated.)........ 569- 
BxOplemchOmniecticu (rain Lightine..,..45.:0400)... 2. Beer hake 173. 
Proposed Standard Insulator Pin, Mechanical Specifications of. 

(CUS aced s)eskee cbs theystes uk eel ate ae le a tno DRM. eee Ree 233: 
Radioactive Substances. (Introduction by President Scott.)..... 327 


of Phosphorescent aad Fluorescent Substance. (Illustrated.).. 331 
Radium and Other Radioactive Substances with a Consideration 

of Phosphorescent and Fluorescent Substances. The Properties 

and Applications of Selenium and the Treatment of Disease by 


the Ultra-Violet Light. (Illustrated.) (Wm. j.4lammer.)... 331 
Railway Train Lighting. (Introduction by President Scott.)..... 129 
Regulation of Alternators, Experimental Basis for the Theory of 

Beihiess: w(lilustraved:)i sc... SAIS eye Ris OR ea epee ony Ot 
Safety Devices in Central Stations and Sub-stations. (Philip 
Tsp MOS) Seen Gie. cn 08, OPA A Ban, OOM cle) HELE DEREK ee es 417 


ium, Properties and Applications of, and the Treatment of 
Be iseise i the Ultra-Violet Light. (Illustrated.) (William 


oon 
Pe HCHIIE TH tars eae Wem eat eM rte ail eee, thp c veias io sw din (socpeogac CHeabe anc 
eee. Beas ie Telephone Traffic and their Effect on Service. 
(GLASS DECI IS Eee scadtathanc 28a Oo ae rer ear ae 73: 
Some of the Problems of Electric Train-Lighting. (George D. Shep- te 
Oe ie eeenict a) Proposed Standard Tuswaics Pas 
Ciistrated ») eu nidia = >. an bites nia Merone hoc 233 
Standard Insulator Pin, Mechanical Specifications of a Proposed. at 
Guilastrateds)) yest ac. Ba Te 3 
Study of the Heyland Machine as Motor and Generator. (Illus- 
trated.) (Comfort A. Adams.).......... ito. cceNat owner nt 51 
Sub-stations, Safety Devices in Central Stations and............ ae 
Ne DOGG MCL TOM Ory Chet piety 22 ies os en voce Fa gree Tae cshdoe otis, swale ae 
Pee cud the Evolution of the Telephone. (lIllustrated.)..... 3 
System of Electric Lighting for Cars. (Illustarted.) (James F. os 
M oe we _ ae ace ce ks ee OG hota erat ete ee a 
h mgineer, Concerning the..........-.........0eeeee Ss 
toestone Ope aioe. Attomatic, (illustrated)... iim woos. pet 31 
Telephone Switchboard. (Introduction by President Scott.)...+. i 


itchboard, the Evolution of. (Illustrated.)........ 3 
ond Poe Some Features of, and their Effect on Service... 73: 


608 INDEX. 


Telephone Wires, Transposition and Relative Location of Power 
and. (Illustrated.).. <.0. 20. 2% 2 ne Sate sar = o> the ees 
Telephony... os + sis » vids igen s oun seen ot ee 
Tendencies of Central Station Development. (Introduction by 
President Scotts) (ial vivoee suigaiaie anise een eee enero 


Testing of Insulators. (F. O. Blackwell.).......++..+-+s0e eee: 
Theory, Alternating-Current, Discussion of Some Points. (Illus- 
trated )is’ ss \euscols.cieyk Gece ees Cle Noack teed Satesor eke ip aoa sehen ss aaa 
Theory of the Regulation of Alternators, Experimental Basis for. 
(Lilustrated.) si. fap cross lee cleat ya Gy eele eteets a eeu ae 


Traffic, Telephone, Some Features of, and their Effect on Service. . 
Train Lighting, an Axle Light System of. (Illustrated: je sey n ie 
Train-Lighting, Electric, Some of the Problems of............+-- 
Drain, Lighting, Ratlwaiy. «fe cs a.) ee eine nee sees 
Transmission Lines, Burning of Wooden Pins on High-Tension. (Il- 
luistrated).) ck: 025 sc ane SHR ape ole ey ee 
Transmission Lines, High-Tension...........-2.+-+-+2+s seese-: 
Transposition and Relative Location of Power and Telephone 
Wires. (Illustrated.) (P.M. Lincolm.)........-+++++.5++55 
Units and Central Stations, Multiple versus Independent Opera- 
tiomiofie. (Mlustrated.) a. a2ios. cise. etl -1- een oe 
Wooden Pins on High-Tension Transmission Lines, Burning of. 
(Tihustiratede)tcadat sieves wits pieneve tere aaiars dene TR nS TT er 


INDEX OF AUTHORS, 


ee em we iecussionim ee 
Ree gee Discussion nga feet er eet 
Bee ee Deron Ce ar ke eee 
Adams, Comfort A., Paper, 519; Discussion. 4..,-.).......,._. 579, 
Pe em SOUSSION. Pek EO. ks. ae ee 
ie eee a Diecussion: ond. eee ee 
Armstrong, J. R., Communications... ..0. 7707 296, 
Bema De) Discussion 5... ss, 457, 460, 
Dee BCUSON er is i ke 
Behrend, B. A., Paper, 497; Discussion........ Dene casl Stuer rae 578, 
Bee tas) oR, Communications... 000...) . | ae RES 
PO apete cere en nk eee ee dt 
Bliss, W. L., Paper, 133; Discussion, 180, 184, 186, 188, 211, 214, 
predectt, George W., Discussion.........._: rhs ee eee ers hee 182, 
Eee dicey, Charles, Discussion... .3......$-..20... ech 
Browne, Sidney Hand, Communication ..... 1.1.11 1717701777 
ES EDIE EUS °c en an ei ete ines Cannan 


Eglin, W.C. L., Discussion........ et ee cam 216, 219, 


Gerry, M. H., Jr., Communication, 295; Discussion, 263, 275, 282, 
Eee Ole ele) NSeessiOn Pe. Aa ioc esl dacs Sate... 
Monrenvach, lrpest, Discussion, ....3.¢6.. 2... scene ce 
Deere cr sommirae USetosOn wince og ig 84, 316, 317, 
eeopattion William) |.4 Papers. <2. dercs-ec dann. cn. 2’. 31, 331, 


Hering, Carl, Discussion, 209, 213, 214, 218, 219, 305, 306, 307, 469, 
ewitts base mDISCussiOMer oh kan. ous. 214, 306, 307, 474, 


610 INDEX. 

Lardner, H. A., Paper, 407; Discussion........- ss see eseeneenene 
Latour, Marius, Communication...........---+.4-++-s.2-2---0: 
Lesley, Hu h, Discussion J) <. Gaacotatir ge eee cee = eames 
Lieb, Jno. W:, Discussion...) 00.5. septa eee eek eee 


Lincoin, P. M., Paper, 245; Discussion, 220, 224, 276, 283, 288, 290, 
305, 306, 317, 466, 586, 

Lockwood, Mr.; (Detroit), Discussion. - 2... os.) oe a pene ee 
Lockwood, Thomas D., Paper, 3; Discussion.............+. 55;--70; 
Lyndon, Lamar, Discussion....... seria: Peso ary fer or 179, 
McElroy, James F., Paper, 197; Discussion,...........-.-..-+-+-. 
McMeen;. S. Gi, Paper. gai sala ariel ahs ole eee et oS ele eae ee ee 
Mailloux, GC. O; Discussioniseig. ct. sem ietenesehare sks tegen 
Masters: Agi). Diseussion 4,4. ¢0cias, ee eens eee 
Matlacik © "D2, Discussion ..22.° 22> Siac ee eae ei ey eee 
Mershon, Ralph D., Paper, 233; Discussion, 263, 266, 267, 271, 274, 
275, 276, 278, 283, 289, 

de, Miuralt! Carl Discussion. 4.74 c 20) 6) see teeee ocaatee eee 
Olin; "ELAM. » Diseussion? : 2/87 ba. oie ee aan ood ann ghee eee 
Peck, Jno.S., Discussion. 2... 265.20, t6 costs ona eee) ae 
Perrine: F-VAC CC Discussion: 2 oe se hae ee ee; Cee 
Pickernell: A Discussioy.2te 2 Mr tad scl aie ee eee 
Pope, Ralph W., Discussion. 9... cet. we - ones oat aan eon 
Reed Chass) Discussions - at.- as citar ae ee ree ee 
Ricexr CSW! Discussion 5-295 51s © a agethe cae oe cae eee ea ans ee 
Rugs. WAS. DISCUSSION «gig osteo eel ai ann igs Ree ae 
Sanville sos Ex \Diseusstoities = 26 aeons 9 ten ote eee ea eee ee 
Sebimirt ait DISCuSstOmas. secu ictessre) aeasiaietees TG Phe REY Re! 
Sthwartz; Carl'.\Commiumicatione. . ois... . asc atv ys otaane ae eee 
Scott, Charles F., Papers, 1, 129, 229, 327, 403; Discussion, 55, 181, 
182, 184, 185, 191, 263, 323, 441, 452, 467, 578, 579, 

Sheldon >Samuel, Discussion....0.).0 0: 0.5 ee. 56," 57, DS. Ob Oly als 
Shepardson,GeorgeD.) Paper cer «os 12 vices Veta tate ee 
HerWwOOt ob) DISCuSstOti. sm oes Slee cote sn aieteiete eg de ee 
Shhocic, se Wie DisGtission yas onic cota cr cdenetcaeas @tasienct tect ene ec ne 
eminent Cos bur DASCUSEIONN Mates oie etoessc tic ake oon mate a 287, 293, 
SJichter = We Ds. DisCusston = eae cr. c's cscs Oe acre ene er ae eee eee 
Sloan poRY Discussioncivccs {one eae kod sinus 5. eegeie tp hece eee eee 
Smith, W. N., Communication, 295; Discussion,..... 185, 273, 210; 
Soifan sd Bdiwa.s Dis@ussion. 2.0 weeaisec Gaetan ocr Stee nee 
Soydars Ry A, le, Paper bi asl. svete ety creer ae ean ee 
Spalding shih alk, (DISCussioty: stately Sica et eet ane none eee nee 
Spencer, Pauly Discussion’. x. 0o a sain egal tena nee orn ee 
Soencer sl homas Discussioni .a.. a8) abo ha eee ene 
Sperry, Wimer Ay weaper, Loos DIsCUSsiOnont as en ieee eae 185, 
Stemmetz= Cy Po I DISGussiOn< ena whe cares cick ake eerie wre ee 
Stern, Philip Ke, Disovssioni.; . aru ener eet see ennie oye ee 
Storer, INGAW i; DISCUSSION geqecile etars aha eo te ec ee 
Stocemiaenry Gis WOSCussion yeah: sire cree water in eee are 184, 442, 
MHOmas se sh. MISGUSSION ey army acts aceseeacear cnn oe ne 218, atone 
Torchio, Philip, Paper, 417; Discussion... .. 293, 455, 456, 472, 474, 
von Recklinghausen, Max, Discussion ies sektme eee ae ee 
Warner Herbert A. Discussion mn ani mcn iran See pee ic 
Wiait. Ete Els® DISCtiSSiOn ts, atic nis reat ca RL eee 
Weatdron SP srAc' DISCTISsiOn/ a. sactecndern se aterc mae kar ace aura eee eee 
Waterman: PsN * Discassionye. yo. ces ee ere ee ee 
Waters! Ws i., Discussion tig. see oe eek eee 280, 
Welz, Prantl» Discussionia..* .~ 2 5 treatin ieee Lee ene ieee 
Williams, R. Neil, Communication 
Williams. W.2Hs, Disctssiones. 2: care tm aheticee cen eietea ieee eee ee 
Wolcott? Townsend Discussion... ee eee ee 
Woodward, Cornelius W., Discussion 
Woodward RiS., Commitinicationac air eee en ne 
Wray, Jv Giskaper wngmea ater JT eee ‘ 


ee etna are oy eee TECM Me on MANY Tr UCC: 


1 


PRINTED IN U.S.A 


DATE DUE 


GAYLORD 


I ermal heme hank kk ott ee LT ee 


o 


‘ 
Tear f _ ic 

LIK TRY Sli han Ra Se VF ec Ne ea HRV RON 

SARE don Se SSS US SLE OE A ANN TY UNI OPE ONES 

“apse meepeenaeteremtitth aero tame open itera aniAte myer reer eenan ene able sn tg 

" - eG fe wee so 


A ~~ Nad - 3 i 


SAM pte enem seaanrirwe regs ~ 


SS 


NCAR tae aaattage nas he aS nse Se ee wee LA ase UN CALAN AS cay ga 
ne =... ; x yn : 


REWARe 


